Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Josephine Paolucci and the
PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


The

LITTLEST REBEL

By

EDWARD PEPLE

GROSSET & DUNLAP: _Publishers_

NEW YORK

Copyright, 1914 By the ESTATE OF EDWARD H. PEPLE

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. NO PART OF THIS BOOK MAY BE REPRODUCED IN ANY FORM
WITHOUT PERMISSION IN WRITING FROM THE PUBLISHER.

_Printed in the United States of America_


FOREWORD


The play, from which this book is written, was in no sense of the word
intended as a war drama; for war is merely its background, and always in
the center stands a lonely little child.

War is its theme but not its purpose. War breeds hatred, horror,
pestilence and famine, yet from its tears and ashes eventually must rise
the clean white spirit of HUMANITY.

The enmity between North and South is dead; it sleeps with the fathers
and the sons, the brothers and the lovers, who died in a cause which
each believed was just.

Therefore this story deals, not with the right or wrong of a lost
confederacy, but with the mercy and generosity, the chivalry and
humanity which lived in the hearts of the Blue and Gray, a noble
contrast to the grim brutality of war.

       *       *       *       *       *

The author is indebted to Mr. E.S. Moffat, who has novelized the play
directly from its text, with the exception of that portion which
appeared as a short story under the same title several years ago,
treating of Virgie in the overseer's cabin, and the endorsing of her
pass by Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison.

EDWARD PEPLE.


THE LITTLEST REBEL


CHAPTER I


Young Mrs. Herbert Cary picked up her work basket and slowly crossed the
grass to a shady bench underneath the trees. She must go on with her
task of planning a dress for Virgie. But the prospect of making her
daughter something wearable out of the odds and ends of nothing was not
a happy one. In fact, she was still poking through her basket and
frowning thoughtfully when a childish voice came to her ears.

"Yes, Virgie! Here I am. Out under the trees."

Immediately came a sound of tumultuous feet and Miss Virginia Houston
Cary burst upon the scene. She was a tot of seven with sun touched hair
and great dark eyes whose witchery made her a piquant little fairy. In
spite of her mother's despair over her clothes Virgie was dressed, or
at least had been dressed at breakfast time, in a clean white frock, low
shoes and white stockings, although all now showed signs of strenuous
usage. Clutched to her breast as she ran up to her mother's side was
"Susan Jemima," her one beloved possession and her doll. Behind Virgie
came Sally Ann, her playmate, a slim, barefooted mulatto girl whose
faded, gingham dress hung partly in tatters, halfway between her knees
and ankles. In one of Sally Ann's hands, carried like a sword, was a
pointed stick; in the other, a long piece of blue wood-moss from which
dangled a bit of string.

"Oh, Mother," cried the small daughter of the Carys, as she came up
flushed and excited, "what do you reckon Sally Ann and me have been
playing out in the woods!"

"What, dear!" and Mrs. Cary's gentle hand went up to lift the hair back
from her daughter's dampened forehead.

"_Blue Beard_!" cried Virgie, with rounded eyes.

"Blue Beard!" echoed her mother in astonishment at this childish freak
of amusement.

"Not really--on this hot day."

"Um, hum," nodded Virgie emphatically. "You know he--he--he was the
terriblest old man that--that ever was. An' he had so many wifses
that--"

"Say 'wives,' my darling. _Wives_."

Sally Ann laughed and Virgie frowned.

"Well, I _thought_ it was that, but Sally Ann's older'n me and she said
'wifses.'"

"Huh," grunted Sally Ann. "Don' make no differ'nce what you call 'em,
des so he had 'em. Gor'n tell her."

"Well, you know, Mother, Blue Beard had such a bad habit of killin' his
wives that--that some of the ladies got so they--they almost didn't like
to marry him!"

"Gracious, what a state of affairs," cried Mrs. Cary, in well feigned
amazement at the timidity of the various Mrs. Blue Beards. "And then--"

"Well, the last time he got married to--to another one--her name was
Mrs. Fatima. An'--an' I've been playin' _her_."

"And who played Blue Beard?"

"Sally Ann--an' she's just fine. Come here, Sally Ann, an' let's show
her. Kneel down."

Clutching the piece of moss from Sally Ann, Virgie ran behind the girl
and put her chubby arms around her neck. "This is his blue beard,
Mother. Hold still, Sally Ann--_My lord_, I mean--till I get it tied in
the right place."

"Be keerful, Miss Virgie," advised the colored girl. "You's a-ticklin'
my nose. I'se gwine to sneeze ef yo' don't, and jes blow my beard all
away."

"Oh, don't be such a baby," remonstrated the earnest Miss Virginia, with
a correcting slap. "S'pose you were a man an' had to wear one all the
time. Now! Stand up! Look, Mother!"

"I'm afraid of him already. He's so ferocious."

"Isn't he? Oh, won't _you_ play with us, Mother? I'll--I'll let you be
Mrs. Fatima." And then, as her mother's face showed signs of doubt as to
her histrionic ability, "If you were _my_ little girl, I'd do it in a
minute."

"All right, dear, of course I will; but I've just remembered a bit of
lace in your grandmother's trunk in the attic. I believe it will be
exactly enough for the neck and sleeves of your new dress." She smiled
courageously as she folded a piece of old silk she was remaking. "You
and--" she cast a glance at Sally Ann--"your respected brother-in-law
can wait a few moments, can't you? You might rehearse a little more.
With all this important audience of solemn oaks you wouldn't want to
make the slightest slip in your parts."

"That's so," agreed Virgie, raising her hands and clasping her tiny
fingers thoughtfully. "And I'll tell you what--we'll mark off the castle
walls around the bench where the window's going to be. We ought to have
a stage. Come on Sal--I mean Blue Beard, pick up some sticks quick."

Mrs. Cary started, but turned back an instant: "By the way, have either
of you seen Uncle Billy. I' must find him, too, and plan something for
our lunch."

"I seen 'im early dis mawnin'," piped Blue Beard, "makin' for de woods.
I reckon he be back pres'n'y."

"Very well," answered Virgie's mother, a shadow creeping into her face
as she went on toward the house. Could Uncle Billy possibly be leaving!
The most trusted negro of all! No--_never_! She would almost as soon
doubt the cause itself!

Three long years ago war had seemed a thrilling, daring necessity.
Caught in the dreadful net of circumstance she had vowed proudly in her
own heart never to be less brave than the bravest. In her ears still
rang the echo of that first ...

       *       *       *       *       *

_Tara-tara!_

From far away a faint fanfare of trumpets, borne on brazen wings from
the distant clamor of the city's streets.

_Tara-tara!_

"What's that--a bugle?"

_R-r-r-r-rum-dum!_

"And that--a drum?"

_Tramp--tramp--tramp_--the rolling thunder of ten thousand feet.

_War has been declared!_

From North to South, the marching lines fill the land--a sea of men
whose flashing bayonets glisten and glitter in the morning light. With
steady step and even rank, with thrill of brass lunged band and
screaming fife the regiments sweep by--in front, the officers on their
dancing steeds--behind them, line after line of youthful faces, chins
in, chests out, the light of victory already shining in their eyes.

In just this way the Nation's sons went forth to fight in those first
brave days of '61. Just so they marched out, defiant, from South and
North alike, each side eager for the cause he thought was right, with
bright pennons snapping in the breeze and bugles blowing gayly and never
a thought in any man's mind but that _his_ side would win and his own
life be spared.

And every woman, too, waving cheerful farewell to valiant lines of
marching gray or sturdy ranks of blue, had hoped the same for _her_
side.

But in war there is always a reckoning to pay. Always one contender
driven to the wall, his cities turned to ashes, his lands laid waste.
Always one depleted side which takes one last desperate stand in the
sight of blackened homes and outraged fields and fights on through ever
darkening days until the inevitable end is come.

And the end of the Confederacy was now almost in sight. Three years of
fighting and the Seceding States had been cut in twain, their armies
widely separated by the Union hosts. Advancing and retreating but always
fighting, month after month, year after year the men in gray had come at
last to the bitterest period of it all--when the weakened South was
slowly breaking under the weight of her brother foes--when the two
greatest of the armies battled on Virginia soil--battled and passed to
their final muster roll.

Of little need to tell of the privations which the pivotal state of the
Confederacy went through. If it were true that Virginia had been simply
one vast arsenal where every inhabitant had unfailingly done his part in
making war, it was also true that she had furnished many of its greatest
battlefields--and at what a frightful cost.

Everywhere were the cruel signs of destruction and want--in scanty
larder, patched, refurbished clothing, servantless homes--in dismantled
outhouses, broken fences and neglected, brier-choked fields. Even the
staples of life were fast diminishing for every man who could shoulder
a gun had gone to fight with Lee, and few animals were left and fewer
slaves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet, for all the dismal outlook, Winter had passed without actual
disaster to the Confederate arms and now that Spring had come the
plantation home of the Herbert Carys, twenty miles below Richmond, had
never had a fairer setting. White-pillared and stately the old Colonial
mansion stood on one of the low, emerald hills which roll back lazily
from the peaceful James. It was true that the flower beds had been
trampled down to ruin by alien horse and heel, but the scent of the
honeysuckle clinging to those shining pillars only seemed the sweeter
for the loss, and whatever else the forager might take, he could not rob
them of their gracious vista of hills and shimmering river.

Across the broad driveway and up the steps of the veranda passed Mrs.
Cary, fairer than had been the flowers, a true daughter of the oldtime
South, gentle and quiet eyed, her light summer dress of the cheapest
material, yet deftly fashioned by her own fingers from slightly opened
neck, where an old brooch lay against her soft throat, down to the
dainty spotless flounces lying above her petticoat of crinoline.

Though her lips and eyes refused to betray it even when there was no one
to see, it was with a very heavy heart that she mounted the stairs to
the attic, thinking, contriving, clutching desperately at her fading
hopes.

For good reason the plantation was very silent on this warm spring
morning. Where only a year before dozens of soft eyed Jerseys had ranged
through the pastures and wood lots there was now no sound of tinkling
bells--one after another the fine, blooded stock had been requisitioned
by a sad faced quartermaster of the Army of Northern Virginia. And one
by one the fat porkers who had muzzled greedily among the ears from the
Cary bins and who ought to have gone into the smoke house had departed,
squealing, to furnish bone and sinew with which to repel the invader.
Saddest of all, the chicken coops down by the deserted negro quarters
were quite as empty as the once teeming cabins themselves. Poverty, grim
and relentless, had caught the Carys in its iron hand and behind
Poverty stood its far more frightening shadow--Starvation.

But in these gloomy thoughts she was not entirely alone. All that
troubled her and more, though perhaps in a different way, passed hourly
through the old gray kinky head of Uncle Billy who happened at this very
moment to be emerging stealthily from the woods below the house. Slowly
and deliberately he made his way toward the front till he reached a
bench where he sat down under a tree to ruminate over the situation and
inspect the feathered prize which he had lately acquired by certain,
devious means known only to Uncle Billy. Wiping his forehead with his
ragged sleeve and holding the bird up by its tied feet he regarded it
with the eye of an expert, and the fatigue of one who has been sorely
put to it in order to accomplish his purpose.

"It 'pears to me," said Uncle Billy, "dat des' when you needs 'em the
mostest the chickens goes to roosting higher 'n' higher. Rooster--I
wonder who you b'longs to. Um-_um_!" he murmured as he thoughtfully
sounded the rooster's well developed chest through the feathers. "From
de feelin' of you, my son, I 'spec' you was raise' by one er de ol'es'
fam'lies what is!"

But Uncle Billy knew the fortunes of the Cary family far too well to
mourn over the probable toughness of his booty, and as he rose up from
the seat and meandered toward the kitchen, his old, wrinkled face broke
into a broad smile of satisfaction over the surprise he had in store.
"Well--after I done parbile you, I reckon Miss Hallie be mighty glad to
see you. Yas, _seh_!"

But as Uncle Billy walked slowly along beside the hedge which shielded
the house on one side he heard a sound which made him halt. A young
negro, coming from the rear, had dodged behind the hedge and was trying
to keep out of his sight.

"Hi, dar! You, Jeems Henry!" shouted Uncle Billy, instantly suspicious
of such maneuvers. "Come heh! Hear _me_! Come heh!"

At this sudden command a young mulatto, hesitating, came through a break
in the hedge and stood looking at him, sullen and silent. In his hands
he carried a small bundle done up in a colored handkerchief and on this
guilty piece of baggage Uncle Billy's eye immediately fastened with an
angry frown.

"Whar you gwine?" demanded Uncle Billy, with an accusing finger
trembling at the bundle.

The younger man made no reply.

"Hear _me_?" the elder demanded again in rising tones of severity.
"Ain't you got no tongue in yo' haid? Whar you gwine?"

Shifting from one foot to the other the younger man finally broke away
from Uncle Billy's eye and tried to pass him by.

"Den _I'll_ tell you whar you gwine," shouted Uncle Billy, furious at
last. "You's runnin' 'way to de Yankees, dat's whar you gwine."

At this too truthful thrust Jeems Henry saw that further deceit would be
futile and he faced Uncle Billy with sullen resentment.

"An' s'posin' I _is_--wat den?"

"Den you's a thief," retorted Uncle Billy with dismayingly quick wit.
"Dat's what you is--a _thief_."

"I _ain'_ no thief," Jeems Henry refuted stubbornly, "_I_ ain' stole
nothin'."

"You is too," and Uncle Billy's forefinger began to shake in the
other's face. "You's stealin' a _nigger_!"

"What dat?" and Jeems Henry's eyes opened wide with amazement. "What you
talkin' 'bout?"

"Talkin' 'bout _you_," replied Uncle Billy, sharper than ever. "Dey say
a nigger's wuth a thousan' dollars. 'Cose _you_ ain't wuth dat much," he
said with utter disgust. "I put you down at a dollar and a quarter. But
dat ain't de p'int," and he steadily advanced on the other till their
faces were only a few inches apart. "It's dis. _You_, Jeems Henry,
belongs to Mars' Herbert Cary an' Miss Hallie; an' when you runs 'way
you's stealin'. _You's stealin yo'sef!_"

"H'm!" sniffed Jeems Henry, now that the nature and extent of his crime
were fully understood. "Ef I ain' wuth but a dollar an' a quarter, I
suttenly ain' stealin' _much_!"

At this smart reply Uncle Billy's disgust overcame him completely and he
tossed the rooster on the ground and clutched Jeems Henry by the arm.

"You mighty right, you ain't!" he shouted. "An' ef I was fo' years
younger I'd take it outer yo' hide with a carriage whip. Hol' on dar,"
as Jeems Henry eluded his grasp and began to move away. "Which way you
gwine? You hear me? Now den!"

"I gwine up de river," replied Jeems Henry, badgered at last into
revealing his plan. Then, after a cautious look around,--"to
Chickahominy Swamp," he added in lower tones.

Uncle Billy cocked his ears. Here was news indeed.

"Chickahominy, huh! So de Yankees is up dar, is dey? An' what you think
you gwine to do when you git to 'em?"

"Wuck 'roun de camp," replied Jeems Henry with some vagueness.

"Doin' what?" was the relentless query.

"Blackin' de gent'men's boots--an'--an' gittin' paid fer it," Jeems
Henry stammered in reply. "It's better'n being a slave, Unc' Billy," he
added as he saw the sneer of contempt on the faithful old man's face.
"An' ef you wan' sech a crazy ol' fool, you'd come along wid me, too."

At this combination of temptation and insult Uncle Billy's eyes narrowed
with contempt and loathing. "Me?" he said, and a rigid arm pointed back
at the house which had been for years his source of shelter and comfort.
"Me leave Miss Hallie _now_? Right when she ain't got _nothin_'? Look
heah, nigger; dog-gone yo' skin, I got a great min' for to mash yo'
mouf. Yas, I _is_ a slave. I b'longs to Mars Cary--an' I b'longed to his
pa befo' him. Dey feed me and gimme de bes' dey got. Dey take care of me
when I'm sick--an' dey take care of me when I'm well--an' _I_ gwine to
stay right here. But you? You jes' go on wid de Yankees, an' black der
boots. Dey'll free you," and Uncle Billy's voice rose in prophetic
tones--"an you'll _keep on_ blackin' boots! Go 'long now, you low-down,
dollar-an'-a-quarter nigger!" as Jeems Henry backed away. "Go long wid
yo' _Yankee_ marsters--and git yo' freedom an' a blackin' brush."

So engrossed were both the actors in this drama that they failed to
hear the sound of footsteps on the veranda, and it was so that the
mistress of the manor found the would-be runaway and the old slave,
glaring into each other's eyes and insulting one another volubly.

Mrs. Cary, with her workbasket on her arm, paused at the top of the
steps and regarded the angry pair with well-bred surprise.

"Why, Uncle Billy," she queried, "what is going on here? What _is_ the
matter?"

"It's Jeems Henry; dat's what's de matter," said Uncle Billy, in defense
of his agitation. "He's runnin' 'way to de Yankees."

Mrs. Cary stopped short for a moment and then came slowly down the
steps.

"Oh, James," she said, unbelievingly. "Is this really true?"

Jeems Henry hung his head and dug at the gravel with his toe.

"I'm sorry," said Mrs. Cary, and the word held a world of painful
thought--of self-accusation, of hopeless regret, of sorrow for one who
could be so foolishly misguided. "I'm sorry not only for ourselves but
for _you_. You know, I promised Mammy before she died that I would look
after you--always."

Still Jeems Henry made no answer and old Uncle Billy saw fit to make a
disclosure.

"He's gwine up to Chickahominy." Then to Jeems Henry he added something
in low tones which made the young negro's eyes roll wildly with fear.
"Dey tells me dat der's _hants_ and _ghoses_ over dar. I hopes dey'll
git you."

"Stop that!" commanded Mrs. Cary. "You know very well, Uncle Billy,
there are no such things as ghosts."

"Nor'm I don't, Miss Hallie," responded Uncle Billy, sticking
tenaciously to his point, because he could plainly see Jeems Henry
wavering. "'Twas jes las' night I hear one--moanin' 'roun' de smoke
house. An' ef I ain't mighty fur wrong, she was smellin' arfter Jeems
Henry."

At this wild fabrication, the reason for which she nevertheless
appreciated, Mrs. Cary had hard work to hold back a smile, although she
promptly reassured the terrified Jeems Henry.

"There now--there--that will do. Nothing of that kind will trouble you,
James; you may take my word for it. If you are quite determined to go I
shall not try to keep you. But what have you in that bundle?"

"Hi! Hi! Dat's de way to talk!" interrupted Uncle Billy, excitedly
foreseeing means to prevent Jeems Henry's departure. "What you got in
yo' bundle?"

Jeems Henry lifted his anguished eyes and gazed truthfully at his
mistress.

"I ain't got nothin'--what don't b'long to me, Miss Hallie."

"I don't mean that," Mrs. Cary responded kindly. "But you have a long
tramp before you. Have you anything to eat?"

"Nor'm, I ain't," and Jeems Henry seemed disturbed.

"Then you'd better come around to the kitchen. We'll see what we can
find."

At this unheard-of generosity, Uncle Billy's eyes opened widely and he
exploded in remonstrance.

"Now, hol' on dar, Miss Hallie! Hol' on. You ain' got none too much fo'
yo'se'f, d'out stuffin' dis yere six-bit rat hole wid waffles an'
milasses."

"_William!_" commanded his mistress.

"Yas'm," was the meek response, and Uncle Billy subsided into silence.

With a sigh, Mrs. Cary turned away toward the house. "Well, James, are
you coming?"

But Jeems Henry, completely abashed before this miracle of kindness
which he did not deserve, decided that it was time for him to be a man.

"Thank you, Miss Hallie," he gulped, "but f'um now on I reckon I gwine
take keer of myse'f."

Mrs. Cary, pausing on the bottom step, raised her eyes heavenward in a
short prayer that children such as these might somehow be protected from
themselves.

"Well, James," she said, when she saw there was nothing more to be done.
"I hope you'll be happy and contented. If you are not--come back to us.
Perhaps, when the war is over, you'll find things a little
more--comfortable. Good-by, James," and she held out her hand.

But this last touch of gentleness was too much for the young mulatto.
Although he made an obedient step forward, his feelings overcame him and
with an audible snuffle and his hand over his eyes he retreated--then
turned his back and plunged through the hedge.

Mrs. Cary sank down on the step and looked as if she, too, would like to
cry.

Manfully, Uncle Billy came to her rescue. "Now don't you care, Miss
Hallie. He wan' no 'count for plowin' no how."

"Oh, it isn't that, Uncle Billy," Mrs. Cary replied with a low cry of
regret. "It isn't the actual loss of help, tho' we need it, goodness
knows. But it makes me sad to see them leaving, one by one. They are
such children and so helpless--without a master hand."

"Yas'm," agreed Uncle Billy readily. "An' de marster's han' ought to
have a hick'ry stick in it fer _dat_ nigger. Yas, bless Gawd. But you
got _me_, Miss Hallie," he announced proudly. "_I_ ain't runned away to
de blue-bellies yet."

"No, you dear old thing," Mrs. Cary cried with laughing relief, and her
hand rested on his shoulder in a gentle caress. "I'd as soon think of
the skies falling. It is just such faithful friends as you who help me
to fight the best."

"Um?" said Uncle Billy promptly, not quite understanding.

"I mean a woman's battles, Uncle Billy--the _waiting_ battles--that we
fight alone." Mrs. Gary rose to her feet and turned sadly away.

"Yas'm," agreed Uncle Billy. "I dunno what yo' talkin' 'bout but I spec'
you's right. Yas'm."

"Dear Uncle Billy," repeated Mrs. Gary, while her eyes filled with
tears. "The most truthful--the most _honest_--"

Mrs. Cary stopped and looked sharply at something lying on the ground
beside the steps. Then she turned and swept the old man with an accusing
glance which made him quail.

"_William!_" she said, in awful tones.

"Yas'm," replied Uncle Billy, feverishly.

"What's _that_?"

Uncle Billy immediately became the very picture of innocence and
ignorance. He looked everywhere but at the helpless rooster.

"What's what?" he asked. "Aw, dat? Why--why, dat ain' nothin' 'tall,
Miss Hallie. Dat's--dat's des a _rooster_. Yas'm."

Mrs. Cary came down from the steps and looked carefully at the
unfamiliar bird. No fear that she would not recognize it if it were
hers. "Whose is he?" she asked.

"You--you mean who he b'longs to?" queried Uncle Billy, fencing for time
in which to prepare a quasi-truthful reply. "He--he don' b'long to
_nobody_. He's his _own_ rooster."

"William!" commanded Mrs. Cary, severely. "Look at me. _Where_ did you
get him?"

Here was a situation which Uncle Billy knew must be handled promptly,
and he picked up the rooster and made an attempt to escape. "Down on de
low grouns--dis mornin'. Dat's right," he said, as he saw dawning
unbelief in his mistress' face. "Now you have to skuse me, Miss Hallie.
I got my wuck to do."

"One moment, William," interposed Mrs. Cary, completely unconvinced.
"You are sure he was on the low grounds?"

"Cose I is!" asseverated Uncle Billy, meanwhile backing farther away.

"What was he doing there?"

Uncle Billy stammered.

"He--he--he, he was trespassin', dat's what he was doin'--des natcherly
trespassin'."

At this marvel of testimony, Mrs. Cary's lips relaxed in a smile and she
warned him with an upraised finger.

"Be careful, Uncle Billy! Be careful."

"Yas, _mar'm_" chuckled the old man. "I _had_ to be. I never would a-got
him! Oh, I's tellin' de trufe, Miss Hallie. Dis' here ol' sinner tooken
flewed off a boat what was comin' up de river. Yas'm. And he sure was
old enough to know better."

"And you _saw_ him fly off the boat?"

"Oh, yas'm. I seed him. I seed him," and Uncle Billy floundered for a
moment, caught in his own trap. "Dat is, not wid my own eyes. But I see
him settin' in de woods, lookin' dat lonesome and losted like, I felt
real sorry for him. Yas'm," and to prove his deep sympathy for the
unfortunate bird he stroked its breast lovingly.

Mrs. Cary turned away to hide her laughter. "How did you catch him?"

"How?" repeated Uncle Billy, while his ancient mind worked with unusual
rapidity. "I got down on all fo's in the thick weeds, an' cluk like a
hen. An' den ol' Mr. Rooster, he came 'long over to see ef I done laid
an aig--an' I des reach right out an' take him home to de Lawd."

"Oh, Uncle Billy," his mistress laughed. "I'm afraid you're
incorrigible. It's a dreadful thing to doubt one's very dinner. Isn't
it?"

"Yas'm. An' I was des 'bout to say ef you an' Miss Virgie kin worry down
de white meat, maybe den dis here bird 'll kinder git eben wid me when I
tackle his drum sticks. Yas'm," and with a final chuckle of joy over his
success the old man hobbled quickly away in the direction of the
kitchen.

Mrs. Cary, still smiling, went back to play Mrs. Fatima to a dusky
moss-covered Blue Beard.

"Oh goody, goody, here is Mrs. Fatima again!" and Virgie's dancing feet
seemed hardly to touch the ground. "We've just finished building the
castle. Look!" She pointed proudly to a square of twigs and leaves
around the garden seat. "Come on, Sally Ann. We can play it now and use
Mamma's keys."

"Wait dar! Whar'd I put my s'wode?" And Sally Ann snatched up her
dangerous weapon and thrust it into a rope around her waist. "Now I'se
ready fo' killin' folks."

"But we have to begin where Blue Beard goes away on a journey," Virgie
cried. "Susan Jemima, you sit there on the bench and clap your hands.
Get up, Mamma. Go ahead, Sally Ann!"

"'Ooman," said Sally Ann, strutting up to her mistress and frowning
terribly. "I'se gwine away fer a night an' a day. Dese yere is de keys
to de castle."

"Yes, sir," was the meek response.

Sally Ann Blue Beard pointed to an imaginary door halfway between them
and where Virgie sat on the steps, wriggling with delight. "You kin look
in ev'ry room in de house--castle, I means--'cept in des dat one.
Orn'estan me? _Des dat one!_ But ef yo' looks in _dar_,--Gawd he'p you.
I gwine cut yo' haid off," and the fearful sword whizzed threateningly
through the air. "Fyarwell--fyarwell."

"Farewell, my lord," said Mrs. Cary, and then in a whisper, as Blue
Beard stalked away to hide behind a tree. "What _do_ we do now?
_Quick_!"

"Now I come in," cried Virgie. "I'm 'Sister Anne' that looks for the
horseman in the cloud of dust." And jumping up, the child managed to
change the tones of her voice in a surprising manner.

"Good morning, fair sister. Blue Beard has gone away, and now we can
look in his secret room."

"No, Sister Anne, No! I dare not," and Mrs. Fatima shrank back full of
fear from the imaginary door. "Urge me no more. I am afraid."

"But, Mother," cried Virgie, with a little squeal of disappointment.
"You _have_ to. It's part of the play," and she led her up to the
invisible door.

"Now look in--and when you look--drop the keys--an' we'll both scream."

Slowly the door seemed to open and, after an instant's terrified
silence, both actresses screamed with complete success. Whereupon Mrs.
Fatima dropped to her knees and Sister Anne hugged her tight.

"It's blood. It's the blood of his seven wives. O-o-o-e-e-e!"

A great roar sounded in their ears.

"Mercy! What's that?" cried the terrified Mrs. Fatima.

"It's Blue Beard. He's coming back," whereupon Virgie immediately left
Mrs. Fatima to face her fate alone.

Having spent a night and a day behind the tree, Blue Beard now rushed
upon the castle and roared for his wife.

"Greeting, my lord," said the trembling Mrs. Fatima with a low curtsey
"I hope you have enjoyed your journey."

"'Ooman," demanded Blue Beard severely. "What make you look so pale?"

"I know not, sweet sir. Am I, then, so pale?"

"You is! What you be'n up to sence I be'n away? Ha! What I tole you?
Look at de blood on dat key! False 'ooman, you done deceib' me. Down on
yo' marrow bones an' prepyar to die!"

"Spare me, my lord. Spare me! I am so--"

It was just about this time that old Uncle Billy, with a bridle in one
hand and a carriage whip in the other came slowly upon the scene. At the
sight of Sally Ann apparently about to assault his mistress the bridle
dropped from his hand and with a tight clutch on the carriage whip he
covered the intervening space at an amazing speed.

"Hi, dar! You li'l woolly haided imp! You tech Miss Hallie wid dat ar
stick an' I bus' you wide open!"

"Oh, stop, Uncle Billy!" cried Virgie in dismay. "We're only having a
play!"

"Maybe you is; but I lay ef I wrop my carriage whip roun' her laig, des
oncet, she'll hop all de way to de river."

At this dismal prospect, which seemed much truer than the play, Sally
Ann began to whimper loudly. "Miss Hallie, ef he stay here, I ain't
gwine to play."

"Whar you git dem whiskers at?" demanded Uncle Billy.

"Shut up!" cried Virgie.

"I'm shuttin'," said Uncle Billy, retreating.

Thus reassured Sally Ann continued:

"I gwine down stairs to git my dinner When I come back, I sho' gwine
kill you. Fyar you well," and Blue Beard, making a wide circle around
the carriage whip, took himself off the scene.

"Now, Mother," Virgie announced, "I have to watch at the castle window,"
and she jumped up on the bench.

"Sister Anne; Sister Anne, do you see anybody coming?"

"No one, Fatima--nothing but a cloud of dust made by the wind."

"Look again, Sister Anne. Do you see anybody coming?"

"Oh, Fatima, Fatima. It's growing bigger."

"Dar now," interposed Uncle Billy. "She's seem' som'pin."

"Sister Anne! Sister Anne. And what do; you see?"

"Dust! Dust! I see a horseman in a cloud of dust. Look! Look! He's
coming this way." By this time Virgie's acting had taken on so close a
resemblance to the real thing that both Mrs. Gary and Uncle Billy rose
to their feet in wonder.

"He's jumped the _fence_," cried Virgie. "He's cutting across our
fields! He sees me! He's waving his hat to me!" With the last words the
child suddenly jumped down from the bench and ran through the opening in
the hedge, leaving her mother gazing after her in sudden consternation.

"Name we Gawd! Miss Hallie," gasped Uncle Billy. "You reckon she done
brought somebody, sho' 'nuff? Hi! Hi! _I_ hear sum'-pin. It's a horse.
Lan' er Glory! Hits, _him_!"


CHAPTER II


Round the corner of the hedge at a swift trot came a man in the uniform
of an officer in the Confederate Army,--and Virgie was in his arms.

Mrs. Cary gave him one look and threw out her arms.

"Herbert!"

The man on horseback let Virgie slide down and then dismounted like a
flash, coming to her across the little space of lawn with his whole soul
in his eyes. With his dear wife caught in his arms he could do nothing
but kiss her and hold her as if he would never again let her go.

"Hallie," he breathed, "but it's good to see you again. It's _good_."
And so they stood for a long moment, husband and wife united after
months of separation, after dangers and terrors and privations which had
seemed as if they never would end.

Sally Ann was one of the first to interrupt, edging up at the earliest
opportunity with her beard in her hand. "How you does, Mars' Cary? How
you fine yo'sef, seh?"

"Why, hullo, Sally Ann!" said Cary, and put out his hand. "What on earth
is this thing?"

Virgie ran to his side and caught his hand in hers. "We were playing
'Blue Beard,' Daddy,--an' you came just like the brother."

"So you've been Blue Beard, have you, Sally Ann?--then I must have the
pleasure of cutting you into ribbons." Herbert Cary's shining saber
flashed half out of its scabbard and then, laughing, he slapped it back
with a clank.

"Sally Ann," he announced, "I'm going to turn you into Sister Anne for a
while. You run up to Miss Hallie's room and sit by the window where you
can watch the road and woods. If you see anything--soldiers, I mean--"

"Oh, Herbert!" cried his wife in anguish.

"S-s-sh!" he whispered. "Go along, Sally Ann. If you see anyone at all
report to me at once. Understand? Off with you!"

Uncle Billy now came forward in an effort to make his master's clothes
more presentable.

"Heh, Mars' Cary, lemme brush you off, seh. You's fyar kivered."

"Look out, you old rascal," Cary laughed, as his wife backed away
coughing before the cloud of fine white dust that rose under Uncle
Billy's vigorous hands. "You're choking your mistress to death. Never
mind the dust. I'll get it back in ten minutes."

Mrs. Cary clasped her hands together at her breast with a look of
entreaty.

"Herbert! Must you go so soon?"

Her husband looked back at her with eyes dark with regret.

"Yes," he said briefly. "I'm on my way to Richmond. How many horses are
there in the stable?"

"Two--only two," was the broken response, as his wife sank down
disconsolate on a bench. "Belle and Lightfoot--we sold the others--I
_had_ to do it."

"Yes, I know, little woman. It couldn't be helped. Here, Billy! Take my
horse and get Belle out of the stable. Lead them down to the swamp and
hide them in the cedars. Then saddle Lightfoot--bring him here and give
him some water and a measure of corn. Look sharp, Billy! Lively!"

In the face of danger to his master Uncle Billy's response was instant.
"Yes, seh. Right away, seh," and he took Cary's lathered animal and made
off for the stables at top speed.

Mrs. Cary looked up at her husband with a great fear written on her
face.

"Why, Herbert dear. You--you don't mean to say that the Yankees are in
the neighborhood?"

Immediately Cary was on the bench beside her with his arm around her,
while Virgie climbed up on the other side.

"Now, come," he murmured, "be a brave little woman and don't be alarmed.
It may be nothing after all. Only--there are several foraging
parties--small ones, a few miles down the river. I've been dodging them
all morning. If they come at all they won't trouble either you or
Virgie."

"But _I'm_ not afraid of them, Daddy-man," cried the small daughter,
and she doubled up her fist ferociously. "Look at _that_."

"Aha! There's a brave little Rebel," her father cried as he swept her up
in a hearty hug. "_You're_ not afraid of them,--nor you either, God
bless you," and his lips rested for a moment on his wife's soft cheek.
"Only, you are apt to be a little too haughty. If they search the house
for arms or stragglers, make no resistance. It's best."

"Yes, yes, I know," his wife cried out, "but you, dear, _you_! Why are
you here? Why aren't you with your company?"

Cary looked away for a moment across the fields and down the slope
towards the shimmering river. They were very beautiful--he wondered why
he had not fully realized all that wife and child and home meant to him
when he volunteered recently for a certain hazardous duty. He knew, too,
how quickly his dear wife would know the full extent of the peril with
which he felt himself surrounded. And so his reply was short and
seemingly gruff, as many another man's has been under too heavy
circumstances.

"Scouting duty. I've been on it for the past two months."

Mrs. Cary's hand went to her heart.

"A _scout_, Herbert! But, darling, why? It's so dangerous--so
horrible--so--"

He put up his hand, with a forced smile, to check her, and broke in
gayly.

"Ah, but think of the fun in it. It's like playing hide-and-go-seek with
Virgie."

But his wife was not to be put off so lightly and she put her impelling
hands on his arm.

Gary changed his tone. His voice deepened.

"They need me, dear," he said earnestly. "What does danger to one man
mean when Dixie calls us all? And I'm doing work--good work. I've
already given one battle to General Lee and now I have information that
will give him another and a bigger one. Two nights ago I came through
the Union lines. I ..."

Mrs. Cary rose unsteadily to her feet.

"Through the Yankee lines! Oh, Herbert. _Not as a spy!_"

"A spy? Of course not. I hid in the woods all day, then climbed a tall
pine tree and got the lay of their camp--the number of their guns--the
disposition of forces and their lines of attack. Yesterday I had the
wires at Drury's Bluff and started trouble. I'm on my way now to join my
command, but I had a good excuse for coming home to hold you in in my
arms again, if only for a moment. You see, poor old Roger got a wound in
his flank--from a stray bullet."

"A _stray_ bullet," asked Mrs. Gary, doubtfully.

"Yes," he smiled, for he had escaped it, "a stray bullet meant for
_me_."

"But, Daddy," Virgie interrupted, "while you were up in the tree--"

A wild whoop broke off Virgie's question. Sally Ann was rushing down the
steps, her eyes rolling up with excitement.

"Mars' Cary! Mars' Cary! Somebody comin' long de road!"

"Who? How many?" Cary demanded, springing up and running towards the
gate that opened on the wagon road over the hills.

"Des' one," responded Sally Ann with naïve truthfulness. "Ol' Dr.
Simmons. He drivin' by de gate in de buggy."

Mrs. Cary threw up her hands with a muffled cry of relief and laughter.
"Oh, Sally! Sally!" she exclaimed, "you'll be the death of me."

"But Lor! Miss Hallie," said Sally plaintively, "he _tole_ me fer to
tell him."

Cary, returning, waved Sally Ann back to her post. "That's right," he
laughed. "You're a good sentry, Sally Ann. Go back and watch again.
_Scoot_!"

"Herbert," and his wife stood before him. "Come into the house and let
me give you something to eat."

For answer Cary gently imprisoned her face in his hands. "Honey, I
can't," he said, his eyes grown sad again. "Just fix me up
something--anything you can find. I'll munch it in the saddle."

For a moment their lips clung and then she stepped back with a broken
sigh. "I'll do the best I can, but oh! how I wish it all were over and
that we had you home again."

A spasm crossed the man's face. "It soon _will_ be over, sweetheart. It
soon _will_ be."

His wife flung him a startled look. "You mean--Oh, Herbert! Isn't there
a single hope--even the tiniest ray?"

Cary took her hands in his, looked into her eyes and his answer breathed
the still unconquered spirit of the South. "There is always hope--as
long as we have a man." Mrs. Cary went into the house, slowly, wearily,
and Cary turned to Virgie.

"Well, little lady," her father said, resting his hand on Virgie's
shining head. "Have you been taking good care of mother--and seeing that
Uncle Billy does his plowing right?"

"Yes, sir," came the prompt response. "Susan Jemima an' me have been
lookin' after everything--but we had to eat up General Butler!"

"General Butler," cried her father, astounded.

"Yes, Daddy--our lastest calf. We named him that 'cause one day when I
was feedin' him with milk he nearly swallowed my silver spoon."

"Ha-ha," laughed the amused soldier, and swept her up in his arms. "If
we could only get rid of all their generals as easy as that we'd promise
not to eat again for a week. Everything else all right?"

"No, sir," said Virgie, dolefully. "All the niggers has runned away--all
'cept Uncle Billy and Sally Ann. Jeems Henry runned away this morning."

"The deuce he did! The young scamp!"

"He's gone to join the Yankees," Virgie continued.

"What's that?" and Cary sprang up to pace to and fro. "I wonder which
way he went?"

"I don' know," whimpered Virgie forlornly. "I only wish I was a soldier
with a big, sharp sword like yours--'cause when the blue boys came I'd
_stick_ 'em in the stomach."

Mrs. Cary was coming down the steps now with a small package of food and
in the roadway Uncle Billy stood feeding and watering his master's
horse. In this bitterest of moments, when his own family had to be the
ones to hurry him along his way, there had come another and greater
danger--peril to those he loved.

"Tell me, dear," he said with his hand warm on his wife's soft shoulder.
"Is it true that Jeems Henry ran away this morning?"

"Yes," she nodded. "I knew the poor boy meant to leave us sooner or
later, so I made no effort to detain him."

"You did right," was the answer. "But which way did he go?"

"Up the river. To a Union camp on the Chickahominy."

"Chickahominy!" exclaimed Cary sharply, and bit his lips. "So that's the
lay of the land, eh! I'm mighty glad you told me this. But still--"
Cary's voice faded away under the weight of a sudden despair. What was
the use of fighting forever against such fearful odds? What could they
ever gain--save a little more honor--and at what dreadful cost?

"What makes you look so worried, Herbert?" his wife murmured, her nerves
on edge again.

"Yes, it's true," the man said with a groan. "They're gradually closing
in on us--surrounding Richmond."

"_Surrounding us?_" Mrs. Cary whispered, hardly believing her ears.

"Yes, it's true--all too true," the man burst out bitterly. "We can
fight against thousands--and against tens of thousands but, darling, we
can't fight half the world."

He sank down on the bench, one elbow on his crossed knee, the other arm
hanging listlessly by his side. His face grew lined and haggard. All the
spirit, the indomitable courage of a moment ago had fled before the
revelation that, try as they might, they could never conquer in this
terribly unequal fight. Then he threw out his hand and began to speak,
half to her and half to the unseen armies of his fellows.

"Our armies are exhausted. Dwindling day by day. We are drawing from the
cradle and the grave. Old men--who can scarcely bear the weight of a
musket on their shoulders: and boys--mere children--who are sacrificed
under the blood-stained wheels. The best! The flower of our land! We
are dumping them all into a big, red hopper. Feed! Feed! Always more
feed for this greedy machine of war!"

Silently wife and daughter came to the man in his despair, as if to ward
off some dark shape which hovered over him with brushing wings. Their
arms went around him together.

"There, there, dear," he heard a soft voice whisper, "don't grow
despondent. _Think!_ Even though you've fought a losing fight it has
been a glorious one--and God will not forget the Stars and Bars!
Remember,--you still have us--who love you to the end--and fight your
battles--on our knees."

Slowly the man looked up.

"Forgive me, honey," he murmured remorsefully. "You are right--and
bravest, after all. It is you--you women, who save us in the darkest
hours. You--our wives--our mothers--who wage a silent battle in the
lonely, broken homes. You give us love and pity--tenderness and tears--a
flag of pride that turns defeat to victory. The women of the South," he
cried, and Herbert Cary doffed his hat before his wife, "the crutch on
which the staggering hope of Dixie leans!"

There came, then, the sound of hurrying footsteps. Once more Sally Ann
rushed from the house but this time genuine danger was written plainly
in her face.

"Mars' Cary! Mars' Cary! Dey's comin' dis time--sho' 'nuff!"

"How many?" Cary cried, springing for the roadway and his horse.

"Dey's comin' thu' de woods--an' Lawd Gawd, de yearth is fyar blue wid'
'em."

"Billy!" commanded Cary. "Take Lightfoot as fast as you can down to the
edge of the woods. Don't worry, Hallie, they'll never catch me once I'm
in the saddle."

He stooped and kissed her, then caught up Virgie for a last hug, burying
his worn face in her curls. "Good-by, little one. Take good care of
Mother. Good-by!"

With one last grasp his wife caught his hand. "Herbert! which way do you
go?"

"Across the river--to the Chesterfield side."

"But the Yankees came that way, too!"

"I'll circle around them. If they've left a guard at the crossing I'll
swim the river higher up." He slapped his holster with his open hand.
"Listen for three shots. If they come in quick succession--then I've
crossed--I'm safe. If I only had a few men I'd stay, but alone, I
can't--you know I can't. Good-by! God bless you." And in another moment
he was in the saddle--had waved his hand--was gone.

Straining their eyes after him, as if they would somehow pierce the dark
woods which hid his flight, mother and daughter stood as if turned to
stone. Only Virgie, after a moment, waved her hand and sent her soft,
childish prayer winging after him to save him from all harm. "Good-by,
Daddy-man, good-by!"

Sally Ann, however, having seen the approaching danger with her own
eyes, began to wring her hands and cry hysterically. "Aw, Miss Hallie, I
so skeered! I so skeered!"

"Sally," cried Mrs. Cary, as the sound of hoofbeats thudding through the
woods came unmistakably to her ears, "take Virgie with you instantly
and run down through the grove to the old ice house. Hide there under
the pine tags. Understand?"

But the negro girl, ashen with terror, seemed incapable of flight.

"I skeered to go, Miss Hallie," she whimpered. "I wan' stay here wid
you! Ou-ou!"

"But you can't, I tell you," her mistress answered, as the certainty of
the girl's helplessness before a questioner flashed through her mind.
"You'd tell everything."

"Oh, come on, you big baby," Virgie urged, pulling at Sally Arm's
sleeve. "_I'll_ take care of you." Then her eye fell on Susan Jemima
lying neglected on the bench and she gave a faint scream at her
heartlessness. "Goodness gracious, Mother," she cried, as, still holding
on to Sally Ann, she ran and caught up her beloved doll. "I nearly
forgot my child!"

With the clank of sabers and the sound of gruff commands already in her
ears, Mrs. Cary turned peremptorily to Uncle Billy.

"Remember, William! If the Yankees ask for my husband _you haven't seen
him!_"

"Nor'm, dat's right," was the prompt answer. "I dunno you eben got one.
But you go in de house, Miss Hallie. Dat's de bes' way,--yas'm."

"Perhaps it _is_ best," his mistress answered. "The longer we can detain
them the better for Captain Cary. You'd better come in yourself."

"Yas'm," replied the faithful old man, although such action was farthest
from his thoughts. "In des' a minnit. I'll be dar in des' a minnit."

But once his mistress had closed the door behind her Uncle Billy's plan
of operations changed. Hurrying down the steps he plunged his arm under
the porch and drew forth--a rusty ax. With his weapon over his shoulder
he hastened up on the veranda and stood with his back against the door.


CHAPTER III


The thudding feet came nearer. A bugle call--a rattling of accouterments
and then, from the other side of the hedge, came a half dozen troopers
in blue, led by a Sergeant with a red face and bloodshot eyes.

"This way, boys!" the Sergeant shouted, and at the sound of a harsh,
never-forgotten voice Uncle Billy's grasp on his ax grew tighter. "_I_
know the place--I've been here before. _We'll_ get the liquor and silver
while the Colonel is stealing the horses, eh?" Then his eyes fell on
Uncle Billy and he greeted him with a yell of recognition. He had "recipes"
for exterminating from a field, blight, tares, foxtail, and all parasitic
growths which destroy the wheat. He defended a rabbit warren against
rats, simply by the odor of a guinea-pig which he placed in it.

One day he saw some country people busily engaged in pulling up nettles;
he examined the plants, which were uprooted and already dried, and
said:
"They are dead. Nevertheless, it would be a good thing to know how to make
use of them.

When the nettle is young, the leaf makes an excellent vegetable; when it
is older, it has filaments and fibres like hemp and flax. Nettle cloth
is as good as linen cloth. Chopped up, nettles are good for poultry;
pounded, they are good for horned cattle. The seed of the nettle,
mixed with fodder, gives gloss to the hair of animals; the root,
mixed with salt, produces a beautiful yellow coloring-matter.

Moreover, it is an excellent hay, which can be cut twice. And what
is required for the nettle? A little soil, no care, no culture.

Only the seed falls as it is ripe, and it is difficult to collect it. That
is all.

With the exercise of a little care, the nettle could be made useful;
it is neglected and it becomes hurtful.

It is exterminated. How many men resemble the nettle!" He added, after
a pause: "Remember this, my friends: there are no such things as
bad plants or bad men.

There are only bad cultivators."
The children loved him because he knew how to make charming little
trifles of straw and cocoanuts.

When he saw the door of a church hung in black, he entered: he
sought out funerals as other men seek christenings.

Widowhood and the grief of others attracted him, because of his great
gentleness; he mingled with the friends clad in mourning, with families
dressed in black, with the priests groaning around a coffin.

He seemed to like to give to his thoughts for text these funereal psalmodies
filled with the vision of the other world. With his eyes fixed on
heaven, he listened with a sort of aspiration towards all the mysteries
of the infinite, those sad voices which sing on the verge of the
obscure abyss of death.

He performed a multitude of good actions, concealing his agency in them
as a man conceals himself because of evil actions. He penetrated houses
privately, at night; he ascended staircases furtively.

A poor wretch on returning to his attic would find that his door had been
opened, sometimes even forced, during his absence. The poor man made a
clamor over it: some malefactor had been there! He entered, and the
first thing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on some piece
of furniture. The "malefactor" who had been there was Father Madeleine.

He was affable and sad. The people said: "There is a rich man who
has not a haughty air. There is a happy man who has not a contented
air."
Some people maintained that he was a mysterious person, and that
no one ever entered his chamber, which was a regular anchorite's
cell, furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones
and skulls of dead men!

This was much talked of, so that one of the elegant and malicious young
women of M. sur M. came to him one day, and asked:
"Monsieur le Maire, pray show us your chamber. It is said to be a
grotto."

He smiled, and introduced them instantly into this "grotto." They
were well punished for their curiosity. The room was very simply
furnished in mahogany, which was rather ugly, like all furniture
of that sort, and hung with paper worth twelve sous.

They could see nothing remarkable about it, except two candlesticks
of antique pattern which stood on the chimney-piece and appeared
to be silver, "for they were hall-marked," an observation full of
the type of wit of petty towns.

Nevertheless, people continued to say that no one ever got into the
room, and that it was a hermit's cave, a mysterious retreat, a
hole, a tomb.

It was also whispered about that he had "immense" sums deposited
with Laffitte, with this peculiar feature, that they were always
at his immediate disposal, so that, it was added, M.

Madeleine could make his appearance at Laffitte's any morning,
sign a receipt, and carry off his two or three millions in ten
minutes.

In reality, "these two or three millions" were reducible, as we have
said, to six hundred and thirty or forty thousand francs.

CHAPTER IV--M. MADELEINE IN MOURNING
At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M.
Myriel, Bishop of D----, surnamed "Monseigneur Bienvenu," who had
died in the odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two.

The Bishop of D---- to supply here a detail which the papers omitted--had
been blind for many years before his death, and content to be blind,
as his sister was beside him.

Let us remark by the way, that to be blind and to be loved, is, in fact,
one of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon this
earth, where nothing is complete.

To have continually at one's side a woman, a daughter, a sister, a
charming being, who is there because you need her and because she
cannot do without you; to know that we are indispensable to a person
who is necessary to us; to be able to incessantly measure one's
affection by the amount of her presence which she bestows on us,
and to say to ourselves, "Since she consecrates the whole of her
time to me, it is because I possess the whole of her heart"; to
behold her thought in lieu of her face; to be able to verify the
fidelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world; to regard the
rustle of a gown as the sound of wings; to hear her come and go,
retire, speak, return, sing, and to think that one is the centre
of these steps, of this speech; to manifest at each instant one's
personal attraction; to feel one's self all the more powerful because
of one's infirmity; to become in one's obscurity, and through one's
obscurity, the star around which this angel gravitates,--few
felicities equal this.

The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction that one
is loved; loved for one's own sake--let us say rather, loved in
spite of one's self; this conviction the blind man possesses.

To be served in distress is to be caressed. Does he lack anything?
No. One does not lose the sight when one has love. And what love! A
love wholly constituted of virtue! There is no blindness where there
is certainty.

Soul seeks soul, gropingly, and finds it.

And this soul, found and tested, is a woman. A hand sustains you; it is
hers: a mouth lightly touches your brow; it is her mouth: you hear a
breath very near you; it is hers. To have everything of her, from her
worship to her pity, never to be left, to have that sweet weakness
aiding you, to lean upon that immovable reed, to touch Providence
with one's hands, and to be able to take it in one's arms,--God
made tangible,--what bliss!

The heart, that obscure, celestial flower, undergoes a mysterious
blossoming.

One would not exchange that shadow for all brightness! The angel
soul is there, uninterruptedly there; if she departs, it is but
to return again; she vanishes like a dream, and reappears like reality.
One feels warmth approaching, and behold! she is there.

One overflows with serenity, with gayety, with ecstasy; one is a radiance
amid the night. And there are a thousand little cares. Nothings,
which are enormous in that void. The most ineffable accents of the feminine
voice employed to lull you, and supplying the vanished universe
to you.

One is caressed with the soul.

One sees nothing, but one feels that one is adored.

It is a paradise of shadows.

It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to
the other.

The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M.
sur M. On the following day, M.

Madeleine appeared clad wholly in black, and with crape on his hat.

This mourning was noticed in the town, and commented on. It seemed
to throw a light on M. Madeleine's origin.

It was concluded that some relationship existed between him and the
venerable Bishop.

"He has gone into mourning for the Bishop of D----" said the drawing-rooms;
this raised M. Madeleine's credit greatly, and procured for him, instantly
and at one blow, a certain consideration in the noble world of M. sur
M. The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditated raising
the quarantine against M. Madeleine, the probable relative of a
bishop.

M. Madeleine perceived the advancement which he had obtained, by the
more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentiful
smiles of the young ones. One evening, a ruler in that petty
great world, who was curious by right of seniority, ventured to
ask him, "M. le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of
D----?"

He said, "No, Madame."
"But," resumed the dowager, "you are wearing mourning for him."

He replied, "It is because I was a servant in his family in my
youth."

Another thing which was remarked, was, that every time that he encountered
in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the country and
seeking chimneys to sweep, the mayor had him summoned, inquired
his name, and gave him money.

The little Savoyards told each other about it: a great many of them passed
that way.

CHAPTER V--VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON
Little by little, and in the course of time, all this opposition subsided.
There had at first been exercised against M.

Madeleine, in virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must
submit to, blackening and calumnies; then they grew to be nothing
more than ill-nature, then merely malicious remarks, then even this
entirely disappeared; respect became complete, unanimous, cordial,
and towards 1821 the moment arrived when the word "Monsieur le
Maire" was pronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as
"Monseigneur the Bishop" had been pronounced in D---- in 1815.

People came from a distance of ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine.
He put an end to differences, he prevented lawsuits, he reconciled enemies.
Every one took him for the judge, and with good reason.

It seemed as though he had for a soul the book of the natural law. It
was like an epidemic of veneration, which in the course of six or seven
years gradually took possession of the whole district.

One single man in the town, in the arrondissement, absolutely
escaped this contagion, and, whatever Father Madeleine did, remained his
opponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable
instinct kept him on the alert and uneasy.

It seems, in fact, as though there existed in certain men a veritable
bestial instinct, though pure and upright, like all instincts,
which creates antipathies and sympathies, which fatally separates
one nature from another nature, which does not hesitate, which feels
no disquiet, which does not hold its peace, and which never belies
itself, clear in its obscurity, infallible, imperious, intractable,
stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence and to all the dissolvents
of reason, and which, in whatever manner destinies are arranged,
secretly warns the man-dog of the presence of the man-cat, and the
man-fox of the presence of the man-lion.

It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along a
street, calm, affectionate, surrounded by the blessings of all, a
man of lofty stature, clad in an iron-gray frock-coat, armed with
a heavy cane, and wearing a battered hat, turned round abruptly
behind him, and followed him with his eyes until he disappeared,
with folded arms and a slow shake of the head, and his upper lip
raised in company with his lower to his nose, a sort of significant
grimace which might be translated by: "What is that man, after all?

I certainly have seen him somewhere. In any case, I am not his
dupe."

This person, grave with a gravity which was almost menacing, was one of
those men who, even when only seen by a rapid glimpse, arrest the
spectator's attention.

His name was Javert, and he belonged to the police.

At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of
an inspector.

He had not seen Madeleine's beginnings. Javert owed the post which he
occupied to the protection of M.

Chabouillet, the secretary of the Minister of State, Comte Angeles,
then prefect of police at Paris.

When Javert arrived at M. sur M. the fortune of the great manufacturer was
already made, and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine.

Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy, which is complicated
with an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority.

Javert possessed this physiognomy minus the baseness.

It is our conviction that if souls were visible to the eyes, we
should be able to see distinctly that strange thing that each one
individual of the human race corresponds to some one of the species
of the animal creation; and we could easily recognize this truth,
hardly perceived by the thinker, that from the oyster to the eagle,
from the pig to the tiger, all animals exist in man, and that each
one of them is in a man.

Sometimes even several of them at a time.

Animals are nothing else than the figures of our virtues and our vices,
straying before our eyes, the visible phantoms of our souls.

God shows them to us in order to induce us to reflect. Only since
animals are mere shadows, God has not made them capable of education
in the full sense of the word; what is the use?

On the contrary, our souls being realities and having a goal which
is appropriate to them, God has bestowed on them intelligence; that
is to say, the possibility of education.

Social education, when well done, can always draw from a soul, of
whatever sort it may be, the utility which it contains.

This, be it said, is of course from the restricted point of view
of the terrestrial life which is apparent, and without prejudging
the profound question of the anterior or ulterior personality of
the beings which are not man.

The visible _I_ in nowise authorizes the thinker to deny the latent
_I_.

Having made this reservation, let us pass on.

Now, if the reader will admit, for a moment, with us, that in every
man there is one of the animal species of creation, it will be easy for
us to say what there was in Police Officer Javert.

The peasants of Asturias are convinced that in every litter of
wolves there is one dog, which is killed by the mother because,
otherwise, as he grew up, he would devour the other little ones.

Give to this dog-son of a wolf a human face, and the result will be
Javert.

Javert had been born in prison, of a fortune-teller, whose husband
was in the galleys. As he grew up, he thought that he was outside the
pale of society, and he despaired of ever re-entering it.

He observed that society unpardoningly excludes two classes of
men,--those who attack it and those who guard it; he had no choice
except between these two classes; at the same time, he was conscious
of an indescribable foundation of rigidity, regularity, and probity,
complicated with an inexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians
whence he was sprung.

He entered the police; he succeeded there.

At forty years of age he was an inspector.

During his youth he had been employed in the convict establishments of the
South.

Before proceeding further, let us come to an understanding as to the
words, "human face," which we have just applied to Javert.

The human face of Javert consisted of a flat nose, with two deep
nostrils, towards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks.

One felt ill at ease when he saw these two forests and these two
caverns for the first time.

When Javert laughed,--and his laugh was rare and terrible,--his
thin lips parted and revealed to view not only his teeth, but his
gums, and around his nose there formed a flattened and savage fold,
as on the muzzle of a wild beast.

Javert, serious, was a watchdog; when he laughed, he was a tiger.

As for the rest, he had very little skull and a great deal of jaw; his
hair concealed his forehead and fell over his eyebrows; between his
eyes there was a permanent, central frown, like an imprint of
wrath; his gaze was obscure; his mouth pursed up and terrible; his
air that of ferocious command.

This man was composed of two very simple and two very good sentiments,
comparatively; but he rendered them almost bad, by dint of exaggerating
them,--respect for authority, hatred of rebellion; and in his eyes,
murder, robbery, all crimes, are only forms of rebellion.

He enveloped in a blind and profound faith every one who had a function
in the state, from the prime minister to the rural policeman.

He covered with scorn, aversion, and disgust every one who had once
crossed the legal threshold of evil.

He was absolute, and admitted no exceptions.

On the one hand, he said, "The functionary can make no mistake; the
magistrate is never the wrong."

On the other hand, he said, "These men are irremediably lost. Nothing
good can come from them."

He fully shared the opinion of those extreme minds which attribute to
human law I know not what power of making, or, if the reader will have
it so, of authenticating, demons, and who place a Styx at the base of
society.

He was stoical, serious, austere; a melancholy dreamer, humble and
haughty, like fanatics.

His glance was like a gimlet, cold and piercing. His whole life hung on
these two words: watchfulness and supervision. He had introduced a
straight line into what is the most crooked thing in the world;
he possessed the conscience of his usefulness, the religion of his
functions, and he was a spy as other men are priests.

Woe to the man who fell into his hands! He would have arrested his
own father, if the latter had escaped from the galleys, and would
have denounced his mother, if she had broken her ban.

And he would have done it with that sort of inward satisfaction which
is conferred by virtue. And, withal, a life of privation, isolation,
abnegation, chastity, with never a diversion.

It was implacable duty; the police understood, as the Spartans understood
Sparta, a pitiless lying in wait, a ferocious honesty, a marble
informer, Brutus in Vidocq.

Javert's whole person was expressive of the man who spies and
who withdraws himself from observation. The mystical school of Joseph
de Maistre, which at that epoch seasoned with lofty cosmogony those
things which were called the ultra newspapers, would not have failed
to declare that Javert was a symbol.

His brow was not visible; it disappeared beneath his hat: his eyes
were not visible, since they were lost under his eyebrows: his chin
was not visible, for it was plunged in his cravat: his hands were not
visible; they were drawn up in his sleeves:
and his cane was not visible; he carried it under his coat.

But when the occasion presented itself, there was suddenly seen to emerge
from all this shadow, as from an ambuscade, a narrow and angular
forehead, a baleful glance, a threatening chin, enormous hands, and
a monstrous cudgel.

In his leisure moments, which were far from frequent, he read, although
he hated books; this caused him to be not wholly illiterate.

This could be recognized by some emphasis in his speech.

As we have said, he had no vices. When he was pleased with himself, he
permitted himself a pinch of snuff.

Therein lay his connection with humanity.

The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was
the terror of that whole class which the annual statistics of the
Ministry of Justice designates under the rubric, Vagrants.

The name of Javert routed them by its mere utterance; the face of
Javert petrified them at sight.

Such was this formidable man.

Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine. An eye full of
suspicion and conjecture. M.

Madeleine had finally perceived the fact; but it seemed to be of no
importance to him.

He did not even put a question to Javert; he neither sought nor avoided
him; he bore that embarrassing and almost oppressive gaze without appearing
to notice it.
He treated Javert with ease and courtesy, as he did all the rest
of the world.

It was divined, from some words which escaped Javert, that he had
secretly investigated, with that curiosity which belongs to the
race, and into which there enters as much instinct as will, all the
anterior traces which Father Madeleine might have left elsewhere.

He seemed to know, and he sometimes said in covert words, that some one
had gleaned certain information in a certain district about a family which
had disappeared. Once he chanced to say, as he was talking to himself,
"I think I have him!"

Then he remained pensive for three days, and uttered not a word.

It seemed that the thread which he thought he held had broken.

Moreover, and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the too absolute
sense which certain words might present, there can be nothing really
infallible in a human creature, and the peculiarity of instinct is that
it can become confused, thrown off the track, and defeated.
Otherwise, it would be superior to intelligence, and the beast would
be found to be provided with a better light than man.

Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalness and
tranquillity of M. Madeleine.

One day, nevertheless, his strange manner appeared to produce an impression
on M. Madeleine. It was on the following occasion.

CHAPTER VI--FATHER FAUCHELEVENT
One morning M. Madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of M.
sur M.; he heard a noise, and saw a group some distance away. He
approached.
An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallen beneath his cart,
his horse having tumbled down.

This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had at
that time.

When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood, Fauchelevent, an ex-notary and
a peasant who was almost educated, had a business which was beginning
to be in a bad way. Fauchelevent had seen this simple workman grow
rich, while he, a lawyer, was being ruined.
Amen!"

And the man, who leaned against the door and watched, had also bowed his
head. A pain was in his throat--and in his heart--a pain that gripped
him, till two great tears rolled down his war-worn cheek and were lost
in his straggling beard.

"Virgie!" he whispered hoarsely. "Virgie!"

She started at the sound and looked about her, wondering; then, as the
name was called again, she slid from her chair and ran forward with a
joyous cry:

"Why, Daddy! Is it you? Is--"

She stopped, for the man had placed a finger on his lip and was pointing
to the door.

"Take a look down the road," he ordered, in a guarded voice; and, when
she had reached a point commanding the danger zone, he asked, "See
anybody?--soldiers?" She shook her head. "Hear anything?"

She stood for a moment listening, then ran to him, and sprang into his
waiting arms.

"It's all right, Daddy! It's all right now!"

He raised her, strained her to his breast, his cheek against her own.

"My little girl!" he murmured between his kisses. "My little rebel!" And
as she snuggled in his arms, her berry-stained fingers clasped tightly
about his neck, he asked her wistfully, "Did you miss me?--_awful_
much?"

"Yes," she nodded, looking into his eyes. "Yes--in the night time--when
the wind was talkin'; but, after while, when--Why, Daddy!" He had
staggered as he set her down, sinking into a chair and closing his eyes
as he leaned on the table's edge. "You are hurt!" she cried. "I--I can
see the blood!"

The wounded Southerner braced himself.

"No, dear, no," he strove to reassure her. "It isn't anything; only a
little scratch--from a Yank--that tried to get me. But he didn't,
though," the soldier added with a smile. "I'm just--tired."

The child regarded him in wondering awe, speaking in a half-breathed
whisper:

"Did he--did he _shoot_ at you?"

Her father nodded, with his hand on her tumbled hair.

"Yes, honey, I'm afraid he did; but I'm so used to it now I don't mind
it any more. Get me a drink of water, will you?" As Virgie obeyed in
silence, returning with the dripping gourd, the man went on: "I tried to
get here yesterday; but I couldn't. They chased me when I came
before--and now they're watching." He paused to sip at his draught of
water, glancing toward the carriage road. "Big fight down the river.
Listen! Can you hear the guns?"

"Yes, plain," she answered, tilting her tiny head. "An' las' night, when
I went to bed, I could hear 'em--oh! ever so loud: Boom! Boom!
Boom-boom! So I knelt up an' asked the Lord not to let any of 'em hit
you."

Two arms, in their tattered gray, slipped round the child. He kissed
her, in that strange, fierce passion of a man who has lost his mate,
and his grief-torn love is magnified in the mite who reflects her image
and her memory.

"Did you, honey?" he asked, with a trembling lip. "Well, I reckon that
saved your daddy, for not one shell touched him--no, not one!" He kissed
her again, and laughed. "And I tell you, Virgie, they were coming as
thick as bees."

Once more he sipped at the grateful, cooling draught of water, when the
child asked suddenly:

"How is Gen'ral Lee?"

Down came the gourd upon the table. The Southerner was on his feet, with
a stiffened back; and his dusty slouch hat was in his hand.

"He's well; God bless him! Well!"

The tone was deep and tender, proud, but as reverent as the baby's
prayer for her father's immunity from harm; yet the man who spoke sank
back into his seat, closing his eyes and repeating slowly, sadly:

"He's well; God bless him! But he's tired, darling--mighty tired."

"Daddy," the soldier's daughter asked, "will you tell him
somethin'--from me?"

"Yes, dear. What?"

"Tell him," said the child, with a thoughtful glance at Miss Susan
Jemima across the table, "tell him, if he ever marches along this way,
I'll come over to his tent and rub his head, like I do yours--if he'll
let me--till he goes to sleep." She clasped her fingers and looked into
her father's eyes, hopefully, appealingly. "Do you think he would,
if--if I washed my hands--real clean?"

The Southerner bit his lip and tried to smile.

"Yes, honey, I know he would! And think! He sent a message--to _you_."

"Did he?" she asked, wide-eyed, flushed with happiness. "What did he
say, Daddy? What?"

"He said," her father answered, taking her hands in his: "'She's a brave
little soldier, to stay there all alone. Dixie and I are proud of her!'"

"Oh, Daddy, did he? Did he?"

"Yes, dear, yes," the soldier nodded; "his very words. And look!" From
his boot leg he took a folded paper and spread it on his knee. "He
wrote you a pass--to Richmond. Can you read it?"

Virgie leaned against her father's shoulder, studying the paper long and
earnestly; then, presently looked up, with a note of grave but courteous
hesitation in her tone:

"Well--he--well, the Gen'ral writes a awful bad hand, Daddy."

Her father laughed in genuine delight, vowing in his heart to tell his
general and friend of this crushing criticism, if ever the fates of war
permitted them to meet again.

"Dead right!" he agreed, with hearty promptness. "But come, I'll read it
for you. Now then. Listen:

    "HEADQUARTERS OF THE ARMY OF NORTHERN VA.

    "_Pass Virginia Cary and escort through all Confederate lines and
    give safe-conduct wherever possible._

    "R.E. LEE, _General_."

There was silence for a moment, then Virgie looked up, with tears in her
eyes and voice.

"An' he did that--for little _me_? Oh, Daddy, I love him so much, it--it
makes me want to cry."

She hid her face on the coat of gray, and sobbed; while her father
stroked her hair and answered soothingly, but in a tone of mourning
reverie:

"So do we all, darling; big grown men, who have suffered, and are losing
all they love. They are ragged--and wounded--hungry--and, oh, so tired!
But, when they think of _him_, they draw up their belts another hole,
and say, '_For General Lee!_' And then they can fight and fight and
fight--till their hearts stop beating--and the god of battles writes
them a bloody pass!"

Again he had risen to his feet. He was speaking proudly, in the reckless
passion of the yet unconquered Southerner, only half-conscious of the
tot who watched him, wondering. So she came to him quickly, taking his
hand in both her own, and striving to bring him comfort from the
fountain of her little mother-heart.

"Don't you worry, Daddy-man. We'll--we'll whip 'em yet."

"No, dear--no," he sighed, as he dropped into his seat. "We won't. It's
hard enough on men; but harder still on children such as you." He
turned to her gravely, earnestly: "Virgie, I had hoped to get you
through to Richmond--to-day. But I can't. The Yankees have cut us off.
They are up the river and down the river--and all around us, I've been
nearly the whole night getting here; creeping through the woods--like an
old Molly-cotton-tail--with the blue boys everywhere, waiting to get me
if I showed my head."

"But they didn't, did they?" said Virgie, laughing at his reference to
the wise old rabbit and feeling for the pockets of his shabby coat, "Did
you--did you bring me anything?"

At her question the man cried out as if in pain, then reached for her in
a wave of yearning tenderness.

"Listen, dear; I--I had a little bundle for you--of--of things to eat."
He took her by the arms, and looked into her quaint, wise face, "And I
was so glad I had it, darling, for you are thinner than you were." He
paused to bite his lip, and continued haltingly, "There was bread in
that bundle--and meat--real meat--and sugar--and tea."

Virgie released herself and clapped her hands.

"Oh, Daddy, where is it?" she asked him happily, once more reaching for
the pocket. "'Cause I'm _so_ hungry for somethin' good."

"Don't! Don't!" he cried, as he drew his coat away, roughly, fiercely,
in the pain of unselfish suffering. "For Daddy's sake, don't!"

"Why, what is it, Daddy," she asked, in her shrillness of a child's
alarm, her eyes on the widening stain of red above his waist. "Is--is it
hurtin' you again? What is it, Daddy-man?"

"Your bundle," he answered, in the flat, dull tone of utter
hopelessness. "I lost it, Virgie. I lost it."

"Oh," she said, with a quaver of disappointment, which she vainly strove
to hide. "How did you do it?"

For a moment the man leaned limply against a chair-back, hiding his eyes
with one trembling hand; then he spoke in shamed apology:

"I--I couldn't help it, darling; because, you see, I hadn't any powder
left; and I was coming through the woods--just as I told you--when the
Yanks got sight of me." He smiled down at her bravely, striving to add a
dash of comedy to his tragic plight. "And I tell you, Virgie, your old
dad had to run like a turkey--wishing to the Lord he had wings, too."

Virgie did not smile in turn, and her father dropped back into his
former tone, his pale lips setting in a straight, hard line.

"And then--the blue boy I was telling you about--when he shot at me, I
must have stumbled, because, when I scrambled up, I--I couldn't see just
right; so I ran and ran, thinking of you, darling, and wanting to get to
you before--well, before it was breakfast time. I had your bundle in my
pocket; but when I fell--why, Virgie, don't you see?--I--I couldn't go
back and find it." He paused to choke, then spoke between his teeth, in
fury at a strength which had failed to breast a barrier of fate: "But I
_would_ have gone back, if I'd had any powder left. I _would_ have! I
would!"

A pitiful apology it was, from a man to a little child; a story told
only in its hundredth part, for why should he give its untold horrors to
a baby's ears? How could she understand that man-hunt in the early dawn?
The fugitive--with an empty pistol on his hip--wading swamps and
plunging through the tangled underbrush; alert and listening, darting
from tree to tree where the woods were thin; crouching behind some
fallen log to catch his laboring breath, then rising again to creep
along his way. He did not tell of the racking pain in his weary legs,
nor the protest of his pounding heart--the strain--the agony--the puffs
of smoke that floated above the pines, and the ping of bullets whining
through the trees. He did not tell of the ball that slid along his ribs,
leaving a fiery, aching memory behind, as the man crashed down a clay
bank, to lie for an instant in a crumpled heap, to rise and stumble
on--not toward the haven of his own Confederate lines, but forward, to
where a baby waited--through a dancing mist of red.

And so the soldier made his poor apology, turning his head away to
avoid a dreaded look in Virgie's big, reproachful eyes; then he added
one more lashwelt to his shame:

"And now your poor old daddy is no more use to you. I come to my little
girl with empty hands--with an empty gun--and an empty heart!"

He said it bitterly, in the self-accusing sorrow of his soul; and his
courage, which had borne him through a hell of suffering, now broke; but
only when a helper of the helpless failed. He laid his outflung arms
across the table. He bowed his beaten head upon them and sobbed aloud,
with sobs that shook him to his heels.

It was then that Virgie came to him again, a little daughter of the
South, who, like a hundred thousand of her sisters, brought comfort in
the blackest hours.

One tiny, weak arm was slipped about his neck. One tiny brown hand, with
its berry-stained fingers, was run through his tangled hair, softly,
tenderly, even as she longed to soothe the weary head of General Lee.

"Don't cry, Daddy-man," she murmured in his ear; "it's all right. _I_
can eat the blackberries. They--they don't taste so _awful_ good when
you have 'em _all_ the time; but _I_ don't mind." She paused to kiss
him, then tried once more to buoy his hope and hers. "We'll have jus'
heaps of things when we get to Richmon'--jus' heaps--an' then--"

She stopped abruptly, lifting her head and listening, in the manner of a
sheep dog scenting danger from afar. Her father looked up sharply and
gripped her hands.

"Virgie! You hear--_what_?"

"Horses! Oh, a lot of 'em! On the big road!"

It was true, for down the breeze came the faintly echoed thud of many
hoofs and the clinking jingle of sabers against the riders' thighs.
Virgie turned back from the open door.

"Why--why, they've turned into _our_ road!" Her breath came fast, as she
sank her voice to a faint, awed whisper, "Daddy--do you reckon
it's--_Yankees_?"

"Yes," said her father, who had risen to his feet. "Morrison's cavalry!
They won't hurt _you_; but I'll have to get to the woods again! Good-by,
honey! Good-by!"

He kissed her hurriedly and started for the door, but shrank into the
shadow at sight of a blue-clothed watcher sharply outlined on the crest
of a distant rise. Escape was cut off, and the hunted soldier turned to
Virgie in his need.

"Shut the door--quick!" She obeyed in silence. "Lock it!" She turned the
rusty key, and waited. "Now the windows! Hurry, but do it quietly."

She closed the clumsy shutters and set the heavy bars into their slots;
then the man came forward, knelt down before her and took her hands.

"Listen, Virginia," he whispered earnestly; "don't you remember how your
dear, dear mother--and I, too, darling--always told you never to tell a
lie?"

"An' I haven't, Daddy-man," she protested, wondering. "'Deed, an' 'deed,
I haven't. Why--"

"Yes, yes, I know," he interrupted hurriedly; "but now--_you must_!" As
the child stepped backward and tried to draw away, he clasped her hands
more tightly still. "But listen, dear; it's to save _me_! Don't you
understand?--and it's _right_! When those men come, they mustn't find
me. Say I _was_ here, but I've gone. If they ask which way, tell them I
went down past the spring--through the blackberry patch. Do you
understand?--and can you remember?" She nodded gravely, and the
Southerner folded her tightly in his arms. "Be a brave little rebel,
honey--_for me_!"

He released her and began to mount the ladder leading to the scuttle in
the ceiling; but halfway up he paused, as Virgie checked him with a
solemn question:

"Daddy--would Gen'ral Lee want me to tell that lie?"

"Yes, dear," he answered slowly, thoughtfully; "this once! And, if ever
you see him, ask him, and he'll tell you so himself. God help you,
darling; it's for General Lee--and _you_!"

The littlest rebel sighed, as though a weight had been lifted from her
mind, and she cocked her head at the sound of louder hoof-beats on the
carriage road.

"All right, Daddy-man. I'll tell--a _whopper_!"


CHAPTER V


The man crawled up through the scuttle hole and disappeared; then drew
the ladder after him and closed the trap, while Virgie tiptoed to the
table and slipped into a seat.

The cabin was now in semi-darkness, except for a shaft of sunlight
entering through the jagged wound from the cannon-shot above the door;
and it fell on the quaint, brown head of little Miss Virginia Cary, and
the placid form of Susan Jemima, perching opposite, in serene contempt
of the coming of a conquering host.

The jingling clank of sabers grew louder to the listeners' ears, through
the rumble of pounding hoofs; a bugle's note came winnowing across the
fields, and Virgie leaned forward with a confidential whisper to her
doll:

"Susan Jemima, I wouldn't tell anybody else--no, not for anything--but I
cert'n'y am awful scared!"

There came a scurrying rush, a command to halt, and a rustling,
scraping noise of dismounting men; a pause, and the sharp, loud rap of a
saber hilt against the door. Virgie breathed hard, but made no answer.

"Open up!" called a voice outside, but the little rebel closed her lips
and sat staring at Susan Jemima across the table. A silence followed,
short, yet filled with dread; then came a low-toned order and the crash
of carbine butts on the stout oak door. For a time it resisted
hopefully, then slowly its top sagged in, with a groaning, grating
protest from its rusty hinges; it swayed, collapsed in a cloud of
dust--and the enemy swept over it.

They came with a rush; in the lead an officer, a naked saber in his
fist, followed by a squad of grim-faced troopers, each with his carbine
cocked and ready for discharge. Yet, as suddenly as they had come, they
halted now at the sight of a little lady, seated at table, eating
berries, as calmly as though the dogs of war had never even growled.

A wondering silence followed, till broken by a piping voice, in grave
but courteous reproof:

"I--I don't think you are very polite."

The officer in command was forced to smile.

"I'm sorry, my dear," he apologized; "but am afraid, this time, I can't
quite help it." He glanced at the door of the adjoining room and turned
to his waiting men, though speaking in an undertone: "He's in there, I
guess. Don't fire if you can help it--on account of the baby. Now then!
Steady, boys! Advance!"

He led the way, six troopers following, while the rest remained behind
to guard the cabin's open door. Virgie slowly turned her head, with eyes
that watched the officer's every move; then presently she called:

"Hey, there! That's _my_ room--an' don't you-all bother any of my
things, either!"

This one command, at least, was implicitly obeyed, for in a moment the
disappointed squad returned. The carbine butts were grounded; the
troopers stood at orderly attention, while their officer stepped toward
the table.

"What's your name, little monkey?"

Virgie raised her eyes in swift reproach.

"I don't like to be called a monkey. It--it isn't respectful."

The Union soldier laughed.

"O-ho! I see." He touched his hat and made her a sweeping bow. "A
thousand pardons, Mademoiselle." He shot his sword into its scabbard,
and laughed again. "Might I inquire as to what you are called by
your--er--justly respectful relatives and friends?"

"Virgie," she answered simply.

"Ah," he approved, "and a very pretty name! Virgie what?"

"My whole name is Miss Virginia Houston Gary."

The soldier started, glanced at his troopers, then back to the child
again:

"Is Herbert Cary your father?"

He waited for her answer, and got it, straight from a baby's shoulder:

"_Mister_ Herbert Cary is--yes, sir."

The enemy smiled and made her another bow.

"I stand corrected. Where is your father now?"

Virgie hesitated.

"I--I don't know."

The voice of her inquisitor took on a sterner tone:

"Is he here?--hiding somewhere? Tell me!"

Her little heart was pounding, horribly, and the hot blood came into her
cheeks; but she looked him squarely in the face, and lied--for General
Lee:

"No, sir. Daddy _was_ here--but he's gone away."

The enemy was looking at her, intently, and his handsome, piercing eyes,
grew most uncomfortable. She hung for an instant between success and
sobbing failure, till a bubble from Mother Eve rose up in her youthful
blood and burst into a spray of perfect feminine deceit. She did not try
to add to her simple statement, but began to eat her berries, calmly, as
though the subject were completely closed.

"Which way did he go?" the officer demanded, and she pointed with her
spoon.

"Down by the spring--through the blackberry patch."

The soldier was half-convinced. He stood for a moment, looking at the
floor, then asked her sharply, suddenly:

"If your father had gone, then why did you lock that door?"

She faltered, but only for an instant.

"'Cause I thought you might be--_niggers_."

The man before her clenched his hands, as he thought of that new-born,
hideous danger menacing the South.

"I see," he answered gently; "_yes_, I see." He turned away, but, even
as he turned, his eye was caught by the double-doored cupboard against
the wall. "What do you keep in there?" he asked; and the child smiled
faintly, a trifle sadly, in reply:

"We _used_ to keep things to eat--when we had any."

He noted her mild evasion, and pushed the point.

"What is in it now?"

"Tin pans."

"Anything else?"

"Er--yes, sir."

He caught his breath and stepped a little nearer, bending till his face
was close to hers.

"What?"

"Colonel Mosby," declared the mite, with a most emphatic nod; "an' you
better look out, too!"

The officer laughed as he turned to his grinning squad.

"Bright little youngster! Still, I think we'll have a look." He dropped
his air of amusement, growing stern again. "Now, men! Ready!"

They swung into line and faced the cupboard, the muzzles of their
carbines trained upon it, while their leader advanced, swung open the
doors, and quickly stepped aside.

On the bottom shelf, as Virgie had declared, were a few disconsolate tin
pans; yet tacked to the door was a picture print of Mosby--that dreaded
guerrilla whose very name was a bugaboo in the Union lines.

The littlest rebel flung back her head and laughed.

"My, but you looked funny!" she cried to the somewhat disconcerted
officer, pointing at him with her spoon. "If a mouse had jumped out, I
reckon it would have scared you mos' to death."

The officer's cheeks flushed red, in spite of his every effort at
control; nor was he assisted by the knowledge that his men were
tittering behind his back. He turned upon them sharply.

"That will do," he said, and gave a brusque command: "Corporal, deploy
your men and make a thorough search outside. Examine the ground around
the spring--and report!"

"Yes, sir," returned Corporal Dudley saluting and dropping his hand
across his mouth to choke off an exclamation of anger. Then he snarled
at his men, to ease the pain of thwarted vengeance: "_'Tention! Right
face! Forward! March!_"

The squad trooped out across the broken door, leaving their commanding
officer alone with his rebel prisoner.

"Now, Virgie," he asked, in a kindly tone, though holding her eyes with
his, "do you mean to tell me--cross your heart--that you are here, just
by yourself?"

"Er--no, sir." As he opened his lips to speak, she pointed to her doll.
"Me an' Susan Jemima."

"Well, that's a fact," he laughed. "Hanged if I'm not losing all my
social polish." He gallantly removed his hat, bowed gravely to the cedar
stick, and shook its hand. "Charmed to make your acquaintance, Miss
Susan, believe me. My own name is Morrison--Lieutenant-Colonel
Morrison--at your service." He turned to the little mother with a smile
that showed a row of white and even teeth. "And now," he said, "since we
are all informally introduced, suppose we have a quiet, comfortable
chat." He paused, but she made no answer. "Well? Aren't you going to ask
me to have some breakfast?"

Virgie cast a troubled gaze into the plate before her.

"Er--no, sir."

"What? Why not?"

She faltered, and answered slowly:

"'Cause--'cause you're one of the damn Yankees."

"Oh! oh! oh!" exclaimed the soldier, shocked to hear a baby's lips
profaned. "Little girls shouldn't use such words. Why, Virgie!"

She raised her eyes, clear, fearless, filled with vindicating innocence.

"Well, it's your _name_, isn't it? _Everybody_ calls you that."

"Um--yes," he admitted, striving to check the twitching of his lips; "I
suppose they do--south of Washington. But don't you know we are just
like other people?" She shook her head. "Oh, yes, we are. Why, _I_ have
a little girl at home--not any bigger than you."

"Have you?" asked Virgie, her budding racial prejudice at war with
youthful curiosity. "What's her name?"

"Gertrude," he answered softly, tenderly. "Gertrude Morrison. Would you
like to see her picture?"

"Yes," said the little rebel, and stepped across the gulf which had lain
between her and her enemy. "You can sit down if you want to. Jus' put
Susan Jemima on the table."

"Thank you," returned her visitor, obeying instructions, seating himself
and loosening the upper buttons of his coat. On his neck, suspended by
a chain, was a silver locket containing the miniature of a plump and
pretty child. It had lain there since the war began, through many a
bivouac, many a weary march, and even in the charge he could feel it
tapping against his breast; so now, as he held it out to Virgie, the
father's hand was trembling.

"There she is. My Gertrude--my little Gertrude."

Virgie leaned forward eagerly.

"Oh!" she said, in unaffected admiration, "She's _mighty_ pretty.
She's--" The child stopped suddenly, and raised her eyes. "An' she's
fat, too. I reckon Gertrude gets lots to eat, doesn't she?"

"Why, yes," agreed the father, thinking of his comfortable Northern
home; "of course. Don't you?"

Virgie weighed the question thoughtfully before she spoke.

"Sometimes--when Daddy gets through the lines and brings it to me."

The soldier started violently, wrenched back from the selfish dream of
happiness that rose as he looked at the picture of his child.

"What! Is _that_ why your father comes?"

"Yes, sir."

"I didn't know! I thought he came--"

He rose to his feet and turned away, his thoughts atumble, a pang of
parental pity gnawing at his heart; then he wheeled and faced her,
asking, with a break in his husky voice:

"And at other times--what do you eat, then?"

She made a quaint, depreciating gesture toward the appointments of her
breakfast table.

"Blackberries--an'--an' coffee made out of aco'ns."

Again the troubled conqueror turned away.

"Oh, it's a shame!" he muttered between his teeth. "A wicked shame!"

He stood for a moment, silently, till Virgie spoke and jarred him with
another confidence.

"My cousin Norris told me that the Yankees have bread every day; an'
tea--an' milk--an' everything. _An' butter!_"

This last-named article of common diet was mentioned with an air of
reverential awe; and, somehow, it hurt the well-fed Union officer far
more than had she made some direct accusation against the invading
armies of the North.

"Don't, Virgie--please," he murmured softly. "There are some things we
just can't bear to listen to--even in times of war." He sighed and
dropped into his former seat, striving gently to change the subject.
"You have lived here--always?"

"Oh, no," she assured him, with a lift of her small, patrician brows.
"_This_ is the overseer's house. _Our_ house used to be up on the hill,
in the grove."

"_Used_ to be--?"

"Yes, sir. But--but the Yankees burnt it up."

Morrison's fist came down on the table with a crash. He remembered now
his raid of some months before upon this same plantation, so unfamiliar
in its present neglected state. Again he looked into the fearless eyes
of a Southern gentlewoman who mocked him while her lover husband swam
the river and escaped. Again he saw the mansion wrapped in flame and
smoke--the work of a drunken fiend in his own command. Yes, he
remembered now; too well; then he turned to the child and spoke:

"Tell me about it. Won't you?"

She nodded, wriggled from her chair, and stood beside the table.

"Oh, it was a long time ago--a month, maybe--an' they came after our
horses. Mamma an' me were all by ourselves--'ceptin' Uncle Billy and
Sally Ann. An' we were dreadful scared--an' we hid in the ice house."

She paused. Her listener had leaned his elbow on the table, his hand
across his eyes.

"Yes, dear. Go on."

The child had been standing opposite, with Susan Jemima and the
acorn-coffee pot between them; but gradually she began to edge a little
nearer, till presently she stood beside him, fingering a shiny button on
his coat.

"An' the blue boys ate up everything we had--an' took our corn. An' when
they went away from our house, they--a man set it on fire. But another
man got real mad with him, an'--an' shot him. _I_ know, 'cause Uncle
Billy put him in the ground." She paused, then sank her voice to a
whisper of mysterious dread, "An'--_an' I saw him!_"

"Don't think about it, Virgie," begged Morrison, slipping his arm about
the mite, and trying not to put his own beloved ones in the little
rebel's place. "What happened then?"

"We came to live here," said Virgie; "but Mamma got sick. Oh, she got
terrible sick--an' one night Daddy came through, and put her in the
ground, too. But _he_ says she's jus' asleep."

The soldier started. Mrs. Cary dead? This poor tot motherless? He drew
the baby closer to him, stroking her hair, as her sleeping mother might
have done, and waited for the rest.

"An' las' Friday, Sally Ann went away--I don't know where--an'--"

"What?" asked Morrison. "She left you here--all by yourself?"

"Yes, sir," said the child, with a careless laugh. "But _I_ don't mind.
Sally Ann was a triflin' nigger, anyhow. You see--"

"Wait a minute," he interrupted, "what became of the old colored man
who--"

"Uncle Billy? Yes, sir. We sent him up to Richmond--to get some things,
but he can't come back--the Yankees won't let him."

"Won't they?"

"No, sir. An' Daddy's been tryin' to get me up to Richmon', where my
Aunt Margaret lives at, but he can't--'cause the Yankees are up the
river an' down the river, an'--an' everywhere--an' he can't." She
paused, as Morrison turned to her from his restless pacing up and down.
"My, but you've got fine clo'es! Daddy's clo'es are all rags--with--with
holes in 'em."

He could not answer. There was nothing for him to say, and Virgie
scorched him with another question:

"What did you come after Daddy for?"

"Oh, not because I _wanted_ to, little girl," he burst out harshly. "But
you wouldn't understand." He had turned away, and was gazing through the
open door, listening to the muttered wrath of the big black guns far
down the river. "It's war! One of the hateful, pitiful things of war! I
came because I had my orders."

"From your Gen'ral?"

He lowered his chin, regarding her in mild astonishment.

"Yes--my General."

"An' do you love _him_--like _I_ love Gen'ral Lee?"

"Yes, dear," he answered earnestly; "of course."

He wondered again to see her turn away in sober thought, tracing lines
on the dusty floor with one small brown toe; for the child was wrestling
with a problem. If a soldier had orders from his general, as she herself
might put it, "he was _bound_ to come"; but still it was hard to
reconcile such duty with the capture of her father. Therefore, she
raised her tiny chin and resorted to tactics of a purely personal
nature:

"An' didn't you know, if you hurt my daddy, I'd tell Uncle Fitz Lee on
you?"

"No," the Yankee smiled. "Is he your uncle?"

The littlest rebel regarded him with a look of positive pity for his
ignorance.

"He's _everybody's_ uncle," she stated warmly. "An' if I was to tell
him, he'd come right after you an'--an' lick the _stuffins_ out of
you."

The soldier laughed.

"My dear," he confided, with a dancing twinkle in hip eye, "to tell you
the honest truth, your Uncle Fitz has done it already--_several_ times."

"Has he?" she cried, in rapturous delight. "Oh, _has_ he?"

"He has," the enemy repeated, with vigor and conviction. "But suppose we
shift our conversation to matters a shade more pleasant. Take you, for
instance. You see--" He stopped abruptly, turning his head and listening
with keen intentness. "What's that?" he asked.

"_I_ didn't hear anything," said Virgie, breathing very fast; but she
too had heard it--a sound above them, a scraping sound, as of someone
lying flat along the rafters and shifting his position and, while she
spoke, a telltale bit of plaster fell, and broke as it struck the floor.

Morrison looked up, starting as he saw the outlines of the closely
fitting scuttle, for the loft was so low and shallow that he had not
suspected its presence from an outside view; but now he was certain of
the fugitive's hiding-place. Virgie watched him, trembling, growing hot
in the pit of her little stomach; yet, when he faced her, she looked him
squarely in the eye, fighting one last battle for her daddy--as hopeless
as the tottering cause of the Stars and Bars.

"You--you don't think he can fly, do you?"

"No, little Rebel," the soldier answered gently, sadly; "but there are
other ways." He glanced at the table, measuring its height with the
pitch of the ceiling, then turned to her again: "Is your father in that
loft?" She made no answer, but began to back away. "Tell me the truth.
Look at me!" Still no answer, and he took a step toward her, speaking
sternly: "Do you hear me? _Look_ at me!"

She tried; but her courage was oozing fast. She had done her best, but
now it was more than the mite could stand; so she bit her lip to stop
its quivering, and turned her head away. For a moment the man stood,
silent, wondering if it was possible that the child had been coached in
a string of lies to trade upon his tenderness of heart; then he spoke,
in a voice of mingled pity and reproach:

"And so you told me a story. And all the rest--is a story, too. Oh,
Virgie! Virgie!"

"I didn't!" she cried, the big tears breaking, out at last. "I didn't
tell you stories'. Only jus' a _little_ one--for Daddy--an' Gen'ral
Lee."

She was sobbing now, and the man looked down upon her in genuine
compassion, his own eyes swimming at her childish grief, his soldier
heart athrob and aching at the duty he must perform.

"I'm sorry, dear," he sighed, removing her doll and dragging the table
across the floor to a point directly beneath the scuttle in the ceiling.

"What are you goin' to do?" she asked in terror, following as he moved.
"Oh, what are you goin' to do?"

He did not reply. He could not; but when he placed a chair upon the
table and prepared to mount, then Virgie understood.

"You shan't! You shan't!" she cried out shrilly. "He's my daddy--and you
shan't."

She pulled at the table, and when he would have put her aside, as gently
as he could, she attacked him fiercely, in a childish storm of passion,
sobbing, striking at him with her puny fists. The soldier bowed his head
and moved away.

"Oh, I can't! I can't!" he breathed, in conscience-stricken pain. "There
_must_ be some other way; and still--"

He stood irresolute, gazing through the open door, watching his men as
they hunted for a fellow man; listening to the sounds that floated
across the stricken fields--the calls of his troopers; the locusts in
the sun-parched woods chanting their shrill, harsh litany of drought;
but more insistent still came the muffled boom of the big black guns far
down the muddy James. They called to him, these guns, in the
hoarse-tongued majesty of war, bidding him forget himself, his love, his
pity--all else, but the grim command to a marching host--a host that
must reach its goal, though it marched on a road of human hearts.

The soldier set his teeth and turned to the little rebel, deciding on
his course of action; best for her, best for the man who lay in the
loft above, though now it must seem a brutal cruelty to both.

"Well, Virgie," he said, "since you haven't told me what I want to know,
I'll have to take you--and give you to the Yankees."

He stepped toward her swiftly and caught her by the wrist. She screamed
in terror, fighting to break his hold, while the trap above them opened,
and the head and shoulders of the Southerner appeared, his pistol held
in his outstretched hand.

"Drop it, you hound!" he ordered fiercely. "Drop it!"

The Northerner released his captive, but stood unmoved as he looked into
the pistol's muzzle and the blazing eyes of the cornered scout.

"I'm sorry," he said, in quiet dignity. "I'm very sorry; but I had to
bring you out." He paused, then spoke again: "And you needn't bother
about your gun. If you'd had any ammunition, our fire would have been
returned, back yonder in the woods. The game's up, Cary. Come down!"


CHAPTER VI


The head and shoulders disappeared. A short pause followed, then the
ladder came slowly down, and the Southerner descended, while Virgie
crouched, a sobbing little heap, beside her doll. But when he reached
the bottom rung, she rose to her feet and ran to meet him, weeping
bitterly.

"Oh, Daddy, Daddy, I didn't do it right! I didn't do it right!"

She buried her head in his tattered coat, while he slipped an arm about
her and tried to soothe a sorrow too great for such a tiny heart to
bear.

"But you did do it right," he told her. "It was my fault. Mine! My leg
got cramped, and I had to move." He stooped and kissed her. "It was _my_
fault, honey; but you?--you did it _splendidly_!" He patted her
tear-stained cheek, then turned to his captor, with a grim, hard smile
of resignation to his fate.

"Well, Colonel, you've had a long chase of it; but you've gotten my
brush at last."

The Union soldier faced him, speaking earnestly:

"Captain Cary, you're a brave man--and one of the best scouts in the
Confederate army. I regret this happening--more than I can say." The
Southerner shrugged his shoulders. His Northern captor asked: "Are you
carrying dispatches?"

"No."

"Any other papers?--of any kind?" No answer came, and he added sternly:
"It is quite useless to refuse. Give them to me."

He held out his hand, but his captive only looked him in the eyes; and
the answer, though spoken in an undertone, held a world of quiet
meaning:

"You can take it--_afterwards_."

The Federal officer bit his lip; and yet he could not, would not, be
denied. His request became demand, backed by authority and the right of
might, till Virgie broke in, in a piping voice of indignation:

"You can't have it! It's mine! My pass to Richmon'--from Gen'ral Lee."

Morrison turned slowly from the little rebel to the man.

"Is this true?" he asked.

The Southerner flushed, and for reply produced the rumpled paper from
his boot leg, and handed it over without a word. The Northerner read it
carefully.

    "_Pass Virginia Cary and escort through all Confederate lines and
    give safe-conduct wherever possible._

    "R.E. LEE, _General_."

The reader crushed the paper in his fist, while his hand sank slowly to
his side, then he raised his head and asked, in a voice which was
strangely out of keeping with a Lieutenant-Colonel of the Union Cavalry:

"And who was to be her escort? You?"

The captive nodded, smiling his sad, grim smile; and the captor
swallowed hard as he moved to the cabin door and stood listening to the
muttered rumble of the river guns.

"I'm sorry, Cary," he whispered brokenly; "more sorry than you can
understand."

For a long time no one spoke, then the Southerner went to Virgie,
dropping his hand in tenderness on her tumbled hair.

"Just go into your room, honey; I want to talk to Colonel Morrison." She
looked up at him doubtfully; but he added, with a reassuring smile:
"It's all right, darling. I'll call you in just a minute."

Still Virgie seemed to hesitate. She shifted her doubting eyes toward
the Union officer, turned, and obeyed in silence, closing the door of
the adjoining room behind her. Then the two men faced each other,
without the hampering presence of the child, each conscious of the
coming tragedy that both, till now, had striven manfully to hide. The
one moved forward toward a seat, staggering as he walked, and catching
himself on the table's edge, while the other's hand went out to lend him
aid; but the Southerner waved him off.

"Thank you," he said, as he sank into a chair. "I don't _want_
help--from _you_!"

"Why not?" asked Morrison.

"Because," said Cary, in sullen anger, "I don't ask quarter, nor aid,
from a man who frightens children."

The Northerner's chin went up; and when he replied his voice was
trembling; not in passion, but with a deeper, finer something which had
gripped his admiration for the courage of a child:

"And I wouldn't hurt a hair of her splendid little head!" He paused,
then spoke again, more calmly: "You thought me a beast to frighten her;
but don't you know it was the only thing to do? Otherwise my men might
have had to shoot you--before her eyes." Cary made no answer, though now
he understood; and Morrison went on: "It isn't easy for me to track a
fellow creature down; to take him when he's wounded, practically
unarmed, and turn him over to a firing squad. But it's war, my
friend--one of the merciless realities of war--and you ought to know the
meaning of its name."

"Yes, I know," returned the Southerner, with all the pent-up bitterness
of a hopeless struggle and defeat; "it has taken three years to teach
me--_and I know_! Look at me!" he cried, as he stood up in his rags and
spread his arms. "Look at my country, swept as bare as a stubble field!
You've whipped us, maybe, with your millions of money and your endless
men, and now you are warring with the women and the children!" He turned
his back and spoke in the deep intensity of scorn: "A fine thing,
Colonel! And may you get your ... reward!"

The Northerner set his lips in a thin, cold line; but curbed his wrath
and answered the accusation quietly:

"There are two sides to the question, Cary; _but there must be one
flag_!"

"Then fly your flag in justice!" the Southerner retorted hotly, wheeling
on his enemy, with blazing eyes and with hands that shook in the stress
of passion. "A while ago you called me a brave man and a good scout;
and, because I'm both, your people have set a price on me. Five hundred
dollars--alive or dead!" He laughed; a hoarse, harsh travesty of mirth,
and added, with a lip that curled in withering contempt: "Alive or dead!
A gentleman and a scout!--for just half the price of one good, sound
nigger! By Heaven, it makes me proud!"

Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison looked across the table at his prisoner, and
answered gravely, yet with a touch of sternness in his military tone:

"You are more than a scout, Cary. The Mississippi, whose course
lies through extensive lime regions, brings down yearly lime enough
to supply all the animals living in the Gulf of Mexico. But behind this
lies a question not so easily settled, as to the origin of the
extensive deposits of limestone found at the very beginning of
life upon earth.

This problem brings us to the threshold of astronomy, for limestone is
metallic in character, susceptible therefore of fusion, and may
have formed a part of the materials of our earth, even in an incandescent
state, when the worlds were forming. But though this investigation as
to the origin of lime does not belong either to the naturalist or the
geologist, its suggestion reminds us that the time has come when
all the sciences and their results are so intimately connected that no
one can be carried on independently of the others.

Since the study of the rocks has revealed a crowded life whose records
are hoarded within them, the work of the geologist and the naturalist
has become one and the same, and at that border-land where the first crust
of the earth condensed out of the igneous mass of materials which
formed its earliest condition their investigation mingles with that of
the astronomer, and we cannot trace the limestone in a little Coral without
going back to the creation of our solar system, when the worlds
that compose it were thrown off from a central mass in a gaseous
condition.

When the Coral has become in this way permeated with lime, all
parts of the body are rigid, with the exception of the upper margin,
the stomach, and the tentacles.

The tentacles are soft and waving, projected or drawn in at will,
and they retain their flexible character through life, and decompose
when the animal dies. For this reason the dried specimens of Corals
preserved in museums do not give us the least idea of the living
Corals, in which every one of the millions of beings composing
such a community is crowned by a waving wreath of white or green
or rose-colored tentacles.

As soon as the little Coral is fairly established and solidly
attached to the ground, it begins to bud. This may take place in a
variety of ways, dividing at the top or budding from the base or from the
sides, till the primitive animal is surrounded by a number of
individuals like itself, of which it forms the nucleus, and which
now begin to bud in their turn, each one surrounding itself with a
numerous progeny, all remaining, however, attached to the parent.

Such a community increases till its individuals are numbered by
millions; and I have myself counted no less than fourteen millions
of individuals in a Coral mass measuring not more than twelve feet in
diameter.

These are the so-called Coral heads which form the foundation of a Coral
wall, and their massive character and regular form seem to be especially
adapted to give a strong, solid base to the whole structure. They are
known in our classifications as the Astraeans, so named on account
of the star-shaped form of the little pits that are crowded upon
the surface, each one marking the place of a single individual in
such a community.

Thus firmly and strongly is the foundation of the reef laid by the
Astraeans; but we have seen that for their prosperous growth they require
a certain depth and pressure of water, and when they have brought
the wall so high that they have not more than six fathoms of water
above them, this kind of Coral ceases to grow.

They have, however, prepared a fitting surface for different kinds
of Corals that could not live in the depths from which the Astraeans
have come, but find their genial home nearer the surface; such a
home being made ready for them by their predecessors, they now
establish themselves on the top of the Coral wall and continue its
growth for a certain time.

These are the Mandrinas, or the so-called Brain-Corals, and the Porites.
The Mandrinas differ from the Astraeans by their less compact and
definite pits. In the Astraeans the place occupied by the animal in
the community is marked by a little star-shaped spot, in the centre
of which all the partition-walls meet.

But in the Mandrinas, although all the partitions converge toward the
central opening, as in the Astraeans, these central openings
elongate, run into each other, and form waving furrows all over the
surface, instead of the small round pits so characteristic of the
Astraeans.

The Porites resemble the Astraeans, but the pits are smaller, with fewer
partitions and fewer tentacles, and their whole substance is more
porous.

But these also have their bounds within the sea: they in their turn reach
the limit beyond which they are forbidden by the laws of their nature
to pass, and there they also pause. But the Coral wall continues
its steady progress; for here the lighter kinds set in,--the Madrepores,
the Millepores, and a great variety of Sea-Fans and Corallines, and
the reef is crowned at last with a many-colored shrubbery of low
feathery growth.

These are all branching in form, and many of them are simple calciferous
plants, though most of them are true animals, resembling, however,
delicate Algae more than any marine animals; but, on examination
of the latter, one finds them to be covered with myriads of minute
dots, each representing one of the little beings out of which the
whole is built.

I would add here one word on the true nature of the Millepores,
long misunderstood by naturalists, because it throws light not only
on some interesting facts respecting Coral Reefs, especially the
ancient ones, but also because it tells us something of the early
inhabitants of the globe, and shows us that a class of Radiates
supposed to be missing in that primitive creation had its representatives
then as now.

In the diagram of the geological periods introduced in a previous
article, I have represented all the three classes of Radiates,
Polyps, Acalephs, and Echinoderms, as present on the first floor
of our globe that was inhabited at all.

But it is only recently that positive proofs have been found of the
existence of Acalephs or Jelly-Fishes, as they are called, at that early
period. Their very name indicates their delicate structure; and
were there no remains preserved in the rocks of these soft, transparent
creatures, it would yet be no evidence that they did not exist.

Fragile as they are, however, they have left here and there some
faint record of themselves, and in the Museum at Carlsruhe, on a
slab from Solenhofen, I have seen a very perfect outline of one
which remains undescribed to this day.

This, however, does not carry them farther back than the Jurassic
period, and it is only lately that I have satisfied myself that they
not only existed, but were among the most numerous animals in the first
representation of organic life.

The earliest Corals correspond in certain features of their structure
to the Millepores.

They differ from them as all early animals differ from the succeeding
ones, every geological period having its special set of representatives.

But still they are always true to their class, and have a certain general
correspondence with animals of like kind that follow them in later
periods. In this sense the Millepores are in our epoch the representatives
of those early Corals called by naturalists Tabulata and
Rugosa,--distinguished from the Polyp Corals by the horizontal
floors, waving in some, straight in others, which divide the body
transversely at successive heights through its whole length, and
also by the absence of the vertical partitions, extending from top
to bottom of each animal, so characteristic of the true Polyps.

As I have said, they were for a long time supposed, notwithstanding these
differences, to be Polyps, and I had shared in this opinion, till, during
the winter of 1857, while pursuing my investigations on the Coral
Reefs of Florida, one of these Millepores revealed itself to me in
its true character of Acaleph.

It is by its soft parts alone--those parts which are seen only in its
living state, and when the animal is fully open--that its
Acalephian character can be perceived, and this accounts for its
being so long accepted as a Polyp, when studied in the dry Coral
stock.

Nothing could exceed my astonishment when for the first time I saw such
an animal fully expanded, and found it to be a true Acaleph. It
is exceedingly difficult to obtain a view of them in this state,
for, at any approach, they draw themselves in, and remain closed
to all investigation.

Only once, for a short hour, I had this opportunity; during that time one
of these little creatures revealed to me its whole structure, as
if to tell me, once for all, the story of its existence through all
the successive epochs from the dawn of Creation till now, and then
withdrew.

With my most patient watching, I have never been able to see one of them
open again. But to establish the fact that one of the Corals
represented from the earliest period till now, and indeed far more
numerous in the beginning than any other, was in truth no Polyp,
but an Acaleph, the glimpse I had was all-sufficient.

It came out as if to bear witness of its class,--as if to say, "We, too,
were among the hosts of living beings with which God first peopled His
earth."

With these branching Corals the reef reaches the level of high-water,
beyond which, as I have said, there can be no further growth, for want
of the action of the fresh sea-water. This dependence upon the vivifying
influence of the sea accounts for one unfailing feature in the Coral
walls.

They are always abrupt and steep on the seaward side, but have a
gentle slope towards the land. This is accounted for by the circumstance
that the Corals on the outer side of the reef are in immediate contact
with the pure ocean-water, while by their growth they partially exclude
the inner ones from the same influence,--the rapid growth of the latter
being also impeded by any impurity or foreign material washed away
from the neighboring shore and mingling with the water that fills
the channel between the main-land and the reef.

Thus the Coral Reefs, whether built around an island, or concentric to
a rounding shore, or along a straight line of coast, are always shelving
toward the land, while they are comparatively abrupt and steep toward
the sea.

This should be remembered, for, as we shall see hereafter, it has
an important bearing on the question of time as illustrated by Coral
Reefs.

I have spoken of the budding of Corals, by which each one becomes
the centre of a cluster; but this is not the only way in which they
multiply their kind.

They give birth to eggs also, which are carried on the inner edge
of their partition-walls, till they drop into the sea, where they
float about, little, soft, transparent, pear-shaped bodies, as
unlike as possible to the rigid stony structure they are to assume
hereafter.

In this condition they are covered with vibratile cilia or fringes, that
are always in rapid, uninterrupted motion, and keep them swimming about
in the water. It is by means of these little germs of the Corals, swimming
freely about during their earliest stages of growth, that the reef is
continued, at the various heights where special kinds die out, by those
that prosper at shallower depths; otherwise it would be impossible
to understand how this variety of building material, as it were,
is introduced wherever it is needed.

This point, formerly a puzzle to naturalists, has become quite clear since
it has been found that myriads of these little germs are poured into the
water surrounding a reef.

There they swim about till they find a genial spot on which to
establish themselves, when they become attached to the ground by
one end, while a depression takes place at the opposite end, which
gradually deepens to form the mouth and inner cavity, while the
edges expand to form the tentacles, and the productive life of the
little Coral begins:
it buds from every side, and becomes the foundation of a new
community.

I should add, that, beside the Polyps and the Acalephs, Mollusks also have
their representatives among the Corals. There is a group of small
Mollusks called Bryozoa, allied to the Clams by their structure, but
excessively minute when compared to the other members of their class,
which, like the other Corals, harden in consequence of an absorption
of solid materials, and contribute to the formation of the reef. Besides
these, there are certain plants, limestone Algae,--Corallines, as they
are called,--which have their share also in the work.

I had intended to give some account of the Coral Reefs of Florida, and
to show what bearing they have upon the question of time and the
permanence of Species; but this cursory sketch of Coral Reefs in
general has grown to such dimensions that I must reserve a more
particular account of the Florida Reefs and Keys for a future article

.

* * * * *

SPIRITS.

"Did you ever see a ghost?" said a gentleman to his friend.

"No, but I once came very nigh seeing one," was the facetious
reply.

The writer of this article has had still better luck,--having _twice_
come very nigh seeing a ghost.

In other words, two friends, in whose veracity and healthy clearness
of vision I have perfect confidence, have assured me that they have
distinctly seen a disembodied spirit.

If I had permission to do so, I would record the street in Boston, and
the number of the house, where the first of these two apparitions
was seen; but that would be unpleasant to parties concerned.

Years ago, the lady who witnessed it told me the particulars, and I
have recently heard her repeat them. A cousin, with whom her relations
were as intimate as with a brother, was in the last stages of
consumption.

One morning, when she carried him her customary offering of fruit or
flowers, she found him unusually bright, his cheeks flushed, his eyes
brilliant, and his state of mind exceedingly cheerful.

He talked of his recovery and future plans in life with hopefulness almost
amounting to certainty.

This made her somewhat sad, for she regarded it as a delusion of his
flattering disease, a flaring up of the life-candle before it sank
in the socket.

She thus reported the case, when she returned home. In the afternoon
she was sewing as usual, surrounded by her mother and sisters, and
listening to one who was reading aloud.

While thus occupied, she chanced to raise her eyes from her work and
glance to the opposite corner of the room.
Her mother, seeing her give a sudden start, exclaimed, "What is the
matter?"

She pointed to the corner of the room and replied, "There is Cousin
------!"

       They all told her she had been dreaming, and was only half wakened.

She assured them she had not even been drowsy; and she repeated with
great earnestness, "There is Cousin ------, just as I saw him this
morning. Don't you see him?" She could not measure the time that the
vision remained; but it was long enough for several questions and answers
to pass rapidly between herself and other members of the family. In
reply to their persistent incredulity, she said, "It is very strange
that you don't see him; for I see him as plainly as I do any of
you."

She was so obviously awake and in her right mind, that the incident
naturally made an impression on those who listened to her. Her mother
looked at her watch, and despatched a messenger to inquire how Cousin
------ did.

Word was soon brought that he died at the same moment he had appeared
in the house of his relatives. The lady who had this singular
experience is too sensible and well-informed to be superstitious.

She was not afflicted with any disorder of the nerves, and was
in good health at the time.

To my other story I can give "a local habitation and a name" well
known.

When Harriet Hosmer, the sculptor, visited her native country a few years
ago, I had an interview with her, during which our conversation happened
to turn upon dreams and visions.

"I have had some experience in that way," said she.
Behind him, a few miles south
on the other bank of the James at Light House Point Sheridan was in camp
with two brigades and Cary knew this fast riding, hard striking
cavalryman too well not to suspect that the country, even in front of
him, was alive with Union men. There was the pass which Morrison had
given him, of course, but the worth of a pass in war time often depends
more on him who receives it than on the signature.

But all those things, even food, would have to wait for a while because
he was consumed with thirst and must find water before he went another
mile forward.

A tired sigh from Virgie caught his ear and he stopped by a stone wall
and let her get down from his shoulder. The child stood up on the broad,
flat stones and then gave a little cry of pain. She raised one foot up
and nursed it against her dusty, brown leg, meanwhile clutching her doll
closer to her neck.

"It's all right, honey; be a brave little girl," her father said
consolingly. "There's a spring along here somewhere and we can look
after that poor little foot. Ah, there it is," he cried, as he caught
sight of a big rock behind a stone wall with a seepage of water under it
among some trees at one side. "Just sit still a minute--till I rest--and
then we'll have a look." He leaned back against the wall and closed his
eyes to shut out the dizziness with which exhaustion and hunger filled
his aching head.

The child watched him anxiously for a moment and then put a soft little
hand on his shoulder:

"Are you _so_ tired, Daddy-man?"

"Yes, dear," he answered with a faint smile as he opened his eyes. "I
had to catch my breath, but I'm really all right. Now then, we'll call
in the hospital corps."

Virgie slipped down and sat on the top of the wall with her foot in her
hand, rocking to and fro, but bravely saying nothing until her father's
eye caught the look of pain on her pinched face.

"Does it hurt you much, dear?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. It--it hurts like the mischief," answered Virgie in a small
voice. "It keeps jumping up and down."

"Little woman, that's too bad," he said with a consoling pat on the head
which seemed to take most of the pain away. "But after we bathe it and
tie it up it will feel better."

Kneeling beside the spring he took off his campaign hat of felt and
dipped it full of clear, cold water.

"Wow!" cried Virgie suddenly in the interval and she slapped her leg
with a resounding whack. "There are 'skeeters roun' this place. One of
'em bit me--an old _he_ one. Jiminy!"

"Did he?" asked her father, smiling as he came back with the hat. "Well,
honey, there are much worse things in this world than those little
fellows and if you don't complain any more than that you're going to be
a very happy lady when you grow up."

"Like Mamma?" asked the little tot, with a thoughtful face.

"Just like Mamma," the man repeated. "The loveliest--the bravest--and
the _best_." He wavered a little on his feet and the hat threatened to
slip through his fingers, but his daughter's great, dark eyes were
steady on his and, curiously enough, he seemed to draw strength to pull
himself together.

"And now, let's see. We'll have to get the grime off first. Just dip the
little wounded soldier in."

"What! My foot in your hat!" protested Virgie with a little scream. "Oh,
you poor daddy!"

"Why, that's all right, honey," he laughed, pleased at her daintiness.
"That hat's an old veteran. He don't mind anything. So--souse her in.

"There--easy now--_easy_" as she threatened to capsize this curious
basin. "Big toe first.

"Yes, I know it's cold," he laughed as the water stung the broken skin
and made her twitch involuntarily, "but bathing will do it good. I just
know it feels better already--doesn't it?"

"Yes, sir," answered Virgie meekly, "only--it jumps up and down harder
than ever. But of course I know it must be getting better."

"Good! What did I tell you? Now let Daddy look."

He lifted her foot up tenderly and examined it with care. "My, my!" he
murmured. "You poor little soldier. If I hadn't looked around that time
I expect you'd been willing to walk all the way to Richmond on a foot
that would make a whole regiment straggle. Just see where you've cut
it--right under the second little piggie. We'll have to tie it right up
and keep the bothersome old dust from getting in. By morning you'll
hardly feel it."

With a soldier's readiness he opened his coat and began to tear a strip
from his shirt from which to make a bandage. But his small daughter
interrupted him with a vigorous protest.

"Wait!" she cried, with a face full of alarm at the willful destruction
of his garment. "Don't do that. Here! You can take it off my petticoat."

"_That_ petticoat," her father laughed, with the first real mirth she
had heard for many weeks. "That poor little petticoat wouldn't make an
arm bandage for Susan Jemima. Now--up with your hoofie and let's play
I'm a surgeon and you're a brave soldier who has fought in every battle
since we first made the Yanks skedaddle at Bull Run."

With the painful foot securely bandaged the little girl gave herself up
to thought, emerging from her study at last to ask what was an
all-important question.

"Daddy--"

"Yes?"

"Do you reckon, by the time the war is over, we could call Susan Jemima
a vet'ran?"

"I should say we could," the father agreed heartily, without the symptom
of a smile. "Hasn't she grown bald in the service? And hasn't she almost
lost an arm--or is it a leg I see dangling so terribly? I'll tell you
what we'll do! We'll give her an honorable discharge--and decorate her.
How's that?"

"Oh, fine!" she cried, clapping her hands with delight at the fantasy.
"And we'll get that Yankee man to write her a pass just like mine. Do
you hear that, Cap'n Susan," she crooned to the doll, unconscious of the
convulsion of silent amusement beside her. "When we get to Richmon'--if
we ever _do_ get there--I'm going to make you a uniform!"

Then she turned to her father with a little sigh, for the miles seemed
very long.

"How far _is_ it to Richmon', Daddy-man?" she said.

"Just about twelve miles," her father answered. "But they're real old
country miles, I'm sorry to say."

"Can we get to it to-night?"

The simple little question made the man's heart ache. What wouldn't he
give for an hour of Roger once more--or Belle--or Lightfoot!
Anything--even one of the old plantation mules would do if he could only
perch her up on its back and take her into Richmond like a lady and not
like the daughter of poor white trash, tramping, poverty stricken, along
a dusty road.

"No, dear, not to-night," he sighed. "We've come a long way and we're
both tired. So when it gets dark we'll curl up somewhere in the nice,
sweet woods and take a snooze, just like camping out. And then--in the
morning, when the old sun comes sneaking up through the trees, we'll
fool him! We won't wait till he can make it hot, but we'll get right up
with the birds and the squirrels and we'll just run right along. And by
twelve o'clock we'll be in Richmond--where they have good things to eat.
So there you are--all mapped out. Only now we'll have a belt supper."

"A belt supper?" queried the child curiously, though her face brightened
at the thought of _any_ kind of supper, made out of belts or any other
thing.

"Um-hum," asseverated her father gravely. "See--this is the way it's
done."

He cupped his hands and took a draught from the spring, pretending to
chew it as it went down. "You take a big drink of nice cold water; then
draw up your belt as tight as you can--and say your prayers."

To his surprise his small daughter only sniffed scornfully.

"Oh, shucks, Daddy! I know a better way than that. Susan an' me used to
do it all the time while you were away."

"What did you do?" he asked curiously, for he had forgotten that more
than half the childish play world is the world of "make believe.'"

"Why, we--we just '_let on_,'" she answered, with simple naïveté. "Sit
down an' I'll show you how."

He sat down obediently, but not before he had picked up an old tin can
from nearby and set it carefully between them.

"This rock is our table--the moss is the table cloth. Oh, it isn't
green," she cried as he looked down in serious doubt. "You must _help_
me make believe. Now--doesn't it look nice and white?"

"It does, indeed. I can see nothing but snowy linen of the finest
texture," he responded instantly.

"That's better," complimented his hostess. And then with a grand air--

"I'm so glad you dropped in, sir--an' just at supper time. Pass your
plate an' allow me to help you to some batter bread."

"Batter bread! Ah, just what I was hoping for," her guest replied,
thankfully extending his plate for the imaginary feast.

"Thank you. Delicious. The very best I've tasted for a year. Did you
make it yourself?"

"Oh, dear, no--the cook."

"Ah, of course! Pray pardon me, I might have known."

The little hostess inclined her head. "Take plenty of butter. 'Cause
batter bread isn't good 'thout butter."

"Thank you--what lovely golden butter. And--goodness gracious! What is
this I see before me? Can this really be a sausage?"

"Yes, sir," laughed Virgie with delight. "And there's the ham. I smoked
it myself over hick'ry wood. Please help yourself."

She pretended to arrange a cup and saucer in front of her and held
daintily in her fingers a pair of imaginary sugar tongs.

"Coffee? How many lumps? And _do_ you take cream?"

"Five, please--and a little cream. There--just right."

She passed the cup gracefully and added a little moue of concern for the
efficiency of her ménage.

"I'm afraid you won't find it very hot," said this surprising young
hostess. "That butler of mine is growing absolutely _wuthless_."

"Then perhaps we can have something better," her guest responded
readily, and he picked up the battered old tin can. "Permit me, Miss
Cary, to offer you a glass of fine old blackberry wine which I carefully
brought with me to your beautiful home. It has been in my family wine
cellars since 1838.

"Well--" he cried, as Virgie suddenly sat back with a look of painful
recollection on her face.

"Oh, Daddy," she murmured pathetically, "_don't_ let's call it
_blackberry_ wine."

"Forgive me, darling," her father said tenderly, and he took the small
face between his hands and kissed her. "There, now--it's all right. It's
_all right_."

To create a diversion he looked behind him with a frown and spoke with
great severity to an imaginary waiter.

"Here, _Jo_! How dare you bring such terribly reminiscent stuff to our
table. Go get the port.

"We'll surely have to discharge that butler," he said. "He's too
shiftless. And now, fair lady, will you honor me by joining the humblest
of your admirers in a sip of port."

"With pleasure," answered his hostess, and lifted the can of water in
both hands. "Your health, sir. May your shadow never grow littler."

Half way through her drink Virgie stopped and slowly put the can down.
She looked at her father, who already had his finger at his lips. Voices
had come to them from down the road--the sounds of a party of men
talking and laughing as they marched along.

Cary's face took on again the grim lines which had been wiped away
momentarily by their little bit of play. He was trying to make himself
believe that the approaching party might be friends, although he knew
only too well that such a possibility was full of doubt. There were too
many scouting parties of Federals ready to pounce on Rebel patrols in
these perilous days to allow any but large forces of men to venture far
from Richmond, and when his own men sallied forth they did not go with
laughter but with tightly drawn, silent lips.

"S-s-s-h," he whispered, and held up his finger again, as she seemed
ready to burst into questioning.

Immediately she snuggled close to him and whispered hotly in his ear,
"Who are they, Daddy?"

"I don't know, honey," he whispered back. "But I'm afraid they're Yanks.
Keep quiet till they pass." And quickly deserting the stone under the
trees where they had had their "belt supper" he drew her with him behind
the large ledge of rock from under which the spring flowed out. Looking
behind them he saw that with good luck they could reach the shelter of
the woods and get up over the hill without being seen. But just now they
could not stir from their hiding place unless--unless the men were
Confederates. This faint hope, however, soon flickered out when he saw
the color of their uniforms.

Up the road came four dismounted men with a corporal in command. They
were taking it easy as they walked along, their caps thrust back, their
coats open and their Sharps' carbines carried in the variety of ways
that a soldier adopts to ease his shoulder of the burden that grows
heavier with every mile.

"Here's the place, boys," the Corporal called out as his eye fell on the
spring. "We can get some decent water, now. That James River water's too
yellow for any white man to put inside of him."

At the sound of a voice which he had heard that same morning while he
hid in the attic of the overseer's cabin Cary's hold on his daughter's
hand tightened warningly.

"Come along, Virgie," he whispered. "We'll get out of the way."

"But, Daddy," she protested in low tones, "we've got our pass."

"Yes, yes, I know," he answered, with a twinge of regret that the rest
of the world could not trust so faithfully to human kindness. "But
that's for emergency. Come along, honey--quick!"

Silently as a shadow the two stole out of the shelter of the ledge of
rock, and by dint of keeping it between them and the troopers, managed
to cover most of the open space between the spring and the protecting
trees without being seen. Meanwhile, they heard the Corporal giving his
commands.

"You, Collins, take sentry duty out there in the road for a while. As
soon as we make the coffee we'll bring you out a cup. Now--over the wall
with you, men."

Leaving one man behind to pace slowly up and down the dusty road the
four sprang over the wall and advanced towards the spring. It was well
the sight of the cool water held their eyes for if they had only looked
up they might have seen Virgie wresting her hand out of her father's
grasp and standing suddenly petrified with the thought that she had left
behind her one beloved possession.

"Here's the spring, Smith--under the rock. Fill up the canteens. Here,
Harry, help me get fire wood."

With a soldier's readiness when it comes to making camp one of the
troopers promptly collected the canteens and knelt down by the spring,
carefully submerging one at a time so as to get the sweet, cold water in
all its purity. Another opened the knapsacks and took out a can of
coffee, biscuits and some scraps of meat--not much with which to make a
meal but still so much more than many a Rebel soldier had that day as to
take on the proportions of a feast. Meanwhile, Corporal Dudley had drawn
his saber and was engaged in leisurely lopping off the dead branches of
a fallen tree.

"This strikes me a lot better than the camp," he remarked as he tossed
his firewood into a heap. "A man and his friends can have a quiet drink
here, without treating a whole battalion."

His eye fell on the ground near the spring as he spoke and he paused.
Then, with a grin on his face, he jabbed his saber into something which
lay there and held it transfixed on the point.

"Say, boys--look at this," and he shook poor Susan Jemima till her arms
and legs wiggled spasmodically and her dress seemed on the point of
complete disintegration.

Perhaps, if Corporal Dudley had not laughed derisively Virgie might have
stayed hidden in the protection of the trees, but this outrageous
insult combined with the terrible sight of poor Susan Jemima impaled on
a Yankee sword was too much for her bursting heart. With blazing eyes
she broke away from her father and dashed back to the group at the
spring.

"Here, you! You stop that," she cried angrily at the astonished
troopers, who caught up their carbines at the sound of feet. "_How dare
you!_"

There was a moment of surprise and then the four broke out in guffaws of
laughter.

"Well, hang me if it isn't the little girl we saw this morning," shouted
Dudley, without, however, stopping the torture of the defenseless Susan
Jemima. "Where did _you_ drop from?"

"Ne'm min' where I dropped from," commanded the wrathful Virgie with her
dark eyes like twin stars of hate. "You're the meanest old thing I ever
saw. _Give me back my baby!_"

Back in the trees a little way a man was watching with a heavy heart. He
knew only too well what was to come. No matter what the final outcome
might be when he showed his safe-guard to his own army's lines there
would be a delay and searching questions and more of the old insults
which always made his blood boil--which always made the increasing
burden of despair still harder to bear. But there was no use in putting
off the trial--Virgie had slipped away in spite of every whispered
remonstrance and now that she was there in the center of that group of
guffawing Yankees, there, too, was the only place for him. And so, he
stepped out swiftly and faced the enemy.

"Hah!" shouted Dudley, looking up at the sound of branches crackling
underfoot. "A Johnnie Reb, eh--walking right into camp! That's right,
Harry, keep him covered."

He looked Cary over from head to foot with a sneer at his tattered
uniform.

"Well, sir," he asked, "who are you?"

"A Confederate officer," was the quiet reply, "acting as escort for this
child. We are on our way to Richmond."

Cary's hand went into the breast of his coat and he drew out a folded
paper.

"Here is my authority for entering your lines--a pass signed by
Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison."

At the sound of the name Corporal Dudley started and quickly took the
paper. But before he opened it he gave Cary a keen look which, to the
Confederate officer, did not bode well for the prospect of immediate
release. It seemed as if the man's sharp wits had suddenly seized on
something which he could profitably turn to his own account.

With his back turned on Cary and Virgie the Corporal unfolded the pass
and studied it carefully, while the troopers gathered behind him and
tried to read its contents over his shoulder.

"Pwhat does it say?" asked the young Irishman, Harry O'Connell, who had
covered Cary with his carbine. "'Tis a precious bit of paper, bedad--if
it passes him through _me_."

"It says: 'Pass Virginia Cary and escort through all Federal lines, and
assist them as far as possible in reaching Richmond,'" read the
Corporal.

Deep in thought he turned the paper over and studied the name on the
back. At the sight of the signature there his mouth fell open and he
uttered a shout of surprise. His eyes brightened and he stepped back
from the group and threw up his head with a look of triumph on his dark
face. He struck the paper a slap with the back of his hand.

"Morrison on _one_ side--and 'Old Bob' on the _other_" he exclaimed.
"What luck! What a _find_."

"How so--a find?"

The man who had had to put his own brother under arrest a few short
weeks before and then had seen him shot through the heart by this same
officer whose name was on the pass looked at the questioner with an ugly
glitter in his eyes. He was beginning to taste already the sweets of
revenge. For blood ties bind, no matter how badly they are stretched,
and long ago Corporal Dudley had sworn to wipe out his grudge.

"Why, man, can't you see?" he whispered excitedly. "This Johnnie Reb is
the man that was hiding in the cabin loft this morning. Morrison lied
when he said he wasn't there--you remember, he was the only one who
looked--he lied and as soon as he got us out of the way he let him come
down and he gave him _this_. Could any man ask for better proof that we
had the spy right in our hands and then our commanding officer
deliberately let him go?"

At the sound of the man's excited whispering Cary's fears as to the
value of Virgie's pass grew too strong to warrant this agony of watching
and waiting, and he stepped forward with a sharp question:

"Well, Corporal, isn't the pass satisfactory?"

"Oh, perfectly--perfectly," Dudley answered with baleful readiness, but
made no move to return it.

Cary put out his hand. "Then I would like to have it again, if you
please."

By way of answer Corporal Dudley carefully found an inside pocket and
buttoned the pass up in his coat. "Oh, no, you don't," he said, with an
evil grin. "I've got a better use for that little piece of paper."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that you're my prisoner, Mister Johnnie Reb," was the brutal
answer.

"For what?" asked Cary, while his heart grew sick inside him and his
lips twitched. Richmond--and food for Virgie were growing farther away
every moment.

"Because you're a Rebel _spy_, that's why," came the biting answer.

"Oh--none of that," as Cary's fists doubled up and he made a forward
step at the Corporal. "I guess you know what's good for you, with three
guns at your back. If Colonel Morrison wouldn't take you as a spy, _I
will!_"

"Here, boys," he said in brusque command to his men, "we'll have to cut
the supper and take this man to camp. There'll be a sunrise hanging
to-morrow or I miss my guess. Come on, now. Bring him along."

"Wait a minute, Corporal," O'Connell said. "Sure I've something to say
to ye," and he led him aside where the others could not bear.

All unconscious of the fatal predicament into which Susan Jemima and
she had got them Virgie looked up at her father from where she stood in
the shelter of his arm.

"Daddy," she questioned, in a small, puzzled voice, "what are they going
to do?"

"S-s-s-h," her father commanded as he patted her head comfortingly.
"Everything will be all right, honey, I'm sure." But he had caught
enough of the Corporal's altercation with Trooper O'Connell to make him
see that things were very far from being what he wanted Virgie to
suppose.

"Ye'd better be careful now," O'Connell said to Dudley. "Ye know well
that if the pass is all right ye'll be getting yerself into a peck o'
trouble."

"It isn't _me_ that'll get in trouble," Dudley answered, with grim
triumph. "It's someone else."

"Faith, then, _who_?" was the query.

"_Morrison_," snapped Dudley, with an ominous click of his teeth.

"The Colonel? Why?"

"_Because he helped this spy escape!_ that's why. He killed my brother,
shot him. Shot him down like a dog. But now I'm even with him."

He shook the pass under the trooper's nose and crowed with satisfaction.

"I've been waiting for a chance like this," he chortled, "and now I'm
going to make him sweat--sweat blood."

"Don't be a fool, Corporal," the trooper counseled. "What'll ye be after
doin'?"

"_Report him, at headquarters_--for helping a spy escape! If I have the
man and _this_," and he slapped the paper, "it'll mean his sword and
shoulder straps--if not a bullet! Come on!"

He turned away, to scramble over the wall, but Trooper O'Connell caught
his arm.

"Hold on! Ye may get in trouble."

In answer Dudley broke away and doggedly kept on towards the stone wall
and the road. "Keep off," he snarled. "_I'm_ running this."

"I know ye are," the trooper replied, "but wait," and he pointed to the
rear. "Don't forgit that the Colonel's out yonder reconnoiterin'. If he
happened to overtake ye on the road--"

Struck with the sudden thought Dudley paused. "Well, that's so," he
growled as he saw how easily he could be held for disobeying orders and
how quickly all his plans for vengeance could be smashed. He stood still
for a moment gnawing his lip, then suddenly struck his doubled fist into
the palm of the other hand.

"Then you stay here to guard the prisoner," he said. "I'll cut through
the woods--make my report--come back with the horses--and my authority."

"Here, Smith! You and Judson come along with me. Never mind the grub.
We'll get that later."

Turning to O'Connell, "If you hear anyone coming, take those two into
the woods. Collins! You'll have to stay on sentry duty till I get back.
If any troops pass here, get out of sight at once and give Harry
warning. Now, boys--come along with me--we'll take it on the trot," and
climbing quickly over the wall the man who held two lives in the hollow
of his hand ran down the road with the two troopers, finally cutting
over into the woods and disappearing from view.

Gary and Virgie stood still by the spring. Out in the road the sentry
paced back and forth. Behind them Trooper O'Connell stood on guard, his
carbine in his arms across his breast.

Virgie pulled gently at her father's hand.

"Daddy," she whispered, "are they--are they goin' to carry us off to the
Yankee camp?"

"I'm afraid so, darling, but I don't know," he answered sadly. "We'll
just have to wait. Wait," he repeated, as he sat down on a rock and drew
her close to him. Without being seen either by Virgie or O'Connell he
picked up a jagged stone the size of his fist and hid it under his knee
against the rock. It would be a poor weapon at best, but Cary had grown
desperate and if the trooper once turned his back and gave him
opportunity poor Harry O'Connell would wake up with a very bad headache
and Virgie would be in Richmond.

But Virgie's eyes were on neither the hidden stone nor her father's
watchful, relentless face. All that Virgie could see was a knapsack open
on the ground and food--real food displayed round about with a
prodigality which made her mouth water and her eyes as big as saucers.

"Daddy," she murmured, clutching at his sleeve, "while we are waitin' do
you reckon we could take just a _little_ bit of that?"

"No, dear--not now," her father answered, with a touch of impatience. It
would be too much, even in those bitter times, to accept a man's food
and then break his head for it.

"Well," said Virgie, completely mystified at the restraint, "I don't see
why they shouldn't be polite to us. We were just as polite as could be
when the Yankees took our corn."

Just then the young Irishman with the carbine turned around and caught
the wan look on Virgie's face and the hunger appeal in her big dark
eyes. At once a broad smile broke over his freckled countenance and he
gestured hospitably with his gun.

"Have somethin' to eat, little wan."

Cary's knee loosened. The jagged stone fell to the ground.

"Thank you, old fellow," he cried, springing to his feet. "I can't show
my gratitude to you in any substantial way at present--but God bless
you, just the same." He dropped down on the rock again and hid his face
in his hands. Another moment and the kindhearted trooper might have been
lying face downwards in the muddy ground around the spring. It had been
only touch-and-go, but the man's warm Irish heart had saved him.

"Oh, that's all right, sir," O'Connell answered freely. "Sure an' _I'd_
like to see ye get through, though I ain't the Gineral. At least, not
yet," he grinned.

"There ye are, little girl," he went on, pushing the knapsack over
towards Virgie with the muzzle of his carbine. "Jist help yerself--an'
give yer dad some, too."

With a little cry of delight Virgie swooped down on the knapsack and
explored its interior with eager hands.

"I'm much obliged, Mr. Yankee. We cert'ny do need it--bad." She tossed
the tangled hair back from her eyes and looked thankfully up at this
curious person who had so much food that he could really give part of it
away. "Please, Mr. Yankee--won't you tell me your name?"

"Harry O'Connell, at your service, miss."

"Thank you," she bowed. "I'm very glad to meet you." Then her searching
hands found something wonderful in the knapsack and she sprang up and
ran with her prizes to her father.

"Look, Daddy--_two biscuits!_ Take one. It's--it's _real_!"

Cary's eyes grew moist.

"Thank you, darling. Thank you." Just now the lump in his throat would
not have allowed him to eat soup, let alone a rather hard biscuit, but
he looked up with a laugh and waved a genial salute to the trooper, who
as genially responded.

Virgie, however, had become quite single minded since she had discovered
food, and with a happy sigh she raised the biscuit to her lips. Just
then the sentry in the road flung up his hand with a shout.

"Look out, O'Connell! They're coming," and he clambered quickly over the
wall and dropped behind it, his gun in readiness.

"What is it?" demanded the other trooper.

"Detachment of cavalry. A small one."

"But whose is it, man. Can ye not see?"

Collins, holding his hand behind him in a gesture which commanded them
to stay where they were, raised his head cautiously over the wall.

"Morrison's," he answered, after a quick look, and he dropped down again
out of sight.

At the sound of hoof beats and the name she remembered so well Virgie,
with her biscuit all untasted, sprang up from the ground as if she would
run out on the road. But her father caught her, for O'Connell had turned
to them with a serious face.

"I'm sorry, sir, but I'll have to trouble ye to get under cover in the
woods. No argymint, sir," he said decisively, as he saw some show of
resistance on Cary's part. "I'm under orders."

"Yes, yes, I know," Cary cried, impatiently, "but I want to speak to
Colonel Morrison. I _must_ speak to him. Give me a moment, man. You
won't ever regret it."

"Come now--none o' that," commanded the trooper, pushing him back with
the carbine across his breast. "Don't make me use force, sir. Ye'll have
to go--so go quietly. And mind--no shenanigan!"

Cary stood his ground for a moment, meeting the trooper eye to eye--then
turned with hanging head and walked a few steps back into the woods.

"Come, Virgie," he said, "I guess we won't get to see Colonel Morrison
after all."

But Virgie, being a woman, had her own ideas about what she would or
would not do. At the same moment that the trooper was forcing her father
step by step back into the woods, Virgie was running madly towards the
stone wall and before either of the soldiers could stop her she had
clambered up on its broad top and was calling out to a man who clattered
by at the head of a troop of cavalry.

"Colonel Morrison! Colonel Morrison!"


CHAPTER VIII


"Halt!"

At the sound of that piping, childish treble calling his name in so
unexpected a place the officer at the head of the troop threw up his
gauntleted hand and brought the detachment to a standstill in a cloud of
dust.

"Hello, there," he said, turning curiously around in his saddle. "Who is
it wants me?"

"It's _me_, Virgie!" the child cried, leaping up and down on the wall,
all forgetful of her sore foot. "Come help Daddy and me--come quick!"

"Well--what on earth--"

Morrison threw out a command to his men and, wheeling his horse, spurred
vigorously up to the wall where he dismounted and came up to take a
closer view of the tangle haired little person dancing on one foot.

"Why--bless my soul if it isn't Virgie!" His arms opened to take her in
when, suddenly, his eye fell on O'Connell, standing at attention on the
other side of the wall.

"O'Connell," he said, sternly, "what is the meaning of this? Why aren't
you with your detachment?"

"It isn't _his_ fault," Virgie interposed in stout defense of the nice
Yankee who carried biscuits in his knapsack. "He's under orders."

The glib use of the military term made a smile flicker across Morrison's
face, but his eyes did not leave the troubled trooper.

"_Whose_ orders?" he demanded.

"Corporal Dudley, sir," was the stammering answer.

At this moment Cary stepped forward and the two officers exchanged nods
of recognition.

"Let me explain," the Confederate said. "Virgie and I were making for
Richmond as rapidly as we could. Here, by this spring, we were put under
arrest by a corporal and four troopers. Naturally, I presented your
pass, but the corporal refused to honor it. He then left me under guard
and hurried off to headquarters with the pass in his possession."

At this unwelcome news Morrison's head jerked back as if he had been
struck and his lips tightened. Without the addition of another word to
Cary's story he saw all the dire consequences to himself of what had
been an act of the commonest humanity. Yes, in other times it would have
been what any right thinking human being would have done for another in
distress, but, unhappily, this was war time and the best of motives were
only too often mis-read. In his mind's eye he saw the vindictive Dudley,
eager for a revenge which he could not encompass any other way, laying
the proof of this act before his superiors with an abundance of
collateral evidence which, he knew, would condemn him before any
military tribunal in the world. It mattered not what kindly impulses had
guided his hand when he wrote the safeguard on the other side of the
paper on which Robert E. Lee had previously placed his name, for it is
not the custom of courts martial to weigh the milk of human kindness
against the blood and iron of war. The good and the safety of the
greater number demand the sacrifice of every man who would imperil the
cause by ill considered generosity. Morrison could see that very
presently he would have to answer certain stern questions.

Yet, there was a chance still that Dudley might be headed off and this
whole miserable business stopped before revenge could set the inexorable
wheels in motion and he whirled round on O'Connell with a sharp
question:

"Which way did Dudley go?"

"Down the pike, then over the hill by the wood road, sor--makin' for
headquarters," the young Irishman answered, only too glad of a chance to
help his officer out of what, he saw, was a frightful situation.

"How long ago?" came back the instant query.

"Five minutes, sor. Ye cud catch him wid a horse."

"Ah," exclaimed Morrison, and he threw up his hand to his men.
"Lieutenant Harris," he shouted. "Take a squad and ride to camp by the
wood road. Overtake Corporal Dudley or intercept him at headquarters.
Don't fail! Get him and bring him here!"

Lieutenant Harris's hand went up to his hat in ready salute and he
bellowed out his orders.

"Jennings! Hewlett! Brown! Hammond! Burt! 'Bout face. Forward!" Almost
before the words were out of his mouth Harris and his men were riding
madly down the road in a chase, which the Lieutenant suspected, meant
something more to his colonel, than merely the recovery of a
safe-conduct for a Confederate officer and a little girl.

Morrison turned to Trooper O'Connell and jerked his thumb towards the
road.

"Report at my quarters this evening--at nine," he said curtly. And the
young Irishman, thankful to be well out of the mess, quickly clambered
over the wall and disappeared though not without a soft voiced farewell
from Virgie.

"Good-by, Mr. Knapsack Man," called the child. "Thank you for the
biscuits."

Then Cary came forward and gripped the other's hand.

"Colonel," he said earnestly, with full appreciation of what was passing
through Morrison's mind, "I hope no trouble will come of this. If I had
only known the vindictiveness of this man--"

He was interrupted by a genially objecting hand and a laugh which
Morrison was somehow able to make lighthearted.

"Oh, that will be all right. Harris will get him--never fear."

"And so," he said, addressing Miss Virginia, "that bad man took your
pass?"

"Yes, sir. He did," Virgie answered, and caught his hand in hers. "He
ran right away with it--mean old thing."

"Well, then--we'll have to write you out another one. A nice, clean,
white one this time. Come on, little sweetheart. We'll do it together,"
and he took out a note book and pencil.

"I say, Morrison," Cary murmured, glancing apprehensively at the
troopers idling in the road and very plainly interested in what the
small group were doing, "do you really think you'd better--on your own
account?"

Again Morrison's hand was raised in polite objection. He had taken a
sporting chance when he wrote the pass which had been stolen but because
he had probably lost was no reason why he shouldn't play the game out
bravely to the end. So he only smiled at Virgie, who came and sat beside
him, and began to write the few short sentences of his second
safe-conduct. But while he wrote he was talking in low tones which the
troopers in the road could not hear.

"There's a line of your pickets about three miles up the road, Cary,"
said he. "If I loaned you a horse, do you think Virgie could ride behind
you?"

"_Me?_" pouted Virgie. "Why, Daddy says that when I was bornded, I came
ridin' in on a stork."

Morrison burst out laughing and dropped his hand down on the small paw
resting on his knee.

"Then, by St. George and the Dragon we'll send you home to Jefferson
Davis on a snorting Pegasus!"

Again Cary spoke to him in warning tones, which at the same time
thanked him unendingly for the kindly thought.

"You needn't trouble about the mount. Why, man," he said huskily,
"you're in trouble enough, as it is! And if our lines are as close as
you say they are--"

Once more the Union officer checked him.

"It isn't any trouble. Only--you'll have to be careful of your approach,
even to your own lines. Those gray devils in the rifle pits up there
have formed the habit of shooting _first_ and asking questions
_afterwards_. There you are," and he tore the leaf from his note book
and handed it up with a faint smile.

The Southerner took it with a reluctant hand.

"I--I wish I could thank you--Morrison," he said in tones that shook
with feeling, "but you see I--I--"

"Then please don't try. Because if you do I'll--I'll have to hold Virgie
as a prisoner of war.

"Well, young one," he said to the small Miss Cary with a laugh, "did you
really get something to eat?"

"Yes, sir. That is--we _almost_ did."

"_Almost?_" he echoed.

"Yes, sir," came the plaintive answer. "Eve'y time we start to
eat--somethin' _always_ happens!"

"Well, well, that _is_ hard luck," he said with a gentle squeeze of her
frail body. "But I'll bet you it won't happen this time; not if a whole
regiment tries to stop it."

"Come on," he suggested as he sprang to his feet and began picking up
dry twigs. "You can start in and munch on those heavenly biscuits while
this terrible Yankee builds the fire." Cary made a move as if to help;
but Morrison checked him.

"Oh, no, Cary, just you keep on sitting still. This is no work for you.
You're tired out.

"Here, Virgie, I know you want to get me some water from the spring.
Please pick out the cleanest pieces of water you can and put them
carefully in the coffee pot. All right. There you are. _'Tention!_
Carr-ee coffee pot! Right wheel! _March!_"

With a carefree laugh he turned away to light the little heap of twigs
he had placed between two flat stones. "It's mighty considerate of my
boys to leave us all these things. We'll call it the raid of Black Gum
Spring.

"And here comes the little lady with the coffee pot filled just right.
Now watch me pour in the good old coffee--_real_ coffee, Virgie
dear--not made from aco'ns." He settled the pot on the fire and sat back
with a grin. "Oh, oh! Don't watch it," he cried, in well feigned alarm
as Virgie, unwilling to believe the sight, stooped over to feast her
eyes on the rich brown powder sinking into the black gulf of the pot.
"If you do that it will never, _never_ boil!"

"All right," the child agreed pathetically, and she sank wearily down
against her father's knee. "I'll just pray for it to hurry up."

The two men exchanged quiet smiles and Cary murmured something in his
daughter's ear.

"Oh, no, I won't," she answered, and then looked up at Morrison with a
roguish light in her dark eyes. "He's only afraid I'll pray so terribly
hard that the old coffee pot will boil over an' put out the fire."

Morrison, chuckling, now began to drag something out of a rear pocket.
Presently, he uncorked it and held it up--a _flask_!

"Here, Cary," he said, holding out a cup. "Join me, won't you? Of
course, you understand--in case a snake should bite us."

"Colonel Morrison," responded the Southerner, "you are certainly a man
of ideas."

He waited for his foe to fill his own cup, then raised his in a toast:

"I drink to the health, sir, of you and yours. Here's hoping that some
day I may take _you_ prisoner!"

At the quizzical look of surprise in the other's face Cary's voice
almost broke.

"I mean, sir, it's the only way I could ever hope to show you how much I
appreciate--"

He stopped and covered his face with his hands, not a little to his
daughter's alarm.

"Come, come, old chap," the Northerner said bluffly, tapping him on the
shoulder. "Brace up. It's the fortunes of war, you know. One side or the
other is bound to win. Perhaps--who knows--it may be _your_ turn
to-morrow. Well, sir--here goes. May it soon be over--in the way that's
best and wisest for us all.

"Now, Virgie," he went on, when the toast had been drunk, "while I wash
these cups suppose you go on another voyage of discovery through the
magic knapsack for some sugar for the coffee."

He watched her fling herself impetuously on the knapsack. "If you find
any Yankee spoons--put them under arrest. They haven't any pass like
yours."

Then he turned to Cary: "Have any trouble on the road as you came
along?"

The other man shook his head.

"None to speak of. We were stopped several times of course, but each
time your pass let us through without delay--until we met Dudley. And
now I'm worried, Colonel," he said frankly, while his eyes tried to tell
the other all that he feared without putting it in words, "worried on
your account. It's easy to see that the man has a grudge against you--"

"Yes, I'm afraid he has," was the thoughtful reply. "But really, Cary,
you mustn't try to carry any more burdens than your own, just now. I
know what you mean and what, I daresay, you'd be only too willing to do,
but I can't permit it."

They were interrupted by the spectacle of Virgie standing before them
with anxiously furrowed brow, a paper bag in one hand and three spoons
clutched in the other.

"But Colonel Morrison," she was saying in tragic tones, "there isn't a
drop of milk."

"Milk!" he cried in mock despair. "Well, dash my buttons if I didn't
forget to order a cow."

"Oh, _I_ know what to do," cried the child. Dropping her supplies and
utensils she ran to the wall and climbed up.

"Hey, there, _you_" commanded the small general with an imperious
gesture to the assembled troopers. "One of you men ride right over to
camp and bring us back some milk--an' butter."

At this abrupt demand of so small a rebel on the commissary of the
United States a roar of laughter went up from the troopers, though some
of them had the grace to salute and so relieve the child of
embarrassment.

"Virgie! Virgie!" called her father, scandalized.

"It's all right, Cary," Morrison laughed. "She's only starting in at
giving orders a little earlier than most women.

"Never you mind, Miss Brigadier," he comforted. "We'll have all those
luxuries next time, or when I come to see you in Richmond after the war
is over. Just now we'll do the best we can. Come along."

Virgie got down from the wall and pattered up to the fire.

"Is it ready yet?" she asked with the perfect directness of seven years.

"In a minute now. Ah-hah! There she goes."

He took the pot from the fire and set it down on a rock where,
presently, he brought a cupful of cold water to pour in.

"Is that to settle it?" she asked of her father.

"Yes, child--and I wish all our questions were as easily cleared up.
And now--to the attack."

"Right-o. Virgie--pass the beautiful, hand painted china and let's fill
up. This one for your daddy--you can put the sugar in. Only don't burn
those precious fingers."

Virgie carried the steaming cup to her father and put it in his hands
with shining eyes.

"This is better than our old belt supper, Daddy, isn't it?" she said,
with a flirt of her tangled curls. "Anyway--it _smells_ nicer."

She was back at the sugar bag at once, digging out spoonfuls for
Morrison's coffee.

"Thank you, Miss Cary, I am indeed obliged to you. Now do sit down and
_eat_. No, not another word till you've eaten two whole biscuits!"

For several ecstatic moments the child munched her biscuits. It had been
a long time since she had eaten anything so delicious, although if those
same biscuits had appeared on the Cary table a month ago they would have
probably been scorned. But eager as her appetite was it did not stop the
active workings of her mind and she presently was struck by an idea
which tried to force itself out through a mouthful of biscuit--with the
usual amusing results.

"_Virginia!_" admonished her father.

Morrison laughed out like a boy and slapped his knee.

"Suppose we swallow--and try again."

Virgie, thus adjured, concentrated her mind on the task--gulped,
blinked, swallowed with pathetically straining eyes, and then smiled
triumphantly.

"Excuse me, Daddy. I guess I wasn't very polite."

"Apology accepted. What were you going to say?"

The child looked up with a sweetly serious look in her eyes that the two
men recognized as the forerunner of true womanly thought for others.

"I was only goin' to ask the Colonel if he didn't think his men out
there would like some of these _heavingly_ things to eat?" she said
plaintively. "It must be terrible--jus' to look on!"

"Well, bless your little heart," the Northerner cried. "But don't you
worry about the boys. They'll have theirs when they get back to camp. Go
on and eat, Virgie. Stuff in another biscuit. And, look! By Jupiter.
_Butter!_"

Evidently Trooper O'Connell during the past twenty-four hours had
foraged or blarneyed most successfully for out of the knapsack which he
had left behind Morrison suddenly produced a small earthenware jam jar
in which was something now indubitably liquid in form but none the less
sweet, yellow, appetizing butter. Pouring a little on a biscuit he held
it out to her, speculating on what she would say.

The tot took it hungrily and raised it to her lips, her eyes shining and
her face glowing with anticipation. Then she paused and, with a little
cry of vexation over her selfishness, held out the biscuit to her
father.

"Here, Daddy," she said. "You take this--because you tried to bring me
somethin' good to eat yesterday."

The father threw a look at Morrison and caught Virgie to him in a swift
embrace.

"No, dear," he said. "Eat your nice buttered biscuit and thank the good
Lord for it. Your father will get more fun out of seeing you eat that
little bit than he would out of owning a whole cellar of big stone
crocks jam full. Do you know--I think when we get up to Richmond you'll
have to write a letter to the Colonel--a nice long letter, thanking him
for all he's done. Won't you?"

There was a pause for a moment as the child looked over at Morrison,
revolving the thought in her mind.

The Union officer had passed into a sudden reverie, the hand holding his
coffee cup hanging listlessly over his knee. He was thinking of another
little girl, and one as dear to him as this man's child was to her
father. He was wondering if the fortunes of war would ever let him see
her face again or hear her voice--or feel her chubby arms around his
neck. She was very, very far away--well cared for, it was true, but he
knew only too well that it would need but one malignant leaden missile
to make her future life as full of hardships as those which the little
tot beside him was passing through to-day. So much, at least, for the
ordinary chances of war--he was beginning to wonder how much had been
added to these perils by the matter of the pass and whether his
superiors would see the situation as it had appeared to his eyes.

Into this sad reverie Virgie's soft voice entered with a gentleness
which roused but did not startle him. When she spoke, it seemed as if
some subtle thought-current between their minds had put the subject of
his dreams into the child's mind.

"Do you reckon," the child said, curiously, "that Gertrude is havin'
_her_ supper now?"

The Union officer looked up with eyes that mutely blessed her.

"Yes, dear, I was thinking of her--and her mother."

Again he was silent for a space, and when he spoke, his voice was
dreamy, tender, as he seemed to look with unseeing eyes far into the
Northland where dwelt the people of his heart.

"Do you know, Cary, this war for us, the men, may be a hell, but what is
it for those we leave at home? The women! Who wait--and watch--and too
often watch in vain. _We_ have the excitement of it--the rush--the
battles--and we think that ours is the harder part when, in reality, we
make our loved ones' lives a deeper, blacker hell than our own. Theirs
to watch and listen with the love hunger in their hearts, month in,
month out and often without a word! Theirs to starve on the crusts of
hope! Waiting--always waiting! Hunting the papers for the thing they
dread to find; a name among the missing. A name among the dead! Good
Heaven! When I think of it sometimes--" Morrison dropped his head
between his clenched fists and groaned.

"Yes, yes, old fellow, I know," the other man answered, for in truth he
_did_ know, "but I want you to remember that for you the crusts of hope
will some day be the bread of life--and love."

Slowly the Northerner's face came up out of his hands and he seemed to
take heart again. After all, he had led a charmed life so far--perhaps
the God of Battles had written his name among those who would some day
go back to live the life for which the Almighty made them. God grant
then that he might have for his friend this man who, in the time of his
own greater grief, was unselfish enough to console him. Ah! If God would
only grant that from this day on there would be no more of this hideous
fighting. Morrison's eyes met the other's and he put out his hand.

Suddenly there came the sound of a shot. Another and another--then a
volley, which almost at once became a continuous rattle of musketry.

The Northerner sprang to his feet. "Look! there go your pickets."

Struck dumb by this sudden return to the actualities of life the two men
stood motionless, listening for every sound which might tell them what
it meant. For a little while they had dreamed the dream of peace only to
have it rudely shattered.

But Virgie had not followed them in their dreams, for she was an
extremely practical young lady. Having seen food, real food, vanish
away before her very eyes several times already she was quite prepared
to see it happen again.

"There!" she said, in tones in which prophecy and resignation were oddly
mingled. "Didn't I jus' _know_ somethin' was goin' to happen!"

By this time Morrison had run to the stone wall and sprung to its top.
Out in the road the troopers had mounted without waiting for command and
with one accord had faced towards the firing.

"Can you see anything?" Cary called.

"Not yet," said Morrison. "I guess we came too close to your nest--and
the hornets are coming out."

"Turner!" he commanded, and a trooper's hand went up, "ride up to the
fork of the road. Learn what you can and report."

As the cavalryman struck his heels into his horse's sides and dashed up
the road Cary put the wishes of both men into words.

"It's too near sundown for a battle. It will only be a skirmish."

"Ye-e-e-s, possibly," the Northerner assented, and he looked
thoughtfully at Virgie, "but still--"

"What is it?"

"I can't send you forward now--in the face of that fire. And, for that
matter, I can't send you to the rear. In five minutes this road will be
glutted with cavalry and guns."

"Never mind, Morrison," the Southerner returned. "I couldn't go
now--anyway."

"Why?"

Cary opened out his hands in a simple gesture. "Because, in case of
trouble for you at headquarters, I'm _still_ your prisoner." With his
eyes brave and steady on the others he took the newly written pass from
his breast--and tore it in pieces. "When you want me," he said, "you'll
find me--_here_."

If there had been time for argument Morrison would have hotly protested
against such self-sacrifice, but events were crowding upon them too
fast. From down the road came the sound of furious galloping. Almost at
once Lieutenant Harris, riding hard at the head of a troop of cavalry,
swept round the curve and drew his horse upon his haunches.

"Colonel Morrison!" he shouted. "You are ordered--"

"One moment, Lieutenant," interrupted Morrison in tones so even that
Cary marveled at his composure, "_Did you get Corporal Dudley?_"

Cary's ears ached for the answer. He knew just as well as the questioner
the danger which might now be disclosed or be forever forgotten and his
heart went out to the other in this moment of hideous suspense.

There was an instant of hesitation and then came the answer.

"_No, sir!_ We tried hard but couldn't make it."

Morrison's face did not change but his hands tightened until the nails
dug deep into his palms. He had played--and lost.

"Go on with your report," he said.

Harris pulled in his fretting horse and delivered his significant news.

"The Rebels are advancing in force. I was sent back to you with orders
to join Major Foster at the fork and hold the road at any cost. Two
light field pieces are coming to your support. Our main batteries are
back there--in the woods."

"Right," said Morrison, "we go at once." Turning back to Virgie he
caught her up in his arms and kissed her. "Good-by, little sweetheart.
Hide under the rocks and keep close."

"Good-by, Morrison," Gary said, as they struck hands. "I can't wish you
luck--but our hearts are with you as a man."

"Thanks, old fellow," said the enemy, as he sprang over the wall "It
helps--God knows."

He caught at his horse's mane and threw himself into the saddle without
touching the stirrup, while his voice roared out his command.

"Ready, men! Forward!"

"Good-by," shrilled Virgie in her childish treble. "Good-by, Colonel!
Don't get hurt."

"Daddy!" she cried, as they crouched down in their hiding place behind
the wall. "Is there going to be a--a _battle_?"

"Only a little one. But you won't be afraid."

A rattle of approaching wheels came from down the road, the shock of
steel tires striking viciously against the stones, the cries and oaths
of the drivers urging the horses forward.

"Look!" cried Cary, springing to his feet in spite of the danger in
which his gray uniform placed him. "Here come the field pieces. In a
minute now the dogs will begin to bark."

With a roar of wheels and a clash of harness and accouterments the guns
rushed by while the child stared and stared, her big eyes almost
starting out of her face.

"The dogs!" she said in wonder. "There wasn't a single dog there!"

"Another kind of dog," her father said with a meaning look. "And their
teeth are _very_ long. Ah! There they go! Over yonder on the hill--in
the edge of the woods. The Yankee dogs are barking. Now listen for the
answer."

Together they listened, father and daughter, with straining
ears--listened for the defiant reply of those men who, being Americans,
were never beaten until hunger and superior numbers forced them to the
wall.

"Boom!" A great, ear-filling sound crashed over the hills and rolled,
echoing, through the woods.

"That's us! That's us!" the man cried out exultantly, while he caught
the child closer in his arms. "Hear our people talking, honey? Hear 'em
talk!"

But overhead something was coming through the air and the child shrank
down in terror--something that whined and screamed as it sped on its
dreadful way and seemed like a demon out of hell searching for his prey.

"Lord a' mercy, Daddy!" the child cried out. "What's _that_?"

He patted her head consolingly. "Nothing at all but a shell. They sound
much worse than they really are. Don't be afraid. Nothing will hurt
you."

From the forks of the road the sound of volley firing grew stronger and,
as if in response, the road to the Union rear now turned into a stream
of living blue, with cavalry madly galloping and sweating infantry
hurrying forward as fast as their legs could carry them.

"Look, Virgie, look!" her father cried, holding her head a little way
above the wall. "See those bayonets shining back there across the road.
A whole regiment of infantry. And they're going up against our _men
across an open field!_ By Jiminy, but those Yanks will get a mustard
bath. Ah-hah!" he chortled, as a roar of musketry broke out. "I told you
so! Our boys are after them. Good work! Good work!"

But again a shell passed over them and again the world was filled with
that awful whining, shrieking sound.

"Daddy," the child cried, with quivering lips, but still dry eyed. "I
don't _like_ those things. I don't _like_'em."

"There, there, darling," he comforted as they shrank closer under the
protection of the wall. "Keep down under my arm and they won't bother
you."

As he spoke a twig with a fresh yellow break in it fell from a tree and
struck his upturned face. He winced at the thought that the bullet
might have flown a few feet lower. And meanwhile the sound of the firing
came steadily closer.

"By Jove!" he murmured to himself, "it's a bigger rumpus than I
thought."

This indeed was true. What had at first promised to be only a skirmish
between the outposts of the two entrenched armies, now developed into a
general engagement covering a space of half a mile along the line. A
reconnoitering force of Federal cavalry had ridden too close to the
rifle pits of the Confederates, and, as Morrison himself expressed it,
"the hornets came out and began to sting."

Major Foster, commanding a larger force of cavalry, rode out in support
of his reconnoitering party, and found himself opposed, not by a
straggling line of Rebel pickets, but by a moving wall of tattered gray,
the units of which advanced on a low-bent run, crouching behind some
bush or stone, to fire, reload and advance again.

An aide raced back to the Union lines to ask for help in support of
Foster's slender force of cavalry; and thus the order came to Morrison
to join the detachment and hold the enemy until reinforcements could be
formed and pushed to the firing line.

The delay, however, was well nigh fatal for Morrison and Major Foster,
and from the point where Cary and little Virgie watched, the case of the
Union horsemen seemed an evil one. True, that infantry and guns were
soon advancing to their aid on a "double-quick"; yet all the advantage
seemed to lie with the ragged, sharp-shooting Southerners.

The crackle of musketry increased; the dust rolled up and intermingled
with the wreathes of drifting smoke, and through it came the vicious
whine of leaden messengers of death.

Then, borne on the wind, came a sound that he would know till his dying
day--_the rebel yell_. An exultant scream,--a cry of unending hate,
defiance, _victory_!

He sprang to his feet. Off came the battered old campaign hat and
unmindful that he stood there hidden in the woods and that his voice
could carry only a few yards against the roar of battle, he swung it
over his head: and shouted out his encouragement.

"Look! We're whipping 'em. Virgie, do you hear? We're getting them on
the run. Come on, boys! Come on!"

He felt her clutch on his sleeve. With wide eyes grown darker than ever
with excitement, she asked her piteous question.

"Daddy! _Will they kill the Colonel?_"

For a moment he could not answer. Then, with a groan he gave back his
answer: "I _hope_ not, darling. I hope not!"

Down the road a riderless horse was coming, head up and stirrups flying.
As it galloped past Cary scrutinized it closely and was glad he did not
recognize it. In its wake came soldiers, infantry and dismounted
cavalry, firing, retreating, loading and firing again, but always
retreating.

"Here come the stragglers," he cried. "We're whipping 'em! Close,
darling, _close_. Lie down against the wall."

He crouched above her, shielding her as best he could with his body.
Then, suddenly, a man in blue leaped on the wall not ten feet away. He
had meant to seize the wall as a breastwork and fight from behind it,
but before he dropped down he would fire one last shot. His gun came up
to his shoulder--he aimed at some unseen foe and fired. But from
somewhere, out of the crash of sound and the rolling powder smoke, a
singing missile came and found its mark. The man in blue bent over
suddenly, wavered, then toppled down inside the wall, his gun ringing on
the stones as he fell.

"Daddy!" the child whispered, with ashen face, "it's the biscuit man.
It's HARRY!"

Her father's hand went out instinctively to cover her eyes. "Don't look,
dear! Don't look!"

The road was choked now. Cavalry and infantry, all in a mad rush for the
rear, were tearing by while the two field pieces which but a moment ago
had gone into action with such a deadly whirl came limping back with
slashed traces and splintered wheels. With fascinated eyes the Rebel
officer watched from behind his wall, while everything, even his child,
was forgotten in the lust for victory. And so he did not hear the faint
voice behind him that cried out in an agony of thirst and pain.

"Water! Water! Help! Someone--give water!"

Virgie, with dilated eyes and heaving breast, crouched low as long as
she could and then gave up everything to the pitiful appeal ringing in
her ears. Quick as a flash, she sped away on bare feet over rocks and
sharp, pointed branches of fallen trees to the spring, where she caught
up a cup and filled it to the brim. Another swift rush and she reached
the fallen man in blue and had the cup at his lips, while her arm went
under his head to lift it.

"Virgie!" her father cried, frantic at the sight. With a great leap he
was at her side, forcing her down to the ground and covering her with
his body.

The trooper's head sank back and his eyes began to dull.

"May God bless ye, little one," he murmured. "Heaven--_Mary_--_!_" His
lips gave out one long, shuddering sigh. His body grew slack and his
chin fell. Trooper Harry O'Connell had fought his last fight--had
passed to his final review.

One look at the boyish face so suddenly gone gray and bloodless and Gary
caught Virgie up in his arms. "Come dear, you can't help him any more,"
and with a crouching run they were back once more in the shelter of the
wall.

And now the shriek of the shells and the whine of the bullets came
shriller than before. All around them the twigs were dropping, while the
acrid powder smoke rolled in through the trees and burnt their eyes and
throats. Again came men in blue retreating and among them an officer on
horseback, wheeling his animal madly around among them and shouting
encouragement as he tried to face them to the front. "Keep at it, men,"
Morrison was crying, half mad with rage. "One decent stand and we can
hold them. Give it to them hard. Stand, I tell you. _Stand!_"

All around him, however, men were falling and those who were left began
to waver. "Steady, men! Don't flinch," came the shout again. "Ah-hah,
you _would_, would you? _Coward!_"

Morrison's sword held flatwise, thudded down on the back of a man who
had flung away his gun. "Get back in the fight, you dog! Get back!"

He whipped out his revolver and pointed it till the gun had been
snatched up, then fired all its chambers at the oncoming hordes in gray.

"One more stand," he yelled. "One more--"

Beside him the color sergeant gave a moan and bent in the middle like a
hinge. Another slackening of his body and the stricken bearer of the
flag plunged from his saddle, the colors trailing in the dust.

Morrison spurred his mount toward the fallen man, bending to grasp the
colors from the tight gripped hand; but even as he bent, his horse went
down. He leaped to save himself, then turned once more, snatched at the
flag of his routed regiment and waved it above his head.

"_Stand, boys, and give it to 'em!_"

A shout went up--not from the men he sought to rally to his flag, but
from those who would win it at a cost of blood, for his troopers were
running on a backward road, and Morrison fought alone. The "gray devils"
were all around him now, and he backed against the wall, fighting till
his sword was sent spinning from his fist by the blow of a musket butt;
then, grasping the color-pole in both his hands, he parried bayonet
thrusts and saber strokes, panting, breathing in hot, labored gasps, and
cursing his enemies from a hoarse, parched throat.

A hideous, unequal fight it was, and soon Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison
must fall as his colors fell and be trampled in the dust; yet now
through an eddying drift of smoke came another ragged Southerner, a
grim, gaunt man whose voice was as hoarse as Morrison's, who had grasped
a saber from the blood stained rocks and waved it above his head.

"Back, boys! Don't kill that man!"

Among them he plunged till he reached the side of Morrison, then turned
and faced the brothers of his country and his State. With a downward
stroke he arrested a saber thrusts and then struck upward at a rifle's
mouth as it spit its deadly flame.

"Don't kill him! Do you hear?" he cried, as he beat at the bayonet
points. "I'm Cary! Herbert Cary!--_on the staff of General Lee!_"

For an instant the attacking Southerners stood aghast at the sight of
this raging man in gray who defended a Yankee officer; and yet he had
made no saber stroke to wound or kill; instead, his weapon had come
between their own and the life of a well-nigh helpless foe. For a moment
more they paused and looked with wondering eyes, and in that moment
their victory was changed to rout.

A bugle blared. A thundering rush of hoof beats sounded on the road, and
the Union reënforcements swept around the curve. Six abreast they came,
a regiment of strong, straight riders, hungry for battle, hot to
retrieve the losing fortune of the day. The road was too narrow for a
concentrated rush, so they streamed into the fields on either side,
re-formed, and swept like an avalanche of blue upon their prey. The guns
in the woods now thundered forth afresh, their echoes rolling out
across the hills, and the attacking Rebels turned and fled, like leaves
before a storm.

On one side of the road, Morrison and Cary shrank down beside the wall
to let the Union riders pass; on the other, all that was left of the
Rebel force ran helter-skelter for a screen of protecting trees. But
before the last one disappeared he threw up his gun and fired,
haphazard, in the direction whence he had come.

As if in reply came the sound of a saber falling from a man's hand and
striking on a stone. Under his very eyes and just as he was putting out
his hand to grip the others Morrison saw Herbert Cary sinking slowly to
the ground.

And then, through the yellow dust clouds and the powder smoke and all
the horrid reek of war, a child came running with outstretched arms and
piteous voice--a frightened child, weeping for the father who had thrown
himself headlong into peril to save another's life and who, perhaps, had
lost his own.


CHAPTER IX


The headquarters of the Army of the Potomac on the morning of August 4,
1864, were at City Point near where the Appomattox meets the James. Here
the grim, silent man in whose hands lay the destinies of the United
States sent out the telegrams which kept the Federal forces gnawing at
the cage in which Lee had shut himself and meanwhile held to his
strategic position south of Richmond. To his left and west lay
Petersburg still unconquered, but Petersburg could wait, for Early's
gray clad troopers were scourging the Shenandoah and the menace must be
removed. To this end Grant had sent a telegram to Washington three days
before expressing in unmistakable terms what he wished General Sheridan
and his cavalry to accomplish. They were to go over into the Shenandoah
and, putting themselves _south_ of the enemy, follow him to the death.
To which telegram the tall, lank, furrow-faced man in the White House
whose kindly heart was bursting with the strain replied in
characteristic fashion and told him that his purpose was exactly right.
And then, with a gleam of humor, warned him against influences in
Washington which would prevent its carrying out unless he forced it.

This message had come but a few minutes before and it had been received
with silent satisfaction for Grant knew now that Abraham Lincoln and he
were in perfect accord as to the means for swiftly bringing on the end.
But the plans must be well laid and to that end he must leave City Point
within a few hours and go north. And so he was standing at a window of
his headquarters this morning with his eyes resting unseeingly on the
camp, while his cool, quiet mind steadily forged out his schemes.

Unlike the headquarters of "play" armies where all is noise and
confusion and bloodied orderlies throw themselves off of plunging horses
and gasp out their reports, the room in which General Grant did his work
was strangely quiet.

It was a large, square room with high ceiling and wall paper which had
defied all the arts of Europe to render interesting in design. Furniture
was neither plentiful nor comfortable--a slippery, black horse-hair
sofa, a few horse-hair chairs and, at one side of the room, a table and
a desk, littered with papers, maps and files. At the table Grant's
adjutant, Forbes, sat writing. Facing him was the door opening out into
the hallway of the house where two sentries stood on guard. In the
silence which pervaded the room and in the quiet application to the work
in hand there was a perfect reflection of the mind of him who stood
impassive at the window with his back turned, a faint blue cloud of
cigar smoke rising above his head.

A quick step sounded in the corridor--the step of one who bears a
message. An orderly appeared in the doorway, spoke to the two sentries
and was passed in with a salute to Forbes.

"For General Grant," he said, holding out a folded note of white paper.
"Personal from Lieutenant Harris, sir."

At the sound of his name the General turned slowly and accepted the
note which the orderly presented. He took it without haste and yet
without any perceptible loss of time or motion and, as always, without
unnecessary words. Scanning it, he shifted his cigar to one corner of
his mouth where its smoke would not rise into his eyes, thought for an
instant, then nodded shortly.

"I'll see him. At once."

Dismissed, the orderly saluted and passed quickly out. The General, with
his chin in his collar and his cigar held between his fingers at nearly
the same level, moved back to the window and stood there silently as
before. He knew what Lieutenant Harris would wish to speak to him about.
A few weeks before a Lieutenant-Colonel of cavalry had been
court-martialed on the charge of allowing the escape of a spy. The court
had found him guilty and its findings had been submitted to the higher
authorities and endorsed by them. A copy of these reports now lay on his
desk. All this his Adjutant, Forbes, knew as well as the General
himself, but if Forbes had thought it worth while to speculate on the
extent of his commander's interest he might have guessed for years
without ever drawing one logical conclusion from all the hints that that
impassive face and figure gave him.

Again a ringing step in the corridor and this time Lieutenant Harris
came into the room, his hand going up in salute. But his General was
still looking out of the window, his eyes on a dead level. There was a
silence and then--without turning around--

"Well, Lieutenant, what is it?"

"A short conference, General, if you'll grant it. The case of
Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison." It was hard work to talk to one who kept
his back turned and Harris was embarrassed.

The smoke from the General's cigar still curled lazily upwards.

"Reprieve?" came the monosyllabic question.

Harris caught himself together and put all his feelings.

"No, General. A _pardon_!"

At once Grant wheeled and stood gazing at him keenly.

"_Pardon?_" he said, and he advanced with deliberation to the desk where
he stood with his eyes steady on Harris' face. "Lieutenant! Do you want
me to think you are out of your mind?"

Before Harris could reply Grant stopped him with a gesture and picked up
a batch of papers which lay on the desk.

"The man has been given every chance. He has been court-martialed--and
found guilty."

He dropped the papers in the case back on the desk. "And you--his
counsel--having failed to prove him otherwise now come to _me_--for
pardon."

He snapped his fingers. "Lieutenant, you are wasting time." And he
turned away, pausing for a moment to turn over a sheaf here and there on
his desk and meditate their contents. The incident of Lieutenant-Colonel
Morrison has been disposed of and, in another moment would be forgotten.
It was now or never for Harris and he answered quickly.

"I hope not, sir. Neither yours nor mine." And then, as the General
looked up with some surprise at this retort. "You have read the
findings of the court?"

"Yes," was the grim reply. "And approve the sentence. To-morrow he will
be shot."

"Yes, sir," acknowledged Harris. "Unless _you_ intervene."

At this curiously insistent plea for clemency the short, stocky bearded
man who, to so few, had the bearing of a great general, faced Lieutenant
Harris and gave him a look which made the young officer's bravery falter
for a long moment.

"_I?_" said the General, with a searching note in his voice which seemed
to probe coldly and with deadly accuracy among the strenuous emotions in
the young man's mind. "Harris--you are an officer of promise. Don't cut
that promise short." With a flick of his ashes to one side he turned
away. The cigar went back into the corner of his sardonic mouth.

Harris strode forward an impulsive step and threw out his hands.

"It is worth the risk. When a man is condemned to die--"

The General wheeled with more impatience than the Adjutant, Forbes, had
seen him exhibit through many vexatious, worrying months. His voice took
on a rasping note. He tapped the papers on the desk with grim
significance.

"Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison has failed in his military duty. He
released a Rebel spy--proved himself a traitor to his cause."

"A traitor, General?" protested the young officer. "Do you call a man a
traitor who fought as Morrison did a week ago? Who stood his ground till
his whole command was shot to pieces! And then stood alone--defending
his colors in the face of hell let loose!"

The appeal was impassioned, its sincerity and humanity undoubted. Yet it
seemingly only served to make the grim rules of war more unyielding than
ever.

Choosing his words with more than ordinary care, and speaking them in
firm, even tones, the General made his reply.

"No act of bravery can atone for a soldier's lapse from duty." He sat
down at his desk and began to write.

Under ordinary circumstances Lieutenant Harris might have accepted
defeat for there seemed no use in trying to break down that iron will or
touch the heart of this relentless soldier. But this was something more
than an ordinary case and Harris was more than simply Morrison's
counsel--he was his friend. The two had fought together through three
hard campaigns; they had shared food and water and shelter, had slept
together for warmth on sodden fields, had exchanged such confidences as
two officers from the same town in the North but of unequal rank may
exchange under the pressure of war-time emotions. If there was one man
living who knew Morrison's heart and appreciated his motives to the
uttermost it was his lieutenant and the young officer was prepared to
lose his commission, aye, even face prison for insubordination if
continued opposition to the Commander-in-Chief would result in a
re-hearing. And so he caught himself together for the second time and
returned to the charge.

"I do not offer his courage as a plea for pardon," he said, and turned
to his general with half a smile, "but still I find in Shakespeare--and
in Blackstone--the suggestion of tempering justice with mercy."

Grant tossed aside his pencil, repeating the last word slowly, bitterly:

"_Mercy!_"

He rose from his seat and stood beside his table, speaking with a low
but almost fierce intensity:

"They call me a war machine! I am! And you--and all the rest--are parts
of it! A lever! A screw! A valve! A wheel! A machine half human--yes! A
thing of muscle and bone and blood--but without a heart! A merciless
_machine_, whose wheels must turn and turn till we grind out this
rebellion to the dust of peace!"

He paused impressively, and in the hard, cold words which followed, all
hope for Morrison seemed to fade and die.

"If a wheel once fails to do its work--discard it!--for another and a
better one! _We want no wheels that slip their cogs!_"

The General ceased and turned to his littered table; but Harris was not
yet beaten.

"No, General," he answered bravely, "but there happens to be a flaw ...
in your machine's control." The General looked up, frowning sharply; but
Harris still went on: "In a military court we have condemned a man to
die--_and the facts have not been proved!_"

Amazed more at the young officer's obstinate temerity than his words the
General stared at him.

"How so?" he asked, with irony.

Harris opened out his hands with a simple gesture that seemed to leave
his logic to the judgment of any impartial observer.

"In times of peace, my profession is that of the Law. I know my
ground--and," in rising tones of sincerity, "I challenge you to shake it
in any civil court in Christendom."

These mail-wagons were two-wheeled cabriolets, upholstered inside with
fawn-colored leather, hung on springs, and having but two seats,
one for the postboy, the other for the traveller.

The wheels were armed with those long, offensive axles which keep
other vehicles at a distance, and which may still be seen on the road
in Germany.

The despatch box, an immense oblong coffer, was placed behind the vehicle
and formed a part of it.
This coffer was painted black, and the cabriolet yellow.

These vehicles, which have no counterparts nowadays, had something
distorted and hunchbacked about them; and when one saw them passing
in the distance, and climbing up some road to the horizon, they
resembled the insects which are called, I think, termites, and
which, though with but little corselet, drag a great train behind
them.

But they travelled at a very rapid rate. The post-wagon which set out
from Arras at one o'clock every night, after the mail from Paris
had passed, arrived at M.
sur M. a little before five o'clock in the morning.

That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdin
road, collided at the corner of a street, just as it was entering
the town, with a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse, which
was going in the opposite direction, and in which there was but one
person, a man enveloped in a mantle.

The wheel of the tilbury received quite a violent shock. The postman
shouted to the man to stop, but the traveller paid no heed and
pursued his road at full gallop.

"That man is in a devilish hurry!" said the postman.

The man thus hastening on was the one whom we have just seen struggling
in convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity.

Whither was he going? He could not have told. Why was he hastening?
He did not know. He was driving at random, straight ahead.

Whither?
To Arras, no doubt; but he might have been going elsewhere as well.
At times he was conscious of it, and he shuddered. He plunged into the
night as into a gulf. Something urged him forward; something drew
him on.

No one could have told what was taking place within him; every one will
understand it.

What man is there who has not entered, at least once in his life,
into that obscure cavern of the unknown?

However, he had resolved on nothing, decided nothing, formed no
plan, done nothing.

None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive.

He was, more than ever, as he had been at the first moment.

Why was he going to Arras?

He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hired
Scaufflaire's cabriolet: that, whatever the result was to be, there
was no reason why he should not see with his own eyes, and judge
of matters for himself; that this was even prudent; that he must
know what took place; that no decision could be arrived at without
having observed and scrutinized; that one made mountains out of
everything from a distance; that, at any rate, when he should have
seen that Champmathieu, some wretch, his conscience would probably
be greatly relieved to allow him to go to the galleys in his stead;
that Javert would indeed be there; and that Brevet, that Chenildieu,
that Cochepaille, old convicts who had known him; but they certainly
would not recognize him;--bah!

what an idea! that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the
truth; that all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu,
and that there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and
conjectures; that accordingly there was no danger.

That it was, no doubt, a dark moment, but that he should emerge
from it; that, after all, he held his destiny, however bad it might
be, in his own hand; that he was master of it.

He clung to this thought.

At bottom, to tell the whole truth, he would have preferred not to go
to Arras.

Nevertheless, he was going thither.

As he meditated, he whipped up his horse, which was proceeding at that
fine, regular, and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a
half an hour.

In proportion as the cabriolet advanced, he felt something within him
draw back.

At daybreak he was in the open country; the town of M. sur M. lay far
behind him.

He watched the horizon grow white; he stared at all the chilly figures
of a winter's dawn as they passed before his eyes, but without
seeing them.

The morning has its spectres as well as the evening. He did not see
them; but without his being aware of it, and by means of a sort
of penetration which was almost physical, these black silhouettes
of trees and of hills added some gloomy and sinister quality to the
violent state of his soul.

Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which
sometimes border on the highway, he said to himself, "And yet there
are people there within who are sleeping!"

The trot of the horse, the bells on the harness, the wheels on the road,
produced a gentle, monotonous noise.

These things are charming when one is joyous, and lugubrious when one
is sad.

It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin.
"Yes, General," said Harris, with a smile, for Unc' Billy's persistency
and his troubles were known to everyone he met.

"Good! It's about time we got even him," the General remarked
sardonically. "Have him in! See to it, Forbes." And again he bent over
his map.

Forbes, passing out again, paused as Harris gestured.

"You'll find him somewhere near the guard house," the Lieutenant said
with a flicker of a, smile. "The old man has been regularly camping out
there since he learned that his master was inside."

A minute passed and then, from a short distance away, came the sound of
a squad of soldiers marching. In single file, with the two prisoners in
line, the squad came into the hallway and stopped at the doorway.

"_Halt! Left face! Order arms! Prisoners file out!_" The two prisoners
stepped forward and entered the room.

Thanks to expert surgical work since he entered Union lines, Herbert
Cary's wounds had healed quickly while plenty of good food had done the
rest. His eyes may not have been bright with hope but at least they
were clear with health and his straight back and squared shoulders
showed that the man's fighting spirit had not left him even under the
adverse decision of a court-martial.

Of the two, Morrison seemed the graver and quieter. With his sword taken
from him and his shoulder straps ripped off the man who had been a
Lieutenant-Colonel in the Army of the Potomac only the day before stood
looking at his general without the slightest hope for clemency. Yet,
with all the sad, quiet look of resignation in his eyes, behind them
glowed a wonderful light--the light of self-sacrifice. For he had chosen
to put on the tender glove of humanity and grip hands with the mailed
gauntlet of war, and though he had been crushed yet even in this bitter
hour they could not take from him the knowledge that the Commander in
Chief of all spiritual armies would stand forever on his side. They
could take his sword and shoulder straps but they could not rob him of
that divine consolation.

And so the two stood with their eyes steady on the General--the
Confederate, hard and defiant--the Union officer with a strange, sad
glow on his face.

But the General paid them no attention. He was still studying the map
laid out before him on his desk, the cigar in the corner of his mouth
drawing one side of his face into harsh, deep lines. As a matter of
fact, Ulysses Simpson Grant was very far removed from harshness--he was
simply and solely efficiency personified. When nothing was to be said
General Grant said nothing. To do otherwise was waste.

Presently he looked up and saw that while Forbes had given the two
prisoners chairs directly in front of his desk one of the important
factors in the business in hand had not been produced.

"Well, Forbes, well? Where is the negro?" He asked crisply. "Bring him
in! Bring him in!"

"In a moment, General," responded the Adjutant, hastening to the doorway
as the tread of feet sounded again in the hallway. Dismissing the two
privates who had arrived with Uncle Billy between them he led the old
man down to the desk and left him there, bowing and scraping a little
and holding his hat in front of him in both hands.

"Wan' see _me_, suh?" ventured Uncle Billy, intruding delicately on the
General's calculations. "Here I is!"

General Grant looked up quickly and ran his eye over the old man.

"Your name!"

"Er--William Lewis, seh. Yas, seh."

"To whom do you belong?"

Although Uncle Billy's back was not particularly straight this sudden
question introduced a stiffening into it which made it more upright than
it had been in years.

"I b'longs to Cap'n Hubbert Cary, seh--of de Confed'it Army. Das who I
b'longs to. Yas, seh."

The General sat back a little in his chair and studied Uncle Billy. He
saw that after all the old negro was simply a natural slave--that he
probably had no other thought in his grayed head than that of faithful
service to his owner. But he would try him and see how far the old man
would go.

"I understand," he said, "that freedom has been offered you--and you
refused it. Is this true?"

"Yas, seh."

"_Why?_" asked the General quietly.

Uncle Billy stammered.

"Well--er--well, 'skuse me, Mars' Gen'l, but--but down whar _I_ lives at
de--de white gent'men understands a nigger better'n what you-all does.
Yas, seh."

General Grant may have smiled internally, but the only symptom of
amusement was the dry note in his voice.

"I see. But there has been some difference of opinion on the point."

He paused and then pointed past Uncle Billy directly at Morrison. "Do
you know that man?"

"Me?" said Uncle Billy. He turned and saw Morrison and instantly his
face lighted up. It made no difference to the old negro that Morrison's
uniform was mutilated--he could only see the familiar features of one
who had treated his dead mistress with perfect respect under trying
circumstances.

"Aw, yas, seh," he broke out, with a broad grin. "How you does, Cun'l. I
clar to--"

Uncle Billy stopped. His eyes had gone beyond Morrison to the man
sitting beside him and at the sight of that loved figure the old man
began to tremble. His voice lowered to a whisper and he began to totter
forward.

"Mars' Cary!" he said, as if he were looking on one risen from the dead.
He came a little nearer, with his hand stretched out as if to touch him
testingly--then suddenly dropped down on his knees before Gary who had
risen from his chair. "Bless Gawd, I done fin' you," he sobbed, his face
buried in his toaster's coat. "I done fin' you at last."

The General frowned.

"Forbes," he ordered. "Put a stop to that. Bring him back!"

But Uncle Billy paid not a bit of attention as the Adjutant sprang up.
All his thought was for his master and his own explanation.

"Dey wouldn' lemme git thru, seh!" he cried, pleading absolution from
what had seemed an inexcusable breach of trust. "Dey wouldn' gimme no
pass an' I'se des been stuck! Aw, Gawd, Mars' Cary--an' I axed 'em ev'y
day!"

"There now, Billy--don't," Cary said with a gesture of pity and unending
gratitude.

Uncle Billy rose slowly to his feet.

"Yas, seh. Yas, seh," he answered obediently. "'Skuse me, Mars' Gen'l. I
couldn' he'p it, seh. I--I couldn' he'p it. Dey wouldn' eben lemme see
him in de guard house--"

"That will do," interrupted the General firmly. "Listen to me. When did
you see Mr. Morrison--last?"

"Him?" said Uncle Billy, looking around at the Union officer.
"'Twas--'twas in de spring, seh. Yas, seh. De time de Yankees bu'nt us
out."

"How's that?" asked the General, not understanding.

Lieutenant Harris came forward a step.

"The act of incendiarism I spoke of, General--on the part of Sergeant
Dudley."

The General looked up and nodded.

"I see," he said, and Harris, knowing that due weight would be given the
fact let go a faint sigh of relief and stepped back.

The cigar came out of the General's mouth. "Tell me about it," he said
to Uncle Billy.

The old negro drew himself up and shifted his weight onto his other
foot.

"Well, seh, 'twas dis way. One mornin' de blue-bellies--'skuse me, seh,
de cav'lry gent'men. One mornin' de cav'lry gent'men come ridin' up,
lookin' fer horses an' fodder an'--an' Mars' Cary--an' anything else
what was layin' roun'. Yas, seh. An' des' befo' dis here gent'man come,"
with a bow at Morrison, "a low-lived white man took'n grab me by de
th'oat--an' choke me, seh. Den he 'sult Miss Hallie--"

"Miss Hallie?" queried the General.

"My mis'tiss, seh," answered Uncle Billy. "My mis'tiss, seh," he said
again and his hand went up to his eyes.

"The wife of Captain Cary," Harris said in a low tone and the General
nodded.

"Den--bless Gawd--de Cun'l come! He pick him down offn de front
po'ch--and put him under 'rest. Yas, seh. An' Miss Hallie, she sho' was
hoppin', Gen'l. She--"

"Never mind that," sighed the man whose creed was Patience. "Go on with
the story."

"Yas, seh. Thank'e, seh. 'Twas des lek I tell you, seh. An' arfter while
orders come to de cav'lry gent'men fer to light out fr'm dar in a hurry.
An' whilst dey was gettin' ready, seh, an' me an' de Cun'l was waitin'
roun' fer to proteck de property, de fire bus' right out de winders!

"Dat's right, Mars' Gen'l," Uncle Billy hurried to state, as the
General's eyebrows went up in surprise. "Dat's right. Den de front do'
flewed open, an' here come dat po' white trash rapscallion--wid de pine
knot in his han'. Yas, _seh_. He--"

"One moment!" snapped the General. "Was he running _towards_ his troop
or _away_ from it?"

"_Way_ fr'm it, seh," replied the old negro, with unmistakable
truthfulness, "t'odes de ice house whar Miss Hallie an' de chillun was
at. Yas, seh."

"And Mr. Morrison tried to stop him?"

"Ha!" cried Uncle Billy, with a chuckle. "He mo'n tried, seh. He _done_
it!"

The General nodded, his lips tight shut.

"So I understand. But what did he do--or say?"

At this question Uncle Billy suddenly developed dramatic abilities that
his master had never dreamed of.

"He say--" and Uncle Billy's arm shot out as he pointed something deadly
at an invisible foe--"he say, '_Halt! Dudley! Halt! Bang!_'"

Uncle Billy's hat dropped down on the floor with a whack. "Dat's all,
seh. Dat po' white trash--he drop lek a stuck pig, seh!"

The General's eyes were on his desk and for a moment there was a pause.
Finally, he lifted his head and looked at Morrison, who rose in salute.

"Mr. Morrison. You did well. Your Sergeant failed in his military
duty--and deserved the punishment. I commend your action."

Harris, listening with all his might, thought the words more favorable
than the tone in which they were spoken and his face brightened. Then he
heard the General speaking more sternly.

"The Federal powers of administrative justice now occupy precisely the
same position with regard to your own default."

Harris' face darkened. After the first just encomium--what was this that
was coming?

Relentless and inflexible the voice went on.

"The rules of war, as applied to a non-commissioned officer, must also
govern his superiors. As Sergeant Dudley deserved his bullet you merit
_yours_."

His eyes dropped from Morrison's face and he looked up at Harris.

"I thought you expected to be hurt."
"I didn't expect to be stabbed."
"Well, just as you please. I suppose you'll go round with one ear-ring."

"Like a little pig with his ear cropped? No, I shall do it myself.
See there, Georgie!" and she threw a bit of a box into my hands.

I opened it, and there lay inside, on their velvet cushion, a pair
of the prettiest things you ever saw,--a tiny bunch of white grapes,
and every grape a round pearl, and all hung so that they would
tinkle together on their golden stems every time Faith shook her
head,--and she had a cunning little way of shaking it often enough.

"These must have cost a penny, Faith," said I. "Where'd you get them?"

"Mr. Gabriel gave them to me, just now. He went up-town and bought them.

And I don't want him to know that my ears weren't bored."

"Mr. Gabriel? And you took them?"
"Of course I took them, and mighty glad to get them."

"Faith, dear," said I, "don't you know that you shouldn't accept presents
from gentlemen, and especially now you're a married woman, and
especially from those of higher station?"

"But he isn't higher."
"You know what I mean.

And then, too, he is; for one always takes rank from one's husband."
Faith looked rather downcast at this.

"Yes," said I,--"and pearls and calico"----
"Just because you haven't got a pair yourself! There, be still! I
don't want any of your instructions in duty!"
"You ought to put up with a word from a friend, Faith," said I. "You
always come to me with your grievances. And I'll tell you what I'll
do.
You used to like these coral branches of mine; and if you'll give
those back to Mr.

Gabriel, you shall have the coral."

Well, Faith she hesitated, standing there trying to muster her mind to
the needle, and it ended by her taking the coral, though I don't believe
she returned the pearls,--but we none of us ever saw them afterwards.

We'd been talking in a pretty low tone, because mother was asleep;
and just as she'd finished the other ear, and a little drop of blood
stood up on it like a live ruby, the door opened and Dan and Mr.

Gabriel came in.

There never was a prettier picture than Faith at that moment, and so the
young stranger thought, for he stared at her, smiling and at ease,
just as if she'd been hung in a gallery and he'd bought a ticket. So then
he sat down and repeated to Dan and mother what she'd told me, and
he promised to send for the papers to prove it all.

But he never did send for them,--delaying and delaying, till the summer
wore away; and perhaps there were such papers and perhaps there
weren't.

I've always thought he didn't want his own friends to know where he was.
Dan might be a rich man to-day, if he chose to look them up; but
he'd scorch at a slow fire before he'd touch a copper of it.

Father never believed a word about it, when we recited it again to
him.

"So Faith 'a come into her fortune, has she?"

said he. "Pretty child!
She 'a'n't had so much before sence she fell heir to old Miss
Devereux's best chany, her six silver spoons, and her surname."

So the days passed, and the greater part of every one Mr.

Gabriel was dabbling in the water somewhere.

There wasn't a brook within ten miles that he didn't empty of trout, for
Dan knew the woods as well as the shores, and he knew the clear nights
when the insects can keep free from the water so that next day the
fish rise hungry to the surface; and so sometimes in the brightest
of May noons they'd bring home a string of those beauties, speckled
with little tongues of flame; and Mr.

Gabriel would have them cooked, and make us all taste them,--for we
don't care much for that sort, down here on the Flats; we should
think we were famished, if we had to eat fish.

And then they'd lie in wait all day for the darting pickerel in the
little Stream of Shadows above; and when it came June, up the river
he went trolling for bass, and he used a different sort of bait
from the rest,--bass won't bite much at clams,--and he hauled in
great forty-pounders.

And sometimes in the afternoons he took out Faith and me,--for, as
Faith would go, whether or no, I always made it a point to put by
everything and go too; and I used to try and get some of the other
girls in, but Mr.

Gabriel never would take them, though he was hail-fellow-well-met
with everybody, and was everybody's favorite, and it was known all
round how he found out Faith, and that alone made him so popular,
that I do believe, if he'd only taken out naturalization-papers,
we'd have sent him to General Court.

And then it grew time for the river-mackerel, and they used to bring
in at sunset two or three hundred in a shining heap, together with
great lobsters that looked as if they'd been carved out of
heliotrope-stone, and so old that they were barnacled.

And it was so novel to Mr. Gabriel, that he used to act as if he'd fallen
in fairy-land.

Then you _did_ capture him?"

"Yes," came the quiet answer.

"And he _was_ the escort mentioned in your pass."

"Yes," Morrison answered slowly.

"H'm," said the General. He rose and turned to Harris.

"I am afraid, my dear Harris, that in spite of fine spun distinctions
and your legal technicalities, the findings of our court were not far
wrong."

Dropping his handful of papers on the desk he caught Morrison's eye and
rasped out his analysis of the case.

"Captain Cary practically admits his guilt! _You_ were aware of it! And
yet you send him through the very center of our lines! A _pass_! Carte
blanche to learn the disposition of our forces--our weakness and our
strength--and to make his report in Richmond. He was an enemy--with a
price on his head! And you trusted him! _A spy!_"

As the General had been speaking the first few words of his contemptuous
summing up Morrison saw where they would lead and his manhood instantly
leaped up in reply.

"I trusted, not the spy, but _Herbert Cary_," he said with honest
courage. Then, as the General turned his back on him with a contemptuous
snap of his fingers--

"General! I have offered no defense. If the justice of court-martial law
prescribes a firing squad--I find no fault. I failed. I pay."

With a gesture which indicated Gary the disgraced officer of the Army of
the Potomac shot out his one and only defense of his action--at an
unyielding back.

"I took this man--hunted--wounded--fighting to reach the side of a
hungry child. I captured him and, by the rules of war, I was about to
have him shot. Then he asked me to get his little girl safely to
Richmond, and not to let her know--about him."

"And she believed in _me_. _Trusted_ me--even as I trusted Herbert Cary
to pierce the very center of your lines--as a father--not a spy!"

From behind the unyielding back came a statement of fact, firm and
pitiless.

"And it cost you your sword--your life."

Morrison centered his eyes on the back of the General's head and sent
his answer home with all the power of his voice and spirit.

"_And I have no regret_" he said. "In the duty of a military servant--I
have failed. But my prisoner still lives! I could _not_ accept the
confidence of his child--the trust of innocence--a baby's kiss--with the
blood of her father on my hands!" He dropped his hands and half turned
away.

The General turned, a little at a time--first his head and then his
shoulders.

"A very pretty sentiment," he remarked dryly. "But you seem to forget
that we are not making love but _war_."

With a supreme burst of anger at his helplessness before the brute
forces which would presently send him forth to the firing squad,
Morrison wheeled on his commanding general and flared forth with his
last reply.

"Yes, _war_! And the hellish laws that govern it. But there is another
law--_Humanity_! Through a trooper in my command the home of an enemy
was turned to ashes--his loved ones flung out to starve. When a helpless
tot had lost its mother and a father would protect it, then _war_
demands that I smash a baby's one last hope--in the name of the Stars
and Stripes. And then--to march back home, to a happy, triumphant
North--and meet _my_ baby--with the memory of a butcher in my heart--_By
Heaven, sir! I'd rather hang!_"

For a moment General and Colonel regarded each other fixedly and then
the General turned away to pace the floor. Presently he came to his
decision and walked slowly back to his desk.

"Lieutenant Harris," he said in tones whose significance could not be
misunderstood, "I was right. You have wasted your time--and mine."

Then he sighed wearily and made a last gesture to Forbes.

"_The guard_" he said.

It was all over.

And then, to the ears of the two prisoners who stood looking at one
another with sad eyes, came a sound which made both men start and look
again with apprehension written on their faces--the shrill scream of a
child who is being kept from something she has set her heart upon.
Another moment and there was a rush of tiny feet in the hall, whereupon
the two sentries crossed their rifles across the doorway. But what
might have proved a serious obstruction for a man was only an absurdity
to a child's quick wit and Virgie, with a little duck of her sunny head,
dodged quickly under the muskets and charged, flushed and panting, on
the General's desk.

"You shan't shoot Colonel Morrison," cried this astonishing new comer in
tones of shrill command as she stamped her little foot: "I won't let
you! You shan't! You shan't!"

A moment of displeased surprise on the part of the General. Then--

"Take the child out of here," he ordered.

"I won't _go_!" answered Virgie, tossing her curls back and standing her
ground with' angry eyes.

"Orderly!" called the General.

With a whirl Virgie dashed away from the desk, eluded the orderly and
threw herself into her father's arms.

"Oh, Daddy, Daddy! You won't let him shoot the Colonel. Daddy, you
won't! You won't!" She burst into a passionate flood of tears.

Cary lifted his hand to the General in a plea for a moment's respite
from force.

"General--please. She'll go."

He turned to the sobbing child and shook her gently. "Virgie! Virgie!
Listen, honey! _Remember General Lee!_" The bowed head rose from her
father's shoulder; the little shoulders stiffened, and eye to eye she
looked into the face of Cary as his pleading voice went on: "_He_
wouldn't want you to cry like this. He said--'She's a brave little
soldier to stay there all alone. Dixie and I are _proud_ of her.'"

The Littlest Rebel's chin went up, and she bravely choked back her sobs.
If this was what her General wanted, this her General would have, though
childhood's sobs are hard to check when a little heart is aching for the
pain of those she loves.

"Go now, darling," her father pleaded. "Go."

She kissed him, and turned in silent, slow obedience, casting a scowl at
the grim and silent General Grant, then moved toward the guarded door.

"Wait!" said a quiet voice.

"Harris! They say that fools and children speak the truth." He paused
and then said gently: "Come here, little girl. Come here and talk to
me."

Somewhat in fear now that the kind voice robbed her of her anger the
little pale faced child choked down her sobs and came slowly forward to
the desk. But, as she stood there, her courage returned and, marvel of
marvels, her tiny hand went up in imitation of a salute.

Grant dropped his chin in his hand so that their heads were nearly on a
level across his desk and looked at her with gentle kindness in his
eyes.

"The Littlest Rebel, eh?" he said in low tones. "How old are you?"

"S-s-s-even. Goin' on eight," responded Virgie, gulping down a sob and
nervously fingering her tattered dress.

"Ah, yes," he nodded. "And do you know the uniform of a Union
officer--when you see it?"

Virgie's small mouth dropped open at the absurdity of the question and
she almost laughed.

"A Yankee?" she queried with scorn. "Well, I reckon I _ought_ to--by
_this_ time."

"Very good," the brown bearded man nodded, and gently blew smoke at the
ceiling. "Now, tell me. When you lived at home--and afterwards in your
cabin--did your father come to see you often?"

Virgie's sunny head nodded in emphatic asseveration. "Yes, sir. Often."

"_How_ often?" asked the bearded man.

Virgie's fingers twisted themselves deep in her dress.

"I--I don't know, sir. But heaps of times."

"Good again," and the questioner actually smiled. "When your father
came, did he ever wear clothes that--that were not his own?"

Virgie turned a side-long look on her father but, as he could not help,
her puzzled eyes went back to the General.

"Well--well, lots of our men don't have hardly _any_ clo's," she said
pathetically.

Another smile broke the sternness of the General's face.

"That isn't what I mean," he explained gently. "Did he ever wear a coat
of blue--a _Yankee_ uniform?"

"_General_!" broke in Harris.

"Lieutenant!" Grant frowned. He turned back to Virgie and coaxed her a
little.

"Well? Tell me!"

With one bare big toe twisted under her foot and fingers interlocked in
agony the child turned a look of pure anguish on her silent, grave faced
father. This was torture--and she could not escape.

"Oh, Daddy, Daddy!" she burst forth with a wail of tragedy in her voice.
"_What must I tell him_?"

The father's lips, which had been closed against the pain that racked
him, softened with the perfect trust which went into his gentle command.

"The _truth_, Virgie. Whatever the General asks."

The General's observant eyes rested on the proud Southerner for an
instant, noted that his face was quite without anxiety, then went back
to the little child.

"Well, did he?" he asked.

"Y-y-y-es, sir," answered Virgie with a gulp.

The General nodded and his face grew grave again.

"I wonder if you even know what it means. A _spy_!"

"Yes, sir," said the Littlest Rebel, and dropped her eyes.

"Hm. And do you remember how many times he came that way?"

"Yes, sir," came the instant answer, and she threw up her head.
"_Once_."

"_Once?_" echoed the General, surprised. "Are you sure?"

"Yes, sir," she answered. She drew herself up proudly, forgetting the
poor, tattered dress, and her clear eyes rested fearlessly on two others
that read through them down into the pure whiteness of her soul.

"_Think!_" said the quiet voice again, while the perspiration started
out on the forehead of more than one listener. "And remember what your
father said just now. When was it?"

Again the fearless eyes of the child, the Littlest Rebel of them all,
rose to the gaze of the man whose iron heel was crushing them into the
ground and she made her answer--as crystal clear and truthful as if she
stood before the Throne on the last great day.

"When--when Daddy came through the woods an'--an' put my mamma in the
ground."

There was a silence. No one moved. Outside in the trees and bushes the
song the summer insects were singing suddenly burst upon, their ears and
the myriad noises of the camp, hitherto unnoticed, became a veritable
clamor, so complete was the stillness in the room. Everyone except,
perhaps, the child herself realized the vital importance of her answer
and now that it had been given the crisis had passed. The Littlest Rebel
had put an end to questioning. An audible sigh went up from everyone
except the man behind the desk.

This one turned his head slowly towards the Confederate prisoner.

"Captain Cary, is this true?"

"Yes, General," came the straightforward answer. "I went to your nearest
post with a flag of truce and asked permission to go to my dead wife. I
was refused. I went _without_ permission."

General Grant rose to his feet. Centering the other's eyes with his own
he spoke to him as one officer speaks to another when he expects the
truth and nothing but the truth.

"And you give me your word, as a soldier and a gentleman, that
once--once _only_--you wore a Federal uniform and that because of the
burial of your wife?"

"I do," answered Herbert Cary, a rebel to the last. "And that was the
only cause in heaven or hell that could have _induced_ me to wear it!"

For a moment the Commander of the Army of the Potomac surveyed the still
defiant prisoner, then turned his back and walked to the window where he
tossed away a much chewed cigar, meantime thinking out his last
analysis.

Here was a man who had been hunted tirelessly month after month as a
rebel spy. It was true that he was a spy and true that he had worn a
uniform of blue. Yet the fact had been established--by the spotless
honesty of a little child--that he had worn the uniform only so that he
might reach his home and bury his dead. And--went on the cool, quiet
mind--since the man was _not_ a spy how could a Union officer be
executed for assisting a _spy_ to escape?

Coming back to his desk again the General picked out another smoke, felt
of it thoughtfully, sniffed at it, then raised his quiet eyes.

"Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison," he said in clear, incisive tones, "_go
back to your command!_"

Five words. Five short, plain words, yet they made all the difference
between a firing squad and a chance at life again. There was a
silence--then a gasp from Morrison's dry throat. At the sound of his
title--at the sound of that blessed order which, by right of supreme
power, instantly restored him to his rank, the Union officer leaped to
his feet with a cry of joy. But it was not even for those around him in
that little room to know the wonderful vista of happiness which opened
up again before the eyes which only a moment ago had been doomed to
close in the sleep of a disgraceful death.

The General's hand went up in a gesture which checked his gratitude.

"The _next_ time you are forced to decide between military duty and
humanity--think twice!"

He turned to his desk and took up a small piece of paper, crumpled and
torn.

"Captain Cary," he said, "I sincerely regret that I cannot honor the
pass as given you by Colonel Morrison," and he turned the paper over,
"but I do honor the pass of your General--R.E. Lee."

He folded the paper and held it out to Cary who came forward as if in a
dream. Then the General turned his back again and began to rummage on
his desk. The incident was closed.

But there was a rush of bare, childish feet sand before he could escape
Virgie's brown little arms were round him and her dimpled chin was
pressed against his waist.

The General made no effort to release himself but looked down on her
with a softer light in his face than any of his men had seen there in
many months.

"And as for you, young lady, the next time you pervert my officers and
upset the discipline of the Federal Army--well, I don't know _what_ I'll
do with you."

He looked down into her face and read there a wistful feminine appeal
for outward and visible reconciliation.

"Oh, well," he said with mock resignation, "I suppose I've got to do
it," and he stooped and kissed her. Then he took up his campaign hat and
walked towards the door.

Behind him the child in her tattered dress and bare brown legs stood
still and threw out her arms to him in a last soft-voiced good-by.

"Thank you, Gen'ral," called the Littlest Rebel, with the light of
heaven in her eyes. "Thank you for Daddy and Colonel Morrison and _me_.
You're another mighty good damn Yankee!"

And then, with a cry of surpassing joy and love, she rushed back to
where the two men waited for her on their knees.


CHAPTER X


In the shade of a fringe of trees that edged the river bank a troop of
cavalry was drawn up in one long, thin line. Knee to knee, the silent,
blue-coated riders sat, waiting, waiting--not for a charge upon the
enemy, or orders for a foray through an already harried land. They
waited for a leader--a man who had led them through the heat and cold,
through peaceful valleys and the bloody ruck of battle; a man whom they
loved and trusted, fearing him only when they shirked a duty or
disobeyed the iron laws of war.

This man had been taken from them, himself a servant who had disobeyed
these laws, his sword dishonored, his shoulder straps ripped off before
their eyes. And now the troopers waited--and for what? An order had come
which put them on review, a long thin line of horsemen waiting on the
river bank, while the sun beat down on the parched red fields, and the
waters of the muddy James lazed by as they murmured their sad, low song.

The troopers were silent--waiting. Alas, there was small room for
hope--Backus's eyes were heavy and bloodshot, his sweaty face was
crimson, his speech maudlin and thick, his body sawed drunkenly
about with the weaving motion of the ship. He drained another glass
to the dregs, whilst the cards were being dealt.

He took his hand, glanced at it, and his dull eyes lit up for a
moment.
The gamblers observed it, and showed their gratification by hardly
perceptible signs.

'How many cards?' 
'None!' said Backus.On his shoulders his straps had been replaced, and his saber rattled
against his thigh to the rise and fall of his horse's stride.

Straight on he came till he checked his mount before the center of the
waiting line, and the troopers knew that Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison had
once more come into his own.

Their sabers rasped from out the scabbards and rose in a joyous, swift
salute, while Morrison's once dishonored sword acknowledged it.

"_'Tention_ ..._company!_"

The long line stiffened and waited for their officer to speak; yet the
voice was not the voice of an officer in command, but that of a comrade
and a friend.

"Thank you, boys! It's good to be back again." He swallowed something in
his throat and struggled manfully to speak in even tones. "I must ask
you to be quiet--and not to--"

He stopped. Again his troop had disobeyed him--disobeyed him to a man. A
shout went up, deep, joyous and uncontrolled, its echoes pulsing out
across the hot, red fields till it reached the distant camp; and Grant
looked up from a war map's crisscross lines, grunted, and lit a fresh
cigar.

And Lieutenant-Colonel Morrison sat his horse before his cheering line
of men, silent, happy, while two tears rolled, unheeded, down his
cheek--a soldier and a man!

His tenderness to a little child had torn him from his saddle and doomed
him to disgrace and death; and then, one line from her baby lips had
mounted him again and set him before his troopers on parade.

"_It was when ... Daddy came through the woods ... and put my mamma ...
in the ground_."

Two lives she had held--in her little hands--and had saved them both
with a dozen words of simple, unfaltering truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the dusty pike which led to Virginia's capital another rider plodded
through the heat and haze. His coat, once gray, now hung in mud-stained
tatters about his form, but beneath his battered campaign hat his thin,
pale features were smoothed by a smile of happiness.

Behind his saddle, one hand gripped tightly in a rent in the soiled gray
coat, sat still another Rebel--the smallest of them all--her tiny legs
stretched out almost straight on the horse's wide, fat back.

"Daddy--how far is it to Richmon' now?"

The rider turned his head and pointed north.

"It's close now, honey. See that line of hills? That's Richmond. A mile
or two and we'll be at home."

Again they plodded on, past fields of shriveled corn whose stalks stood
silently in parched and wilted lines--lines that were like the ranks of
the doomed Confederacy--its stalks erect, yet sapped of the juice of
life. Where orchards once had flourished their rotted branches now hid
mouths of rifle pits, and low, red clay entrenchments stretched across
the fields.

"Daddy," broke out a piping voice, "don't you think we'd better make
this Yankee horse get up a little? 'Cause--'cause somethin' _else_ might
happen before we get there."

"It's all right, Virgie," her father answered, with a pat on her small,
brown knee. "These lines are ours, and I reckon we are safe at last."

They were. Two Rebels on a Yankee horse soon made their triumphant entry
into Richmond. "Yes, Monsieur le Maire. You must hold him in a little when
going down hill. Are there many descends between here and the place
whither you are going?"
"Do not forget to be at my door at precisely half-past four o'clock
to-morrow morning," replied M. Madeleine; and he took his departure.

The Fleming remained "utterly stupid," as he himself said some time
afterwards.

The mayor had been gone two or three minutes when the door opened
again; it was the mayor once more.

He still wore the same impassive and preoccupied air.
"Monsieur Scaufflaire," said he, "at what sum do you estimate the
value of the horse and tilbury which you are to let to me,--the one
bearing the other?"
"The one dragging the other, Monsieur le Maire," said the Fleming,
with a broad smile.Up the stone steps went Virgie, holding tightly to her father's hand,
for now, as she neared her General, her little heart was pounding, and
her breath came eagerly and fast.

On the threshold of a dim and shaded room they paused and looked. He sat
there, at a table strewn with war maps and reports--a tall gray man in a
coat of gray--the soldier and the gentleman.

As father and child came in he rose to meet them, looking at the two
with eyes that seemed to hold the sadness and the tenderness of all the
world.

He knew their story; in fact, he had bent his every effort to the
saving of Cary's life. He had sent a courier to the camp of General
Grant below the city, asking a stay of sentence till the facts in the
case were cleared; and only a half hour before his courier had returned
with news of the prisoner's release.

And now, as he advanced and gave a courtly welcome to his trusted scout,
the hand of the Littlest Rebel once more went up in salute to a superior
officer.

"Gen'ral," she said, as she stole a glance at her father's smiling face,
"I've brought him back--with--with the pass you gave me, sir."

And the General stooped--six feet of him--till his lips were on a level
with Virgie's lips; then folded her closely into his great gray arms.


THE END


PEACE


  Hushed is the rolling drum. The bugle's note
    Breathes but an echo of its martial blast;
  The proud old flags, in mourning silence, float
    Above the heroes of a buried past.
  Frail ivy vines 'round rusting cannon creep;
    The tattered pennants droop against the wall;
  The war-worn warriors are sunk in sleep,
    Beyond a summons of the trumpet's call.

  Do ye still dream, ye voiceless, slumbering ones,
    Of glories gained through struggles fierce and long,
  Lulled by the muffled boom of ghostly guns
    That weave the music of a battle-song?
  In fitful flight do misty visions reel,
    While restless chargers toss their bridle-reins?
  When down the lines gleam points of polished steel,
    And phantom columns flood the sun-lit plains?

  A breathless hush! A shout that mounts on high
    Till every hoary hill from sleep awakes!
  Swift as the unleashed lightning cleaves the sky,
    The tumbling, tempest-rush of battle breaks!
  By-and-bye, in due course, we were approaching San Francisco.
    It was an ugly black night, with a strong
  wind blowing, but there was not much sea. I was
    on deck, alone. Toward ten I started below.

  A figure issued from the gamblers' den, and
    disappeared in the darkness. I experienced a
  shock, for I was sure it was Backus. I
    flew down the companion-way, looked
  about for him, could not find him, then
    returned to the deck just in time to catch a glimpse of him as he
re-entered that confounded nest of rascality.In crimson-crested waves the columns break,
    Like shattered foam, across the shell-swept plain.

  A still form lies upon the death-crowned hill,
    With sightless eyes, gray lips that may not speak.
  His dead hand holds his shot-torn banner still--
    Its proud folds pressed against his bloodstained cheek.

  O slumbering heroes, cease to dream of war!
    Let hatreds die behind the tread of years.
  Forget the past, like some long-vanished scar
    Whose smart is healed in drops of falling tears.
  Keep, keep your glory; but forget the strife!
    Roll up your battle-flags so stained and torn!
  Teach, teach our hearts, that still dream on in life,
    To let the dead past sleep with those we mourn!

  From pitying Heaven a pitying angel came.
    Smiling, she bade the tongues of conflict cease.
  Her wide wings fanned away the smoke and flame,
    Hushed the red battle's roar. God called her Peace.
  From land and sea she swept mad passion's glow;
    Yet left a laurel for the hero's fame.
  She whispered hope to hearts in grief bowed low,
    And taught our lips, in love, to shape her name.

  She sheathed the dripping sword; her soft hands pres't
    Grim foes apart, who scowled in anger deep.
  She laid two grand old standards down to rest,
    And on her breast rocked weary War to sleep.
  Peace spreads her pinions wide from South to North;
    Dead enmity within the grave is laid.
  The church towers ring their holy anthems forth,
    To hush the thunders of the cannonade.

  EDWARD PEPLE.