"A purpose!"  she cried with withering scorn.  "Was it not that
the King might see that girl?"

"Yes," I replied patiently, "it was."

She stared at me.  "And you can tell me that to my face!"  she
said.

"I see no reason why I should not, Madame," I replied easily--"I
cannot conceive why you should object to the union--and many why
you should desire to see two people happy.  Otherwise, if I had
had any idea, even the slightest, that the matter was obnoxious
to you, I would not have engaged in it."

"But--what was your purpose then?"  she muttered, in a different
tone.

"To obtain the King's good word with M. de Perrot to permit the
marriage of his son with his niece; who is, unfortunately,
without a portion."

Madame uttered a low exclamation, and her eyes wandering from me,
she took up--as if her thoughts strayed also--a small ornament;
from the table beside her.  "Ah!"  she said, looking at it
closely.  "But Perrot's son did he know of this?"

"No," I answered, smiling.  "But I have heard that women can love
as well as men, Madame.  And sometimes ingenuously."

I heard her draw a sigh of relief, and I knew that if I had not
persuaded her I had accomplished much.  I was not surprised when,
laying down the ornament with which she had been toying, she
turned on me one of those rare smiles to which the King could
refuse nothing; and wherein wit, tenderness, and gaiety were so
happily blended that no conceivable beauty of feature, uninspired
by sensibility, could vie with them.  "Good friend, I have
sinned," she said.  "But I am a woman, and I love.  Pardon me.
As for your PROTEGEE, from this moment she is mine also.  I will
speak to the King this evening; and if he does not at once,"
Madame continued, with a gleam of archness that showed me that
she was not yet free from suspicion, "issue his commands to M. de
Perrot, I shall know what to think; and his Majesty will
suffer!"

I thanked her profusely, and in fitting terms.  Then, after a
word or two about some assignments for the expenses of her
household, in settling which there had been delay--a matter
wherein, also, I contrived to do her pleasure and the King's
service no wrong--I very willingly took my leave, and, calling my
people, started homewards on foot.  I had not gone twenty paces,
however, before M. de Perrot, whose impatience had chained him to
the spot, crossed the street and joined himself to me.  "My dear
friend," he cried, embracing me fervently, "is all well?"

"Yes," I said.

"She is appeased?"

"Absolutely."

He heaved a deep sigh of relief, and, almost crying in his joy,
began to thank me, with all the extravagance of phrase and
gesture to which men of his mean spirit are prone.  Through all I
heard him silently, and with secret amusement, knowing that the
end was not yet.  At length he asked me what explanation I had
given.

"The only explanation possible," I answered bluntly.  "I had to
combat Madame's jealousy.  I did it in the only way in which it
could be done:  by stating that your niece loved your son, and by
imploring her good word on their behalf."

He sprang a pace from me with a cry of rage and astonishment.
"You did that?"  he screamed.

"Softly, softly, M. de Perrot," I said, in a voice which brought
him somewhat to his senses.  "Certainly I did.  You bade me say
whatever was necessary, and I did so.  No more.  If you wish,
however," I added grimly, "to explain to Madame that--"

But with a wail of lamentation he rushed from me, and in a moment
was lost in the darkness; leaving me to smile at this odd
termination of an intrigue that, but for a lad's adroitness,
might have altered the fortunes not of M. de Perrot only but of
the King my master and of France.


II. THE TENNIS BALLS.

A few weeks before the death of the Duchess of Beaufort, on
Easter Eve, 1599, made so great a change in the relations of all
at Court that "Sourdis mourning" came to be a phrase for grief,
genuine because interested, an affair that might have had a
serious issue began, imperceptibly at the time, in the veriest
trifle.

One day, while the King was still absent from Paris, I had a mind
to play tennis, and for that purpose summoned La Trape, who had
the charge of my balls, and sometimes, in the absence of better
company, played with me.  Of late the balls he bought had given
me small satisfaction, and I bade him bring me the bag, that I
might choose the best.  He did so, and I had not handled half-a-
dozen before I found one, and later three others, so much more
neatly sewn than the rest, and in all points so superior, that
even an untrained eye could not fail to detect the difference.

"Look, man!"  I said, holding out one of these for his
inspection. "These are balls; the rest are rubbish.  Cannot you
see the difference?  Where did you buy these?  At Constant's?"

He muttered, "No, my lord," and looked confused.

This roused my curiosity.  "Where, then?"  I said sharply.

"Of a man who was at the gate yesterday."

"Oh!"  I said.  "Selling tennis balls?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Some rogue of a marker," I exclaimed, "from whom you bought
filched goods!  Who was it, man?"

"I don't know his name," La Trape answered.  "He was a Spaniard."

"Well?"

"Who wanted to have an audience of your excellency."

"Ho!"  I said drily.  "Now I understand.  Bring me your book.
Or, tell me, what have you charged me for these balls?"

"Two francs," he muttered reluctantly.

"And never gave a sou, I'll swear!"  I retorted.  "You took the
poor devil's balls, and left him at the gate!  Ay, it is rogues
like you get me a bad name!"  I continued, affecting more anger
than I felt--for, in truth, I was rather pleased with my
quickness in discovering the cheat.  "You steal and I bear the
blame, and pay to boot!  Off with you and find the fellow, and
bring him to me, or it will be the worse for you!"

Glad to escape so easily, La Trape ran to the gate; but he failed
to find his friend, and two or three days elapsed before I
thought again of the matter, such petty rogueries being ingrained
in a great man's VALETAILLE, and being no more to be removed than
the hairs from a man's arm.  At the end of that time La Trape
came to me, bringing the Spaniard; who had appeared again at the
gate.  The stranger proved to be a small, slight man, pale and
yet brown, with quick-glancing eyes.  His dress was decent, but
very poor, with more than one rent neatly darned.  He made me a
profound reverence, and stood waiting, with his cap in his hand,
to be addressed; but, with all his humility, I did not fail to
detect an easiness of deportment and a propriety that did not
seem absolutely strange since he was a Spaniard, but which struck
me, nevertheless, as requiring some explanation.  I asked him,
civilly, who he was.  He answered that his name was Diego.

"You speak French?"

"I am of Guipuzcoa, my lord," he answered, "where we sometimes
speak three tongues."

"That is true," I said.  "And it is your trade to make tennis
balls?"

"No, my lord; to use them," he answered with a certain dignity.

"You are a player, then?"

"If it please your excellency."

"Where have you played?"

"At Madrid, where I was the keeper of the Duke of Segovia's
court; and at Toledo, where I frequently had the honour of
playing against M. de Montserrat."

"You are a good player?"

"If your excellency," he answered impulsively, "will give me an
opportunity--"

"Softly, softly," I said, somewhat taken aback by his
earnestness.  "Granted that you are a player, you seem to have
played to small purpose.. Why are you here, my friend, and not in
Madrid?"

He drew up his sleeves, and showed me that his wrists were deeply
scarred.

I shrugged my shoulders.  "You have been in the hands of the Holy
Brotherhood?"  I said.

"No, my lord," he answered bitterly.  "Of the Holy Inquisition."

"You are a Protestant?"

He bowed.

On that I fell to considering him with more attention, but at the
same time with some distrust; reflecting that he was a Spaniard,
and recalling the numberless plots against his Majesty of which
that nation had been guilty.  Still, if his tale were true he
deserved support; with a view therefore to testing this I
questioned him farther, and learned that he had for a long time
disguised his opinions, until, opening them in an easy moment to
a fellow servant, he found himself upon the first occasion of
quarrel betrayed to the Fathers.  After suffering much, and
giving himself up for lost in their dungeons, he made his escape
in a manner sufficiently remarkable, if I might believe his
story.  In the prison with him lay a Moor, for whose exchange
against a Christian taken by the Sallee pirates an order came
down.  It arrived in the evening; the Moor was to be removed in
the morning.  An hour after the arrival of the news, however, and
when the two had just been locked up for the night, the Moor,
overcome with excess of joy, suddenly expired.  At first the
Spaniard was for giving the alarm; but, being an ingenious
fellow, in a few minutes he summoned all his wits together and
made a plan.  Contriving to blacken his face and hands with
charcoal he changed clothes with the corpse, and muffling himself
up after the fashion of the Moors in a cold climate he succeeded
in the early morning in passing out in his place.  Those who had
charge of him had no reason to expect an escape, and once on the
road he had little difficulty in getting away, and eventually
reached France after a succession of narrow chances.

All this the man told me so simply that I knew not which to
admire more, the daring of his device--since for a white man to
pass for a brown is beyond the common scope of such disguises--or
his present modesty in relating it.  However, neither of these
things seemed to my mind a good reason for disbelief.  As to the
one, I considered that an impostor would have put forward
something more simple; and as to the other, I have all my life
long observed that those who have had strange experiences tell
them in a very ordinary way.  Besides, I had fresh in my mind the
diverting escape of the Duke of Nemours from Lyons, which I have
elsewhere related.  On the other hand, and despite all these
things, the story might be false; so with a view to testing one
part of it, at least, I bade him come and play with me that
afternoon.

"My lord," he said bluntly, "I had rather not.  For if I defeat
your excellency, I may defeat also your good intentions.  And if
I permit you to win, I shall seem to be an impostor."

Somewhat surprised by his forethought, I reassured him on this
point; and his game, which proved to be one of remarkable
strength and finesse, and fairly on an equality, as it seemed to
me, with that of the best French players, persuaded me that at
any rate the first part of his tale was true.  Accordingly I made
him a present, and, in addition, bade Maignan pay him a small
allowance for a while.  For this he showed his gratitude by
attaching himself to my household; and as it was the fashion at
that time to keep tennis masters of this class, I found it
occasionally amusing to pit him against other well-known players.
In the course of a few weeks he gained me great credit; and
though I am not so foolish as to attach importance to such
trifles, but, on the contrary, think an old soldier who stood
fast at Coutras, or even a clerk who has served the King
honestly--if such a prodigy there be--more deserving than these
professors, still I do not err on the other side; but count him a
fool who, because he has solid cause to value himself, disdains
the ECLAT which the attachment of such persons gives him in the
public eye.

The man went by the name of Diego the Spaniard, and his story,
which gradually became known, together with the excellence of his
play, made him so much the fashion that more than one tried to
detach him from my service.  The King heard of him, and would
have played with him, but the sudden death of Madame de Beaufort,
which occurred soon afterwards, threw the Court into mourning;
and for a while, in pursuing the negotiations for the King's
divorce, and in conducting a correspondence of the most delicate
character with the Queen, I lost sight of my player--insomuch,
that I scarcely knew whether he still formed part of my suite or
not.

My attention was presently recalled to him, however, in a rather
remarkable manner.  One morning Don Antonio d'Evora, Secretary to
the Spanish Embassy, and a brother of that d'Evora who commanded
the Spanish Foot at Paris in '94, called on me at the Arsenal, to
which I had just removed, and desired to see me.  I bade them
admit him; but as my secretaries were at the time at work with
me, I left them and received him in the garden--supposing that
he wished to speak to me, about the affair of Saluces, and
preferring, like the King my master, to talk of matters of State
in the open air.

However, I was mistaken.  Don Antonio said nothing about Savoy,
but after the usual preliminaries, which a Spaniard never omits,
plunged into a long harangue upon the comity which, now that
peace reigned, should exist between the two nations.  For some
time I waited patiently to learn what he would be at; but he
seemed to be lost in his own eloquence, and at last I took him
up.

"All this is very well, M. d'Evora," I said.  "I quite agree with
you that the times are changed, that amity is not the same thing
as war, and that a grain of sand in the eye is unpleasant," for
he had said all of these things.  "But I fail, being a plain man
and no diplomatist, to see what you want me to do."

"It is the smallest matter," he said, waving his hand gracefully.

"And yet," I retorted, "you seem to find a difficulty in coming
at it."

"As you do at the grain of sand in the eye," he answered wittily.
"After all, however, in what you say, M. de Rosny, there is some
truth.  I feel that I am, on delicate ground; but I am sure that
you will pardon me.  You have in your suite a certain Diego."

"It may be so," I said, masking my surprise, and affecting
indifference.

"A tennis-player."

I shrugged my shoulders.  "The man is known," I said.

"A Protestant?"

"It is not impossible."

"And a subject of the King, my master.  A man," Don Antonio
continued, with increasing stiffness, "in fine, M. de Rosny, who,
after committing various offences, murdered his comrade in
prison, and, escaping in his clothes, took refuge in this
country."

I shrugged my shoulders again.

"I have no knowledge of that," I said coldly.

"No, or I am sure that you would not harbour the fellow," the
secretary answered.  "Now that you do know it, however, I take it
for granted that you will dismiss him?  If you held any but the
great place you do hold, M. de Rosny, it would be different; but
all the world see who follow you, and this man's presence stains
you, and is an offence to my master."

"Softly, softly, M. d'Evora," I said, with a little warmth.  "You
go too fast.  Let me tell you first, that, for my honour, I take
care of it myself; and, secondly, for your master, I do not allow
even my own to meddle with my household."

"But, my lord," he said pompously, "the King of Spain--"

"Is the King of Spain," I answered, cutting him short without
much ceremony.  "But in the Arsenal of Paris, which, for the
present, is my house, I am king.  And I brook no usurpers, M.
d'Evora."

He assented to that with a constrained smile.

"Then I can say no more," he answered.  "I have warned you that
the man is a rogue.  If you will still entertain him, I wash my
hands of it.  But I fear the consequences, M. de Rosny, and,
frankly, it lessens my opinion of your sagacity."

Thereat I bowed in my turn, and after the exchange of some
civilities he took his leave.  Considering his application after
he was gone, I confess that I found nothing surprising in it; and
had it come from a man whom I held in greater respect I might
have complied with it in an indirect fashion.  But though it
might have led me under some circumstances to discard Diego,
naturally, since it confirmed his story in some points, and
proved besides that he was not a persona grata at the Spanish
Embassy, it did not lead me to value him less.  And as within the
week he was so fortunate as to defeat La Varenne's champion in a
great match at the Louvre, and won also a match, at M. de
Montpensier's which put fifty crowns into my pocket, I thought
less and less of d'Evora's remonstrance; until the king's return
put it quite out of my head.  The entanglement with Mademoiselle
d'Entragues, which was destined to be the most fatal of all
Henry's attachments, was then in the forming; and the king
plunged into every kind of amusement with fresh zest.  The very
day after his return he matched his marker, a rogue, but an
excellent player, against my man; and laid me twenty crowns on
the event, the match to be played on the following Saturday after
a dinner which M. de Lude was giving in honour of the lady.

On the Thursday, however, who should come in to me, while I was
sitting alone after supper, but Maignan:  who, closing the door
and dismissing the page who waited there, told me with a very
long face and an air of vast importance that he had discovered
something.

"Something?"  I said, being inclined at the moment to be merry.
"What?  A plot to reduce your perquisites, you rascal?"

"No, my lord," he answered stoutly.  "But to tap your
excellency's secrets."

"Indeed," I said pleasantly, not believing a word of it.  "And
who is to hang?"

"The Spaniard," he answered in a low voice.

That sobered me, by putting the matter in a new light; and I sat
a moment looking at him and reviewing Diego's story, which
assumed on the instant an aspect so uncommon and almost
incredible that I wondered how I had ever allowed it to pass.
But when I proceeded from this to the substance of Maignan's
charge I found an IMPASSE in this direction also, and I smiled.
"So it is Diego, is it?"  I said.  "You think that he is a spy?"

Maignan nodded.

"Then, tell me," I asked, "what opportunity has he of learning
more than all the world knows?  He has not been in my apartments
since I engaged him.  He has seen none of my papers.  The
youngest footboy could tell all he has learned."

"True, my lord," Maignan answered slowly; "but--"

"Well?"

"I saw him this evening, talking with a Priest in the Rue Petits
Pois; and he calls himself a Protestant."

"Ah!  You are sure that the man was a priest?"

"I know him."

"For whom?"

"One of the chaplains at the Spanish Embassy."

It was natural that after this I should take a more serious view
of the matter; and I did so.  But my former difficulty still
remained, for, assuming this to be a cunning plot, and d'Evora's
application to me a ruse to throw me off my guard, I could not
see where their advantage lay; since the Spaniard's occupation
was not of a nature to give him the entry to my confidence or the
chance of ransacking my papers.  I questioned Maignan further,
therefore, but without result.  He had seen the two together in a
secret kind of way, viewing them himself from the window of a
house where he had an assignation.  He had not been near enough
to hear what they said, but he was sure that no quarrel took
place between them, and equally certain that it was no chance
meeting that brought them together.

Infected by his assurance, I could still see no issue; and no
object in such an intrigue.  And in the end I contented myself
with bidding him watch the Spaniard closely, and report to me the
following evening; adding that he might confide the matter to La
Trape, who was a supple fellow, and of the two the easier
companion.

Accordingly, next evening Maignan again appeared, this time with
a face even longer; so that at first I supposed him to have
discovered a plot worse than Chastel's; but it turned out that he
had discovered nothing.  The Spaniard had spent the morning in
lounging and the afternoon in practice at the Louvre, and from
first to last had conducted himself in the most innocent manner
possible.  On this I rallied Maignan on his mare's nest, and was
inclined to dismiss the matter as such; still, before doing so, I
thought I would see La Trape, and dismissing Maignan I sent for
him.

When he was come, "Well," I said, "have you anything to say?"

"One little thing only, your excellency," he answered slyly, "and
of no importance."

"But you did not tell it to Maignan?"

"No, my Lord," he replied, his face relaxing in a cunning smile.

"Well?"

"Once to-day I saw Diego where he should not have been."

"Where?"

"In the King's dressing-room at the tennis-court."

"You saw him there?"

"I saw him coming out," he answered.

It may be imagined how I felt on hearing this; for although I
might have thought nothing of the matter before my suspicions
were aroused--since any man might visit such a place out of
curiosity--now, my mind being disturbed, I was quick to conceive
the worst, and saw with horror my beloved master already
destroyed through my carelessness.  I questioned La Trape in a
fury, but could learn nothing more.  He had seen the man slip
out, and that was all.

"But did you not go in yourself?"  I said, restraining my
impatience with difficulty.

"Afterwards?  Yes, my lord."

"And made no discovery?"

He shook his head.

"Was anything prepared for his Majesty?"

"There was sherbet; and some water."

"You tried them?"

La Trape grinned.  "No, my lord," he said.  "But I gave some to
Maignan."

"Not explaining?"

"No, my lord."

"You sacrilegious rascal!"  I cried, amused in spite of my
anxiety.  "And he was none the worse?"

"No, my lord."

Not satisfied yet, I continued to press him, but with so little
success that I still found myself unable to decide whether the
Spaniard had wandered in innocently or to explore his ground. In
the end, therefore, I made up my mind to see things for myself;
and early next morning, at an hour when I was not likely to be
observed, I went out by a back door, and with my face muffled and
no other attendance than Maignan and La Trape, went to the
tennis-court and examined the dressing-room.

This was a small closet on the first floor, of a size to hold two
or three persons, and with a casement through which the King, if
he wished to be private, might watch the game.  Its sole
furniture consisted of a little table with a mirror, a seat for
his Majesty, and a couple of stools, so that it offered small
scope for investigation.  True, the stale sherbet and the water
were still there, the carafes standing on the table beside an
empty comfit box, and a few toilet necessaries; and it will be
believed that I lost no time in examining them.  But I made no
discovery, and when I had passed my eye over everything else that
the room contained, and noticed nothing that seemed in the
slightest degree suspicious, I found myself completely at a loss.
I went to the window, and for a moment looked idly into the
court.

But neither did any light come thence, and I had turned again and
was about to leave, when my eye alighted on a certain thing and I
stopped.

"What is that?"  I said.  It was a thin case, book-shaped, of
Genoa velvet, somewhat worn.

"Plaister," Maignan, who was waiting at the door, answered.  "His
Majesty's hand is not well yet, and as your excellency knows,
he--"

"Silence, fool!"  I cried.  and I stood rooted to the spot,
overwhelmed by the conviction that I held the clue to the
mystery, and so shaken by the horror which that conviction
naturally brought with it that I could not move a finger.  A
design so fiendish and monstrous as that which I suspected might
rouse the dullest sensibilities, in a case where it threatened
the meanest; but being aimed in this at the King, my master, from
whom I had received so many benefits, and on whose life the well-
being of all depended, it goaded me to the warmest resentment.  I
looked round the tennis-court--which, empty, shadowy and silent,
seemed a fit place for such horrors--with rage and repulsion;
apprehending in a moment of sad presage all the accursed strokes
of an enemy whom nothing could propitiate, and who, sooner or
later, must set all my care at nought, and take from France her
greatest benefactor.

But, it will be said, I had no proof, only a conjecture; and this
is true, but of it hereafter.  Suffice it that, as soon as I had
swallowed my indignation, I took all the precautions affection
could suggest or duty enjoin, omitting nothing; and then,
confiding the matter to no one the two men who were with me
excepted--I prepared to observe the issue with gloomy
satisfaction.

The match was to take place at three in the afternoon.  A little
after that hour, I arrived at the tennis-court, attended by La
Font and other gentlemen, and M. l'Huillier, the councillor, who
had dined with me.  L'Huillier's business had detained me
somewhat, and the men had begun; but as I had anticipated this, I
had begged my good friend De Vic to have an eye to my interests.
The King, who was in the gallery, had with him M. de Montpensier,
the Comte de Lude, Vitry, Varennes, and the Florentine
Ambassador, with Sancy and some others.  Mademoiselle d'Entragues
and two ladies had taken possession of his closet, and from the
casement were pouring forth a perpetual fire of badinage and BONS
MOTS.  The tennis-court, in a word, presented as different an
aspect as possible from that which it had worn in the morning.
The sharp crack of the ball, as it bounded from side to side, was
almost lost in the crisp laughter and babel of voices; which as I
entered rose into a perfect uproar, Mademoiselle having just
flung a whole lapful of roses across the court in return for some
witticism.  These falling short of the gallery had lighted on the
head of the astonished Diego, causing a temporary cessation of
play, during which I took my seat.

Madame de Lude's saucy eye picked me out in a moment.  "Oh, the
grave man!"  she cried.  "Crown him, too, with roses."

"As they crowned the skull at the feast, madame?"  I answered,
saluting her gallantly.

"No, but as the man whom the King delighteth to honour," she
answered, making a face at me.  "Ha!  ha!  I am not afraid!  I am
not afraid!  I am not afraid!"

There was a good deal of laughter at this.  "What shall I do to
her, M. de Rosny?"  Mademoiselle cried out, coming to my rescue.

"If you will have the goodness to kiss her, mademoiselle," I
answered, "I will consider it an advance, and as one of the
council of the King's finances, my credit should be good for the
re--"

"Thank you!"  the King cried, nimbly cutting me short.  "But as
my finances seem to be the security, faith, I will see to the
repayment myself!  Let them start again; but I am afraid that my
twenty crowns are yours, Grand Master; your man is in fine play."

I looked into the court.  Diego, lithe and sinewy, with his
cropped black hair, high colour, and quick shallow eyes, bounded
here and there, swift and active as a panther.  Seeing him thus,
with his heart in his returns, I could not but doubt; more, as
the game proceeded, amid the laughter and jests and witty sallies
of the courtiers, I felt the doubt grow; the riddle became each
minute more abstruse, the man more mysterious.  But that was of
no moment now.

A little after four o'clock the match ended in my favour; on
which the King, tired of inaction, sprang up, and declaring that
he would try Diego's strength himself, entered the court.  I
followed, with Vitry and others, and several strokes which had
been made were tested and discussed.  Presently, the King going
to talk with Mademoiselle at her window, I remarked the Spaniard
and Maignan, with the King's marker, and one or two others
waiting at the further door.  Almost at the same moment I
observed a sudden movement among them, and voices raised higher
than was decent, and I called out sharply to know what it was.

"An accident, my lord," one of the men answered respectfully.

"It is nothing," another muttered.  "Maignan was playing tricks,
your excellency, and cut Diego's hand a little; that is all."

"Cut his hand now!"  I exclaimed angrily "And the King about to
play with him.  Let me see it!"

Diego sulkily held up his hand, and I saw a cut, ugly but of no
importance.

"Pooh!"  I said; "it is nothing.  Get some plaister.  Here, you,"
I continued wrathfully, turning to Maignan, "since you have done
the mischief, booby, you must repair it.  Get some plaister, do
you hear?  He cannot play in that state."

Diego muttered something, and Maignan that he had not got any;
but before I could answer that he must get some, La Trape thrust
his may to the front, and producing a small piece from his
pocket, proceeded with a droll air of extreme carefulness to
treat the hand.  The other knaves fell into the joke, and the
Spaniard had no option but to submit; though his scowling face
showed that he bore Maignan no good-will, and that but for my
presence he might not have been so complaisant.  La Trape was
bringing his surgery to an end by demanding a fee, in the most
comical manner possible, when the King returned to our part of
the court.  "What is it?"  he said.  "Is anything the matter?"

"No, sire," I said.  "My man has cut his hand a little, but it is
nothing."

"Can he play?"  Henry asked with his accustomed good-nature.

"Oh, yes, sire," I answered.  "I have bound it up with a strip of
plaister from the case in your Majesty's closet."

"He has not lost blood?"

"No, sire."

And he had not.  But it was small wonder that the King asked;
small wonder, for the man's face had changed in the last ten
seconds to a strange leaden colour; a terror like that of a wild
beast that sees itself trapped had leapt into his eyes.  He shot
a furtive glance round him, and I saw him slide his hand behind
him.  But I was prepared for that, and as the King moved off a
space I slipped to the man's side, as if to give him some
directions about his game.

"Listen," I said, in a voice heard only by him; "take the
dressing off your hand, and I have you broken on the wheel.  You
understand?  Now play."

Assuring myself that he did understand, and that Maignan and La
Trape were at hand if he should attempt anything, I went back to
my place, and sitting down by De Vic began to watch that strange
game; while Mademoiselle's laughter and Madame de Lude's gibes
floated across the court, and mingled with the eager applause and
more dexterous criticisms of the courtiers.  The light was
beginning to sink, and for this reason, perhaps, no one perceived
the Spaniard's pallor; but De Vic, after a rally or two, remarked
that he was not playing his full strength.

"Wise man!"  he added.

"Yes," I said.  "Who plays well against kings plays ill."

De Vic laughed.  "How he sweats!"  he said, "and he never turned
a hair when he played Colet.  I suppose he is nervous."

"Probably," I said.

And so they chattered and laughed--chattered and laughed, seeing
an ordinary game between the King and a marker; while I, for whom
the court had grown sombre as a dungeon, saw a villain struggling
in his own toils, livid with the fear of death, and tortured by
horrible apprehensions.  Use and habit were still so powerful
with the man that he played on mechanically with his hands, but
his eyes every now and then sought mine with the look of the
trapped beast; and on these occasions I could see his lips move
in prayer or cursing.  The sweat poured down his face as he moved
to and fro, and I, fancied that his features were beginning to
twitch.  Presently--I have said that the light was failing, so
that it was not in my imagination only that the court was sombre
--the King held his ball.  "My friend, your man is not well," he
said, turning to me.

"It is nothing, sire; the honour you do him makes him nervous," I
answered.  "Play up, sirrah," I continued; "you make too good a
courtier."

Mademoiselle d'Entragues clapped her hands and laughed at the
hit; and I saw Diego glare at her with an indescribable look, in
which hatred and despair and a horror of reproach were so nicely
mingled with something as exceptional as his position, that the
whole baffled words.  Doubtless the gibes and laughter he heard,
the trifling that went on round him, the very game in which he
was engaged, and from which he dared not draw back, seemed in his
eyes the most appalling mockery; but ignorant who were in the
secret, unable to guess how his diabolical plot had been
discovered, uncertain even whether the whole were not a concerted
piece, he went on playing his part mechanically; with starting
eyes and labouring chest, and lips that, twitching and working,
lost colour each minute.  At length he missed a stroke, and
staggering leaned against the wall, his-face livid and ghastly.
The King took the alarm at that, and cried out that something was
wrong.  Those who were sitting rose.  I nodded to Maignan to go
to the man.

"It is a fit," I said.  "He is subject to them, and doubtless the
excitement--but I am sorry that it has spoiled your Majesty's
game.

"It has not," Henry answered kindly.  "The light is gone.  But
have him looked to, will you, my friend?  If La Riviere were here
he might do something for him."

While he spoke, the servants had gathered round the man, but with
the timidity which characterises that class in such emergencies,
they would not touch him.  As I crossed the court, and they made
way for me, the Spaniard, who was still standing, though in a
strange and distorted fashion, turned his bloodshot eyes on me.

"A priest!"  he muttered, framing the words with difficulty, "a
priest!"

I directed Maignan to fetch one.  "And do you," I continued to
the other servants, "take him into a room somewhere."

They obeyed, reluctantly.  As they carried him out, the King,
content with my statement, was giving his hand to Mademoiselle to
descend the stairs; and neither he nor any, save the two men in
my confidence, had the slightest suspicion that aught was the
matter beyond a natural illness.  But I shuddered when I
considered how narrow had been the King's escape, how trifling
the circumstance which had led to suspicion, how fortuitous the
inspiration by which I had chanced on discovery.  The delay of a
single day, the occurrence of the slightest mishap, might have
been fatal not to him only but to the best interests of France;
which his death at a time when he was still childless must have
plunged into the most melancholy of wars.

Of the wretched Spaniard I need say little more.  Caught in his
own snare, he was no sooner withdrawn from the court than he fell
into violent convulsions, which held him until midnight when he
died with symptoms and under circumstances so nearly resembling
those which had attended the death of Madame de Beaufort at
Easter, that I have several times dwelt on the strange
coincidence, and striven to find the connecting link.  But I
never hit on it; and the King's death, and that unexplained
tendency to imitate great crimes under which the vulgar labour,
prevailed with me to keep the matter secret.  Nay, as I believed
that d'Evora had played the part of an unconscious tool, and as a
hint pressed home sufficed to procure the withdrawal of the
chaplain whom Maignan had named, I did not think it necessary to
disclose the matter even to the King my master.


III.  TWO MAYORS OF BOTTITORT.

Believing that I have now set down all those particulars of the
treaty with Epernon and the consequent pacification of Brittany
in the year 1598 which it will be of advantage to the public to
know, that it may the better distinguish in the future those who
have selfishly impoverished the State from those who, in its
behalf, have incurred obloquy and high looks, I proceed next to
the events which followed the King's return to Paris.

But, first, and by way of sampling the diverting episodes that
will occur from time to time in the most laborious existence, and
for the moment reduce the minister to the level of the man, I am
tempted to narrate an adventure that befell me on my return,
between Rennes and Vitre; when the King having preceded me at
speed under the pretext of urgency, but really that he might
avoid the prolix addresses that awaited him in every town, I
found myself no more minded to suffer.  Having sacrificed my
ease, therefore, in two of the more important places, and come
within as many stages of Vitre, I determined also on a holiday.
Accordingly, directing my baggage and the numerous escort and
suite that attended me to the full tale of four-score horses--to
keep the high road, I struck myself into a byway, intending to
seek hospitality for the night at a house of M. de Laval's; and
on the second evening to render myself with a good grace to the
eulogia and tedious mercies of the Vitre townsfolk.

I kept with me only La Font and two servants.  The day was fine,
and the air brisk; the country open, affording many distant
prospects which the sun rendered cheerful.  We rode for some
time, therefore, with the gaiety of schoolboys released from
their tasks, and dining at noon in the lee of one of the great
boulders that there dot the plain, took pleasure in applying to
the life of courts every evil epithet that came to mind.  For a
little time afterwards we rode as cheerfully; but about three in
the afternoon the sky became overcast, and almost at the same
moment we discovered that we had strayed from the track.  The
country in that district resembles the more western parts of
Brittany, in consisting of huge tracts of bog and moorland strewn
with rocks and covered with gorse; which present a cheerful
aspect in sunshine, but are savage and barren to a degree when
viewed through sheets of rain or under a sombre sky.

The position, therefore, was not without its discomforts.  I had
taken care to choose a servant who was familiar with the country,
but his knowledge seemed now at fault.  However, under his
direction we retraced our steps, but still without regaining the
road; and as a small rain presently began to fall and the day to
decline, the landscape which in the morning had flaunted a wild
and rugged beauty, changed to a brown and dreary waste set here
and there with ghost-like stones.  Once astray on this, we found
our path beset with sloughs and morasses; among which we saw
every prospect of passing the night, when La Font espied at a
little distance a wind-swept wood that, clothing a low shoulder
of the moor, promised at least a change and shelter.  We made
towards it, and discovered not only all that we had expected to
see, but a path and a guide.

The latter was as much surprised to see us as we to see her, for
when we came upon her she was sitting on the bank beside the path
weeping bitterly.  On hearing us, however, she sprang up and
discovered the form of a young girl, bare-foot and bareheaded,
wearing only a short ragged frock of homespun.  Nevertheless, her
face was neither stupid nor uncomely; and though, at the first
alarm, supposing us to be either robbers or hobgoblins--of which
last the people of that country are peculiarly fearful--she made
as if she would escape across the moor, she stopped as soon as
she heard my voice.  I asked her gently where we were.

At first she did not understand, but the servant who had played
the guide so ill, speaking to her in the PATOIS of the country,
she answered that we were near St. Brieuc, a hamlet not far from
Bottitort, and considerably off our road.  Asked how far it was
to Bottitort, she answered--between two and three leagues, and an
indifferent road.

We could ride the distance in a couple of hours, and there
remained almost as much daylight.  But the horses were tired, so,
resigning myself to the prospect of some discomfort, I asked her
if there was an inn at St. Brieuc.

"A poor place for your honours," she answered, staring at us in
innocent wonder, the forgotten tears not dry on her cheeks.

"Never mind; take us to it," I answered.

She turned at the word and tripped on before us.  I bade the
servant ask her, as we went, why she had been crying, and learned
through him that she had been to her uncle's two leagues away to
borrow money for her mother; that the uncle would not lend it,
and that now they would be turned out of their house; that her
father was lately dead, and that her mother kept the inn, and
owed the money for meal and cider.

"At least, she says that she does not owe it," the man corrected
himself, "for her father paid as usual at Corpus Christi; but
after his death M. Grabot said that he had not paid, and--"

"M. Grabot?"  I said.  "Who is he?"

"The Mayor of Bottitort."

"The creditor?"

"Yes."

"And how much is owing?"  I asked.

"Nothing, she says."

"But how much does he say?"

"Twenty crowns."

Doubtless some will view my conduct on this occasion with
surprise; and wonder why I troubled myself with inquiries so
minute upon a matter so mean.  But these do not consider that
ministers are the King's eyes; and that in a State no class is so
unimportant that it can be safely overlooked.  Moreover, as the
settlement of the finances was one of the objects of my stay in
those parts--and I seldom had the opportunity of checking the
statements made to me by the farmers and lessees of the taxes,
the receivers, gatherers, and, in a word, all the corrupt class
that imparts such views of a province as suit its interests--I
was glad to learn anything that threw light on the real condition
of the country:  the more, as I had to receive at Vitre a
deputation of the notables and officials of the district.

Accordingly, I continued to put questions to her until, crossing
a ridge, we came at last within sight of the inn, a lonely house
of stone, standing in the hollow of the moor and sheltered on one
side by a few gnarled trees that took off in a degree from the
bleakness of its aspect.  The house was of one story only, with a
window on either side of the door, and no other appeared in
sight; but a little smoke rising from the chimney seemed to
promise a better reception than the desolate landscape and the
girl's scanty dress had led us to expect.

As we drew nearer, however, a thing happened so remarkable as to
draw our attention in a moment from all these points, and bring
us, gaping, to a standstill.  The shutters of the two windows
were suddenly closed before our eyes with a clap that came
sharply on the wind.  Then, in a twinkling, one window flew open
again and a man, seemingly naked, bounded from it, fled with
inconceivable rapidity across the front of the house and vanished
through the other window, which opened to receive him.  He had
scarcely gained that shelter before a coal-black figure followed
him, leaping out of the one window and in at the other with the
same astonishing swiftness--a swiftness which was so great that
before any of us could utter more than an exclamation, the two
figures appeared again round the corner of the house, in the same
order, but this time with so small an interval that the fugitive
barely saved himself through the window.  Once more, while we
stared in stupefaction, they flashed out and in; and this time it
seemed to me that as they vanished the black spectre seized its
victim.

When I say that all this time the two figures uttered no sound,
that there was no other living being in sight, and that on every
side of the solitary house the moor, growing each minute more
eerie as the day waned, spread to the horizon, the more
superstitious among us may be pardoned if they gave way to their
fears.  La Font was the first to speak.

"MON DIEU!"  he cried--while the girl moaned in terror, the
Breton crossed himself, and La Trape looked uncomfortable--"the
place is bewitched!"

"Nonsense!"  I said.  "Who is in the house, girl?"

"Only my mother," she wailed.  "Oh, my poor mother!"

I silenced her, scolding them all for fools, and her first; and
La Font, recovering himself, did the same.  But this was the year
of that strange appearance of the spectre horseman at
Fontainebleau of which so much has been said; and my servants,
when we had approached the house a little nearer, and it still
remained silent and, as it were, dead to the eye, would go no
farther, but stood in sheer terror and permitted me to go on
alone with La Font.  I confess that the loneliness of the house,
and the dreary waste that surrounded it (which seemed to exclude
the idea of trickery) were not without their effect on my
spirits; and that as I dismounted and approached the door, I felt
a kind of chill not remarkable under the circumstances.

But the courage of the gentleman differs from that of the vulgar
in that he fears yet goes; and I lifted the latch, and entered
boldly.  The scene which met my eyes inside was sufficiently
commonplace to reassure me.  At the farther end of a long bare
room, draughty, half-lighted, and having an earthen floor, yet
possessing that air of homeliness which a wood fire never fails
to impart, sat a single traveller; who had drawn his small table
under the open chimney, and there, with his feet almost in the
fire, was partaking of a poor meal of black bread and onions.  He
was a tall, spare man, with sloping shoulders and a long sour
face, of which, as I entered, he gave me the full benefit.

I looked round the room, but look as I might I could see no one
else, nor anything that explained what we had witnessed and I
accosted the man civilly, wishing him good evening.  He made an
answer, but indistinctly, and, this done, went on with his meal
like one who viewed our arrival with little pleasure; while I,
puzzled and astonished by the ordinary look of things and the
stillness of the house, affected to warm my feet at the logs.  At
length, espying no signs of disturbance anywhere, I asked him if
he was alone.

"I was, sir," he answered gravely.

I was going on to tell him, though reluctantly, what we had seen
outside, and to question him upon it, when on a sudden, before I
could speak again, he leaned towards me and accosted me with
startling abruptness.  "Sir," he said, "I should like to have
your opinion of Louis Eleven."

I stared at him in the most perfect astonishment; and was for a
moment so completely taken aback that I mechanically repeated his
words.  For answer, he did so also.

"The Eleventh Louis?"  I said.

"Yes," he rejoined, turning his pale visage full upon me.  "What
is your opinion of him, sir?  He was a man?"

"Well," I said, shrugging my shoulders, "I take that for
granted."  I began to think that the traveller was demented.

"And a king?"

"Yes, I suppose so," I answered contemptuously.  "I never heard
it doubted."

He leaned towards me, and spoke with the most eager
impressiveness.  "A man--and a king!"  he said.  "Yet neither a
manly king, nor a kingly man!  You take me?"

"Yes," I said impatiently.  "I see what you mean.

"Neither a kingly man, nor a manly king!"  he repeated with
solemn gusto.  "You take me clearly, I think?"

I had no stomach for further fooleries, and I was about to answer
him with some sharpness--though I could not for the life of me
tell whether he was mad or an eccentric when a harsh voice
shrieked in my ear, "Bob!"  and in a twinkling a red figure
appeared bounding and whirling in the middle of the kitchen; now
springing into the air until its head touched the rafters, now
eddying round and round the floor in the giddiest gyrations.  At
the first glance, startled by the voice in my ear, I recoiled;
but a second disclosing what it was, and the secret of our alarm
outside, I masked my movement; and when the man brought his
performance to a sudden stop, and falling on one knee in an
attitude of exaggerated respect held out his cap, I was ready for
him.

"Why, you knave," I said, "you should be whipped, not rewarded.
Who gave you leave to play pranks on travellers?"

He looked at me with a droll smile on his round merry face, which
at its gravest was a thing to laugh at.  "Let him whip who is
scared," he said, with roguish impudence.  "Or if there is to be
whipping, my lord, whip Louis XI."

Thus reminded, I turned to the solemn traveller; but my eyes had
no sooner met his than he twisted his visage into so wry a smile
--if smile it could be called--that wherever there was a horse
collar he must have won the prize.  To hide my amusement, I asked
them what they were.  "Mountebanks?"  I said curtly.

"Your lordship has pricked the garter offhand," the merry man
answered cheerfully.  "You see before you the renowned Pierre
Paladin VOILA!--and Philibert Le Grand!  of the Breton fairs,
monsieur."

"But why this foolery--here?"  I said.

"We took you for another, monsieur," he answered.

"Whom you intended to frighten?"

"Precisely, your grace."

"Well, you are nice rogues," I said, looking at him.

"So is he," he answered, undaunted.

I left the matter there for a moment, while I summoned La Font
and the servants; whose rage, when, entering a-tiptoe and with
some misgiving, they discovered how they had been deceived, and
by whom, was scarcely to be restrained even by my presence.
However, aided by Philibert's comicalities, I presently secured a
truce, and the two strollers vacating in my honour the table by
the fire--though they had not the slightest notion who I was we
were soon on terms.  I had taken the precaution to bring a meal
with me, and while La Trape and his companion unpacked it, and I
dried my riding boots, I asked the players who it was they had
meant to frighten.

They were not very willing to tell me, but at length confessed,
to my astonishment, that it was M. Grabot.

"Grabot--Grabot!"  I said, striving to recollect where I had
heard the name.  "The Mayor of Bottitort?"

The solemn man made an atrocious grimace.  Then, "Yes, monsieur,
the Mayor of Bottitort," he said frankly.  "A year ago he put
Philibert in the stocks for a riddle; that is his affair.  And
the woman of this house has more than once befriended me, and he
is for turning her out for a debt she does not owe; and that is
my affair.  However, your lordship's arrival has saved him for
this time."

"You expected him here this evening, then?"

"He is coming," he answered, with more than his usual gloom.  "He
passed this way this morning, and announced that on his return he
should spend the night here.  We found the goodwife all of a
tremble when we arrived.  He is a hard man, monsieur," the
mountebank continued bitterly.  "She cried after him that she
hoped that God would change his heart, but he only answered that
even if St. Brieuc changed his body--you know the legend,
monseigneur, doubtless--he should be here."

"And here he is," the other, who had been looking out of one of
the windows, cried.  "I see his lanthorn coming down the hill.
And by St. Brieuc, I have it!  I have it," the droll continued,
suddenly spinning round in a wild dance of triumph on the floor,
and then as suddenly stopping and falling into an attitude before
us.  "Monsieur, if you will help us, I have the richest jest ever
played.  Pierre, listen.  You, gentlemen all, listen!  We will
pretend that he is changed.  He is a pompous man; he thinks the
Mayor of Bottitort equal to the Saint Pere.  Well, Pierre shall
be M. Grabot, Mayor of Bottitort.  You, monsieur, that we may
give him enough of mayors, shall be the Mayor of Gol, and I will
be the Mayor of St. Just.  This gentleman shall swear to us, so
shall the servants.  For him, he does not exist.  Oh, we will
punish him finely."

"But," I said, astounded by the very audacity of the rogue's
proposition, "you do not flatter yourself that you will deceive
him?"

"We shall, monsieur, if you will help," he answered confidently.
"I will be warrant for it we shall."

The thing had little of dignity in it, and I wonder now that I
complied; but I have always shared with the King, my master, a
taste for drolleries of the kind suggested; while nothing that I
had as yet heard of this Grabot was of a nature to induce me to
spare him.  Seeing that La Font was tickled with the idea, and
that the servants were a-grin, and the more eager to trick others
as they had just been tricked themselves, I was tempted to
consent.

After this, the preparations took not a minute.  Philibert
covered his fool's clothes with a cloak, and their table was
drawn nearer to the fire, so as, with mine, to take up the whole
hearth.  La Trape fell into an attitude behind me; and the
Breton, adopting a refinement suggested at the last moment, was
sent out to intercept Grabot before he entered, and tell him that
the inn was full, and that he had better pass on.

The knave did his business so well that Grabot, being just such a
man as the stroller had described to us, the altercation on the
threshold was of itself the most amusing thing in the world.
"Who?"  we heard a loud, coarse voice exclaim.  "Who d'ye say are
here, man?"

"The Mayor of Bottitort."

"MILLE DIABLES!"

"The Mayor of Bottitort and the Mayors of Gol and St. Just," the
servant repeated as if he noticed nothing amiss.

"That is a lie!"  the new comer replied, with a snort of triumph,
"and an impudent one.  But you have got the wrong sow by the ear
this time."

"Why, man," a third voice, somewhat nasal and rustical, struck
in, "don't you know the Mayor of Bottitort?"

"I should," my Breton answered bluntly, and making, as we
guessed, a stand before them.  "For I am his servant, and he is
this moment at his meat."

"The Mayor of Bottitort?"

"Yes."

"M. Grabot?"

"Yes."

"And you are his servant?"

"I have thought so for some time," the Breton answered
contemptuously.

The Mayor fairly roared in his indignation.  "You--his servant!
The Mayor of Bottitort's?"  he cried in a voice of thunder.
"I'll tell you what you are; you are a liar!--a liar, man, that
is what you are!  Why, you fool, I am the Mayor of Bottitort
myself. Now, do you see how you have wasted yourself?  Out of my
way!  Jehan, follow me in.  I shall look into this.  There is
some knavery here, but if Simon Grabot cannot get to the bottom
of it the Mayor of Bottitort will.  Follow me, I say.  My servant
indeed?  Come, come!"

And, still grumbling, he flung open the door, which the Breton
had left ajar, and stalked in upon us, fuming and blowing out his
cheeks for all the world like a bantam cock with its feathers
erect.  He was a short, pursy man; with a short nose, a wide
face, and small eyes.  But had he been Caesar and Alexander
rolled into one, he could not have crossed the threshold with a
more tremendous assumption of dignity.  Once inside, he stood and
glared at us, somewhat taken aback, I think, for the moment by
our numbers; but recovering himself almost immediately, he
strutted towards us, and, without uncovering or saluting us, he
asked in a deep voice who was responsible for the man outside.

"I am, the graver mountebank answered, looking at the stranger
with a sober air of surprise.  "He is my servant."

"Ah!"  the Mayor exclaimed, with a withering glance.  "And who,
may I ask, are you?"

"You may ask, certainly," the player answered drily.  "But until
you take off your hat I shall not answer."

The Mayor gasped at this rebuff, and turned, if it were possible,
a shade redder; but he uncovered.

"Now I do not mind telling you," Pierre continued, with a mild
dignity admirably assumed, "that I am Simon Grabot, and have the
honour to be Mayor of Bottitort."

"You!"

"Yes, monsieur, I; though perhaps unworthy."

I looked to see an explosion, but the Mayor was too far gone.
"Why, you swindling impostor," he said, with something that was
almost admiration in his tone.  "You are the very prince of
cheats!  The king of cozeners!  But for all that, let me tell
you, you have chosen the wrong ROLE this time.  For I--I, sir, am
the Mayor of Bottitort, the very man whose name you have taken!"

Pierre stared at him in composed silence, which his comrade was
the first to break.  "Is he mad?"  he said in a low voice.

The grave man shook his head.

The Mayor heard and saw; and getting no other answer, began to
tremble between passion and a natural, though ill-defined,
misgiving, which the silent gaze of so large a party--for we all
looked at him compassionately--was well calculated to produce.
"Mad?"  he cried.  "No, but some one is, Sir," he continued,
turning to La Font with a gesture in which appeal and impatience
were curiously blended, "Do you know this man?"

"M. Grabot?  Certainly," he answered, without blushing.  "And
have these ten years."

"And you say that he is M. Grabot?"  the poor Mayor retorted, his
jaw falling ludicrously.

"Certainly.  Who should he be?"

The Mayor looked round him, sudden beads of sweat on his brow.
"MON DIEU!"  be cried.  "You are all in it.  Here, you, do you
know this person?"

La Trape, to whom he addressed himself, shrugged his shoulders.
"I should," he said.  "The Mayor is pretty well known about
here."

"The Mayor?"

"Ay."

"But I am the Mayor--I," Grabot answered eagerly, tapping himself
on the breast in the most absurd manner.  "Don't you know me, my
friend?"

"I never saw you before, to my knowledge," the rascal answered
contemptuously; "and I know this country pretty well.  I should
think that you have been crossing St. Brieuc's brook, and
forgotten to say your--"

"Hush!"  the stout player interposed with some sharpness.  " Let
him alone.  LE BON DIEU knows that such a thing may happen to the
best of us."

The Mayor clapped his hand to his head.  "Sir," he said almost
humbly, addressing the last speaker, "I seem to know your voice.
Your name, if you please?"

"Fracasse," he answered pleasantly.  "I am Mayor of Gol."

"You--Fracasse, Mayor of Gol?"  Grabot exclaimed between rage and
terror.  "But Fracasse is a tall man.  I know him as well as I
know my brother."

The pseudo-Fracasse smiled, but did not contradict him.

The Mayor wiped the moisture from his brow.  He had all the
characteristics of an obstinate man; but if there is one thing
which I have found in a long career more true than another, it is
that no one can resist the statements of his fellows.  So much, I
verily believe, is this the case, that if ten men maintain black
to be white, the eleventh will presently be brought into their
opinion.  Besides, the Mayor had a currish side.  He looked
piteously from one to another of us, his cheeks seemed to grow in
a moment pale and flabby, and he was on the point of whimpering,
when at the last moment he bethought him of his servant, and
turned to him in a spurt of sudden thankfulness.  "Why, Jehan,
man, I had forgotten you," he said.  "Are these men mad, or am
I?"

But Jehan, a simple rustic, was in a state of ludicrous
bewilderment.  "Dol, master, I don't know," he stuttered, rubbing
his head.

"But I am myself," the Mayor cried, in a most ridiculous tone of
remonstrance.

"Dol, and I don't know," the man whimpered.  "I do believe that
there is a change in you.  I never saw you look the like before.
And I never said any PATER either.  Holy saints!"  the poor fool
continued piteously, "I wish I were at home.  And there, for all
I know, my wife has got another man."

He began to blubber at this; which to us was the most ludicrous
thought, so that it was all we could do to restrain our laughter.
But the Mayor saw things in another light.  Shaken by our steady
persistence in our story, and astounded by our want of respect,
the defection of his follower utterly cowed him.  After staring
wildly about him for a moment, he fairly turned tail, and sat
down on an old box by the door, where with his hands on his
knees, he looked out before him with such an expression of chap-
fallen bewilderment as nearly discovered our plot by throwing us
into fits of laughter.

Still he was not persuaded; for, from time to time, he roused
himself, and lifting his head cast suspicious glances at our
party.  But the two strollers, who were now in their element,
played their parts with so much craft and delicacy, and with such
an infinity of humour besides, that everything he overheard
plunged him deeper in the slough.  They knew something of local
affairs, and called one another Mayor very naturally; and
mentioning their wives, let drop other scraps of information
that, catching his ear, made the wretched man every now and then
sit up as if a wasp had stung him.  One story in particular which
the false Mayor told--and which, it appeared, was to the
knowledge of all the country round the real Mayor's stock
anecdote--had an absurd effect upon him.  He straightened
himself, listened as if his life depended upon it, and when he
heard the well-known ending, uttered, doubtless, in something of
his old tone, he collapsed into himself like a man who had no
longer faith in anything.

Presently, however, an effort of common-sense would again
disperse the fog.  He would raise his head, his eye grow bright,
something of his old pugnacity would come back to him.  He would
appear--this more than once--to be on the point of rising to
challenge us.  But these occasions were as skilfully met as they
were easily detected; and as the rogues had invariably some
stroke in reserve that in a twinkling flung him back into his old
state of dazed bewilderment, while it well-nigh killed us with
stifled mirth, they only gave ever new point to the jest.

This, to be brief, was carried on until I retired; and probably
the two strollers would have kept it up longer if the ludicrous
doubt whether he was himself, which they had lodged in the
Mayor's mind, had not at last spurred him to action.  An hour
before midnight, feeling it rankle intolerably, I suppose, he
sprang up on a sudden, dragged the door open, darted out with the
air of a madman, and in a moment was lost in the darkness of the
moor.

When I rose in the morning, therefore, I found him gone, the
strollers looking glum, and the good-wife and her girl between
tears and reproaches.  I could not but feel, on my part, that I
had somewhat stooped in the night's diversion; but before I had
time to reflect much on that an unexpected trait in the
strollers' conduct reconciled me to this odd experience.  They
proposed to leave when I did; but a little before the start they
came to me, and set before me very ingenuously that the woman of
the house might suffer through our jest; if I would help her
therefore, they would subscribe two crowns so that she might have
a substantial sum to offer on account of her debt.  As I took
this to be the greater part of their capital, and judged for
other reasons that the offer was genuine, I received it in the
best part, and found their good-nature no less pleasant than
their foolery.  I handed over three crowns for our share, and on
that we parted; they set out with their bundles strapped to their
backs, and I waited somewhat impatiently for La Trape and the
Breton to bring round the horses.

Before these appeared, however, La Font, who was at the door,
cried out that the two players were coming hack; and going to the
window I saw with astonishment a whole troop, some mounted and
some on foot, hurrying down the hill after them.  For a moment I
felt some alarm, supposing it to be a scheme of Epernon's to
seize my person; and I cursed the imprudence which had led me to
expose myself in this solitary place.  But a second glance
showing me that the Mayor of Bottitort was among the foremost, I
repented almost as seriously of the unlucky trifling that had
landed me in this foolish plight.

I even debated whether I should mount and, if it were possible,
get clear before they arrived; but the rueful faces of the two
players as they appeared breathless in the doorway, and the
liking I had taken for the rascals, decided me to stand my ground
"What is it?"  I said.

"The Mayor, monsieur," Philibert answered, while Pierre pursed up
his lips with gloomy gravity.  "I fear it will not stop at the
stocks this time," the rogue continued with a grimace.

His comrade muttered something about a rod and a fool's back; but
M. Grabot's entrance cut his witticism short.  The Mayor, between
shame and rage, and the gratification of his revenge, was almost
bursting, and the moment he caught sight of us opened fire.
"All, M. de Gol; we have them all!"  he cried exultingly.  "Now
they shall smart for it!  Depend upon it, it is some deep-laid
scheme of that party.  I have said so."

But the Mayor of Gol, a stout, big, placid man, looked at us
doubtfully.  "Well," he said, "I know these two; they are
strolling mountebanks, honest knaves enough but always in some
mischief."

"What, strolling clowns?"  M. Grabot rejoined, his face falling.

"Ay, and you may depend upon it it is some joke of theirs," his
friend answered, his eyes twinkling.  "I begin to think that you
would have done better if you had waited a little before bringing
M. le Comte into the matter."

"Ah, but there are these two," M. Grabot cried, as he recovered
from the momentary panic into which the other's words had thrown
him.  "Depend upon it they are the chief movers.  What else but
treason could they mean by asserting that one of them was Mayor
of Bottitort?  By denying my title?  By setting up other officers
than those to whom his Gracious Majesty has delegated his
authority?"

"Umph!"  his brother Mayor said, "I don't know these gentlemen."

"No!"  his companion cried in triumph.  "But I intend to know
them; and to know a good deal about them.  Guard the window
there," he continued fussily.  "Where is my clerk?  Is M. de
Laval coming?"

Two or three cried obsequiously that he had crossed the hill; and
would arrive immediately.

Hearing this, and thinking it more becoming not to enter into an
altercation, I kept my seat and the scornful silence I had
hitherto maintained.  The two Mayors had brought with them a
posse of busybodies--huissiers, constables, tip-staves, and the
like; and these all gaped upon us as if they saw before them the
most notable traitors of the age.  The women of the house wept in
a corner, and the strollers shrugged their shoulders and strove
to appear at their ease.  But the only person who felt the
indifference which they assumed was La Font; who, obnoxious to
none of the annoyances which I foresaw, could hardly restrain his
mirth at the DENOUEMENT which he anticipated.

Meanwhile the Mayor, foreseeing a very different issue, stood
blowing out his cheeks and fixing us with his little eyes with an
expression of dignity that would have pleased me vastly if I had
been free to enjoy it.  But the reflection that Laval's presence,
which would cut the knot of our difficulties, would also place me
at the mercy of his wit, did not enable me to contemplate it with
entire indifference.

By-and-by we heard him dismount, and a moment later he came in
with a gentleman and two or three armed servants.  He did not at
once see me, but as the crowd made way for him he addressed
himself sharply to M. Grabot.  "Well, have you got them?"  he
said.

"Certainly, M. le Comte."

"Oh!  very well.  Now for the particulars, then.  You must state
your charge quickly, for I have to be in Vitre to-day."

"He alleged that he had been appointed Mayor of Bottitort,"
Grabot answered pompously.

"Umph!  I don't know?"  M. de Laval muttered, looking round with
a frown of discontent.  "I hope that you have not brought me
hither on a fool's errand.  Which one?"

"That one," the Mayor said, pointing to the solemn man, whose
gravity and depression were now something preternatural.

"Oh!"  M. de Laval grumbled.  "But that is not all, I suppose.
What of the others?"

M. Grabot pointed to me.  "That one," he said--

He got no farther; for M. de Laval, springing forward, seized my
hand and saluted me warmly.  "Why, your excellency," he cried, in
a tone of boundless surprise, "what are you doing in this GALERE!
All last evening I waited for you, at my house, and now--"

"Here I am," I answered jocularly, "in charge it seems, M. le
Comte!"

"MON DIEU!"  he cried.  "I don't understand it!"

I shrugged my shoulders.  "Don't ask me," I said.  "Perhaps your
friend the Mayor call tell you."

"But, Monsieur, I do not understand," the Mayor answered
piteously, his mouth agape with horror, his fat cheeks turning in
a moment all colours.  "This gentleman, whom you seem to know,
Monsieur le Comte--"

"Is the Marquis de Rosny, President of the Council, blockhead!"
Laval cried irately.  "You madman!  you idiot!"  he continued, as
light broke in upon him, and he saw that it was indeed on a
fool's errand that he had been roused so early.  "Is this your
conspiracy?  Have you dared to bring me here--"

But I thought that it was time to interfere.  "The truth is," I
said, "that M. Grabot here is not so much to blame.  He was the
victim of a trick which these rascals played on him; and in an
idle moment I let it go on.  That is the whole secret.  However,
I forgive him for his officiousness since it brings us together,
and I shall now have the pleasure of your company to Vitre."

Laval assented heartily to this, and I did not think fit to tell
him more, nor did he inquire; the Mayor's stupidity passing
current for all.  For M. Grabot himself, I think that I never saw
a man more completely confounded.  He stood staring with his
mouth open; and, as much deserted as the statesman who has fallen
from office, had not the least credit even with his own
sycophants, who to a man deserted him and flocked about the Mayor
of Gol.  Though I had no reason to pity him, and, indeed, thought
him well punished, I took the opportunity of saying a word to him
before I mounted; which, though it was only a hint that he should
deal gently with the woman of the house, was received with
servility equal to the arrogance he had before displayed; and I
doubt not it had all the effect I desired.  For the strollers, I
did not forget them, but bade them hasten to Vitre, where I would
see a performance.  They did so, and hitting the fancy of Zamet,
who chanced to be still there, and who thought that he saw profit
in them, they came on his invitation to Paris, where they took
the Court by storm.  So that an episode trifling in itself, and
such as on my part requires some apology, had for them
consequences of no little importance.


IV. LA TOUSSAINT.

Towards the autumn of 1601, when the affair of M. de Biron, which
was so soon to fill the mouths of the vulgar, was already much in
the minds of those whom the King honoured with his confidence, I
was one day leaving the hall at the Arsenal, after giving
audience to such as wished to see me, when Maignan came after me
and detained me; reporting that a gentleman who had attended
early, but had later gone into the garden, was still in waiting.
While Maignan was still speaking the stranger himself came up,
with some show of haste but none of embarrassment; and, in answer
to my salutation and inquiry what I could do for him, handed me a
letter.  He had the air of a man not twenty, his dress was a
trifle rustic; but his strong and handsome figure set off a face
that would have been pleasing but for a something fierce in the
aspect of his eyes.  Assured that I did not know him, I broke the
seal of his letter and found that it was from my old flame Madame
de Bray, who, as Mademoiselle de St. Mesmin, had come so near to
being my wife; as will be remembered by those who have read the
early part of these memoirs.

The young man proved to be her brother, whom she commended to my
good offices, the impoverishment of the family being so great
that she could compass no more regular method of introducing him
to the world, though the house of St. Mesmin is truly respectable
and, like my own, allied to several of the first consequence.
Madame de Bray recalled our old TENDRESSE to my mind, and
conjured me so movingly by it--and by the regard which her family
had always entertained for me--that I could not dismiss the
application with the hundred others of like tenor that at that
time came to me with each year.  That I might do nothing in the
dark, however, I invited the young fellow to walk with me in the
garden, and divined, even before he spoke, from the absence of
timidity in his manner, that he was something out of the common.
"So you have come to Paris to make your fortune?"  I said.

"Yes, sir," he answered.

"And what are the tools with which you propose to do it?"  I
continued, between jest and earnest.

"That letter, sir," he answered simply; "and, failing that, two
horses, two suits of clothes, and two hundred crowns."

"You think that those will suffice?"  I said, laughing.

"With this, sir," he answered, touching his sword; "and a good
courage."

I could not but stand amazed at his coolness; for he spoke to me
as simply as to a brother, and looked about him with as much or
as little curiosity as Guise or Montpensier.  It was evident that
he thought a St. Mesmin equal to any man under the King; and that
of all the St. Mesmins he did not value himself least.

"Well," I said, after considering him, "I do not think that I can
help you much immediately.  I should be glad to know, however,
what plans you have formed for yourself."

"Frankly, sir," he said, "I thought of this as I travelled; and I
decided that fortune can be won by three things--by gold, by
steel, and by love.  The first I have not, and for the last I
have a better use.  Only the second is left.  I shall be
Crillon."

I looked at him in astonishment; for the assurance of his manner
exceeded that of his words.  But I did not betray the feeling.
"Crillon was one in a million," I said drily.

"So am I," he answered.

I confess that the audacity of this reply silenced me.  I
reflected that the young man who--brought up in the depths of the
country, and without experience, training or fashion--could so
speak in the face of Paris was so far out of the common that I
hesitated to dash his hopes in the contemptuous way which seemed
most natural.  I was content to remind him that Crillon had lived
in times of continual war, whereas now we were at peace; and,
bidding him come to me in a week, I hinted that in Paris his
crowns would find more frequent opportunities of leaving his
pockets than his sword its sheath.

He parted from me with this, seeming perfectly satisfied with his
reception; and marched away with the port of a man who expected
adventures at every corner, and was prepared to make the most of
them.  Apparently he did not take my hint greatly to heart,
however; for when I next met him, within the week, he was
fashionably dressed, his hair in the mode, and his company as
noble as himself.  I made him a sign to stop, and he came to
speak to me.

"How many crowns are ]eft?"  I said jocularly.

"Fifty," he answered, with perfect readiness.

"What!"  I said, pointing to his equipment with something of the
indignation I felt, "has this cost the balance?

"No," he answered.  "On the contrary, I have paid three months'
rent in advance and a month's board at Zaton's; I have added two
suits to my wardrobe, and I have lost fifty crowns on the dice."

"You promise well!"  I said.

He shrugged his shoulders quite in the fashionable manner.
"Always courage!"  he said; and he went on, smiling.

I was walking at the time with M. de Saintonge, and be muttered,
with a sneer, that it was not difficult to see the end, or that
within the year the young braggart would sink to be a gaming-
house bully.  I said nothing, but I confess that I thought
otherwise; the lad's disposition of his money and his provision
for the future seeming to me so remarkable as to set him above
ordinary rules.

From this time I began to watch his career with interest, and I
was not surprised when, in less than a month, something fell out
that led the whole court to regard him with a mixture of
amusement and expectancy.

One evening, after leaving the King's closet, I happened to pass
through the east gallery at the Louvre, which served at that time
as the outer antechamber, and was the common resort as well of
all those idlers who, with some pretensions to fashion, lacked
the ENTREE, as of many who with greater claims preferred to be at
their ease.  My passage for a moment stilled the babel which
prevailed.  But I had no sooner reached the farther door than the
noise broke out again; and this with so sudden a fury, the tumult
being augmented by the crashing fall of a table, as caused me at
the last moment to stand and turn.  A dozen voices crying
simultaneously, "Have a care!"  and "Not here!  not here!"  and
all looking the same way, I was able to detect the three
principals in the FRACAS.  They were no other than M. de St.
Mesmin, Barradas--a low fellow, still remembered, who was already
what Saintonge had prophesied that the former would become--and
young St. Germain, the eldest son of M. de Clan.

I rather guessed than heard the cause of the quarrel, and that
St. Mesmin, putting into words what many had known for years and
some made their advantage of, had accused Barradas of cheating.
The latter's fury was, of course, proportioned to his guilt; an
instant challenge while I looked was his natural answer.  This,
as he was a consummate swordsman, and had long earned his living
as much by fear as by fraud, should have been enough to stay the
greediest stomach; but St. Mesmin was not content.  Treating the
knave, the word once passed, as so much dirt, he transferred his
attack to St. Germain, and called on him to return the money he
had won by betting on Barradas.

St. Germain, a young spark as proud and headstrong as St. Mesmin
himself, and possessed of friends equal to his expectations,
flung back a haughty refusal.  He had the advantage in station
and popularity; and by far the larger number of those present
sided with him.  I lingered a moment in curiosity, looking to see
the accuser with all his boldness give way before the almost
unanimous expression of disapproval.  But my former judgment of
him had been correctly formed; so far from being browbeaten or
depressed by his position, he repeated the demand with a stubborn
persistence that marvellously reminded me of Crillon; and
continued to reiterate it until all, except St. Germain himself,
were silent.  "You must return my money!"  he kept on saying
monotonously.  "You must return my money.  This man cheated, and
you won my money.  You must pay or fight."

"With a dead man?"  St. Germain replied, gibing at him.

"No, with me."

"Barradas will spit you!"  The other scoffed.  "Go and order your
coffin, and do not trouble me."

"I shall trouble you.  If you did not know that he cheated, pay;
and if you did know, fight."

"I know?"  St. Germain retorted fiercely.  "You madman!  Do you
mean to say that I knew that he cheated?"

"I mean what I say!"  St. Mesmin returned stolidly.  "You have
won my money.  You must return it.  If you will not return it,
you must fight."

I should have heard more, but at that moment the main door
opened, and two or three gentlemen who had been with the King
came out.  Not wishing to be seen watching the brawl, I moved
away and descended the stairs; and Varenne overtaking me a moment
later, and entering on the Biron affair--of which I had just been
discussing the latest developments with the King--I forgot St.
Mesmin for the time, and only recalled him next morning when
Saintonge, being announced, came into my room in a state of great
excitement, and almost with his first sentence brought out his
name.

"Barradas has not killed him then?"  I said, reproaching myself
in a degree for my forgetfulness.

"No!  He, Barradas!"  Saintonge answered.

"No?"  I exclaimed.

"Yes!"  he said.  "I tell you, M. le Marquis, he is a devil of a
fellow--a devil of a fellow!  He fought, I am told, just like
Crillon; rushed in on that rascal and fairly beat down his guard,
and had him pinned to the ground before he knew that they had
crossed swords!"

"Well," I said, "there is one scoundrel the less.  That is all."

"Ah, but that is not all!"  my visitor replied more seriously.
"It should be, but it is not; and it is for that reason I am come
to you.  You know St. Germain?"

"I know that his father and you are--well, that you take opposite
sides," I said smiling.

"That is pretty well known," he answered coldly.  "Anyway, this
lad is to fight St. Germain to-morrow; and now I hear that M. de
Clan, St. Germain's father, is for shutting him up.  Getting a
LETTRE DE CACHET or anything else you please, and away with him."

"What!  St. Germain?"  I said.

"No!"  M. de Saintonge answered, prolonging the sound to the
utmost.  "St. Mesmin!"

"Oh," I said, "I see."

"Yes," the Marquis retorted pettishly, "but I don't.  I don't
see.  And I beg to remind you, M. de Rosny, that this lad is my
wife's second cousin through her step-father, and that I shall
resent any interference with him.  I have spent enough and done
enough in the King's service to have my wishes respected in a
small matter such as this; and I shall regard any severity
exercised towards my kinsman as a direct offence to myself.
Whereas M. de Clan, who will doubtless be here in a few minutes,
is--"

"But stop," I said, interrupting him, "I heard you speaking of
this young fellow the other day.  You did not tell me then that
he was your kinsman."

"Nevertheless he is; my wife's second cousin," he answered with
heat.

"And you wish him to--"

"Be let alone!"  he replied interrupting me in his turn more
harshly than I approved.  "I wish him to be let alone.  If he
will fight St. Germain, and kill or be killed, is that the King's
affair that he need interfere?  I ask for no interference," M. de
Saintonge continued bitterly, "only for fair play and no favour.
And for M. de Clan who is a Republican at heart, and a Bironist,
and has never done anything but thwart the King, for him to come
now, and--faugh!  it makes me sick."

"Yes," I said drily; "I see."

"You understand me?"

"Yes," I said, "I think so."

"Very well," he replied haughtily--he had gradually wrought
himself into a passion; "be good enough to bear my request in
mind then; and my services also.  I ask no more, M. de Rosny,
than is due to me and to the King's honour."

And with that, and scarcely an expression of civility, he left
me.  Some may wonder, I know, that, having in the Edict of Blois,
which forbade duelling and made it a capital offence, an answer
to convince even his arrogance, I did not use this weapon; but,
as a fact, the edict was not published until the following June,
when, partly in consequence of this affair and at my instance,
the King put it forth.

Saintonge could scarcely have cleared the gates before his
prediction was fulfilled.  His enemy arrived hot foot, and
entered to me with a mien so much lowered by anxiety and trouble
that I hardly knew him for the man who had a hundred times
rebuffed me, and whom the King's offers had found consistently
obdurate.  All I had ever known of M. de Clan heightened his
present humility and strengthened his appeal; so that I felt pity
for him proportioned not only to his age and necessity, but to
the depth of his fall.  Saintonge had rightly anticipated his
request; the first, he said, with a trace of his old pride, that
he had made to the King in eleven years:  his son, his only son
and only child--the single heir of his name!  He stopped there
and looked at me; his eyes bright, his lips trembling and moving
without sound, his hands fumbling on his knees.

"But," I said, "your son wishes to fight, M. de Clan?"

He nodded.

"And you cannot hinder him?"

He shrugged his shoulders grimly.  "No," he said; "he is a St.
Germain."

"Well, that is just my case," I answered.  "You see this young
fellow St. Mesmin was commended to me, and is, in a manner, of my
household; and that is a fatal objection.  I cannot possibly act
against him in the manner you propose.  You must see that; and
for my wishes, he respects them less than your son regards
yours."

M. de Clan rose, trembling a little on his legs, and glaring at
me out of his fierce old eyes.  "Very well," he said, "it is as
much as I expected.  Times are changed--and faiths--since the
King of Navarre slept under the same bush with Antoine St.
Germain on the night before Cahors!  I wish you good-day, M. le
Marquis."

I need not say that my sympathies were with him, and that I would
have helped him if I could; but in accordance with the maxim
which I have elsewhere explained, that he who places any
consideration before the King's service is not fit to conduct it,
I did not see my way to thwart M. de Saintonge in a matter so
small.  And the end justified my inaction; for the duel, taking
place that evening, resulted in nothing worse than a serious, but
not dangerous, wound which St. Mesmin, fighting with the same
fury as in the morning, contrived to inflict on his opponent.

For some weeks after this I saw little of the young firebrand,
though from time to time he attended my receptions and invariably
behaved to me with a modesty which proved that he placed some
bounds to his presumption.  I heard, moreover, that M. de
Saintonge, in acknowledgment of the triumph over the St. Germains
which he had afforded him, had taken him up; and that the
connection between the families being publicly avowed, the two
were much together.

Judge of my surprise, therefore, when one day a little before
Christmas, M. de Saintonge sought me at the Arsenal during the
preparation of the plays and interludes--which were held there
that year--and, drawing me aside into the garden, broke into a
furious tirade against the young fellow.

"But," I said, in immense astonishment, "what is this?  I thought
that he was a young man quite to your mind; and--"

"He is mad!"  he answered.

"Mad?"  I said.

"Yes, mad!"  he repeated, striking the ground violently with his
cane.  "Stark mad, M. de Rosny.  He does not know himself!  What
do you think--but it is inconceivable.  He proposes to marry my
daughter!  This penniless adventurer honours Mademoiselle de
Saintonge by proposing for her!"

"Pheugh!"  I said.  "That is serious."

"He--he!  I don't think I shall ever get over it!"  he answered.

"He has, of course, seen Mademoiselle?"

M. de Saintonge nodded.

"At your house, doubtless?"

"Of course!"  he replied, with a snap of rage.

"Then I am afraid it is serious," I said.

He stared at me, and for an instant I thought that he was going
to quarrel with me.  Then he asked me why.

I was not sorry to have this opportunity of at once increasing
his uneasiness, and requiting his arrogance.  "Because," I said,
"this young man appears to me to be very much out of the common.
Hitherto, whatever he has said he would do, he has done.  You
remember Crillon?  Well, I trace a likeness.  St. Mesmin has much
of his headlong temper and savage determination.  If you will
take my advice, you will proceed with caution."

M. de Saintonge, receiving an answer so little to his mind, was
almost bursting with rage.  "Proceed with caution!"  he cried.
"You talk as if the thing could be entertained, or as if I had
cause to fear the coxcomb!  On the contrary, I intend to teach
him a lesson a little confinement will cool his temper.  You
must give me a letter, my friend, and we will clap him in the
Bastille for a month or two."

"Impossible," I said firmly.  "Quite impossible, M. le Marquis."

M. de Saintonge looked at me, frowning.  "How?"  he said
arrogantly.  "Have my services earned no better answer than
that?"

"You forget," I replied.  "Let me remind you that less than a
month ago you asked me not to interfere with St. Mesmin; and at
your instance I refused to accede to M. de Clan's request that I
would confine him.  You were then all for non-interference, M. de
Saintonge, and I cannot blow hot and cold.  Besides, to be plain
with you," I continued, "even if that were not the case, this
young fellow is in a manner under my protection; which renders it
impossible for me to move against him.  If you like, however, I
will speak to him."

"Speak to him!"  M. de Saintonge cried.  He was breathless with
rage.  He could say no more.  It may be imagined how unpalatable
my answer was to him.

But I was not disposed to endure his presumption and ill-temper
beyond a certain point; and feeling no sympathy with him in a
difficulty which he had brought upon himself by his spitefulness,
I answered him roundly.  "Yes," I said," I will speak to him, if
you please.  But not otherwise.  I can assure you, I should not
do it for everyone."

But M. de Saintonge's chagrin and rage at finding himself thus
rebuffed, in a quarter where his haughty temper had led him to
expect an easy compliance, would not allow him to stoop to my
offer.  He flung away with expressions of the utmost resentment,
and even in the hearing of my servants uttered so many foolish
and violent things against me, that had my discretion been no
greater than his I must have taken notice of them.  As, however,
I had other and more important affairs upon my hands, and it has
never been my practice to humour such hot-heads by placing myself
on a level with them, I was content to leave his punishment to
St. Mesmin; assured that in him M. Saintonge would find an
opponent more courageous and not less stubborn than himself.

The event bore me out, for within a week M. de St. Mesmin's
pretensions to the hand of Mademoiselle de Saintonge shared with
the Biron affair the attention of all Paris.  The young lady,
whose reputation and the care which had been spent on her
breeding, no less than her gifts of person and character,
deserved a better fate, attained in a moment a notoriety far from
enviable; rumour's hundred tongues alleging, and probably with
truth--for what father can vie with a gallant in a maiden's
eyes?--that her inclinations were all on the side of the
pretender.  At any rate, St. Mesmin had credit for them; there
was talk of stolen meetings and a bribed waiting-woman; and
though such tales were probably as false as those who gave them
currency were fair, they obtained credence with the thoughtless,
and being repeated from one to another, in time reached her
father's ears, and contributed with St. Mesmin's persecution to
render him almost beside himself.

Doubtless with a man of less dogged character, or one more
amenable to reason, the Marquis would have known how to deal; but
the success which had hitherto rewarded St. Mesmin's course of
action had confirmed the young man in his belief that everything
was to be won by courage; so that the more the Marquis blustered
and threatened the more persistent the suitor showed himself.
Wherever Mademoiselle's presence was to be expected, St. Mesmin
appeared, dressed in the extreme of the fashion and wearing
either a favour made of her colours or a glove which he asserted
that she had given him.  Throwing himself in her road on every
occasion, he expressed his passion by the most extravagant looks
and gestures; and protected from the shafts of ridicule alike by
his self-esteem and his prowess, did a hundred things that
rendered her conspicuous and must have covered another than
himself with inextinguishable laughter.

In these circumstances M. de Saintonge began to find that the
darts which glanced off his opponent's armour were making him
their butt; and that he, who had valued himself all his life on a
stately dignity and a pride:  almost Spanish, was rapidly
becoming the laughing-stock of the Court.  His rage may be better
imagined than described, and doubtless his daughter did not go
unscathed. But the ordinary contemptuous refusal which would have
sent another suitor about his business was of no avail here; he
had no son, while St. Mesmin's recklessness rendered the boldest
unwilling to engage him.  Saintonge found himself therefore at
his wits' end, and in this emergency bethought him again of a
LETTRE DE CACHET.  But the King proved as obdurate as his
minister; partly in accordance with a promise he had made me
about a year before that he would not commonly grant what I had
denied, and partly because Biron's affair had now reached a stage
in which Saintonge's aid was no longer of importance.

Thus repulsed, the Marquis made up his mind to carry his daughter
into the country; but St. Mesmin meeting this with the confident
assertion that he would abduct her within a week, wherever she
was confined, Saintonge, desperate as a baited bull, and
trembling with rage--for the threat was uttered at Zamet's and
was repeated everywhere--avowed equally publicly that since the
King would give him no satisfaction he would take the law into
his own hands, and serve this impudent braggart as Guise served
St. Megrin.  As M. le Marquis maintained a considerable
household, including some who would not stick at a trifle, it was
thought likely enough that he would carry out his threat;
especially as the provocation seemed to many to justify it.  St.
Mesmin was warned, therefore; but his reckless character was so
well known that odds were freely given that he would be caught
tripping some night--and for the last time.

At this juncture, however, an unexpected ally, and one whose
appearance increased Saintonge's rage to an intolerable extent,
took up St. Mesmin's quarrel.  This was young St. Germain, who,
quitting his chamber, was to be seen everywhere on his
antagonist's arm.  The old feud between the Saint Germains and
Saintonges aggravated the new; and more than one brawl took place
in the streets between the two parties.  St. Germain never moved
without four armed servants; he placed others at his friend's
disposal; and wherever he went he loudly proclaimed what he would
do if a hair of St. Mesmin's head were injured.

This seemed to place an effectual check on M. de Saintonge's
purpose; and my surprise was great when, about a week later, the
younger St. Germain burst in upon me one morning, with his face
inflamed with anger and his dress in disorder; and proclaimed,
before I could rise or speak, that St. Mesmin had been murdered.

"How?"  I said, somewhat startled.  "And when?"

"By M. de Saintonge!  Last night!"  he answered furiously.  "But
I will have justice; I will have justice, M. de Rosny, or the
King--"

I checked him as sternly as my surprise would let me; and when I
had a little abashed him--which was not easy, for his temper vied
in stubbornness with St. Mesmin's--I learned the particulars.
About ten o'clock on the previous night St. Mesmin had received a
note, and, in spite of the remonstrances of his servants, had
gone out alone.  He had not returned nor been seen since, and his
friends feared the worst.

"But on what grounds?"  I said, astonished to find that that was
all.

"What!"  St. Germain cried, flaring up again.  "Do you ask on
what grounds?  When M. de Saintonge has told a hundred what he
would do to him!  What he would do--do, I say?  What he has
done!"

"Pooh!"  I said.  "It is some assignation, and the rogue is late
in returning."

"An assignation, yes," St. Germain retorted; "but one from which
he will not return."

"Well, if he does not, go to the Chevalier du Guet," I answered,
waving him off.  "Go!  do you hear?  I am busy," I continued.
"Do you think that I am keeper of all the young sparks that bay
the moon under the citizens' windows?  Be off, sir!"

He went reluctantly, muttering vengeance; and I, after rating
Maignan soundly for admitting him, returned to my work, supposing
that before night I should hear of St. Mesmin's safety.  But the
matter took another turn, for while I was at dinner the Captain
of the Watch came to speak to me.  St. Mesmin's cap had been
found in a bye-street near the river, in a place where there were
marks of a struggle; and his friends were furious.  High words
had already passed between the two factions, St. Germain openly
accusing Saintonge of the murder; plainly, unless something were
done at once, a bloody fray was imminent.

"What do you think yourself, M. le Marchand?"  I said, when I had
heard him out.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "What can I think, your Excellency?"
he said.  "What else was to be expected?"

"You take it for granted that M. de Saintonge is guilty?"

"The young man is gone," he answered pithily.

In spite of this, I thought the conclusion hasty, and contented
myself with bidding him see St. Germain and charge him to be
quiet; promising that, if necessary, the matter should be
investigated and justice done.  I still had good hopes that St.
Mesmin's return would clear up the affair, and the whole turn out
to be a freak on his part; but within a few hours tidings that
Saintonge had taken steps to strengthen his house and was lying
at home, refusing to show himself, placed a different and more
serious aspect on the mystery.  Before noon next day M. de Clan,
whose interference surprised me not a little, was with me to
support his son's petition; and at the King's LEVEE next day St.
Germain accused his enemy to the King's face, and caused an angry
and indecent scene in the chamber.

When a man is in trouble foes spring up, as the moisture rises
through the stones before a thaw.  I doubt if M. de Saintonge was
not more completely surprised than any by the stir which ensued,
and which was not confined to the St. Germains' friends, though
they headed the accusers.  All whom he had ever offended, and all
who had ever offended him, clamoured for justice; while St.
Mesmin's faults being forgotten and only his merits remembered,
there were few who did not bow to the general indignation, which
the young and gallant, who saw that at any moment his fate might
be theirs, did all in their power to foment.  Finally, the
arrival of St. Mesmin the father, who came up almost broken-
hearted, and would have flung himself at the King's feet on the
first opportunity, roused the storm to the wildest pitch; so
that, in the fear lest M. de Biron's friends should attempt
something under cover of it, I saw the King and gave him my
advice.  This was to summon Saintonge, the St. Germains, and old
St. Mesmin to his presence and effect a reconciliation; or,
failing that, to refer the matter to the Parliament.

He agreed with me and chose to receive them next day at the
Arsenal.  I communicated his commands, and at the hour named we
met, the King attended by Roquelaure and myself.  But if I had
flattered myself that the King's presence would secure a degree
of moderation and reasonableness I was soon undeceived; for
though M. de St. Mesmin had only his trembling head and his tears
to urge, Clan and his son fell upon Saintonge with so much
violence--to which he responded by a fierce and resentful
sullenness equally dangerous--that I feared that blows would be
struck even before the King's face.  Lest this should happen and
the worst traditions of old days of disorder be renewed, I
interposed and managed at length to procure silence.

"For shame, gentlemen, for shame!"  the King said, gnawing his
moustachios after a fashion he had when in doubt.  "I take Heaven
to witness that I cannot say who is right!  But this brawling
does no good.  The one fact we have is that St. Mesmin has
disappeared."

"Yes, sire; and that M. de Saintonge predicted his
disappearance," St. Germain cried, impulsively.  "To the day and
almost to the hour."

"I gather, de Saintonge," the King said, turning to him, mildly,
"that you did use some expressions of that kind."

"Yes, sire, and did nothing upon them," he answered resentfully.
But he trembled as he spoke.  He was an older man than his
antagonist, and the latter's violence shook him.

"But does M. de Saintonge deny," St. Germain broke out afresh
before the King could speak, "that my friend had made him a
proposal for his daughter?  and that he rejected it?"

"I deny nothing!"  Saintonge cried, fierce and trembling as a
baited animal.  "For that matter, I would to Heaven he had had
her!"  he continued bitterly.

"Ay, so you say now," the irrepressible St. Germain retorted,
"when you know that be is dead!"

"I do not know that he is dead," Saintonge answered.  "And, for
that matter, if he were alive and here now he should have her.  I
am tired; I have suffered enough."

"What!  Do you tell the King," the young fellow replied
incredulously, "that if St. Mesmin were here you would give him
your daughter?"

"I do--I do!"  the other exclaimed passionately.  "To be rid of
him, and you, and all your crew!"

"Tut, tut!"  the King said.  "Whatever betides, I will answer for
it, you shall have protection and justice, M. de Saintonge.  And
do you, young sir, be silent.  Be silent, do you hear!  We have
had too much noise introduced into this already."

He proceeded then to ask certain details, and particularly the
hour at which St. Mesmin had been last seen.  Notwithstanding
that these facts were in the main matters of common agreement,
some wrangling took place over them; which was only brought to an
end at last in a manner sufficiently startling.  The King with
his usual thoughtfulness had bidden St. Mesmin be seated.  On a
sudden the old man rose; I heard him utter a cry of amazement,
and following the direction of his eyes I looked towards the
door.  There stood his son!

At an appearance so unexpected a dozen exclamations filled the
air; but to describe the scene which ensued or the various
emotions that were evinced by this or that person, as surprise or
interest or affection moved them, were a task on which I am not
inclined to enter.  Suffice it that the foremost and the loudest
in these expressions of admiration was young St. Germain; and
that the King, after glancing from face to face in puzzled
perplexity, began to make a shrewd guess at the truth.

"This is a very timely return, M. de St. Mesmin," he said drily.

"Yes, sire," the young impertinent answered, not a whit abashed.

"Very timely, indeed."

"Yes, sire.  And the more as St. Germain tells me that M. de
Saintonge in his clemency has reconsidered my claims; and has
undertaken to use that influence with Mademoiselle which--"

But on that word M. de Saintonge, comprehending the RUSE by which
he had been overcome, cut him short; crying out in a rage that he
would see him in perdition first.  However, we all immediately
took the Marquis in hand, and made it our business to reconcile
him to the notion; the King even making a special appeal to him,
and promising that St. Mesmin should never want his good offices.
Under this pressure, and confronted by his solemn undertaking,
Saintonge at last and with reluctance gave way.  At the King's
instance, he formally gave his consent to a match which
effectually secured St. Mesmin's fortunes, and was as much above
anything the young fellow could reasonably expect as his audacity
and coolness exceeded the common conceit of courtiers.

Many must still remember St. Mesmin; though an attack of the
small-pox, which disfigured him beyond the ordinary, led him to
leave Paris soon after his marriage.  He was concerned, I
believe, in the late ill-advised rising in the Vivarais; and at
that time his wife still lived.  But for some years past I have
not heard his name, and only now recall it as that of one whose
adventures, thrust on my attention, formed an amusing interlude
in the more serious cares which now demand our notice.


V. THE LOST CIPHER.

I might spend many hours in describing the impression which this
great Sovereign made upon my mind; but if the part which she took
in the conversation I have detailed does not sufficiently exhibit
those qualities of will and intellect which made her the worthy
compeer of the King my master, I should labour in vain.
Moreover, my stay in her neighbourhood, though Raleigh and
Griffin showed me every civility, was short.  An hour after
taking leave of her, on the 15th of August, 1601, I sailed from
Dover, and crossing to Calais without mishap anticipated with
pleasure the King's satisfaction when he should hear the result
of my mission, and learn from my mouth the just and friendly
sentiments which Queen Elizabeth entertained towards him.

Unfortunately I was not able to impart these on the instant.
During my absence a trifling matter had carried the King to
Dieppe, whence his anxiety on the queen's account, who was
shortly to be brought to bed, led him to take the road to Paris.
He sent word to me to follow him, but necessarily some days
elapsed before we met; an opportunity of which his enemies and
mine were quick to take advantage, and that so insidiously and
with so much success as to imperil not my reputation only but his
happiness.

The time at their disposal was increased by the fact; that when I
reached the Arsenal I found the Louvre vacant, the queen, who lay
at Fontainebleau, having summoned the King thither.  Ferret, his
secretary, however, awaited me with a letter, in which Henry,
after expressing his desire to see we, bade me nevertheless stay
in Paris a day to transact some business.  "Then," he continued,
"come to me, my friend, and we will discuss the matter of which
you know.  In the meantime send me your papers by Ferret, who
will give you a receipt for them."

Suspecting no danger in a course which was usual enough, I
hastened to comply.  Summoning Maignan, who, whenever I
travelled, carried my portfolio, I unlocked it, and emptying the
papers in a mass on the table, handed them in detail to Ferret.
Presently, to my astonishment, I found that one, and this the
most important, was missing.  I went over the papers again, and
again, and yet again.  Still it was not to be found.

It will be remembered that whenever I travelled on a mission of
importance I wrote my despatches in one of three modes, according
as they were of little, great, or the first importance; in
ordinary characters that is, in a cipher to which the council
possessed the key, or in a cipher to which only the King and I
held keys.  This last, as it was seldom used, was rarely changed;
but it was my duty, on my return from each mission, immediately
to remit my key to the King, who deposited it in a safe place
until another occasion for its use arose.

It was this key which was missing.  I had been accustomed to
carry it in the portfolio with the other papers; but in a sealed
envelope which I broke and again sealed with my own signet
whenever I had occasion to use the cipher.  I had last seen the
envelope at Calais, when I handed the portfolio to Maignan before
beginning my journey to Paris; the portfolio had not since been
opened, yet the sealed packet was missing.

More than a little uneasy, I recalled Maignan, who had withdrawn
after delivering up his charge, "You rascal!"  I said with some
heat.  "Has this been out of your custody?"

"The bag?"  he answered, looking at it.  Then his face changed.
"You have cut your finger, my lord," he said.

I had cut it slightly in unbuckling the portfolio, and a drop or
two of blood had fallen on the papers.  But his reference to it
at this moment, when my mind was full of my loss, angered me, and
even awoke my suspicions.  "Silence!"  I said, "and answer me.
Have you let this bag out of your possession?"  This time he
replied straightforwardly that he had not.

"Nor unlocked it?"

"I have no key, your excellency."

That was true; and as I had at bottom the utmost confidence in
his fidelity, I pursued the inquiry no farther in that direction,
but made a third search among the papers.  This also failing to
bring the packet to light, and Ferret being in haste to be gone,
I was obliged for the moment to put up with the loss, and draw
what comfort I could from the reflection that, no despatch in the
missing cipher was extant.  Whoever had stolen it, therefore,
another could be substituted for it and no one the worse.  Still
I was unwilling that the King should hear of the mischance from a
stranger, and be led to think me careless; and I bade Ferret be
silent about it unless Henry missed the packet, which might not
happen before my arrival.

When the secretary, who readily assented, had given me his
receipt and was gone, I questioned Maignan afresh and more
closely, but with no result.  He had not seen me place the packet
in the portfolio at Calais, and that I had done so I could vouch
only my own memory, which I knew to be fallible.  In the
meantime, though the mischance annoyed me, I attached no great
importance to it; but anticipating that a word of explanation
would satisfy the King, and a new cipher dispose of other
difficulties, I dismissed the matter from my mind.

Twenty-four hours later, however, I was rudely awakened.  A
courier arrived from Henry, and surprising me in the midst of my
last preparations at the Arsenal, handed me an order to attend
his Majesty; an order couched in the most absolute and peremptory
terms, and lacking all those friendly expressions which the King
never failed to use when he wrote to me.  A missive so brief and
so formal--and so needless, for I was on the point of starting--
had not reached me for years; and coming at this moment when I
had no reason to expect a reverse of fortune, it had all the
effect of a thunder-bolt in a clear sky.  I stood stunned, the
words which I was dictating to my secretary dying on my lips.
For I knew the King too well, and had experienced his kindness
too lately to attribute the harshness of the order to chance or
forgetfulness; and assured in a moment that I stood face to face
with a grave crisis, I found myself hard put to it to hide my
feelings from those about me.

Nevertheless, I did so with all effort; and, sending for the
courier asked him with an assumption of carelessness what was the
latest news at Court.  His answer, in a measure, calmed my fears,
though it could not remove them.  He reported that the queen had
been taken ill or so the rumour went.

"Suddenly?"  I said.

"This morning," he answered.

"The King was with her?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"Had he left her long when he sent this letter?"

"It came from her chamber, your excellency."

"But--did you understand that her Majesty was in danger?"  I
urged.

As to that, however, the man could not say anything; and I was
left to nurse my conjectures during the long ride to
Fontainebleau, where we arrived in the cool of the evening, the
last stage through the forest awakening memories of past pleasure
that combated in vain the disorder and apprehension which held my
spirits.  Dismounting in the dusk at the door of my apartments, I
found a fresh surprise awaiting me in the shape of M. de Concini,
the Italian; who advancing to meet me before my foot was out of
the stirrup, announced that he came from the King, who desired my
instant attendance in the queen's closet.

Knowing Concini to be one of those whose influence with her
Majesty had more than once tempted the King to the most violent
measures against her--from which I had with difficulty dissuaded
him--I augured the worst from the choice of such a messenger; and
wounded alike in my pride and the affection in which I held the
King, could scarcely find words in which to ask him if the queen
was ill.

"Indisposed, my lord," he replied carelessly.  And he began to
whistle.

I told him that I would remove my boots and brush off the dust,
and in five minutes be at his service.

"Pardon me," he said, "my orders are strict; and they are to
request you to attend his Majesty immediately.  He expected you
an hour ago."

I was thunderstruck at this--at the message, and at the man's
manner; and for a moment I could scarcely restrain my
indignation.  Fortunately the habit of self-control came to my
aid in time, and I reflected that an altercation with such a
person could only lower my dignity.  I contented myself,
therefore, with signifying my assent by a nod, and without more
ado followed him towards the queen's apartments.

In the ante-chamber were several persons, who as I passed saluted
me with an air of shyness and incertitude which was enough of
itself to put me on my guard.  Concini attended me to the door of
the chamber; there he fell back, and Mademoiselle Galigai, who
was in waiting, announced me.  I entered, assuming a serene
countenance, and found the King and queen together, no other
person being present.  The queen was lying at length on a couch,
while Henry, seated on a stool at her feet, seemed to be engaged
in soothing and reassuring her.  On my entrance, he broke off and
rose to his feet.

"Here he is at last," he said, barely looking at me.  "Now, if
you will, dear heart ask him your questions.  I have had no
communication with him, as you know, for I have been with you
since morning."

The queen, whose face was flushed with fever, made a fretful
movement but did not answer.

"Do you wish me to ask him?"  Henry said with admirable patience.

"If you think it is worth while," she muttered, turning sullenly
and eyeing me from the middle of her pillows with disdain and
ill-temper.

"I will, then," he answered, and he turned to me.  "M. de Rosny,"
he said in a formal tone, which even without the unaccustomed
monsieur cut me to the heart, "be good enough to tell the queen
how the key to my secret cipher, which I entrusted to you, has
come to be in Madame de Verneuil's possession."

I looked at him in the profoundest astonishment, and for a moment
remained silent, trying to collect my thoughts under this
unexpected blow.  The queen saw my hesitation and laughed
spitefully.  "I am afraid, sire," she said, "that you have
overrated this gentleman's ingenuity, though doubtless it has
been much exercised in your service."

Henry's face grew red with vexation.  "Speak, man!"  he cried.
"How came she by it?"

"Madame de Verneuil?"  I said.

The queen laughed again.  "Had you not better take him out first,
sir," she said scornfully, "and tell him what to say?"

"'Fore God, madame," the King cried passionately, "you try me too
far!  Have I not told you a hundred times, and sworn to you, that
I did not give Madame de Verneuil this key?"

"If you did not give her that," the queen muttered sullenly,
picking at the silken coverlet which lay on her feet, "you have
given her all else.  You cannot deny it."

Henry let a gesture of despair escape him.  "Are we to go back to
that?"  he said.  Then turning to me, "Tell her," he said between
his teeth; "and tell me.  VENTRE SAINT GRIS--are you dumb, man?"

Discerning nothing for it at the moment save to bow before this
storm, which had arisen so suddenly, and from a quarter the least
expected, I hastened to comply.  I had not proceeded far with my
story, however--which fell short, of course, of explaining how
the key came to be in Madame de Verneuil's hands--before I saw
that it won no credence with the queen, but rather confirmed her
in her belief that the King had given to another what he had
denied to her.  And more; I saw that in proportion as the tale
failed to convince her, it excited the King's wrath and
disappointment.  He several times cut me short with expressions
of the utmost impatience, and at last, when I came to a lame
conclusion--since I could explain nothing except that the key was
gone--he could restrain himself no longer.  In a tone in which he
had never addressed me before, he asked me why I had not, on the
instant, communicated the loss to him; and when I would have
defended myself by adducing the reason I have given above,
overwhelmed me with abuse and reproaches, which, as they were
uttered in the queen's presence, and would be repeated, I knew,
to the Concinis and Galigais of her suite, who had no occasion to
love me, carried a double sting.

Nevertheless, for a time, and until he had somewhat worn himself
out, I let Henry proceed.  Then, taking advantage of the first
pause, I interposed.  Reminding him that he had never had cause
to accuse me of carelessness before, I recalled the twenty-two
years during which I had served him faithfully, and the enmities
I had incurred for his sake; and having by these means placed the
discussion on a more equal footing, I descended again to
particulars, and asked respectfully if I might know on whose
authority Madame de Verneuil was said to have the cipher.

"On her own!"  the queen cried hysterically.  "Don't try to
deceive me,--for it will be in vain.  I know she has it; and if
the King did not give it to her, who did?"

"That is the question, madam," I said.

"It is one easily answered," she retorted.  "If you do not know,
ask her."

"But, perhaps, madam, she will not answer," I ventured.

"Then command her to answer in the King's name!"  the queen
replied, her cheeks burning with fever.  "And if she will not,
then has the King no prisons--no fetters smooth enough for those
dainty ankles?"

This was a home question, and Henry, who never showed to less
advantage than when he stood between two women, cast a sheepish
glance at me.  Unfortunately the queen caught the look, which was
not intended for her; and on the instant it awoke all her former
suspicions.  Supposing that she had discovered our collusion, she
flung herself back with a cry of rage, and bursting into a
passion of tears, gave way to frantic reproaches, wailing and
throwing herself about with a violence which could not but injure
one in her condition.

The King stared at her for a moment in sheer dismay.  Then his
chagrin turned to anger; which, as he dared not vent it on her,
took my direction.  He pointed impetuously to the door.  "Begone,
sir!"  he said in a passion, and with the utmost harshness.  "You
have done mischief enough here.  God grant that we see the end of
it!  Go--go!"  he continued, quite beside himself with fury.
"Send Galigai here, and do you go to your lodging until you hear
from me!"

Overwhelmed and almost stupefied by the catastrophe, I found my
way out I hardly knew how, and sending in the woman, made my
escape from the ante-chamber.  But hasten as I might, my
disorder, patent to a hundred curious eyes, betrayed me; and, if
it did not disclose as much as I feared or the inquisitive
desired, told more than any had looked to learn.  Within an hour
it was known at Nemours that his Majesty had dismissed me with
high words--some said with a blow; and half a dozen couriers were
on the road to Paris with the news.

In my place some might have given up all for lost; but in
addition to a sense of rectitude, and the consciousness of
desert, I had to support me an intimate knowledge of the King's
temper; which, though I had never suffered from it to this extent
before, I knew to be on occasion as hot as his anger was short
lived, and his disposition generous.  I had hopes, therefore--
although I saw dull faces enough among my suite, and some pale
ones--that the King's repentance would overtake his anger, and
its consequences outstrip any that might flow from his wrath.
But though I was not altogether at fault in this, I failed to
take in to account one thing--I mean Henry's anxiety on the
queen's account, her condition, and his desire to have an heir;
which so affected the issue, that instead of fulfilling my
expectations the event left me more despondent than before.  The
King wrote, indeed, and within the hour, and his letter was in
form an apology.  But it was so lacking in graciousness; so
stiff, though it began "My good friend Rosny," and so insincere,
though it referred to my past services, that when I had read it I
stood awhile gazing at it, afraid to turn lest De Vic and
Varennes, who had brought it, should read my disappointment in my
face.

For I could not hide from myself that the gist of the letter lay,
not in the expressions of regret which opened it, but in the
complaint which closed it; wherein the King sullenly excused his
outbreak on the ground of the magnitude of the interests which my
carelessness had endangered and the opening to harass the queen
which I had heedlessly given.  "This cipher," he said, "has long
been a whim with my wife, from whom, for good reasons well known
to you and connected with the Grand Duke's Court, I have thought
fit to withhold it.  Now nothing will persuade her that I have
not granted to another what I refused her.  I tremble, my friend,
lest you be found to have done more ill to France in a moment of
carelessness than all your services have done good."

It was not difficult to find a threat underlying these words, nor
to discern that if the queen's fancy remained unshaken, and ill
came of it, the King would hardly forgive me.  Recognising this,
and that I was face to face with a crisis from which I could not
escape but by the use of my utmost powers, I assumed a serious
and thoughtful air; and without affecting to disguise the fact
that the King was displeased with me, dismissed the envoys with a
few civil speeches, in which I did not fail to speak of his
Majesty in terms that even malevolence could not twist to my
disadvantage.

When they were gone, doubtless to tell Henry how I had taken it,
I sat down to supper with La Font, Boisrueil, and two or three
gentlemen of my suite; and, without appearing too cheerful,
contrived to eat with my usual appetite.  Afterwards I withdrew
in the ordinary course to my chamber, and being now at liberty to
look the situation in the face, found it as serious as I had
feared.  The falling man has few friends; he must act quickly if
he would retain any.  I was not slow in deciding that my sole
chance of an honourable escape lay in discovering--and that
within a few hours--who stole the cipher and conveyed it to
Madame de Verneuil; and in placing before the queen such evidence
of this as must convince her.

By way of beginning, I summoned Maignan and put him through a
severe examination.  Later, I sent for the rest of my household--
such, I mean, as had accompanied me--and ranging them against the
walls of my chamber, took a flambeau in my hand and went the
round of them, questioning each, and marking his air and aspect
as he answered.  But with no result; so that after following some
clues to no purpose, and suspecting several persons who cleared
themselves on the spot, I became assured that the chain must be
taken up at the other end, and the first link found among Madame
de Verneuil's following.

By this time it was nearly midnight, and my people were dropping
with fatigue.  Nevertheless, a sense of the desperate nature of
the case animating them, they formed themselves voluntarily into
a kind of council, all feeling their probity attacked; in which
various modes of forcing the secret from those who held it were
proposed--Maignan's suggestions being especially violent.
Doubting, however, whether Madame had more than one confidante, I
secretly made up my mind to a course which none dared to suggest;
and then dismissing all to bed, kept only Maignan to lie in my
chamber, that if any points occurred to me in the night I might
question him on them.

At four o'clock I called him, and bade him go out quietly and
saddle two horses.  This done, I slipped out myself without
arousing anyone, and mounting at the stables, took the Orleans
road through the forest.  My plan was to strike at the head, and
surprising Madame de Verneuil while the event; still hung
uncertain, to wrest the secret from her by trick or threat.  The
enterprise was desperate, for I knew the stubbornness and
arrogance of the woman, and the inveterate enmity which she
entertained towards me, more particularly since the King's
marriage.  But in a dangerous case any remedy is welcome.

I reached Malesherbes, where Madame was residing with her
parents, a little before seven o'clock, and riding without
disguise to the chateau demanded to see her.  She was not yet
risen, and the servants, whom my appearance threw into the utmost
confusion, objected this to me; but I knew that the excuse was no
real one, and answered roughly that I came from the King, and
must see her.  This opened all doors, and in a moment I found
myself in her chamber.  She was sitting up in bed, clothed in an
elegant nightrail, and seemed in no wise surprised to see me.  On
the contrary, she greeted me with a smile and a taunting word;
and omitted nothing that might evince her disdain or hurt my
dignity.  She let me advance without offering me a chair; and
when, after saluting her, I looked about for one, I found that
all the seats except one very low stool had been removed from the
room.

This was so like her that it did not astonish me, and I baffled
her malice by leaning against the wall.  "This is no ordinary
honour--from M. de Rosny!"  she said, flouting me with her eyes.

"I come on no ordinary mission, madame," I said as gravely as I
could.

"Mercy!"  she exclaimed in a mocking tone.  "I should have put on
new ribbons, I suppose!"

"From the King, madame," I continued, not allowing myself to he
moved, "to inquire how you obtained possession of his cipher."

She laughed loudly.  "Good, simple King," she said, "to ask what
he knows already!"

"He does not know, madame," I answered severely.

"What?"  she cried, in affected surprise.  "When he gave it to me
himself!"

"He did not, madame."

"He did, sir!"  she retorted, firing up.  "Or if he did not,
prove it--prove it!  And, by the way," she continued, lowering
her voice again, and reverting to her former tone of spiteful
badinage, "how is the dear queen?  I heard that she was
indisposed yesterday, and kept the King in attendance all day.
So unfortunate, you know, just at this time."  And her eyes
twinkled with malicious amusement.

"Madame,"I said, "may I speak plainly to you?"

"I never heard that you could speak otherwise," she answered
quickly.  "Even his friends never called M. de Rosny a wit; but
only a plain, rough man who served our royal turn well enough in
rough times; but is now growing--"

"Madame!"

"A trifle exigeant and superfluous."

After that, I saw that it was war to the knife between us; and I
asked her in very plain terms If she were not afraid of the
queen's enmity, that she dared thus to flaunt the King's favours
before her.

"No more than I am afraid of yours," she answered hardily.

"But if the King is disappointed in his hopes?"

"You may suffer; very probably will," she answered, slowly and
smiling, "not I.  Besides, sir--my child was born dead.  He bore
that very well."

"Yet, believe me, madame, you run some risk."

"In keeping what the King has given me?"  she answered, raising
her eyebrows.

"No!  In keeping what the King has not given you!"  I answered
sternly.  "Whereas, what do you gain?"

"Well," she replied, raising herself in the bed, while her eyes
sparkled and her colour rose, "if you like, I will tell you.
This pleasure, for one thing--the pleasure of seeing you there,
awkward, booted, stained, and standing, waiting my will.  That--
which perhaps you call a petty thing--I gain first of all.  Then
I gain your ruin, M. de Rosny; I plant a sting in that woman's
breast; and for his Majesty, he has made his bed and may lie on
it."

"Have a care, madame!"  I cried, bursting with indignation at a
speech so shameless and disloyal.  "You are playing a dangerous
game, I warn you!"

"And what game have you played?"  she replied, transported on a
sudden with equal passion.  "Who was it tore up the promise of
marriage which the King gave me?  Who was it prevented me being
Queen of France?  Who was it hurried on the match with this
tradeswoman, so that the King found himself wedded, before he
knew it?  Who was it--but enough; enough!"  she cried,
interrupting herself with a gesture full of rage.  "You have
ruined me, you and your queen between you, and I will ruin you!"

"On the contrary, madame," I answered, collecting myself for a
last effort, and speaking with all the severity which a just
indignation inspired, "I have not ruined you.  But if you do not
tell me that which I am here to learn--I will!"

She laughed out loud.  "Oh, you simpleton!"  she said.  "And you
call yourself a statesman!  Do you not see that if I do not tell
it, you are disgraced yourself and powerless, and can do me no
harm?  Tell it you?  When I have you all on the hip--you, the
King, the queen!  Not for a million crowns, M. de Rosny!"

"And that is your answer, madame?"  I said, choking with rage.
It had been long since any had dared so to beard me.

"Yes," she replied stoutly; "it is!  Or, stay; you shall not go
empty-handed."  And thrusting her arm under the pillow she drew
out, after a moment's search, a small packet, which she held out
towards me.  "Take it!"  she said, with a taunting laugh.  "It
has served my turn.  What the King gave me, I give you."

Seeing that it was the missing key to the cipher, I swallowed my
rage and took it; and being assured by this time that I could
effect nothing by staying longer, but should only expose myself
to fresh insults, I turned on my heel, with rudeness equal to her
own, and, without taking leave of her, flung the door open and
went out.  I heard her throw herself back with a shrill laugh of
triumph.  But as, the moment the door fell to behind me, my
thoughts began to cast about for another way of escape--this
failing--I took little heed of her, and less of the derisive
looks to which the household, quickly taking the cue, treated me
as I passed.  I flung myself into the saddle and galloped off,
followed by Maignan, who presently, to my surprise, blurted out a
clumsy word of congratulation.

I turned on him in amazement, and, swearing at him, asked him
what he meant.

"You have got it," he said timidly, pointing to the packet which
I mechanically held in my hand.

"And to what purpose?"  I cried, glad of this opportunity of
unloading some of my wrath.  "I want, not the paper, but the
secret, fool!  You may have the paper for yourself if you will
tell me how Madame got it."

Nevertheless, his words led me to look at the packet.  I opened
it, and, having satisfied myself that it contained the original
and not a copy, was putting it up again when my eyes fell on a
small spot of blood which marked one corner of the cover.  It was
not larger than a grain of corn, but it awoke, first, a vague
association and then a memory, which as I rode grew stronger and
more definite, until, on a sudden, discovery flashed upon me--and
the truth.  I remembered where I had seen spots of blood before
--on the papers I had handed to Ferret and remembered, too, where
that blood had come from.  I looked at the cut now, and, finding
it nearly healed, sprang in my saddle.  Of a certainty this paper
had gone through my hands that day!  It had been among the
others; therefore it must have been passed to Ferret inside
another when I first opened the bag!  The rogue, getting it and
seeing his opportunity, and that I did not suspect, had doubtless
secreted it, probably while I was attending to my hand.

I had not suspected him before, because I had ticked off the
earlier papers as I handed them to him; and had searched only
among the rest and in the bag for the missing one.  Now I
wondered that I had not done so, and seen the truth from the
beginning; and in my impatience I found the leagues through the
forest, though the sun was not yet high and the trees sheltered
us, the longest I had ridden in my life.  When the roofs of the
chateau at length appeared before us, I could scarcely keep my
pace within bounds.  Reflecting how Madame de Verneuil had over-
reached herself, and how, by indulging in that last stroke of
arrogance, she had placed the secret in my hands, I had much ado
to refrain from going to the King booted and unwashed as I was;
and though I had not eaten since the previous evening.  However,
the habit of propriety, which no man may lightly neglect, came to
my aid.  I made my toilet, and, having broken my fast standing,
hastened to the Court.  On the way I learned that the King was in
the queen's garden, and, directing my steps thither, found him
walking with my colleagues, Villeroy and Sillery, in the little
avenue which leads to the garden of the Conciergerie.  A number
of the courtiers were standing on the low terrace watching them,
while a second group lounged about the queen's staircase.  Full
of the news which I had for the King, I crossed the terrace;
taking no particular heed of anyone, but greeting such as came in
my way in my usual fashion.  At the edge of the terrace I paused
a moment before descending the three steps; and at the same
moment, as it happened, Henry looked up, and our eyes met.  On
the instant he averted his gaze, and, turning on his heel in a
marked way, retired slowly to the farther end of the walk.

The action was so deliberate that I could not doubt he meant to
slight me; and I paused where I was, divided between grief and
indignation, a mark for all those glances and whispered gibes in
which courtiers indulge on such occasions.  The slight was not
rendered less serious by the fact that the King was walking with
my two colleagues; so that I alone seemed to be out of his
confidence, as one soon to be out of his councils also.

I perceived all this, and was not blind to the sneering smiles
which were exchanged behind my back; but I affected to see
nothing, and to be absorbed in sudden thought.  In a minute or
two the King turned and came back towards me; and again, as if he
could not restrain his curiosity, looked up so that our eyes met.
This time I thought that he would beckon me to him, satisfied
with the lengths to which he had already carried his displeasure.
But he turned again, with a light laugh.

At this a courtier, one of Sillery's creatures, who had presumed
on the occasion so far as to come to my elbow, thought that he
might safely amuse himself with me.  "I am afraid that the King
grows older, M. de Rosny," he said, smirking at his companions.
"His sight seems to be failing."

"It should not be neglected then," I said grimly.  "I will tell
him presently what you say."

He fell back, looking foolish at that, at the very moment that
Henry, having taken another turn, dismissed Villeroy, who, wiser
than the puppy at my elbow, greeted me with particular civility
as he passed.  Freed from him, Henry stood a moment hesitating.
He told me afterwards that he had not turned from me a yard
before his heart smote him; and that but for a mischievous
curiosity to see how I should take it, he would not have carried
the matter so far.  Be that as it may--and I do not doubt this,
any more than I ever doubted the reality of the affection in
which he held me--on a sudden he raised his hand and beckoned to
me.

I went down to him gravely, and not hurriedly.  He looked at me
with some signs of confusion in his face.  "You are late this
morning," he said.

"I have been on your Majesty's business," I answered.

"I do not doubt that," he replied querulously, his eyes
wandering.  "I am not--I am troubled this morning."  And after a
fashion he had when he was not at his ease, he ground his heel
into the soil and looked down at the mark.  "The queen is not
well.  Sillery has seen her, and will tell you so."

M. de Sillery, whose constant opposition to me at the council-
board I have elsewhere described, began to affirm it.  I let him
go on for a little time, and then interrupted him brusquely.  "I
think it was you," I said, "who nominated Ferret to be one of the
King's clerks."

"Ferret?"  he exclaimed, reddening at my tone, while the King,
who knew me well, pricked up his ears.

"Yes," I said; "Ferret."

"And if so?"  Sillery asked, haughtily.  "What do you mean?"

"Only this," I said.  "That if his Majesty will summon him to the
queen's closet, without warning or delay, and ask him in her
presence how much Madame de Verneuil gave him for the King's
cipher, her Majesty, I think, will learn something which she
wishes to know."

"What?"  the King cried.  "You have discovered it?  But he gave
you a receipt for the papers he took."

"For the papers he took with my knowledge--yes, sire."

"The rogue!"  Sillery exclaimed viciously.  "I will go and fetch
him."

"Not so--with your Majesty's leave," I said, interposing quickly.
"M. de Sillery may say too much or too little.  Let a lackey take
a message, bidding him go to the queen's closet, and he will
suspect nothing."

The King assented, and bade me go and give the order.  When I
returned, he asked me anxiously if I felt sure that the man would
confess.

"Yes, if you pretend to know all, sire," I answered.  "He will
think that Madame has betrayed him."

"Very well," Henry said.  "Then let us go."

But I declined to be present; partly on the ground that if I were
there the queen might suspect me of inspiring the man, and partly
because I thought that the rogue would entertain a more confident
hope of pardon, and be more likely to confess, if he saw the King
alone.  I contrived to keep Sillery also; and Henry giving the
word, as he mounted the steps, that he should be back presently,
the whole Court remained in a state of suspense, aware that
something was in progress but in doubt what, and unable to decide
whether I were again in favour or now on my trial.

Sillery remained talking to me, principally on English matters,
until the dinner hour; which came and went, neglected by all.  At
length, when the curiosity of the mass of courtiers, who did not
dare to interrupt us, had been raised by delay to an almost
intolerable pitch, the King returned, with signs of disorder in
his bearing; and, crossing the terrace in half a dozen strides,
drew me hastily, along with Sillery, into the grove of white
mulberry trees.  There we were no sooner hidden in part, though
not completely, than he threw his arms about me and embraced me
with the warmest expressions.  "Ah, my friend," he said, putting
me from him at last, "what shall I say to you?"

"The queen is satisfied, sire?"

"Perfectly; and desires to be commended to you."

"He confessed, then?"

Henry nodded, with a look in his face that I did not understand.
"Yes," he said, "fully.  It was as you thought, my friend.  God
have mercy upon him!"

I started.  "What?"  I said.  "Has he--"

The King nodded, and could not repress a shudder.  "Yes," he
said; "but not, thank Heaven, until he had left the closet.  He
had something about him."

Sillery began anxiously to clear himself; but the King, with his
usual good nature, stopped him, and bade us all go and dine,
saying that we must be famished.  He ended by directing me to be
back in an hour, since his own appetite was spoiled.  "And bring
with you all your patience," he added, "for I have a hundred
questions to ask you.  We will walk towards Avon, and I will show
you the surprise which I am preparing for the queen."

Alas, I would I could say that all ended there.  But the rancour
of which Madame de Verneuil had given token in her interview with
me was rather aggravated than lessened by the failure of her plot
and the death of her tool.  It proved to be impenetrable by all
the kindnesses which the King lavished upon her; neither the
legitimation of the child which she soon afterwards bore, nor the
clemency which the King--against the advice of his wisest
ministers extended to her brother Auvergne, availing to expel it
from her breast.  How far she or that ill-omened family were
privy to the accursed crime which, nine years later, palsied
France on the threshold of undreamed-of glories, I will not take
on myself to say; for suspicion is not proof.  But history, of
which my beloved master must ever form so great a part, will lay
the blame where it should rest.


VI. THE MAN OF MONCEAUX.

In the month of August of this year the King found some
alleviation of the growing uneasiness which his passion for
Madame de Conde occasioned him in a visit to Monceaux, where he
spent two weeks in such diversions as the place afforded.  He
invited me to accompany him, but on my representing that I could
not there--so easily as in my own closet, where I had all the
materials within reach--prepare the report which he had commanded
me to draw up, he directed me to remain in Paris until it was
ready, and then to join him.

This report which he was having written, not only for his own
satisfaction but for the information of his heir, took the form
of a recital of all the causes and events, spread over many
years, which had induced him to take in hand the Great Design;
together with a succinct account of the munitions and treasures
which he had prepared to carry it out.  As it included many
things which were unknown beyond the council, and some which he
shared only with me--and as, in particular, it enumerated the
various secret alliances and agreements which he had made with
the princes of North Germany, whom a premature discovery must
place at the Emperor's mercy--it was necessary that I should draw
up the whole with my own hand, and with the utmost care and
precaution.  This I did; and that nothing might be wanting to a
memorial which I regarded with justice as the most important of
the many State papers which it had fallen to my lot; to prepare,
I spent seven days in incessant labour upon it.  It was not,
therefore, until the third week in August:  that I was free to
travel to Monceaux.

I found my quarters assigned to me in a pavilion called the
Garden House; and, arriving at supper time, sat down with my
household with more haste and less ceremony than was my wont.
The same state of things prevailed, I suppose, in the kitchen;
for we had not been seated half an hour when a great hubbub arose
in the house, and the servants rushing in cried out that a fire
had broken out below, and that the house was in danger of
burning.

In such emergencies I take it to be the duty of a man of standing
to bear himself with as much dignity as is consistent with
vigour; and neither to allow himself to be carried away by the
outcry and disorder of the crowd, nor to omit any direction that
may avail.  On this occasion, however, my first thought was given
to the memorial I had prepared for the King; which I remembered
had been taken with other books and papers to a room over the
kitchen.  I lost not a moment, therefore, in sending Maignan for
it; nor until I held it safely in my hand did I feel myself at
liberty to think of the house.  When I did, I found that the
alarm exceeded the danger; a few buckets of water extinguished a
beam in the chimney which had caught fire, and in a few moments
we were able to resume the meal with the added vivacity which
such an event gave to the conversation.  It has never been my
custom to encourage too great freedom at my table; but as the
company consisted, with a single exception, of my household, and
as this person--a Monsieur de Vilain, a young gentleman, the
cousin of one of my wife's maids-of-honour--showed himself
possessed of modesty as well as wit, I thought that the time
excused a little relaxation.

This was the cause of the misfortune which followed, and bade
fair to place me in a position of as great difficulty as I have
ever known; for, having in my good humour dismissed the servants,
I continued to talk for an hour or more with Vilain and some of
my gentlemen; the result being that I so far forgot myself, when
I rose, as to leave the report where I had laid it on the table.
In the passage I met a man whom the King had sent to inquire
about the fire; and thus reminded of the papers I turned back to
the room; greatly vexed with myself for negligence which in a
subordinate I should have severely rebuked, but never doubting
that I should find the packet where I had left it.

To my chagrin the paper was gone.  Still I could not believe that
it had been stolen, and supposing that Maignan or one of my
household had seen it and taken it to my closet, I repaired
thither in haste.  I found Maignan already there, with M.
Boisrueil, one of my gentlemen, who was waiting to ask a favour;
but they knew nothing of the report, and though I sent them down
forthwith, with directions to make strict but quiet inquiry, they
returned at the end of half an hour with long faces and no news.

Then I grew seriously alarmed; and reflecting on the many
important secrets which the memorial contained, whereof a
disclosure must spoil plans so long and sedulously prepared, I
found myself brought on a sudden face to face with disaster.  I
could not imagine how the King, who had again and again urged on
me the utmost precaution, would take such a catastrophe; nor how
I should make it known to him.  For a moment, therefore, while I
listened to the tale, I felt the hair rise on my head and a
shiver descend my back; nor was it without an uncommon effort
that I retained my coolness and composure.

Plainly no steps in such a position could be too stringent.  I
sent Maignan with an order to close all the doors and let no one
pass out.  Then I made sure that none of the servants had entered
the room, between the time of my rising and return; and this
narrowed the tale of those who could have taken the packet to
eleven, that being the number of persons who had sat down with
me.  But having followed the matter so far, I came face to face
with this difficulty:  that all the eleven were, with one
exception, in my service and in various ways pledged to my
interests, so that I could not conceive even the possibility of a
betrayal by them in a matter so important.

I confess, at this, the perspiration rose upon my brow; for the
paper was gone.  Still, there remained one stranger; and though
it seemed scarcely less difficult to suspect him, since he could
have no knowledge of the importance of the document, and could
not have anticipated that I should leave it in his power, I found
in that the only likely solution.  He was one of the Vilains of
Pareil by Monceaux, his father living on the edge of the park,
little more than a thousand yards from the chateau; and I knew no
harm of him.  Still, I knew little; and for that reason was
forward to believe that there, rather than in my own household,
lay the key to the enigma.

My suspicions were not lessened when I discovered that he alone
of the party at table had left the house before the doors were
closed; and for a moment I was inclined to have him followed and
seized.  But I could scarcely take a step so decisive without
provoking inquiry; and I dared not at this stage let the King
know of my negligence.  I found myself, therefore, brought up
short, in a state of exasperation and doubt difficult to
describe; and the most minute search within the house and the
closest examination of all concerned failing to provide the
slightest clue, I had no alternative but to pass the night in
that condition.

On the morrow a third search seeming still the only resource, and
proving as futile as the others, I ordered La Trape and two or
three in whom I placed the greatest confidence to watch their
fellows, and report anything in their bearing or manner that
seemed to be out of the ordinary course; while I myself went to
wait; on the King, and parry his demand for the memorial as well
as I could.  This it was necessary to do without provoking
curiosity; and as the lapse of each minute made the pursuit of
the paper less hopeful and its recovery a thing to pray for
rather than expect, it will be believed that I soon found the
aspect of civility which I was obliged to wear so great a trial
of my patience, that I made an excuse and retired early to my
lodging.

Here my wife, who shared my anxiety, met me with a face full of
meaning.  I cried out to know if they had found the paper.

"No," she answered; "but if you will come into your closet I will
tell you what I have learned."

I went in with her, and she told me briefly that the manner of
Mademoiselle de Mars, one of her maids, had struck her as
suspicious.  The girl had begun to cry while reading to her; and
when questioned had been able to give no explanation of her
trouble.

"She is Vilain's cousin?"  I said.

"Yes, monsieur."

"Bring her to me," I said.  "Bring her to me without the delay of
an instant."

My wife hastened to comply; and whatever had been the girl's
state earlier, before the fright of this hasty summons had upset
her, her agitation when thus confronted with me gave me, before a
word was spoken, the highest hopes that I had here the key to the
mystery.  I judged that it might be necessary to frighten her
still more, and I started by taking a harsh tone with her; but
before I had said many words she obviated the necessity of this
by falling at my wife's feet and protesting that she would tell
all.

"Then speak quickly, wench!"  I said.  "You know where the paper
is."

"I know who has it!"  she answered, in a voice choked with sobs.

"Who?"

"My cousin, M. de Vilain."

"Ha!  and has taken it to his house?"

But she seemed for a moment unable to answer this; her distress
being such that my wife had to fetch a vial of pungent salts to
restore her before she could say more.  At length she found voice
to tell us that M. de Vilain had taken the paper, and was this
evening to hand it to an agent of the Spanish ambassador.

"But, girl," I said sternly, "how do you know this?"

Then she confessed that the cousin was also the lover, and had
before employed her to disclose what went on in my household, and
anything of value that could be discovered there.  Doubtless the
girl, for whom my wife, in spite of her occasional fits of
reserve and temper, entertained no little liking, enjoyed many
opportunities of prying; and would have continued still to serve
him had not this last piece of villainy, with the stir which it
caused in the house and the rigorous punishment to be expected in
the event of discovery, proved too much for her nerves.  Hence
this burst of confession; which once allowed to flow, ran on
almost against her will.  Nor did I let her pause to consider the
full meaning of what she was saying until I had learned that
Vilain was to meet the ambassador's agent an hour after sunset at
the east end of a clump of trees which stood in the park; and
being situate between his, Vilain's, residence and the chateau,
formed a convenient place for such a transaction.

"He will have it about him?"  I said.

She sobbed a moment, but presently confessed.  "Yes; or it will
be in the hollow of the most easterly tree.  He was to leave it
there, if the agent could not keep the appointment."

"Good!"  I said; and then, having assured myself by one or two
questions of that, of which her state of distress and agitation
left me in little doubt--namely, that she was telling the truth
--I committed her to my wife's care; bidding the Duchess lock her
up in a safe place upstairs, and treat her to bread and water
until I had taken the steps necessary to prove the fact, and
secure the paper.

After this--but I should be tedious were I to describe the
alternations of hope and fear in which I passed the period of
suspense.  Suffice it that I informed no one, not even Maignan,
of what I had discovered, but allowed those in the secret of the
loss still to pursue their efforts; while I, by again attending
the Court, endeavoured at once to mitigate the King's impatience
and persuade the world that all was well.  A little before the
appointed time, however I made a pretext to rise from supper, and
quietly calling out Boisrueil, bade him bring four of the men,
armed, and Maignan and La Trape.  With this small body I made my
way out by a private door, and crossed the park to the place
Mademoiselle had, indicated.

Happily, night had already begun to close in, and the rendezvous
was at the farther side of the clump of trees.  Favoured by these
circumstances, we were able to pass round the thicket--some on
one side and some on the other---without noise or disturbance;
and fortunate enough, having arrived at the place, to discover a
man walking uneasily up and down on the very spot where we
expected to find him.  The evening was so far advanced that it
was not possible to be sure that the man was Vilain; but as all
depended on seizing him before he had any communication with the
Spanish agent, I gave the signal, and two of my men, springing on
him from either side, in a moment bore him to the ground and
secured him.

He proved to be Vilain, so that, when he was brought face to face
with me, I was much less surprised than he affected to be.  He
played the part of an ignorant so well, indeed, that, for a
moment, I was staggered by his show of astonishment, and by the
earnestness with which he denounced the outrage; nor could
Maignan find anything on him.  But, a moment later, remembering
the girl's words, I strode to the nearest tree, and, groping
about it, in a twinkling unearthed the paper from a little hollow
in the trunk that seemed to have been made to receive it.  I need
not say with what relief I found the seals unbroken; nor with
what indignation I turned on the villain thus convicted of an act
of treachery towards the King only less black than the sin
against hospitality of which he had been guilty in my house.  But
the discovery I had made seemed enough of itself to overwhelm
him; for, after standing apparently stunned while I spoke, he
jerked himself suddenly out of his captors' hands, and made a
desperate attempt to escape.  Finding this hopeless, and being
seized again before he had gone four paces, he shouted, at the
top of his voice:  "Back!  back!  Go back!"

We looked about, somewhat startled, and Boisrueil, with presence
of mind, ran into the darkness to see if he could detect the
person addressed; but though he thought that he saw the skirt of
a flying cloak disappear in the gloom, he was not sure; and I,
having no mind to be mixed up with the ambassador, called him
back.  I asked Vilain to whom he had called, but the young man,
turning sullen, would answer nothing except that he knew naught
of the paper.  I thought it best, therefore, to conduct him at
once to my lodgings, whither it will be believed that I returned
with a lighter heart than I had gone out.  It was, indeed, a
providential escape.

How to punish the traitor was another matter, for I could
scarcely do so adequately without betraying my negligence.  I
determined to sleep on this, however, and, for the night,
directed him to be locked into a chamber in the south-west
turret, with a Swiss to guard the door; my intention being to
interrogate him farther on the morrow.  However, Henry sent for
me so early that I was forced to postpone my examination; and,
being detained by him until evening, I thought it best to tell
him, before I left, what had happened.

He heard the story with a look of incredulity, which, little by
little, gave way to a broad smile.  "Well," he said, "Grand
Master, never chide me again!  I have heard that Homer sometimes
nods; but if I were to tell this to Sillery or Villeroy, they
would not believe me."

"They would believe anything that your Majesty told them," I
said.  "But you will not tell them this?"

"No," he said kindly, "I will not; and there is my hand on it.
For the matter of that, if it had happened to them, they would
not have told me."

"And perhaps been the wiser for that," I said.

"Don't believe it," he answered.  "But now, what of this young
Vilain?  You have him safe?"

"Yes, sire."

"The girl is one degree worse; she betrays both sides to save her
skin."

"Still, I promised--"

"Oh, she must go," Henry said.  "I quite understand.  But for
him--we had better have no scandal.  Keep him until to-morrow,
and I will see his father, and have him sent out of the country."

"And he will go scot free," I said, bluntly, "when a rope and the
nearest tree--"

"Yes, my friend," Henry answered with a dry smile; "but that
should have been done last night.  As it is, he is your guest and
we must give an account of him.  But first drain him dry.
Frighten him, as you please, and get all out of him; then I wish
them joy of him.  Faugh!  and he a young man!  I would not be his
father for two such crowns as mine!"

As I returned to my lodgings I thought over these words; and I
fell to wondering by what stages Vilain had sunk so low.
Occasionally admitted to my table, he had always borne himself
with a modesty and discretion that had not failed to prepossess
me; indeed, the longer I considered the King's saying, the
greater was the surprise I felt at this DENOUEMENT; which left me
in doubt whether my dullness exceeded my negligence or the young
man's parts surpassed his wickedness.

A few questions, I thought, might resolve this; but having been
detained by the King until supper-time, I postponed the interview
until I rose.  Then bidding them bring in the prisoner, I assumed
my harshest aspect and prepared to blast him by discovering all
his vileness to his face.

But when I had waited a little, only Maignan came in, with an air
of consternation that brought me to my feet.  "Why, man, what is
it?"  I cried.

"The prisoner," he faltered.  "If your excellency pleases--"

"I do not please!"  I said sternly, believing that I knew what
had happened.  "Is he dead?"

"No, your excellency; but, he has escaped."

"Escaped?  From that room?"

Maignan nodded.

"Then, PAR DIEU!"  I replied, "the man who was on guard shall
suffer in his place!  Escaped?  How could he escape except by
treachery?  Where was the guard?"

"He was there, excellency.  And he says that no one passed him."

"Yet the man is gone?"

"The room is empty."

"But the window--the window, fool, is fifty feet from the
ground!"  I said.  "And not so much footing outside as would hold
a crow!"

Maignan shrugged his shoulders, and in a rage I bade him follow
me, and went myself to view the place; to which a number of my
people had already flocked with lights, so that I found some
difficulty in mounting the staircase.  A very brief inspection,
however, sufficed to confirm my first impression that Vilain
could have escaped by the door only; for the window, though it
lacked bars and boasted a tiny balcony, hung over fifty feet of
sheer depth, so that evasion that way seemed in the absence of
ladder or rope purely impossible.  This being clear, I ordered
the Swiss to be seized; and as he could give no explanation of
the escape, and still persisted that he was as much in the dark
as anyone, I declared that I would make an example of him, and
hang him unless the prisoner was recaptured within three days.

I did not really propose to do this, but in my irritation I spoke
so roundly that my people believed me; even Boisrueil, who
presently came to intercede for the culprit, who, it seemed, was
a favourite.  "As for Vilain," he continued; "you can catch him
whenever you please."

"Then catch him before the end of three days," I answered
obstinately, "and the man lives."

The truth was that Vilain's escape placed me in a position of
some discomfort; for though, on the one hand, I had no particular
desire to get him again into my hands, seeing that the King could
effect as much by a word to his father as I had proposed to do
while I held him safe; on the other hand, the evasion placed me
very peculiarly in regard to the King himself, who was inclined
to think me ill or suddenly grown careless.  Some of the facts,
too, were leaking out, and provoking smiles among the more
knowing, and a hint here and there; the result of all being that,
unable to pursue the matter farther in Vilain's case, I hardened
my heart and persisted that the Swiss should pay the penalty.

This obstinacy on my part had an unforeseen issue.  On the
evening of the second day, a little before supper-time, my wife
came to me, and announced that a young lady had waited on her
with a tale so remarkable that she craved leave to bring her to
me that I might hear it.

"What is it?"  I said impatiently.

"It is about M. Vilain," my wife answered, her face still wearing
all the marks of lively astonishment.

"Ha!"  I exclaimed.  "I will see her then.  But it is not that
baggage who--"

"No," my wife answered.  "It is another."

"One of your maids?"

"No, a stranger."

"Well, bring her," I said shortly.

She went, and quickly returned with a young lady, whose face and
modest bearing were known to me, though I could not, at the
moment, recall her name.  This was the less remarkable as I am
not prone to look much in maids' faces, leaving that to younger
men; and Mademoiselle de Figeac's, though beautiful, was
disfigured on this occasion by the marked distress under which
she was labouring.  Accustomed as I was to the visits of persons
of all classes and characters who came to me daily with
petitions, I should have been disposed to cut her short, but for
my wife's intimation that her errand had to do with the matter
which annoyed me.  This, as well as a trifle of curiosity--from
which none are quite free--inclined me to be patient; and I asked
her what she would have with me.

"Justice, M. le Duc," she answered simply.  "I have heard that
you are seeking M. de Vilain, and that one of your people is
lying under sentence for complicity in his escape."

"That is true, mademoiselle," I said.  "If you can tell me--"

"I can tell you how he escaped, and by whose aid," she answered.

It is my custom to betray no astonishment, even when I am
astonished.  "Do so," I said.

"He escaped through the window," she answered firmly, "by my
brother's aid."

"Your brother's?"  I exclaimed, amazed at her audacity.  "I do
not remember him."

"He is only thirteen years old."

I could hide my astonishment no longer.  "You must be mad, girl!"
I said, "mad!  You do not know what you are saying!  The window
of the room in which Vilain was confined is fifty feet from the
ground, and you say that your brother, a boy of thirteen,
contrived his escape?"

"Yes, M. de Sully," she answered.  "And the man who is about to
suffer is innocent."

"How was it done, then?"  I asked, not knowing what to think of
her persistence.

"My brother was flying a kite that day," she answered.  "He had
been doing so for a week or more, and everyone was accustomed to
seeing him here.  After sunset, the wind being favourable, he
came under M. de Vilain's window, and, when it was nearly dark,
and the servants and household were at supper, he guided the kite
against the balcony outside the window."

"But a man cannot descend by a kite-string!"

"My brother had a knotted rope, which M. de Vilain drew up," she
answered simply; "and afterwards, when he had descended,
disengaged."

I looked at her in profound amazement.

"Your brother acted on instructions?"  I said at last.

"On mine," she answered.

"You avow that?"

"I am here to do so," she replied, her face white and red by
turns, but her eyes continuing to meet mine.

"This is a very serious matter," I said.  "Are you aware,
mademoiselle, why M. Vilain was arrested, and of what he is
accused?"

"Perfectly," she answered; "and that he is innocent.  More!"  she
continued, clasping her hands, and looking at me bravely, "I am
willing both to tell you where he is, and to bring him, if you
please, into your presence."

I stared at her.  "You will bring him here?"  I said.

"Within five minutes," she answered, "if you will first hear me."

"What are you to him?"  I said.

She blushed vividly.  "I shall be his wife or no one's," she
said; and she looked a moment at my wife.

"Well, say what you have to say!"  I cried roughly.

"This paper, which it is alleged that he stole--it was not found
on him; but in the hollow of a tree."

"Within three paces of him!  And what was he doing there?"

"He came to meet me," she answered, her voice trembling slightly.
"He could have told you so, but he would not shame me."

"This is true?"  I said, eyeing her closely.

"I swear it!"  she answered, clasping her hands.  And then, with
a sudden flash of rage, "Will the other woman swear to her tale?"
she cried.

"Ha!"  I said, "what other woman?"

"The woman who sent you to that place," she answered.  "He would
not tell me her name, or I would go to her now and wring the
truth from her.  But he confessed to me that he had let a woman
into the secret of our meeting; and this is her work."

I stood a moment pondering, with my eyes on the girl's excited
face, and my thoughts, following this new clue through the maze
of recent events; wherein I could not fail to see that it led to
a very different conclusion from that at which I had arrived.  If
Vilain had been foolish enough to wind up his love-passages with
Mademoiselle de Mars by confiding to her his passion for the
Figeac, and even the place and time at which the latter was so
imprudent as to meet him, I could fancy the deserted mistress
laying this plot; and first placing the packet where we found it,
and then punishing her lover by laying the theft at his door.
True, he might be guilty; and it might be only confession and
betrayal on which jealousy had thrust her.  But the longer I
considered the whole of the circumstances, as well as the young
man's character, and the lengths to which I knew a woman's
passion would carry her, the more probable seemed the explanation
I had just received.

Nevertheless, I did not at once express my opinion; but veiling
the chagrin I naturally felt at the simple part I had been led to
play--in the event I now thought probable--I sharply ordered
Mademoiselle de Figeac to retire into the next room; and then I
requested my wife to fetch her maid.

Mademoiselle de Mars had been three days in solitary confinement,
and might be taken to have repented of her rash accusation were
it baseless.  I counted somewhat on this; and more on the effect
of so sudden a summons to my presence.  But at first sight it
seemed that I did so without cause.  Instead of the agitation
which she had displayed when brought before me to confess, she
now showed herself quiet and even sullen; nor did the gleam of
passion, which I thought that I discerned smouldering in her dark
eyes, seem to promise either weakness or repentance.  However, I
had too often observed the power of the unknown over a guilty
conscience to despair of eliciting the truth.

"I want to ask you two or three questions," I said civilly.
"First, was M. de Vilain with you when you placed the paper in
the hollow of the tree?  Or were you alone?"

I saw her eyelids quiver as with sudden fear, and her voice shook
as she stammered, "When I placed the paper?"

"Yes," I said, "when you placed the paper.  I have reason to know
that you did it.  I wish to learn whether he was present, or you
did it merely under his orders?"

She looked at me, her face a shade paler, and I do not doubt that
her mind was on the rack to divine how much I knew, and how far
she might deny and how far confess.  My tone seemed to encourage
frankness, however, and in a moment she said, "I placed it under
his directions."

"Yes," I said drily, my last doubt resolved by the admission;
"but that being so, why did Vilain go to the spot?"

She grew still a shade paler, but in a moment she answered, "To
meet the agent."

"Then why did you place the paper in the tree?"

She saw the difficulty in which she had placed herself, and for
an instant she stared at me with the look of a wild animal caught
in a trap.  Then, "In case the agent was late," she muttered.

"But since Vilain had to go to the spot, why did he not deposit
the paper in the tree himself?  Why did he send you to the place
beforehand?  Why did--" and then I broke off and cried harshly,
"Shall I tell you why?  Shall I tell you why, you false jade?"

She cowered away from me at the words, and stood terror-stricken,
gazing at me like one fascinated.  But she did not answer,

"Because," I cried, "your story is a tissue of lies!  Because it
was you, and you only, who stole this paper!  Because--Down on
your knees!  down on your knees!"  I thundered, "and confess!
Confess, or I will have you whipped at the cart's tail, like the
false witness you are!"

She threw herself down shrieking, and caught my wife by the
skirts, and in a breath had said all I wanted; and more than
enough to show me that I had suspected Vilain without cause, and
both played the simpleton myself and harried my household to
distraction.

So far good.  I could arrange matters with Vilain, and probably
avoid publicity.  But what was now to be done with her?

In the case of a man I should have thought no punishment too
severe, and the utmost rigour of the law too tender for such
perfidy; but as she was a woman, and young, and under my wife's
protection, I hesitated.  Finally, the Duchess interceding, I
leaned to the side of that mercy which the girl had not shown to
her lover; and thought her sufficiently punished, at the moment
by the presence of Mademoiselle de Figeac whom I called into the
room to witness her humiliation, and in the future by dismissal
from my household.  As this imported banishment to her father's
country-house, where her mother, a shrewd old Bearnaise, saved
pence and counted lentils into the soup, and saw company once a
quarter, I had perhaps reason to be content with her
chastisement.

For the rest I sent for M. de Vilain, and by finding him
employment in the finances, and interceding for him with the old
Vicomte de Figeac, confirmed him in the attachment he had begun
to feel for me before this unlucky event; nor do I doubt that I
should have been able in time to advance him to a post worthy of
the talents I discerned in him.  But, alas, the deplorable crime,
which so soon deprived me at one blow of my master and of power,
put an end to this, among other and greater schemes.


VII. THE GOVERNOR OF GUERET.

Without attaching to dreams greater importance than a prudent man
will always be willing to assign to the unknown and
unintelligible, I have been in the habit of reflecting on them;
and have observed with some curiosity that in these later years
of my life, during which France has enjoyed peace and comparative
prosperity, my dreams have most often reproduced the stormy rides
and bivouacs of my youth, with all the rough and bloody
accompaniments which our day knows only by repute.  Considering
these visions, and comparing my sleeping apathy with my daylight
reflections, I have been led to wonder at the power of habit;
which alone makes it possible for a man who has seen a dozen
stricken fields, and viewed, scarcely with emotion, the slaughter
of a hundred prisoners, to turn pale at the sight of a coach
accident, and walk a mile rather than see a rogue hang.

I am impelled to this train of thought by an adventure that
befell me in the summer of this year 1605; and which, as it
seemed to me in the happening to be rather an evil dream of old
times than a waking episode of these, may afford the reader some
diversion, besides relieving the necessary tedium of the thousand
particulars of finance that render the five farms a study of the
utmost intricacy.

My appointment to represent the King at the Assembly of
Chatelherault had carried me in the month of July into Poitou.
Being there, and desirous of learning for myself whether the
arrest of Auvergne had pacified his country to the extent
described by the King's agents, I determined to take advantage of
a vacation of the assembly and venture as far in that direction
as Gueret; though Henry, fearing lest the malcontents should make
an attempt on my person in revenge for the death of Biron, had
strictly charged me not to approach within twenty leagues of the
Limousin.

I had with me for escort at Chatelherault a hundred horse; but,
these seeming to be either too many or too few for the purpose, I
took with me only ten picked men with Colet their captain, five
servants heavily armed, and of my gentlemen Boisrueil and La
Font.  Parabere, to whom I opened my mind, consented to be my
companion.  I gave out that I was going to spend three days at
Preuilly, to examine an estate there which I thought of buying,
that I might have a residence in my government; and, having
amused the curious with this statement, I got away at daybreak,
and by an hour before noon was at Touron, where I stayed for
dinner.  That night we lay at a village, and the next day dined
at St. Marcel.  The second afternoon we reached Crozant.

Here I began to observe those signs of neglect and disorder
which, at the close of the war, had been common in all parts of
France, but in the more favoured districts had been erased by a
decade of peace.  Briars and thorns choked the roads, which ran
through morasses, between fields which the husbandman had
resigned to tares and undergrowth.  Ruined hamlets were common,
and everywhere wolves and foxes and all kinds of game abounded.
But that which roused my ire to the hottest was the state of the
bridges, which in this country, where the fords are in winter
impassable, had been allowed to fall into utter decay.  On all
sides I found the peasants oppressed, disheartened, and primed
with tales of the King's severity, which those who had just cause
to dread him had instilled into them.  Bands of robbers committed
daily excesses, and, in a word, no one thing was wanting to give
the lie to the rose-coloured reports with which Bareilles, the
Governor of Gueret, had amused the Council.

I confess that, at sight and thought of these things--of this
country so devoured, the King's authority so contemned, all evils
laid at his door, all his profits diverted--my anger burned
within me, and I said more to Parabere than was perhaps prudent,
telling him, in particular, what I designed against Bareilles, of
whose double-dealing I needed no further proof; by what means I
proposed to lull his suspicions for the moment, since we must lie
at Gueret, and how I would afterwards, on the first occasion,
have him seized and punished.

I forgot, while I avowed these things, that one weakness of
Parabere's character which rendered him unable to believe evil of
anyone.  Even of Bareilles, though the two were the merest
acquaintances, he could only think indulgently, because,
forsooth, he too was a Protestant.  He began to defend him
therefore, and, seeing how the ground lay, after a time I let the
matter drop.

Still I did not think that he bad been serious in his plea, and
that which happened on the following morning took me completely
by surprise.  We had left Crozant an hour, and I was considering
whether, the road being bad, we should even now reach Gueret
before night, when Parabere, who had made some excuse to ride
forward, returned, to me with signs of embarrassment in his
manner.

"My friend," he said, "here is a message from Bareilles."

"How?"  I exclaimed.  "A message?  For whom?"

"For you," he said; "the man is here."

"But how did Bareilles know that I was coming?"  I asked.

Parabere's confusion furnished me with the answer before he
spoke.  "Do not be angry, my friend," he said.  "I wanted to do
Bareilles a good turn.  I saw that you were enraged with him, and
I thought that I could not help him better than by suggesting to
him to come and meet you in a proper spirit, and make the
explanations which I am sure that he has it in his power to make.
Yesterday morning, therefore, I sent to him."

"And he is here?"  I said drily.

Parabere admitted with a blush that he was not.  His messenger
had found Bareilles on the point of starting against a band of
plunderers who had ravaged the country for a twelvemonth.  He had
sent me the most; civil messages therefore--but he had not come.
"However, he will be at Gueret to-morrow," Parabere added
cheerfully.

"Will he?"  I said.

"I will answer for it," he answered.  "In the meantime, he has
done what he can for our comfort."

"How?"  I said,

"He bids us not to attempt the last three leagues to Gueret to-
night; the road is too bad.  But to stay at Saury, where there is
a good inn, and to-morrow morning he will meet us there."

"If the brigands have not proved too much for him," I said.

"Yes," Parabere answered, with a simplicity almost supernatural.
"To be sure."

After this, it was no use to say anything to him, though his
officiousness would have justified the keenest reproaches.  I
swallowed my resentment, therefore, and we went on amicably
enough, though the valley of the Creuse, in its upper and wilder
part, through which our road now wound, offered no objects of a
kind to soften my anger against the governor.  I saw enough of
ruins, of blocked defiles, and overgrown roads; but of returning
prosperity and growing crops, and the King's peace, I saw no
sign--not so much as one dead robber.

About noon we alighted to eat a little at a wretched tavern by
one of the innumerable fords.  A solitary traveller who was here
before us, and for a time kept aloof, wearing a grand and
mysterious manner with a shabby coat, presently moved; edging
himself up to me where I sat a little apart, eating with Parabere
and my gentlemen.

"Sir," he said, on a sudden and without preface, "I see that you
are the leader of this party."

As I was more plainly dressed than Parabere, and had been giving
no orders, I wondered how he knew; but I answered, without any
remark, "Well, sir; and what of that?"

"You are in great danger," he replied.

"I?"  I said.

"Yes, sir; you!"  he answered.

"You know me?"

He shrugged his shoulders.  "Not I," he said, "but those who
speak by me.  Enough that you are in danger."

"From what?"  I asked sceptically; while my companions stared,
and the troopers and servants, who were just within hearing,
listened open-mouthed.

"A one-eyed woman and a one-eyed house," he answered darkly.
Then, before I could frame a question, he turned from me as
abruptly as he had come, and, mounting a sorry mare that stood
near, stumbled away through the ford.

It required little wit to see that the man was an astrologer, and
one whose predictions, if they had not profited his clients more
than himself, had been ominous indeed.  I was inclined,
therefore, to make sport of him, knowing that the pretenders to
that art are to the true men as ten to one.  But his words, and
particularly the fact that he had asked for nothing, had
impressed my followers differently; so that they talked of
nothing else while we ate, and could still be heard discussing
him in the saddle.  The wildness of the road and the gloomy
aspect of the valley had doubtless some effect on their minds;
which a thunderstorm that shortly afterwards overtook us and
drenched us to the skin did not tend to lighten.  I was glad to
see the roofs of Saury before us; though, on a nearer approach,
we found all the houses except the inn ruined and tenantless; and
even, that scorched and scarred, with the great gate that had
once closed its courtyard prostrate in the road before it.

However, in view of the country we had come through, and the
general desolation, we were thankful to find things no worse.
The village stood at the entrance to a gorge, with the Creuse--
here a fast-rushing stream--running at the back of the inn.  The
latter was of good size, stone-built and tiled, and, at first,
seemed to be empty; but the servants presently unearthed a man
and then a boy.  Fires were lit, and the horses stabled; and a
second room with a chimney being found, Parabere and I, with
Colet and my gentlemen, took possession of it, leaving the
kitchen to my following.

I had had my boots removed, and was drying my clothes and
expecting supper, when Boisrueil, who was beside me, uttered an
exclamation of amazement.

"What is it?"  I said.

He did not answer, and I followed his eyes.  A woman had just
entered the room with a bundle of sticks.  She had one eye!

I confess that, for an instant, this staggered me; but a moment's
thought reminded me that the astrologer had come from this inn to
us, and I smiled at the credulity which would have built on a
coincidence that was no coincidence.  When the woman had retired
again, therefore, I rallied Boisrueil on his timidity; but,
though he admitted the correctness of my reasoning, I saw that he
was not entirely convinced.  He started whenever a shutter
flapped, or the draughts, which searched the grim old building
through and through, threatened to extinguish our lights.  He
hung cloaks over the windows to obviate the latter inconvenience
he said--and was continually going out and coming back with
gloomy looks.  Parabere joined me in rallying him, which we did
without mercy; but when I had occasion, after a while, to pass
through the outer room I found that he was not alone in his
fears.  The troopers sat moodily listening, or muttered together;
while the cup passed round in silence.  When I bade a man go on
an errand to the stable, four went; and when I dropped a word to
the woman who was attending to her pot, a dozen heads were
stretched out to catch the answer.

Such a feeling--to which, in this instance, the murmur of the
stream and the steady downpour of rain doubtless added something
--is so contagious that I was not surprised to find Colet and La
Font sinking under it.  Only Parabere, in fact, rose quite
superior to the notion, laughed at their fears, and drank to
their better spirits; and, making the best of the situation, as
became an old soldier, presently engaged me in tales of the war--
fought again the siege of Laon, and buried men whose bodies bad
lain for ten years under the oaks at Fontaine Francoise.

Talk of this kind, which we still maintained after we had
despatched our supper, was sufficiently engrossing to erase
Boisrueil's fancies entirely from my mind.  They were recalled by
his sudden entrance, with Colet at his elbow, the faces of both
full of importance.  I saw that they had something to say, and
asked what it was.

"We have been examining the back gate, M. le Marquis," Colet
said.

"Well, man?"

"It is barricaded, and cannot be opened," he answered.

"Well," I said again, "there is nothing wonderful in that.
Anyone can see that there has been rough work here.  The front
gate was stormed, I suppose, and the back one left standing."

"But if is so barricaded that it is not possible to open it," he
objected.  "And the men have an idea--"

"Well?"  I said, seeing that he hesitated.

"That this is a one-eyed house."

Parabere laughed loudly.  "Of course it is!"  he said.  "That
strolling rogue saw the gate as well as the woman, and made his
profit of them."

"Pardon, sir!"  Boisrueil answered bluntly, "That is just what he
did not do!"

"Well," I said, silencing him by a gesture, "is that all?"

"No," he replied; "I have tasted the men's wine."

"And it is drugged?"

"No," he said.  "On the contrary, it is a great deal too good for
the price--or the house.  And you ordered a litre apiece.  Some
have had two, and not asked twice for it!"

"Ho, ho!"  I said, staring at him.  "Are you sure of that?"

"Quite!"  he said.

I was genuinely startled at last; but Parabere still made light
of it.  "What!"  he said.  "Are we a pack of nervous women, or
one poor traveller in a solitary inn, that we see shadows and
shake at them?"

"The inn is solitary enough," Boisrueil grumbled.

"But we are twenty swords!"  Parabere retorted, opening his eyes
wide.  "Why, I have ridden all day in an enemy's country with
less!"

"And been beaten with more at Craon."

"But, man alive, that was in a battle, and by an army!"

"Well, and there may be a battle and an army here," Boisrueil
answered sulkily,

I was inclined to laugh at this as extravagance; but seeing that
La Font and Colet sided with Boisrueil, I remembered that the
latter was no coward though a great gossip; and I thought better
of it.  Accordingly, resolving to look into the thing myself, I
bade La Font fetch a couple of lanthorns, and, when he had done
so, went out with him and Boisrueil as if I had a mind to go
round the horses before I retired.  Parabere declined to
accompany me on the ground that he would not be at the pains of
it; and Colet I left in the kitchen to keep an eye on the man and
woman.

There was no moon, rain was still falling, and the yard, crowded
with steaming, shivering horses, was dreary enough where the
lanthorns displayed it; but, accustomed to such a sight, I made,
without regarding it, for the gate, which a moment's examination
showed to be barricaded, as they had described, with great beams
and stones.  In this there was nothing beyond the ordinary, one
entrance to a house being in troublous times better than two; but
Boisrueil, bidding me kneel and look lower, I found, when I did
so, that the soil under the beams--which did not touch the ground
by some inches--was wet, and I began to understand.  When he
asked me at what hour rain had begun to fall, I answered two in
the afternoon, and drew at once the inference at which he aimed--
that the beams had been put there, and the gate barricaded, at
some later hour.

"We reached here at six," he said; "it was done some time between
two and six, my lord; therefore to-day.  To-day," he repeated in
a low voice; "and by a dozen men at least, Fewer could not move
those beams."

"And the object?"

"To prevent our escape."

"But who are they?"  I said, looking at him.

"The woman knows," he answered.  "We must ask her, my lord."

I assented; and we went back into the house, where it would not
have surprised me if we had found the wretches flown and the nest
empty.  But Colet had done his work too well.  They were both
there, and, in a moment, at a signal from Boisrueil, were secured
and pinioned.  Parabere, hearing the scuffle, came out and would
have remonstrated, but I silenced him with a sharp word; and,
despatching La Font with a couple of discreet men to keep watch
in the court that we might not be surprised, I bade one of the
servants throw some fir-cones on the fire.  These, blazing up,
filled the squalid room in a moment with a glare of light, which
revealed alike the livid faces of the two prisoners and the
excited looks and dark countenances of my escort.

I bade them put the woman forward first, and addressed her
sternly, telling her that I knew all, and that she would do well
to confess; inasmuch as if she made a clean breast of the matter,
I would grant her her life, and if she did not, she would be the
first to die, since I would hang her were a single shot fired
against the house.

The promise found her unmoved, but the threat, uttered in a tone
which showed that I was in earnest, proved more effectual.  With
an ugly look, under which my men shrank as if her eye had power
to scorch them, the hag said that she would confess, and, with
impotent rage, admitted the truth of Boisrueil's surmises.  The
rearward gate had been barricaded that afternoon by the Great
Band, who had had notice of our coming, and intended to attack us
at midnight.  I asked her how many they mustered.

"A hundred," she answered sullenly.

"Very well," I said.  "And, supposing that we do not wait for
them, how shall we escape?  By the road to Gueret?"

"Fifty lie in ambush on it."

"By the road by which we came?"

"The other fifty lie there."

"Across the river?"

"There is no ford."

"Then in the village?  If we seize some other building?"

"The village is watched, and this house," she answered, with a
sparkle of joy in her eye.

At that the position began to assume so serious an aspect that I
turned to Parabere to take his advice.  We numbered twenty in
all, and were well armed; but five to one are large odds, and we
had little ammunition, while, for all we knew, the house might be
fired with ease from the outside.  The roads north and south
being occupied, and the river enclosing us on the west, there
remained only one direction in which escape seemed possible; but,
as we knew nothing of the country, and the brigands everything,
the desperate idea of plunging into it blindly, at night, and
with pursuers at our heels, was dismissed as soon as formed.

Parabere interrupted these calculations by drawing me aside into
the room in which we had supped, where, after rallying me on the
whimsical notion of the Grand Master of the Ordnance and Governor
of the Bastile being besieged in a paltry inn, he confessed that
he had been wrong, and that the adventure was likely to prove
serious.  "Ten to one this is the very band that Bareilles is
pursuing," he said.

"Very likely," I answered bluntly; "but the question is how are
we to evade them.  Are we to fight or fly?"

"Well, for lighting," he replied coolly; "the front gate lies in
the road, there are no shutters to half the windows, the door is
crazy, and there is a thatched pent-house against one wall."

"And no help-nearer than Gueret."

"Three leagues," he assented.  "And from that we are cut off.
Fifty men in the gorge might hold it against five hundred.
Better man the courtyard here than that, tether the horses in the
gateway, and fight it out."  "Perhaps so," I said; and we looked
at one another, hearing through the open door the men muttering
and whispering in the kitchen, and above their voices the dull
murmur of the stream, which seemed of a piece with the bleak
night outside, the ruined hamlet, and the danger that lurked
round us.  Bitterly repenting the hardihood that had led me to
expose myself to such risks in breach of the King's commandment,
I found it difficult to direct my mind to the immediate question.
So many reflections connected with my mission at Chatelherault
and other affairs of state would intrude that I seemed to be
occupied rather with the results of my death at this juncture,
and particularly the injury which it must inflict on the King's
service, than with the question how I could escape.

However, Parabere soon recalled me to the point.  "It is now ten
o'clock," he said in a placid tone; "we have two hours."

"Yes," I answered; then, as if my mind had all the time been
running in an under-current to the desired goal, I continued,
"And we must make the most of them.  We must remove the
barricade, in the dark and quietly, from the rear to the front
gate.  Do you see?  Then the moment they sound the attack in
front we must slip out at the back, make a dash for the road, and
through the gorge to Gueret."

"Good," Parabere assented, with the utmost coolness.  "Why not?
Let us do it."

We went in, and in a moment the orders were given, and, the men
being charged to be silent and to make as little noise as
possible over the work, we had every hope of accomplishing it
undetected.  To go out into the road and raise and replace the
shattered gate would have been too bold a step.  We contented
ourselves, therefore, with removing four great baulks of timber
from the one gate to the other, and placing them across the gap
in such a manner that, being supported by large stones, they
formed a pretty high barrier.  To these, at Boisrueil's
suggestion, were added three doors which we forced from their
hinges in the house, and behind the whole, to cover our retreat
the better, we tethered six sumpter horses in two lines.

It remained only to unbar the rear gate and see that it opened
easily.  This being done, as we had done all the rest, stealthily
and in darkness, and by men who dared not speak above a whisper,
I gave the word to hang the male prisoner and gag and bind the
woman.  Colet undertook these duties, and with a grim humour of
his own hung the rascally host on the threshold where the
brigands must run against him when they entered.  Then I directed
every man to saddle and bridle his nag and stand by it, and so we
waited with what patience we might for the DENOUEMENT.

It seemed very long in coming, yet when it did, what with the
restless movements of the horses and the melancholy murmur of the
stream, it well-nigh took us by surprise.  It was Boisrueil who
touched my sleeve and made me aware of a low trampling on the
road outside, a sound that had scarcely become clearly audible
before it ceased.  I judged that the moment was come, and passed
the word in a whisper to open the gates.  Unfortunately, they
creaked, and I feared for a moment that I had been premature; but
before they were more than ajar a harsh whistle startled the
silence, a flare blazed up on the road, and a voice cried to
charge.

On the instant the ground shook under the assailants' rush, but
the barricade, which doubtless took the rogues by surprise,
brought them to a sudden stop, and gave us time to file out.  The
heavy rain which was failing served to cover our movements almost
as well as the baggage horses which we had posted for the
purpose; while we ran the less risk, inasmuch as the flare they
had kindled lit up the upper part of the house but left the
courtyard in perfect darkness.

Naturally, once outside, we did not linger to see what happened,
but, filing in a line and like ghosts up the bank of the stream,
were glad to hit on the road a hundred and fifty paces away,
where it entered the gorge.  Here, where it was as dark as pitch,
we whipped our horses into a canter and made a good pace for half
a league, then, drawing rein, let our horses trot until the
league was out.  By that time we were through the gorge, and I
gave the word to pull up, that we might listen and learn whether
we were pursued.  Before the order had quite brought us to a
standstill, however, two figures on a sudden rose out of the
darkness before us and barred the way.  I was riding in the front
rank, abreast of Parabere and La Font, and I had just time to lay
my hand on a pistol when one of the figures spoke.

"Well, M. le Capitaine, what luck?"  he cried, advancing, and
drawing rein to turn with us.

I saw his mistake, and, raising my hand to check those behind,
muttered in my beard that all had gone well.

"You got the man?"

"Yes," I said, peering at him through the darkness.

"Good!"  he answered.  "Then now for Bareilles, supper, and a
full purse; and afterwards, for me, the quietest corner of
France!  The King will make a fine outcry, and I do not trust one
gov--"

In a flash Parabere had him by the throat, and dragged him in a
grip of iron on to the withers of his horse.  Still he managed to
utter a cry, and the other rascal, taking the alarm, whipped his
horse round, and in a second got a start of twenty paces.  Colet,
a light man and well mounted, was after him in a trice, and we
heard them go ding-dong, ding-dong, through the darkness for a
mile or more as it seemed to us.  Then a sharp scream came
faintly down the wind.

"Good!"  Parabere said cheerfully.  "Let us be jogging."  He had
tied his prisoner neck and knees over the saddle before him.

"You heard what he said?"  I muttered, as we moved on.

"Perfectly," he answered in the same tone.

"And you think?"

"I think, Grand Master," he replied drily, "that the sooner you
are out of La Marche and Bareilles' government the longer you are
likely to live."

I was quite of that opinion myself, having drawn the same
inferences from the words the prisoner had uttered.  But for the
moment I had no alternative save to go on, and put a bold face on
the matter; and accordingly I led the way forward at as fast a
pace as the darkness and the jaded state of our horses permitted.
Colet presently joined us, and half an hour later a bunch of
lights which appeared on the side of a hill in front proclaimed
that we were nearing Gueret.  From this point half a league
across a rushy bottom and through a ford brought us to the gate,
which opened before we summoned it.  I had taken care to call to
the van one of my men who knew the town; and he guided us
quickly, no one challenging us, through a number of foul, narrow
streets and under dark archways, among which a stranger must have
gone astray.  We reached at last a good-sized square, on one side
of which--though the rest of the town lay buried in darkness--a
large building, which I judged to be Bareilles' residence,
exposed a dozen lighted windows to the street.  Two or three
figures lounged half-seen on the wide stone steps which led up to
the entrance, and the rattle of dice, with a murmur of voices,
came from the windows.  Without a moment's hesitation I
dismounted at the foot of the steps, and, bidding La Font and
Boisrueil attend me, with three of the servants, I directed Colet
to withdraw with the rest and the horses to the farther end of
the square.

Dreading nothing so much as that I might lose the advantage of
surprise, I put aside two of the men on the steps who would have
questioned me, and strode boldly across the stone landing at the
head of the flight.  Here I found two doors facing me, and
foresaw the possibility of error; but I was relieved from the
burden of choosing by the sudden appearance at one of them of
Bareilles himself.  The place was lit only by an oil lamp, and,
for a reason best known to himself, he did not look directly at
me, but stood with his head half-turned as he said,

"Well, Martin, is it done?"

I heard the dicers hold their hands to catch the answer, and in
the silence a bottle in some unsteady hand clinked against a
glass.  Through the half-open door behind him it was possible to
see a long table, laid and glittering with steel and plate; and
all seemed to wait.

Parabere broke the spell.  "We are late!"  he said in a ringing
voice, which startled the governor as if it had been the voice of
doom.  "But we could not have found you better prepared, it
seems.  Do you always sup as late as this?"

For a moment the villain could not speak, but leaned against the
doorpost, with his cheeks gone white and his jaw fallen, the most
pitiable spectacle to be conceived.  I affected to see nothing,
however, but went by him easily, and into the room, drawing off
my gauntlets as entered.  The dicers, from their seats beside a
table on the hearth, gazed at me, turned to stone.  I took up a
glass, filled it, and drank it off.  "Now I am better!"  I said.
"But this is not the warmest of welcomes, M. de Bareilles."

He muttered something, looking fearfully from one to another of
us; and, his hand shaking, filled a glass and pledged me.  The
wine gave him courage and impudence:  he began to speak; and
though his hurried sentences and excited manner must have
betrayed him to the least suspicious, we pretended to see
nothing, but rather to congratulate ourselves on his late hours
and timely preparations.  And certainly nothing could have seemed
more cheerful in comparison with the squalid inn and miry road
from which we came than this smiling feast; if death had not
seemed to my eyes to lurk behind it.

"I thought it likely that you would lie at Saury," he said, with
a ghastly smile.

"And yet made this preparation for us?"  I answered politely, yet
letting a little of my real mind be seen.  "Well, as a fact, M.
Bareilles, save for one thing we should have lain there."

"And that thing?"  he asked, his tongue almost failing him as he
put the question.

"The fact that you have a villain in your company," I answered.

"What?"  he stammered.

"A villain, M. le Capitaine Martin," I continued sternly.  "You
sent him out this morning against the Great Band; instead, he
took it upon him to lay a plot for me, from which I have only
narrowly escaped."

"Martin?"

"Yes, M. de Bareilles, Martin!"  I answered roundly, fixing him
with my eyes; while Parabere went quietly to the door, and stood
by it.  "If I am not mistaken, I hear him at this moment
dismounting below.  Let us understand one another therefore, I
propose to sup with you, but I shall not sit down until he
hangs."

It would be useless for me to attempt to paint the mixture of
horror, perplexity, and shame which distorted Bareilles'
countenance as I spoke these words.  While Parabere's attitude
and my demeanour gave him clearly to understand that we suspected
the truth, if we did not know it, our coolness and the very
nature of my demand imposed upon his fears and led him to believe
that we had a regiment at our call.  He knew, too, that that
which might be done in a ruined hamlet might not be done in the
square at Gueret; and his knees trembled under him.  He muttered
that he did not understand; that we must be mistaken.  What
evidence had we?

"The best!"  I answered grimly.  "If you wish to hear it, I will
send for it; but witnesses have sometimes loose tongues,
Bareilles, and he may not stop at the Capitaine Martin."

He started and glared at me.  From me his eyes passed to
Parabere; then he shuddered, and looked down at the table.  As he
leaned against it, I heard the glasses tinkling softly.  At last
he muttered that the man must have a trial.

I shrugged my shoulders, and would have answered that that was
his business; but at the moment a heavy step rang on the stone
steps, the door was flung hastily open, and a dark-complexioned
man came in with his hat on.  The stranger was splashed to the
chin, and his face wore an expression of savage annoyance; but
this gave place the instant he saw us to one of intense surprise,
while the words he had had on his lips died away, and he stood
nonplussed.  I turned to M. de Bareilles.

"Who is this?"  I said harshly.

"One of my lieutenants," he answered in a stifled tone.

"M. le Capitaine Martin?"

"The same," he answered.

"Very well," I replied.  "You have heard my terms."

He stood clutching the table, and in the bright light of the
candles that burned on it his face was horrible.  Still he
managed to speak.  "M. le Capitaine, call four men," he muttered.

"Monsieur?"  the Captain answered.

"Call four men--four of your men," Bareilles repeated with an
effort.

The Captain turned and went downstairs in amazement, returning
immediately after with four troopers at his heels.

Bareilles' face was ghastly.  "Take M. le Capitaine's sword," he
said to them.

The Captain's jaw fell, and, stepping back a pace, he looked from
one to another.  But all were silent; he found every eye upon
him, and, doubtful and taken by surprise, he unbuckled his sword
and flung it with an oath upon the floor.

"To the garden with him!"  Bareilles continued, hoarsely.
"Quick! Take him!  I will send you your orders."

They laid hands on the man mechanically, and, unnerved by the
suddenness of the affair, the silence, and the presence of so
many strangers,--ignorant, too, what was doing or what was meant,
he went unresisting.  They marched him out heavily; the door
closed behind them; we stood waiting.  The glittering table, the
lights, the arrested dicers, all the trivial preparations for a
carouse that at another time must have given a cheerful aspect to
the room, produced instead the most sombre impression.  I waited,
but, seeing that Bareilles did not move, I struck the table with
my gauntlet.  "The order!"  I said, sharply; "the order!"

He slunk to a table in a corner where there was ink, and scrawled
it.  I took it from his hand, and, giving it to Boisrueil, "Take
it," I said, "and the three men on the landing, and see the order
carried out.  When it is over, come and tell me."

He took the order and disappeared, La Font after him.  I remained
in the room with Parabere, Bareilles, and the dicers.  The
minutes passed slowly, no one speaking; Bareilles standing with
his head sunk on his breast, and a look of utter despair on his
countenance.  At length Boisrueil and La Font returned.  The
former nodded.

"Very well," I said.  "Then let us sup, gentlemen.  Come, M. de
Bareilles, your place is at the head of the table.  Parabere, sit
here.  Gentlemen, I have not the honour of knowing you, but here
are places."

And we supped; but not all with the same appetite.  Bareilles,
silent, despairing, a prey to the bitterest remorse, sat low in
his chair, and, if I read his face aright, had no thought but of
vengeance.  But, assured that by forcing him to that which must
for ever render him odious--and particularly among his inferiors
--I had sapped his authority at the root, I took care only that
he should not leave us.  I directed Colet to unsaddle and bivouac
in the garden, and myself lay all night with Parabere and
Bareilles in the room in which we had supped, Boisrueil and La
Font taking turns to keep the door.

To have betrayed too much haste to be gone might have proved as
dangerous as a long delay; and our horses needed rest.  But an
hour before noon next day I gave the order and we mounted in the
square, in the presence of a mixed mob of soldiers and townsfolk,
whom it needed but a spark to kindle.  I took care that that
spark should be wanting, however; and to that end I compelled
Bareilles to mount and ride with us as far as Saury.  Here, where
I found the inn burned and the woman murdered, I should have done
no more than justice had I hung him as well; and I think that he
half expected it.  But reflecting that he had a score of
relations in Poitou who might give trouble, and, besides that,
his position called for some degree of consideration, I parted
with him gravely, and hastened to put as many leagues between us
as possible.  That night we slept at Crozant, and the next at St.
Gaultier.

It was chiefly in consequence of the observations I made during
this journey that Henry, in the following October, marched into
the Limousin with a considerable force and received the
submission of the governors.  The details of that expedition, in
the course of which he put to death ten or twelve of the more
disorderly, will be found in another place.  It remains for me
only to add here that Bareilles was not of them.  He escaped a
fate he richly deserved by flying betimes with Bassignac to
Sedan.  Of his ultimate fate I know nothing; but a week after my
return to the Arsenal, a man called on me who turned out to be
the astrologer.  I gave him fifty crowns.


VIII. THE OPEN SHUTTER.

Few are ignorant of that weakness of the vulgar which leads them
to admire in the great not so much the qualities which deserve
admiration as those which, in the eyes of the better-informed,
are defects; so that the amours of Caesar, the clock-making of
Charles, and the jests of Coligny are more in the mouths of men
than their statesmanship or valour.  For one thing commendable,
two that are diverting are told; and for one man who in these
days recalls the thousand great and wise deeds of the late King a
thousand remember his occasional freaks, the duel he would have
fought, or his habit of visiting the streets of Paris by night
and in disguise.  That this last has been much exaggerated, I can
myself bear witness; for though Varenne or Coquet, the Master of
the Household, were his usual companions on these occasions, he
seldom failed to confess to me after the event, and more than
once I accompanied him.

If I remember rightly, it was in April or May of this year, 1606,
and consequently a few days after his return from Sedan, that he
surprised me one night as I sat at supper, and, requesting me to
dismiss my servants, let me know that he was in a flighty mood;
and that nothing would content him but to play the Caliph in my
company. I was not too willing, for I did not fail to recognise
the risk to which these expeditions exposed his person; but, in
the end, I consented, making only the condition that Maignan
should follow us at a distance.  This he conceded, and I sent for
two plain suits, and we dressed in my closet.  The King,
delighted with the frolic, was in his wildest mood.  He uttered
an infinity of jests, and cut a thousand absurd antics; and,
rallying me on my gravity, soon came near to making me repent of
the easiness which had led me to fall in with his humour.

However, it was too late to retreat, and in a moment we were
standing in the street.  It would not have surprised me if he had
celebrated his freedom by some noisy extravagance there; but he
refrained, and contented himself--while Maignan locked the
postern behind us--with cocking his hat and lugging forward his
sword, and assuming an air of whimsical recklessness, as if an
adventure were to be instantly expected.

But the moon had not yet risen, the night was dark, and for some
time we met with nothing more diverting than a stumble over a
dead dog, a word with a forward wench, or a narrow escape from
one of those liquid douches that render the streets perilous for
common folk and do not spare the greatest.  Naturally, I began to
tire, and wished myself with all my heart back at the Arsenal;
but Henry, whose spirits a spice of danger never failed to raise,
found a hundred things to be merry over, and some of which he
made a great tale of afterwards.  He would go on; and presently,
in the Rue de ]a Pourpointerie, which we entered as the clocks
struck the hour before midnight, his persistence was rewarded.

By that time the moon had risen; but, naturally, few were abroad
so late, and such as were to be seen belonged to a class among
whom even Henry did not care to seek adventures.  Our
astonishment was great therefore when, half-way down the street--
a street of tall, mean houses neither better nor much worse than
others in that quarter--we saw, standing in the moonlight at an
open door, a boy about seven years old.

The King saw him first, and, pressing my arm, stood still.  On
the instant the child, who had probably seen us before we saw
him, advanced into the road to us.  "Messieurs," he said,
standing up boldly before us and looking at us without fear, "my
father is ill, and I cannot close the shutter."

The boy's manner, full of self-possession, and his tone,
remarkable at his age, took us so completely by surprise--to say
nothing of the late hour and the deserted street, which gave
these things their full effect--that for a moment neither of us
answered.  Then the King spoke.  "Indeed, M. l'Empereur," he said
gravely; "and where is the shutter?"

The boy pointed to an open shutter at the top of the house behind
him.

"Ah!"  Henry said.  "And you wish us to close it?"

"If you please, messieurs."

"We do please," Henry replied, saluting him with mock reverence.
"You may consider the shutter closed.  Lead on, Monsieur; we
follow."

For the first time the boy looked doubtful; but he turned without
saying anything, and passing through the doorway, was in an
instant lost in the pitchy darkness of the entry.  I laid my hand
on the King's arm, and tried to induce him not to follow; fearing
much that this might be some new thieves' trap, leading nowhither
save to the POIRE D'ANGOISSE and the poniard.  But the attempt
was hopeless from the first; he broke from me and entered, and I
followed him.

We groped for the balustrade and found it, and began to ascend,
guided by the boy's voice; who kept a little before us, saying
continually, "This way, messieurs; this way!"  His words had so
much the sound of a signal, and the staircase was so dark and
ill-smelling, that, expecting every moment to be seized or to
have a knife in my back, I found it almost interminable.  At
last, however, a gleam of light appeared above us, the boy opened
a door, and we found ourselves standing on a mean, narrow
landing, the walls of which had once been whitewashed.  The child
signed to us to enter, and we followed him into a bare attic,
where our heads nearly touched the ceiling.

"Messieurs, the air is keen," he said in a curiously formal tone.
"Will you please to close the shutter?"

The King, amused and full of wonder, looked round.  The room
contained little besides a table, a stool, and a lamp standing in
a basin on the floor; but an alcove, curtained with black, dingy
hangings, broke one wall.  "Your father lies there?"  Henry said,
pointing to it.

"Yes, monsieur."

"He feels the cold?"

"Yes, monsieur.  Will you please to close the shutter?"

I went to it, and, leaning out, managed, with a little
difficulty, to comply.  Meanwhile, the King, gazing curiously at
the curtains, gradually approached the alcove.  He hesitated
long, he told me afterwards, before he touched the hangings; but
at length, feeling sure that there was something more in the
business than appeared, he did so.  Drawing one gently aside, as
I turned from the window, he peered in; and saw just what he had
been led to expect--a huddled form covered with dingy bed-clothes
and a grey head lying on a ragged, yellow pillow.  The man's face
was turned to the wall; but, as the light fell on him, he sighed
and, with a shiver, began to move.  The King dropped the curtain.

The adventure had not turned out as well as he had hoped; and,
with a whimsical look at me, he laid a crown on the table, said a
kind word to the boy, and we went out.  In a moment we were in
the street.

It was my turn now to rally him, and I did so without mercy;
asking if he knew of any other beauteous damsel who wanted her
shutter closed, and whether this was the usual end of his
adventures.  He took the jest in good part, laughing fully as
loudly at himself as I laughed; and in this way we had gone a
hundred paces or so very merrily, when, on a sudden, he stopped.

"What is it, sire?"  I asked.

"Hola!"  he said, "The boy was clean."

"Clean?"

"Yes; hands, face, clothes.  All clean."

"Well, sire?"

"How could he be?  His father in bed, no one even to close the
shutter.  How could he be clean?"

"But, if he was, sire?"

For answer Henry seized me by the arm, turned me round without a
word, and in a moment was hurrying me back to the house.  I
thought that he was going thither again, and followed
reluctantly; but twenty paces short of the door he crossed the
street, and drew me into a doorway.  "Can you see the shutter?"
he said.  "Yes?  Then watch it, my friend."

I had no option but to resign myself, and I nodded.  A moist and
chilly wind, which blew through the street and penetrating our
cloaks made us shiver, did not tend to increase my enthusiasm;
but the King was proof even against this, as well as against the
kennel smells and the tedium of waiting, and presently his
persistence was rewarded.  The shutter swung slowly open, the
noise made by its collision with the wall coming clearly to our
ears.  A minute later the boy appeared in the doorway, and stood
looking up and down.

"Well," the King whispered in my ear, "what do you make of that,
my friend?"

I muttered that it must be a beggar's trick.

"They would not earn a crown in a month," he answered.  There
must be something more than that at the bottom of it."

Beginning to share his curiosity, I was about to propose that we
should sally out and see if the boy would repeat his overture to
us, when I caught the sound of footsteps coming along the street.
"Is it Maignan?"  the King whispered, looking out cautiously.

"No, sire," I said.  "He is in yonder doorway."

Before Henry could answer, the appearance of two strangers coming
along the roadway confirmed my statement.  They paused opposite
the boy, and he advanced to them.  Too far off to hear precisely
what passed, we were near enough to be sure that the dialogue was
in the main the same as that in which we had taken part.  The men
were cloaked, too, as were we, and presently they went in, as we
had gone in.  All, in fact, happened as it had happened to us,
and after the necessary interval we saw and heard the shutter
closed.

"Well," the King said, "what do you make of that?"

"The shutter is the catch-word, sire."

"Ay, but what is going on up there?"  he asked.  And he rubbed
his hands.

I had no explanation to give, however, and shook my head; and we
stood awhile, watching silently.  At the end of five minutes the
two men came out again and walked off the way they had come, but
more briskly.  Henry moreover, whose observation was all his life
most acute, remarked that whatever they had been doing they
carried away lighter hearts than they had brought.  And I thought
the same.

Indeed, I was beginning to take my full share of interest in the
adventure; and in place of wondering, as before, at Henry's
persistence, found it more natural to admire the keenness which
he had displayed in scenting a mystery.  I was not surprised,
therefore, when he gripped my arm to gain my attention, and, a
the window fell slowly open again, drew me quickly into the
street, and hurried me across it and through the doorway of the
house.

"Up!"  he muttered in my ear.  "Quickly and quietly, man!  If
there are to be other visitors, we will play the spy.  But
softly, softly; here is the boy!"

We stood aside against the wall, scarcely daring to breathe; and
the child, guiding himself by the handrail, passed us in the dark
without suspicion, and pattered on down the staircase.  We
remained as we were until we heard him cross the threshold, and
then we crept up; not to the uppermost landing, where the light,
when the door was opened, must betray us, but to that immediately
below it.  There we took our stand in the angle of the stairs and
waited, the King, between amusement at the absurdity of our
position and anxiety lest we should betray ourselves, going off
now and again into stifled laughter, from which he vainly strove
to restrain himself by pinching me.

I was not in so gay a mood myself, however, the responsibility of
his safety lying heavy upon me; while the possibility that the
adventure might prove no less tragical in the sequel than it now
appeared comical, did not fail to present itself to my eyes in
the darkest colours.  When we had watched, therefore, five
minutes more--which seemed to me an hour--I began to lose faith;
and I was on the point of undertaking to persuade Henry to
withdraw, when the voices of men speaking at the door below
reached us, and told me that it was too late.  The next moment
their steps crossed the threshold, and they began to ascend, the
boy saying continually, "This way, messieurs, this way!"  and
preceding them as he had preceded us.  We heard them approach,
breathing heavily, and but for the balustrade, by which I felt
sure that they would guide themselves, and which stood some feet
from our corner, I should have been in a panic lest they should
blunder against us.  But they passed safely, and a moment later
the boy opened the door of the room above.  We heard them go in,
and without a second's hesitation we crept up after them,
following them so closely that the door was scarcely shut before
we were at it.  We heard, therefore, what passed from the first:
the child's request that they would close the shutter, their
hasty compliance, and the silence, strange and pregnant, which
followed, and which was broken at last by a solemn voice.  "We
have closed one shutter," it said, "but the shutter of God's
mercy Is never closed."

"Amen," a second person answered in a tone so distant and muffled
that it needed no great wit to guess whence it came, or that the
speaker was behind the curtains of the alcove.  "Who are you?"

"The cure of St. Marceau," the first speaker replied.

"And whom do you bring to me?"

"A sinner."

"What has he done?"

"He will tell you."

"I am listening."

There was a pause on this, a long pause; which was broken at
length by a third speaker, in a tone half sullen, half miserable.
"I have robbed my master," he said.

"Of how much?"

"Fifty livres."

"Why?"

"I lost it at play."

"And you are sorry."

"I must be sorry," the man panted with sudden fierceness, "or
hang!"  Hidden though he was from us, there was a tremor in his
voice that told a tale of pallid cheeks and shaking knees,and a
terror fast rising to madness.

"He makes up his accounts to-morrow?"

"Yes."

Someone in the room groaned; it should have been the culprit, but
unless I was mistaken the sound came through the curtains.  A
long pause followed.  Then, "And if I help you," the muffled
voice resumed, "will you swear to lead an honest life?"

But the answer may be guessed.  I need not repeat the assurances,
the protestations and vows of repentance, the cries and tears of
gratitude which ensue; and to which the poor wretch, stripped of
his sullen indifference, completely abandoned himself.  Suffice
it that we presently heard the clinking of coins, a word or two
of solemn advice from the cure, and a man's painful sobbing; then
the King touched my arm, and we crept down the stairs.  I was for
stopping on the landing where we had hidden ourselves before; but
Henry drew me on to the foot of the stairs and into the street.

He turned towards home, and for some time did not speak.  At
length he asked me what I thought of it.

"In what way, sire?"

"Do you not think," he said in a voice of much emotion, "that if
we could do what he does, and save a man instead of hanging him,
it would be better?"

"For the man, sire, doubtless," I answered drily; "but for the
State it might not be so well.  If mercy became the rule and
justice the exception--there would be fewer bodies at Montfaucon
and more in the streets at daylight.  I feel much greater doubt
on another point."

Shaking off the moodiness that had for a moment overcome him,
Henry asked with vivacity what that was.

"Who he is, and what is his motive?"

"Why?"  the King replied in some surprise--he was ever of so kind
a nature that an appeal to his feelings displaced his judgment.
"What should he be but what he seems?"

"Benevolence itself?"

"Yes."

"Well, sire, I grant that he may be M. de Joyeuse, who has spent
his life in passing in and out of monasteries, and has performed
so many tricks of the kind that I could believe anything of him.
But if it be not he--"

"It was not his voice," Henry said, positively.

"Then there is something here," I answered, "still unexplained.
Consider the oddity of the conception, sire, the secrecy of the
performance, the hour, the mode, all the surrounding
circumstances!  I can imagine a man currying favour with the
basest and most dangerous class by such means.  I can imagine a
conspiracy recruited by such means.  I can imagine this
shibboleth of the shutter grown to a watchword as deadly as the
'TUEZ!' of '72.  I can imagine all that, but I cannot imagine a
man acting thus out of pure benevolence."

"No?"  Henry said, thoughtfully.  "Well, I think that I agree
with you."  and far from being displeased with my warmth (as is
the manner of some sovereigns when their best friends differ from
them), he came over to my opinion so completely as to halt and
express his intention of returning and probing the matter to the
bottom.  Midnight had gone, however; it would take some little
time to retrace our steps; and with some difficulty I succeeded
in dissuading him, promising instead to make inquiries on the
morrow, and having learned who lived in the house, to turn the
whole affair into a report, which should be submitted to him.

This amused and satisfied him, and, expressing himself well
content with the evening's diversion--though we had done nothing
unworthy either of a King or a Minister--he parted from me at the
Arsenal, and went home with his suite.

It did not occur to me at the time that I had promised to do
anything difficult; but the news which my agents brought me next
day--that the uppermost floor of the house in the Rue
Pourpointerie was empty--put another face upon the matter.  The
landlord declared that he knew nothing of the tenant, who had
rented the rooms, ready furnished, by the week; and as I had not
seen the man's face, there remained only two sources whence I
could get the information I needed--the child, and the cure of
St. Marceau.

I did not know where to look for the former, however; and I had
to depend on the cure.  But here I carne to an obstacle I might
easily have foreseen.  I found him, though an honest man,
obdurate in upholding his priest's privileges; to all my
inquiries he replied that the matter touched the confessional,
and was within his vows; and that he neither could, nor dared--to
please anyone, or for any cause, however plausible--divulge the
slightest detail of the affair.  I had him summoned to the
arsenal, and questioned him myself, and closely; but of all
armour that of the Roman priesthood is the most difficult to
penetrate, and I quickly gave up the attempt.

Baffled in the only direction in which I could hope for success,
I had to confess my defeat to the King, whose curiosity was only
piqued the more by the rebuff.  He adjured me not to let the
matter drop, and, suggesting a number of persons among whom I
might possibly find the unknown, proposed also some theories.  Of
these, one that the benevolent was a disguised lady, who
contrived in this way to give the rein at once to gallantry and
charity, pleased him most; while I favoured that which had first
occurred to me on the night of our sally, and held the unknown to
be a clever rascal, who, to serve his ends, political or
criminal, was corrupting the commonalty, and drawing people into
his power.

Things remained in this state some weeks, and, growing no wiser,
I was beginning to think less of the affair--which, of itself,
and apart from a whimsical interest which the King took in it,
was unimportant--when one day, stopping in the Quartier du Marais
to view the works at the new Place Royale, I saw the boy.  He was
in charge of a decent-looking servant, whose hand he was holding,
and the two were gazing at a horse that, alarmed by the heaps of
stone and mortar, was rearing and trying to unseat its rider.
The child did not see me, and I bade Maignan follow him home, and
learn where he lived and who he was.

In an hour my equerry returned with the information I desired.
The child was the only son of Fauchet, one of the Receivers-
General of the Revenue; a man who kept great state in the largest
of the old-fashioned houses in the Rue de Bethisy, where he, had
lately entertained the King.  I could not imagine anyone less
likely to be concerned in treasonable practices; and, certain
that I had made no mistake in the boy, I was driven for a while
to believe that some servant had, perverted the child to this
use.  Presently, however, second thoughts, and the position of
the father, taken, perhaps, with suspicions that I had for a long
time entertained of Fauchet--in common with most of his kind--
suggested an explanation, hitherto unconsidered.  It was not an
explanation very probable at first sight, nor one that would have
commended itself to those who divide all men by hard and fast
rules and assort them like sheep.  But I had seen too much of the
world to fall into this mistake, and it satisfied me.  I began by
weighing it carefully; I procured evidence, I had Fauchet
watched; and, at length, one evening in August, I went to the
Louvre.

The King was dicing with Fernandez, the Portuguese banker; but I
ventured to interrupt the game and draw him aside.  He might not
have taken this well, but that my first word caught his
attention.

"Sire," I said, "the shutter is open."

He understood in a moment.  "St. Gris!"  He exclaimed with
animation.  "Where?  At the same house?"

"No, sire; in the Rue Cloitre Notre Dame."

"You have got him, then?"

"I know who he is, and why he is doing this."

"Why?"  the King cried eagerly.

"Well, I was going to ask for your Majesty's company to the
place," I answered smiling.  "I will undertake that you shall be
amused at least as well as here, and at a cheaper rate."

He shrugged his shoulders.  "That may very well be," he said with
a grimace.  "That rogue Pimentel has stripped me of two thousand
crowns since supper.  He is plucking Bassompierre now.

Remembering that only that morning I had had to stop some
necessary works through lack of means, I could scarcely restrain
my indignation.  But it was not the time to speak, and I
contented myself with repeating my request.  Ashamed of himself,
he consented with a good grace, and bidding me go to his:
closet, followed a few minutes later.  He found me cloaked to the
eyes, and with a soutane and priest's hat; on my arm.  "Are those
for me?"  he said.

"Yes, sire."

"Who am I, then?"

"The cure of St. Germain."

He made a wry face.  "Come, Grand Master," he said; "he died
yesterday.  Is not the jest rather grim?"

"In a good cause," I said equably.

He flashed a roguish look at me.  "Ah!"  he said, "I thought that
that was a wicked rule which only we Romanists avowed.  But,
there; don't be angry.  I am ready."

Coquet, the Master of the Household, let us out by one of the
river gates, and we went by the new bridge and the Pont St.
Michel.  By the way I taught the King the role I wished him to
play, but without explaining the mystery; the opportune
appearance of one of my agents who was watching the end of the
street bringing Henry's remonstrances to a close.

"It is still open?"  I said.

"Yes, your excellency."

"Then come, sire," I said, "I see the boy yonder.  Let us ascend,
and I will undertake that before you reach the street again you
shall be not only a wiser but a richer sovereign."

"St. Gris!"  he answered with alacrity.  Why did you not say that
before, and I should have asked no questions.  On, on, in God's
name, and the devil take Pimentel!"

I restrained the caustic jest that rose to my lips, and we
proceeded in silence down the street.  The boy, whom I had espied
loitering in a doorway a little way ahead, as if the great bell
above us which had just tolled eleven had drawn him out, peered
at us a moment askance; and then, coming forward, accosted us.
But I need not detail the particulars of a conversation which was
almost word for word the same as that which had passed in the Rue
de la Pourpointerie; suffice it that he made the same request
with the same frank audacity, and that, granting it, we were in a
moment following hint up a similar staircase.

"This way, messieurs, this way!"  he said; as he had on that
other night, while we groped our way upwards in the dark.  He
opened a door, and a light shone out; and we entered a room that
seemed, with its bare walls and rafters, its scanty stool and
table and lamp, the very counterpart of that other room.  In one
wall appeared the dingy curtains of an alcove, closely drawn; and
the shutter stood open, until, at the child's request, expressed
in the same words, I went to it and closed it.

We were both so well muffled up and disguised, and the light of
the lamp shining upwards so completely distorted the features,
that I had no fear of recognition, unless the King's voice
betrayed him.  But when he spoke, breaking the oppressive silence
of the room, his tone was as strange and hollow as I could wish.

"The shutter is closed," be said; "but the shutter of God's mercy
is never closed!"

Still, knowing that this was the crucial moment, and that we
should be detected now if at all, I found it; an age before the
voice behind the curtains answered "Amen!"  and yet another age
before the hidden speaker continued "Who are you?"

"The cure of St. Germain," Henry responded.

The man behind the curtains gasped, and they were for a moment
violently agitated, as if a hand seized them and let them go
again.  But I had reckoned that the unknown, after a pause of
horror, would suppose that he had heard amiss and continue his
usual catechism.  And so it proved.  In a voice that shook a
little, he asked, "Whom do you bring to me?"

"A sinner," the King answered.

"What has he done?"

"He will tell you."

"I am listening," the unknown said.

The light in the basin flared up a little, casting dark shadows
on the ceiling, and at the same moment the shutter, which I had
failed to fasten securely, fell open with a grinding sound.  One
of the curtains swayed a little in the breeze, "I have robbed my
master," I said, slowly.

"Of how much?"

"A hundred and twenty thousand crowns."

The bed shook until the boards creaked under it; but this time no
hand grasped the curtains.  Instead, a strained voice--thick and
coarse, yet differing from that muffled tone which we had heard
before--asked, "Who are you?"

"Jules Fauchet."

I waited.  The King, who understood nothing but had listened to
my answers with eager attention, and marked no less closely the
agitation which they caused in the unknown, leant forward to
listen.  But the bed creaked no more; the curtain hung still;
even the voice, which at last issued from the curtains, was no
more like the ordinary accents of a man than are those which he
utters in the paroxysms of epilepsy.  "Are you--sorry?"  the
unknown muttered--involuntarily, I think; hoping against hope;
not daring to depart from a formula which had become second
nature.  But I could fancy him clawing, as he spoke, at his
choking throat.

France, however, had suffered too long at the hands of that race
of men, and I had been too lately vilified by them to feel much
pity; and for answer I lifted a voice that to the quailing wretch
must have been the voice of doom.  "Sorry?"  I said grimly.  "I
must be--or hang!  For to-morrow the King examines his books, and
the next day I--hang!"

The King's hand was on mine, to stop me before the last word was
out; but his touch came too late.  As it rang through the room
one of the curtains before us was twitched aside, and a face
glared out, so ghastly and drawn and horror-stricken, that few
would have known it for that of the wealthy fermier, who had
grown sleek and fat on the King's revenues.  I do not know
whether he knew us, or whether, on the contrary, he found this
accusation, so precise, so accurate, coming from an unknown
source, still more terrible than if he had known us; but on the
instant he fell forward in a swoon.

"St. Gris!"  Henry cried, looking on the body with a shudder,
"you have killed him, Grand Master!  It was true, was it?"

"Yes, sire," I answered.  "But he is not dead, I think."  And
going to the window I whistled for Maignan, who in a minute came
to us.  He was not very willing to touch the man, but I bade him
lay him on the bed and loosen his clothes and throw water on his
face; and presently M. Fauchet began to recover.

I stepped a little aside that he might not see me, and
accordingly the first person on whom his eyes lighted was the
King, who had laid aside his hat and cloak, and taken the
terrified and weeping child on his lap.  M. Fauchet stared at him
awhile before he recognised him; but at last the trembling man
knew him, and tottering to his feet, threw himself on his knees,
looking years older than when I had last seen him in the street.

"Sire," he said faintly, "I will make restitution."

Henry looked at him gravely, and nodded.  "It is well," he said.
"You are fortunate, M. Fauchet; for had this come to my ears in
any other way I could not have spared you.  You will render your
accounts and papers to M. de Sully to-morrow, and according as
you are frank with him you will be treated."

Fauchet thanked him with abject tears, and the King rose and
prepared to leave.  But at the door a thought struck him, and he
turned.  "How long have you done this?"  he said, indicating the
room by a gesture, and speaking in a gentler tone.

"Three years, sire," the wretched man answered.

"And how much have you distributed?"

"Fifteen hundred crowns, sire."

The King cast an indescribable look at me, wherein amusement,
scorn, and astonishment were all blended.  "St. Gris!  man!"  he
said, shrugging his shoulders and drawing in his breath sharply,
"you think God is as easily duped as the King!  I wish I could
think so."

He did not speak again until we were half-way back to the Louvre;
when he opened his mouth to announce his intention of rewarding
me with a tithe of the money recovered.  It was duly paid to me,
and I bought with it part of the outlying lands of Villebon--
those, I mean, which extend towards Chartres.  The rest of the
money, notwithstanding all my efforts, was wasted here and there,
Pimentel winning thirty crowns of the King that year.  But the
discovery led to others of a similar character, and eventually
set me on the track of a greater offender, M. l'Argentier, whom I
brought to justice a few months later.


IX. THE MAID OF HONOUR.

In accordance with my custom I gave an entertainment on the last
day of this year to the King and Queen; who came to the Arsenal
with a numerous train, and found the diversions I had provided so
much to their taste that they did not leave until I was half dead
with fatigue, and like to be killed with complaisance.  Though
this was not the most splendid entertainment I gave that year, it
had the good fortune to please; and in a different and less
agreeable fashion is recalled to my memory by a peculiar chain of
events, whereof the first link came under my eyes during its
progress.

I have mentioned in an earlier part of these memoirs, a
Portuguese adventurer who, about this time, gained large sums
from the Court at play, and more than once compelled the King to
have recourse to me.  I had the worst opinion of this man, and
did not scruple to express it on several occasions; and this the
more, as his presumption fell little short of his knavery, while
he treated those whom he robbed with as much arrogance as if to
play with him were an honour.  Holding this view of him, I was
far from pleased when I discovered that the King had brought him
to my house; but the feeling, though sufficiently strong, sank to
nothing beside the indignation and disgust which I experienced
when, the company having fallen to cards after supper, I found
that the Queen had sat down with him to primero.

It did not lessen my annoyance, that I had, after my usual
fashion, furnished the Queen with a purse for her sport; and in
this way found myself reduced to stand by and see my good money
pass into the clutches of this knave.  Under the circumstances,
and in my own house, I could do nothing; nevertheless, the table
at which they sat possessed so strong a fascination for me that I
several times caught myself staring at it more closely than was
polite; and as to disgust at the unseemliness of such
companionship was added vexation at my own loss, I might have
gone farther towards betraying my feelings if a casual glance
aside had not disclosed to me the fact that I did not stand alone
in my dissatisfaction; but that, frivolous as the majority of the
courtiers were, there was one at least among those present who
viewed this particular game with distaste.

This person stood near the door, and fancying himself secured
from observation, either by his position or his insignificance,
was glowering on the pair in a manner that at another time must
have cost him a rebuke.  As it was, I found something friendly,
as well as curious, in his fixed frown; and ignorant of his name,
though I knew him by sight, wondered both who he was and what was
the cause of his preoccupation.

On the one point I had no difficulty in satisfying myself.
Boisrueil, who presently passed, told me that his name was
Vallon; that he belonged to a poor but old family in the
Cotentin, and that he had been only three months at court.

"Making his fortune, I suppose?"  I said grimly.  "He games?"

"No, your excellency."

"Is in debt?"

"Not to my knowledge."

"To whom does he pay his court, then?"

"To the King."

"And the Queen?"

"Not particularly--as far as I know, at least.  But if you wish
to know more, M. le Duc," Boisrueil continued, "I will--"

"No, no," I said peevishly.  The Queen had just handed her last
rouleau across the table, and was still playing.  "Go, man, about
your business; I don't want to spend the evening gossiping with
you."

He went, and I dismissed the young fellow from my mind; only to
find him five minutes later at my elbow.  To youth and good looks
he added a modest bearing that did not fail to enhance them and
commend him to me; the majority of the young sparks of the day
being wiser than their fathers.  But I confess that I was not
prepared for the stammering embarrassment with which he addressed
me--nor, indeed, to be addressed by him at all.

"M. de Sully," he said, in a tone of emotion, "I beg you to
pardon me.  I am in great trouble, and I think that perhaps,
stranger as I am, you may condescend to do me a service."

So many men appeal to a minister with some such formula on their
lips, and at times with a calculated timidity, that at the first
blush of his request I was inclined to bid him come to me at the
proper time; and to remove to another part of the room.  But
curiosity, playing the part of his advocate, found so much that
was candid in his manner that I hesitated.  "What is it?"  I said
stiffly.

"A very slight, if a very unusual, one," he muttered.  "M. le
Duc, I only want you to--"

"To?"  for he stopped and seemed unable to go on.

"To supplement the present you have given to the Queen with
this," he blurted out, his face pale with emotion; and he
stealthily held out to me a green silk purse, through the meshes
of which I saw the glint of gold.  "M. de Sully," he continued,
observing my hasty movement, "do not be offended!  I know that
you have done all that hospitality required.  But I see that the
Queen has already lost your gift, and that--"

She is playing on credit?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

He said it simply, and as he spoke, he again pressed on me the
purse.  I took and weighed it, and calculated at a guess that it
held fifty crowns.  The sum astonished me.  "Why, man," I said,
"you are not mad enough to be in love with her Majesty?"

"No!"  he cried, vehemently, yet with a gleam of humour in his
eye.  "I swear that it is not so.  If you will do me this favour
--"

It was a mad impulse that took me, but I nodded, and resolving to
make good the money out of my own pocket should the case, when
all was clear, seem to demand it, I went straight from him, and,
crossing the floor, laid the purse near her Majesty's hand, with
a polite word of regret that fortune had used her so ill, and a
hope that this might be the means of recruiting her forces.

It would not have surprised me had she shown some signs of
consciousness, and perhaps betrayed that she recognised the
purse.  But she contented herself with thanking me prettily, and
almost before I had done speaking had her slender fingers among
the coins.  Turning, I found that Vallon had disappeared; so that
all came to a sudden stop; and with the one and the other, I
retired completely puzzled, and less able than before to make
even a guess at the secret of the young man's generosity.

However, the King summoning me to him, there, for the time, was
an end of the matter:  and between fatigue and the duties of my
position, I did not give a second thought to it that evening.
Next morning, too, I was taken up with the gifts which it was my
privilege as Master of the Mint to present to the King on New
Year's Day, and which consisted this year of medals of gold,
silver, and copper, bearing inscriptions of my own composition,
together with small bags of new coins for the King, the Queen,
and their attendants.

These I always made it a point to offer before the King rose; nor
was this year an exception, for I found his Majesty still in bed,
the Queen occupying a couch in the same chamber.  But whereas it
generally fell to me to arouse them from sleep, and be the first
to offer those compliments which befitted the day, I found them
on this occasion fully roused, the King lazily toying with his
watch, the Queen talking fast and angrily, and at the edge of the
carpet beside her bed Mademoiselle D'Oyley in deep disgrace.  The
Queen, indeed, was so taken up with scolding her that she had
forgotten what day it was; and even after my entrance, continued
to rate the poor girl so fiercely that I thought her present
violence little less unseemly than her condescension of the night
before.

Perhaps some trace of this feeling appeared in my countenance;
for, presently, the King, who seldom failed to read my thoughts,
tried to check her in a good-natured fashion.  "Come, my dear,"
he said; "let that trembling mouse go.  And do you hear what our
good friend Sully has brought you?  I'll be bound--"

"How your Majesty talks!"  the Queen answered, pettishly.  "As if
a few paltry coins could make up for my jar!  I'll be bound, for
my part, that this idle wench was romping and playing with--"

"Come, come; you have made her cry enough!"  the King
interrupted--and, indeed, the girl was sobbing so passionately
that a man could not listen without pain.  "Let her go, I say,
and do you attend to Sully.  You have forgotten that it is New
Year's Day--"

"A jar of majolica," the Queen cried, Utterly disregarding him,
"worth your body and soul, you little slut!"

"Pooh!  pooh!"  the King said.

"Do you think that I brought it from Florence, all the way in my
own--"

"Nightcap," the King muttered.  "There, there, sweetheart," he
continued, aloud, "let the girl go!"

"Of course!  She is a girl," the Queen cried, with a sneer.
"That is enough for you!"

"Well, madam, she is not the only one in the room," I ventured.

"Oh, of course?, you are the King's echo!"

"Run away, little one," Henry said, winking to me to be silent.

"And consider yourself lucky," the Queen cried, venomously.  "You
ought to be whipped; and if I had you in my country, I would have
you whipped for all your airs!  San Giacomo, if you cross me, I
will see to it!"

This was a parting thrust; for the girl, catching at the King's
permission, had turned and was hurrying in a passion of tears to
the door.  Still, the Queen had not done.  Mademoiselle had
broken a jar; and there were other misdemeanours which her
Majesty continued to expound.  But in the end I had my say, and
presented the medals, which were accepted by the King with his
usual kindness, and by the Queen, when her feelings had found
expression, with sufficient complaisance.  Both were good enough
to compliment me on my entertainment; but observing that the
Queen quickly buried herself again in her pillows and was
inclined to be peevish, I cut short my attendance on the plea of
fatigue, and left them at liberty to receive the very numerous
company who on this day pay their court.

Of these, the greater number came on afterwards, to wait on me;
so that for some hours the large hall at the Arsenal was thronged
with my friends, or those who called themselves by that name.
But towards noon the stream began to fail; and when I sat down to
dinner at that hour, I had reason to suppose that I should be
left at peace.  I had not more than begun my meal, however, when
I was called from table by a messenger from the Queen.

"What is it?"  I said, when I had gone to him.  Had he come from
the King, I could have understood it more easily.

"Her Majesty desires to know, your excellency, whether you have
seen anything of Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

"I?"

"Yes, M. le Duc."

"No, certainly not.  How should I?"  I replied.

"And she is not here?"  the man persisted.

"No!"  I answered, angrily.  "God bless the Queen, I know nothing
of her.  I am sitting at meat, and--"

The man interrupted me with protestations of regret, and,
hastening to express himself thoroughly satisfied, retired with a
crestfallen air.  I wondered what the message meant, and what had
come over the Queen, and whither the girl had gone.  But as I
made it a rule throughout my term of office to avoid, as far as
possible, all participation in bed-chamber intrigues, I wasted
little time on the matter, but returning to my dinner, took up
the conversation where I had left it.  Before I rose, however, La
Trape came to me and again interrupted me.  He announced that a
messenger from his Majesty was waiting in the hall.

I went out, thinking it very probable that Henry had sent me a
present; though it was his more usual custom on this day to
honour me with a visit, and declare his generous intentions by
word of mouth, when we had both retired to my library and the
door was closed.  Still, on one or two occasions he had sent me a
horse from his stables, a brace of Indian fowl, a melon or the
like, as a foretaste; and this I supposed to be the errand on
which the man had come.

His first words disabused me.  "May it please your excellency,"
he said, very civilly, "the King desires to be remembered to you
as usual, and would ]earn whether you know anything of
Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

"Of whom?"  I cried, astonished.

"Of Mademoiselle D'Oyley, her Majesty's maid of honour."

"Not I, i'faith!"  I said, drily.  "I am no squire of dames, to
say nothing of maids!"

"But his Majesty--"

"If he has sent that message," I replied, "has yet something to
learn--that I do not interest myself in maids of honour or such
frailties."

The man smiled.  "I do not think," he began, "that it was his
Majesty--"

"Sent the message?"  I said.  "No, but the Queen, I suppose."

On this he gave me to understand, in the sly, secretive manner
such men affect, that it was so.  I asked him then what all this
ferment was about.  "Has Mademoiselle D'Oyley disappeared?"  I
said, peevishly.

"Yes, your excellency.  She was with the Queen at eight o'clock.
At noon her Majesty desired her services, and she was not to be
found."

"What?"  I exclaimed.  "A maid of honour is missing for three
hours in the morning, and there is all this travelling!  Why, in
my young days, three nights might have--"

But discerning that he was little more than a youth, and could
not; restrain a smile, I broke off discreetly, and contented
myself with asking if there was reason to suppose that there was
more than appeared in the girl's absence.

"Her Majesty thinks so," he answered.

"Well, in any case, I know nothing about it," I replied.  "I am
not hiding her.  You may tell his Majesty that, with my service.
Or I will write it."

He answered me, eagerly, that that was not necessary, and that
the King had desired merely a word from me; and with that and
many other expressions of regret, he went away and left me at
leisure to go to the riding-school, where at this time of the
year it was my wont to see the young men practise those manly
arts, which, so far as I can judge, are at a lower ebb in these
modern days of quips and quodlibets than in the stirring times of
my youth.  Then, thank God, it was held more necessary for a page
to know his seven points of horsemanship than how to tie a
ribbon, or prank a gown, or read a primer.

But the first day of this year was destined to be a day of
vexation.  I had scarcely entered the school, when M. de Varennes
was announced.  Instead of going to meet him I bade them bring
him to me, and, on seeing him, bade him welcome to the sports.
"Though," I said, politely overlooking his past history and his
origin, "we did better in our times; yet the young fellows should
be encouraged."

"Very true," he answered, suavely.  "And I wish I could stay with
you.  But it was not for pleasure I came.  The King sent me.  He
desires to know--"

"What?"  I said.

"If you know anything of Mademoiselle D'Oyley.  Between
ourselves, M. le Duc--"

I looked at him in amazement.  "Why," I said, "what on earth has
the girl done now?"

"Disappeared," he answered.

"But she had done that before."

"Yes," he said, "and the King had your message. But--"

"But what?"  I said sternly.

"He thought that you might wish to supplement it for his private
use."

"To supplement it?"

"Yes.  The truth is," Varennes continued, looking at me
doubtfully, "the King has information which leads him to suppose
that she may be here."

"She may be anywhere," I answered in a tone that closed his
mouth, "but she is not here.  And you may tell the King so from
me!"

Though he had begun life as a cook, few could be more arrogant
than Varennes on occasion; but he possessed the valuable knack of
knowing with whom he could presume, and never attempted to impose
on me.  Apologising with the easy grace of a man who had risen in
life by pleasing, he sat with me awhile, recalling old days and
feats, and then left, giving me to understand that I might depend
on him to disabuse the King's mind.

As a fact, Henry visited me that evening without raising the
subject; nor had I any reason to complain of his generosity,
albeit he took care to exact from the Superintendent of the
Finances more than he gave his servant, and for one gift to Peter
got two Pauls satisfied.  To obtain the money he needed in the
most commodious manner, I spent the greater part of two days in
accounts, and had not yet settled the warrants to my liking, when
La Trape coming in with candles on the second evening disturbed
my secretaries.  The men yawned discreetly; and reflecting that
we had had a long day I dismissed them, and stayed myself only
for the purpose of securing one or two papers of a private
nature.  Then I bade La Trape light me to my closet.

Instead, he stood and craved leave to speak to me.  "About what,
sirrah?"  I said.

"I have received an offer, your excellency," he answered with a
crafty look.

"What!  To leave my service?"  I exclaimed, in surprise.

"No, your excellency," he answered.  "To do a service for
another--M. Pimentel.  The Portuguese gentleman stopped me in the
street to-day, and offered me fifty crowns."

"To do what?"  I asked.

"To tell him where the young lady with Madame lies; and lend him
the key of the garden gate to-night."

I stared at the fellow.  "The young lady with Madame?"  I said.

He returned my look with a stupidity which I knew was assumed.
"Yes, your excellency.  The young lady who came this morning," he
said.

Then I knew that I had been betrayed, and had given my enemies
such a handle as they would not be slow to seize; and I stood in
the middle of the room in the utmost grief and consternation.  At
last, "Stay here," I said to the man, as soon as I could speak.
"no not move from the spot where you stand until I come back!"

It was my almost invariable custom to be announced when I visited
my wife's closet; but I had no mind now for such formalities, and
swiftly passing two or three scared servants on the stairs, I
made straight for her room, tapped and entered.  Abrupt as were
my movements, however, someone had contrived to warn her; for
though two of her women sat working on stools near her, I heard a
hasty foot flying, and caught the last flutter of a skirt as it
disappeared through a second door.  My wife rose from her seat,
and looked at me guiltily.

"Madame," I said, "send these women away.  Now," I continued when
they had gone, "who was that with you?"  She looked away dumbly.

"You do well not to try to deceive me, Madame," I continued
severely.  "It was Mademoiselle D'Oyley."

She muttered, not daring to meet my eye, that it was.

"Who has absented herself from the Queen's service," I answered
bitterly, "and chosen to hide herself here of all places!
Madame," I continued, with a severity which the sense of my false
position amply justified, "are you aware that you have made me
dishonour myself?  That you have made me lie; not once, but three
times?  That you have made me deceive my master?"

She cried out at that, being frightened, that "she had meant no
harm; that the girl coming to her in great grief and trouble--"

"Because the Queen had scolded her for breaking a china jar!"  I
said, contemptuously.

"No, Monsieur; her trouble was of quite another kind," my wife
answered with more spirit than I had expected.

"Pshaw!  "I exclaimed.

"It is plain that you do not yet understand the case," Madame
persisted, facing me with trembling hardihood.  "Mademoiselle
D'Oyley has been persecuted for some time by the suit of a man
for whom I know you, Monsieur, have no respect:  a man whom no
Frenchwoman of family should be forced to marry."

"Who is it?"  I said curtly.

"M. Pimentel."

"Ah!  And the Queen?"

"Has made his suit her own.  Doubtless her Majesty," Madame de
Sully continued with grimness, "who plays with him so much, is
under obligations to him, and has her reasons.  The King, too, is
on his side, so that Mademoiselle--"

"Who has another lover, I suppose?"  I said harshly.

My wife looked at me in trepidation.  "It may be so, Monsieur,"
she said hesitating

"It is so, Madame; and you know it," I answered in the same tone.
"M. Vallon is the man."

"Oh!"  she exclaimed with a gesture of alarm.  "You know!"

"I know, Madame," I replied, with vigour, "that to please this
love-sick girl you have placed me in a position of the utmost
difficulty; that you have jeopardised the confidence which my
master, whom I have never willingly deceived, places in me; and
that out of all this I see only one way of escape, and that is by
a full and frank confession, which you must make to the Queen."

"Oh, Monsieur," she said faintly.

"The girl, of course, must be immediately given up."

My wife began to sob at that, as women will; but I had too keen a
sense of the difficulties into which she had plunged me by her
deceit, to pity her over much.  And, doubtless, I should have
continued in the resolution I had formed, and which appeared to
hold out the only hope of avoiding the malice of those enemies
whom every man in power possesses--and none can afford to
despise--if La Trape's words, when he betrayed the secret to me,
had not recurred to my mind and suggested other reflections.

Doubtless, Mademoiselle had been watched into my house, and my
ill-wishers would take the earliest opportunity of bringing the
lie home to me.  My wife's confession, under such circumstances,
would have but a simple air, and believed by some would be
ridiculed by more.  It might, and probably would, save my credit
with the King; but it would not exalt me in others' eyes, or
increase my reputation as a manager.  If there were any other
way--and so reflecting, I thought of La Trape and his story.

Still I was half way to the door when I paused, and turned.  My
wife was still weeping.  "It is no good crying over spilled milk,
Madame," I said severely.  "If the girl were not a fool, she
would have gone to the Ursulines.  The abbess has a stiff neck,
and is as big a simpleton to boot as you are.  It is only a step,
too, from here to the Ursulines, if she had had the sense to go
on."

My wife lifted her head, and looked at me eagerly; but I avoided
her gaze and went out without more, and downstairs to my study,
where I found La Trape awaiting me.  "Go to Madame la Duchesse,"
I said to him.  "When you have done what she needs, come to me in
my closet."

He obeyed, and after an interval of about half an hour, during
which I had time to mature my plan, presented himself again
before me.  "Pimentel had a notion that the young lady was here
then?"  I said carelessly.

"Yes, your excellency."

"Some of his people fancied that they saw her enter, perhaps?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"They were mistaken, of course?"

"Of course," he answered, dutifully.

"Or she may have come to the door and gone again?"  I suggested.

"Possibly, your excellency."

"Gone on without being seen, I mean?"

"If she went in the direction of the Rue St. Marcel," he answered
stolidly, "she would not be seen."

The convent of the Ursulines is in the Rue St. Marcel.  I knew,
therefore, that Madame had had the sense to act on my hint; and
after reflecting a moment I continued, "So Pimentel wished to
know where she was lodged?"

"That, and to have the key, your excellency."

"To-night?"

"Yes, your excellency."

"Well, you are at liberty to accept the offer," I answered
carelessly.  "It will not clash with my service."  And then, as
he stood staring in astonishment, striving to read the riddle, I
continued, "By the way, are the rooms in the little Garden
Pavilion aired?  They may be needed next week; see that one of
the women sleeps there to-night; a woman you can depend on."

"Ah, Monsieur!"

He said no more, but I saw that he understood; and bidding him be
careful in following my instructions, I dismissed him.  The line
I had determined to take was attended by many uncertainties,
however; and more than once I repented that I had not followed my
first; instinct, and avowed the truth.  A hundred things might
fall out to frustrate my scheme and place me in a false position;
from which--since the confidence of his sovereign is the breath
of a minister, and as easily destroyed as a woman's reputation--
I might find it impossible to extricate myself with credit.

I slept, therefore, but ill that night; and in conjunctures
apparently more serious have felt less trepidation.  But
experience has long ago taught me that trifles, not great events,
unseat the statesman, and that of all intrigues those which
revolve round a woman are the most dangerous.  I rose early,
therefore, and repaired to Court before my usual hour, it being
the essence of my plan to attack, instead of waiting to be
attacked.  Doubtless my early appearance was taken to corroborate
the rumour that I had made a false step, and was in difficulties;
for scarcely had I crossed the threshold of the ante-chamber
before the attitude of the courtiers caught my attention.  Some
who twenty-four hours earlier would have been only too glad to
meet my eye and obtain a word of recognition, appeared to be
absorbed in conversation.  Others, less transparent or better
inclined to me, greeted me with unnatural effusion.  One who bore
a grudge against me, but had never before dared to do more than
grin, now scowled openly; while a second, perhaps the most
foolish of all, came to me with advice, drew me with insistency
into a niche near the door, and adjured me to be cautious.

"You are too bold," he said; "and that way your enemies find
their opening.  Do not go to the King now.  He is incensed
against you.  But we all know that he loves you; wait, therefore,
my friend, until he has had his day's hunting--he is just now
booting himself and see him when he has ridden off his
annoyance."

"And when my friends, my dear Marquis, have had time to poison
his mind against me?  No, no," I answered, wondering much whether
he were as simple as he looked.

"But the Queen is with him now," he persisted, seizing the lappel
of my coat to stay me, "and she will be sure to put in a word
against you."

"Therefore," I answered drily, "I had better see his Majesty
before the one word becomes two."

"Be persuaded," he entreated me.  "See him now, and nothing but
ill will come of it."

"Nothing but ill for some," I retorted, looking so keenly at him
that his visage fell.  And with that he let me go, and with a
smile I passed through the door.  The rumour had not yet gained
such substance that the crowd had lost all respect for me; it
rolled back, and I passed through it towards the end of the
chamber, where the King was stooping to draw on one of his boots.
The Queen stood not far from him, gazing into the fire with an
air of ill-temper which the circle, serious and silent, seemed to
reflect, I looked everywhere for the Portuguese, but he was not
to be seen.

For a moment the King affected to be unaware of my presence, and
even turned his shoulder to me; but I observed that he reddened,
and fidgeted nervously with the boot which he was drawing on.
Nothing daunted, therefore, I waited until he perforce discovered
me, and was obliged to greet me.  "You are early this morning,"
he said, at last, with a grudging air.

"For the best of reasons, sire," I answered hardily.  "I am ill
placed at home, and come to you for justice."

"What is it?"  he said churlishly and unwillingly.

I was about to answer, when the Queen interposed with a sneer.
"I think that I can tell you, sire," she said.  "M. de Sully is
old enough to know the adage, 'Bite before you are bitten.'"

"Madame," I said, respectfully but with firmness.  "I know this
only, that my house was last night the scene of a gross outrage;
and by all I can learn it was perpetrated by one who is under
your Majesty's protection."

"His name?"  she said, with a haughty gesture.

"M. Pimentel."

The Queen began to smile.  "What was this gross outrage?"  she
asked drily.

"In the course of last night he broke into my house with a gang
of wretches, and bore off one of the inmates."

The Queen's smile grew broader; the King began to grin.  Some of
the circle, watching them closely, ventured to smile also.
"Come, my friend," Henry said, almost with good humour, "this is
all very well.  But this inmate of yours--was a very recent one."

"Was, in fact, I suppose, the rebellious little wench of whom you
knew nothing yesterday!"  the Queen cried harshly, and with an
air of open triumph.  "There can be no stealing of stolen goods,
sir; and if M. Pimentel, who had at least as much right as you to
the girl--and more, for I am her guardian--has carried her off,
you have small ground to complain,"

"But, Madame," I said, with an air of bewilderment, "I really do
not--it must be my fault, but I do not understand."

Two or three sniggered, seeing me apparently checkmated and at
the end of my resources.  And the King laughed out with kindly
malice.  "Come, Grand Master," he said, "I think that you do.
However, if Pimentel has carried off the damsel, there, it seems
to me, is an end of the matter."

"But, sire," I answered, looking sternly round the grinning
circle, "am I mad, or is there some mystery here?  I assured your
Majesty yesterday that Mademoiselle D'Oyley was not in my house.
I say the same to-day.  She is not; your officers may search
every room and closet.  And for the woman whom M. Pimentel has
carried off, she is no more Mademoiselle D'Oyley than I am; she
is one of my wife's waiting-maids.  If you doubt me," I
continued, "you have only to send and ask.  Ask the Portuguese
himself."

The King stared at me.  "Nonsense!"  he said, sharply.  "If
Pimentel has carried off anyone, it must be Mademoiselle
D'Oyley."

"But it is not, sire," I answered with persistence.  "He has
broken into my house, and abducted my servant.  For Mademoiselle,
she is not there to be stolen."

"Let some one go for Pimentel," the King said curtly.

But the Portuguese, as it happened, was at the door even then,
and being called, had no alternative but to come forward.  His
face and mien as he entered and reluctantly showed himself were
more than enough to dissipate any doubts which the courtiers had
hitherto entertained; the former being as gloomy and downcast as
the latter was timid and cringing.  It is true he made some
attempt at first, and for a time, to face the matter out;
stammering and stuttering, and looking piteously to the Queen for
help.  But he could not long delay the crisis, nor deny that the
person he had so cunningly abducted was one of my waiting-women;
and the moment that this confession was made his case was at an
end, the statement being received with so universal a peal of
laughter, the King leading, as at one and the same time
discomfited him, and must have persuaded any indifferent listener
that all, from the first, had been in the secret.

After that he would have spent himself in vain, had he contended
that Mademoiselle D'Oyley was at my house; and so clear was this
that he made no second attempt to do so, but at once admitting
that his people had made a mistake, he proffered me a handsome
apology, and desired the King to speak to me in his behalf.

This I, on my side, was pleased to take in good part; and having
let him off easily with a mild rebuke, turned from him to the
Queen, and informed her with much respect that I had learned at
length where Mademoiselle D'Oyley had taken refuge.

"Where, sir?"  she asked, eyeing me suspiciously and with no
little disfavour.

"At the Ursulines, Madame," I answered,

She winced, for she had already quarrelled with the abbess
without advantage.  And there for the moment the matter ended.
At a later period I took care to confess all to the King, and he
did not fail to laugh heartily at the clever manner in which I
had outwitted Pimentel.  But this was not until the Portuguese
had left the country and gone to Italy, the affair between him
and Mademoiselle D'Oyley (which resolved itself into a contest
between the Queen and the Ursulines) having come to a close under
circumstances which it may be my duty to relate in another place.


X. FARMING THE TAXES.

In the summer of the year 1608, determining to take up my abode,
when not in Paris, at Villebon, where I had lately enlarged my
property, I went thither from Rouen with my wife, to superintend
the building and mark out certain plantations which I projected.
As the heat that month was great, and the dust of the train
annoying, I made each stage in the evening and on horseback,
leaving my wife to proceed at her leisure.  In this way I was
able, by taking rough paths, to do in two or three hours a
distance which her coaches had scarcely covered in the day; but
on the third evening, intending to make a short cut by a ford on
the Vaucouleurs, I found, to my chagrin, the advantage on the
other side, the ford, when I reached it at sunset, proving
impracticable.  As there was every prospect, however, that the
water would fall within a few hours, I determined not to retrace
my steps; but to wait where I was until morning, and complete my
journey to Houdan in the early hours.

There was a poor inn near the ford, a mere hovel of wood on a
brick foundation, yet with two storeys.  I made my way to this
with Maignan and La Trape, who formed, with two grooms, my only
attendance; but on coming near the house, and looking about with
a curious eye, I remarked something which fixed my attention,
and, for the moment, brought me to a halt.  This was the
spectacle of three horses, of fair quality, feeding in a field of
growing corn, which was the only enclosure near the inn.  They
were trampling and spoiling more than they ate; and, supposing
that they had strayed into the place, and the house showing no
signs of life, I bade my grooms fetch them out.  The sun was
about setting, and I stood a moment watching the long shadows of
the men as they plodded through the corn, and the attitudes of
the horses as, with heads raised, they looked doubtfully at the
newcomers.

Suddenly a man came round the corner of the house, and seeing us,
and what my men were doing, began to gesticulate violently, but
without sound.  The grooms saw him too, and stood; and he ran up
to my stirrup, his face flushed and sullen.

"Do you want to see us all ruined?"  he muttered.  And he begged
me to call my men out of the corn.

"You are more likely to be ruined that way," I answered, looking
down at him.  "Why, man, is it the custom in your country to turn
horses into the half-ripe corn?"

He shook his fist stealthily.  "God forbid!"  he said.  "But the
devil is within doors, and we must do his bidding."

"Ah!"  I replied, my curiosity aroused "I should like to see
him."

The boor shaded his eyes, and looked at me sulkily from under his
matted and tangled hair.  "You are not of his company?"  he said
with suspicion.

"I hope not," I answered, smiling at his simplicity.  "But your
corn is your own.  I will call the men out."  On which I made a
sign to them to return.  "Now," I said, as I walked my horse
slowly towards the house, while he tramped along beside me, "who
is within?"

"M. Gringuet," he said, with another stealthy gesture.

"Ah!"  I said, "I am afraid that I am no wiser."

"The tax-gatherer."

"Oh!  And those are his horses?"  He nodded.

"Still, I do not see why they are in the corn?"

"I have no hay."

"But there is grass."

"Ay," the inn-keeper answered bitterly.

"And he said that I might eat it.  It was not good enough for his
horses.  They must have hay or corn; and if I had none, so much
the worse for me."

Full of indignation, I made in my mind a note of M. Gringuet's
name; but at the moment I said no more, and we proceeded to the
house, the exterior of which, though meagre, and even miserable,
gave me an impression of neatness.  From the inside, however, a
hoarse, continuous noise was issuing, which resolved itself as we
crossed the threshold into a man's voice.  The speaker was out of
sight, in an upper room to which a ladder gave access, but his
oaths, complaints, and imprecations almost shook the house.  A
middle-aged woman, scantily dressed, was busy on the hearth; but
perhaps that which, next to the perpetual scolding that was going
on above, most took my attention was a great lump of salt that
stood on the table at the woman's elbow, and seemed to be
evidence of greater luxury--for the GABELLE had not at that time
been reduced--than I could easily associate with the place.

The roaring and blustering continuing upstairs, I stood a moment
in sheer astonishment.  "Is that M. Gringuet?"  I said at last.

The inn-keeper nodded sullenly, while his wife stared at me.
"But what; is the matter with him?"  I said.

"The gout.  But for that he would have been gone these two days
to collect at Le Mesnil."

"Ah!"  I answered, beginning to understand.  "And the salt is for
a bath for his feet, is it?"

The woman nodded.

"Well," I said, as Maignan came in with my saddlebags and laid
them on the floor, "he will swear still louder when he gets the
bill, I should think."

"Bill?"  the housewife answered bitterly, looking up again from
her pots.  "A tax-gatherer's bill?  Go to the dead man and ask
for the price of his coffin; or to the babe for a nurse-fee!  You
will get paid as soon.  A tax-gatherer's bill?  Be thankful if he
does not take the dish with the sop!"

She spoke plainly; yet I found a clearer proof of the slavery in
which the man held them in the perfect indifference with which
they regarded my arrival--though a guest with two servants must
have been a rarity in such a place--and the listless way in which
they set about attending to my wants.  Keenly remembering that
not long before this my enemies had striven to prejudice me in
the King's eyes by alleging that, though I filled his coffers, I
was grinding the poor into the dust--and even, by my exactions,
provoking a rebellion I was in no mood to look with an indulgent
eye on those who furnished such calumnies with a show of reason.
But it has never been my wont to act hastily; and while I stood
in the middle of the kitchen, debating whether I should order the
servants to fling the fellow out, and bid him appear before me at
Villebon, or should instead have him brought up there and then,
the man's coarse voice, which had never ceased to growl and snarl
above us, rose on a sudden still louder.  Something fell on the
floor over our heads and rolled across it; and immediately a
young girl, barefoot and short-skirted, scrambled hurriedly and
blindly down the ladder and landed among us.

She was sobbing, and a little blood was flowing from a cut in her
lip; and she trembled all over.  At sight of the blood and her
tears the woman seemed to be transported.  Snatching up a
saucepan, she sprang towards the ladder with a gesture of rage,
and in a moment would have ascended if her husband had not
followed and dragged her back.  The girl also, as soon as she
could speak, added her entreaties to his, while Maignan and La
Trape looked sharply at me, as if they expected a signal.

All this while, the bully above continued his maledictions.
"Send that slut back to me!"  he roared.  "Do you think that I am
going to be left alone in this hole?  Send her back, or--" and he
added half-a-dozen oaths of a kind to make an honest man's blood
boil.  In the midst of this, however, and while the woman was
still contending with her husband, he suddenly stopped and
shrieked in anguish, crying out for the salt-bath.

But the woman, whom her husband had only half-pacified, shook her
fist at the ceiling with a laugh of defiance.  "Shriek; ay, you
may shriek, you wretch!"  she cried.  "You must be waited on by
my girl, must you--no older face will do for you--and you beat
her?  Your horses must eat corn, must they, while we eat grass?
And we buy salt for you, and wheaten bread for you, and are
beggars for you!  For you, you thieving wretch, who tax the poor
and let the rich go free; who--"

"Silence, woman!"  her husband cried, cutting her short, with a
pale face.  "Hush, hush; he will hear you!"

But the woman was too far gone in rage to obey.  "What!  and is
it not true?"  she answered, her eyes glittering.  "Will he not
to-morrow go to Le Mesnil and squeeze the poor?  Ay, and will not
Lescauts the corn-dealer, and Philippon the silk-merchant, come
to him with bribes, and go free?  And de Fonvelle and de Curtin--
they with a DE, forsooth!--plead their nobility, and grease his
hands, and go free?  Ay, and--"

"Silence, woman!"  the man said again, looking apprehensively at
me, and from me to my attendants, who were grinning broadly.
"You do not know that this gentleman is not--"

"A tax-gatherer?"  I said, smiling.  "No.  But how long has your
friend upstairs been here?"

"Two days, Monsieur," she answered, wiping the perspiration from
her brow, and speaking more quietly.  "He is talking of sending
on a deputy to Le Mesnil; but Heaven send he may recover, and go
from here himself!"

"Well," I answered, "at any rate, we have had enough of this
noise.  My servant shall go up and tell him that there is a
gentleman here who cannot put up with a disturbance.  Maignan," I
continued, "see the man, and tell him that the inn is not his
private house, and that he must groan more softly; but do not
mention my name.  And let him have his brine bath, or there will
be no peace for anyone."

Maignan and La Trape, who knew me, and had counted on a very
different order, stared at me, wondering at my easiness and
complaisance; for there is a species of tyranny, unassociated
with rank, that even the coarsest view with indignation.  But the
woman's statement, which, despite its wildness and her
excitement, I saw no reason to doubt, had suggested to me a
scheme of punishment more refined; and which might, at one and
the same time, be of profit to the King's treasury and a lesson
to Gringuet.  To carry it through I had to submit to some
inconvenience, and particularly to a night passed under the same
roof with the rogue; but as the news that a traveller of
consequence was come had the effect, aided by a few sharp words
from Maignan, of lowering his tone, and forcing him to keep
within bounds, I was able to endure this and overlook the
occasional outbursts of spleen which his disease and pampered
temper still drew from him.

His two men, who had been absent on an errand at the time of my
arrival, presently returned, and were doubtless surprised to find
a second company in possession.  They tried my attendants with a
number of questions, but without success; while I, by listening
while I had my supper, learned more of their master's habits and
intentions than they supposed.  They suspected nothing, and at
day-break we left them; and, the water having duly fallen in the
night, we crossed the river without mishap, and for a league
pursued our proper road.  Then I halted, and despatching the two
grooms to Houdan with a letter for my wife, I took, myself, the
road to Le Mesnil, which lies about three leagues to the west.

At a little inn, a league short of Le Mesnil, I stopped, and
instructing my two attendants in the parts they were to play,
prepared, with the help of the seals, which never left Maignan's
custody, the papers necessary to enable me to enact the role of
Gringuet's deputy.  Though I had been two or three times to
Villebon, I had never been within two leagues of Le Mesnil, and
had no reason to suppose that I should be recognised; but to
lessen the probability of this I put on a plain suit belonging to
Maignan, with a black-hilted sword, and no ornaments.  I
furthermore waited to enter the town until evening, so that my
presence, being reported, might be taken for granted before I was
seen.

In a larger place my scheme must have miscarried, but in this
little town on the hill, looking over the plain of vineyards and
cornfields, with inn, market-house, and church in the square, and
on the fourth side the open battlements, whence the towers of
Chartres could be seen on a clear day, I looked to have to do
only with small men, and saw no reason why it should fail.

Accordingly, riding up to the inn about sunset, I called, with an
air, for the landlord.  There were half-a-dozen loungers seated
in a row on a bench before the door, and one of these went in to
fetch him.  When the host came out, with his apron twisted round
his waist, I asked him if he had a room.

"Yes," he said, shading his eyes to look at me, "I have."

"Very well," I answered pompously, considering that I had just
such an audience as I desired--by which I mean one that, without
being too critical, would spread the news.  "I am M. Gringuet's
deputy, and I am here with authority to collect and remit,
receive and give receipts for, his Majesty's taxes, tolls, and
dues, now, or to be, due and owing.  Therefore, my friend, I will
trouble you to show me to my room.

I thought that this announcement would impress him as much as I
desired; but, to my surprise, he only stared at me.  "Eh!"  he
exclaimed at last, in a faltering tone, "M. Gringuet's deputy?"

"Yes," I said, dismounting somewhat impatiently; "he is ill with
the gout and cannot come."

"And you--are his deputy?"

"I have said so."

Still he did not move to do my bidding, but continued to rub his
bald head and stare at me as if I fascinated him.  "Well, I am--I
mean--I think we are full," he stammered at last, with his eyes
like saucers.

I replied, with some impatience, that he had just said that he
had a room; adding, that if I was not in it and comfortably
settled before five minutes were up I would know the reason.  I
thought that this would settle the matter, whatever maggot had
got into the man's head; and, in a way, it did so, for he begged
my pardon hastily, and made way for me to enter, calling, at the
same time, to a lad who was standing by, to attend to the horses.
But when we were inside the door, instead of showing me through
the kitchen to my room, he muttered something, and hurried away;
leaving me to wonder what was amiss with him, and why the
loungers outside, who had listened with all their ears to our
conversation, had come in after us as far as they dared, and were
regarding us with an odd mixture of suspicion and amusement.

The landlord remained long away, and seemed, from sounds that
came to my ears, to be talking with someone in a distant room.
At length, however, he returned, bearing a candle and followed by
a serving-man.  I asked him roughly why he had been so long, and
began to rate him; but he took the words out of my mouth by his
humility, and going before me through the kitchen--where his wife
and two or three maids who were about the fire stopped to look at
us, with the basting spoons in their hands--he opened a door
which led again into the outer air.

"It is across the yard," he said apologetically, as he went
before, and opening a second door, stood aside for us to enter.
"But it is a good room, and, if you please, a fire shall be
lighted.  The shutters are closed," he continued, as we passed
him, Maignan and "La Trape carrying my baggage, "but they shall
be opened.  Hallo!  Pierre!  Pierre, there!  Open these shut--"

On the word his voice rose--and broke; and in a moment the door,
through which we had all passed unsuspecting, fell to with a
crash behind us.  Before we could move we heard the bars drop
across it.  A little before, La Trape had taken a candle from
someone's hand to light me the better; and therefore we were not
in darkness.  But the light this gave only served to impress on
us what the falling bars and the rising sound of voices outside
had already told us--that we were outwitted!  We were prisoners.

The room in which we stood, looking foolishly at one another, was
a great barn-like chamber, with small windows high in the
unplaistered walls.  A long board set on trestles, and two or
three stools placed round it--on the occasion, perhaps, of some
recent festivity--had for a moment deceived us, and played the
landlord's game.

In the first shock of the discovery, hearing the bars drop home,
we stood gaping, and wondering what it meant.  Then Maignan, with
an oath, sprang to the door and tried it--fruitlessly.

I joined him more at my leisure, and raising my voice, asked
angrily what this folly meant.  "Open the door there!  Do you
hear, landlord?"  I cried.

No one moved, though Maignan continued to rattle the door
furiously.

"Do you hear?"  I repeated, between anger and amazement at the
fix in which we had placed ourselves.  "Open!"

But, although the murmur of voices outside the door grew louder,
no one answered, and I had time to take in the full absurdity of
the position; to measure the height; of the windows with my eye
and plumb the dark shadows under the rafters, where the feebler
rays of our candle lost themselves; to appreciate, in a word, the
extent of our predicament.  Maignan was furious, La Trape
vicious, while my own equanimity scarcely supported me against
the thought that we should probably be where we were until the
arrival of my people, whom I had directed my wife to send to Le
Mesnil at noon next day.  Their coming would free us, indeed, but
at the cost of ridicule and laughter.  Never was man worse
placed.

Wincing at the thought, I bade Maignan be silent; and, drumming
on the door myself, I called for the landlord.  Someone who had
been giving directions in a tone of great, consequence ceased
speaking, and came close to the door.  After listening a moment,
he struck it with his hand.

"Silence, rogues!"  he cried.  "Do you hear?  Silence there,
unless you want your ears nailed to the post."

"Fool!"  I answered.  "Open the door instantly!  Are you all mad
here, that you shut up the King's servants in this way?"

"The King's servants!"  be cried, jeering at us.  "Where are
they?"

"Here!"  I answered, swallowing my rage as well as I might.  "I
am M. Gringuet's deputy, and if you do not this instant--"

"M. Gringuet's deputy!  Ho!  ho!"  he said.  "Why, you fool, M.
Gringuet's deputy arrived two hours before you.  You must get up
a little earlier another time.  They are poor tricksters who are
too late for the fair.  And now be silent, and it may save you a
stripe or two to-morrow."

There are situations in which even the greatest find it hard to
maintain their dignity, and this was one.  I looked at Maignan
and La Trape, and they at me, and by the light of the lanthorn
which the latter held I saw that they were smiling, doubtless at
the dilemma in which we had innocently placed ourselves.  But I
found nothing to laugh at in the position; since the people
outside might at any moment leave us where we were to fast until
morning; and, after a moment's reflection, I called out to know
who the speaker on the other side was.

"I am M. de Fonvelle," he answered.

"Well, M. de Fonvelle," I replied, "I advise you to have a care
what you do.  I am M. Gringuet's deputy.  The other man is an
impostor."

He laughed.

"He has no papers," I cried.

"Oh, yes, he has!"  he answered, mocking me.  "M. Curtin has seen
them, my fine fellow, and he is not one to pay money without
warrant."

At this several laughed, and a quavering voice chimed in with
"Oh, yes, he has papers!  I have seen them.  Still, in a case--"

"There!"  M. Fonvelle cried, drowning the other's words.  "Now
are you satisfied--you in there?"

But M. Curtin had not done.  "He has papers," he piped again in
his thin voice.

"Still, M. de Fonvelle, it is well to be cautious, and--"

"Tut, tut!  it is all right."

"He has papers, but he has no authority!"  I shouted.

"He has seals," Fonvelle answered.  "It is all right."

"It is all wrong!"  I retorted.  "Wrong, I say!  Go to your man,
and you will find him gone--gone with your money, M. Curtin."

