To begin, however, first upon the article which came out in 1867. He
affirmed that the House of Lords does, by its veto, exercise a very
powerful, though unseen, influence over the administration of the country.
He insisted on the urgent need of its becoming "a real, supreme, judicial
court for maintaining the rights of the princes of India, and an
authoritative expounder of the treaties which have passed between us and
them." It will be seen why this step is called for when we recall the fact
that in 1833 the Home Government signed a treaty in which it was
definitely agreed that the professions in India should be open to the
natives--a promise which has never been kept.

Newman goes on to say, "Until India can have its own Parliament, it needs
to find in England such protection as only our own Upper House can give
it." He places before us the possibility of economizing the time--to-day
so terribly overcrowded--of the House of Commons by letting domestic
legislation, "which is in no immediate relation to executive necessities,"
proceed from the Upper House. That in that House it could be so adapted
and so regulated, that when it came back finally to the House of Commons
no otherwise inevitable delay need occur. Thus "the Commons would have for
their chief business Bills connected with immediate administrative
exigencies, _and private Bills would be cast upon local legislatures_" (a
measure for which he was, as we know, constantly pleading). He reminds us
that the Roman executive was successful and prompt in the methods at which
they aimed, _because_ "the Senate guided and controlled it, _prescribed
the policy and required the execution_."

In his "Reorganization of English Institutions" he insists very strongly
on the great need of such a scheme of decentralization as the formation of
Provincial Chambers--in other words, the dividing the country into local
government centres which should send delegates, chosen delegates of tried
men, "virtually its ambassadors to Parliament, with instructions and a
proper salary, for a three years' term; but reserving the power to recall
any delegate earlier by a two-thirds vote, and to replace him, like an
ambassador, by a successor." Now, here comes in Newman's proposed drastic
change--a change which, in the opinion of those of us who have seen at
close focus the evils of our present system of canvassing for votes, could
not be condemned as a change for the worse.

For each delegate sent up to Parliament "would be elected without
candidacy and without expense ... confusion and intrigue would be
lessened.... There would be no convulsive interruptions of public
business." Many questions very naturally rise in our minds when we fairly
face this plan. Newman feels so confident, besides, that it would "settle
our harassing Irish difficulties."

The "old institutions of the shires are known only to students of ancient
law," says Mr. Toulmin Smith, one of the greatest authorities of his
country's old records, documents, etc. "They have been overridden by
justices of the peace, county lieutenants, and other functionaries....
From this general decay of local institutions centralization has grown
up."

From this "decay of local institutions," Newman points to what he
designates as the "Trades' Union"--the Cabinet (the "Secret Diplomacy"),
which has, he declares, superseded the old Privy Council.

"Let us go up here."
They turned into a deserted side street, and rapidly she told her
story.

"So Pinto's getting out, is he?" said the colonel thoughtfully. "Well, it
is no more than I expected. An aeroplane, too? Well, that's enterprising.
I thought of something of the sort, but there's nowhere I could go, except
to America."
He dropped his head on to his chest and was considering something.

"Thank you, Lollie," he said simply. "I'm glad that you didn't go with
Selby--you would never have got to the Continent alive."
He said this in an ordinary conversational tone, and the girl gasped.
She did not ask him for an explanation and he offered none. Crewe, standing
in the background, looked at the man with something like
bewilderment.

"And now I think you'd better make a real getaway, and not trust to the
police," said the colonel. "Maybe with the best intentions in the
world, Stafford King can't save you if I happen to be jugged. And you
too, Crewe," he turned to the other.
"So Pinto is going, eh?" he bit his nether lip, "and that is why
he promised to bring the fifty thousand to-morrow morning. Well,
somehow I don't think Pinto will go," he spoke deliberately. "I
don't think Pinto will go."
"It is too dangerous for you to stop him----" began Crewe.
"I shall not try to stop him," said the other; "there's somebody
besides myself on Pinto's track, and that somebody is going to pull
him down."
"But why don't you escape, colonel?" she urged. "There is the
aeroplane waiting at Bromley.This, then, briefly stated, was Francis Newman's plan of dealing with the
accumulation of business, etc., which beset the House of Commons as
matters stand at present.

The whole of Great Britain, he urged, should be divided in provincial
chambers for local legislation. He proposed ten for England, four for
Ireland, two for Scotland, and one for Wales.

These local powers "must be to the central like planets round a sun....
All unforeseen business would fall to the central power, which in all
cases would undertake: public defence, communications with foreign Powers,
principal highways, shores and harbours, Crown lands, national money and
weights, and national taxes.... Our impending Church and State question
will be solved in this island, with least convulsion, if local variety of
sentiment be allowed free play." [Footnote: Perhaps then we should be rid
of the anomaly which allows a Prime Minister, of whatever religious
denomination, to choose Bishops for the Anglican Church.] Newman proceeds
thus to describe further his suggestions with regard to the working of the
provincial courts: "Each electoral district to send one member to the
Provincial Chamber; household franchise, of course, would be the rule, and
I trust women householders would not be arbitrarily excluded." They would
deal directly, and on the spot, with local pauperism in the provincial
courts. That, in itself, would be one great gain. For pauperism cannot
effectively be dealt with except by local legislation. Some system such as
Ruskin's, with powerful local legislation, could not fail to end the
trouble which is at the present moment making a tremendous drain on the
pockets of the law-abiding citizen of this country, in that system of
workhouses, which besides being subversive of the very idea of home-life
amongst our poor, degrades the non-worker, and rankles as a lasting shame
in the hearts of those whom misfortune alone has driven to that last
resource of the unfortunate. Were one able to follow the example set us,
among cities, by Leipsic (where the word pauperism is absolutely non-
existent), we should have effectually turned the corner out of the ill-
kept vagrant road into which Henry VIII first led us, when "pauperism"
began to be a sore in the midst of England's healthy body of citizens.
Now, it is a self-evident fact that "pauperism," which is a living drag on
our social wheel, can _not_ be dealt with other than by rigorous local
government. Cases could then be dealt with personally; the whole area
would not be too gigantic for this; but, of course, it is a moral
impossibility to generalize in dealing with this subject.

After all, this is not, as Francis Newman insists, a new departure in any
way. He points to other countries to show that as a fact, centralization
has been gradually establishing itself in England, though in other times
decentralization was a very potent force in our midst, and a success.

In 1875, Newman quotes the following countries as regards their local
legislatures: "Look ... at Switzerland. Environed by ambitious neighbours
far superior in power, her institutions have well stood the severe trial
of time. She has her Central Diet and Ministry, vigorous enough; but also
in her several cantons she has local legislatures, each with well-trained
soldiers, simply because every man is bound to learn the use of arms, as
Englishmen used to be; therefore they need no standing army.... Italy also
has local legislatures which belonged to independent States--Sicily,
Naples, Piedmont, Tuscany, and so on--besides her National Parliament....
In Hungary notoriously the national spirit has been maintained for three
centuries and a half ... solely by the independent energy of the local
institutions.... The seven united provinces of Holland similarly prove the
vitality of freedom and good order when free local power is combined with
a strong centre.... And on a far greater scale we have... an illustrious
example in the United States--a mighty monarchy and a mighty republic....
The American Union started in that advanced stage. It is a cluster of some
thirty-seven States, each with its own legislature, for all which, and for
the outlying territories, the Federal Parliament also legislates. Contrast
their condition with ours. Only of late has their population outrun ours.
Very likely he was married, though that fact did not greatly trouble the
girl. Such men as these have always a good as well as a bad past,
pleasant as well as bitter memories, and possibly he included amongst the
former the recollection of a girl whose shoelaces Lollie Marsh was
not fit to tie.

She took a delight in torturing herself with pictures of her own humiliation,
though she may have counted it to the good that she was capable of feeling
humiliated at all. She finished her trunk, squeezed in the last article and
locked down the lid. She looked at her wrist watch--it was half-past
nine. Stafford King had not asked to see her, and she had the
evening free.

She had only spoken the truth when she had told Boundary that the
police chief had made no inquiries as to the gang.

Stafford King knew human nature rather well, and he would not make
the mistake of questioning her.

Or perhaps it was because he did not wish to spoil the value of his
gifts by fixing a price--the price of treachery.

She wondered what the colonel was doing, and Pinto--and Crewe. She
impatiently stamped her foot. She was indulging in the kind of insanity
of which hitherto she had shown no symptoms. She looked at her
watch again and then remembered the Orpheum. It was a favourite house of
hers.
She could always get a free box if there was one vacant, and she had
spent many of her lonely evenings in that way. She had always declined
Pinto's offer to share his own, and of late he had got out of the habit
of inviting her.

She dressed and took a taxi to the Orpheum. The booking office clerk knew
her, and without asking her desires drew a slip from the ticket rack.

"I can give you Box C to-night, Miss Marsh," he said. "That is the one
above the governor's."
The "governor" was Pinto.

"Have you a good house?"
The youth shook his head.

"We're not having the houses we had when Miss White was here," he
said.
"What's become of her, miss?"
"I don't know," said Lollie shortly.
She had to pass to the back of Pinto's box to reach the little
staircase which led to the box above. She thought she heard voices,
and stopping at the door, listened. Perhaps Crewe had come down or
the colonel. But it was not Crewe's voice she heard.Thus, even if the men of the nation could
"plead against" a war, the women would have no voice.

Newman urges that there are many among us who firmly believe that a time
is coming when no destructive weapons will be made, and "universal peace
shall reign." He believes himself, he says, that "a time will come when
men will look back in wonder and pity on our present barbarism, a time at
which to begin a war--unless previously justified by the verdict of an
impartial tribunal, bound in honour to overlook what is partially
expedient to their own nation or party--will be esteemed a high and
dreadful crime." These are strong words, but they are not too strong, for,
looked at by any thoughtful man or woman, war is an anomaly. It proves
nothing by reason; it simply acts by brute force, and by sheer superior
strength the victor, at the sword's point, drives defeat down the throat
of the defeated. But the arbitrary destruction of thousands of men on each
side who slay each other at the word of command (often for no reason that
concerns their own welfare, but only on account of some political
quarrel), is, from the point of view of civilization, of morality, of
humanity, without reasonable defence. It throws civilization, land
development, education back incalculably. Indeed, when one regards the
matter _au fond_, one sees that nothing could hinder the _true_
civilization, the _true_ humanity, more than does war. It _is_ barbaric;
there is no other word for it. It _is_ the great flaw that runs throughout
the whole garment of humanity.

Newman reminds us that it is only within very recent years "that the
atrocious system of paying _head money_ to soldiers and sailors for the
numbers they kill, was abolished by us."

John Stuart Mill very rightly said "that our force ought to be as strong
as possible for defence and as weak as might be for offence," only that it
is so very difficult sometimes to tell which is which.

In the _Ethics of War_, Newman argues that "there is nothing more
fundamental to civilized warfare than that no war shall be commenced
without a previous statement of grievances, and demand of redress--a
demand made to the Sovereign himself; and that _only after_ he has refused
redress, and when in consequence war has been solemnly declared, with its
motives and aim, shall hostilities be begun. In dealing with great Powers
we anxiously observe these forms.... But it is our Asiatic wars which have
brought out the formidable fact that the Cabinets claim to discard the
authority of Parliament altogether.... There is no more fundamental
principle of freedom ... than that no nation shall be dragged into a war
by its executive, against its will and judgment.... Nay, if even a
majority of every class in the nation desired war, yet they have no right
to enter into it without first hearing what the minority has to say on the
other side. This is the essential meaning of deliberative institutions."

Mr. Toulmin Smith, whose weighty words bring to bear on the subject the
witness of an England of medieval days, says that in the fourteenth
century it was a positive rule that "_consent_ of the Great Council, and
afterwards _of the Parliament_, _was necessary_ to a war or to a treaty."
In his _Parliamentary Remembrances_ he gives many precedents, both from
the histories of England and Scotland, showing that no peace was made, no
war was made, without Parliament being summoned. Henry V, he says, would
not enter "matters of foreign embroilment" (war with France, for instance)
without the consent of Parliament; and when the French king wished for
peace, Henry replied that peace needed to "be allowed, accepted, and
approved by the three Estates of each kingdom." The same process was gone
through with regard to the French king and his Estates of France. Newman
quotes Rome, whose citizens went through a long formality before making
any war, the King and Senate "consulting the College of Heralds for
erudite instructions as to minute ceremonies. For perhaps four centuries
the discipline of the army was admirable; its decline began from the day
when a general (Gen. Manlius) first took upon himself to make war at his
own judgment, trusting to obtain a bill of indemnity."

Livy tries to force on us the belief that the Romans were never
aggressive; that they only conquered the world in self-defence. And it is
true that here would come in difficulties in the way of carrying out John
Stuart Mill's _obiter dictum_ as regards wars of defence and of offence,
for many plausible reasons have been constantly brought forward for
aggressive wars: to take one only, it is not always easy to say what is
"defence" and what "offence." One may see some other country assuming a
warlike attitude towards ourselves, and it might very possibly be allowed
to come within the bounds of the word "defence" if we were prepared to
strike the initial blow before our enemy--to all intents and purposes,
save for the actual throwing of the glove--were fully prepared as to
armaments, etc. It is well known how earnestly Richard Cobden, the
Manchester Apostle of Free Trade, was one of the most prominent champions
of peace; he who, for championing the cause of the Abolition of corn
duties for the sake of his poorer countrymen, when he and others pushed
forward the "Anti-Corn Law League" (which was passed in 1846), lost all
his own private funds, and his business was ruined, simply because his
time was _all_ given not to his own affairs, but to the service of his
country. Mr. Cobden, as Newman reminds us, "was entirely convinced that
European wars could be stopped by a general agreement to abide by
arbitration." Indeed, he prevailed on the Ministers of his day so far
that, when the Russian War ended in 1856, "Lord Clarendon, in the name of
England, initiated some important clauses, of which one avowed that the
Powers who signed the treaty would never thenceforward undertake war
without first attempting to stay and supersede it by arbitration. England,
France, Russia, Sardinia, and Turkey all signed this treaty, yet in a very
few years the solemn promise proved itself to be mere wind." He goes on
say, "When passions are at work, superior might, not unarmed arbitration,
is needed to control them."

Cobden always declared that no one need fear Russia's strength because of
her climate, her vast wildernesses, her frozen seas, her great
unwieldiness. It is seen, therefore, that the sort of arbitration planned
out by Cobden did not work. It must, according to Newman, be an armed one.
It is clear that it is not possible to agree _in toto_ with the Quaker
method of opposing war, and the most thoughtful Quakers will hardly urge
it perhaps to-day. War, for defence of one's country, is a present
necessity. What, then, are Francis Newman's proposed remedies? For in the
beginning of this chapter I stated that he, very definitely, had his
answer to the great question as regards the nation: its veto or agreement,
whenever war is proposed. First of all, before giving these however, let
us look for a moment at the plan pursued in such case in modern England.
This plan he always set himself against with all the force of personal
conviction: "It is the singular disgrace of modern England to have allowed
the solemn responsibility of war to be tampered with by the arbitrary
judgment of executive officers: ... this same nation permits war to be
made; lives by the twenty thousand or fifty thousand to be sacrificed ...
at the secret advice of a Cabinet, _all of one party, acting collectively
for party objects_, no one outside knowing how each has voted.... The
orders to make or not to make war went out direct from the Board of
Control--that is, really from the Ministry in Downing Street. Two, or even
one resolute man had power to make war without check.... If Earl Grey is
right, and a Cabinet must be a _party_, this is a decisive, irrefragable
reason why a Cabinet must _never_ exercise the function of deciding on
Peace or War. The recent [Footnote: He is writing in 1859.] overthrow of
the East India Company has swept away all the shams which have hidden from
England that the Ministry in Downing Street worked the Indian puppet....
Parliament should claim that public debate shall precede all voluntary
hostilities, small or great ... to protest in the most solemn way that
henceforth no blow in war shall be struck until the voice of Parliament
has permitted and commanded it."

Then, in Newman's article "On the War Power," he goes on to say: "In
regard to the difficulties as regards arbitration, and also as regards the
voice of the people being made a _sine quâ non_, whenever a proposal for
war emanates from the powers that be: When an evil is undeniable, serious,
unjust in principle ... (referring to secret diplomacy), a remedy must
exist. Where there is a will there is a way: nay, many ways."

Then he declares that these (following) measures have commended themselves
to him. The full discussion in Parliament by representatives of the
people; the determination that nothing shall be settled by secret
diplomacy as regards war until the whole matter has been thoroughly
threshed out. In more than a few ways, _Vox populi, vox Dei_ is still
true.

Next he puts before us the advisability of an _armed_ arbitration.

"If we look to a great central European Power as having for one of its
functions to repress wars and enforce arbitration, it is evident that a
large increase of force is necessary beyond all that is at present in
prospect. If wars voluntarily taken up for noble objects must be sustained
out of spare energy, much more does the place of that Power which is to
forbid wars require a great superfluity of energy. To be able to do this
within the limits of a great federation is in itself a mighty
achievement." [Footnote: Europe in the Near Future, F. W. Newman.] And
again: "Apparently the only way in which European wars can be suppressed
is by the successive agglomeration of free men, living under and retaining
their separate institutions, into powers which have no interest in war,
but much interest in peace; until unions reach such a magnitude as to be
able to forbid wars of cupidity, and offer a high tribunal for the redress
of international grievances.... If all parts of a mighty union have their
proportionate weight in questions of war and peace, no partial and vicious
expediency can actuate them in common. Justice alone is the universal good
which can unite their desires and efforts, or make them collectively
willing to undergo sacrifice.... The wider the federation, the more benign
its aspect on the whole world without, especially if the populations
absorbed into it are heterogeneous in character, in pursuit, and in
cultivation.... A federation resting on strict justice, conceding local
freedom, but suppressing local wars and uniting its military force for
national defence, is economic of military expenditure in time of peace in
proportion to the magnitude of the populations federated."


CHAPTER XIV

DECENTRALIZATION AND LAND REFORM


"If law be centralized, it always lingers far behind men's needs." This
_obiter dictum_ of Francis Newman's, spoken nearly sixty years ago,
strikes one as more true to-day even than when he originally gave voice to
it. For if there is one thing truer than another, it is that half the
wrongs to which we are heir to-day, are due to centralization. This may be
due in part, no doubt, to the enormous increase of population; but
certainly one overwhelming reason is that class with class has lost in
very great measure all sense of cooperation, all sense of sympathy, all
sense of their real intimate connection and relationship with each other.
Instead of provincial legislature, we have our one parliamentary centre,
instead of treating our own local matters ourselves, we hale them up
before a central bureaucracy--a bureaucracy already so overcrowded with
business that it is absolutely and practically unable to deal with all the
questions which come up for settlement. So that instead of imperative
local matters being dealt with first hand, private bill after private bill
swarms through the doors of Parliament, and it becomes a veritable
impossibility to go into detail with respect to the pros and cons which
they bear upon their pages, much less grasp the whole drift of the
question with justice in its entirety.

Far wiser was the old system of provincial legislature, in which the
people were really represented, a system in which personality counted for
much and men were brought into familiar and friendly relations with each
other, not kept apart by the rubicon of red-tapeism, and liable to have
the door of the Closure slammed in their faces at some critical juncture
of discussion, and the subject shelved. It is true that since Francis
Newman's day we may have made some effort after local councils, but it is
also true that these local councils do not really bring class and class
together. Each class is by no means adequately represented in them, nor is
it the council's object that this should be the case. To compare the
England of to-day--the agricultural England, at any rate--with the England
of the past, brings all true thinkers to the same conclusion, that class
demarcations are as insistent, as absolute as ever they were, even in the
culminating early Victorian days. [Footnote: "We must mainly refer our
practical evils to the _demoralization_ of the State which the restoration
of the Stuarts caused.... Then began the estrangement of the Commonalty
from the Church of the aristocracy."--Francis Newman.] One has but to go
abroad to be convinced how "classy" we are as a nation, for class
prejudices and insularity are produced by provincial England, and
indigenous to the soil, and alas! this crop never fails. There are,
unfortunately, no lean years. There are, it is true, plenty of
organizations in which the more fortunate class tries to ameliorate the
lot of the less fortunate one, plenty of organizations in which the more
cultured class tries--often devotes its whole life to this trying--to make
better conditions for the less cultured one, and all honour and praise is
due to self-denying work of the kind, but it is not enough. The truest,
purest Christian socialism [Footnote: I use the word in its truest ancient
sense.] requires that helper and helped meet on absolutely equal ground;
that there is banished that indescribable stalking figure which follows
close in the wake of most meetings between rich and poor in England, the
Gentleman-hood (or Lady-hood, for I have seen that often quite as
insistently in evidence) of the class which, so to speak, "_stoops_ to
conquer," the limitations of the less fortunate classes, in its work for
the people.

I remember coming across the word "gentleman" interpreted in a far
different sense in an old fifteenth-century book. Many words change their
meaning with time, but this word has changed from its fifteenth-century
interpretation more than any. The sentence ran thus: "Jesus Christ was the
first Gentleman." Anything further from the original conception of its
meaning as set forward in this sentence than our English idea of what is
meant to-day by "gentleman" it would be difficult to find. For He went
among the people as one of themselves, was born among them, and was
educated as they were. There was no hint of patronage, no suggestion of
any social demarcation. He Who was the world's Redeemer was yet a
Socialist [Footnote: I cannot but add here that, in my opinion, the much-
abused word "Socialist" has changed in character in the same way as the
word "gentleman," and the modern interpretation is very far from being the
true, admirable, original thing signified.] in the highest and best sense
of the term.

We have come far since those days, but we have not come beyond the need to
deprive birth and riches of some of that arbitrary power by which they
have assumed more authority than is their due in the matter of
legislation, influence, disposal of land, and economic local conditions in
the provinces.

As regards decentralized government and the "immense importance of local
liberties," I cannot do better than quote first from the preface written
by Francis Newman to his lectures on _Political Economy_, when he issued
them in a printed form in 1851:--

"Of the immense importance of local liberties, and their actual
deficiencies among us, I became fully convinced during six years'
residence in Manchester; but it is only from Mr. Toulmin Smith's works
(the most important political work, as to me appears, which the nineteenth
century has produced in England) that I have learnt the immense resources
of the Common Law of England, and that nothing but the arbitrary
encroachments of Parliament at this moment hinders a vigorous local
legislation and local government under the fullest local freedom which can
be desired."

The lectures themselves, notably the twelfth, are in my opinion a counsel
of perfection which we should do well to follow to-day in very many
respects. For instance, he urges very strongly that "every town in
England, and every county, ought to have the feelings of a little State,
_as in fact it once had_" [the italics are my own]. "Our own history for
many centuries shows that this is quite consistent with the existence of a
central power--a Crown Parliament--_for all purposes truly national_; and
if the action of the central power were strictly limited to such things,
the provinces would, now more than ever, have abundant room for high
ambition." He shows how all organization has been lost in large provincial
towns, even though meetings are held from time to time, and men _seem_ to
come together for counsel and combination of ideas; the only really fixed
"moral union" being that narrow tie of family life which does but make a
number of separate entities in the big whole of citizenship. There is no
corporate union which makes each citizen the charge, to all intents and
purposes, of his neighbour. Each family holds together. It rises and falls
by itself. It holds to its heart no innate real sense of responsibility of
a wider citizenship. That is lost--undeniably lost.

[Illustration: TOULMIN SMITH
ENLARGEMENT FROM A PHOTO. BY KIND PERMISSION OF MISS TOULMIN SMITH]

The question arises naturally: When was this splendid link of "Each for
All" broken and mislaid? For nothing is more imperatively necessary among
the ranks of workers to-day.

Mr. Toulmin Smith tells us: "The link which has been broken and mislaid was
the "English Guild" (or "gild," as seems the more correct spelling). He
tells us--and it is generally conceded that he is our great authority on
this subject--that as a system of practical and universal institutions, a
English Guilds are older than any kings of England." [Footnote: "They were
associations of those living in the same neighbourhood, who remembered
that they had, as neighbours, common obligations."] And as another
authority on medieval life--Dom Gasquet--says: "The oldest of our ancient
laws--those, for example, of Alfred, of Athelstan, and Ina--assume the
existence of guilds to some one of which, as a matter of course, everyone
was supposed to belong."

There were of course trade (or handicraft) associations and social guilds.
Dom Gasquet describes thus their object: "Broadly speaking, they were the
benefit societies and the provident associations of the Middle Ages. They
undertook towards their members the duties now frequently performed by
burial clubs, by hospitals, by almshouses, and by guardians of the poor."
[Footnote: "Poor laws had no existence in medieval England, yet the
peasants did not fear and die of starvation in old age. The Romans had no
poor laws ... until the destruction of small freehold."--Francis Newman.]
"Not infrequently they are found acting for the public good of the
community in the mending of roads and in the repair of bridges.... The
very reason of their existence was to afford mutual aid." [Footnote:
Parish Life of Medieval England.] They were in very deed, as Mr. Toulmin
Smith describes them, institutions of "local self-help." And everyone who
knows anything of the subject is aware that they "obviated pauperism,
assisted in steadying the price of labour, and formed a permanent centre."
Also it has been proved that they acted as the lever which effectually
made citizenship more together as a whole, bound together by common need
and common responsibilities.

This sense of oneness of interest of "Each for All," then, we have
unfortunately as a nation lost. And with the loss have gone many of the
people's rights and privileges both with regard to local self-government,
local liberties, and co-operation.

Now the question arises how are we to recover what was so necessary to the
public well-being? And Francis Newman is ready with an answer.

"To recognize little states in our towns and countries would be the first
step of organization; I believe it would be an easy one.... If each town
had full power to tax itself for public purposes, a thousand civilizing
ameliorations would be introduced.... If local institutions had been kept
up in energy, the unhealthy buildings which now exist could never have
arisen; there is at present an Augean stable to cleanse.... Look at the
sellers in the street, look at the cab-drivers and their horses on a rainy
day; what can be more barbarous than their exposure?... Nothing surely is
more obvious than that in a city where thirty or forty thousand persons
live all day under the sky, having no power to shelter themselves, there
ought to be numerous covered piazzas, market-places, and sheds for
cabriolets. By such means, to save the poor from rheumatism and
inflammations, would be cheaper than to raise their wages, if that were
possible, and would confer far more direct benefit on them than the
removing of taxes."

Here is indeed the mind of a modern Hercules in its strong, rational
suggestions as to how this particular "stable" must be swept out. It is a
striking illustration of how far we have come since the days of the
medieval guilds, this lack of grasp on our part of the particular needs of
particular sections of the community. For were our local self-government
in working order and thoroughly representative, it is not to be thought of
for a moment that such a lack of shelters and proper appliances for the
labouring man and woman would be in such evidence amongst us as now is the
case. For look at England as she is, in respect of unsettled, rainy and
stormy weather: her spells of wintry weather, her spring changes: one day
warm, and the next, constant spells of snow, sleet, and bitter driving
gusts of wind. Where do the loafers of our streets go? Where do the
unemployed, hanging about at the street corner in search of a job, go
during some pelting shower which drenches whoever remains to face it in
less than three minutes? The centre of the street, and the streaming
pavements clear almost at once, but where does the "man in the street"--
the woman--the child go? Certainly they do not go into a shelter put up by
Government for their protection, as a rule. There are, in provincial
towns, no shelters sufficiently large to accommodate them.

I have often talked to the inspectors--to take a case in point--of
provincial trams. These men have to wait, to stand about at corners of
streets or cross roads great part of the day. Many of them suffer in no
small degree from this constant standing about in all weathers.

Then again, there is no provision made for the drivers of the trams. It
would be quite possible to provide seats for them, as is often done in
motor buses, but the same reason holds good for this not having been
thought of, as is in evidence with regard to the lack of street shelters.

There is not sufficient co-operation in the local government. When the
guilds died out, no local arrangements took their place. In other words,
the local government, of whatever nature it is, is not sufficiently
representative. The men who work upon the road, day in day out, have not
sufficient opportunity of saying, in open meeting of their fellow
citizens, where their particular trade shoe pinches. It is, as old Sir
Thomas More said very truly, the matter of the rich legislating for the
poor, which is at fault.

Here, then, is the remedy suggested by Francis Newman: "The stated meeting
of a number of people in a _Ward-mote_ would make their faces familiar to
one another, and give to the richer orders a distinct acquaintance with a
definite portion of the vast community. Out of this ... meeting for
discussion of practical business in a _Ward-mote_ ... would rise numerous
other relations."

Here men would meet--men drawn from every class--and could voice their
complaints, their difficulties, their desire for improved conditions of
work. Only in this way could local government become really a help to its
neighbourhood. Only in this way could men consult on the best way of
improving economic conditions, frame their own amelioration of existing
laws, and send them up to the Imperial Parliament for consent or veto.

Then it would probably follow that some measure of land reform would be
the natural result of such local government. Perhaps it is over the land
that the Plough of Reform needs most urgently to be driven. More than
eight centuries ago the first idea of parks began in this country. Then it
was that in the selfish desire for private property the dwellings of the
people were swept away to make room for those of game for royal sport.
Later this method was adopted by Henry VIII's baronial retainers, who
ejected the tenants from their estates for the sake of trade profit--
profit to be gained by exporting wool from the large sheep farms into
which they made their private estates.

But the system of large tracts of land in a small country, such as our
own, being bought up for private property, and made into parks or game
preserves, is of course at the root of very many economic evils which have
largely helped to cause pauperism and unhealthy conditions of life for the
agricultural labourer. If rich men may add, without the law stepping in to
limit amount, land to land as their pocket makes it possible, it follows,
as a matter of course, that more of the rustic population must move into
the towns: and that more and more crowding and over-competition are the
result later on.

Newman--the man who was always boldest where there was a cause that needed
fighting for, or fellow citizens who were powerless to right their own
wrongs, and who required someone to voice them--spoke out his views on
this subject, unhesitatingly. "That a man should be able to buy up large
tracts of land, and make himself the owner of them--to keep them in or out
of culture as he pleases--to close or open roads, and dictate where houses
should be built ... this is no natural right, but is an artificial
creation of arbitrary law; law made by legislation for personal
convenience ... certainly not for the benefit of the nation.... I find it
stated that in 1845 the Royal Commission estimated that, since 1710, above
seven millions of acres had been appropriated by Private Acts of
Parliament." (This was because of the enormous extension of claims made by
lords of the manors.) "It is certain that wild land was not imagined to be
a property in old days. The moors and bogs, and hillsides and seacoast
imposed on the baron the duty of maintaining the King's peace against
marauders, but yielded to him no revenue.... Supplies open to all ought
never to have been made private property.... Vast private estates are
pernicious in every country which permits them. It was notorious to the
Romans under the early emperors how ruinous they had been to Italy....
There they wrought out, among other evils, emptiness of population, and
extinction of agriculture." He represents that it was really due to the
break-up of the feudal system in the Tudor times which was responsible for
the "chronic pauperism" and multitude of "sturdy beggars" of later
centuries. And the reason is a very patent one. If more and more land is
swamped in private enterprise, private revenue, it is a _sine quâ non_
that peasant proprietorship must get less and less. There is not, in
effect, enough land to go round. Newman points out that, as regards land
cultivation, we are behind France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and Hungary;
that a hundred years ago there were far more small freeholds in England
than is now the case; that England is a "marked exception in Europe in the
land tenure." "We know not whither beside England to look for a nation of
peasants living by wages, and divorced from all rights in the crops which
they raise."

As Henry Fawcett said long ago, these wages of English labourers will not
allow of the least provision to be made either for the sickness or the
feebleness of old age. They have, at the close of a life of hard toil,
nothing but the workhouse to live in, the road to beg in or sell in that
out-at-elbow, trade, the modern "chapman's."

Look at the average labourer of our own day. He has, as Newman clearly
points out, "more than enough to do in rearing a family, and has no better
prospect in his declining years than rheumatism and the poorhouse, perhaps
with separation from his wife, or at least a miserable dole of out-door
relief." [Footnote: We have gone some way since these words were written
in our Old Age Pensions.] Here he puts his finger on the very spot where
one thoughtless cruelty of bureaucratic legislation is most shown. For
many faithful servants of the State come in their last extremity to this
destiny. This irony of legislation shone out lately in its true colours
when it was discovered that, of over a thousand survivors of the Indian
Mutiny, a large proportion, who were invited to the demi-centenary
celebration dinner, came out of workhouses where they, who had served
their country so well in the days of their youth, had been forced to spend
their old age.

There is no doubt that Francis Newman's remedy for the economic evils of
the people is the right one. To develop rural industry, to come back to
the land, is the hope for England's future. "It is essential to the public
welfare to multiply to the utmost the proportion of actual cultivators or
farmers who have a firm tenure of the soil by paying a quit-rent to the
State.... The soil of England ought to be the very best investment for
rich and poor, pouring out wealth to incessant industry, and securing to
every labourer the fruit of his own toils."

And in this way, he urges, can this suggestion be carried to its definite
conclusion. The revival of small freeholds, the re-institution of peasant
proprietorships, are the ways out of the block at the end of the way where
there is at present a deadlock in regard to the peasants' individual
advancement. It is well known how admirably this system has worked in
France, where millions of peasants have profited by the law in favour of
small freeholds, and its regulation that such land shall always be divided
equally among the children of the landholder. It is well known how largely
Indian revenue was drawn from the rent paid by small cultivators in the
Dekkan. It may be taken as an invariable consequence that the measure
which really profits the citizen profits the State too.

I remember seeing among some old papers dating back to the early quarter
of the nineteenth century, an account showing that tobacco planting was
really started somewhere in the Midlands by two or three Englishmen, and
it was found that the soil was thoroughly adapted to the culture of
tobacco. Indeed, the venture proved a complete success. Then the
Government of that day, fearing later consequences to the import trade,
promptly intervened and put a stop to the home cultivation. But the fact
remains that it had been proved, by a definite experience, that there
_was_ an opening for this industry in England.

It was suggested to me only the other day how many more cider-growing
districts, for instance, might be with advantage started in the provinces.
For the truth of the matter, when we look at it fairly and squarely, is
that the home country can give rural work to many more of her inhabitants
than she is allowed to do at present; that, as Newman was always
suggesting in his lectures, the labourer should be given an interest in
the land; that he should be encouraged in trying to make a crop as good as
possible by adopting some modification of the Métayer Culture; that he
should have _rights_ in the land; be associated in the profit accruing to
his overlord; that if the wages of a farm labourer were small, yet that he
should be given, perhaps, one-twentieth of the produce; and that he should
be encouraged to invest what saving might be possible to him in the farm
or trade. Newman was not in favour of the Savings Bank, as we understand
it in this country. He thought that associated profit and investment of
savings in the employer's land or trade would work far better in the long
run, and lead to keener fellowship between labourer and master.

To-day his plan, as it seems to many, stands very good chance of success,
if given a fair trial among the right sort of Englishmen. I am aware that
these last four words sound vague, but I have a very clear idea of what
they mean myself! Newman thought that if a co-operative society began by
buying a moderate-sized farm, and divided it into "portions of six to ten
acres, they might find either among their own members or among other
tradesmen known and trusted among them, persons rich enough to provide
seed and stock, and thus to live through the first year on such holdings,
and willing (later) to occupy them for themselves or for their sons. The
beginning is the great difficulty.... The first thing of all is to show,
on however small a scale, that such a cultivation can succeed.... If once
peasants see peasant proprietors they will have new motive for saving."


CHAPTER XV

VEGETARIANISM


The London Vegetarian Society was founded in 1847. When Newman joined it,
therefore, it was, so to speak, in its childhood. It will easily be
understood, therefore, that much amazement was excited (as is shown by the
following letters), by his fellow guests at some large dinner parties at
which he was present, when Newman withstood valiantly the long siege of
savoury dishes at his elbow; and it seemed as if, though present in body,
he was absent in appetite. This amazement was scarcely lessened when,
after passing seventeen dishes, at length he threw the gates of his
personal fortress open before some small omelet (prepared specially for
him by the cook), and that, practically, formed his entire dinner!

To Newman's mind the theory of Vegetarianism was proved. He published some
_Essays on Diet_; and was always an exponent of its rational claims on
mankind.

Since the days when he wrote up the subject, many people have come over to
his way of thinking, and the way is made easy for those who wish to follow
its _obiter dicta_ for health.

But it is quite as keenly a subject for debate now as formerly among a
large proportion of men, though perhaps few among anti-vegetarians would
dispute the point that there are, and must be, certain conditions involved
by anti-vegetarianism which can hardly be evaded, or defended. One of
these conditions, of course, is that it is not always possible to detect
some diseases in flesh sold for food: and that these diseases are
communicable to man; another, the degrading spectacle of the slaughter-
house; another, the presence in our midst of the butcher's shop, with all
its revolting display: [Footnote: I have not forgotten that M. Zola
contended that the atmosphere of a butcher's shop conduced to the best and
most healthy complexions of those who served in it!] another, as Mr.
Josiah Oldfield points out to us, that "horticulture ... would employ an
enormously greater amount of labour than does stock-raising, and so tend
to afford a counter current to the present downward drift, and to
congested labour centres." Mr. Oldfield urges also that "all elements for
perfect nutrition in assimilable forms are found in a proper vegetarian
dietary."

I have not opportunity for finding out in what years Newman took up this
practical dietary of vegetarianism for himself, but I think it must have
been towards the latter end of his life. Mention will be found in the
Reminiscences contributed by Mrs. Bainsmith, the sculptor, relating to his
bringing across occasionally, when she and her father and mother lived
just opposite the Professor's house at Weston-super-Mare, some
particularly delicious vegetarian dish (concocted by his own cook), which
he had thought his friends could not fail to appreciate.

The following letters have been kindly sent me for reproduction by Mr. F.
P. Doremus in connection with Newman's views on Vegetarianism:--


_To Mr. F. P. Doremus from Professor Newman._

"_21st Sept._, 1883.

"Dear Sir,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I _deliberately prefer_ the rule of our Society and by preference adhere
to it. But I have never interpreted it as severely as I find some to do.
On some occasions, in early years, when I could get no proper vegetarian
food, I have eaten some small bit of ham fat (as I remember on _one_
occasion) to aid dry potato from sticking in my throat. I do not interpret
our rule as forbidding _exceptional_ action _under stress of difficulty_.
But when I found what a fuss was made about this, and saw that many people
took the opportunity of _inferring_ that a simple act implied a habit, I
saw that it was unwise to give anyone a handle of attack....

"I can only say that I interpret our rules conscientiously, and obey them
according to my interpretation faithfully. I do not see in our profession
any vow or engagement comparable to that about _never tasting_
intoxicating drink. If my wife, who is not a professed vegetarian (though
in practice she is all but one), asks me to taste a bit of flesh and
see... whether it is good, I find nothing in our rules to forbid my
gratifying her _curiosity_. In that case I do not take it _as diet_ to
nourish me nor to gratify me. My words of adhesion simply declared that I
had abstained from such _food_ for half a year, and _I intended to abstain
in the future_. Of course this forbids my _habit_ or any _intention_ to
the contrary; but I deprecate interpreting this as a vow or as a trap and
a superstition. One who feels and believes as I do the vast superiority of
our vegetarian food, never can desire, unless perhaps in some abnormal
state of illness, the inferior food....

"Faithfully yours,

"F. W. Newman."


"_1st Oct._, 1883.

"Dear Sir,

"... On reading yours anew after some ten days or less, I think I ought to
notice what you say of an unknown publisher.

"I cannot remember that for twenty years I have ever eaten in the company
of any well-known publisher (anyone known to _me_ as a publisher) except
Mr. Nicolas Trübner _before_ I joined the Vegetarians, and _one other_
more recently. The latter was in the house of a lady friend who always
anxiously humoured me by providing a _special dish_ for me.

"Her cook was not skilful in _our_ cookery, but did her best. I remember
distinctly who was present on this occasion with this respected publisher.
It was a luncheon with meats. I ate at the same table, and it may very
easily have escaped his notice that a different dish was handed to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have several times sat at this friend's table with a large number of
guests. I remember once counting that seventeen dishes were handed to me.
I dined on my own food to the great marvel of those near me....

"I have always maintained that the main reason for proclaiming any _rule_
of diet is, that the outsiders may be afforded facts to aid their own
judgment; and that our engagement has no other element of obligation than
that we shall not vitiate the materials of such judgment.

"Therefore also I have advocated several grades--for instance, an
engagement allowing of _fish_ as food (which many will take who will not
go our length), and another in which absence from home (where one cannot
arrange the cookery) is an exemption. I rejoice also in the Daniclete
rule. Provided that it is KNOWN what is the diet, we give valuable
information."


"_14th Oct._, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I knew that the publisher to whom you referred could only be Mr. Kegan
Paul, who met me some few years back at luncheon in the house of my
friends the Miss Swanwicks: that until _you told_ me his name, I thought
it better not to write to him. But thereupon I wrote and explained to him
that my friend Miss Anna Swanwick knew perfectly that I could not accept
their hospitality (as I have habitually done for a week or more at a time)
if they expected me to partake of any food inconsistent with the rules of
our Society. I long ago furnished her with some of our recipes, and she
_showed her cook_ always to make a _special_ dish for me. At one of their
dinner parties I remember the amazement of guests at my passing _all_ the
dishes, as at first it seemed, until my own little dish came. I told Mr.
Kegan Paul that _he must have mistaken_ what was in my plate (perhaps
crumb omelette _browned over_--which I remember the cook was apt to give
me) for some fish of which he and others were partaking. I have no doubt
that this was the whole matter....

"I am sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


The closing letter in this series is evidently an answer to some questions
from Mr. Doremus as regards Newman's portrait, and as regards the
incidents of his life.

"My life has been eminently uneventful." When one remembers in how many
questions of social reform, of theology, of written matter, Newman had
been concerned, this short sentence strikes one's eyes strangely enough.
For what is an "event"? Surely it does not mean only something which is a
carnal happening: a material outbreak in some form or other which occurs
before our eyes? Surely there are far greater spiritual "events" than
physical ones? And of _this_ kind of event Newman's life had been full.
Originality of thought, of conception, of aim, is the Event which takes
precedence of all other. And these events were strewn like Millet's
"Sower" from side to side of his path: to take the true Latin significance
of the word, they _came out_ from him.


"_31st July_, 1884.

"Dear Sir,

"Your letter has been forwarded to me from home to this place
[Keswick].... Messrs. Elliot and Fry (Baker Street, Portman Square),
recently by pressure induced me to let them take my photograph. In fact
they took four, in different positions, all judged excellent, all of
cabinet size. Each, I believe, costs 2/-. I have none at my disposal. With
or without my leave, anyone can publish them in any magazine. Now, as to
my biography--my life has been eminently uneventful. There is nothing to
tell but my studies, my successive posts as a teacher, and the list of
books, etc., from my pen, _unless one add_ the effects of study on my
CREED, which more than one among you might desire _not_ to make prominent
in the _Food Reformer_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can I assent to the request that I will myself write something? Others
might wish to know in how many _Antis_ I have been and am engaged!!
Certainly more than you will care to make known will go into two pages of
your magazine.

"I am, sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


Two letters to Dr. Nicholson from Newman I think may be given here: one in
April, 1875, and one in June, 1881, as both bear strongly on the
vegetarian question:--


"25 _April_, 1875.

"My dear Nicholson,

"How time flies! Bearded men, active in moral and political questions,
tell me they know nothing of the Austro-Hungarian events, because they
happened when they were children.

"One of them asked me to give a lecture on Austria and Hungary of the
Past, as he was curious and totally ignorant.... We are overrun with every
kind of meeting, and the public are sated....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Happily every day is too short for me, and I cannot have time on my
hands.... I do not know whether you have attended the movement against
vivisection, which is becoming lively. It has long been a dire horror to
me. I rejoice to see that Sir W. Thomson, [Footnote: Sir William Thomson,
born 1843, was late President of the Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland;
Exam. in Surgery, Queen's University and Royal College of Surgeons,
Ireland.] and other scientific men, desire a severe restriction to be put
on it. I agree heartily with those who say we have no more RIGHT to
torture a dog than to torture a man; but I fear that to move at present
with Mr. Jesse for the total prohibition will only give to the worst
practices a longer lease of life.

"Our vegetarianism is becoming more active with the pressure from the high
price of butcher's meat. Not that we make many entire conversions, but
plentiful well-wishers and half-converts, and a great increase in the
belief that _too much_ flesh meat is eaten, and that the doctors are much
to blame for having pressed it as they press wine and ale, calling it
'generous' food. At the same time it is remarkable that the argument
against slaughter-houses and for tenderness to tame animals plays a more
decisive part, especially with women, than economic and sanitary
arguments.... I am ever in experiment on something. At present it is on
cacao butter and vegetable oils. We esteem the cacao butter for _savoury
dishes_ very highly. Messrs. Cadbury sell it 'to me and my friends' for
1s. a lb. In pastry and sweets the chocolate smell offends most people;
but my wife likes it. It is too hard to spread on cold meat.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The gardens are becoming sprightly. I have not had success with new
vegetables, viz. German peas, celery, turnips, Belgian red dwarf beans.
The drought last summer was bad. No _warm rain_ in spring last year.

"Ever yours heartily,

"F. W. Newman."


The following is quoted from the second letter I mentioned:--

"I send to you a Penny Vegetarian Cookery Book herewith. Surely I was a
Vegetarian when I last was with you? I began the practice in 1867. But let
me recite: (1) At breakfast and the third meal I need nothing but what all
fleshmeaters provide. (2) At dinner the utmost that I need is _one_
Vegetarian dish, which may be a soup. (3) If it so happen that you have
any _really solid_ sweet puddings that alone will suffice. (4) For the
_one_ Vegetarian dish good _brown_ bread and butter is an acceptable
substitute, or rather fulfilment. But I confess I am desirous of
propagating everywhere a knowledge of our peculiar dishes, which teach how
to turn to best account the manifold and abundant store of leaves, roots,
and grains, besides pulse.

"My wife is fully able to impart practical knowledge: to please me, and
see that others please me, she has given great attention to Vegetarian
cookery for many years back...."


CHAPTER XVI

NATIVE REPRESENTATION IN INDIAN GOVERNMENT


It is rare indeed that an Englishman looks at India as Francis Newman
looked at it. Fifty years ago--probably longer--he put his finger on
exactly the spot which to-day is the crux which most puzzles and baffles
politicians. In social and intellectual questions his were the clear-
sighted, far-focussed eyes that reached beyond the measures of most men's
minds. He saw clearly, fifty years ago, that India was drawing ever closer
and closer to an inevitable terminus. That she was beginning to recognize
--every year more definitely--her ultimate destination: was beginning to
realize, too, that her foreign rulers were aware also of that terminus,
but were not very anxious that she should reach it. Nay, were practically
rather jogging her elbow to prevent her becoming so conscious of the
direction in which the tide of affairs was drifting.

Nevertheless it is becoming more and more patent to everyone who really
studies the question impartially that things are not what they were fifty
or sixty years ago; that a critical juncture is drawing ever nearer and
nearer--a juncture which inevitably will mean great changes for the
governed and the governors.

Even the slow-moving East does move appreciably in half a century, when
centres of education are doing their best to train Indians in European
ideas of civilization, in European ideas of government, and of the
authority which learning gives. We cannot expect to educate and yet leave
those we educate exactly where we find them; for with education comes
invariably, inevitably, the growth of ideas planted by it--their growth,
and no less invariable fruition. To show someone all that is to be gained
by reaching forward, and then to expect him not to reach, but to remain
quiescent, is the act of a fool.

We have, as a nation, so taken it for granted that India is our own to do
as we like with, that it is perhaps not a pleasant reminder which faces us
as we cast our thoughts back to the initial steps taken by ourselves in
the days which preceded the formation of the Honourable East India
Company. It bids us realize that at first, as Francis Newman says in his
_Dangerous Glory of India_, "neither king, statesmen, nor people ever
deliberately planned from the beginning or desired such an empire. It
began as a set of mercantile establishments which took up private arms for
mere self-defence.... The Honourable East India Company was glad to
legitimate its position by accepting from the Grand Mogul the subordinate
position of a rent-collector; indeed, from the beginning to the end of its
political career it was animated by a consistent and unswerving
disapproval of aggression and fresh conquest."

Since that time, however, the English dominion spread rapidly. Since that
time we became more and more aware of what a splendid field lay ready for
occupation by our surplus population. Since that time we have moved
forward through a vast country that formerly, through lack of European
ways of civilization and co-operation, practically lay at our feet. It is
true that we have done much--very much for India. It is impossible for
anyone to deny that. We have brought to her doors European civilization;
modern points of view; the miracles of new discoveries in science;
inventions for making the wheels of life move easier; opportunities for
cultivating and selling her land's produce, and for its quick transport.
We have lifted her up--yes, but here is where the mental shoe pinches--we
have insisted on preventing her from reaching her full stature. We have
trained her sons to be able to work side by side with ourselves in various
official duties; and then when they are desirous--as is indeed only the
inevitable consequence of their education--of entering the lists side by
side with Englishmen, they find there is no crossing the rubicon which
officially divides the two nations.

It is true that many Anglo-Indians stand aghast at this idea that they
should cross it, but it is only those who are unaware that, as a general
rule, education and environment combined come out as top dog over heredity
in most instances in which it plays a part. It is only those who, when
they go out to India, take, as it were, England with them, and fail to
recognize how far Indian points of view and power of dealing with things
have progressed. It is only those who have forgotten--if indeed they ever
truly realized it--that it is a point of honour that such a proceeding
should be carried out, if we, as Englishmen, remember all that the notable
charter of 1833 bound us to do.

For the charter of 1833 [Footnote: During Lord Grey's ministry.]
definitely promised that native Indian subjects of the English Government
were to be admitted on equal terms with English subjects _to every office
of State_, except that of governor-general or commander-in-chief. Not only
that, but the solemn proclamation of the late Queen was issued in 1858,
pledging the word of Sovereign and Parliament that the "sole aim of
British rule in India was the welfare of the Indian people, and that no
distinction would be made between Indians and Europeans in the government
of the country, on the grounds of race, or creed, or colour."

As Francis Newman says very clearly, it is a "task which we have
voluntarily assumed-to rule India, which means" (the italics are his) "_to
defend it from itself in infancy, to train it into manhood_.... It
presupposes that the people gradually get more and more power until, like
a son who comes of age, the parental control is discontinued.... We cannot
take the last steps first, nor can we abruptly and recklessly resign our
post...."

The Hon. M. G. K. Gokhale, in a keenly interesting paper read before the
East India Association in the summer of 1906, states very definitely the
point of view of educated Indians as regards our unfulfilled pledges of
nearly eighty years since. He says: "Until a few years ago, whatever might
have been thought of the pace at which we were going, there was no general
disposition to doubt the intention of the rulers to redeem their plighted
word. To-day, however, the position is no longer the same.... There is no
doubt that the old faith of the people in the character and ideals of
British rule has been more than shaken.... Half a century of Western
education, and a century of common laws, common administration, common
grievances, common disabilities, have not failed to produce their natural
effect even in India.... Whatever a certain school of officials in India
may say, the bulk of educated Indians have never in the past desired a
severance of the British connection.... "But, he adds: "It is a critical
juncture in the relations between England and India.... The educated
classes in India ... want their country to be a prosperous, self-
governing, integral part of the Empire, like the colonies, and not a mere
poverty-stricken bureaucratically-held possession of that Empire."

Fifty years ago Francis Newman was urging with all the force in his power
--and no one in his day was more farsighted in detecting just that social
reform which would make more and more insistent demand for a hearing, as
decade followed decade--that it was to our own interest as a nation, as
well as the only honourable course open to us, to open up public offices
in India to the educated native. It need not, he showed, be done otherwise
than with caution, and gradually "many variations" were "imaginable; many
different ways might succeed, if only the _right end in view_" was
"steadily held up, namely, to introduce, fully and frankly, _into true
equality with ourselves_" [Footnote: To "exclude natives from all high
office," Sir Charles Napier said once emphatically, "is what debases a
nation."] (again the italics are his) "as quickly as possible, and as many
as possible, of the native Indians whose loyalty could be counted on....
Lord Grey and his coadjutors, in renewing the charter of 1833, understood
most clearly that nothing but an abundance of black faces in the highest
judicature, and intelligent Indians of good station in the high police,
could administer India uprightly.... Behold, Allah hath taken her wits! She
is no more than a wild bird in the wilderness."
It was his one way to save her; for among her people the mad, the blind, and
the idiot are reputed highly favoured of God.

The Sheikh-el-beled shook his head. "She is a blasphemer. Her words are as
the words of one who holds the sacred sword and speaks from the high
pulpit," he said sternly; and his dry lean face hungered like a wolf's
for the blood of the woman.

"She has blasphemed," said the Ulema.

Outside the house, quietness had given place to murmuring, murmuring to a
noise, and a noise to a tumult, through which the yelping and howling of
the village dogs streamed.

"She shall be torn to pieces by wild dogs," said the Sheikh-el-beled.

"Let her choose her own death," said Dicky softly; and, lighting a
cigarette, he puffed it indolently into the face of the Arab sitting
beside him.

For Dicky had many ways of showing hatred, and his tobacco was strong. The
sea has its victims, so had Dicky's tobacco.

"The way of her death shall be as we choose," said the Sheikh-el-beled, his
face growing blacker, his eyes enlarging in fury.

Dicky yawned slightly, his eyes half closed. He drew in a long breath of
excoriating caporal, held it for a moment, and then softly ejected
it in a cloud which brought water to the eyes of the Sheikh-el-beled.

Dicky was very angry, but he did not look it. His voice was meditative,
almost languid as he said:

"That the woman should die seems just and right--if by your kindness
and the mercy of God ye will let me speak. But this is no court, it is
no law: it is mere justice ye would do."
"It is the will of the people," the chief of the Ulema interjected. "It
is the will of Mussulmans, of our religion, of Mahomet," he said.

"True, O beloved of Heaven, who shall live for ever," said Dicky,
his lips lost in an odorous cloud of 'ordinaire.' "But there be evil
tongues and evil hearts; and if some son of liars, some brother of foolish
tales, should bear false witness upon this thing before our master the
Khedive, or his gentle Mouffetish--"
"His gentle Mouffetish" was scarcely the name to apply to Sadik Pasha,
the terrible right-hand of the Khedive. But Dicky's tongue was in his
cheek.

"There is the Mudir," said the Sheikh-el-beled: "he hath said that the
woman should die, if she were found."
"True; but if the Mudir should die, where would be his testimony?"
asked Dicky, and his eyes half closed, as though in idle contemplation
of a pleasing theme. "Now," he added, still more negligently, "I shall
see our master the Khedive before the moon is full. Were it not well that
I should be satisfied for my friends?"
Dicky smiled, and looked into the eyes of the Mussulmans with an
incorruptible innocence; he ostentatiously waved the cigarette smoke
away with the hand on which was the ring the Khedive had given him.

"Thy tongue is as the light of a star," said the bright-eyed Sheikh-el-
beled; "wisdom dwelleth with thee." The woman took no notice of what they
said. Her face showed no sign of what she thought; her eyes were
unwaveringly fixed on the distance.

"She shall choose her own death," said the Sheikhel-beled; "and
I will bear word to the Mudir."
"I dine with the Mudir to-night; I will carry the word," said Dicky;
"and the death that the woman shall die will be the death he will
choose."

The woman's eyes came like lightning from the distance, and fastened upon
his face. Then he said, with the back of his hand to his mouth to hide
a yawn:

"The manner of her death will please the Mudir. It must please him."
"What death does this vulture among women choose to die?" said the
Sheikh-el-beled.

Her answer could scarcely be heard in the roar and the riot surrounding
the hut.

A half-hour later Dicky entered the room where the Mudir sat on his
divan drinking his coffee.

The great man looked up in angry astonishment--for Dicky had come unannounced-and
his fat hands twitched on his breast, where they had been folded. His
sallow face turned a little green.
Dicky made no salutation.

"Dog of an infidel!" said the Mudir under his breath.

Dicky heard, but did no more than fasten his eyes upon the Mudir for a
moment.

"Your business?" asked the Mudir.

"The business of the Khedive," answered Dicky, and his riding-whip tapped
his leggings. "I have come about the English girl."

As he said this, he lighted a cigarette slowly, looking, as it were casually,
into the Mudir's eyes.

The Mudir's hand ran out like a snake towards a bell on the cushions, but
Dicky shot forward and caught the wrist in his slim, steel-like fingers.
There was a hard glitter in his eyes as he looked down into the eyes of the
master of a hundred slaves, the ruler of a province.

"I have a command of the Khedive to bring you to Cairo, and to kill you
if you resist," said Dicky. "Sit still--you had better sit still," he
added, in a soothing voice behind which was a deadly authority.

The Mudir licked his dry, colourless lips, and gasped, for he might
make an outcry, but he saw that Dicky would be quicker. He had
been too long enervated by indulgence to make a fight.

"You'd better take a drink of water," said Dicky, seating himself upon a
Louis Quinze chair, a relic of civilisation brought by the Mudir from
Paris into an antique barbarism.

Then he added sternly: "What have you done with the English girl?"

"I know nothing of an English girl," answered the Mudir.

Dicky's words were chosen as a jeweller chooses stones for the ring
of a betrothed woman. "You had a friend in London, a brother of hell
like yourself. He, like you, had lived in Paris; and that is why this thing
happened. You had your own women slaves from Kordofan, from Circassia,
from Syria, from your own land. It was not enough: you must have an
English girl in your harem. You knew you could not buy her, you knew
that none would come to you for love, neither the drab nor the lady.

None would lay her hand in that of a leprous dog like yourself.

So you lied, your friend lied for you--sons of dogs of liars all of you,
beasts begotten of beasts! You must have a governess for your children,
forsooth! And the girl was told she would come to a palace. She came to a
stable, and to shame and murder."
Dicky paused.

The fat, greasy hands of the Mudir fumbled towards the water-glass. It was
empty, but he raised it to his lips and drained the air.

Dicky's eyes fastened him like arrows. "The girl died an hour ago," he
continued.

"I was with her when she died. You must pay the price, Abbas Bey."
He paused.

There was a moment's silence, and then a voice, dry like that of
one who comes out of chloroform, said: "What is the price?"

The little touch of cruelty in Dicky's nature, working with a sense
of justice and an ever-ingenious mind, gave a pleasant quietness to the
inveterate hate that possessed him.

He thought of another woman--of her who was to die to-morrow.

"There was another woman," said Dicky: "one of your own people.

She was given a mind and a soul. You deserted her in your harem--what was
there left for her to think of but death? She had no child. But death
was a black prospect; for you would go to heaven, and she would be in
the outer darkness; and she loved you! A woman's brain thinks wild things.
She fled from you, and went the pilgrimage to Mecca. She did all that
a man might do to save her soul, according to Mahomet. She is to die
to-morrow by the will of the people--and the Mudir of the Fayoum."
Dicky paused once more. He did not look at the Mudir, but out of the window
towards the Bahr-el-Yusef, where the fellaheen of the Mudir's
estate toiled like beasts of burden with the barges and the great
khiassas laden with cotton and sugar-cane.

"God make your words merciful!"

said the Mudir.

"What would you have me do?"
"The Khedive, our master, has given me your life," said Dicky. "I will
make your end easy. The woman has done much to save her soul. She buries
her face in the dust because she hath no salvation. It is written in the
Koran that a man may save the soul of his wife. You have your choice:
will you come to Cairo to Sadik Pasha, and be crucified like a bandit
of your own province, or will you die with the woman in the Birket-el-Kurun
to-morrow at sunrise, and walk with her into the Presence and save her
soul, and pay the price of the English life?"
"Malaish!" answered the Mudir. "Water," he added quickly.

He had no power to move, for fear had paralysed him. Dicky brought him a
goolah of water.

The next morning, at sunrise, a strange procession drew near to the
Birket-el-Kurun. Twenty ghaffirs went ahead with their naboots; then came
the kavasses, then the Mudir mounted, with Dicky riding beside, his hand
upon the holster where his pistol was. The face of the Mudir was like a
wrinkled skin of lard, his eyes had the look of one drunk with hashish.
Behind them came the woman, and now upon her face there was only a look of
peace. The distracted gaze had gone from her eyes, and she listened without
a tremor to the voices of the wailers behind.

Twenty yards from the lake, Dicky called a halt--Dicky, not the Mudir.
The soldiers came forward and put heavy chains and a ball upon the woman's
ankles. The woman carried the ball in her arms to the very verge of the
lake, by the deep pool called "The Pool of the Slaughtered One."
Dicky turned to the Mudir. "Are you ready?" he said.

"Inshallah!" said the Mudir.

The soldiers made a line, but the crowd overlapped the line. The fellaheen
and Bedouins looked to see the Mudir summon the Ulema to condemn the woman
to shame and darkness everlasting. But suddenly Abbas Bey turned and
took the woman's right hand in his left.

Her eyes opened in an ecstasy. "O lord and master, I go to heaven with
thee!" she said, and threw herself forward.

Without a sound the heavy body of the Mudir lurched forward with her,
and they sank into the water together. A cry of horror and wonder burst
from the crowd.

Dicky turned to them, and raised both hands.

"In the name of our master the Khedive!" he cried.

Above the spot where the two had sunk floated the red tarboosh of
the Mudir of the Fayoum.

A TREATY OF PEACE
Mr. William Sowerby, lieutenant in the Mounted Infantry, was in a difficult
situation, out of which he was little likely to come with credit--or his
life. It is a dangerous thing to play with fire, so it is said; it is a
more dangerous thing to walk rough-shod over Oriental customs. A man ere
this has lost his life by carrying his shoe-leather across the threshold
of a mosque, and this sort of thing William Sowerby knew, and of his
knowledge he heeded. He did not heed another thing, however; which is, that
Oriental ladies are at home to but one man in all the world, and that your
acquaintance with them must be modified by a mushrabieh screen, a yashmak,
a shaded, fast-driving brougham, and a hideous eunuch.

William Sowerby had not been long in Egypt, he had not travelled very far
or very wide in the Orient; and he was an impressionable and harmless young
man whose bark and bite were of equal value. His ideas of a harem were
inaccurately based on the legend that it is necessarily the habitation of
many wives and concubines and slaves.

It had never occurred to him that there might be a sort of family life in
a harem; that a pasha or a bey might have daughters as well as wives;
or might have only one wife--which is less expensive; and that a harem is
not necessarily the heaven of a voluptuary, an elysium of rosy-petalled
love and passion. Yet he might have known it all, and should have known
it all, if he had taken one-fifth of the time to observe and study
Egyptian life which he gave to polo and golf and racquets. Yet even if he
had known the life from many stand-points he would still have cherished
illusions, for, as Dicky Donovan, who had a sense of satire, said in some
satirical lines, the cherished amusements of more than one dinner
table:

"Oh, William William Sowerby Has come out for to see The way of a bimbashi
With Egyptian Cavalree.
But William William Sowerby His eyes do open wide When he sees the
Pasha's chosen In her "bruggam" and her pride.
And William William Sowerby, He has a tender smile, Which will bring him
in due season To the waters of the Nile And the cheery crocodile!"

It can scarcely be said that Dicky was greatly surprised when Mahommed
Yeleb, the servant of "William William Sowerby," came rapping at his
door one hot noon-day with a dark tale of disaster to his master.

This was the heart of the thing--A languid, bored, inviting face, and two
dark curious eyes in a slow-driving brougham out on the Pyramid Road;
William's tender, answering smile; his horse galloping behind to within
a discreet distance of the palace, where the lady alighted, shadowed by the
black-coated eunuch. The same thing for several days, then a device
to let the lady know his name, then a little note half in Arabic,
half in French, so mysterious, so fascinating--William Sowerby walked on
air!
Then, a nocturnal going forth, followed by his frightened servant, who dared
not give a warning, for fear of the ever-ready belt which had scarred
his back erstwhile; the palace wall, an opening door, the figure of
his master passing through, the closing gate; and then no more--
nothing more, for a long thirty-six hours!

Mahommed Yeleb's face would have been white if his skin had permitted-- it
was a sickly yellow; his throat was guttural with anxiety, his eyes furtive
and strained, for was he not the servant of his master, and might not he
be marked for the early tomb if, as he was sure, his master was
gone that way?

"Aiwa, efendi, it is sure," he said to Dicky Donovan, who never was
surprised at anything that happened. He had no fear of anything that
breathed; and he kept his place with Ismail because he told the truth
pitilessly, was a poorer man than the Khedive's barber, and a beggar
beside the Chief Eunuch; also, because he had a real understanding of the
Oriental mind, together with a rich sense of humour.

"What is sure?"

said Dicky to the Arab with assumed composure; for it was important that
he should show neither anxiety nor astonishment, lest panic seize the man,
and he should rush abroad with grave scandal streaming from his mouth, and
the English fat be in the Egyptian fire for ever. "What is sure, Mahommed
Yeleb?" repeated Dicky, lighting a cigarette idly.

"It is as God wills; but as the tongue of man speaks, so is he--Bimbashi
Sowerby, my master--swallowed up these thirty-six hours in the
tomb prepared for him by Selamlik Pasha."

Dicky felt his eyelids twitch, and he almost gave a choking groan of anxiety,
for Selamlik Pasha would not spare the invader of his harem; an English
invader would be a delicate morsel for his pitiless soul. He shuddered
inwardly at the thought of what might have occurred, what might occur
still.

If Sowerby had been trapped and was already dead, the knowledge would creep
through the bazaars like a soft wind of the night, and all the Arab world
would rejoice that a cursed Inglesi, making the unpardonable breach
of their code, had been given to the crocodiles, been smothered, or
stabbed, or tortured to death with fire.

       And, if it were so, what could be done?

Could England make a case of it, avenge the life of this young fool who had
disgraced her in the eyes of the world, of the envious French in
Cairo, and of that population of the palaces who hated her because Englishmen
were the enemies of backsheesh, corruption, tyranny, and slavery?

And to what good the attempt? Exists the personal law of the Oriental
palace, and who may punish any there save by that personal law? What outside
law shall apply to anything that happens within those mysterious
walls?

Who shall bear true witness, when the only judge is he whose palace it is?
Though twenty nations should unite to judge, where might proof be found--inside
the palace, where all men lie and bear false witness?

If Sowerby was not dead, then resort to force? Go to Selamlik Pasha the
malignant, and demand the young officer? How easy for Selamlik Pasha to
deny all knowledge of his existence! Threaten Selamlik--and raise a
Mahommedan crusade? That would not do.

Say nought, then, and let Sowerby, who had thrust his head into the
jaws of the tiger, get it out as best he might, or not get it out,
as the case might be?
Neither was that possible to Dicky Donovan, even if it were the
more politic thing to do, even if it were better for England's name.
Sowerby was his friend, as men of the same race are friends together
in a foreign country. Dicky had a poor opinion of Sowerby's sense
or ability, and yet he knew that if he were in Sowerby's present
situation--living or dead-- Sowerby would spill his blood a hundred
useless times, if need be, to save him.
He had no idea of leaving Sowerby where he was, if alive; or of not
avenging him one way or another if dead. But how that might be he
was not on the instant sure. He had been struck as with a sudden
blindness by the news, though he showed nothing of this to Mahommed
Yeleb. His chief object was to inspire the Arab with confidence,
since he was probably the only man outside Selamlik's palace who
knew the thing as yet. It was likely that Selamlik Pasha would be
secret till he saw whether Sowerby would be missed and what inquiry
was made for him. It was important to Dicky, in the first place,
that this Mahommed Yeleb be kept quiet, by being made a confidant
of his purposes so far as need be, an accomplice in his efforts
whatever they should be. Kept busy, with a promise of success and
backsheesh when the matter was completed, the Arab would probably
remain secret. Besides, as Dicky said to himself, while Mahommed
kept his head, he would not risk parading himself as the servant
of the infidel who had invaded the Pasha's harem. Again, it was
certain that he had an adequate devotion to his master, who had
given him as many ha'pence as kicks, and many cast-off underclothes
and cigarettes.
Thus it was that before Dicky had arranged what he should do, though
plans were fusing in his brain, he said to Mahommed Yeleb seriously,
as befitting the crime Sowerby had committed--evenly, as befitted
the influence he wished to have over the Arab: "Keep your tongue
between your teeth, Mahommed. We will pull him through all right."

"But, effendi, whom God honour, for greatness is in all thy ways,
friend of the Commander of the Faithful as thou art--but, saadat
el basha, if he be dead?"
"He is not dead. I know it by the eyes of my mind, Mahommed--yea,
by the hairs of my head, he is not dead!"
"Saadat el basha, thou art known as the truth-teller and the
incorruptible--this is the word of the Egyptian and of the infidel
concerning thee. I kiss thy feet. For it is true he hath deserved
death, but woe be to him by whom his death cometh! And am I not his
servant to be with him while he hath life, and hath need of me? If
thou sayest he is alive, then is he alive, and my heart rejoices."

Dicky scarcely heard what the Arab said, for the quick conviction
he had had that Sowerby was alive was based on the fact, suddenly
remembered, that Selamlik Pasha had only returned from the Fayoum
this very morning, and that therefore he could not as yet have had
any share in the fate of Sowerby, but had probably been sent for
by the Chief Eunuch. It was but an hour since that he had seen
Selamlik Pasha driving hastily towards his palace.
His mind was instantly made up, his plans formed to his purpose.
"Listen, Mahommed," he said to the Arab. "Listen to each word I
say, as though it were the prayer to take thee into Paradise. Go
at once to Selamlik Pasha. Carry this ring the Khedive gave to
me--he will know it.
Do not be denied his presence. Say that it is more than life and
death; that it is all he values in the world. Once admitted, say
these words:
'Donovan Pasha knows all, and asks an audience at midnight in this
palace. Until that hour Donovan Pasha desires peace. For is it not
the law, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth? Is not a market
a place to buy and sell?'"
Four times did Dicky make the Arab repeat the words after him, till
they ran like water from his tongue, and dismissed him upon the
secret errand with a handful of silver.
Immediately the Arab had gone, Dicky's face flushed with excitement,
in the reaction from his lately assumed composure.Such things are not possibilities merely and dreams;
they are stern realities, and the law gives her no redress."

When one thinks of all that these words mean, one is face to face with the
almost unthinkable fact that the case of the woman in England is unjust
beyond description, and for this reason, that, as Newman says, "Men, who
alone make the laws, make them with but little account of woman." At home
with her children she is defenceless. She has no power over them, and her
husband is not bound to "maintain" her, notwithstanding the sentence,
which English law has made absolutely meaningless, of his marriage vow to
her: "With all my worldly goods I thee endow."

In the world, if she have no husband or be unmarried, she is not a
"person" in a legal sense; and during election time her house is
described, in canvassing for votes, as having "no occupier"! In the world,
too, she is unable to obtain a fair wage for her work. She may do the work
as well as man, but nevertheless, in most cases, her pay is less. Mr.
Johnston tells us that the average male worker's wage has been calculated
to be about 18s., but the average woman worker's wage is only about 7s.
And when women find out these many injustices suffered at home and in the
world by their sex, as Miss Christabel Pankhurst says, they are absolutely
unable to right these wrongs, for "women have no political power."

Here is the pivot round which the wrongs of women revolve--her lack of
legal status, her voicelessness as regards the laws of her country, the
country which is so openly irrational as to count her a "person" when it
wants to get a tax out of her, but refuses to do so at any other time when
she has something to ask of it in return!

Once the parliamentary vote is given to women, the same results would
follow in England as have followed elsewhere. Wages and hours of labour
are made just for women, as in many respects they have been now made for
men. The laws of divorce are the same. Mothers are made joint guardians of
their children with their fathers. The age of protection for girls is
raised to 18. [Footnote: At the present moment, by the English law, a girl
can contract a valid marriage at twelve years of age; a boy at fourteen.
(See _Legal Status of Women_, by H. H. Schloesser.)] In New South Wales,
after the women were given the vote, Dr. Mackellar brought in a bill to
deal with the protection of illegitimate children, which has answered
admirably; while in New Zealand and Australia the Wages Board, which the
women's vote helped to pass, has raised in both countries the wages of
women from 5s. to l6s. per week for the same amount of work done. And in
other respects it has abolished sweating--that crucial question of crucial
questions in England to-day.

There is another point, too, amongst many others, in which the vote helped
the national life in Australia in the giving of old age pensions. Perhaps
had women the vote here in England, the shameful system in which old men
and women are separated in the last years of their life, as the workhouses
ordain, would be altered. And this is a question which demands immediate
attention--_immediate_ attention; for more than £26,000,000 are paid by
taxpayers each year to be spent in great part on our wretched system of
poor laws.

Francis Newman was strongly against poor laws administered as they are in
England to-day, as, indeed, is every thoughtful man. He was also strongly
of opinion that there should be women on juries in some cases. And indeed
it is a fact that women magistrates, as well as women jurors, are most
certainly a _sine quâ non_ in those cases where, at the present moment,
owing to juries being composed of men only, common justice for the
unrepresented Englishwoman in relation with the other sex is not, in a
great proportion of cases, rendered her. But even were women made eligible
for these offices, it would be no new thing, for in Mary Tudor's reign
there were two women appointed justices of the peace; and, of course,
always there has been a provision in law for "a jury of matrons" in
certain cases.

Indeed, when one goes far enough back in research into most questions, the
invariable lesson, is taught us, which we are always so reluctant, in our
cocksureness of the "antiquity" of our present-day conditions of life, to
learn, and we find that our arrangements very often are _not_ "as it was
in the beginning," but only mushroom growths of a decade or two. As Mrs.
Wolstenholme Elmy very justly says in her recent pamphlet on "Woman's
Franchise," women possessed voting rights from time immemorial, and the
year 1832 was the year when they were dispossessed of many ancient rights
by the Reform Act passed in that year.

As regards other disabilities of women, Francis Newman wrote very fully
and very strongly upon them, and it is impossible to leave them
unmentioned here. In 1869 he wrote: "There is one important matter which
young men need specially to be taught, viz. that at no time of life is any
man ... exempt from the essential duty of curbing animal impulses....
Nothing so paralyzes his force of Will as to be told that some men have
from God the gift of continence, and _others have it not_. This doctrine
is disastrously prominent in the Anglican marriage service, and is
borrowed from St. Paul. But that great and deep-hearted apostle was
unmarried and without personal experience. He writes, not as one revealing
supernatural communications, _but as imparting his best wisdom_.... A
general and just inference is, that a firm self-restraint is necessary and
salutary for every man."

It is impossible to write more strongly and clearly of the wickedness of
women's ancestral personal rights being swept away than does Newman in
articles published in the fourth volume of his _Miscellanies_. He does not
disguise the shameful state of the law as it affects woman to-day, and as
it is carried out by Government--that law which makes wrongdoing so easy
and unpunishable for man, and so hard and unjust to woman. The
unjustifiableness of certain laws was shown up with no uncertain pen by
him. He was himself convinced of their iniquity; and once convinced, he
stood forward as a modern John the Baptist, spared no one, and
passionately accused his countrymen of the injustice, immorality, and
cruelty of their making one law for men and another for women. He
inveighed against the world's point of view of this subject: and this not
once, nor twice, but constantly; and urged with all his might that these
wrongs to his countrywomen should be righted. Nevertheless his articles,
many of them, are forgotten. The dust of neglect is lying thick upon them
on many an unused shelf to-day. His voice has long been silent; and no
doubt it has been said of him (as it was by a Church dignitary of Father
Dolling at his death): "We shan't be worried any more by _him_ now about
the righting of social abuses." Laws against which Newman declaimed are
not altered yet, and we are a long way from those far-reaching reforms he
advocated. But the words he wrote are not dead. They are in our midst to-
day, and they stir depths to-day in the hearts of his countrymen in
suggestions towards social reformation; towards the righting of wrongs
just as glaring to-day as they were a century ago. Questions which can
never be put superficially aside, by men who, like Newman, cannot endure
to leave a social wrong unredressed, if they can by any searching find the
remedy.


CHAPTER XVIII

FRANCIS NEWMAN AND HIS RELIGION


More than one person has said to me in connection with this memoir: "If
the whole of Frank Newman's heterodox religious opinions be not given, the
book will lose half its point."

To my mind there are quite two, if not more, sides to this question. My
strongest argument, however, in favour of only dealing briefly with them
is this: It is quite true that Agnosticism more or less held its sway over
him during the years between 1834 and 1879. I am quite aware of how
tremendous a slice that is of a man's life. But it is not an overwhelming
testimony when one comes to look at it not from the worldly point of view.

There are periods in which Time--as Time--seems almost beside the mark. "A
thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday." When the Israelites had
once achieved their journey through the wilderness--nay, even through the
earlier time of tyranny amongst the Egyptians-I suppose the actual years
seemed as a dream _when one awaketh_.

I myself have known forty years pass, for someone afflicted with a
terrible mental disability, as a watch in the night, once light pierced
through the clouds of the long-darkened mental vision. Time, as sex, is
purely temporary. In this present world we cannot do without either, but
when Time itself passes for good, the old implements which were necessary
to make the clock go round will pass likewise.

So, in Newman's case, when that tremendous slice in a man's life--forty-
five years--was overpast, he sloughed off the old garments of Agnosticism,
and came back to the Christian faith professed by him in early childhood
so conscientiously--and, indeed, up to the year after his missionary
journey, 1834.

This fact influences me largely in the matter of dealing only briefly with
the time-as regards his religious professions--which lies between these
two dates, and for these reasons, which I hope to prove, carry
considerable weight.

The first is that people are mistaken in considering that it was his
religious opinions which made Newman great. The real valour of his life
was shown in the splendid aspects of Social Reform which he showed to the
world; the way of the New Citizenship, of the New Patriotism, which he was
for ever preaching and writing about. He was the Perseus of To-day whose
wholehearted efforts were spent in freeing the Andromedas from their
antiquated bonds and fetters; whose good sword was ever pointed at the
throats of the dragons which lift their ugly heads against freedom--
against reforms of all sorts; the dragons who take so long in dying.

The door was slightly ajar, and the man who was talking was evidently
on the point of departure, because she glimpsed his hand upon the
handle and his voice was so distinct that he must have been quite near
her.

"----three o'clock in the morning.

You can't miss the aerodrome. It is a mile out of Bromley on the main road
and on the right. You will see three red lamps burning in a
triangle."
The aerodrome! She put her hand to her mouth to suppress an
exclamation.
Pinto was talking, but his voice was a mumble.He said in it that he was
looking for a "religion which shall combine the tenderness, humility, and
disinterestedness that are the glories of the purest Christianity, with
that activity of intellect and untiring pursuit of truth." [Footnote: He
said once he wished for a religion which should combine the best out of
all religions in the world.]

When he mentions that, in his time, "of young men at Oxford not one in
five seemed to have any convictions at all," he seems to imply that it was
on account of the desire for a new religion; whereas it was far more
traceable to the after-effects of Calvinism and Puritanism, which have
stuck, as spiritual limpets, to England's religious rocks ever since they
first reached them. They are certainly looser in their hold than was the
case formerly, but they are there still.

_Phases of Faith_ was published in 1850. But the year before a book of far
more religious suggestiveness had come out, though that too was a book of
opposition to the accepted forms of religion, _The Soul: its Sorrows and
Aspirations_.

Regarded as a work postulating a new spiritual point of view, it was vague
and unsatisfying. It was without form and void. It desired that most
unsatisfying thing, a religion with no dogmas:--those stakes which
preserve the ground on which grow the flowers of religious truth, from
those who come but to spoil and destroy.

Yet, with all its lack of convincing power, and those parts of it which
are, like _Phases of Faith_, painful reading and profitless--to
Christians--there are here and again striking passages such as this, whose
beauty cannot fail to appeal to us: "None can enter the kingdom of Heaven
without becoming a little child. But behind and after this there is a
mystery revealed to but few; namely, if the Soul is to go on into higher
spiritual blessedness, it must become a _woman_. Yes, however manly thou
be among men, it must learn to love being dependent; must lean on God, not
solely from distress and alarm, but because it does not like independence
or loneliness.... God is _not_ a stern Judge; exacting every tittle of
some law from us.... He does not act towards us (spiritually) by
generalities ... but His perfection consists in dealing with each case by
itself as if there were no other...." And again: "The Bible is a blessed
book if we do not stifle the Holy Spirit within us."

The second reason why I touch on these religious opinions (before
mentioned) but briefly, is because of my own _strong impression_ since I
have been writing this memoir, that in that next chapter of existence upon
which Newman has now entered, he may not impossibly be nearer the Light,
the religious truth, which here he so earnestly sought, but mistakenly;
and in his regret for his own phases of religious unfaith, now cast aside,
may not wish them to be recapitulated anew. There is a certain pathetic
sentence of his, in a letter in later life, which seems to give a certain
amount of confirmation to this idea: "It is a sad thing to have printed
erroneous fact. I have three or four times contradicted and renounced the
passage ... _but I cannot reach those whom I have misled_."

I have mentioned before that Francis Newman returned to his earlier faith
in Christianity a few years before his death.

It remains, therefore, to give the proofs which have been put into my
hands regarding this fact.

Two of his very greatest friends, Anna Swanwick and Dr. Martineau,
received from his own hands the knowledge that he wished it to be known
that he died a Christian. I shall give a quotation from one of Newman's
last letters to the former, from Miss Bruce's _Memoir of Recollections of
Anna Swanwick_. In almost illegible writing, he says:--

"If I live through this year, I hope to effect, by aid of a friend's eyes,
a third ... edition of my _Paul of Tarsus_, with grateful acknowledgment
that, in spite of a few details, I more and more come round to the
substance of the views of my honoured friend, James Martineau. Also I
close by my now sufficient definition of a Christian--'one, who in heart,
and steadily, is a disciple of Jesus in upholding the prayer called the
Lord's Prayer as the highest and purest in any known national religion.' I
think J. M. will approve this."

I should also like to add Miss Bruce's own words in this connection:--

"He" (Newman) "was drawn back at the end of his long life by the sweet
reasonableness and loving sympathy of his friend Anna Swanwick, and the
teaching of Dr. Martineau."

Also these words from a letter written by Anna Swanwick: "It is delightful
to me to think how, when the veil shall have fallen from the eyes of our
friend" (F. W. Newman), "he will love and venerate Him in Whose footsteps
he is unconsciously treading." Yet I must add here that in a letter from
Newman to Anna Swanwick (to which I had access) in 1897, there is no
definite statement of his belief in Immortality. "If God gives me
immortality, I am content. If it pleases Him to annihilate me, it is well.
Let Him do with me as seemeth to Him good."

As regards Dr. Martineau's statement, I quote now from a letter received
by me from Mr. William Tallack, who gave me particulars of a letter
written in 1903, by Mr. W. Garrett Horder, on a meeting he had with Dr.
Martineau:--

"Not more than three or four years before his death I was sitting in an
omnibus at Oxford Circus, when Dr. Martineau, accompanied by his daughter,
got in and took seats by my side. After I had confessed my pleasure at
seeing him, he said, 'I think you ought to know that the other day I had a
letter from Frank Newman saying that, when he died, he wished it to be
known that he died in the Christian faith.'"

To my mind these strong assertions that Newman wished it known that he
"died a Christian," which he wrote to two of his closest friends, speak
for themselves.

There was also another, Rev. J. Temperley Grey, who visited Newman
constantly in his last illness, and who said of his final conversion these
words, in the "In Memoriam" address he gave at Newman's funeral:--

"Of late his" (Newman's) "attitude towards Christ had undergone a great
change. He confessed to me only very recently that for years he had held
on to Christianity by the skirts of S. Paul; 'but now,' he said, 'Paul is
less and less, and Christ is more and more.' He made this statement with
an emphasis and an emotion which conveyed the impression that he wished it
to be regarded as a final testimony."

To those of us who are Christians these are strong words, showing clearly
where, in his last illness and failing strength, he had turned for final
help.

Some have called Francis Newman an atheist. But he was no atheist. A
theist for many years he was: but it was because he was unable to
reconcile certain historical difficulties, or to get rid of certain
earlier Calvinistic tendencies, or to accept certain dogmas which seemed
to him impossible of acceptation, and in this last respect he is certainly
not alone.

Mr. Temperley Grey's testimony to Newman as a fellow townsman, during his
last days at Weston-super-Mare (he died 6th Oct., 1897), shows him to us
as a man who _acted_ to his fellow men, and women, as a Christian should,
although he did not, till near the end, _believe_ as one.

"Without depreciating in the least his illustrious brother, it may truly
be said that while the one was a saint in the cloister, the other was a
saint in the very thick of life's battle. [Footnote: "Henry Newman...
stood for a spiritual Tory; while Francis Newman was a spiritual Radical"
(_Morning Leader_, October, 1897).] ... I would speak of him rather as the
neighbour and townsman who moved to and fro among us ... and whom,
distrusting at first, we ultimately reverenced and loved for his nobility
of character, his simplicity of life, his tenderness of conscience, his
devoutness of spirit, and his generosity of heart.

"Theologically we were far apart, but we were entirely with him in his
enthusiasm for righteousness, his sympathy with downtrodden and oppressed
peoples.... We were with him also in his untiring efforts to secure for
women their rightful place in the shaping of our national life, and in his
splendid protests against the tortures inflicted in the name of science on
the poor, helpless animals, our dumb brothers. To hear the old man
eloquently discourse upon these themes was to be morally uplifted....
Those of us who were admitted into the inner circle of his friends were
profoundly impressed by his devoutness. He lived as in the Presence of
God, and his prayers in the home, so simple, so trustful, so reverential,
were always a means of grace, a real refreshment.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He was a true philanthropist. He championed the cause of the oppressed
everywhere.... A room in his house was set apart as a guest-chamber for
persons needing a change to the seaside, but whose circumstances barred
the way; and not a few were fresh equipped for the work and battle of
life, as a result of his thoughtful hospitality.... Francis Newman stood
by himself in his greatness, his goodness, his simplicity, and we shall
not find his like again.... Above all, our friend was a truth seeker. This
was the ruling passion of his life."

Mrs. Temperley Grey tells me that it was always Newman's first wife's
great hope that her husband should be the means, through his ministrations
during the last part of Newman's life, of leading him back to his original
faith. Mrs. Newman used deeply to regret Newman's lack of definite belief,
but always said when the subject was raised, "Cannot they understand that
my husband is under a cloud--a mist, as it were?" Both the brothers, the
Cardinal and Francis Newman, through the greater part of their lives had
been restlessly searching for truth--for certainty--in their faith.
Calvinism had been the black cloud under which they had both been brought
up. If the _obiter dictum_ of a celebrated Cardinal in the Roman Church be
correct: "Give _me_ the child till he is seven years old, and he will be a
Jesuit all his life," then indeed it shows the tremendous power of habit,
for it was only through much tribulation, through passionate inward
wrestlings with those terrible tenets, and through many searchings of
heart, that either brother made his way out of its toils at length. The
Cardinal sought above all things Truth, through authority; no one will
forget those soul-stirring words of his in his _Apologia pro Vitâ Suâ_ in
which he speaks of the great peace that at last quieted his doubts and
fears when he was received into the Roman Church. To many of us Authority
_is_ the life-buoy which supports us "o'er crag and torrent till the night
is gone"; but Francis Newman could not believe in it. "Authority is the
bane," he would say, "of religion." He must see with his intellectual
eyes, to be saved. He must see and touch Truth for himself; his
intellectual self must be convinced, or he must stand outside the creeds
he knew--a questioner still.

But he was honest and open in his aloofness. Did it mean loss of a
distinguished brilliant worldly career (as it did at Oxford in 1830)?
Well, then the career _must_ be lost, for he could not bring himself to
sign to doctrines which he did not believe. Did it mean unpopularity, that
he held certain views on Social Reform? Well, rather than compromise,
rather than temporize, he _would_ stand out alone rather than yield an
iota of what he held to be the true Progressive Aims for People and Land.
Only--and this was a flaw, and no small one either--he often wrote his
religious opinions so openly as to pain his readers. In many of his
letters which I have read there are expressions relating to the religious
dogmas held by his correspondents which are bluntly, unrestrainedly,
bitterly used. It is true that often, at the close of a letter, there
follows a hope that he had not hurt his friends' feelings; but that he
must, at all costs, be open as to his own beliefs. But that apology only
came as an after-thought, as it were as an attempt to dress the wound
which he himself had made, and is quite unable to do away with the
impression produced by the written word. _Litera scripta manet_.

In writing on "The National Church" thirty-three years after he had
refused to sign the Thirty-nine Articles, he said, with emphasis,
"Truthfulness of the _individual_ man is essential to moral worth; but for
this very reason the _system_ of the Church must be lax in order to allow
truthfulness to individuals." This is curious reasoning, and subversive of
the idea of Unity. Still, as no one can deny that as Life implies
Progression, so as regards the Churches, the inspired words that they
should be "led into all truth" surely allow for progression also into
higher regions of knowledge and methods of teaching. To allow for this
spirit of progression Newman held that a State Church should not be tied
down to fixed conditions. "No general Church system will go so far as the
foremost minds.... All the moderate and wisest historians of the Anglican
Church have extolled its foundations. They have judged that, take it as a
whole, the Reformation went as far as the collective nation was then able
to go." That it "was necessary to reform it in the sixteenth century in
order to harmonize it with the higher intelligence of the best minds, so
far as could be done without making it useless to the inferior minds." All
this has a certain truth, but when all is said, the fact forces itself
upon one that after all it is a matter for debate whether the Reformation
was a "progressive" movement at all: whether it did not in reality delay
progression. For it is well known to-day that it was really managed by the
machinations of one of the most selfish and unprincipled of kings
[Footnote: Whose conduct at this time largely hinged on the refusal of the
Pope to grant him his wished-for divorce from Katherine.]--who was only
progressive in the matter of wives--and by his ministers, who were, many
of them, men of vile characters and greed. As to motive, it is very patent
to-day what _that_ was. It was that of the man who covets his neighbour's
goods, i.e. the lands and moneys of the monasteries and churches, and who
whitewashes his sin when his desire is satisfied. There is besides
sufficient proof to-day that the great bulk of the unrepresented nation
did _not_ regard this act of wholesale robbery as "lawful and necessary,"
nor that it "harmonized" the Church "with the higher intelligence of the
best minds."

To the end of his life (from his Oxford days to his death), of course,
Newman was never greatly in sympathy with the Anglican Church. He did not,
even at the end, own himself bound by her dogmas or obedient to her
conditions. To go further into the question is, I think, not desirable
here. It is enough to say that though _he was outside the visible Church_,
yet he was, in life and spirit, "not far off". As was said of Stanley, "he
believed more than he knew." His "life was in the right," though his
doubts and rationalism led him into unbeliefs, which only at the close of
his long life he renounced. And he had a far deeper longing for religious
truth than have many conventional Churchmen.


CHAPTER XIX

LAST YEARS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SOME LETTERS RELATING TO THE _EARLY LIFE
OF THE CARDINAL_


It will be remembered that Francis Newman retired from his official duties
at University College in 1863, with the title Emeritus Professor. As most
of us are aware, this word "Emeritus" was originally given to Roman
soldiers who had served out their term and been discharged, on the
understanding of being given a settled sum of money which was practically
the equivalent of our English half-pay. The term is now used to designate
a professor who has been "honourably relieved" of his office, either
because of physical disability or on account of a term of long service
fulfilled. It is, in effect, a retiring pension.

As will have been seen by letters from Newman which precede this chapter,
he retired from the office of Professor, but in no sense from his work of
writing, studying, and lecturing. The enormous number of books published
will testify to this. His five volumes of _Miscellanies_, his
_Reminiscences of Two Exiles, Europe of the Near Future_, translation of
the _Odes of Horace_, [Footnote: Which did not meet with the approval of
Matthew Arnold.] _Handbook and Dictionary of Modern Arabic, Kabail
Vocabulary, Libyan Vocabulary, Text of the Iguvine Inscriptions, Christian
Commonwealth, History of the Hebrew Monarchy, Hebrew Theism, Early Life of
Cardinal Newman, Anglo-Saxon Abolition of Negro Slavery_, not to mention
many others, alone show how writing largely filled his days and occupied
his mind.

Besides all this work, however, he was for ever interesting himself in any
cause or society which applied to him for help, or seemed in any way to
need a champion. Indeed, as Mr. Hornblower Gill says of him, "Scholar,
translator, mathematician, historian, political economist, political
philosopher, moralist, theologian, philanthropist, he was the most copious
and various writer of his time."

For a great many years before he died Newman lived at Weston-super-Mare.
But two years before his death, in October, 1897, when he was ninety-two
years of age, he found himself, partly owing to senile decay and partly
owing to a bad fall he had had in the spring of the year, and also to loss
of eyesight, unable to take part in public affairs any longer, nor yet to
write as he had been used to do.

The unpublished article on "Land Nationalization" (which is printed in
this volume) came into the hands of Mr. William Jameson (to whose kindness
I am indebted for it) in 1886, at which time he was Hon. Secretary of the
Land Nationalization Society, and Francis Newman, Vice-President.

Mr. Jameson, at the time of sending me the article, wrote me a letter from
which I shall here quote those parts relating to his friendship with
Newman. He says, speaking of their first meeting: "There was an instant
fellowship that endears his memory to me. I was then about thirty-five,
and he past eighty. There was a quiet dignity in his manner, but no
suggestion of _old age_."

One little anecdote may be of interest.

"We left a rather stormy committee meeting together, over which Professor
Newman had presided. The _storm_ was due to one member who had a grievance
against some others. Speaking of the pity of this, Professor Newman said
to me, 'You know how very strongly my brother and myself differ in
opinion; yet this has never created the _slightest personal discord_....'"

Several years later. Professor Newman wrote Mr. Jameson a letter (on
finding out that he was suffering from overwork and the fear of subsequent
breakdown), saying these strong words of sympathy: "I charge you to give
it up. Save yourself for the years to come." He went on to say that a
friend of his own had kept working on for some cherished cause at the cost
of much mental pressure, and had ended his days in a lunatic asylum. Mr.
Jameson adds that Newman's words of counsel have often and often rung in
his ears since they were first said to him, and he attributes to the fact
that he obeyed them, his having been saved from a physical breakdown.

"Save yourself for the years to come" is a counsel which we, who are
workers, are so often in danger of forgetting. Except in extreme youth,
most men and women live far more in the present and in the past than they
do in the future which lies before them, so largely to be carved into
shape by their Present.

In April, 1887, Sir Samuel Walker Griffith, G.C.M.G., Chief Justice of
Queensland since 1893, Secretary for Public Instruction, Attorney-General
from 1874-8, 1890-3, Premier of Queensland from 1883-8, and 1890-3, was
over in England, and Francis Newman was to have been introduced by Mrs.
Bucknall (mother of Mrs. Bainsmith, the distinguished sculptor [Footnote:
Mrs. Georgina Bainsmith, F.N.B.A., member of the Royal Society of Arts,
and of the Honorary Council of the North British Academy.] to whom I am
indebted for the photo in this book of her bust of Francis Newman, which
now stands in University College, London) to Sir Samuel, at the latter's
own special desire. Unfortunately, Newman was unable to go with Mrs.
Bucknall to Sir Samuel Griffith's house, and this is his letter (kindly
lent me, with Sir Samuel Griffith's reply, by Mrs. Bucknall).


"Dear Mrs. Bucknall,

"Since you tell me that time presses, I have no way but to give up to you
my private copy of (_my_) Christian Commonwealth, which I now send you.
Very sorry I am that I could not accompany you on Sunday to Sir Samuel
Griffith's, but learning from you how graciously such a visitor from the
Antipodes expressed his desire to meet me, I am really sorry that I was
not able in person to attest my deep reverence and admiration as well as
affection for Mrs. Butler, and my conviction that only moral and spiritual
influences can quell the demon of impurity, while the _despair_ which
tries to keep it within limits by moderation and indulging it, is a folly
and an infatuation, especially when coupled with police licenses and
police espionage. Our ladies since 1869 have learned to detest the
despotic police and the despotic doctor with an intensity which time ever
increases.

"They must conquer at last: the sole question is,--after how much more
moral damage to young men and women, and how much mental agony to our
Christian martyrs.

"Our young men happily are joining this crusade. Alas, for those who mean
to be Christian, and do not know the elements of Christian sentiment.
[Footnote: See "Marriage Laws" (1867), "State Provision for Vice" (1869),
and "Remedies for the Great Social Evil" (1869), in Vol. III of F. W.
Newman's _Miscellanies_.]

"I look to you to apologize for me to Sir S. G, for offering to him a book
written by me... one which my pen has defaced....

"Most truly yours,

"F. W. Newman.
"Weston-s.-M., _19th April_, 1887."


This is Sir Samuel Griffith's answer:--


"Brown's Hotel,
"Dover Street, W.,
"_21st April_, 1887.

"Dear Mrs. Bucknall,

"Accept my best thanks for Professor Newman's writings on the _Christian
Commonwealth_ and the _New Crusade_. I really feel ashamed to deprive you
of the latter, and Professor Newman of the former, but it would be most
ungracious of me to refuse to accept them.

"Pray assure him that the value of the copy of the _Christian
Commonwealth_ is to be much enhanced by the fact that it bears his
autograph notes, and that I feel deeply honoured by the terms in which he
has been good enough to express himself in his note to you, which I have
read with great interest and which I enclose. I shall always regret that I
had not the honour and pleasure of meeting him at Weston, but my time was
too short....

"Believe me,
"Yours very faithfully,

"S. W. Griffith."


Mr. and Mrs. Frederick Pennington were great friends of Newman's, and he
often stayed with them from time to time. By the kindness of Mrs.
Pennington I am able to quote from some letters written by him in 1881-90,
and one much earlier, in 1875, in which he laments the death of Mrs.
Blackburn. Mrs. Blackburn was a sister of Mr. Pennington's, and one of the
most munificent of contributors to the United Kingdom Alliance in its
early days, who (I am told by Mrs. Pennington) often denied herself many
luxuries in order to be able to make her contributions larger. She
describes her as one of the best women she had ever known.

Newman, in his letter to Mr. Pennington in 1875, says of Mrs. Blackburn:--

"I have known her ever since Michaelmas 1869, when the revelation was
first made to us of the Contagious Diseases Act; and at the Congress of
Social Science at Bristol she was pleased to receive my hospitality. My
esteem for her was great and ever increasing...."

He goes on to say that his dread of cold and chills makes him fear a long
journey, "though it is mortifying to me not to meet you and Mrs.
Pennington, and many other earnest friends of this very important cause."

In 1881 Gladstone was Prime Minister, and stayed in office for five years.
For almost the whole of this time the country was hardly ever at peace.
The Transvaal rebellion was started in 1880 and later our own troops were
defeated by the insurrectionists; whereupon the Government promptly
surrendered the Transvaal.

About this time Newman writes to Mrs. Pennington:

"_I am not a member of Cambridge University, nor indeed of Oxford
University since 1830. If I had kept my name on the book, I should have
paid £6 a year, if I remember; that is, £300 in these fifty years; and as
I never took my M.A. degree (because of the 39 Articles), I should even
then have no vote.

"I now act on the fixed rule _not to take any long journey in the winter
months_, except from real duty. Experience guides me, and I refuse even
pressure from very friendly quarters.... I am melancholy about this
Cabinet and Mr. Gladstone, and ashamed to be an Englishman. All comes to
me like a domestic calamity. And Parliament is so overworked that
_English_ misrule cannot be corrected. I look on _Ministers in the House_
as nearly our worst nuisance. But I must not begin on our defective and
evil institutions...."

Then in 1890 the letters begin more and more to show a change in his
handwriting. He no longer wrote in his original firm, clear style, but in
a crabbed, cramped manner. His words now were often difficult to decipher,
and the letters of the words very shaky and undecided, bearing witness
very plainly of the trembling hand of Age. After mentioning the immense
number of letters which he had to answer, and how the trouble of replying
was almost beyond his strength, he says, "The sister-like affection of my
honoured friend Anna Swanwick has ... again and again won me to London;...
but the place seems never to agree with me. Partly the whirl by night and
day, I suppose, is my bane; still more, the endless meeting of fresh and
fresh small talk, with the fatigue of _listening_, and the impression on
my brain of miscellaneous memories when I ought to sleep. In Oxford, from
like causes, I became as it were 'daft,' and from forgetfulness of the
right words could not complete an English sentence. A like affection came
on me in London last summer, and I had to break away suddenly, to the
disappointment of friends, because my own sense of _idiotcy_ was
unbearable. Rest and sleep sufficed to restore me when I reached home. The
inability to get out the right word, if (for instance) _suddenly_ asked
'to what station I am going,' is enough to make me seem insane or half
asleep.... I am increasingly aware that my _brain_ is my weakest part....
On the whole I am healthy, and agile in all movement as are few men of my
age (two doctors fancy that _all_ men of eighty-five have pulses as
_disorderly_ as mine!)...."

[Illustration: CARDINAL NEWMAN
FROM AN OIL PAINTING BY MISS DEANE, OF BATH.
PHOTO BY MESSRS. WEBSTER, CLAPHAM COMMON]

As regards the work on the _Early Life of the Cardinal_, which was
published at this time, he says:--

"I am (_under a sense of duty_) writing concerning the late Cardinal quite
a different side of his character from that which for fifty years the
public have heard. I knew him as eminently generous as to money, but so
fanatical as to embarrass judgment of his character. Another weakness I
confess and _lament_. I can write large. I begin everything with
resolution so to write. But as soon as I think only of the substance, and
forget the manner, my writing so dwindles that I can hardly read it
myself. I suppose that weakness of the fingers is the cause. I see how
deficient they are of flesh."

In September, 1890, he wrote the following letters to Rev. J. K. Tucker,
Rector of Pettaugh, Suffolk, who was an old friend of Newman's, and to Mr.
John Henry Tucker, [Footnote: Which have been kindly lent me by Mr. John
Warren.] from which I make quotations:--

"Ever since my brother's death (Cardinal J. H. N.) I am overwhelmed with
letters, and now am writing more and longer every day than my fingers can
well manage, for publishers eager for my MS."

And again in October of the same year:--

"I am about to send to my publishers my _painful_ contribution to the life
of the late Cardinal, my brother. I am conscientiously bound to write it,
because in his _fifty_ years' absence from the sight of the public a new
generation has grown up ignorant of the facts, and the attempt is already
begun to puff them off for their beauty of style..,. My age being eighty-
five, I know the truths, and must tell them. I shall be howled at as
_unbrotherly_. My immediate business now is to write to numbers of
correspondents of whom you are one, whom I have necessarily neglected
while engaged in the most anxious work I have ever undertaken...."

As regards this book to which he alludes, his _Early Life of Cardinal
Newman_, everyone feels that in some sense it belittles the writer. For
there was no real need of any sort that he should have written it. From
one brother to another, such an "early history" was, from some points of
view, a disloyalty--and a disloyalty not altogether free from embittered
personal feeling.

Was there no personal feeling roused in the lives of the two men? For the
younger was practically overshadowed by the elder. It was the elder one to
whom the world kotow-ed. It was the elder who---though the younger was so
strikingly intellectual, and so strong a social reformer in many ways--
carried the world's laurels, and who was finally given the "splendid
funeral" to which Francis Newman takes exception. And there was another
reason too, which I believe exercised a strong sway over his feelings to
his brother in early youth, and brought into play, though perhaps
unrecognized by himself, the quality of emulation, followed by keen
disappointment, when failure, as regarded that incident, fell to his
share. Be that as it may, it is impossible to justify Francis Newman's
writing thus of his brother, in the "early history" to which I refer. Not
even his keen desire for truth, which some declare to have been his motive
power in the matter, accounted for it.

"I should vastly have preferred entire oblivion of him" (of the Cardinal),
"and his writings of the first forty years, but that is impossible. In the
cause of Protestants and Protestantism, I feel bound to write, however
painful to myself, as simply as if my topic were an old Greek or Latin
one." Later on he says, "I have _tried_ to cherish for him a sort of
_filial_ sentiment," but "we seemed never to have an interest nor a wish
in common." [Footnote: J. H. Newman once in speaking of his brother, said,
"Much as we love each other, neither would like to be mistaken for the
other." A sentence which seems to contain more meanings than one!] Perhaps
no words could more absolutely convey the lack of sympathy between the
brothers, than do these. "I have _tried_ to cherish for him a sort of
filial sentiment!" showing as it does, only too evidently, that there was
no spontaneity of affection between them. The only voice that called each
to each was that of old childish association and duty. Francis Newman
could not be accused of seeking personal distinction or fame for itself;
witness his giving up a very promising career at home in order to go on
his missionary journey to Syria. Witness also his open denunciation of
many existing State abuses. Witness his unceasing crusades against the
stronger party (whatever it might be), which, in his opinion, oppressed
and wronged the weaker section of the community, unable of themselves to
obtain justice and a hearing at the court of English public opinion.

All the more, then, is it difficult to explain away sentences such as
these, which seem to proceed from such an absolutely different personality
than was Frank Newman's; and yet the man who reads his memoirs of his
brother finds them almost on every page, and cannot understand their
presence there.

"The existing generation has seen him" (he is alluding to the Cardinal),
"through a mist; and if my simple statement anywhere clears away that
mist, they may almost resent my truth-speaking as an impiety." As indeed
they did--and do. Some of his own friends, indeed, urged him not to
publish the book, but he was obdurate.

"In my rising manhood I received inestimable benefits from this (my
eldest) brother.... He supported me, not out of his abundance, but when he
knew not whence weekly and daily funds were to come.... Yet a most painful
breach ... broke in on me in my nineteenth year and _was unhealable_."
This was, of course, when Francis had been at college two years, for in
those days men very often went at the age of sixteen, as he did.

But the entries of 1822 and 1823, which last would be for Francis his
"nineteenth year," give no clue to the "painful breach" which "was
_unhealable_"

Yet the fact that religious differences did begin between the two brothers
very early in life has been proved beyond all question. Proved also is it
that religious discussions were of constant occurrence between them, and
that while J. H. Newman had always a strange leaning to Churchmanship,
Frank Newman's religious tendencies drew him strongly towards dissent and
Unitarianism.

I think the latter mentions in his _Phases of Faith_ that when he first
came to college he found his brother had hung up a picture of Our Lady in
his younger brother's room, which he at once removed, and refused to have
on the walls.

The following letter is to Rev. J. K. Tucker; in it he describes himself
as a "Conscious Christian" "at the age of fourteen." But he has often
described himself as holding Christianity _without_ Christ:--

"I hold firmly in memory, that in Easter of 1836 I wished to conduct my
_bride_ to Oxford, and introduce her there to my mother and two sisters--
in those Coaching days we came from Bristol and Cheltenham en route to
Oxford. _I_ did not plan the thought of staying a night at your father's
house, in which I suppose _you and your wife_ were living. No doubt the
scheme was planned _by my wife_ to meet _her friend_. The winter of our
marriage had been one of wild snow; and the following Easter was alike
untimely. I just remember the fact of your kind hospitality fifty-four and
a half years ago, and the snow around us. In that visit to my mother (the
last time I saw her), my young wife caught inflammation of the lungs,
which I did not perceive or understand--she was so cruelly bled and
cupped, that I think she never recovered it.

"It is very kind of you to keep alive in your heart the friendship of the
two ladies. I perhaps ought to state that about two and a half years after
the death of that wife in 1876 I married her ... friend.... Else I must
have given up housekeeping, and know not into what family I could have
gone. My second wife is nineteen years my junior, yet in walking, not at
all my equal, but in affectionate care of me inestimable."

In June, 1892, he writes to J. H. Tucker, Esq.:--"I have not heard whether
your father, like me, is favoured by life continued, but I venture to send
a copy of my hymns.... To-day I have received a letter and book in
_Bengali_ from a believer in _Theosophy_, supposing me to be one of them!
Hence, I was not too early in telling my friends that since _at the age of
fourteen_ I became a Conscious Christian, no unbelief has made my hymns
less precious, _mutato saltem nomine_.... My change more than fifty years
ago was on Historical arguments mainly."

To return to the subject of Newman's last years at Weston-super-Mare.
Perhaps the most graphic descriptions of him as an old man are those
contributed as "Reminiscences" by Mrs. Kingsley-Tarpey and Mrs. Bainsmith.
We know him there as a man who, though hardly ever free from some
discomfort or pain in those days, yet never failed in that old-world
courtesy of which, alas! there is so poor a supply in the world at the
present day.

We know him as a man who was always eager to help those who came to him in
trouble or in any difficulty; nay, perhaps almost _too_ ready to believe a
cock-and-bull story of those who did not mind, for their own ends,
practising on his credulity.

A lady, a relation of the Newmans', said that once on coming to stay with
him and Mrs. Newman, she found a secretary in his study smelling strongly
of brandy. When the secretary went out of the room, Frank Newman drew
their guest aside and said, "Ah, yes, it's a sad case, poor fellow! He's
getting away from the temptation of the public-houses."

But when later the secretary's rooms were searched, there were found
numbers of brandy bottles hidden away, to prove that he evidently had
_not_ "escaped from temptation"! This lady said also that when Newman was
old people not infrequently deceived him thus, and traded on his
temperance views, and that he had had _two_ secretaries who obtained their
post on false pretences.

To conclude this chapter I should like to give one striking instance of
his tender sympathy and respect for the poor and lonely. A poor charwoman
had died at Weston-super-Mare who had, I believe, often worked in Newman's
house. He found that she had no friends to follow her body to the grave,
and so he himself, his wife and servants, walked to the funeral as
mourners to show her a last respect. It is the Idea represented by his act
which makes it serve as an unforgettable and very uncommon illustration of
a championship of those unlucky ones who have few or none to champion
them.

Could any act speak clearer of the unfailing respect and reverence for
women which distinguished Francis Newman through life? Though all others
should see the lonely funeral, there should be but the one Good Samaritan
who crossed over the road of ordinary, usual, Conventionalities to show by
his act that he recognized that class and position count for nothing
before the fact of the Universal Brotherhood of Humanity and Religion.


CHAPTER XX

TOULMIN SMITH: AUTHOR, ANTIQUARIAN STUDENT, AND POLITICAL REFORMER


Among the names of those who have done most, by untiring, laborious search
among old parish registers, etc., and dusty old records, to bring to light
interesting social ordinances, details of ancient parish government, and
gems of Norse literature and archaeological research, there have been none
in the last century who have by patient work attained more knowledge of
their country's inner history than Mr. Toulmin Smith.

His name is indeed familiar to everyone as the greatest living authority
on "English Gilds." That book alone, by itself, is an invaluable gift to
the nation. By that alone has he done so signal a service to his
countrymen that no gratitude could repay it.

It is true that, owing to ill-health, Mr. Toulmin Smith unavoidably left
it unfinished at his death, but there is sufficient fulness of information
in it as it is, to make it worth more than an infinity of other finished
books of to-day.

As Father Gasquet says in his _Parish Life in Medieval England_, of the
universality of these "gilds" in this country: "Every account of a
medieval parish must necessarily include some description of the work of
fraternities and guilds.... Their existence dates from the earliest
times." Mr. Toulmin Smith, indeed, says, "English Guilds are older than
any kings of England.... They were associations of those living in the
same neighbourhood, who remembered that they had, as neighbours, common
obligations." But it was not only because of his _English Gilds_ that he
is remembered. In 1854, when he was thirty-eight years of age, he
published another very important volume, _The Parish: its Obligations and
Powers, its Officers and their Duties_. This was also a book towards the
making of which had gone many long years of the most incessant, careful
research in old documents. It was one of those rare literary buildings,
each stone of which was laid with infinite exactitude and care. There is
too much "jerry-building" to-day, both in houses and books.

To Mr. Toulmin Smith some of the shallow books of to-day would represent
literary "pariahs." He would bar the very superficial method in which they
were put together.

In _The Parish_ and in many a pamphlet he set his face steadily against
centralization. "The ruling passion, the guide of his life, the dream of
his youth, the glory of his manhood and his later years, was the
intelligent freedom of the people, based on 'the ancient ways.'"
[Footnote: _Toulmin Smith, 1816 to 1869_, by the late Samuel Timmins,
Esq., of Birmingham. From this pamphlet I have gained much information of
his life.]

It is not difficult to understand how the friendship between Toulmin Smith
and Frank Newman began. For the decentralization of the nation, better
forms of local self-government, were also, each of them, a dream of the
latter's, which he longed eagerly to see realized. There was another keen
common interest between them. Both ardently desired the freedom of
Hungary. Both wrote strongly in favour of it. Both warmly welcomed the
exiled patriot, Louis Kossuth, when he came to England to collect funds
for the revolutionary movement of his country. But long before Englishmen
had made themselves _au fait_ with the subject of the Hungarian revolt,
Toulmin Smith had, in his literary studies, understood the why and
wherefore of the quarrel, and had, by his words, roused his country to the
true recognition of how urgent was the whole question between Austria and
Hungary. It must not be forgotten, too, that all his labours amongst the
tangled undergrowths of the literary land were undertaken in the leisure
time he could spare from his profession. For he was barrister-at-law of
Lincoln's Inn, and he was also a landowner in Birmingham (his native
city), of property which had belonged to his ancestors in succession for
five hundred years. He had made himself a proficient in the Icelandic,
Danish, Norse languages, and was learned in the ancient history and
politics of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Iceland, and Scandinavia. [Footnote:
I quote from the pamphlet on _Toulmin Smith_, referred to before.]

Mr. Timmins tells us that "while he maintained his own convictions with
energy and power, he had a kindly regard for all who differed from him, a
large appreciation of genuine humour, and he was in private life one of
the most courteous, kindly, and genial of men. While he honoured the past
and the memory of his fathers, he was no blind adherent of a falling
cause, no obstinate opponent of the needful changes of the age.... Amid
all the worry of a London lawyer's life, when far away in the United
States and stricken down by 'grievous illness,' almost his last written
words, 'I _long_ to return to Birmingham,' express the passion of his
life."

The friendship between Toulmin Smith and Newman probably began in 1849, in
connection with the formation of the Hungarian Committee. This I am told
by Miss Toulmin Smith, to whose kindness I am indebted for permission to
use the following letters.

She believes that her father was introduced to Newman by Mr. John Edward
Taylor (of Norwich). She says she has a keen memory of Francis Newman
coming to her father's house at Highgate at that time, with Pulszky and
other Hungarians, all eager in the "efforts for reform and constitutional
freedom and local government." But later on, she adds, many difficulties
arose, and "about 1852 something connected with Louis Kossuth" (and the
Hungarian movement) "caused a coolness" between the friends, and their
correspondence seems to have come to an end after September in that year.
Newman, owing to his University College engagements probably, I think
retired from his position on the Committee in October, 1849.


_Francis Newman to Toulmin Smith._

"University College, Gower Street,
"_8th Jan._, 1850.

"My dear Sir,

"I rejoice in your ward-mote exertions, and I beg you will not think that
I am indifferent to them."

[This refers to "a series of meetings during the winter of 1849-50 in one
of the Wards of the City of London; part of a movement endeavouring to
rouse the citizens to a sense of civic local duties."] [Footnote: I am
quoting from notes _re_ these letters, kindly supplied by Miss Toulmin
Smith.]

"On Wednesday I have to attend a meeting of our Professors here which will
interfere with the Wardmote.... I exceedingly want presence of mind, if
there is any tumult, so as to remember quickly enough what is to be said.
Against a mob I could _act_ with firmness, but I could not speak with
promptitude. Moreover, I suffer physically from the air of a crowded room,
and never go to _hear_ a speech when there is a chance of my being able to
_read_ it."


The next letter I quote from is dated from Church Street, Old Eastbourne,
August, 1850. It begins with questions of canvassing at University
College, and goes on to touch on the subject about which he and his
correspondent were at one: local land reform:--


"I have been here less than a week, but was at first unsettled, and my
servant did not know whither to send my letters. It is fine air, rather
bleak downs" (this is an unappreciative criticism of those exquisitely
rounded outlines), "but with sunny days very pleasant and healthy.

"I am glad to hear of your Bristol excursion. If one could convert some
sheriff of a county, I should like to see the thing tested in some
practical form, i.e. to assemble every month a Parliament of County
Freeholders to do some real work--as, if roads, or public lands, or docks,
etc., were to be dealt with; or to protest against a Private Bill in
Parliament, and claim to have the settling of it.

"I wish you knew Tom Taylor. He is an able man, desiring Reform, and is on
the Public Health Board in some legal capacity. He heartily wishes to
develop the local powers, and will not admit that they are practically
undermining them. He fully assented to all I said in theory, but thought I
misconceived what they were actually doing.

"Believe me, sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


Tom Taylor, journalist and playwriter, was born 1817 in Sunderland. For
two years he was Professor of the English language and literature at
University College. He was called to the Bar of Inner Temple in 1845. He
acted as Secretary to the Board of Health and Local Government Act Office.
After the year 1846 he devoted himself chiefly to playwriting, and in 1874
was editing _Punch_.

The following letter is dated September, 1850:--

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is not Tom Taylor only who honestly believes the Sanitary Board to be
engaged in teaching Central and Local Powers to _co-operate_, and to be
anxious to leave _bonâ fide_ power of the most important kind to the
localities. Only a few days ago a friend of mine (a physician) was proving
to me this very point in them. We who are not lawyers do not understand
points rapidly enough (or cannot remember them) to see where a great
principle is violated.

"I do not care about the Sanitary Board _per se_ ... but what I think you
are most wanted to do is to show that, however much the Parliamentary
franchise needs reform, yet a _greater_ need is that of limiting the
functions of Parliament, and giving them to County Assemblies or Town
Motes.

"That word _Mote_ is almost obsolete! May not the fact itself be a text to
you? The modern substitute, 'meeting,' has no taxing powers, no legal
officers, no constitutional power any more than a mob.... The sands of the
Whigs run fast out, and it is high time for the Radicals to have a creed.
Do you find any Chartists listen to you? If you cannot convert a Sheriff,
I should be as well pleased with a hundred Chartists, for they learn from
one another by contagion."


In this year there was put forward a project for a society to make more
local government possible. This was later carried out under the name of
the "Anti-Centralization Union."

In November, 1850, decentralization was again to the fore in the minds of
Newman and Toulmin Smith, as is shown here; and what the former says he
puts very trenchantly, forcibly:--


"7 Park Village East,
"R.P., _Oct. 16th_, 1850.

"My dear Smith,

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can speak with much freedom and energy (but no _wit_) on a subject on
which I have information and feel interested: but I cannot make an after-
dinner speech of compliment, nor talk on a subject which I do not feel I
have very maturely considered.... In regard to _local government_, I think
you would disarm the fears or scruples of many excellent and wise persons
if you made prominent that you do not wish to return to the Middle Ages,
or disown that progress of society which has knit England into a single
State. I think it high time to make an outcry against a system of infinite
legislation, in which we are subjected to laws too numerous for anyone to
be acquainted with; yet I doubt whether we shall get a hearing with the
most influential minds unless we make it clear that we fully understand
that the progress of society forbids our returning to the simplicity of
law which the good Saxons had under Alfred and his successors. The gap is
vast, and there is _no danger whatever_ of our becoming too simple; yet
this fanatical aim will be so surely imputed to us (in days when such men
as Lord John Manners in Politics and the Puseyites in Church are afloat)
that it is not needless to disown it even to candid and strong-headed
hearers.

"I am asking Froude to dine with me on Tuesday, the 29th instant, at 6
o'clock, to meet you and _some other friends_ whom I want to bring
together: as I believe he will then be in London....

"_Thursday, 6 o'clock_.--I have just got Froude's reply, _Yes_: so please
to say Yes, too.

"In haste, sincerely yours,

"F. W. Newman."


As to the real meaning of the word "Democracy" Newman deals with it
thus:--

"_What is_ Democracy?... Show that if one town governs itself by universal
suffrage, that _is_ Democracy, so long as the people really exercise
interest in their public concerns; but that if a whole country, as France,
elects an Assembly, that is _not_ Democracy, but Empire delegated to an
Oligarchy, because the people at large cannot understand, follow, and
control public measures.

"I do not mean to dictate this, or any one mode; but I feel strongly that
you must put a sharp curb on all invective _until_ you have fully
developed the difference between the common Radicalism and your own views.
Pulszky says he is satisfied you were not _understood_ at the Radley Hotel
dinner. Radicals are almost as slow as Tories to admit a new thought.

"I should also like to have the question brought out: 'What has been,
historically, the Service performed by Monarchy and Centralization?' The
answer is: 'It has formed nations into larger masses, and lessened or
destroyed _border war_.' The inference is, that the great and peculiar
function of the Central Government is, in fact, what the American Congress
does, viz. to maintain peace at home between the several States, and make
the country _One_ in resisting hostile attack. To do more than this,
should be rather exceptive, and confined to subordinate matters, else
Centralization becomes mischievous...."

And again, later in the year, in answer to a letter from Mr. Toulmin
Smith:--

"What I said of 'Democracy' was meant as _argumentum ad hominem_ to that
side, not as intending to identify myself with it, but I see the danger
you speak of. Query: Would 'popular government' do? Even Conservatives
wish for a Commonwealth and for _Constitutional_ Government. We have
it: the wizard's cap is a defensive weapon, a protective crest. The
Ram charges with his forehead, the Empusa butts with her mitre.

But this does not mean dinner.

I serve up the House-fly, alive. She is accepted, without hesitation. The
moment that the Fly comes within reach, the watchful Devilkin turns her
head, bends the stalk of her corselet slantwise and, flinging out her
fore-limb, harpoons the Fly and grips her between her two saws. No Cat
pouncing upon a Mouse could be quicker.

The game, however small, is enough for a meal. It is enough for the whole
day, often for several days.

This is my first surprise: the extreme abstemiousness of these
fiercely-armed insects.

I was prepared for ogres: I find ascetics satisfied with a meagre collation
at rare intervals. A Fly fills their belly for twenty-four hours at
least.

Thus passes the late autumn: the Empusae, more and more temperate from day
to day, hang motionless from the wire gauze. Their natural abstinence
is my best ally, for Flies grow scarce; and a time comes when I should be
hard put to it to keep the menageries supplied with provisions.

During the three winter months, nothing stirs. From time to time, on fine
days, I expose the cage to the sun's rays, in the window. Under the influence
of this heat-bath, the captives stretch their legs a little, sway from
side to side, make up their minds to move about, but without
displaying any awakening appetite.

The rare Midges that fall to my assiduous efforts do not appear to
tempt them.

It is a rule for them
to spend the cold season in a state of complete abstinence.

My cages tell me what must happen outside, during the winter.

Ensconced in the crannies of the rockwork, in the sunniest places, the young
Empusae wait, in a state of torpor, for the return of the hot weather.
Notwithstanding the shelter of a heap of stones, there must be painful
moments when the frost is prolonged and the snow penetrates little by
little into the best-protected crevices. No matter: hardier than they look,
the refugees escape the dangers of the winter season.

Sometimes, when the sun is strong, they venture out of their hiding-place
and come to see if spring be nigh.

Spring comes. We are in March. My prisoners bestir themselves, change
their skin. They need victuals. My catering difficulties recommence. The
House-fly, so easy to catch, is lacking in these days.

I fall back upon earlier Diptera: Eristales, or Drone-flies.

The Empusa refuses them.

They are too big for her and can offer too strenuous a resistance.

She wards off their
approach with blows of
her mitre.

A few tender morsels, in the shape of very young Grasshoppers, are readily
accepted. Unfortunately, such windfalls do not often find their way
into my sweeping-net. Abstinence becomes obligatory until the arrival of
the first Butterflies. Henceforth, Pieris brassicae, the White Cabbage
Butterfly, will contribute the greater portion of the victuals.

Let loose in the wire cage, the Pieris is regarded as excellent game.
The Empusa lies in wait for her, seizes her, but releases her at once,
lacking the strength to overpower her.

The Butterfly's great wings, beating the air, give her shock after shock
and compel her to let go. I come to the weakling's assistance and cut the
wings of her prey with my scissors. The maimed ones, still full of life,
clamber up the trellis-work and are forthwith grabbed by the Empusae,
who, in no way frightened by their protests, crunch them up. The
dish is to their taste and, moreover, plentiful, so much so that there are
always some despised remnants.

The head only and the upper portion of the breast are devoured: the
rest--the plump abdomen, the best part of the thorax, the legs and lastly,
of course, the wing-stumps--is flung aside untouched. Does this mean
that the tenderest and most succulent morsels are chosen? No, for the belly
is certainly more juicy; and the Empusa refuses it, though she eats up her
House-fly to the last particle. It is a strategy of war. I am again in
the presence of a neck-specialist as expert as the Mantis herself
in the art of swiftly slaying a victim that struggles and, in
struggling, spoils the meal.

Once warned, I soon perceive that
the game, be it Fly, Locust, Grasshopper, or Butterfly, is always
struck in the neck, from behind.

The first bite is aimed at the point containing the cervical ganglia
and produces sudden death or immobility.

Complete inertia will
leave the consumer
in peace, the essential condition of every satisfactory repast.

The Devilkin, therefore, frail though she be, possesses the secret
of immediately destroying the resistance of her prey.

She bites at the back of the neck first, in order to give the finishing
stroke. She goes on nibbling around the original attacking-point.
In this way the Butterfly's head and the upper part of the breast are
disposed of. But, by that time, the huntress is surfeited: she wants so
little! The rest lies on the ground, disdained, not for lack of
flavour, but because there is too much of it. A Cabbage Butterfly far
exceeds the capacity of the Empusa's stomach. The Ants will benefit by
what is left.

There is one other matter to be mentioned, before observing the metamorphosis.
The position adopted by the young Empusae in the wire-gauze cage is
invariably the same from start to finish. Gripping the trellis-work by the
claws of its four hind-legs, the insect occupies the top of the dome and
hangs motionless, back downwards, with the whole of its body supported by
the four suspension-points. If it wishes to move, the front harpoons
open, stretch out, grasp a mesh and draw it to them. When the short
walk is over, the lethal arms are brought back against the chest. One may
say that it is nearly always the four hind-shanks which alone support
the suspended insect.

And this reversed position, which seems to us so trying, lasts for no short
while: it is prolonged, in my cages, for ten months without a break. The
Fly on the ceiling, it is true, occupies the same attitude; but she
has her moments of rest: she flies, she walks in a normal posture,
she spreads herself flat in the sun.

Besides, her acrobatic feats do not cover a long period. The Empusa,
on the other hand, maintains her curious equilibrium for ten months on
end, without a break. Hanging from the trellis-work, back downwards, she
hunts, eats, digests, dozes, casts her skin, undergoes her transformation,
mates, lays her eggs and dies. She clambered up there when she was
still quite young; she falls down, full of days, a corpse.

Things do not happen exactly like this under natural conditions. The insect
stands on the bushes back upwards; it keeps its balance in the
regular attitude and turns over only in circumstances that occur
at long intervals.

The protracted suspension of my captives is all the more remarkable
inasmuch as it is not at all an innate habit of their race.

It reminds one of the Bats, who hang, head downwards, by their hind-legs
from the roof of their caves. A special formation of the toes enables birds
to sleep on one leg, which automatically and without fatigue clutches the
swaying bough. The Empusa shows me nothing akin to their contrivance. The
extremity of her walking-legs has the ordinary structure: a double claw
at the tip, a double steelyard-hook; and that is all.

I could wish that anatomy would show me the working of the muscles and
nerves in those tarsi, in those legs more slender than threads, the
action of the tendons that control the claws and keep them gripped for
ten months, unwearied in waking and sleeping. If some dexterous scalpel
should ever investigate this problem, I can recommend another,
even more singular than that of the Empusa, the Bat and the bird.

I refer to the attitude of certain Wasps and Bees during the night's
rest.

An Ammophila with red fore-legs (A. holosericea) is plentiful in
my enclosure towards the end of August and selects a certain
lavender-border for her dormitory.

At dusk, especially
after a stifling day, when a storm is brewing, I am sure to find
the strange sleeper settled there.

Never was more eccentric attitude adopted for a night's rest!

The mandibles bite right into the lavender-stem. Its square shape supplies
a firmer hold than a round stalk would do.

With this one and only prop, the animal's body juts out stiffly, at full
length, with legs folded. It forms a right angle with the supporting
axis, so much so that the whole weight of the insect, which has
turned itself into the arm of a lever rests upon the mandibles.

The Ammophila sleeps extended in space by virtue of her mighty jaws. It takes
an animal to think of a thing like that, which upsets all our preconceived
ideas of repose. Should the threatening storm burst, should the stalk
sway in the wind, the sleeper is not troubled by her swinging
hammock; at most, she presses her fore-legs for a moment against
the tossed mast.

As soon as equilibrium is restored, the favourite posture, that of the
horizontal lever, is resumed. perhaps the mandibles, like the bird's
toes, possess the faculty of gripping tighter in proportion to the
rocking of the wind.

The Ammophila is not the only one to sleep in this singular position, which
is copied by many others--Anthidia (Cotton-bees.--Translator's Note.),
Odyneri (A genus of Mason-wasps.--Translator's Note.), Eucerae (A species
of Burrowing-bees.--Translator's Note.)--and mainly by the males. All grip
a stalk with their mandibles and sleep with their bodies outstretched
and their legs folded back.

Some, the stouter species, allow themselves to rest the tip of their
arched abdomen against the pole.

This visit to the dormitory of certain Wasps and Bees does not
explain the problem of the Empusa; it sets up another one, no less
difficult.

It shows us how deficient we are in insight, when it comes to
differentiating between fatigue and rest in the cogs of the animal
machine.

The Ammophila, with the static paradox afforded by her mandibles;
the Empusa, with her claws unwearied by ten months' hanging, leave
the physiologist perplexed and make him wonder what really constitutes
rest.

In absolute
fact, there is no rest, apart from that which puts an end to life.

The struggle never ceases; some muscle is always toiling, some nerve
straining.

Sleep, which resembles a return to the peace of non-existence, is, like
waking, an effort, here of the leg, of the curled tail; there of the claw,
of the jaws.

The transformation is effected about the middle of May, and the adult Empusa
makes her appearance. She is even more remarkable in figure and attire
than the Praying Mantis.

Of her youthful eccentricities, she retains the pointed mitre, the
saw-like arm-guards, the long bust, the knee-pieces, the three rows
of scales on the lower surface of the belly; but the abdomen is now
no longer twisted into a crook and the animal is comelier to look
upon.

Large pale-green
wings, pink at the shoulder and swift in flight in both sexes,
cover the belly, which is striped white and green underneath.

The male, the dandy
sex, adorns himself with plumed antennae, like those of certain
Moths, the Bombyx tribe.

In respect of size, he is almost the equal of his mate.

Save for a few slight structural details, the Empusa is the Praying Mantis.
The peasant confuses them. When, in spring, he meets the mitred insect,
he thinks he sees the common Prgo-Dieu, who is a daughter of the autumn.
Similar forms would seem to indicate similarity of habits.

In fact, led away by the extraordinary armour, we should be tempted
to attribute to the Empusa a mode of life even more atrocious than
that of the Mantis.

I myself thought so at first; and any one, relying upon false
analogies, would think the same. It is a fresh error: for all her warlike
aspect, the Empusa is a peaceful creature that hardly repays the trouble
of rearing.

Installed under the gauze bell, whether in assemblies of half a dozen or in
separate couples, she at no time loses her placidity. Like the larva,
she is very abstemious and contents herself with a Fly or two as her
daily ration.

Big eaters are naturally quarrelsome.

The Mantis, bloated
with Locusts, soon becomes irritated and shows fight.

The Empusa, with her frugal meals, does not indulge in hostile
demonstrations.

There is no strife among
neighbours nor any
of those sudden unfurlings of the wings so dear to the Mantis when
she assumes the spectral attitude and puffs like a startled Adder;
never the least inclination for those cannibal banquets whereat the
sister who has been worsted in the fight is devoured.

Such atrocities or here unknown.

Unknown also are tragic nuptials. The male is enterprising and assiduous
and is subjected to a long trial before succeeding.

For days and days he worries his mate, who ends by yielding. Due
decorum is preserved after the wedding. The feathered groom retires,
respected by his bride, and does his little bit of hunting, without
danger of being apprehended and gobbled up.

The two sexes live together in peace and mutual indifference until the
middle of July. Then the male, grown old and decrepit, takes counsel
with himself, hunts no more, becomes shaky in his walk, creeps down
from the lofty heights of the trellised dome and at last collapses on the
ground. His end comes by a natural death. And remember that the other,
the male of the Praying Mantis, ends in the stomach of his gluttonous
spouse.

The laying follows close upon the disappearance of the males.

One word more on comparative manners. The Mantis goes in for battle
and cannibalism; the Empusa is peaceable and respects her kind.

To what cause are these profound moral differences due, when the organic
structure is the same? Perhaps to the difference of diet. Frugality, in
fact, softens character, in animals as in men; gross feeding brutalizes
it.

The gormandizer gorged with meat and strong drink, a fruitful source
of savage outbursts, could not possess the gentleness of the ascetic who
dips his bread into a cup of milk. The Mantis is that gormandizer, the
Empusa that ascetic.

Granted. But whence does the one derive her voracious appetite, the
other her temperate ways, when it would seem as though their almost identical
structure ought to produce an identity of needs? These insects tell
us, in their fashion, what many have already told us: that
propensities and aptitudes do not depend exclusively upon anatomy;
high above the physical laws that govern matter rise other laws
that govern instincts.

CHAPTER 4. THE CAPRICORN.

My youthful meditations owe some happy moments to Condillac's famous
statue which, when endowed with the sense of smell, inhales the scent of
a rose and out of that single impression creates a whole world of ideas.
(Etienne Bonnot de Condillac, Abb de Mureaux (1715-80), the leading
exponent of sensational philosophy.

    His most important work is the "Trait des sensations," in which
he imagines a statue, organized like a man, and endows it with the
senses one by one, beginning with that of smell.

    He argues by a process of imaginative reconstruction that all human
faculties and all human knowledge are merely transformed sensation,
to the exclusion of any other principle, that, in short, everything
has its source in sensation: man is nothing but what he has acquired.

    --Translator's Note.) My twenty-year-old mind, full of faith in
    syllogisms, loved to follow the deductive jugglery of the
abb-philosopher: I saw, or seemed to see, the statue take life in
that action of the nostrils, acquiring attention, memory, judgment
and all the psychological paraphernalia, even as still waters are
aroused and rippled by the impact of a grain of sand.

I recovered from my illusion under the
instruction of my abler master, the animal.

The Capricorn shall teach us that the problem is more obscure than
the abb led me to believe.

When wedge and mallet are at work, preparing my provision of firewood
under the grey sky that heralds winter, a favourite relaxation
creates a welcome break in my daily output of prose.

By my express orders, the woodman has selected the oldest and most
ravaged trunks in his stack.

My tastes bring a smile to his lips; he wonders by what whimsy I prefer
wood that is worm-eaten--chirouna, as he calls it--to sound wood
which burns so much better. I have my views on the subject; and the
worthy man submits to them.

And now to us two, O my fine oak-trunk seamed with scars, gashed with
wounds whence trickle the brown drops smelling of the tan-yard. The mallet
drives home, the wedges bite, the wood splits. What do your flanks
contain? Real treasures for my studies. In the dry and hollow parts,
groups of various insects, capable of living through the bad season
of the year, have taken up their winter quarters: in the low-roofed
galleries, galleries which some Buprestis-beetle has built, Osmia-bees,
working their paste of masticated leaves, have piled their cells,
one above the other; in the deserted chambers and vestibules,
Megachiles (Leaf-cutting Bees.

--Translator's Note.) have arranged their leafy jars; in the live
wood, filled with juicy saps, the larvae of the Capricorn (Cerambyx
miles), the chief author of the oak's undoing, have set up their
home.

Strange creatures, of a verity, are these grubs, for an insect of
superior organization: bits of intestines crawling about!

 At this time of year, the middle of autumn, I meet them of two
different ages. The older are almost as thick as one's finger; the others
hardly attain the diameter of a pencil. I find, in addition, pupae more
or less fully coloured, perfect insects, with a distended abdomen, ready
to leave the trunk when the hot weather comes again. Life inside the wood,
therefore, lasts three years. How is this long period of solitude and
captivity spent?

In wandering lazily through the thickness of the oak, in making roads
whose rubbish serves as food. The horse in Job swallows the ground in a
figure of speech; the Capricorn's grub literally eats its way. ("Chafing
and raging, he swalloweth the ground, neither doth he make account when
the noise of the trumpet soundeth."--Job 39, 23 (Douai version).

--Translator's Note.)

With its carpenter's
gouge, a strong black mandible, short, devoid
of notches, scooped into a sharp-edged spoon, it digs the opening
of its tunnel.

The piece cut out is a mouthful which, as it enters the stomach,
yields its scanty juices and accumulates behind the worker in heaps
of wormed wood.

The refuse leaves room in front by passing through the worker. A labour at
once of nutrition and of road-making, the path is devoured while
constructed; it is blocked behind as it makes way ahead. That,
however, is how all the borers who look to wood for victuals and lodging
set about their business.

For the harsh work of its two gouges, or curved chisels, the larva of the
Capricorn concentrates its muscular strength in the front of its body,
which swells into a pestle-head.

The Buprestis-grubs, those other
industrious carpenters, adopt a similar form; they even exaggerate
their pestle.

The part that toils and carves hard wood requires a robust structure;
the rest of the body, which has but to follow after, continues slim.

The essential thing is that the implement of
the jaws should possess a solid support and a powerful motor.

The Cerambyx-larva strengthens its chisels with a stout, black,
horny armour that surrounds the mouth; yet, apart from its skull
and its equipment of tools, the grub has a skin as fine as satin
and white as ivory.

This dead white comes from a copious layer of grease which the animal's
spare diet would not lead us to suspect. True, it has nothing to do,
at every hour of the day and night, but gnaw.
"But I confess if we wish to attract ancient nations to Christianity, we
have first to reconsider our creed fundamentally, a terrible summons to
Protestants as well as Catholics....

"I have not with me _your last_, and I hope I do not evade any question.

"With best wishes to you and all yours,
"I am, your earnest friend,

"F. W. Newman."


"_27th Nov._, 1891.

"My dear Mrs. Kingsley,

"So many of my juniors die, that my friends when they do not hear of me
may well fancy that I am decrepit and declining. That is not true; only my
muscular strength is less. I cannot walk so far nor work so much, but no
vital organ seems to fail; nor can I write so much or so long....

"The longer I live, the more hopeful and more interesting I find the whole
world. In spite of crime, folly, and misery, the massive nations seem to
improve. The good--i.e. our sounder party--become wiser and stronger, as
well as in proportion more numerous. Our worst misrule has been in Ireland
and in India. The crisis in Ireland seems to me turned for the better.
Misrule in India is met not by insurrection, but by constitutional and
loyal, widely demanded Reform, such as, I feel convinced, the enlarged
franchise in England will support too warmly for the old routine to
resist. All the churches are seeking _moral_ reform.... Reforms lately too
great to think of, we now calmly contemplate as certainties of a near
future. Lord Herschell, an ex-Chancellor, pronounces that the legislative
power of the House of Lords is an evil unbearable. Scotland and Wales are
ready to demand abolition of the State Church. The English party called
Liberal (I think miscalled) desire the same, and within the last ten years
I come to think, rightly. Other reforms, too numerous to detail, cannot be
trifled with or the nation be blinded. While I wonder at all this, I see
that Scandinavia and Germany, even Belgium and France, are moving for
_moral_ objects, and also against war.

"Is there not plenty in all this to draw forth hope, joy, and
thankfulness, and in every conviction, that amidst all our tumult the Lord
reigneth? I rejoice that I have lived to see this day, and expect to
rejoice more while I live.

"How you have fared this year I seem not to know, but believe that you
have my earnest good wishes for you and yours.

"I am, yours most truly,

"F. W. Newman."


"Bournemouth (undated).

"My dear Friend,

"Your letter of July 12th from Margate has reached me here, to which place
I came because my wife five years ago gained such health here, and all the
year and past autumn she has never felt sure of health at home. I cannot
think she manages herself rightly, yet she believes, with no small reason,
that I am not a safe traveller without her; yet of the two _I_ seem the
stronger. She is better here, perhaps, because she is more in the outer
air. I must add, I too have recovered from my fall, and am fairly well,
though I do not pretend to be strong yet (as the French would say), _Que
voulez vous?_ when I am past 88.... I am glad to learn about your
children. I have good hope concerning the coming future, though the foes
of progress call us faddists because we think _national morality_
paramount to vicious routine. May but the Good prevail!

"... I now argue _for_ Fish-food as not to be forbidden or frowned on, but
do not lessen my esteem of our Manchester V. E. M. Society, nor lessen my
contribution to it, though they can only receive me as an outsider.

"I turn a vegetarian argument against them on the Fish question, but I
have no time now for it.

"I am bringing out another volume on Paul of Tarsus, which, when complete,
I hope to send you.

"With warm salutes, I am yours,

"Francis Wm. Newman.
"My wife desires her kind thought to be named."


"_1st Nov._, 1892.

"My dear Madam,

"I have not time nor strength to search out your last kind letter, which
perhaps informed me when your two sons from India were expected and when
they were to leave you....

"I do fairly well, if I potter on in my old solid routine. My 88th year
makes pretension to _strength_; but when so many moans are heard about
_neuralgia_, not to say influenza, I feel myself much favoured by the
total absence of pain, except merely what is incidental to a thin body
with some sharp bones. In rising from bed I am aware of small discomforts,
which I shake off on standing upright, and similarly after sitting in one
posture. I have not enough suffering to claim pity. I can wish the same to
all my friends, especially to my wife.

"To my judgment the world ... is in an entirely novel state, which
forebodes a wholly new future, and requires new thoughts, new policy in
our rulers, _with much higher_ MORALITY if grave overthrow is to be
averted.

"The United States of America _ought_ to be our leader in chief, but
mainly through ... the dreadful colour war that is year by year waxing
worse. The only thing clear to me is, that their _home_ calamity must for
a long while hinder their giving aid to the world. The policy in Russia is
so fatal, and its result presages an overturn of the scale of the France
of 1793. This makes all foresight impossible, except that every State is
safest which least violates the laws of universal morality. That England
can avoid great retribution seems to me scarcely probable. But as soon as
morality is allowed to speak loud in high places, I believe our main
dangers will quickly disappear. The prospect cannot be defined, but is to
me of intense interest. Britain seems to me immensely superior to its own
ruling classes in goodness, and the good is sure _at length to prevail_,
to the benefit also of your Ireland.

"With kindest best wishes, I am,
"Most truly yours,

"F. W. Newman."


CHAPTER XXI

LANDOWNERS AND WAGE RECEIVERS
BY FRANCIS W. NEWMAN
CONTRIBUTED BY MR. WILLIAM JAMIESON

[Presumably written in 1886, when Newman was Vice-President of the "Land
Nationalization Society." It was kindly sent me by Mr. William Jamieson,
who was Hon. Sec. to the above Society at the time. I wish to express here
my sense of gratitude to him for much help and information regarding his
own work with Newman in 1886.]


The tendency of English industry for a long time back has been to exalt
the land_lord_, or chief man in any locality, into land _owner_ (a phrase
implying that no one but he has legal right in the land), and to convert a
larger and larger fraction of the nation into wage receivers, liable to be
cast out of work either at the simple will, or by the imprudence or
misfortune of their paymaster. In order to analyse the natural results of
this juncture, we must follow the method received in Political Economy, of
taking an imaginary case, far simpler than any which is actually met in
human life, so as to make all the conditions of the problem known to us by
hypotheses. Let us suppose an island, secluded commercially from the rest
of the world, and peopled by a vast working lower class under three small
ruling castes. The island is physically divisible into three parts:
_first_, marshy coast land, abounding with shrubs, canes, rushes of many
kinds, from which human garments of various sorts can be made; _secondly_
rolling land, eminently suitable for the cultivation of grain, and of
certain fruit trees and roots on which the whole population live;
_thirdly_, the mountain land, on which are timber trees and copses
affording firewood; also quarries of stone, gravel pits, lime rocks, and
mines of copper and iron. Of the marshy coast land, the _second_ lordly
caste is acknowledged to be absolute owner; the first or highest caste
owns the rolling land, which is the arable and cultivated portion; and the
_third_ caste owns the mountain land and its products. From the first
comes the food of the native, from the second comes the clothing, from the
third the houses. It is possible that gravel, lime, and stone can be found
in rolling land, and that fruit trees either exist or if planted would
bear fruit in the marsh land, some even in the mountains; but the ruling
castes follow ancient custom, and the working caste has no right to
innovate. They work _under_ and _for_ their masters, and receive wages _in
kind_--that is, as an equivalent for their work, a definite but liberal
supply of the three necessary articles--food, clothes, and house
accommodation. Money does not exist, nor tame animals in our island. To
add sharpness to our imaginary case, and to make argument intelligible, we
must assign definite numbers to the working population; but from whatever
numbers we start, the argument and the practical result will be the same.
Let us suppose the first caste to employ _ten thousand_ cultivators; the
second caste to employ _three thousand_ knitters and plaiters; the third
caste _one thousand_ masons, miners, and carpenters. Each of these castes
furnishes to the workman such rude tools as are necessary, but these
remain the property of the masters, not of the workmen.

The soil and climate being favourable, and the habits of the people
simple, a few hours of work suffice; and like many barbarians, they have
been accustomed to much idle time, which they employ in sport; moreover,
by the connivance or good of the superior caste, they have been accustomed
to pick or steal largely the leaves of an intoxicating grass, and the
masters to whom the whole produce of their labour belongs, have large
superfluity after paying their wages; hereby the lordlings easily feed
domestic servants and exhibit themselves in gay clothing with superior
dwellings.

But the tendency of the workers to drunkenness shocks a certain religious
preacher, who traces the vice to idleness and sport. He goes about the
island urging upon them a higher morality. They widely receive him as a
divine messenger, and under his exhortation they become more industrious
and more conscientious in their work; not only working more hours, and
curtailing their sport, but in every hour using more diligence. In
consequence, the masters are enriched by stores somewhat embarrassing.
Grain comes in, more than they want: their barns begin to overflow.
Garments are too many for the warehouses. Huge piles of timber block up
the yards, besides masses of stones, and heaps of other superfluous
material. Before long, the masters conclude that their simplest course for
checking supply is by lessening the number of the workmen. The increased
diligence of the people (we may suppose) has made the work of three men on
an average as efficient in all tasks as were _five_ men previously. Thus
sixty do the work of a hundred; and the masters discover that what had
been the normal average produce will be maintained, if they dismiss forty
out of every hundred dependents. Not only so; but retaining their usual
surplus, which we may call their rent, at the old level, they will be able
to raise the wages to these workmen whom they still keep, since instead of
a hundred they will have only sixty now to feed and clothe; and only for
these do they feel morally responsible. Forthwith they actually dismiss
forty out of every hundred. Each landowner cares for his own workmen as by
a sort of social duty; but for those who are discharged he feels no
responsibility. In the average result the landowners who had had a hundred
workmen, but now only sixty, take as increased rent the food and clothes
of ten, and use it to add ten servants to their domestic retinue, but add
to the wage of the sixty whom they keep at work, the food and clothes
previously received by thirty of the forty whom they have dismissed. Thus
they raise wages by one half--that is, they pay in the proportion of one
hundred and fifty instead of one hundred.

The labourers, clothworkers, and builders who are dismissed (the remaining
thirty out of every hundred) being without work and without houses, are at
once in a state of beggary. Only by betaking themselves to some _new
industry_ will they be able to get a livelihood, and it rests with them to
devise their new industries. Meanwhile they can only subsist on charity,
which is doled out to them chiefly by the fellow feeling of those of their
class who are still in work. What is your Christian name?" she asked.

He looked at her in surprise.

"Jack," he said. "What a weird question to ask!"
"Isn't it?" she said with a laugh but a little catch in her throat.
"Only we're to be comrades and stick to one another, and I hate calling
you by your surname, so I'm going to call you Jack."
It was his turn to be amused. They walked in the opposite direction
to that which the colonel had taken.

"You're very quiet," she said after a while.

"Aren't I?" he laughed.

"Have I offended you?" she asked quickly. "Was it wrong to call you Jack?
Oh, yes, somebody else must have called you Jack."
"No, no, it isn't that," he said, "but I haven't been called by my Christian
name for years and years," he said wearily, "and somehow it seems to span
all the bad times and take me back to the--the----"
"The 'Jack' days?" she suggested, and he nodded.

Then after another period of silence.

"This is a queer ending to it all, isn't it?" he said, and her heart skipped
a beat.

"Ending?" she whispered. "No, no, not ending! It may be the beginning
of a new life. I haven't got religious," she added quickly, "and I'm not
getting sentimental. All my past life doesn't come up in front of me as
it does in the story-books. Only I've just faith that there's something
better in life than I've ever found."
"I should think there is," said Crewe. "It couldn't be much worse, could
it?"
"I haven't been bad," she said--"not bad like you probably think I have."

"I never thought you were bad," he said. "You were just a victim like the
rest of them. You were only a kid when you started working for the colonel,
weren't you?"
She nodded.

"Well, there's a chance for you, Lollie. Your passage is booked and all
that sort of thing--have you sufficient money?"
"I've plenty of money," she said.

"Fine!" He dropped his hand lightly on her shoulder. "There's a big,
big chance for you, my girl." 
"And for you?" she asked.
He laughed.
"There is no chance for me at all," he said simply. "They'll take
me and they'll take Pinto and last of all they'll take the colonel.
It is written," he added philosophically. "Why--why, what is the
matter?"
She stood stock-still and was holding on to his arm with both
hands.
"You mustn't say that, you mustn't say that!" she said brokenly.
"It isn't finished for you, Jack. There's a chance to get out, and
the colonel has told you there's a chance. He meant it. He knows
much more than we do. If you've got murder on your soul, or something
worse; if you feel that you're altogether so bad that there isn't
a chance for you, that there's no goodness in your life which can
be expanded, why, just wait and take what's coming. But for God's
sake know your mind, and if you feel that in another land, with--with
someone who loves you by your side----" 
Her voice broke.
"Why, Lollie," he said very gently. "You don't mean----?"
"I'm just as shameless as I've ever been" she said, "but I'm not
proposing to marry you, I'm not asking for anything save your
friendship and your comradeship. I think people can love one another
without--marrying and all that sort of thing; but do you--will
you----" 
"Will I go?" he asked.

She nodded.This is a national loss.

Further, our hypothesis that the men voluntarily become more industrious
may be called an extreme and unlikely case. For that very reason it has
been here adopted. The ordinary causes give us _a fortiori_ argument,
because they are ever in action. _Skill_ naturally increases among men
employed continuously on any work. In a settled, industrious nation small
improvements accumulate. In modern Europe the cultivation of mechanics and
chemistry conduces to a steady improvement in tools, a cheapening also of
tools, and introduction of such more complex tools as we call "machines,"
by dint of all which human work constantly becomes more effective, so that
fewer and fewer workmen are needed for _the same amount_ of produce. Thus
the normal and natural order of things, wherever _the wage-system exists_
tends to dispense with some, or many, of the workmen. This is a clear gain
if the men thus displaced _are instantly taken up for some other service_.
But this seldom can happen; often their old skill is made useless, and
before they can learn a new trade they become demoralized, and many
perish. The loss of their industrial position is a grievance and a
national mischief which our "Economists" are prone to undervalue, and pass
unnoticed.

Let us contrast the case of men who work not for a master, not for wages,
but for themselves; holding their own little homestead, from which they
cannot be driven out. Such is the case of back-settlers in the Far West of
the United States. Each perhaps carries out with him a box of stout
clothes, some agricultural tools and important seeds, and either _squats_
on a bit of wild land, or by a very easy payment buys possession of the
Federal Government. This bit of land the settler counts _his own_. With
the aid of friendly neighbours he builds the rude log-hut. The felling of
the trees needed to construct it makes an opening for small culture. In a
very few years he raises more food than his family needs. If the season
and the roads favour, he sends his superfluous barrels of corn and fruit
eastward, and recovers an equivalent. But what happens if wide distance
part him from civilized towns, if the roads are swampy and not made by
art, and the conveyance of food be too onerous to remunerate him? All his
neighbours being in like case, there is a local Overproduction of food;
yet not one of the little community is thereby made a pauper. No one is
able to expel them from their rude homes, or forbid their cultivation.
They are not made outcasts or idlers. Simply they are kept poorer, than
with access to a market they would have been; but they lessen their
production of food, and either with the females of the family work at
clothing, or execute carpentering. In many ways they can use their time to
produce articles which they could have bought in a better finished state
had the market of the East been open to them. The present writer was
informed by an Englishman who in the American Civil War had penetrated
very far West, that he had seen with his own eyes a colonist _burning
wheat as fuel_, because he had it in so great excess. Probably he had
plenty of green maize for his horses and pigs.

Whenever a man retains a house of his own, and has neither rent to pay nor
any excessive taxation, if only he have a moderate plot of land for
workshop and garden, he is not made destitute, though he do not directly
raise food for his household, but works at some domestic manufacture. Our
"Spitalfields" poor who fought a long battle with the hand-loom against
the loom driven by steam power, might not have been at length utterly
ruined if they had had freehold houses and some small garden in a healthy
country. If the system of huge factories had had to compete with domestic
manufacture conducted by private families living in small freeholds, it is
possible that the battle might simply have driven the independent workers
either to buy small steam engines for their aid, or what now is more
obvious, to hire power from some company, as from a Gas Company or Water
Company, which had it in superfluity. Such, in the opinion of some far-
sighted men, may very possibly be even now the solution of our difficulty.

At present the Trade Unions gravely mistake the end for which they ought
to strive. They mischievously unite two objects. First, they are Benefit
Societies. The funds of a Benefit Society ought to be forbidden by law to
be spent in warring against capitalists; this enables the directors, or a
majority of them, to confiscate the whole contributions of any member who
disapproves of the war.

Next, the main effort to raise the status of the workmen is ill-directed
towards raising or sustaining the _rate_ of wages, else towards dictating
concerning the management. This effort is ill-directed, first, because it
is liable to aim at an impossibility--i.e. to extort from a master a wage
so high that he prefers not to light his engine fires; next, because to
raise the _rate_ of wages does not secure continuous work, and idle days
neither tend to sobriety nor give pay. Strikes which inflict vast loss
upon the workers cause loss to the masters also, and make them less able
to pay high wages. But beyond all these, if the Unions were wise, they
would struggle against the system of wage-earning, wherever it is new and
needless; that is, as far as possible, strive to recover the system of
domestic manufacture. For certain new and peculiar industries undoubtedly
combine, and large capital is essential; even in them the effort ought to
be towards uniting, _as far as possible_, the interests of each workman,
and of the company, the opposite of which is in general the Union policy.
But for every old trade independent work is physically possible, under the
condition that the workman have a fixed homestead. To effect this ought to
be the main effort of the Unions.

In the thirty-two years between the battle of Waterloo and the Irish
famine, the farmers and manufacturers were like two buckets of a well;
when one was up, the other was down. But now, both at once are down. The
causes are clearly separate.

Our manufacturers when allowed to accept payments from abroad In wheat and
sugar and foods and all raw produce, Immensely increased their foreign
sales; and during the Cotton Famine, capital was largely invested in
building new cotton mills, as if we were to supply all the world.

But the European Continent more and more chooses to compete with us, and
from more causes than one deprive our merchants of their customers.
Between us and our rivals more of the _same sort_ is produced than the
existing markets can take: this is again Overproduction. Hence stagnation
in our manufacturing districts. Meanwhile, in near thirty years of
manufacturing prosperity after 1847, the increased riches of these towns
enriched the farmers and enabled the landlords to raise rents in England,
and in consequence, by dint of landlord power, rent rose in the whole
United Kingdom. At the same time, Englishmen found too little
encouragement to invest their savings on English soil, and preferred to
invest many millions on foreign railways and on foreign loans; and the
payment of their dividends is made largely by imported foreign food. Their
investments at first were an advantage to our manufacturers, while they
sent out railway plant and carriages and locomotives. Now foreigners
compete with us even as to these, and the imported food competes with the
farmers. Thus a double failure convulses us.

How much better, if instead of quarrelling for distant markets (and _it is
said_ conquering Burmah in the hope of advantage to our merchants) we had
_a native population of small cultivators_, prosperous enough to be
valuable as well as steady customers to our manufacturing towns, and
gradually (in the course of several generations) another population of
country folk, substituting domestic manufactures for those of factories
with wage earners!


CHAPTER XXII

THE RIGHT AND DUTY OF EVERY STATE TO ENFORCE SOBRIETY ON ITS CITIZENS
BY F. W. NEWMAN, M.R.A.S.
PUBLISHED IN 1882 IN PAMPHLET FORM


No human community can be so small as not to involve duties from each
member to the rest; duties to which a sound human mind is requisite.
Neither an idiot nor a madman can be a normal citizen. The former ranks as
in permanent childhood; the latter, being generally dangerous, must be
classed with criminals. A dehumanized brain impairs a citizen's rights
because it unmans him,--disabling him from duty, even making him
dangerous. In India, such a one now and then runs amuck, stabbing every
one whom he meets: in England, he beats and tramples down those nearest to
him,--those whom he is most bound to protect. A human community cannot be
constituted out of men and brutes, nor ought civilized men to be forced to
carry arms or armour for self-defence. For all these reasons, to be drunk
is in itself an offence against the community, prior to any statute
forbidding it, prior to any misdemeanour superinduced by it. In the State
it is both a right and a duty to enforce (as far as its means reach)
sobriety on every citizen, rich or poor, in private or in public; and with
a view to this, to use such methods as will best prevent, discourage, or
deter from intoxication.

When a national religion totally forbids the use of intoxicating drugs,
vigilance in the State is less needful: public opinion, or even public
show of disgust and violence, effectively stifles the evil. But if the
national religion does not forbid the use, but solely enjoins moderation
(a word which everyone interprets for himself), a far heavier task falls
on the State, whose right and duty nevertheless in this matter several
causes have concurred to obscure, not least in England and Scotland. Out
of the teachings of Rome, our forefathers very ill learned the rights of
the State or the distinction of Morals from Religion. Although even men
not highly educated must have known that Moral truth is far older than any
special system of Religious beliefs, yet in the popular idea morals have
no other basis than religion. Hence, the demand for freedom of conscience
against any oppressive State policy (besides the vices of Courts and
Courtiers) led to a vehement jealousy of State power even in moral
concerns. Many generous minds feared, that to concede to the State a right
of enforcing morality, covertly allowed religious persecution. _Who_ first
uttered the formula--"The only duty of the State is, to protect persons
and property"--is unknown to the present writer; but certainly fifty,
forty, even thirty years ago, this principle was widely accepted by
radical politicians and active-minded dissenters. The late Dr. Arnold of
Rugby regarded this denial of the State's moral character as a widespread,
untractable and mischievous delusion.

After long torpor the prohibition of Lotteries showed that Parliament was
waking to its moral duties. Little by little, the mass of the middle-
classes and the gentry imbibed nobler views of human life, and have
discovered, that of all the powers which make a nation immoral the State
is the most influential. One day of licensed debauch undoes the work of
the Clergy on fifty-two Sundays. No wonder that in the past the State
collectively has been our worst corrupter: but to open this whole question
space does not here allow. A long struggle has gone on, to implore public
men not to connive at drunkenness--a national pest which for more than a
century was greeted with merriment though politically avowed to be
criminal. None dare now to laugh at it, except the depraved men who laugh
at bribery, and use drunkenness as a trump-card at elections, and, if in
office, rejoice on the vast revenue sucked by the Exchequer out of the
vice and misery of the people. There had been no chance of escape during
these three days, for his three friends had never left his side, and
now they were beside him. His chances were not brilliant. If he escaped
from the iron hoofs of the Sheikh's horse, if the weight did not crush the
life out of his small body, there was a fair chance; for to escape
unhurt from the Dosah is to prove yourself for ever a good Mussulman, who
has undergone the final test and is saved evermore by the promise
of the Prophet.

But even if he escaped unhurt, and the suspicions of his comrades were
allayed, what would the Khedive do? The Khedive had recognised him, and
had done nothing--so far. Yet Ismail, the chief Mussulman in Egypt, should
have thrown him like a rat to the terriers! Why he had acted otherwise
he was not certain: perhaps to avoid a horrible sensation at the Dosah
and the outcry of the newspapers of Europe; perhaps to have him assassinated
privately; perhaps, after all, to pardon him. Yet this last alternative
was not reasonable, save from the stand-point that Ismail had no religion
at all.

Whatever it was to be, his fate would soon come, and in any case he
had done what only one European before him had done--he had penetrated
to the tomb of Mahomet at Mecca. Whatever should come, he had crowded into
his short life a thousand unusual and interesting things. His inveterate
curiosity had served him well, and he had paid fairly for the candles
of his game. He was ready.

Low moans came to his ears. He could hear the treading hoofs of the
Sheikh's horse. Nearer and nearer the frightened animal came; the shout
of those who led the horse was in his ears: "Lie close and still, O
brothers of giants!" he heard the ribs of a man but two from him
break- he heard the gurgle in the throat of another into whose neck the
horse's hoof had sunk. He braced himself and drew his breast close to
the ground.

He could hear now the heavy breathing of the Sheikh of the Dosah, who,
to strengthen himself for his ride, had taken a heavy dose of hashish. The
toe of the Arab leading the horse touched his head, then a hoof
was on him--between the shoulders, pressing-pressing down, the iron
crushing into the flesh--down--down--down, till his eyes seemed to
fill with blood.

Then another hoof--and this would crush the life out of him. He gasped,
and nerved himself. The iron shoe came down, slipped a little, grazed his
side roughly, and sank between himself and the dervish next him, who had
shrunk away at the last moment.

A mad act; for the horse stumbled, and in recovering himself plunged forward
heavily. Dicky expected the hind hoofs to crush down on his back or neck,
and drew in his breath; but the horse, excited by the cries of the people,
drove clear of him, and the hind hoofs fell with a sickening thud on the
back and neck of the dervish who had been the cause of the disaster.

Dicky lay still for a moment to get his breath, then sprang to his feet
lightly, cast a swift glance of triumph towards the Khedive, and turned
to the dervishes who had lain beside him. The man who had shrunk
away from the horse's hoofs was dead, the one on the other side was badly
wounded, and the last, bruised and dazed, got slowly to his feet.

"God is great," said Dicky to him: "I have no hurt, Mahommed."
"It is the will of God. Extolled be Him who created thee!" answered the
dervish, all suspicion gone, and admiration in his eyes, as Dicky
cried his Allah Kerim--"God is bountiful!"
A kavass touched Dicky on the arm.
"His Highness would speak with you," he said. Dicky gladly turned
his back on the long lane of frantic immolation and the sight of
the wounded and dead being carried away. Coming over to the Khedive
he salaamed, and kneeling on the ground touched the toe of Ismail's
boot with his forehead.
Ismail smiled, and his eyes dropped with satisfaction upon the
prostrate Dicky. Never before had an Englishman done this, and that
Dicky, of all Englishmen, should do it gave him an ironical pleasure
which chased his black humour away.From sailors fond of grog and tobacco, proceed fire in ships out
at sea; and on foreign coasts, broils that disgrace England and
Christendom, and lay a train which sometimes explodes in war. The
drunkenness of a captain has before now stranded a noble ship. On a
railroad, access of the engine driver to drink is a prime danger; and
shall we say that there is no danger in Parliament legislating when half
asleep with wine, and hereby open to the intrigue of any scheming clique,
who may wish to fasten suddenly on the nation fraudulent or wicked law?
Wisely does the American Congress forbid to its members wine in its own
dining-room, because those who have to make sacred law are bound to
deliberate and vote with clear heads. Evil law is of all tyrannies the
most hateful, and makes a State contemptible to its own citizens--thus
preparing Revolution.

English Statesmen have yet to learn Yankee wisdom; but no one who is, or
hopes to be, in high office dares to speak lightly of drunkenness. The
celebrated Committee of 1834 advised Parliament to reverse its course,
with a view to the ultimate _extinction_ of the trade in ardent spirits.
The advice was disgracefully spurned; yet neither the legislature nor the
executive has ever dared to deny that drunkenness is a civil offence. Our
opponents plead only for the _use_, not for the _abuse_ of intoxicating
drink.

No doubt, teetotallers maintain that all use of such liquors for drink is
an abuse. The avowals of Dr. William Gull, who calls our view extreme,
beside those of Sir Henry Thompson and Dr. Benjamin Richardson, seem to
justify the extreme view: so do the Parisian experiments of 1860-1. Yet it
is not necessary to go so far _in a political argument_. I desire to
obtain common ground with such men as my friend Mr. P. A. Taylor, M.P. for
Leicester, and waive our difference with him as to _moderate use_. Let us
admit (that is, temporarily) that as Prussic Acid is fatal in ever so
small a draught, yet is safe as well as delicious in extract of almonds
and in custard flavoured by bay-leaf, so alcohol is harmless, not only in
Plum Pudding and Tipsy Cake, but also in one tumbler of Table Beer and one
wineglass of pure Claret. Let us further concede that the propensity of
very many to excess makes out no case for State-interference against the
man whose use of the dangerous drink is so sparing, that no one can
discover any ill effect of it on _him_. Nevertheless, irrefutable reasons
remain, why we should claim new legislation, and a transference of control
over the trade from the magistrates who do not suffer from it to the local
public who do.

First of all, let me speak of undeniable excess. At one time perhaps it
was punished by exposure in the pillory or stocks; but for a long time
past, the penalty (when not aggravated by other offences) has been at most
a pecuniary fine: five shillings used often to be inflicted. A "gentleman"
who could pay, was let off: a more destitute man might fare worse.
Inevitably, the vices of the eighteenth century affected national opinion.
The wealthier classes were so addicted to wine, that to be "as drunk as a
lord" became a current phrase. From highest to lowest the drunkard was an
object more of merriment than of pity, and scarcely at all of censure,
unless he were a soldier or sailor on duty. When a host intoxicated his
guests, it was called hospitality; to refuse the proffered glass was in
many a club an offence to good company. Peers and Members of Parliament,
officers of Army and Navy, Clergymen and Fellows of Colleges--nay, some
Royal Princes--loved wine, often too much. Who then could be earnest and
eager to punish poorer men for love of strong beer? The preaching of
Whitefield and Wesley began the awakening of the nation. A very able
Spaniard despondingly said of his country: "A profligate individual may be
converted, but a debased nation never"; and the recovery no doubt is
arduous, when the national taste has been depraved and vicious customs
have fixed themselves in society. Even now, few indeed are able to rejoice
in the punishment of mere drunkenness; for, the only penalty imagined is a
pecuniary fine, which never can prevent repetition nor deter others; when
most severe, it does but aggravate suffering to an innocent wife and
children. To be "drunk _and disorderly_" is now the general imputation
before a magistrate. Unless molestation of others can be charged, the
drunkard is very seldom made to feel the hand of the law. Hereby many
persons seem to believe (as apparently does one bishop) that, as a part of
English _liberty_, every one has a _right_ to be drunk. While we complain
that authorities are negligent and connive at vice, after accepting and
assuming the duty to prevent it; the _sellers_ of the drink are open to a
severer charge. A man too poor to keep a servant is glad to get a wife to
serve him. She is to him housemaid and cook and nurse of his children. For
all these functions she has a clear right to full wages, besides careful
nurture during motherly weakness. The husband manifestly is bound to
supply to his wife _more_ than all she might have earned in serving
others, before he spends a sixpence on his own needless indulgences: and
the publican knows it; knows, sometimes in definite certainty, always in
broad suspicion, that he is receiving money which does not in right belong
to his customer. Of course he cannot be convicted by law; but in a moral
estimate he is comparable to a lottery-keeper who accepts from shopmen
money which he suspects is taken from their master's till, or to a
receiver of goods which he ought to suspect to be stolen. Such is the
immoral aspect of traders, who now claim "compensation," if the twelve-
month licences granted to them as privilege, for no merit of their own,
be, _in the interest of public morality_, terminated at the end of the
twelve months. _In the interest and at the will of landlord magistrates_
such traders have borne extinction meekly, over a very wide rural area.
What made them _then_ so meek and unpretending? Apparently because against
powerful Peers and Squires impudence was not elicited in them by the
encouragement of a John Bright and a Gladstone.

How then ought the State to deal with a drunkard? Sowerby of the Mounted
Infantry was freed that night, and the next day Dicky Donovan had six
Circassian slaves upon his hands. He passed them over to the wife
of Fielding Bey with whom he had shared past secrets and past
dangers.asylums which
make a job for medical men, take the drunkard away from his family and
business, without anything to guarantee that on his release from prison he
will have a Will strong enough to resist the old temptation. Such asylums
please medical philanthropy; nor is any animosity displayed against them
in Parliament. How can we account for the fact, that M.P.'The coming
Capricorn will not enjoy the same privileges. Stiffly girt in his horn
cuirass, he will not be able to turn from end to end; he will not
even be capable of bending, if some sudden wind should make the passage
difficult.Had they never heard of it? This would
convict them of ignorance disgraceful in an M.P., still more so in a
Minister. Perhaps someone charitably suggests: "They think the prohibition
never could be enforced." To this pretence General Neal Dow makes reply:
"What we Yankees have done, you English certainly can do, WHENEVER YOU
HAVE THE WILL." Nothing is easier, when anyone has been convicted of
drunkenness, than to send official notice to all licensed shops (say,
within five miles) forbidding them to supply him, under penalty of
forfeiting their licences. At the same time it should be a misdemeanour in
anyone else to supply him gratuitously. (It would be pedantic here to
suggest after how long probation, and under what conditions, this stigma
should be effaceable.)

The misery which husband can inflict on wife, or wife on husband, by
drunkenness, has led many Yankees further, and--to our shame--we have as
yet refused to learn from them. If a wife (with certain legal formalities)
forbid the drinkshops to supply her husband, this should be of the same
avail, as if the husband were convicted of drunkenness before a
magistrate. Of course a husband ought to have the same right against a
wife, and either parent against a son or daughter under age. And he
said "nothing" in good English.

"Say your prayers then, Mahommed Ibrahim," said Dicky in that voice
like a girl's; and he backed a little till he rested a shoulder
against the binnacle.

Mahommed Ibrahim turned slightly till his face was towards the east.
The pistol now fell in range with his ear. The Orderly took off his shoes,
and, standing with his face towards the moon, and towards Mecca, he murmured
the fatihah from the Koran. Three times he bowed, afterwards he
knelt and touched the deck with his forehead three times also.How
deadly is now the propensity of the country, will sufficiently appear from
an experience of the late Sir Titus Salt in his little kingdom of
Saltaire.

For a single year he made trial of granting to four select shops a licence
to supply _table beer_ in bottles, delivered at the houses in quantity
proportioned to the number of inmates;--a more severe limitation than any
previously heard of. Yet in the course of some months evil grew up and
multiplied. Something stronger than table beer (apparently) had been
substituted. The liquor was smuggled into the works. Disobedience and
disorders arose; and at length a deputation of his own men complained to
him that their _women_ at home were getting too much of the drink. At the
year's end he cancelled the licences, and to the general content and
benefit restored absolute prohibition. Nothing short of this extinguishes
the unnatural taste. Female drunkenness is a new vice, at least in any but
the most debased of the sex: yet alas! courtly physicians now tell us that
it has invaded the boudoirs of great ladies. Such has been the mischief of
Confectioners' and Grocers' Licences.

Unsatisfactory as has been the control of the drink trade by the
magistrates, their neglect has never been resented in higher quarters,
ever since, by gift of the Excise, Parliament made the Exchequer a
sleeping partner in the gains of the Drink Trade. 'Tis impossible to tell
at the first glance.

The equilibrium of this living blanket is not so firm but that falls often
occur, especially when the mother climbs from indoors and comes
to the threshold to let the little ones take the sun.A transference of power is claimed, chiefly under the title of
Local Option. To give the power to town councils has been proved wholly
insufficient in Scotland; though the Right Hon. John Bright seems
obstinately to shut eyes and ears to the fact.

Again and again in crowded meetings the Resolution has been affirmed: "The
people who suffer by the trade ought to have a veto against it."All crowd
round her. The lady responds to their advances by clashing her mandibles,
which open and shut rapidly, several times in succession. The suitors
forthwith fall back; and they also, no doubt to keep up their dignity,
execute savage mandibular grimaces.The Publicans know far better, and they avow, there is
nothing they so much dread as local option. In Maine itself, a State
frightfully drunken in the first half of the century, the opponents of
Neal Dow in the State Legislature scornfully allowed him to carry a Bill
which gave to each parish _Permission_ to accept his measure as law. They
expected that the drunkards would outvote it: but to their discomfiture
found that the drunkards were glad of his law, and nailed it firm. Let all
sound-hearted Englishmen trust our suffering population to use their own
remedy. Under Local Option we now embrace two systems which have been
already discussed in Parliament--that of Sir Wilfrid Lawson, and that upon
the outlines of Mr. Joseph Cowen's Bill.

