"The same is true of the diaphragm; it is forced upward, the muscles
are therefore elongated and tense; but there is no evidence of
active contractions. Abdominal respiration ceases; gradually then,
as may be recognized by the limits of percussion, increasing loss
of _muscle tonus_ is added. In this case the autopsy showed that the
peritonitis had not advanced up to the serosa of the diaphragm."

[The muscle tonus when a patient is under the influence of opiates
cannot be reckoned with, for that drug paralyzes the muscles, and
the bowels fill with gas as was seen in this case up to the day
before the abscess ruptured; on that day feeding had been suspended,
resulting in a decrease of gas and an amelioration of all the
symptoms.]

"Among these signs pain, either spontaneous or upon touch, a rise in
temperature, increased frequency of the pulse and, in general, the
signs of severe illness, are to be looked upon as the local and
general symptoms of a severe septic inflammation; vomiting, at least
in the first stages of peritonitis, was due to decided reflex
irritation of the numerous branches of the peritoneal nerves; the
fecal discharges at the onset may be explained, but by no means
invariably, as due to peristalsis acting reflexively. The
constipation which followed this, however, as well as the meteorism,
must be attributed to a hypotonia and paralysis of the musculature
of the intestine by collateral edema."

[Beautiful sophistry. Words well woven together are captivating and
frequently dethrone reason. If I didn't happen to know better I
might really believe the author of this contribution to medical
science knew exactly what he was talking about.

The constipation in such diseases as this is caused by the fixing,
or natural resistance to motion, which is always to be found in
diseases of tile bowels and is one of nature's conservative
measures. The hypotonia or paralysis of the musculature was brought
about by the opium; and it is certainly strange that educated men
can build a symptom or condition by the administration of drugs and
yet remain absolutely unconscious of the part they are playing, and
proceed to build a beautiful theory explanatory of results.]

"The excessive abdominal pain, increased by movement and on the
slightest pressure, caused the patient to remain motionless upon his
back and to avoid the slightest movement of the abdomen either by
speaking or coughing."

[This is a characteristic symptom when there is great distention of
the bowels.]

"At the start the temperature was uniformly high, but later
remissions in the pus fever were recognized."

[All fever would have disappeared had it not been that the
intestinal putrefaction was kept alive by feeding.]

"The pulse from the onset was comparatively frequent, regular and
somewhat tense.

"The vomitus was at first composed of the gastric contents, the bile
of a peculiarly pure, grass-green, biliverdin color mixed with a
yellowish chyme-like material, and in the later stages of the
disease showed thin masses having a fecal odor_ (ileus
paralyticus)._ In regard to the dejecta, the two passages at the
onset of the disease pointed to increased peristalsis; this was of
short duration, soon changing to the opposite condition, and until
the rupture of the perityphlitic abscess absolute constipation
existed."

[The vomiting would have gone to stay within three days if no drugs
nor food had been given; as it was, when real vomiting ceased the
opium nausea began.

This patient was not allowed to come into that state of peristaltic
elimination that is due in all cases in three days at the farthest,
and which would have come to this man if food and drugs had been
withheld.]

"Pain upon urination and strangury was due to inflammation of the
peritoneal coat of the bladder, in which a noticeable irritation was
produced by slight distention as well as by contraction of the
bladder. The albuminuria was the well known infectio-toxic 'febrile'
form; indicanuria was in proportion to tile fecal stasis.

"In the course of the next few days a new symptom was added to this
group: Exudation, which was demonstrable both by palpation and
percussion. It was the natural consequence of inflammation of the
peritoneum, and was both of diagnostic value as indicating general
peritonitis and of special value in that, more definitely than the
pain, it pointed to the original seat of the affection, which,
according to present indications, could only have been an internal
incarceration following right-sided inguinal hernia, or femoral
hernia, or appendicitis. As neither the history nor the general
status (normal condition of the hernial rings) furnished any points
of support for the first view, only the diagnosis of appendicitis,
that is, of perforation of the appendix, could be made with that
degree of certainty attainable in diseases of the abdominal cavity
in general.

"After the appearance of these symptoms, a more or less firmly
adherent but limited perityphlitic abscess, and a less intense
although well developed peritonitis in this region, were assumed;
the latter, notwithstanding the painful meteorism, was not
necessarily diffuse in the strict sense of the term; the omentum
often protects the upper abdominal cavity from infection, as was
proven in this case at the autopsy. It is possible that this diffuse
peritonitis, which did not in the early period of the affection
extend beyond the limited local focus, was not due to the intestinal
contents and to bacteria, but chiefly to bacterial toxins which
arose from the circumscribed original focus. This fact is pointed
out by the prompt retrogression of the diffuse peritoneal symptoms
after rupture of the abscess; the diffuse peritonitis of this stage
might then be designated a nonbacterial 'chemical' inflammation,
according to the terminology now in vogue; finally, it was
positively a bacterial infection, although the postmortem finding of
bacteria in the distant folds of the peritoneum is not proof of
this; we know that during the terminal agony or after death these
may wander a long distance from the perityphlitic focus."

[The author plays so fast and loose with the words, "diffuse
peritonitis," that I am reminded of a remark made to me several
years ago by a society lady who posed as a pace-setter in all
matters pertaining to the intricacies of what one should and should
not do. The subject was one that I did not know much about at that
time, and upon which I am not much better informed at present. It
was on diamonds. I complimented her on a very beautiful sunburst.
She took the compliment modestly, of course. The center diamond was
large and, I thought, of uncommon brilliancy, and I remarked, "That
center stone properly mounted would make a very fine solitaire." She
then informed me that she once owned a _cluster of solitares._

The author tells us that at first the diffuse peritonitis probably
did not extend beyond the local focus; this of course is exactly
what I am contending for from first to last and I insist that there
was not peritonitis proper until the occurrence of the fatal
relapse.

It is somewhat surprising that this article should be selected to
represent the last word on this subject, when the author builds his
treatment upon diffuse peritonitis; then enters into a lengthy
analysis and explanation of symptoms to fit the diagnosis and
treatment and before he is through with the subject he declares that
the _diffusion is confined _to the focus of infection.

If I did not know something of the worth of words I am not sure but
such an excellent explanation might persuade me!! If I did not know
from experience that all this is _theory, beautiful theory, _it
might be very hard to resist!]

