Some of them are not, however, models of ideal data organization when
it comes to Internet listings. There are lots of one- or two-person
operations dealing with an inventory of many thousands of books, and
having located your book online, you should check that it's still
available.

You can place an order through the site and wait for the confirmation,
or you can simply call the bookseller. Not all booksellers' contact
details are listed, so it's not always an option, but when you do
phone you're likely to be speaking immediately to someone who can tell
you for sure whether the book is still there, can pull the book off
the shelf and answer questions about it, and can take your credit card
details on the spot and dispatch the book immediately.


Copyright Clearance

As soon as your book arrives, send us the information needed for
Copyright Clearance first. Even if your book is a true-blue,
no-questions-asked pre-1923 edition, we should know about it as soon
as possible so that it can go onto the In-Progress list for others to
see that someone has started on it.

Wait for the confirmation e-mail before starting any serious work.
Some people have thought that "Copyright 1923" plus some wishful
thinking would be good enough, and, unfortunately, it isn't. Some
people have gone ahead and produced the whole book before sending
in the clearance, only to be disappointed, all their work wasted.

Books published in 1922 or earlier are clearable, but some people,
ever optimists, overlook that little "1927" in small print on the
verso. Sometimes there is no copyright date on the front, and other
optimists assume that these books are OK. They may be; they may not
be. Don't get caught in the copyright trap.

As soon as you have what you think might be an eligible book, do
not start on it. Do not ask another volunteer's opinion. Just send
in the TP&V and wait for the confirmation e-mail to find out for sure.

Even when your TP&V clearly says "Copyright 1901", send it in.
We need to get it into the clearance files so that we can register
it as being In-Progress.


Producing

If you're a typist, there's not much more you need to know from this
point: you can just get on with the job, with maybe a few tips from
the FAQ. In fact, if you're a typist, you might wonder why the rest of
us make such a fuss about scanners, and settings, and OCR. Take pity
on us! we just can't produce the way you can. Smile indulgently,
ignore all the scanner jargon, and submit your completed text while
we're still saying bad words about the guttering on a greyscale image
of page 372. :-)

If you are using a scanner to copy a book for the first time, be
patient with yourself. Some people start off with too high
expectations of what they can achieve. Believe it or not, scanning
does work effectively; it just doesn't work perfectly. And often, you
need a little practice before your scans work right with your OCR. The
Scanning FAQ [S.1] has lots of specific tips you can try. Start by
scanning a double-page about a third of the way through the book. Scan
in Black and White and in Greyscale, at 300dpi and 400dpi. Try 600 dpi
if it seems like a good idea. Put it through your OCR and see what
comes out. Move your scanner so that you can be comfortable while
placing the book and turning pages. Allow yourself an hour to
experiment with different settings, and different pages. Put the
sample images included with the Scanning FAQ through your OCR and
see how the output compares to the text produced by other packages.
That first hour finding out about how your setup works will be the
most valuable hour of scanning you will ever do.

Having figured out what settings you want to use for this book, make
sure you implement the best speed you can. Usually this means telling
the scanner to scan _only as much area as the book covers_. This is
quite important, since the scanner will by default scan its whole
area, and you don't need all that; it just wastes time and makes your
images bigger.

You may also be able to set your OCR or scanner software to auto-scan
pages with some preset delay, like 5 seconds. This also speeds things
up, because the scanner isn't waiting for you to hit the keyboard, and
you have both hands free at all times to turn the page and replace the
book. It takes a few pages to get into the rhythm; if you miss a
page-turn, don't worry--you can get it on the next scan.

Using a reasonably modern but quite ordinary home/office type flatbed
scanner, you should be able to scan 200 pages an hour [S.9] of a 
typical book, at good quality. 400 pages an hour is not unheard-of.
Now, it may fairly be said that scanning offers all the fun of ironing,
without the sense of adventure :-), but if you have got your settings
right, you will probably be able to do the whole job in less than two
hours. And now you're really on the road!


V.2. What experience do I need to produce or proof a text?

None.

For producing, you will have to be able to type pretty well, or have
a scanner.

For proofing someone else's text, when you don't have a copy of the
book in front of you, you should be reasonably familiar with the
language used in the book, and the styles of the time--Chaucer's
English was quite different from ours, and even 19th Century novelists
write some phrases unfamiliar to us today.

That's it. You don't need experience in publishing, editing, or
computers.


V.3. How do I produce a text?

There are acres of words in this FAQ about that, but it all boils
down to 4 simple steps:

 1. Get an eligible book--pre-1923, or one of the exceptions. Pull
    it from your attic, borrow it from a library or a friend, buy it
    in your local bookstore, in a flea-market or on-line. We don't
    care which.
 2. Send us a copy or the front and back of the title page so we
    can file proof of copyright clearance.
 3. Copy the text from the book into a computer text file. We don't
    care whether you type it, scan it, voice-dictate it, or think of
    some totally new way to do it. Just get it into a file.
 4. Send us the computer text file.

That's all there is to it!


V.4. Do I need any special equipment?

You need the use of a computer of some kind, and Internet access is
usual, though we have had some volunteers contribute texts on floppy
disks.

If you intend to scan books, you will need a scanner, but if you're
just typing or proofing you won't.


V.5. Do I need to be able to program?

Absolutely not! Very little of Project Gutenberg's work involves
programming, and it is never necessary to any part of volunteering.


V.6. I am a programmer, and I would like to help by programming.
     What can I do?

At the risk of sounding facetious, the very best thing you can do is
figure out ways that more programming can help Project Gutenberg!

A lot of programmers work on PG books, and anything easy has probably
already been done. The challenge for programmers who want to write
something that will help to produce etexts is not in writing the code;
it's in identifying ways that programs can help.

Please see the FAQ "What programs could I write to help with PG work?"
[P.2] for some ideas in this direction. Whatever you do, don't just
hang around waiting for someone to ask you to write something, because
that's not going to happen. Think up a project, ask volunteers if they
would use it, and dig in! Better still, produce a few etexts yourself,
using the existing tools, and get a feel for the kinds of problems
that new software could help with.

Apart from text production, we do develop some programs to help with
posting work, but as of mid-2002, we have nothing like an ongoing
programming project which people can join.


V.7. What does a Gutenberg volunteer actually do?

We buy or borrow eligible books, scan, type, and proofread. There are
a few other activities, but they consume only a very small fraction of
volunteer time.


V.8. Can I produce a book in my own language?

Yes! We want to encourage people to produce books in all languages,
and we cheer when we can add a new language to the list.


V.9. Does it have to be a book? Can I produce pieces from a magazine
     or other periodical?

Magazines, newspapers, and other publications are just fine. For
copyright clearance, they work just the same way as a book.

You do need to check the length of your piece [V.17]; we don't want a
zillion separate one- or two-page files. If the piece you have in mind
isn't long enough, you can add other pieces to it, or even most or all
of the magazine. If the work was serialized over multiple issues, you
can join them together for your PG text, but you do have to copyright
clear every issue of the magazine from which you copy material.

If you have lots of old periodicals, you could even take one piece
from several, and make a new text which is a "theme" anthology of
those pieces. You can give it an appropriate title: "Civil War
Commentaries from X magazine 1892-1898."


V.10. Do I _have_ to produce in plain ASCII text?

Certainly not if it doesn't make sense. To take an extreme example, if
you're working in Japanese or Arabic, or creating audio files, there
is no point in trying to reproduce that in ASCII!

Where the text can largely be expressed in ASCII, we do want to post
an ASCII version, even if it is somewhat degraded compared to the
original. However, we will post your file in as many open formats as
you want to create, so that your original work is available for those
who have the software to read it.


V.11. Where do I sign up as a volunteer?

You don't. We have no formal sign-up process, no list of volunteers,
no roll-call. If you produce a PG eBook, or help to produce one, you
are a volunteer.


V.12. How do PG volunteers communicate, keep in touch, or co-ordinate work?

We are very scattered geographically: U.S., Australia, Brazil, Taiwan,
Germany, South Africa, Italy, India, England, and all over the world,
so we can't really meet for coffee on Thursdays. :-)

Most co-operation and co-ordination goes on by private e-mail. This is
efficient for volunteers who have worked with each other before, since
they know each other's interests and skills, but not so easy for
beginners to break in on, since they don't.

The Volunteers' Web Board at <http://promo.net/pg/vol/wwwboard/> is a
publicly accessible forum for volunteers or potential volunteers to
post any question or information about how to create a PG eBook.

There are a few Project Gutenberg mailing lists. Information about
joining them is available on the main site, at 
<http://promo.net/pg/subs.html>.

The Project Gutenberg Weekly and Monthly Newsletters, gweekly and
gmonthly, are one-way announcements, which allow PG to communicate with
non-volunteers who are interested in the eBooks we produce, but they
also contain notes and requests for assistance from volunteers.

The Volunteers' Discussion Mailing list, gutvol-d, is a an e-mail
discussion forum for subscribers about any Gutenberg topic.

The Volunteers' List, gutvol-l, is for private announcements for
active volunteers.

The Programmers' List, gutvol-p, is for discussion of programming
topics.

There are some other, specialized, closed lists for people who
do specific work within PG:

The "Posted" List, posted, is for people who perform indexing on our
texts. An e-mail is sent to this list every time we post a text (see
the FAQ "How does a text get produced?" [V.16] section 5: Notification)
and the members of the list use it to update their catalogs.

The Whitewashers' List, pgww, is for Posting Team internal messages.

