"That's little Pixie!  Esmeralda gave her two shillings for unpicking
some old dresses, and she went into the village and got photographed for
my birthday present.  There was a travelling photographer down for a
week, and it's wonderfully like her for eighteenpence.  The other
sixpence she spent on a frame--green plush, with shells at the corners.
Esmeralda had remarks to make when I put it on the drawing-room
mantelpiece, and offered to give me a silver one instead."  Bridgie
smiled and shook her head with an expression which showed that the price
of the green plush frame was above rubies.  "No, indeed!  It's not
likely I will give up Pixie's present."

"She is not very like any of you!"  Sylvia said lamely.  She wanted to
be pleasant and appreciative, but could not think what on earth to say
next.  "It must be--er--very nice to have a little sister.  She is in
Paris, you say.  Will she be away long?"

"She is coming home for good in January.  Geoffrey and Esmeralda are
going over to bring her back, and she will go on with finishing lessons
at home.  We can't do without each other any longer.  I feel quite sore
with wanting her sometimes, and she is home-sick too.  I had a letter
from her this morning.  Would you like me to read it to you to show you
what she is like?"

"Please do!" said Sylvia politely, but in reality she was rather bored
by the prospect.

It was one of Aunt Margaret's peculiarities that she insisted upon
reading aloud the letters which she received from old-lady friends, and
the incredible dulness of the epistles made them a trial to the patience
of her lively young niece.  She stifled a yawn as Bridgie straightened
the sheets of foreign note-paper, and cleared her throat with
prospective enjoyment.

  "`Dearest, Darling People, especially Bridgie,--I was gladder than
  ever to get your letters this week, because it's been raining and
  dull, and the mud looked so home-like that it depressed my spirits.
  Therese has gone out for the day, so Pere and I are alone.  He wears
  white socks and a velvet jacket, and sleeps all the time.  He told me
  one day that he used to be very active when he was young, and that was
  why he liked to rest now.  "All the week I do nozzing, and on Sundays
  I repose me!"  I teach him English, but he doesn't like to talk it
  much, because it's so difficult to be clever in a foreign language.

  "`My dear, I never suffered more than when I first came here, and
  Therese telling everyone how amusing I was, and myself sitting as dumb
  as a mummy!  I can talk quite beautifully now, and wriggle about like
  a native.  I'll teach you how to shrug your shoulders, and you hold up
  your dress quite differently in France, and it's fashionable to be
  fat.  Last night Therese let me have two girls for _souper_.  They are
  called Marie and Julie, and wear plaid dresses, and combs in their
  hair.  I like them frightfully, but they are very rude sometimes,
  saying France is better than England, and that we have big teeth and
  ugly boots.  Then they got angry because I laughed, and said England
  always thought she was right, but that everyone else knew she was a
  cheat and a bully, and that she was the most disliked nation on earth!
  "And you are the politest," says I, quite composed, and at that they
  got red in the face, for I was all alone, and there were two of them
  in their own country.

  "`When they went away they kissed me, and said they were sorry, and
  that my teeth weren't big a bit, and I said France was an elegant
  country, but you couldn't wear high heels in Ireland, or you'd never
  be free of the bog.  It's a pity French people don't like us, and I
  don't think they always mean exactly what they say, but they make
  beautiful things to eat.

  "`Therese gives me cooking lessons out of school hours, and I've lost
  my taste for coffee with grounds in it, like we had at Knock.
  Everything is as clean as if it were quite new, and there is such a
  different smell in the houses--a lonely smell!  It makes me long for
  home and you, and a peat fire, and all the people in the streets
  speaking English, and never as much as thinking of the tenses of
  verbs.

  "`You are quite sure I may come home in January, aren't you, Bridgie?
  You are not saying it just to pacify me?  I'll tell you a secret!
  Once I thought of running away and coming back to you in London,
  because I couldn't bear myself any longer.  I said to Therese, just in
  a careless kind of way, as if I had only thought of it that moment:
  "Supposing now that a young girl was in Paris, and wanting to run away
  to her friends in England, how would she set about getting there?"

  "`And she never suspected a bit, for she said:--

  "`"Supposing that she lived in this suburb, it would be quite easy to
  manage.  She should rest tranquil until the family were in bed, and no
  one in the streets but thieves and robbers, and then slip out of the
  house and walk to the station.  There would be no _voiture_, but
  perhaps the thieves may not see her, and all of them do not care about
  kidnapping children.  When she reaches the station, she will take her
  ticket for England--it costs but a few sovereigns--and she has only to
  change twice, and get through the custom-house.  If all went well, she
  would be in London next morning, while the poor friends in Paris might
  cry as much as they liked--they could not bring her back."

  "`She seemed to think it quite easy, but I was afraid of the thieves,
  and had only three francs in my purse; and that afternoon they were
  both awfully kind to me, and Pere called me _cherie_, and Therese took
  me to the circus.  The clown is called August, but the principal one
  is English, because they are the best.  He made English jokes, and I
  laughed as loudly as I could, to show that I understood.  The other
  people smiled with their lips, don't you know--the way people do when
  they don't understand, but think it is grand to pretend.  I feel so
  stylish being English in France.  When I come home to London, I'll be
  French!

  "`Esmeralda sent me a book and some money for Christmas presents.
  Tell Jack to write me a funny letter with illustrations.  How is the
  poor girl with the bark on the road?  We haven't a single animal in
  the house, not even a cat.  I miss them frightfully.  Do you remember
  when my ferret died, and I filled up to cry, and the Major bought me a
  white rat for consolation?  Health, and tons of love, darling, from
  your own Pixie.'"

Sylvia chuckled softly from the bed.

"It's not a scrap like a letter," she said.  "It is just like somebody
talking.  What a jolly little soul!  She seems very young, doesn't she?
Some girls of sixteen are quite young ladies."

"Pixie will always be a child," said Pixie's sister fondly.  "There is
something simple and trustful about her which will keep her young all
her life.  She is so transparently honest, that it never occurs to her
that anyone else can be different; and she is the kindest, most loving
little creature that was ever created.  Don't you think she looks a
darling in the photograph?"

It had come at last, the dreaded question, and Sylvia tried her best to
combine truthfulness with politeness.

"She has very sweet eyes.  It is difficult to judge when you have never
seen a person.  She--she isn't exactly pretty, is she?"

"_Pretty_--Pixie pretty!  I should think not, indeed!" cried Bridgie,
with a heat of denial which seemed singularly out of keeping with the
occasion.  From the manner of her reply it was evident that she
considered Pixie's plainness a hundred times more _distingue_ than
Esmeralda's beauty.  "She's the quaintest-looking little creature that
ever you set eyes on, with the dearest, funniest face!  Father used to
call her the ugliest child in Galway.  He was so proud of her, bless
him!"

Bridgie sighed pensively, and Sylvia stared at her with curious eyes.
So far she had made the acquaintance of but one member of the
O'Shaughnessy family, but it seemed as though they took the various
trials and vicissitudes of life in a very different spirit from the
people with whom she herself had associated.  Instead of moaning over
the inevitable, they discerned the humour of the situation, and in happy
fashion turned the trial into a joke.

"I wonder," sighed Sylvia to herself, "I wonder where the joke comes in
in losing your hair.  I suppose she would say it was so cool to be
bald!"  Not even to herself would she put into words the deeper,
crueller dread which lay hauntingly in the background of her mind!


CHAPTER FOUR.

DREAD.

The foot refused to heal, and one morning a well-known surgeon followed
Dr Horton into the sick-room.  The very sound of his name was as a
death-knell to the girl in the bed, but she controlled herself by a
mighty effort, and strained every nerve to watch the faces of her
attendants during the examination which followed.  She knew that they
would keep up appearances in her presence, and so long as possible hide
the worst from her knowledge; but if she appeared unsuspicious they
would perhaps be less careful, and a stray word, an interchange of
glances, might show the direction of their thoughts.  She lay perfectly
still, not even flinching with pain when the diseased bone was touched,
for the tension of mind was so great as to eclipse bodily suffering; but
the cool, business-like manner of the great surgeon gave no hint of his
decision, while Dr Horton was as cheerful, Whitey as serenely composed,
as on ordinary occasions.

The cage was replaced over the foot, the bedclothes put in order, a few
pleasant commonplaces exchanged, and the trio adjourned for
consultation.  Trained to their work of self-repression, not one of them
had given the slightest hint of what was feared, but their precautions
were undone by the thoughtless haste of the watcher outside.

Miss Munns was hovering about the landing awaiting the verdict, and
trembling at the thought of the news which she might have to send to her
brother, when the door opened and the surgeon came towards her.  Dr
Horton and the nurse followed, and before the door was closed behind
them an eager whisper burst from her lips--

"Can you save it?  Must you ampu--"

Before the word was completed the surgeon's hand was over her lips,
Whitey brought to the door with a bang, and three pale faces stared at
each other in consternation.  Had Sylvia heard?  Could she have
overheard?  That was the question which was agitating every mind.  They
strained their ears for a cry from the sick-room, but no cry came.
Whitey looked at the doctor and made a movement towards the door, and he
bent his head in assent.

"Yes!  Go in as if you had forgotten something.  She may have fainted.
Poor child, it was enough to make her!"

Tears of remorse were standing in Aunt Margaret's eyes, but she waited
silently enough now while Whitey re-entered the room and strolled across
to the window to pick up the book in which she wrote the daily report.
She smiled at Sylvia as she passed, and Sylvia looked at her quietly,
quite quietly, and the dark eyes showed no signs of tears.  Whitey went
back to the doctors with lightened face, and eased their minds by a
definite assurance.

"She heard nothing.  She is lying quite still and composed.  She cannot
possibly have heard."

They turned and went downstairs to the dining-room.  Sylvia heard their
footsteps die away in the distance, the opening and shutting of the
door.  The brown eyes shone with unnatural brilliancy, the hot hands
were clasped tightly together beneath the sheet.

"God," she was crying deep down in her soul, "do You really mean it?
I've been very wicked often, I've forgotten You and taken my own way,
but I'm so young--only twenty-one--don't make me lame!  I'll be good,
I'll think of other people, I'll be grateful all my life.  Don't make me
lame!  Think what it means to a girl like me to lose her foot!  I have
no mother, nor brothers, nor sisters, and father is far-away.  It would
be so dreadful to be shut up here and never, never run about any more.
Have pity on me.  _Don't make me lame_!"

It was a cry from the depths of her heart, very different from the
formal prayers which she was accustomed to offer morning and evening--a
plea for help such as she would have addressed to her dear earthly
father in any of the minor difficulties of life, but in this great
crisis of her fate she must needs go straight to the fountain of
comfort--the Great Physician who was able to save the soul as well as
the body.

All the rest of the day, as she lay so quietly on her pillows, she was
talking to Him, pleading for deliverance, setting forth pathetic girlish
arguments why she should be spared the coming trial.  When the thought
arose of many others younger than herself who were leading maimed lives,
she thrust the memory aside as something which could not be faced, and
her lips refused to utter the words which she had been taught to affix
to her petitions.  "`Nevertheless, not my will, but Thine be done.'  I
can't say it, Lord.  I can't mean it!" she cried tremblingly.  "Not yet!
Forgive me, and be patient with me.  I'm so frightened!" and even as
the prayer went up, the assurance came into her soul that the Heavenly
Father would understand, and show towards her the divinest of sympathy
and patience.

For some reason which she would have found difficult to explain to
herself Sylvia felt an intense disinclination to let her attendants know
what she had overheard.  She perceived that they were more than usually
tender towards herself, and they on their part were puzzled by the quiet
of the once restless patient.  She grumbled no more about small
unpleasantnesses--oh, how small they seemed!  She was content to lie
still and think her own thoughts, and seemed to have lost all interest
in the ordinary events of the day.

Only once in the twenty-four hours did a smile light up the set face,
and that was when Bridgie O'Shaughnessy appeared for her afternoon
visit, and seated herself by the bedside.  On one of these occasions, a
week after the surgeon's first visit, Whitey went out for, her daily
walk, and Sylvia watched her go and peered anxiously round the screen to
make sure that the door was really shut.  Then she stretched out her
hand, and gripped Bridgie by the wrist.  It was a very thin, feeble-
looking hand, but the grip had nothing feeble about it--it was almost
painful in its strength, and the brown eyes had a glazed misery of
expression which made Bridgie tremble at the thought of what was to
come.

"Bridget O'Shaughnessy, you call yourself my friend.  Will you tell me
the truth?"

"I'll not promise that, me dear.  I'll not deceive you about anything if
I can help it, but you are an invalid, and there are some questions
which you should not ask me.  Only the doctor should answer them."

But Sylvia went on with her story as if she had not heard the protest.

"The other morning Sir Alfred Heap came to see my foot.  He said very
little about it to me, and after examining it, went out of the room to
consult with Dr Horton.  Aunt Margaret was waiting for them on the
landing, and they were not quick enough in shutting the door.  I heard
what she said.  To-morrow morning Sir Alfred is coming again.
Bridgie,--_is he going to cut off my foot_?"

"He is not, darling.  He is going to give you chloroform and do
something to the bone to try to make it sound and healthy again."

"And if that fails, will he cut it off then?"

"He will operate again, and go on trying as long as he dare."

"And if everything else fails, then--"

"Yes, Sylvia," said Bridgie gently.

Downstairs in the dining-room Miss Munns had been consulting with Whitey
as to how the patient was to be prepared for the ordeal of to-morrow,
and by whom the news should be broken.  Whitey had taken the task upon
herself with the unselfish heroism of her profession, but her pretty
face was worn with the strain of this long anxious case, and Bridgie's
heart had ached for her in her painful task.  Now, in the midst of her
own agitation, she felt a thrill of unselfish joy that she had been able
to take one burden at least from those heavily-laden shoulders.

Sylvia knew not only of the ordeal of the morrow, but also of that
nightmare dread of what might have to follow.  She had known it for a
week past, and had lain quietly on her bed with all the horror and
misery of it locked up in her own heart.  Such restraint seemed almost
incredible to the outspoken Irish nature, but Bridgie's words of
admiration brought an added shade over the invalid's face.

"No, it was not bravery, it was cowardice!  I was like an ostrich hiding
my head in the ground for fear of what I might see.  I literally dare
not ask until it came to the last moment.  Oh, Bridgie, what a week it
has been!  Going to sleep with the weight on my heart; waking up and
thinking, `What is it?  What is it?' and the shock of remembering
afresh!  I lay and thought it all out; never to be able to run, nor
bicycle, nor skate, nor dance, nor even walk without crutches, to dread
going upstairs, to be cut off from girls of my own age because I could
not take part in their amusements, to hear people say `Poor thing!' and
look pitifully at me as I hobbled by.  I've tried to be resigned and
take it like invalids in books, but--I can't!  I feel desperate.
Bridgie, suppose it was you!  How would you feel?"

"I should cry myself ill for two or three days, and then brisk up and be
thankful that if it was one foot, it wasn't two!" said Bridgie quaintly.
"That is, if I were quite certain about it, but I never believe in
disagreeable things until they have really happened.  Hope for the best
as long as you can.  You have clever doctors and nurses, and you will
have a better chance if you keep up your spirits."

Sylvia shook her head hopelessly.

"It's easy to be philosophic for someone else.  I could preach
beautifully to you, Bridgie, if you were lying here instead of me, but
the suspense is so hard to bear!  I feel as if I could not live through
another week like the last.  Have you ever known what it was to drag
through the days with a nightmare of dread growing bigger and bigger,
nearer and nearer, to look ahead and see your life robbed of the things
you care for most, to hope against hope, while all the time your heart
is sinking down--down--"

"Down--until it is just one great big ache clouding out the whole world?
Yes, I know!" said Bridgie quietly.  "I have never had a bad illness,
but my trouble came to me in a different way, Sylvia, and my time of
suspense was not days, but weeks and months, I might almost say years,
except that even my hopes died out before that time arrived!"

The two girls looked at each other intently, and the blank depression on
the invalid's face gave place to one of anxious sympathy.

"You mean, of course, that it was a mental trouble.  Could you tell me
about it, Bridgie, do you think?  I don't want to force your confidence,
but I am so interested in you, and it would do me good to be sorry for
someone beside myself.  Was it a--love affair?"

"I cared for him, but I am afraid he could not have liked me very much,"
said Bridgie sadly.  "I have never spoken of him except to Esmeralda and
one other person, but I don't mind telling you, dear, if it will be the
least bit of help to you now.  We seem to know each other so well that
it seems absurd to think we had not met, two months ago.

"It was just someone I met one time when I was visiting, and when he was
ordered abroad he asked if he might write while he was away.  I was very
happy about it, for I had never seen anyone I liked so much, and we
wrote to each other regularly for over a year.  They were not love-
letters; just quite ordinary, sensible, telling-the-news, but there was
always one little sentence in his which seemed to say more than the
words, and to tell me that he cared a great deal.  If a stranger had
read it, he would not have understood, but I knew what he meant, and I
used to skim over the pages until I came to those few words, and they
were the whole letter to me.

"Looking back now I can see how I lived in expectation of mail day, but
suddenly his letters stopped.  When father was pronounced hopelessly
ill, I sent him a hurried note, saying that we should have to leave the
Castle, for all the money was gone, and from that day to this I have
heard no more.  It was very hard coming just then, Sylvia!

"For the first few months I was not really uneasy, though very
disappointed.  I knew that a soldier's life is not always his own, and
that he might have been ordered to a part of the country where it was
impossible to send off letters, but then I read his name as taking part
in some function in Bombay, and I knew that could be the case no longer.
I would not tell Esmeralda to depress her in the midst of her
happiness, so I just sat tight and waited, and the time was very long.

"When it came near mail day my hopes would go up, for it's my nature to
be cheerful.  The postman would knock at the door, and my heart would go
head over heels with excitement, and it would be a circular, or a bill
wanting payment.  Another time he would not come at all, and that was
worse, for one went on drearily hoping and hoping, and pretending that
the clock was fast.  Now I forget mail days on purpose, for it is nearly
eighteen months since he wrote last, and I have given up all hope of
hearing."

Sylvia drew a deep sigh, and knitted her forehead.

"I can't believe that anyone could forget you when he had once cared.
You are so different from other girls.  It is most strange and
mysterious.  Do you think that perhaps--you won't mind my suggesting
it--the money had some influence with him?  Perhaps he thought you were
an heiress--at any rate, that your people were rich and influential, and
when he heard that you were poor he may have changed."

"No!" said Bridgie decisively.  "No, I won't think it!  I won't let
myself think so badly of anyone for whom I have cared so much.  I don't
know what his reasons were, and perhaps I never shall, but I would
rather believe the best.  Some people don't find it easy to remember
when they are far-away, and he might have a delicacy in writing to say
that he had forgotten!

"If I had still been Miss O'Shaughnessy of Knock, I should have sent
just one more letter to ask if anything was wrong, but I had too much
pride to obtrude myself as Bridgie of nowhere.  I have no reason to
believe that my letter went astray, and even if it had, he would have
written again if he had wished to hear.  He is alive and well, I know so
much, and I'm well too, and very happy with my boys.  I had a bad time
of it, and the suspense had more to do with making me ill than the hard
work of that summer; but now I have faced the worst, and have far too
much to do to be able to mope.  Boys are such cheering creatures!  They
give you so much work.  The very darning of their socks is a
distraction!"

"It would distract me in a very different way!" said Sylvia, with a
smile.


CHAPTER FIVE.

AN INVITATION.

The operation was successful and unsuccessful--that is to say, the fear
of amputation was removed; but it became abundantly evident that it
would be a very long time before Sylvia recovered the power of walking
about with ease.

A few weeks earlier she would have been heartbroken at the prospect of a
spell of crippledom, but the greater troubles eclipse the less, and
compared with that other paralysing dread, it was a passing
inconvenience at which she could afford to smile.

Poor child! her first impulse on recovering from the chloroform had been
to dive to the bottom of the bed to feel if the foot were still there,
and her elastic spirits went up with a bound as she listened to the
surgeon's reassuring report.  She was perfectly willing to lie on the
sofa and give up all idea of Christmas festivities, willing, in fact, in
the relief and joy of the moment, to promise anything and everything if
only she might look forward to unimpaired strength in the future.

As for Miss Munns, she rejoiced with grumbling, as her custom was,
mingling thankful speeches with plaints for her own deprivations, to the
mingled distress and amusement of her hearers.  Christmas was drawing
near, and there had been no time to prepare for the proper keeping of
the festival, for cook had been too much occupied with jellies and beef-
teas to have any time to spare.  There were no mince-pies in the larder,
no plum-puddings in their fat cloth wrappings, no jars of lemon cheese,
no cakes, no shortbread, not so much as a common bun-loaf, and Aunt
Margaret hung her head, and felt that a blot had fallen upon her
escutcheon.

"I can't fancy Christmas with bought mince-pies!" she said sadly.  "I've
kept house for forty years and never failed to make four plum-puddings--
one for Christmas Day, one for New Year, one for company, and one for
Easter.  Some people make them without eggs nowadays, but I keep to the
old recipe.  My mother's plum-puddings were quite famous among her
friends.  Of course, my dear, we have great cause for thankfulness, and
I should have had no appetite if you had lost your foot; but it really
upsets me to look at that larder!  How many pounds of mincemeat have
_you_ made, Miss O'Shaughnessy, may I ask?"

Sylvia was lying on the sofa in the drawing-room, to which she had been
carried in time for tea, and Bridgie was sitting beside her, looking
with wondering eyes at the muffled splendours which she now beheld for
the first time.  She blushed as she heard the question, and adroitly
evaded an answer, for, to tell the truth, she bought her pies from the
pastry-cook, and congratulated herself on the saving of trouble.

"Oh, indeed, we get through a great deal, for the boys think nothing of
three pies at a sitting.  I'd be obliged to you, Miss Munns, if you
would lend me your recipe for the pudding, for my cook is not the
cleverest in the world, and, as Jack says, there is no monotony about
her results.  If she does a thing well three times, there's all the more
chance that it will be wrong the fourth, when you are encouraged to ask
a friend to dinner."

Aunt Margaret sawed the air with her mittened hands, and shook her cap
in solemn denunciation.

"Method, my dear--method!  They won't take the trouble to measure the
ingredients, but just trust to chance, so what can you expect?  You
shall have the recipe with pleasure, but if you take my advice you will
look after the weighing yourself.  Are you expecting any friends for the
day, or perhaps one of your sisters?"

"No--we shall be quite alone.  My married sister wanted us all to go to
Ireland, but the boys cannot spare the time, and I will not leave them."
Bridgie sighed, and a shadow passed over her face.  "It won't seem like
Christmas to have no coming nor going, and Esmeralda and Pixie so far-
away.  I have been trying to think of a diversion for the boys, but I
might spare myself the trouble, for I've no money to pay for it if I had
the idea."

"Straitness of means is a great curtailer of pleasure," said Miss Munns,
gazing solemnly into space over the edge of her spectacles.  "In my own
family we have had sad experiences of the kind.  My great-uncle was in
most comfortable circumstances, and kept his own brougham and peach-
houses before the failure of the Glasgow Bank.  They removed to Syringa
Villas after that, and did the washing at home.  I shall never forget
calling upon Emma the first Tuesday that the clothes were hanging out to
dry in the back garden, and finding her in tears, with the blinds drawn
down.  She had a great deal of family pride, had poor Emma, for her
mother belonged to the leading circles in Wolverhampton, and the steam
of clothes in the boiler is most depressing unless you have been brought
up to it from a child.  George died soon after.  He never held up his
head again, and Emmeline, the daughter, had a very good offer from a
corn-broker.  She was a fine-looking girl, with black eyes and her poor
father's nose.  She looked very well in the evening, when she was
dressed, and had a colour."

"And did she marry the corn-broker?" queried Bridgie eagerly.

Sylvia was flushed and frowning, more than half ashamed of the old
lady's disclosures, fearful lest they might affect her own importance in
the estimation of a friend who had lived in a Castle, and owned a sister
who went to Court, and profoundly uninterested in Emmeline and her
destiny; but Bridgie was all animation and curiosity, her grey eyes wide
with anxiety as to the success of the corn-broker and his suit.  Here,
indeed, was a listener worth having, and Miss Munns warmed to her task
with even more than the usual enjoyment.

"My dear, you would hardly believe the time poor Emma had with that
girl!  She took a fancy to a bank clerk on two hundred a year, and
nothing would suit but she must be engaged to him.  He gave her a
turquoise ring, I remember--a shabby thing that could not have cost more
than a sovereign, and Emma was quite mortified when people asked to see
it.  They were engaged for five years, and she lost all her looks, and
he had a bicycling accident, and hurt his right arm so badly that he
could not write.

"Emma insisted that the engagement should be broken off, but the stupid
girl would not listen to reason.  She had a little legacy from her
godmother about that time, and his father allowed him something, so they
were married, and went abroad to try a cure for his arm.  He is back at
work again, and they seem happy enough; but it was a poor match for her,
and they can only afford one servant.  The corn-broker said he could
never look at a girl again, but he married one of the Miss Twemlows
within the year.  Perhaps you know the Twemlows?  They are a very well-
known family in their suburb."

No, Bridgie did not know them, but her expression seemed to denote that
she was quite ready to listen to their family history, in addition to
those which she had already heard.  But this was more than Sylvia could
bear, and she hastened to interrupt the flow of her aunt's
reminiscences.

"You have not heard from Aunt Emma lately--at least, you have not told
me of her letters.  I suppose you have not seen her while I have been
ill?"

Miss Munns pursed up her lips in a manner which seemed to imply that she
was in possession of some weighty secret, but from motives of prudence
was resolved to conceal it from the world.

"I have heard from her, my dear.  I have not seen her.  As I said in my
reply, everything must give way to illness, though I am very sorry
indeed to think of her alone in the house.  Emmeline can't leave the
baby, so it is only natural that her mother should want some
companionship over Christmas.  I would have had her here instead, but
the house is so upset that I am not prepared for visitors.  It is very
pleasant meeting from time to time, being contemporaries as we are, and
having gone through so many troubles together.  There is nothing I enjoy
more than talking them over with your Aunt Emma, and I am grieved to
disappoint her.  Of course I made up my mind from the first to say
nothing about it to you."

Now it was Bridgie's turn to look blank, and Sylvia's to question
anxiously.

"Do you mean that she invited you for Christmas, and that you refused
because of me?  Oh, Aunt Margaret, you must not do that!  You need a
change, and it would be a relief to have all arrangements taken off your
hands.  Whitey and I could manage quite well by ourselves.  Do please
change your mind and write to say that you will go!"

"My love, I assure you that I considered the matter very carefully
before I decided, and it is impossible for me to leave home.  I have
promised nurse that she shall spend two days with her sister, coming
round each morning to attend to your foot, and I should not like to
disappoint her.  It is only natural that she should wish to be with her
own friends.  I sympathise with her, but I don't complain.  It is not
your fault that your illness has upset my plans, and it is my duty to be
resigned and cheerful."

Aunt Margaret testified to her sense of duty by heaving a sigh of
funereal proportions, the while Sylvia's brow became fretted with lines,
and she turned a glance of despair upon her friend.

To be condemned to spend Christmas alone with Aunt Margaret in this mood
of melancholy resignation; to realise that she had deprived her of the
happiness of talking over past troubles with poor dear Emma; to listen
from morning to night to her transparently-veiled repinings--this was
indeed a cheerful prospect for an invalid, who might naturally have
expected to receive the sympathy herself.

"Aren't you sorry for me?" the brown eyes asked Bridgie mutely.  But,
lo!  Bridgie was radiant, her face one sparkle of animation, her hands
uplifted to hail the advent of a happy thought.

"The Diversion," she cried rapturously--"the Diversion!  I see it all,
and it is perfectly charming!  Sylvia shall be the diversion!  She shall
stay over the New Year with us; Miss Munns shall go to her friend and
talk over old times; nurse shall visit her sister and have a rest after
her hard work; I will look after Sylvia, and Sylvia shall flirt with the
boys, and keep them happy.  It's a perfectly charming arrangement all
round!"

"My dear!" cried Aunt Margaret in horrified protest against the last
item on the programme.  But Sylvia gave a chuckle of cheerful
complacency, and, so far from being overcome, looked so much revived by
the prospect that there could be no doubt as to the expediency of the
proposed visit, so far as health at least was concerned.

Miss Munns went through the form of protesting, but her objections were
easily waved aside, for to tell the truth she was only too ready to be
persuaded, and her objections had no deeper root than the belief that it
was not polite to seize too eagerly on an invitation.

"I could not think of it, my dear!  Such an upset for you.  You don't
know how much work an invalid makes in the house!  She has to be carried
up and down stairs, and waited on hand and foot!"

"I have three big strong boys, and you have only women in the house.
Pat could put her in his pocket, and not know there was anything there!"

"My dear--how can you!  It would take up your spare room, too, and make
so much ringing at the bell with nurse coming in the morning and the
doctor in the afternoon."

"But what a lesson it would be to me to see them attending to her!  So
useful for the next time the boys break their legs!  I love Whitey, and
feel better for it every time I see her sweet, kind face."

"If you had had to prepare meals at all hours of the night and day, you
would be sick of the sight of a nurse, however sweet she might look!  I
don't see why you should be upset, my dear, for the sake of my friend."

"Dear Miss Munns, I am thinking even more of my own friend.  It is
selfishness which makes me want to have Sylvia with me.  We would enjoy
being together and talking over our troubles just as you do.  Please let
her come!"

"Troubles, my dear--troubles?  Has your cook given notice?" cried Miss
Munns, her mind flying at once to domestic matters, and dwelling thereon
with accustomed enjoyment.  She had so many stories to tell of cooks who
had left their places immediately before Christmas, and of the tragic
consequences which followed, that the original subject of discussion
took a secondary position in her thoughts, and when Bridgie began
placidly to discuss arrangements, she fell into the trap with innocent
alacrity.  Sylvia could hardly believe her ears.  It seemed quite too
good to be true.  The week's holiday held out glorious possibilities of
enjoyment, and she began at once to count the hours which must elapse
before her departure.


CHAPTER SIX.

BRIDGIE'S PUDDING.

It was two days before Christmas, and Bridgie O'Shaughnessy enveloped
herself in a white apron, and pensively regarded the contents of the
larder.  In a couple of hours Sylvia was expected to arrive, and
meanwhile Mary the cook had been seized with an irresistible craving to
visit an invalid mother, and had taken herself off for the afternoon,
leaving the arrangements for dinner in the care of the young mistress,
and a still younger parlourmaid.

Mary's excuse for requesting leave of absence at so inconvenient a time
was somewhat contradictory and involved.  Her mother was failing fast,
and as it was a custom in the family to die in December, it was a
daughter's duty to visit her as often as possible; the shops were all
dressed-up for Christmas, and it was hard that a body should not get a
bit of pleasure sometimes, and the steak was stewed, and could be
"hotted up" at a moment's notice.  The invalid mother sat up for a
couple of hours in the afternoon only, so Mary must get to the house by
three o'clock at the latest, and would it matter if she were after
eleven in returning, as Christmas came but once a year?

Sweet Bridgie assented warmly to each proposition as it was put before
her, urged a speedy departure, and was rather inclined to think it would
be wise to stay at home for the night.  She could never find it in her
heart to deny a pleasure which it was in her power to grant, and was
gaily confident of managing "somehow" to prepare a palatable meal for
her guest, indeed, in the ardour of hospitality was rather pleased than
otherwise to have a hand in the preparations.

On the principle of "first catch your hare, then cook it," she looked
critically over the contents of the cupboards to find some ingredients
which commended themselves to her limited knowledge of the culinary art.
Gelatine had endless possibilities, but time was against her, and she
had the dimmest notions as to the quantity required; pastry was always
attainable, but on the one occasion when she had experimented in this
direction, Jack had taken the nutcrackers to divide his tartlet amidst
the cheers of an admiring audience, so that there was plainly no fame to
be won in this direction.

Milk puddings were too painfully ordinary, but a bag of macaroni seemed
to offer at once an easy and a tasty alternative.  Bridgie felt herself
quite capable of boiling the sticks into tenderness, and scraping down
cheese to add to the milky concoction, and a further search discovered a
dark yellow lump stowed away in the corner of a cupboard evidently
destined for such an end.  It was wonderfully hard; Bridgie's fingers
ached with the strain of cutting it, and she shook her pretty head
solemnly over the wastefulness of servants in not using up materials
before their freshness was lost.  She had intended to use the whole of
the piece, but it took so long to prepare that she stopped half-way, and
to judge by the mellow brownness of the pudding when she peeped at it in
the oven, quality had more than made up for quantity.

Sylvia sniffed delicately as she limped over the threshold, for the
pudding had a strangely powerful smell, not exactly savoury perhaps, but
distinctly fresh and wholesome.  Bridgie bridled in proud consciousness
of success the while she tucked up her guest on the drawing-room sofa.

"I've been making a pudding for you, dear.  Mind you enjoy it!  Mary is
out, so you are to excuse everything that goes wrong.  There's a pretty
pink cushion to match your dress.  I never saw that dress before!  You
are wonderfully smart, Miss Sylvia Trevor!"

"It's for the boys," said Sylvia, laughing.  "I want to make a good
impression, for I am dreadfully afraid they mayn't like me.  I know
nothing about young men.  They never penetrate into Number Six, and Aunt
Margaret thinks it is proper to ignore their existence between the ages
of six and sixty.  I thought if I put on the bright dress and my pet
chiffon fichu, they might not notice how thin my hair is at the top!"

"I'll tell them not to notice," said Bridgie gravely.  She crossed the
room and poked the fire with the best brass poker, a real, live coal
fire and no wretched asbestos imitation, and knelt on the rug holding
out her hands to the blaze and scorching her cheeks with undisturbed
complacency.

The room was mathematically the same in size and shape as the one across
the road, but oh, how different in appearance!  The one was a museum for
the preservation of household gods, the other a haven for rest and
amusement, where comfort was the first consideration and appearance the
last.  Bridgie's mending-basket stood on the floor, Jack's pipe peered
from behind a chimney-piece ornament, and a bulky blotter and well-
filled ink-bottle showed that the writing-table was really and seriously
meant for use.

There was a writing-table in Miss Munns's drawing-room also, on which
were set out, in formal order, a _papier-mache_ blotter embellished with
a view of York Minster by moonlight, a brass ink-stand, which would have
been insulted by the touch of ink, and a penholder with a cornelian
handle which had never known a nib.  Not the most daring of visitors had
ever been known to desecrate that shrine.  When the mistress of the
house wished to write a letter, she spread a newspaper over the dining-
room table, and a sheet of blotting-paper over that, and carefully
unlocked the desk which had been a present from Cousin Mary Evans on her
sixteenth birthday!

It is extraordinary what a complete change of air may be obtained
sometimes by merely crossing a road, or going into the house at the
other side of a dividing wall!  Sylvia felt that she might have
travelled a hundred miles, so entirely different were the conditions by
which she found herself surrounded.

By and by the three brothers arrived in a body, letting themselves into
the house with a latch-key, and talking together in eager undertones in
the hall.  Bridgie sat still with a mischievous smile on her lips, and
presently the drawing-room door was noiselessly opened for half a dozen
inches, and round the corner appeared a brown head, a white forehead,
and a pair of curious brown eyes.  Sylvia's cheeks were as pink as her
dress by the time that those eyes met hers, but she was the only person
to show signs of embarrassment.

"Pat" came forward to shake hands with swift cordiality, followed in
succession by Jack and Miles, and the three big brothers stood beside
the sofa, looking down on their guest with kindly scrutiny.  Pat's
twinkling smile was an augury for future friendship; Miles's air of
angelic sympathy was as good as a tonic; while the rapt gaze of Jack's
fine eyes seemed to imply that never, no never, had he beheld a girl who
so absolutely fulfilled his ideal of womanhood!  It was nothing that the
conversation was most ordinary and impersonal, concerning itself mostly
with such matters as the weather, the trains from the city, and the
Christmas traffic.

The atmosphere was full of subtle flattery, and Sylvia purred with
satisfaction like a sleek little kitten that stretches up its neck to
meet an unaccustomed caress.  Nothing is so inspiring as appreciation,
and she was quite startled by the aptness and brilliancy of her own
remarks during the meal which followed.

Jack helped his guest in to dinner, and once again the pungent odour
from the kitchen attracted notice and remark, whereat Bridgie bridled
complacently, and when the macaroni was brought to table it did indeed
look a most attractive dish to be the work of an amateur.  So brown was
it, so mellow of tint, with such promise of richness, that the general
choice settled on it in preference to its more modest neighbour.

Sylvia was naturally helped in advance, and the moment of swallowing the
first spoonful was momentous, and never to be forgotten.  What had
happened she could not tell; the room swam round her, the tears poured
from her eyes.  She recovered from a paralysing shock of surprise just
in time to see Pat's mouth open wide to receive a heaped-up spoonful, to
hear him roar like a wounded bull, and make a dash from the room.

"What is the matter?" cried Bridgie in amaze, and Jack smoothed out the
smoking macaroni on his plate and replied cheerfully--

"Scalded himself as usual!  He is so impetuous with his food.  Do him
good to have a lesson."  Then he in his turn partook of the dainty, and
his eyes grew bigger and bigger, rounder and rounder, the Adam's apple
worked violently in his throat.  For one moment it seemed as though he
too would fly from the room, but presently the struggle was over, and he
leaned back in his chair, pale and dejected, his glance meeting Sylvia's
with melancholy sympathy.

"What _is_ the matter?" queried Bridgie once more, and this time there
was a touch of testiness in her voice, for it was trying to have her
efforts treated with such want of appreciation, and even if the dish
were not all that could be desired, consideration for her feelings might
have kept her brothers silent before a stranger.  "Miles, _you_ taste
it!" she cried, and Miles smacked his lips for a thoughtful moment, and
pronounced sturdily--

"It's very good!"

Sylvia groaned involuntarily; she could not help it, and Jack gasped
with incredulous dismay, staring at his brother as if he could not
believe his senses.

"Well, I always did say that there was nothing in this wide world which
would quell your appetite, but this beats everything!  Take another
spoonful--I _dare_ you to do it!"

"All right, here goes!  It's a very good mixture," said Miles
complacently, swallowing spoonful after spoonful, while his _vis-a-vis_
looked on with distended eyes, and Pat stood transfixed upon the
threshold.  As for Bridgie, her face brightened with relief, and she
smiled upon her younger brother with grateful affection.

"That's right, Miles; never mind what they say!  You are the greatest
comfort I have.  Some people are so saucy there is no pleasing them.
You and I will enjoy it, if no one else will."

So far she had prudently refrained from experimenting on her own
account, but now she took up her spoon, and there was a breathless
silence in the room while she lifted it to her lips.  It fell back on
the plate with a rattle and clang, and an agonised glance roamed round
the table from one face to another.

"Oh--oh--oh!  How p-p-p-perfectly awful!  What can have happened?  It
was so nice when I left it!  Has anyone"--the voice took a tone of
indignation--"have any of you boys been playing tricks on me?"

"How could we, now, if you think of it?  We have been upstairs or in the
drawing-room ever since we came back.  It's not the will that's wanting,
but the opportunity!" cried the boys in chorus; but it was not a time
for joking, and Bridgie smote upon the table-gong with a determined
hand.

"Then it must be Sarah's fault.  She has done something to it.  It is
too bad--I took such pains!"  She looked pathetically at the red marks
which still lingered on her fingers from that painful cutting and
scraping, and there was a distinct air of resentment in the voice in
which she questioned her assistant a moment later.

Sarah was a round-faced, vacant-looking damsel of sixteen summers, who
had come straight from an industrial home to serve in the O'Shaughnessy
family.  She was scrupulously clean, admirably willing, and so blindly
obedient that in the bosom of the family she was known by the title of
"Casabianca."  She understood to a nicety how to dust and sweep, make
beds and turn out a room, but the manners and customs of gentlefolk had
been an unknown science to her before entering her present situation,
and anything that Bridgie chose to do was, in her eyes, a demonstration
of what was right and proper.  She adored her young mistress, and
trembled at the new tone of severity in which she was addressed.

"Please, ma'am, I did nothing at it!"

"But something has happened to it, Sarah--that's quite certain.  Think
now--think carefully what you have done since I left the kitchen.  I am
not angry, only anxious to find out what has gone wrong."

It was really most embarrassing.  The three young gentlemen were
watching her with laughing eyes, the pretty young lady in the pink dress
was staring at her plate and twisting her lips to keep from smiling, the
Missis sat up straight in her chair and looked so grave and masterful.
Like Topsy of old, Sarah tried hard to find something to confess, but
failed to recall any delinquencies.

"I took it out of the oven when you said, and put it on a plate.  I
brought it into the room--"

"You are quite sure you didn't let anything fall into it by mistake?"

"Please, ma'am, there was nothing to fall.  I had tidied the things away
before I touched it.  I put the macaroni sticks back in the bag and the
beeswax along of the turpentine for to-morrow's cleaning--all that you
didn't use for the pudding."

"The--the--what?" gasped Bridgie breathlessly.

But the next moment a great burst of laughter all round the table
greeted the solution of the mystery.  Pat capered about the floor, Jack
put his elbows on the table and peered at Sylvia with dancing eyes,
Miles undauntedly helped himself to another spoonful, and wagged his
head as who should say that, beeswax or no beeswax, he stuck to his
favourable verdict on the "mixture."  Bridgie's soft, gurgling laugh was
full of unaffected enjoyment.

"Did ever I hear the like of that?  It was a lump of beeswax, and I
mistook it for cheese!  It looked just like it--so smooth, and yellow,
and hard--too hard, maybe--but I was blaming Mary for that, not the
cheese, and thinking myself so good and economical to use it up!
Beeswax and macaroni!  Oh--oh--I'll never forget it while I live!"

"It's a very pretty nose you've got, dear, but it's not much use to you,
I'm afraid," said Jack teasingly.  "Did it never occur to you one moment
that it was rather highly scented, and the scent a little different from
the ordinary common or garden cheese?" and Bridgie shook her head in
solemn denial.

"Never the ghost of a suspicion!  It shows how easily our senses are
deceived when we get a fixed idea in our heads; but indeed you were not
much cleverer yourselves.  Every man of you had something to say about
the smell, but not a hint of what it was!"

"I thought it was rather spring-cleaningey," Sylvia said mischievously.
"Never mind, Bridgie dear--it has been a great success.  I do feel so
much at home--more so than I should have done after a dozen formal
dinners where everything went right.  I shall always remember it too,
and how Mr Miles declared it was nice!"

"Don't call him `Mr,' please!  He is only seventeen, though he _is_ the
champion eater of the world.  I wonder what exactly is the effect of
beeswax taken internally!  You must tell us all about it, Miles, if you
live to the morning!"

"How pleased Pixie will be!" murmured Bridgie reflectively, leaving her
hearers to decide whether she referred to Miles's problematical disease
or the latest culinary disaster, and once again Sylvia admired the happy
faculty of seizing on the humorous side of a misfortune which seemed to
be possessed so universally by the O'Shaughnessy family.


CHAPTER SEVEN.

A HAPPY INSPIRATION.

Mrs Geoffrey Hilliard stood in the long gallery of Knock Castle and
drummed wearily on the window-pane with a white, heavily-ringed hand.
It had rained for a whole week without stopping, and for the happiest
girl in the world, as she proclaimed herself to be at least three times
a day, she came perilously near feeling shedding tears of depression.

Geoffrey was out shooting, and the old Castle seemed full of ghosts--
ghosts of the living, not of the dead--of those dear, gay, loving,
teasing, happy-go-lucky brothers and sisters who had filled the rooms
with echoes of song and laughter.  Geoffrey was the dearest of husbands,
but he had one great, insuperable failing--he was not Irish, and one
phase of his wife's character was even yet an inexplicable riddle in his
eyes.  Why should she consider it monotonous to have her meals served
regularly at a stated hour; why should she find infinite enjoyment in
arranging a festivity in a rush and scramble, instead of making her
plans with due leisure and decorum; why should she wear the latest Paris
fashions on a day when the thermometer pointed to rain, and walk about
in the sunshine in an ulster and deerstalker?--these, and many similar
questions, were as puzzling to him as the fact that she found it
absolutely impossible to do a thing twice over in the same way, or to
master the very rudiments of method.

Geoffrey inherited the business instincts which had made his fathers
successful above their competitors, and when he had become temporary
owner of Knock, he had striven hard to introduce order and punctuality
into the establishment, with more success in the servants' hall than in
those regions where the mistress reigned supreme.

Esmeralda was a devoted wife, who would have gone through fire and water
to ensure his happiness; she would have shared his poverty with a
smiling face, and have worked her fingers to the bone on his behalf, but
she seemed quite incapable of replacing the match-box on his dressing-
room mantelpiece when she had borrowed it for her own use, or of
refraining from taking his nail-scissors downstairs and then forgetting
where she had put them.

Geoffrey on his part adored his beautiful wife, and would have fought a
dozen dragons on her behalf, but when he groped in the dark for his
matches, and knocked his pet ornaments off the chimney-piece, and barked
his knee against a chair, and tried vainly to get out of the room
through a blank wall--well, he was only a man after all, and he was not
precisely lamb-like in temper.

Some such incident had happened this afternoon when the husband had made
a complaining remark, and the wife had poured oil on the troubled waters
by murmured allusions to people who were not really men, but "finnicky
old maids."  Geoffrey had stalked majestically from the room, leaving
Esmeralda to reflect sadly how very unsatisfactory it was to quarrel
when your adversary was dignified and English.  With either of her three
brothers such an introduction would have meant an enjoyable and lengthy
wrangle; even "Saint Bridget" could snap on occasion, while Pixie was
capable of screaming, "It is not--it is not!" until her breath failed,
for pure love of contradiction.

Esmeralda yawned, and wondered what in the world she could do to while
away the long afternoon.  As the wife of a millionaire, with a
professional cook in the kitchen who tolerated her mistress's incursions
at stated hours only; with a wardrobe full of new clothes, and a French
maid to sew up every hole almost before it made an appearance; with a
gardener who did not like interference, and a patriarchal butler who
said, "Allow me, madam!" if she dared to lift a hand for herself, life
was not really half so amusing as in the dear old days, when she could
make potato cakes for tea, re-trim old dresses, with Bridgie as model,
and sit perched on one of the empty stages in the conservatory, while
Dennis confided his latest love experiences and the gossip of the
countryside.

Esmeralda had longed for riches all her life, and for the most part
found the experience to her taste, but there were occasions when she
felt fettered by the golden chains.  When Bridgie wrote of her
experiences in that funny, cramped little house, of her various devices
for making sixpence do duty for a shilling, of excursions about London,
when she rode with the boys on the tops of omnibuses and dined
luxuriously at an ABC, it was not pity, but envy, which filled
Esmeralda's bosom as she drove in state behind coachman and footman to
pay dull, proper calls on the county magnates.

It was cold and dark in the gallery this December afternoon, so she went
downstairs into the room which had been dedicated to lessons, when Miss
Minnitt the governess tried to instil knowledge into half a dozen
ignorant heads.  It was now metamorphosed into a luxuriant little
boudoir, with pots of hothouse plants banked on the table, a couch piled
with silken cushions taking the place of the old horsehair sofa, a
charming grate, all glowing copper and soft green tiles, and beside it a
deep arm-chair and a pile of books to while away an idle hour.
Esmeralda yawned and flicked over the pages of the topmost of the pile,
looked at the beginning to see if it promised excitement, peeped at the
last sentence of all to make sure there was no heart-breaking
separation, finally sank down into the chair, and settled herself to
read.

There was something wanting for perfect enjoyment, however, for in the
old days she and Bridgie had agreed that the charms of an interesting
book could only be thoroughly appreciated to an accompaniment of crisp
sweet apples.  Esmeralda O'Shaughnessy had been wont to climb up into
the loft and bring down as many rosy baldwins as she could carry in the
crown of her cap; but Mrs Geoffrey Hilliard crept down her own passages
like a thief, listened breathlessly at the pantry door to make sure that
Montgomery was absent, then abstracted an apple from each of the two
pyramids of fruit already prepared for dinner, and flew back to her
room, aghast at her own temerity.

The presence of the apples seemed to bring back other schoolgirl
impulses, for instead of seating herself in dignified, grown-up fashion,
she stretched herself on the rug before the fire, her back supported
against the chair, her head drooping ever nearer and nearer the
cushions, as warmth and quiet wrought their usual work.  She slept and
dreamt, and awoke with a start to hear a voice observing, "Tea is
served, madam!" and to see Montgomery the immaculate standing over her
with an unmoved expression, as if, in the many noble families in which
he had served, it was an invariable custom to find his mistress fast
asleep on the floor, with a half-gnawed apple in her hand!

Esmeralda crawled to her feet, trying vainly to look dignified, but she
had no appetite for muffins.  She felt like a child who has been found
out, and blushed at the thoughts of her embarrassment that evening when
the fruit pyramid was handed for her selection.  Tea did not taste half
so nice out of the Queen Anne silver as when it had been poured from the
old brown pot, which had to be refilled so many times to satisfy
clamorous appetites, and the longing for companionship made her hurry
through the meal, and run upstairs to a wide room overlooking the park.

With the opening of the door came that sweet, flannely, soapy, violet-
powdery smell which is associated with a well-kept nursery, and there on
the rocking-chair sat Mistress Nurse with a bundle of embroidery on her
knee, which purported to be O'Shaughnessy Geoffrey, the heir of the
Hilliards.

"Oh, I'm so glad you have come, ma'am!  I did so want you to see him.
He has been so pert this afternoon.  I don't know what to do with him,
he is so pert!  I never saw such a forward child for his age!"

Esmeralda's face softened to a beautiful tenderness as she turned down
the Shetland shawl and looked at her little son.  The pert child had a
fat white face, with vacant eyes, a button of a nose, and an expression
of preternatural solemnity.  His head waggled helplessly from side to
side as his nurse held him out at arm's length, and stared fixedly into
space, regardless of his mother's blandishments.

"There now, _isn't_ he pert?" repeated the triumphant nurse.  "You know
your mammie, my precious--yes, you do!  The cleverest little sing that
was ever seen!  He will begin to talk, ma'am, before he is many months
old, I'm sure he will!  I was speaking to him just now, and he tried so
hard to copy me.  I said `Goo-oo!' and he said `Coo-oo!'  Oh, you would
have loved to hear him!  He is a prince of babies, he is!  A beautiful
darling pet!"

Esmeralda beamed with maternal pride.

"He _is_ clever!" she cried.  "Fancy talking at three months old!  I
must write and tell Bridgie.  And he looks so intelligent, too--doesn't
he, nurse?  So wise and serious!  He stares at the fire as if he knew
all about it.  I believe his hair has grown since yesterday!  I do,
indeed!"

"He has beautiful hair--so fine!  It's going to curl, too," declared the
optimistic nurse, holding the child's head against the light, when the
faintest of downs could be dimly discerned across the line of the
horizon.  "He will smile in a moment if you go on talking to him, ma'am.
Perhaps you would like to sit down and take him for a bit?"

Yes, Esmeralda was only too willing, for it was only by act of grace and
when Mistress Nurse felt inclined for a gossip in the servants' hall
that she was allowed to nurse her own baby.  She took the dear little
soft bundle in her arms and rocked gently to and fro, studying the
little face and dreaming mother dreams of the days to come.

If God spared him, the tiny form would grow strong, the vacant face
would become bright and alert with life, the mite of a hand would be
bigger than her own--a man's hand with a man's work as its inheritance.
There was something awful in the thought, and in her own responsibility
towards his future.  Esmeralda never felt so serious, so prayerful, so
little satisfied with herself, as when she sat alone with her baby in
her arms.  I don't always say it; I don't think I ever said it," she
answered quietly. "I know that one cannot like people who are not
likable. But Georgie," (with much earnestness,) "I know, and you know,
that it is God's will, that it is God's command, that we should
be kind, and tender, and gentle, and pitiful to every one, whether
we like them or not."

Yes, Georgie did know that. Often had he been reminded of it. But as
this was a command he often broke, he did not like to think of it.
He moved restlessly and impatiently on his chair, and said, with some
fretfulness:--
"Well, but how can one; at least how can a rough boy like me? You can,
Annie, I know. You do. Although you are often confined to this stupid
bed for weeks at a time, you do more good, and make more people happy
and comfortable, than any one in all the house. You are so good.
It is easy for you."

"No, Georgie, it is not easy for me," she answered, her sweet, pale
face, flushing at his praise. "I am not always kind.

But a thought came into my mind about a year ago that has always helped
me a great deal. I think God must have put it into my mind. Indeed I am
sure he did, it has helped me so much."
"And what was the thought?" George asked eagerly.

"I was thinking how difficult it was to feel kindly, to feel
rightly towards those whom we don't care for, who are not pleasant; and
then it came all in a minute into my head, that we should find it
much easier if we could only remember ever and always that everybody
we meet must be either God's friend or God's enemy."
"But how could that help?"

George asked, knitting his brows, as if greatly puzzled.

Annie tried to explain.

"You know," she said, "that there are no two ways about it,--that we must
either be God's friend or his enemy."
"Yes," he answered thoughtfully; "papa made me see that long ago."
"And every boy you meet is either the one or the other, whatever
else he may be, nice or not, pleasant and likable, or unpleasant
and unlikable.

If he be God's friend--if he be a boy who loves our dear Lord
Jesus Christ," she went on, with an earnestness of feeling which brought
tears to her eyes,--"a boy whom Christ loves, and for whom he died--a
boy that Christ cares for, and is ever watching over, and in whose
troubles and pleasures, joys and sorrows, Christ is tenderly concerned--O
Georgie, if he be Christ's friend, must not we like to be kind to and
help him, to do him as much good and as little harm as we can?"

"Yes, yes, I see," he answered softly, and with much feeling.

Annie went on.

"And if he be a boy who does not love God," she said solemnly, "then
must he be one of the wicked with whom God says that he is angry every
day. And oh, Georgie, think what it must be to have God angry with
you every day!

to go through the world without God, never to think of him with
love! to have no God to serve, no God to care for you; never to have
your troubles made easy by knowing that the loving God has sent them,
never to have your joys made sweet because they are his loving gift! O
Georgie, how dreary, how desolate! Can you help being pitiful to any
one who is in such a state?"

"No, oh no," was said by Georgie's eyes even more earnestly than by his
tongue. He said no more; for boys cannot speak of what they feel so readily
as girls.

But Annie's thought had gone deep into his heart, and as he went
a few minutes after down towards the village on an errand for his
father, his whole thoughts were occupied by it.

Much more soberly than usual did he walk down the avenue, thinking over
again all that Annie had said, and praying earnestly that God would
keep it in his memory, and bring it strongly before him each time he
had occasion to use it.

Such occasion was close at hand. As he came out of the gate into the road,
he saw, a little way before him, a boy who, as he feared--nay, rather
as he knew--was one of those wicked of whom Annie had been speaking.

His name was Alick. Poor fellow, he was a cripple; he had been a
cripple from his very babyhood. He had never been able to put his feet
to the ground, to walk or run about like other boys, but could only get
along slowly and painfully by the help of crutches. He was besides
very delicate, and often suffered violent attacks of pain in his
back and limbs, so that every one must have felt sorry for him, had
he not been such a bad, cruel, selfish boy, that anger often drove
pity away from the softest hearts.

But there was this excuse for him, he had never had any one to
teach him better. His mother died when he was a baby. His father was
very rich, but was a coarse, hard man--one who, like the unjust
judge, feared not God, nor regarded man. He was fond of his poor boy,
who was his only child, but he showed his fondness by indulging his
every wish, and suffering him to do in all things exactly as he
pleased.

So that Alick grew more and more wicked, cruel, and selfish every year,
until he had come to be disliked and avoided by every one who knew him.
Georgie had a particular dislike to him. For Alick, knowing that
Georgie was far too brave to strike a cripple who could not help himself,
took the greatest pleasure in teasing, and provoking, and working
him up into passions which George could not vent upon him.

The two boys saw each other a good while before they met, and Alick
had time to prepare a taunting speech which he knew would be
particularly provoking to George.

But George also had time to think of Alick, time to recollect what
Annie had said about the utter dreariness of going through the world
without God; and God, answering George's earnest prayer, caused
this recollection to move his heart to the tenderest pity and concern
for poor Alick.

So when the mocking, provoking speech was given forth in the bitterest
way, George's only answer was a look of tender, even of loving
compassion.

Alick misunderstood George's feeling. He thought that look was meant
to express pity for his infirmities, and pity on that account he could
not bear. His cheek flushed crimson with anger, and he poured forth
a volley of fearful oaths and curses upon George, who was now passing him
upon the opposite side of the road. Again George only answered with
that look so strangely full of deep, tender pity, that Alick's
heart was stirred by it, he knew not how nor why.

He felt half provoked, as if he were being cheated out of his anger, and
taking up a small stone from the old wall against which he leaned,
he threw it at George, hitting him pretty smartly upon the arm.

George took no further notice than merely to turn round and walk backward,
so as to be able to watch for and avoid future compliments of the same
kind.

Many such were sent after him without effect.

But just as he was getting beyond reach, Alick, in a last violent
effort to throw far enough, overbalanced himself, one crutch slipped
from under him, and he fell forward on his face in the mud!

In an instant George was by his side, helping him to rise, and asking
tenderly if he were hurt. He was covered with mud from head to foot,
his face was sorely cut and bruised by some sharp stones lying under the
mud, and his teeth had cut through his upper lip. Georgie raised him
into a sitting posture, and did all he could for him. A little burn
ran by the way-side.

Georgie dipped his handkerchief in it, and kneeling beside him, tried
to wash away the mud and blood from his face with the utmost
tenderness and gentleness, saying all the time words of kindness and
concern, and giving him those looks of deep, wistful pity.

At first Alick submitted to his kind offices without speaking; but
after a few minutes he turned his head from him with a fretful,
impatient, "There, that'll do," and stretched out his hand for his
crutches. Georgie brought them to him, and helped him to get upon them.
But poor Alick had severely sprained his shoulder in trying to save
himself as he fell, and the attempt to use his crutches gave him
the most violent pain. Selfish boys are never manly. They always think
too much of their own troubles. This new pain, and the fear that he
should not be able to get home, were too much for Alick. He gave way to
a most unrestrained fit of crying. At another time George would
have been either provoked or amused at the big boy crying thus
like a baby.

But now the pity God had planted in his heart swallowed up every other
feeling. He thought only of comforting and helping him.

"Oh, don't cry," he said encouragingly; "I'll get you home, never fear.
See, sit here a minute, and I'll run for Annie's garden-chair, and wheel
you home in it." And having seated him comfortably leaning against the
wall, he ran off, and was back with the chair before even the impatient
Alick could have expected him.

It was not easy to drive the chair through the soft mud, where
hidden stones, were constantly turning aside the wheels, jarring
George's arms, and calling forth bitter complaints from the fretful
Alick.

But Georgie bore complaints and jarrings with equal patience and kindly
good humour, and as the homes of the two boys were not far apart, he got
Alick safe to his own door in no very long time.

The next afternoon when Georgie came home from school, he heard from his
mother that the doctor had been there to see Annie, and had told them
that Alick was very ill. He had sprained his back as well as his
shoulder, and was suffering great pain, and must, the doctor said,
be confined to bed for many weeks.

Georgie felt very sorry for him.

"Sickness and pain are bad enough," he thought, "even when one can feel
that it is our good and loving Father who has sent them; but what
must they be to him?" And he asked his mother's leave to go to see if
he could be of any use to Alick.

His mother consented, and resolutely turning his mind from the cricket-match
just beginning in the school-yard, George went.

He found the poor boy in a pitiable state. His face was swelled
from the effect of the cuts and bruises; one eye was quite closed up, and
the other he could only open a little way, for a minute at a time.

He could not turn himself in bed,--the sprained arm was bound to his
side; he could do nothing to amuse himself; and in that motherless,
sisterless home, there was no one to devise amusement for him. His father
was kind and anxious about him; but it never occurred to him to sit
by his bedside, and try to make the time pass pleasantly; and even
if it had occurred to him, he would not have known how to do it.
All that money could buy Alick had in abundance; but tenderness and kind
companionship were what he most wanted, and these could not be
bought.

He seemed pleased to see Georgie, and gladly accepted his offer to
sit for a little with him and read to him.

Georgie read aloud very well, and with great spirit, and Alick
was delighted with an amusement which was quite new to him. The hour
Georgie was allowed to give him passed most delightfully, and when
Georgie rose to go away, he was eagerly asked to come back the next
day.

The next, and the next, and many succeeding afternoons, Georgie spent
by Alick's bedside, reading or chatting to him; and when he was able
to use his arms, playing with him at chess, draughts, or any such game
that Alick liked.

That tender pity which God had put into Georgie's heart for the poor
wicked boy, he kept fresh and warm from day to day; and Georgie never
grudged the time or trouble which he gave to Alick,--never lost patience
with him, however fretful and unreasonable he might be, but was
ever ready to do what Alick wished, whether he himself liked it or
not.

One afternoon they had played for a long time at a favourite game of
Alick's, but one which Georgie thought very tiresome.

"Well, that is one of the nicest games in the world," said Alick,
stretching himself back upon his pillows when the game was done.

"Isn't it? Don't you like it?"
"No," said Georgie, looking up with an amused smile; "I don't like it
much."

"Why then did you play so long without saying that you did not like it?"
Alick asked, much surprised.

"Because you like it. I wanted you to have what you like," Georgie
answered simply; and having put away all the things, he stooped
over Alick and asked him very kindly, nay, I may say very lovingly,
if he thought he should have a better night, if he thought his pain
was less than it had been.

"Yes,--no,--I don't know," Alick said, looking earnestly up into
Georgie's eyes. "But, Georgie, I say, why do you care so much?"
"Because I am so very sorry for you," burst from Georgie's very heart.

"You well may," muttered poor Alick, glancing down at his useless,
shrunken limbs.

But this time there was no anger in his thoughts.

"It is not for that, not at all for that," Georgie cried eagerly, as
if guessing that pity for his infirmities might be painful.

"For what then?" Alick asked, looking at him keenly.

"Because you do not know, you do not love God," Georgie answered with
deep feeling. "O Alick, how heartless, how dreary it must be!" and
the tears rose to his eyes, and ran down his cheeks without his knowing
it.

His words, spoken in that tone of intense pity, thrilled Alick to the
heart. This was the meaning of all those looks of tender,
yearning compassion which Georgie so continually cast upon him.

And was it then such a terrible thing not to know God?

Georgie's "how heartless, how dreary!" sounded again in his ears, and
seemed to answer the question. He said nothing to Georgie nor to
any one; but all night long these words came back and back to his mind.
He could not get rid of them. They were pressed down into his heart by
the recollection of all that exceeding tender pity which Georgie's
eyes had so long expressed for him, and of Georgie's loving, patient
kindness, during his illness. And ever deeper and stronger grew the
sense that his life was in truth, and ever had been, more heartless and
dreary than Georgie could imagine.

Next day, when Georgie came to his bedside, Alick looked him full in
the face and said:--
"Georgie, can you teach me to know God?"
You may imagine how Georgie's heart leaped with joy at the question.
Often had he longed to speak to Alick of his God and Saviour,
but hitherto he had been afraid to do it; not afraid of what Alick
might say to or of him, but afraid to hear him speak against the
Lord whom he had so often blasphemed.

Now his mouth was opened, and in simple, boyish speech, he poured out his
heart to Alick, and told him all he knew of Christ's love in taking upon
himself the sins of those who were his enemies. And God's Spirit going
with the words he taught Georgie to speak, Alick's heart was touched,
and the poor boy was brought to take Christ as his Lord and his
God.

THE SIXPENNY CALICO.

One day a new scholar appeared in school, and as usual was the mark of
public gaze. She was gentle and modest-looking, and never ventured
to lift her eyes from her books. At recess, to the inquiries, "Who is
she?" "What's her name?"

nobody could satisfactorily answer. None of us ever saw or heard of her
before.

"I know she's not much," said one of the girls.

"Poorly off," said I.

"Do you see her dress? Why, I believe it is nothing but a sixpenny calico."

"Poor thing, she must be cold."

"I can't imagine how a person can wear calico in winter," said
another, whose rich plaid was the admiration of the school.

"I must say I like to see a person dressed according to the season,"
remarked another; "that is, if people can afford it," she added,
in a manner plainly enough indicating that _her_ father could.

Such was recess talk. None of us went to take the stranger by the hand
and welcome her as the companion of our studies and our play. We stood
aloof, and stared at her with cold and unfeeling curiosity. The teacher
called her Abby. When she first came to her place for recitation, she
took a seat beside the rich plaid. The plaid drew haughtily away, as if
the sixpenny calico might dim the beauty of its colours. A slight
colour flushed Abby's cheek, but her quiet remained the same. It was
some time before she ventured on the play-ground, and then it was only
to stand aside, and look on, for we were slow in asking her to join
us.

On one occasion we had a harder arithmetic lesson than usual, completely
baffling our small brains. Upon comparing notes at recess, none of us had
mastered it.

"I'll ask Abby of her success," said one of my intimate associates.

"It is quite unlikely she has," I replied; "do stay here; besides, what
if she has?"

"I _will_ go," she answered.

Away she went, and as it appeared, Abby and she were the only members of
the class ready for recitation. Abby had been more successful than the
rest of us, and kindly helped my friend to scale the difficulties of the
lesson.

"Shall we ask Abby to join the sleigh-ride?" asked one of the girls,
who was getting a subscription for a famous New Year's ride.

"Judging from her dress," I said, "if she goes, we must _give_ her
the ride."

"But how will it do to leave her out?" they asked.

"She does not of course expect to be asked to ride with us," I said; "she
is evidently of a poor family."
As a sort of leader in school, my words were influential, and poor Abby
was left out.

How often did I contrast my white hands and warm gloves with the purple
fingers and cheap mittens of my neighbour Abby.
How miserable I should be with such working hands and no gloves.

By-and-by I took to patronizing her. "She is really a very nice
creature, and ought to join us more in our plays," we said. So we used
to make her "one of us" in the play-ground. In fact, I began to thaw
towards her very considerably. There was something in Abby which called
out our respect.

One Saturday afternoon, as I was looking out of the window, wishing for
something to do, my mother asked me to join her in a little walk.
On went my new cloak, warm furs, and pink hat, and in a trice I was
ready. We went first to the stores, where I was very glad to be met
by several acquaintances in my handsome winter dress. At last I found
my mother turning off into less frequented thoroughfares.

"Where, mother," I asked, "in this vulgar part of the town?"
"Not vulgar, my dear," she said.

"A very respectable and industrious part of our population live here."

"Not fashionable, certainly," I added.

"And not vulgar because not fashionable, by any means," she said; for
you may be sure my false and often foolish notions were not gained
from her. She stopped before a humble-looking house, and entered
the front door.

"Where are you going?" I asked with much curiosity.

She gently opened a side door, and hesitated a moment on the
threshold.

"Caroline, come in," said a voice from within. "I am very happy to
see you."
"Pray, don't rise, dear," said my mother, going forward and
affectionately kissing a sick lady who sat in a rocking chair.

"You look better than when I saw you before. Do not exert yourself."
I was introduced, and I fancied the invalid looked at me with a sort
of admiring surprise as she took my hand and hoped I should prove
worthy of such a mother.

Then, while my mother and she were talking, I sat down and took
notes with my eyes of everything in the room. It looked beautifully
neat, and the furniture evidently had seen better days. By-and-by
mother asked for her daughter.
"Gone out on some errands," said the sick lady. "The dear child is
an inexpressible blessing to me," and tears filled her eyes.
"A mother might well be thankful for such a daughter. She is a
pattern _my_ child might safely imitate."
I thought I should be exceedingly glad to see the person my mother
was so willing I should copy.
"She will return soon," said the invalid. "She has gone to carry
some work which she has contrived to do in her leisure moments. The
self-sacrifice of the child is wonderful. She seems to desire nothing
that other girls of her age generally want. A little while ago, an
early friend who had found me out and befriended me as you have
done"--tears came into the speaker's eyes--"sent her a handsome
winter dress. 'O mother,' she said, 'this is too expensive for me,
when you want some warm flannel so.' I told her it was just what
she needed. A few days afterwards she went out and came home with
a roll of flannel and a calico dress. 'See, mother,' she said, 'I
shall enjoy this calico a hundred times more than the finest dress
in the world, when you can have your flannel.' Excuse me for telling
it, but you know a mother's heart. There is her step; she is coming."

The outer door opened. How I longed to see the comer! "A perfect
angel," I thought, "so generous, so disinterested, so good; I should
love her." The latch was lifted. A young girl entered, and my
school-fellow Abby stood before me! I could have sunk into the earth
for very shame. How wicked my pride! how false and foolish my
judgments! Oh, how mean did my fine winter dress appear before the
plain _sixpenny calico_!
I was almost sure my mother had managed all this, for she had a way
of making me see my faults, and making me desire to cure them,
without ever saying much directly herself. This, however, had not
come about by her intervention; God taught me by his providence.
As we walked home, my mother gave me an account of Mrs. G----, an
early friend who made an imprudent marriage. But that story is no
matter here. I will only add, my judgment of people was formed ever
after according to a better standard than the dress they wore, and
that Abby and I became intimate friends.

A WESTMORELAND STORY.
Who among my little readers are not older than ten years? Come and
I shall tell you a story of what happened to six poor children, all
under that age, about fifty years ago. It will be a good lesson for
us all, to see what God helped one brave little girl to do.She thought that that
prediction might apply to more than one member of the O'Shaughnessy
family, and cherished a pleasant conviction that Jack's outburst of
indignation had been more on her account than his own.  He was not the
type of man to stand on his dignity, and his quick glance into her face
as Esmeralda gave her invitation had been eloquent of understanding.
His protest had saved her from a most distasteful position, and once
again she felt a debt of gratitude towards him.


CHAPTER NINE.

CHRISTMAS PRESENTS.

Christmas morning was heralded by the luxury of a late breakfast, when
no one need hurry off to town, and even Miles could satisfy the demands
of appetite without casting a thought to the time-table.  Porridge,
bacon, eggs and sausages laid the foundation of his meal, before he
tackled marmalade, strawberry jam, fresh oranges and honey, accompanied
by numerous draughts of tea and coffee, and finally by a cup filled with
the united drainings of both pots, which he drank with obvious relish.

If it had been merry Pat who was so difficult to appease, there would
have been no cause for astonishment, but Miles's rapt eyes and ethereal
expression seemed to bespeak no stronger diet than moonbeams and
mountain dew, and to hear him accompany his last mouthful with an eager,
"When's lunch?" was a distinct shock to the visitor.  Jack, too, had
sustained a relapse into sentiment, and was only awaiting opportunity to
wax melancholy and confidential.  With a word of encouragement he would
have stayed away from church to bear her company, but Sylvia was
provokingly obtuse, and he went off looking unutterable reproaches with
his "humbugging eyes."

Left to herself, Sylvia hobbled to the piano and sang Christmas hymns in
a weak little voice, which wavered suspiciously towards the close.
Christmas is the day of all others when families are united, and it
seemed hard that when she possessed just one beloved relation, he should
be away off at the other end of the world.  The strange house, the
unusual silence, and her own inability to move about, added to the
feeling of depression, and her thoughts turned towards Aunt Margaret
with unusual yearning.  The old lady was at times a sore trial to her
niece's patience, but at least they had a claim on each other's
affection; she was the dear father's sister, and her own legal guardian
during his absence!

Sylvia wondered how the two ladies would pass their day--church in the
morning as a matter of course; early dinner and reminiscences of the
brougham and peach-houses; arrival of the postman with cards; renewed
reminiscences and family histories of the various senders; one arm-chair
at each side of the fire; two white caps nodding sleepily forward; two
pairs of cashmere boots reposing on footstools.  Arrival of tea and
exchange of recipes and household experiences.  Letters of thanks to
valued friends for seasonable gifts.  Supper of cold turkey and cocoa,
with anecdotal references to Christmases of long ago.  Mutual exchange
of compliments, bed, nightcaps, and sleeping-socks.

Oh dear me!  It all seemed very flat to one-and-twenty, and why should
one girl have health and beauty, and brothers and sisters, and an
adoring young husband into the bargain, and another be a solitary unit,
with no one to cosset her and help her to bear her manifold infirmities?

Sylvia's tears were still rather near the surface, and she mopped her
eyes with her handkerchief, and mopped them again, and then carefully
dried them on a dry place, and craned forward to look in the glass and
see if they looked very red and tell-tale.  The bleared reflection had a
wonderfully calming effect, and she limped to her couch and read
persistently to distract her thoughts, until the peal of the bell
announced the Hilliards' arrival.  From her corner she could not see the
doorway, but judging from the sounds of coming and going, of dragging
heavy weights, of scurrying along the passage, of whispered colloquies,
and sudden explosions of laughter, it was evident that some great
mystery was in the air.

Then the cab drove away, the dining-room door closed with a bang, she
heard the furniture being dragged to and fro, and wondered how long it
would be before the drawing-room was raided in its turn.  For a quarter
of an hour the conspirators remained shut up together, then Esmeralda
came sailing into the room, all smiles and amiability.

"A happy Christmas to you, Miss Trevor!  Excuse me for not coming in
before, but I am so anxious to arrange my presents before the others
come home from church.  I want the easel from that corner, and I want
you to promise faithfully that you won't come into the dining-room
before you are allowed!"

"I can't walk so far without help.  You are quite safe so far as I am
concerned," said Sylvia regretfully, and Esmeralda looked at her with
quick scrutiny.

"So bad as that!  I didn't know.  Is that why you have been crying?"

"No--oh no!  I am used to that now.  I felt a little lonely, that's all.
I wanted my father."

The beautiful face changed suddenly, the lips tightened, the eyes grew
large and strained.  There was a ring of pain in the clear voice.

"Is he dead?"

"No, no, only so far-away.  At the other end of the world, in Ceylon!"

"You will see him again!" said Esmeralda shortly.  She looked at the
portrait of a handsome, reckless face which hung on the wall above the
sofa, and drew a fluttering sigh.  "That was my father.  It is nearly
two years since he had his accident, and I thought I could never be
happy again.  If I could write to him, if I could get his letters, and
think that some day, it might be in twenty years to come, he would be
back among us again, I should feel as if there was nothing else to wish
for."

She sat down suddenly by the couch with an air of having forgotten all
about the errand which had brought her into the room, clasped her hands
round her knee, and began a series of disconnected childish memories,
while Sylvia gazed spellbound at the beautiful, dreamy face, and
wondered how she could ever have thought it cold and unfeeling.

"We were always such chums, from the time that I was a mite in
pinafores.  I remember his first explaining to me what happened when
people died--how their bodies were put into the grave, while their souls
went straight to heaven; but I didn't understand what a soul was, and I
was frightened and cried out, `Well, I won't go one step without my
body!'  I used to play tricks on him, and he would catch me up and carry
me into his room, and say, `Will you rather be poisoned, or buried
alive?' and I would prefer the poisoning because it was chocolates out
of the corner cupboard.

"He used to wake me in the mornings coming battering at my door, and
singing, `Come awake thee, awake thee, my merry Swiss lass!' and when we
were learning French fables from Miss Minnitt, we used to take arms,
Bridgie and I, and walk up and down before him reciting, `Deux
compagnons presse d'argent!'  It didn't make any difference whether he
had the money or not--he always gave it to us.

"One day we were going for a picnic, and he walked on with the men,
leaving me to drive after them in the cart with the provisions.  There
was only one thing he told me to remember, and that was just what I
forgot--his camera, to take a special view which he'd wanted for an age.
Four miles from home it jumped into my mind, and I sat in misery the
rest of the way.  The Major laughed when I told him, and sympathised
with me for my upset.  `You'll forget your own head next, and it will be
a pity,' he said, `for it's a very pretty one.'

"I hated to vex him just because he was so sweet about it.  No one ever
understood me as well as the Major, and when I was in a tantrum he would
say, `Think it over till to-morrow, my girl.  If you are of the same
mind then, we will discuss it together,' and, of course, I never did
think the same two days running.

"When he was ill he used to lie looking at me, and his face was quite
different from that in the picture--so sad and wistful.  `I've not done
much in the way of training you, my girl,' he would say, `but I've loved
you a great deal.  Maybe that will do as well.  You are not one to stand
a bridle.'  He loved to have me with him; to the last he would stretch
out his hand--"

Her voice quivered and stopped, and Sylvia sat with lowered eyes,
murmuring incoherent condolences.  Esmeralda's love for her dead father
was very sweet and touching, but to the more reserved nature it seemed
an extraordinary thing that she could speak so openly to a stranger, and
in the twinkling of an eye change her mood from gay to grave.

The hands of the clock were approaching the hour when the rest of the
family might be expected to return from church, yet there she sat
dreaming over the past, and apparently absolutely forgetful of the
demands of the present.  Sylvia dare not risk a reminder which would
seem in the last degree unfeeling, but presently the door opened, and
Geoffrey Hilliard appeared on the threshold, looking round with anxious
inquiry.

"Good morning, Miss Trevor.  The compliments of the season."  Then he
looked at his wife, all incredulous and aghast.  "My dear girl, what are
you about?  Do you know that at any moment Bridgie may be here?  I
thought you had come for the easel."

Esmeralda leaped to her feet with a cry of dismay.  "Hurry! hurry!" she
cried.  "Oh, what are you waiting for?  Carry it for me.  Be quick! be
quick!" and off she rushed with a swirl of flounces, a rustle of silk, a
wild waving of arms, while her husband chuckled with amusement, and
confided in Sylvia--

"That's the usual programme!  First keeps me waiting for hours, and then
upbraids me for being slow.  Keep Bridgie occupied if she comes in too
soon, please, Miss Trevor.  This little surprise needs a good deal of
preparation."

What could it be?  Sylvia grew quite excited as once more peals of
laughter echoed from the dining-room.  Esmeralda was evidently sparing
no pains to display her presents to the best advantage, and, lucky girl,
no want of money had hampered her choice of what would be appropriate
and welcome.

"I'm glad I gave Bridgie my minute offering this morning, so that it
won't be shamed by contrast.  I shall be out of this distribution, so it
doesn't matter, but I do hope they will ask me to go in," said Sylvia to
herself.  "I hated Esmeralda last night, but I rather love her this
morning.  She is like the little girl in the rhyme--when she is nice she
is very, very nice; but when she is bad she is--horrid!"

After all, the mysterious preparations were completed before the return
of the church party, for the service had been unusually lengthy, and
Esmeralda was champing with impatience before the latch-key clicked in
the lock.  There was great kissing and hugging beneath the mistletoe,
and Bridgie was sent flying upstairs to take off her wraps, in
preparation for the great exhibition.

"I have laid out our presents in the dining-room, and they take up all
the table, so there will be no dinner until they are distributed.  I've
lighted the lamp, dear, to make it look more festive.  Hope you don't
mind?  It was just the least thought in the world gloomy in that back
room this morning."

"Anything you like, dear! anything you like!" cried Bridgie the docile;
then she looked at Sylvia, and beamed with satisfaction as Geoffrey
offered his arm to support the invalid's halting footsteps.

They led the way together, and she seated herself in state in an arm-
chair, while the brothers and sisters crowded in at the doorway,
exclaiming volubly at the sight which met their eyes.

The table had been pushed lengthways against the window, the crimson
curtains making an effective background to its heaped-up treasures.  The
lamp stood at the farther end of the room, casting a subdued rosy light
on the eager faces.  It was not exactly a "cheery" illumination, but it
was certainly becoming, and lent an air of mystery to the everyday
surroundings.

"A new lamp-shade!  How lovely!  Pink silk and roses.  Wouldn't it make
a sweet garden hat?" exclaimed Bridgie rapturously.  "Is that my
present, Joan?  How did you know I wanted a shade?"

"That's a present for the house; yours is over there in that round box;
Geoffrey will hand it to you.  There's a present for everybody, and one
for you all together.  You'll see that last!"

At that every eye turned curiously at the curtained picture-frame which
stood artfully supported by boxes at the place of honour at the farther
end of the table.  Evidently this was the grand climax of the
entertainment, but meantime there were half a dozen excitements in
store, all calling for rapturous acknowledgments.

Bridgie's round box was found to contain a muff of real Russian sable,
on receiving which, to use her own expressive phrase, she "nearly
swooned with delight."  She sat purring over it, and rubbing it fondly
against her cheeks, while dandy Jack was presented with a dressing-case,
fitted with silver and ivory, Pat with a handsome camera, and Miles with
a bicycle deftly wheeled from behind the curtains.

Even the servants had been remembered, for there was a bulky parcel
addressed to each name, and Sylvia grew red with mingled pleasure and
embarrassment as a casket of French bon-bons was deposited on her knee.
It was a delightful scene, and not the least delightful part of it was
the enjoyment of the young couple themselves, and their whole-hearted
participation in the pleasure of the recipients.

It is the custom of most donors to depreciate their gifts, but that was
not Esmeralda's way.  Not a bit of it!  She was a capital show-woman,
and if by chance any detail of perfection passed unnoticed, she pointed
it out forthwith, and dilated at length upon its virtues.  Jack turned
over the silver-topped bottles, and peeped at his reflection in the
mirror; Miles tingled his bicycle-bell, and balanced himself on the
saddle; Sylvia handed round bon-bons and surreptitiously fumbled to
discover how many rows the box contained; and Pat demanded immediate
orders for family groups.  It took some little time to restore order,
but Geoffrey stood patiently waiting until he could make himself heard,
his hand stretched out to uncover the curtained frame.

"Now for the general present!  With best wishes to the family circle,
from Joan and myself.  Are you ready?  Very well, then, here you are!
One, two, three!"

With the last word he whisked off the cloth, and a gasp sounded through
the room, followed by a silence more eloquent than words.

Sylvia stared with widened eyes at the picture of a girl's head,
strangely like and yet unlike that precious photograph which Bridgie had
exhibited with so much pride.  It was Pixie--that was quite evident--but
an older, bigger, wonderfully smartened edition of the elf-like child.
The dark locks were rolled back in pompadour fashion over a high
cushion, the plait turned up in a queue, fastened at the nape of the
neck by an enormous outstanding bow; the cheeks were fuller in outline,
and the disproportion between nose and mouth less marked.  She was by no
means pretty, yet there was a charm about the quaint little face which
made the onlooker smile involuntarily and feel a sudden outgoing of
affection.

"P-pixie!" gasped Bridgie in a breathless whisper.  She rested her cheek
against the muff, and stared before her with rapt grey eyes.  "Pixie's
portrait!  Oh, Esmeralda--what a lovely thought!  You had it taken for
us?  You sent to Paris for it?"

"Yes--yes!" cried Esmeralda gleefully.  "I knew it would please you more
than anything else to have her with us.  Do you like it?  Do you think
it is good?  Is it quite like her?"

"It's like--yes, but not quite lifelike.  Does she really do her hair
like that?  I can't imagine Pixie looking so neat.  She looks grave,
too--graver than she ever looked, except when she was up to mischief.  I
hope she is not fretting, poor child!  Oh, it makes me long for her more
than ever!  I could look at it all day long!"

Jack stroked his chin, and smiled contentedly.

"That's what I call something like a present!  It's a rattling good
portrait of the Piccaninny, judiciously flattered as portraits ought to
be.  We can't see it, though, in this light.  Let me put the lamp a
little nearer, or take off the shade."

Esmeralda, however, was standing next the lamp, and refused to move
aside.

"We arranged it to give the best light, so it's no use trying to improve
it.  The best view is from over there by the door," she said in her
masterful fashion which would brook no contradiction.  "One can never
see a picture to the best advantage by lamp-light, but you must make
allowances for that.  Do you think it is well done?  It is by a very
good master!"

"Rather starry about the eyes!" said Pat critically.

"Laid on the red rather too thickly about the cheeks!" objected Miles.

Bridgie put down her muff, and went stooping across the room to get a
nearer view.

"Is it oil or water-colour?  I seem to know the frame.  Oh, it _is_ like
her, Esmeralda--oh, so like!  Pixie, Pixie, my little Pixie!"

"_Bridgie_!" cried an answering voice.  The picture swayed, rocked
forward, and fell on its face on the table; a little figure stood
squeezed in between the table and the window.  It was no picture, but a
reality.  Pixie herself stood among them in warm, living flesh and
blood!


CHAPTER TEN.

PIXIE'S REMINISCENCES.

It is wonderful what money can do--in conjunction with generous impulse
and ingenious brain.  Esmeralda hung on to Bridgie's arm relating in
breathless accents how, being herself unable to go abroad until after
the New Year, the happy inspiration had occurred to Geoffrey of
despatching the French maid to her native city to bring back the dear
living Christmas present which now stood before them; how the travellers
had arrived on the previous evening, afire with delight at their own
share in the conspiracy; how she herself had conceived the idea of
presenting Pixie in the form of a portrait, and had brought the frame
from home, and tacked across it a piece of black gauze to heighten the
picture-like effect.

"And I put the lamp as far-away from it as possible, and covered it over
so that she might not have to keep still too long.  Oh, if you could
only have seen yourselves staring at her, and taking it all in grim
earnest!  I never, never enjoyed anything so much in my days!"

"Is it oil colours I am, or water?  I'm flattered, ain't I, as a
portrait ought to be?  Ye couldn't imagine I could be so neat!" cried
Pixie tauntingly, as she pirouetted to and fro on the top of the table,
to which she had lightly sprung at the first moment of discovery.  She
looked like a big French doll, as she swung from side to side, her hands
outheld, her shoulders raised, her tiny feet twinkling to and fro.  Her
pink frock was marvellously smart, the flounces stood out in jaunty
fashion around the ankles, the sash encircled a tiny waist, and the
brothers and sisters stood looking on, joy, incredulity, amaze written
upon their faces.

Bridgie's arms kept stretching out and falling back to her side with
automatic regularity, and still the little figure pranced, and
gesticulated, and blew kisses to right and left, at one moment a merry
Irish vagabond, at the next a French marionette--all smirks and bows and
shrugging shoulders.

"We got the better of you that time, I'm thinking!  Oh, la-la! how it
was droll to hear you all making your pleasantries upon me while I kept
still--so still!  I have never been so still but when I am up to
mischief.  If ye could have seen under the table, I was shaking like a
jelly, but Esmeralda said, `I'll pack ye back as quick as ye came if you
spoil it on me, after all me trouble!'"

"Figure it to yourselves; I was sitting so _triste_ by myself in the
_salon_, thinking of you all at home, and the fun ye'd have without me,
and the slices of plum-pudding fried up the next day the way I like them
best, and never a bite to come my way, when behold I the door opened,
and there enters to me Marie, all smiles and complaisance.  Everything
is altered, she bears a letter from Madame Hilliard--I must pack my box,
and say my farewells, and be ready to start by the train next day.
Fortunately all is ready.  Therese has already prepared for my return.
There was nothing to do but lay the things in the box and drive away."

"And what did Therese say to it all?  How did she and Pere like parting
from you in such a hurry?"

"They wept!" said Pixie tragically.  Her shoulders approached her ears
in eloquent gesture.  "But how they wept!  I also wept to see them weep,
and Marie wept to leave her dear Paris."  She paused, and the solemn
expression gave place to a broad smile of enjoyment.

"There wasn't a dry rag between the four of us, and Pere took snuff to
console himself, and that started him crying harder than ever.  I was so
flurried I couldn't tell which was the topmost, joy or sorrow, until we
had ham and eggs for breakfast this morning, and I felt I was at home.
It's an awful thing to live in a country where there's never a bite of
solid food to cheer your spirits in the morning!  Many's the time me
heart would bleed, thinking of Miles if he'd been there.  Are ye glad to
see me, boys, now you know that I'm real?"

There was no doubt about that.  When at last the little sister
condescended to step down from her perch, she was passed from one to
another in a series of bear-like hugs, from which she emerged flushed
and complacent, to step briskly towards Sylvia and kiss her effusively
upon the cheek.

"How d'ye do, me dear, and how's your illness?  I've heard so much about
it that I expected to see you worse.  You look too pretty to be an
invalid!"

"Hear, hear!" muttered Jack softly.

Sylvia blushed and gripped the little hand which lay so confidingly in
her own.

"Thank you very much.  I am getting better, but I don't feel at all
pretty.  I'm lame, and have to limp about wherever I go, and my hair is
tumbling out.  I have the greatest difficulty to make it look
respectable.  I shall be bald soon!"

Pixie craned forward and examined her head with sorrowful candour.

"It _is_ thin!  Ye can see the scalp shining through like shot silk.
You'll look like an old man with a bald head; but never mind!  Think of
the saving in the morning!  It will be so easy to do your hair!"

There was a burst of laughter from brothers and sisters, while Sylvia
covered her face with her hands and rocked to and fro in mock despair.

"You need never be unduly elated by a compliment from Pixie, Miss
Trevor," said Geoffrey Hilliard meaningly.  "She is the most
transparently truthful person I ever encountered, and favoured me with
several character sketches of my wife before we were engaged, which
might have warned me of my fate if I'd been a sensible fellow.  I have
remembered them, Pixie, many a time since then, and I'm glad to find
your foreign experiences have not affected your candour.  There's
another thing that is not much altered, so far as I can hear--and that's
your brogue, my dear!  It sounds to me almost as pronounced as in the
old days when you were running wild at Knock."

"But it's got a French accent to it now--that's better than English!"
cried Pixie eagerly.  "I was learning to speak quite elegantly in
Surbiton, but Therese wouldn't listen to a word of English out of my
mouth, and if you'll believe me, me dears, my very dreams are in French
the last few months.  There was a _jeune fille_ in Paris who used to
promenade with us sometimes for the benefit of hearing me talk English.
She said the words didn't sound the same way as when they taught them to
her at school.  _Helas le miserable_!  The brogue of her put shame on me
own before I came away."

The shoulders went up again, and a roguish smile lit up the little face.
Bridgie watched it with rapt, adoring eyes; her Pixie, her baby, was
now a big girl, almost grown-up, transformed from the forlorn-looking
elf to a natty little personage, more like the pictures of _jeunes
filles_ on the back of French pattern plates than she could have
believed possible for Irish flesh and blood.  Imitative Pixie had caught
"the air," and the good Therese had evidently taken immense pains with
the costume in which her pupil should make her reappearance in the
family circle.

Bridgie gazed at the buckled, high-heeled shoes peeping from beneath the
flounces, and wondered if it could really be that they held the same
little feet which used to patter about, buttonless, and down at heel;
she looked at the jaunty, outstanding bow which tied back the hair, and
contrasted it with the wisp of ribbon twisted to the proportions of a
tape, and knotted like a cat-o'-nine-tails, which used to bind together
the straggly locks, and as she looked, she felt--shall it be
confessed?--a pang of longing and regret for the days that were no more.
It passed in a moment, for whatever her external appearance might be,
Pixie was transparently the same at heart, and quick to note the
faintest shadow on the face of the dear mother-sister.  She swung round
to face Bridgie, the grey eyes bent upon her in earnest scrutiny.

They saw something written there that had not been visible two years
before--the outward marks of an inward, and very bitter struggle, and
Bridgie flushed beneath the scrutiny of that clear-seeing, childlike
gaze, and trembled at the thought of what was to come.

"Has anyone been unkind to ye, Bridgie?" asked Pixie in deep, full-
throated tones.  She put up her hand and stroked the soft cheek with a
tenderness of pitying love which was more eloquent than words.  "There
are dips in your cheeks, like Miss Minnitt's when she was getting over
the fever, and your eyes look tired.  What has happened to worry ye, me
dear, and take the colour out of your face?"

"She has enough colour to satisfy you at the moment, hasn't she?"  Jack
said, laughing, and Pixie nodded with ruthless candour.

"Because she is blushing.  What are you blushing for, you silly girl?
It isn't as if I had asked about a heart affair.  The girls in France
were always talking of heart affairs, and asking if you were _fiancee_.
They thought you were very old, and must be going to _coif_ Saint
Catherine.  That means that you are going to be an old maid.  I said
yes, of course you were, because you were needed at home.  Esmeralda was
no use, but we could not get on without Bridgie!"

"You miserable, ungrateful child!  This is my reward for all I have done
for you!" declaimed Esmeralda with dramatic emphasis, but Bridgie's face
lit up with a smile of whole-hearted satisfaction.

Thank God!  Whatever her personal disappointment might be, she could
never feel that she was alone in the world--that among all its teeming
millions there was no human being whose happiness depended upon her
presence; she had been spared that worst trial to a woman's heart, and
Pixie's calm taking-for-granted that she was indispensable to the family
circle was the greatest comfort which she could have given.

"No, I shan't leave you, darling.  I have too much to do looking after
you and those three big boys, and when you fly away to nests of your
own, Sylvia and I have all sorts of plans for enjoying ourselves
together.  I have promised faithfully to wheel her about in her Bath-
chair."

"And I will make your caps.  I'm clever at millinery," said Sylvia,
pretending not to hear Jack's murmurs of protest, and looking very
pretty and animated as she sat erect in her chair and gesticulated with
her thin little hands.  "You shall have one with pearl dangles for high
days and holidays, and nice, stiff little black bows for ordinary wear.
We will knit socks and mittens, and play cribbage in the evening, and
talk over the days of our youth.  It's almost a pity we know each other
now, for we shan't be able to romance as much as we would like!"

"Perhaps the romance will come in in some other way!  Perhaps a husband
may interfere with the claims of Saint Catherine!" said Geoffrey,
putting into words the language of Jack's eyes, and everybody stared at
Sylvia's face with embarrassing curiosity.

"I shall never marry!" she said obstinately.  Not that she meant it in
the least, for she did not, but she was one of the girls who foolishly
think it the right thing to protest in public, and who are mistaken
enough to feel a trifle ashamed of the natural womanly longing for
someone to love and to protect them, which God Himself has put in their
hearts.  A few girls there may be who honestly mean such a decision, but
they are very few indeed, while their hearers are invariably sceptical.

Not one of the O'Shaughnessys seemed in the least impressed by Sylvia's
disclaimer, and it was disconcerting to hear Pixie's sympathetic, "Did
no one ever ask ye?  Never mind!  They may still.  You are not so very
old!"

Sylvia made up her mind there and then that it was better to say exactly
what one meant in the presence of Miss Pixie O'Shaughnessy!


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

ESMERALDA CHECKMATED.

Three days after Christmas, Esmeralda and her husband returned to
Ireland, scattering invitations, severally and in bulk, to all the
inhabitants of Number Three, Rutland Road.  Even Sylvia found herself
invited for a long visit, and was the more surprised at this mark of
favour because Mrs Hilliard's demeanour towards her was tinged with
jealousy and uneasy suspicion.  She was willing enough to play Lady
Bountiful, present offerings of fruit and flowers, and be gushingly
sympathetic, but she liked to monopolise the whole attention of her
sisters, and was not well pleased when they in their turn hung about the
invalid's couch.  She had not been an hour in the same room, moreover,
before she had intercepted one of Jack's most melting glances, and the
stare of the great grey eyes left no doubt as to the disapproval with
which she viewed the flirtation.

Sylvia's annoyance converted her into a very hedgehog of dignity, and
the prickly quills kept the young fellow at such a distance that he lost
faith in his own fascinations for the first and only time in his career.
He bade Esmeralda an affectionate farewell, but was in truth well
resigned to her departure--a fact which she was quite sharp enough to
discover.

"Jack is pleased that I am going away!" she said to Bridgie as the two
sisters sat together for the last confidential chat.  "He knows that I
watch him flirting with Sylvia Trevor, and thinks he will get on better
without me.  You really ought to be careful, Bridgie, and not let them
be too much together!"

"Does he flirt with her?  Not more than he does with every other girl,"
said Bridgie leniently.  "I don't see why I should worry myself about
it.  Sylvia is a sensible girl, who is not given to fancying that every
man is in love with her, and Jack is just a dear, soft-hearted boy, who
can't help making pretty speeches, but he would never make serious love
if he did not mean it, and if he did--well, why not Sylvia as well as
anyone else?"

But Mrs Geoffrey Hilliard was not to be so easily appeased.  She threw
back her haughty head, lowered languid eyelids, and drawled out--

"My dear Bridgie, remember whom you are speaking about!  Jack is the
head of the family--he's O'Shaughnessy of Knock!  Eventually, as we hope
and believe, he will go back to take up his own position, and, thanks to
Geoff, the property will be in a very different condition from what it
was when he left.  He must make a marriage which will be a help, not a
hindrance.  And who is she?  Answer me that!  What do you know about
her?"

"She is a dear girl!  She is very attractive!  Her father is abroad.
She lives with an old aunt."

"Exactly!  A pleasant girl in a London suburb!"  Esmeralda's voice was
full of ineffable condescension.  "There are thousands of them, and no
doubt they are charming in their way, but not for Jack.  He owes a duty
to the family as well as himself, and you ought to tell him as much.
You really ought, Bridgie!  Speak to him at once, before it goes too
far!"

"Suppose you speak to him yourself!  When you are so hot upon it, it's a
pity to leave it to me."

"No, I'd rather not.  Jack is so stupid about taking advice.  He would
snap my nose off if I said anything."

"I really don't see why my nose is not as valuable as yours!  Why should
I do your disagreeable work for you?" retorted Bridgie with spirit.
"You did not know that Geoffrey was a rich man when you promised to
marry him, and it's the last thing I would think of myself, so why
should we expect any more of Jack?  I am not going to interfere,
whatever happens, and if you take my advice you won't mention Sylvia's
name to him!"

"I don't intend to, but--"

Esmeralda shut her lips tightly over an unspoken determination.  There
are more ways than one of nipping in the bud an incipient love affair,
but she did not care about confiding her latest inspiration to any
hearer, least of all to Bridgie, who would have given up her most
cherished plans rather than hurt the feelings of a fellow-creature.  She
changed the subject, and talked lightly on impersonal topics until the
moment of parting drew near, when there came a sudden softening over the
beautiful face, and she said in gentle, diffident tones--

"I didn't like to ask before, but I can't leave without knowing,
darling.  Have you heard?"

Bridgie shook her head mutely, and the lines which Pixie had noticed
deepened round her eyes and mouth, but the eyes smiled still--a brave,
steady smile.

"I never shall hear now, Joan.  I've made up my mind to that."

"I don't know how you bear it!  I can't think how you manage to be so
composed and cheerful!  If Geoff had treated me like that, it would have
soured me for life.  You were never sour from the first, and now you
seem quite happy.  Yet, as Pixie says, you have a pathetic look which
shows that you have not really forgotten.  You still care, Bridgie
dear?"

"I shall always care," said Bridgie quietly.  "There's an ache at the
back of my heart, but there are so many things at the front that it gets
crowded out.  Besides, you know, Esmeralda darling, I don't want to seem
to praise myself, but it's a trouble which God has sent me, and I ask
Him every night to help me to bear it in the right way.  It wouldn't be
the right way to let the shadow of it darken other lives besides my own.
If I moped and grizzled, everyone in the house would be uncomfortable,
and they have their own worries, poor creatures, without suffering for
mine!  I made an excellent rule for my own benefit--to laugh downstairs
and cry in my own room, and it answers beautifully, for I'm so tired
when I get to bed that I've no sooner begun repining than I wake up and
find it's morning.  You try it, dear, when you've got a worry.  You'll
find it splendid!"

Esmeralda shook her head.

"Not for me!  What I feel I must show, and sooner than I feel it, if
that is possible.  If I tried to bottle up my feelings it would make me
ill, and the explosion would be all the greater when it did come.  My
only chance is to get it over as soon as possible, but in your case it
is a long slow suspense, which is worse than any definite trouble.  You
are an angel, dear, to bear it as you do!  It's mysterious that it
should have come to you and not me, for you didn't need discipline, and
I, who was always the naughty one, have got all that I want--Geoffrey,
and home, and the dear little boy.  You must come soon, Bridgie, to see
the boy.  He will be getting teeth and all sorts of luxuries, and his
godmother ought to be there to look after him."

Esmeralda rose and strolled over to the glass to arrange her hat and pin
on a filmy veil.  "I must go downstairs now, and say good-bye to Miss
Trevor.  Don't hurry, dear, if you have anything to do.  We don't leave
for a quarter of an hour still."

Unsuspecting Bridgie trotted away to the kitchen to give some orders,
while Esmeralda sailed into the drawing-room, all smiles and amiability.
A peal of laughter greeted her ears as she entered, and there sat Pixie
perched on the end of the sofa, with her hands clasped round her knees,
and her chin poked forward, enjoying to the full the discovery of a new
audience, who was apparently as much interested in the sayings and
doings of the O'Shaughnessy family as she was herself.

Both girls looked up as the rustle of silks heralded Mrs Hilliard's
approach, but while the younger remained serenely composed, Sylvia's
lips tightened, and her eyes gave out an ominous flash.  It was as if
she felt an antagonistic spirit in the air, and braced herself for the
conflict.  Yet nothing could have been more friendly than Esmeralda's
smile--more cordial than her voice.

"I told Bridgie I must really have ten minutes for a farewell chat with
you before I go.  It has been so pleasant to have you here, and I hope
we shall soon meet again.  Has Pixie been amusing you while we were
upstairs?  Come down from that couch, child!  You must be quite cramped.
I am here, so you need not mount guard any longer."

"I'm very comfortable where I am," said Pixie easily.  She laid her head
on one side, and stared at her sister with large, innocent eyes, which
seemed strangely disconcerting to that young lady's composure.  She
frowned, and snapped a bracelet together with quite a vicious snap.

"But you are too old for such inelegant positions.  You are almost
grown-up now, and must learn how to behave.  For goodness' sake get up
before Geoff sees you!  He is so very particular about nice behaviour in
girls."

"'Twas a bad relapse for him when he married you!" muttered Pixie
beneath her breath.  She straightened herself slowly and let her feet
slip to the ground, but Esmeralda realised that nothing but a direct
request would convince her of the extraordinary fact that her absence
was for once more desired than her presence.  For obvious reasons such a
request could not be made, and as the time was quickly passing nothing
remained but to clothe her hints even more circumspectly than she had
intended.

"I am so glad that your foot is really getting better," she said
graciously to Sylvia.  "Bridgie says the nurse is so pleased with its
progress the last few days.  You will be able to walk about soon, and
then if you feel inclined for a change we shall be so pleased if you
will come over to visit us.  It is quiet at Knock, but I would drive you
about, and the air is so delightful that I am sure it would do you good.
You will hear all about the place from Pixie, so that it would not feel
strange to you when you arrived, and we have a few nice friends within
driving distance.

"She would like Mollie Burrell, wouldn't she, Pixie?  That's a young
girl who lives seven miles from us at Knock, but we think nothing of
that distance in the country.  She was always over at the Castle before
Jack went away, and we used to say she felt like another sister.  You
remember how he used to drive over in the cart, and bring her back to
surprise us?"

"I do so!  And the afternoon when she went shopping into the post-office
as they drove through the village, and Tim Hegan came up and began
bidding for the old grey mare, and with that Jack took him into the cart
and drove over to the farm, and never a thought of poor Mollie until the
evening, when she cut him dead limping home through the mud.  'Twas a
cruel thing to do, and the poor creature putting on new boots for the
occasion to do him honour, and says Jack, `I've done for myself this
time!  It would take a cleverer man than myself to twist _that_ into a
compliment!'"

"Oh, that's an old-world story!" cried Esmeralda, with her head in the
air.  Her cheeks had flushed despite her efforts for composure, and she
was uncomfortably conscious that Sylvia was trying to restrain a smile
at this most open contradiction of the implied attachment between Jack
and his Irish neighbour.  Her irritation urged her to stronger measures,
and she said testily--

"It proves how little dependence can be placed upon Jack's promises.  If
he could forget Mollie, it is no wonder that he changes his mind every
other day.  But they made up that quarrel ages ago, and he was over
there shooting in September and squiring her all over the county.  You
should not tell tales out of school, Pixie!"

"Was it me?  I thought it was yourself.  You began saying that they were
such friends, and I thought maybe it would amuse Sylvia to hear--"

"So it does, Pixie.  It amuses me extremely," assented Sylvia with an
intentional emphasis, which made Esmeralda wince once more, for, however
innocent the little sister might be, she felt convinced that Sylvia
Trevor thoroughly understood her implied warning, and was by no means
docile in her manner of receiving it.  She sat up stiff and erect,
smiling into space with an expression of scornful superiority which
filled the beholder with unwilling admiration.  In just such a spirit
would she herself have accepted interference from the lips of a
stranger.  She recognised a kindred spirit, and realised that, putting
Jack out of the question, Miss Sylvia Trevor would be a friend after her
own heart.

The repeated invitation had in it a note of sincerity which had been
wanting in the earlier rendering, but Sylvia only murmured, "Thank you!"
in a politely non-committal manner, and shrank back so decidedly from
the proffered kiss that there was no choice but to substitute a formal
handshake in its stead.

The sisters drove off together to the station, and Sylvia was left alone
to relieve pent-up irritation by making one impetuous resolve after
another, to replace each the following moment by one diametrically
different.

"Thank goodness, she has gone at last!  I can't think how I ever could
have liked her!  I think I dislike her more than anyone I ever met.  How
dare she interfere with me!  How dare she imply that I want to
monopolise her precious brother!  I shall never speak to him again as
long as I live!  I shall go home to-morrow, and take good care that I
never come across when he is likely to be at home.  Perhaps she has
warned him too, as if he were not conceited enough already!  He is worth
a dozen of her all the same, and is far nicer than I thought at first.
It's perfectly absurd to think a man and a girl cannot be in the same
house for a week without falling in love with each other.  I won't
condescend to take the faintest notice of her insinuations.  I shall be
as nice as I like, and give up snubbing him from this minute.  He can be
engaged to fifty Mollie Burrells if he likes; that's no reason why I
should not treat him civilly!"

In the hours which elapsed before the return of the sisters she had had
time to change her mind a dozen times over, to write letters to Aunt
Margaret and burn them in the fire, to invent scathing sarcasms by which
poor Jack was to be reduced to a condition of hopeless subjection, and
rehearse melting scenes when her womanly sympathy would soothe ruffled
spirits and restore him to calm.

All uncertainty as to her conduct was, however, removed by the first
glance at Jack's face when he returned home in the evening, for it bore
the unmistakable marks of real anxiety, and the weary sigh with which he
sank into his chair was something new to his vigorous manhood.

Bridgie bustled in with the tea which always awaited his coming, kissed
him lightly, and hurried away to finish some letters.  Pixie sat hunched
up before the fire devouring a book, and Jack pushed his chair nearer
Sylvia's couch, staring at her in a dumb, melancholy fashion which had
in it something singularly beguiling.  Despite his great height and
muscular form, he looked so helpless and appealing, like a nice child
who has lost a toy, or a big collie dog which turns pathetic eyes
towards his master's face.

Sylvia smiled involuntarily, but it was a very friendly smile, and her
voice had lost its mocking tone as she inquired--

"Well--what's the trouble?"

Jack put his cup on the table and leant towards her, his elbows resting
on his knees, his chin supported on clasped hands.  Pixie read on
undisturbed, soft gurgles of laughter marking her enjoyment of
sensational passages.

"I've had a blow," said Jack, "a ghastly disappointment!  This is the
day when the firm announces the various arrangements for the year,
increases in salary and so on.  I quite understood that I should come in
for a substantial rise, if not a junior partnership.  It was talked
about when I joined four years back, and as nothing was done last
January I made a certainty of it coming off now.  Instead of that, I get
nothing--nothing!  No advance at all upon the payment of the last two
years.  I had it out with the partners this afternoon, and they seemed
to think I had done unusually well.  They implied that it was a piece of
pure imagination on my part to have expected to be taken into the firm."

"But--I know nothing about business except what I have read--but is it
not usual to have something written--a definite agreement which settles
things without the possibility of argument?  If you joined this firm
with the idea of being made a partner, was not an agreement written down
in black and white?"

Jack waved his hand in airy dissent.

"No, there was nothing definite, but we talked it over.--The old fellow
certainly held out hopes for the future!  I made so sure of a
partnership that we took this house in the prospect of being able to pay
for it out of my increased earnings.  It's too expensive as it is for
people brought up as we have been.  I'm the most practical of the
bundle, and with care and attention can make half a crown go almost as
far as an Englishman's shilling; but Bridgie, bless her! wears herself
out saving pennies, and throws away pounds with the best.  In my
father's time there was never any money to trouble about, so she got
into the way of ordering things without thinking what they would cost,
and it's a difficult plan to forsake.  She's done her best, poor
creature!  I wouldn't blame her for the world."

"And--and will you have to leave the house?"  Sylvia's heart sank
drearily at the prospect.  What if the O'Shaughnessys flitted away to a
suburb at the opposite end of the city, and Number Three, Rutland Road
was deserted once more, or tenanted by an ordinary, commonplace family,
such as inhabited every other villa in the neighbourhood!  After the
sweet friendship of Bridgie, the fascinations of Jack, the audacities of
the two boys, the witcheries of Pixie, and last but not least, the
incursions of Esmeralda, exasperating, but to the last degree romantic
and beautiful, Sylvia felt a shudder of distaste at the thought of a
stout mamma and papa, one baby in a perambulator, another in a mail-
cart, and a graduated line of school-boys and girls sallying forth daily
to their appointed tasks.  "Oh, I'm so sorry you will have to leave!"
she sighed, and Jack smiled at her in grateful acknowledgment of her
regret.

"I'm glad you are sorry, but I don't intend to leave.  We have been here
only four months, and I can't face another removal for--many reasons!
We will have to squeeze along somehow until things look up.  A crop of
bills have come in during the last few days to make matters worse, and I
will have to talk things over with Bridgie to-night.  I hate to worry
her, but there must be some system, or we shall find ourselves in the
workhouse some fine day.  And now there is the child to think of.  She
will be an extra expense!"

Sylvia glanced quickly across the room at the figure in the depths of
the arm-chair.  She sat motionless, her head bent over her book, but
Pixie was one of those intensely alive little creatures who seem to
infect their very surroundings with vitality.  It seemed to Sylvia that
the pages fluttered in agitated fashion, the bow of ribbon holding back
her hair seemed of a sudden to stand out at attention, the knotted ends
looked like two alert, curious ears at the back of her head.

How much had Pixie heard?


CHAPTER TWELVE.

A FAMILY COUNCIL.

That night after dinner Jack broke the news of his disappointment to the
assembled family, who bore the shock with surprising resignation.  Pat
whistled, and said, "Just our luck!  Ah, well, if it's no better, let's
be thankful it's no worse!"  Miles suggested cheerfully, "Why don't you
chuck it and keep a shop?  Then we should get all our food for nothing."
And Bridgie's sigh turned into a smile as she cried, "What a blessing
we took this house when we did!  Now we should not have been able to
afford it, and we should never have known you, Sylvia dear!  It's funny,
isn't it, to think that this little crib is too big for us?"

"Oh, awfully funny!" said Jack drily.  He had opened the topmost drawer
in the writing-table and taken out half a dozen red-backed books and a
bundle of bills.  "The fact remains that we shall have to spend at least
a hundred a year less than we calculated if we want to keep out of the
Bankruptcy Court.  I don't know how it is, but I seem to have given the
money for half these bills, and yet here they are again!  I was
perfectly horrified to see them.  This coal bill, for instance,--I
remember distinctly giving you two sovereigns one morning just as I was
starting for town--"

Sylvia sat up hastily and fumbled for the stick by which she supported
herself about the house.  It seemed to her impossible that such intimate
family affairs could be discussed before a stranger, but at the first
movement Jack inquired eagerly where she was going, and both he and
Bridgie laughed to scorn the idea of privacy.  The presence of a
stranger seemed indeed to whet their interest in the forthcoming
discussion, which was conducted throughout with a cheerfulness and
composure which contrasted strangely with Miss Munns's weekly
lamentations over her tradesmen's accounts.

"'Deed, I remember quite well!" said Bridgie, referring to the money
which had been given to her in settlement of the coal bill.  "It was the
morning the cat got lost in the oven, and all of us searching the house
over because of the piteous mews of it.  It crept in, Sylvia, when the
door was open, after the bacon came out, and Sarah pushed it to as she
passed, so the poor creature had a fine Turkish bath of it before we
found her.  Did I not pay the bill, after all?  I suppose I was short of
money for something else.  It's wonderful the way it slips away when you
are keeping house!"

Jack sighed and took up another paper from the table.

"There's another here.  I know I gave you ten shillings to settle this
ironmonger fellow.  Eight and threepence!  It's ridiculous running on
bills for little sums like this."

"I paid it!  I paid it!" cried Bridgie triumphantly.  "I distinctly
remember, because there is such a funny little man in the shop who says,
`What is your next pleasure, madam?' when you buy a box of tacks.  I
remember distinctly going in and paying something."

"Very well, then, you must have the receipt.  Where have you put the
receipt?"

Bridgie looked vaguely round the room, turned out the contents of her
writing-pad, peeped into a drawer under the table, searched the bottom
of the stocking-basket, the pocket of her dress, then stroked her chin
meditatively, and said--

"Perhaps I was paying for something else!  I remember now that I _did_
buy a saucepan."

Jack sighed again, and paced up and down the floor, but he showed no
signs of anger or even surprise, and his voice was quite apologetic as
he said--

"I'm afraid you will have to be more methodical, dear, if we stay on in
this house.  We shall never know how we stand if bills keep coming in
when we think they are settled.  We had better hold a cabinet council
and decide how much we can afford to spend in housekeeping and other
departments, and cut our coat according to our cloth.  It will be
difficult after the way things went on at Knock, but it's our only
chance.  I tried to put down my private expenses this afternoon, and was
horrified to find how heavy they were."

Bridgie cast an admiring glance upon him, and turned to Sylvia with an
air of pride.

"Isn't he splendid, now, at his age, talking like an old man for wisdom
and prudence!  You may well say things are different from what they were
at home, for there, if the worst came to the worst, you could always
fall back on the pigs and the vegetables that grew for nothing at your
door.  The idea of paying fourpence for a cauliflower takes me heart out
of me every time I go marketing, and the bacon is no sooner bought, than
it is eaten.  Well, I'm willing enough to learn method, but who's to
teach me?  Saving your presence, Jack, you're just a beginner yourself!"

Sylvia chuckled mischievously, and her eyes danced with amusement.

"There is a mistress in the art at your very door!  Aunt Margaret would
be enchanted to instruct you, and her housekeeping is a marvel of
accuracy.  She could tell you exactly how much she spent last year on
soft soap, and the reason why it was more in ninety-six than in ninety-
seven.  She could walk about the house in the dark and put her hand on
the blue-bag and the list of last week's washing.  She makes lists of
everything she possesses, from household linen to the Christmas cards
which she sends out and receives.  Her dresses last for best for four
years before they are turned for afternoon wear, and two years later
they are re-dipped for mornings.  They have histories, like her
relations, and make valuable Christmas presents to the charwoman on
their eighth birthday.  She thinks I am recklessly extravagant because
my dresses are worn-out in a year!"

"I'll ask her to teach me at once!  I'll begin making lists this very
afternoon!  I'll practise shutting my eyes and searching for the blue-
bag," cried Bridgie ardently.  "Jack dear, I'll be a model housekeeper,
and save so much money that we shall be quite rich."

She was all smiles and complaisance, and sat down for the cabinet
council with an unruffled brow, but, as we all know, it is more
difficult to face one or two definite difficulties than an army of
shadowy deprivations, and when the division of the family income made it
necessary to subtract considerably from her housekeeping allowance, and
to saddle her in addition with several outside expenses, Mistress
Bridget sighed and showed signs of rebellion.

"Such a lot of trouble for such a trifling saving!  'Twill destroy me
altogether to be fussing over every halfpenny.  What would it matter if
we were a trifle in debt at the end of the year?  Geoffrey would pay a
hundred pounds without knowing it, and be proud to do it into the
bargain!"

"But I won't accept it.  He has done quite enough as it is.  He has paid
for Pat's training, and will give him the agency as soon as he is ready
to take it, and he paid for Pixie's lessons in Paris.  I could not
refuse what was good for them, but I'll keep my own house, or give it up
altogether!" said Jack proudly, and Sylvia nodded her head in emphatic
approval from her place of vantage on the sofa.

Pat and Miles also applauded the declaration of independence, and
accepted their own share in the contemplated economies with unperturbed
serenity, while Pixie sat solemnly in a corner, turning her eyes on the
face of each speaker in turns, her shoulders heaving with suppressed
emotion.  Of all the members of the family it was evident that she took
the present difficulty most seriously, and Sylvia was strengthened in
the conviction that she had heard and taken to heart the reference to
herself which had been made in the afternoon.

She made no reference to the subject, but three times over the next day
Sylvia entered a room in time to hear a hurried rustle and scramble, and
behold Pixie gazing into the fire with an air of elaborate
unconsciousness--the newspaper rolled into a ball beneath her chair.  It
was always open at the advertisement sheet, moreover, so that the
onlooker had not much difficulty in guessing the character of the
letters which were inscribed with such deep-breathed earnestness in the
afternoon.

They were posted in the pillar-box at the corner of the road, and Pixie
marched back to the house and sat herself down with an air of mysterious
importance.  Her head was held proudly erect, her lips pressed tightly
together as if nothing, no nothing, would induce her to put her secret
into words, and Sylvia smiled to herself, and from the experiences of a
week's acquaintance, gave her exactly five minutes in which to divulge
the whole story.

"If you were threatened with a danger--a hidjus danger--what should you
think would be the best way to avoid it?" asked Pixie earnestly, at the
expiration of two minutes and a half.

Sarah had that moment brought in the lamp and brushed up the fire, and
the little room looked wonderfully cheerful and cosy.  It was just the
time and opportunity for a confidential chat, and Sylvia sat herself
down in the arm-chair with a pleasant sense of expectancy.  She was
allowed to sit up for an hour or two in the day, and that in itself was
a cheering circumstance.

"If I were threatened with a danger, how should I try to avoid it?  I
really don't know, Pixie.  What do you advise yourself?" she asked
smilingly, and Pixie smote her fists together, and stamped on the floor
with dramatic emphasis.

"Ye ought to march straight out and meet it!  That's what Therese has
been teaching me all these years, for, says she, `Bridgie, the dear, is
so soft-hearted that she'll never believe but that everything will come
right if ye sit still and look pleasant.'  The last thing but one that
she said to me before parting was that I must look after the family and
keep them out of trouble; so I've been reading over the papers to see
how I can make some money, and it's wonderful the choice you can have!
I thought at first about taking a situation, but it's better that I
should stay at home to look after Bridgie, and teach her how to use up
the scraps as they do in France.  Me dear, the most elegant soup made
out of nothing at all but the scraps ye would throw to the hens!
There's one advertisement which says a lady like meself can earn a
handsome income in her own home, without interfering with present
duties.  It sounds so light and pleasant that it quite struck my fancy;
and only two shillings for samples and directions!"

"Oh, Pixie, did you really send it?  I'm so sorry you did that without
telling me first.  I'm afraid it's a hoax, dear!  It sounds too good to
be true!"

"But it says so plainly in those very words.  I'll show it to you if you
like.  It's printed!" cried Pixie in a tone of shocked reproof which
silenced the protests on Sylvia's lips.  If her suspicions were correct,
time would teach the lesson that even printed advertisements were not
always accurately truthful, but she had not the heart to dilate on the
perfidiousness of mankind in the presence of such innocent trustfulness.
She murmured apologetic phrases, and Pixie beamed once more and
continued her story.

"There's another gentleman wants you to go round and sell books.  I've
written to him, but I'd rather do things at home.  Did you ever hear of
anyone making a fortune by addressing envelopes?  They want someone to
do that too, but I write so slowly meself, and it's only a shilling a
thousand.  A literery lady is wanted to correct proofs.  That would be
nice, because they might be stories.  How do you spell `literery',
Sylvia?"

"L-i-t-e-r-a-r-y!"

"Not `e-r-y?'  You are quite sure?"

"Absolutely sure!"

"I put `literery'!" said Pixie, with a sigh.  Perhaps it will prejudice
him against me!  Spelling was never my strong point, but that was worse
than ignorance--with the paper lying beside me for reference!  The best
of all is a shop that wants you to colour photographs.  I love painting
pictures, and the scrap-books I've done for hospitals would fill a
museum.  Of course, these would have to be done carefully, but I've seen
Therese sketching at Versailles, and artists painting in the Louvre, and
I'm quick at imitating.  They wanted three shillings to sell you the
paints and brushes, and it will be cheap if it brings in pounds a week.
"Twas a good thing Esmeralda gave me a sovereign before she left, and I
could get the stamps without anyone being the wiser.  I thought, you
see, it would be so nice to keep it a secret until I could go to Bridgie
with my earnings in my hand.  You will promise truly and faithfully not
to tell?"

"If you will promise not to send any more money without asking my
advice.  I think you ought to do that, Pixie!"

"I shan't need to, me dear.  I'll earn enough as it is.  Will I get the
replies to-morrow, do you think?  The letters ought to be delivered to-
night!"

Sylvia felt doubtful whether answers would ever be received, but as
events proved, she was wrong, and Pixie was right, for her inquiries
were answered by return of post, and on the first opportunity handed
over for inspection.  The philanthropist who provided remunerative work
for gentlewomen at their own homes without interfering with present
duties, forwarded samples as promised, the which Pixie spread out on the
table with an air of depression.  They consisted of a two-inch length of
a simple stamping-off pattern, a fragment of black net, and a few dozen
common jet beads, wrapped in a paper.

"You iron off the pattern on the net, and then you sew round it with the
beads, and then ye cut off the scallops, and then it's jetted lace!" she
explained anxiously.  "And when it's jetted lace, ye go out and sell it
to the shops."  She sighed deeply, and turned over the patterns with her
fingers.  "How much a yard is jetted lace, Sylvia?"

"I don't know exactly, but I should think a narrow width like this could
not be over a couple of shillings at the most."

"And it would take me months to do, and be puckered at that!  It's such
wobbly stuff to sew.  Even if I did a lot, I'm afraid the shops would
never buy it."

"I'm afraid not, Pixie.  I wouldn't waste your time trying, dear!"

Pixie sighed again and carefully replaced the fragments in their
envelopes.

"It was very kind of them to send them so soon, and if I was clever with
my fingers, it would be a fine idea, but I know quite well it would be
puckered.  Will I send back the patterns, do you think?  They might be
useful for someone else."

"I think whoever sent them can very well afford to send another
selection to the next inquirer.  I should not dream of wasting a stamp
on them," replied Sylvia drily, and as she spoke she pulled Pixie nearer
to her, and kissed her with a fervour which was somewhat startling to
the recipient.

"Are ye sorry for me?" she queried.  "Ye needn't be, because I shall
have so much to do with the photographs that I am not disappointed a
bit.  They have sent me one to paint, and if I do it to their
satisfaction they can keep me in constant work.  They don't say anything
about paying, but I expect that will be settled next week.  Here's the
paints, and here's the lady!"

Sylvia looked, and beheld half a dozen cheap paints such as are found in
a child's sixpenny box, a thick and a thin brush, equally common, and a
photograph of a buxom lady with a mop of tousled hair, swinging in a
hammock-chair under some trees, while a flight of marble steps led up to
a palatial mansion in the background.  She read the letter, and found
that Pixie had accurately described its contents.  It appeared that the
firm was in pressing need of outside help, and had practically unlimited
work to bestow upon ladies "with artistic tendencies."

Judging from the note-paper, the handwriting, and the style of the
photograph itself, the critics could not be very severe, and for a
moment Sylvia found herself wondering if by chance Pixie had indeed
found some work within her scope.  She herself knew little about
painting, but after a long discussion of the different features of the
photograph, she succeeded in dissuading the youthful artist from a
somewhat violent scheme of colour, and in extracting a promise that the
completed picture should be brought across the road for her inspection
before it was despatched, for by this time Miss Munns was once more
settled at home, and the last evening of the happy visit had arrived.

Sylvia tried not to allow herself to think how quiet and dull the days
would seem with only Aunt Margaret as a companion; how hard it would be
to sit contentedly playing cribbage in the evenings, while across the
road, within a stone's-throw from the window, was this dear, bright,
homey room, full of young creatures like herself.  She told herself that
she had had a happy holiday, and ought to go home refreshed and cheered.
She made noble resolutions to be more patient and considerate, and
pretended that she was really quite relieved to be leaving Jack
O'Shaughnessy, for it was far more difficult to withstand the humbugging
eyes now that she knew what a dear kind fellow he was at heart, and he
on his part seemed quite embarrassingly sorry to say good-bye!

"You have not been half so nice to me lately as you were the first few
days," he said plaintively in the privacy afforded by the strains of a
comb orchestra vigorously conducted at the end of the room.  "I must
have offended you without meaning it; clumsy fellow that I am!"

"Oh dear no, not at all.  It is only that I am getting better, and my
natural bad temper is asserting itself.  Most people are mild when they
are ill," she replied lightly, but Jack was not so easily silenced.

"That's not the reason.  Saving your presence, you are better tempered,
not worse, but there's a difference all the same.  I suppose you don't
like me so well now that you know me better?"

"On the contrary, I like you infinitely more."  Sylvia hesitated a
moment, then added with sudden resolution, "I thought you were a very
agreeable flirt; you amused me, and I enjoyed being flattered; but now I
think you are a real good friend, and I treat you in a different way.
One gets tired of compliments, but friendship grows better and better
all the time."

Jack coloured, and was silent.  Sylvia wondered if he were offended by
the plainness of her words, but when he turned to her again, there was
the frank, manly expression in his eyes which she liked most to see.

"May I come and call upon you sometimes in the evening?  I shall have no
chance of seeing you in the daytime."

"I should like it very much, but it is not my house, remember, and Aunt
Margaret is not fond of young men."

"But I am terribly partial to old ladies, and I never met the one yet
that wasn't wrapped up in me before we parted.  I've got a way with old
ladies!" said Jack complacently.  "There was an old dear in Ireland who
managed everyone for miles around, but she was as soft as putty in my
hands.  The poor girl, her daughter, was not allowed to join in any of
the fun that was on hand, and when there was anything special coming on,
she'd write pitiful letters and ask me to lunch.  I always went--she had
very good eyes of her own!--and she'd meet me in the drive, and put me
up to what she wanted.  By the time the old lady had told me all about
her hens, and her servants, and her latest quarrel with her neighbours,
and I'd flattered her by saying her rheumatism was the pick of any in
the county, she'd be ready to eat out of my hand.  And I'd fix up to
call for Mollie, and see her safely home after the show was over."

"Mollie?  A pretty name!  Is it common in Ireland?"

"It is so.  We knew a stack of them at Knock, but Mollie Burrell was the
best of the bundle."

Sylvia smiled, but her lips felt stiff, and the effort was not a
success.  A little weight of depression settled over her spirits.  She
felt anything but sympathetic for the deprivations of Miss Mollie
Burrell.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

BARGAIN-HUNTING.

Two days after Sylvia's return home, Pixie took the tinted photograph
across the road for inspection.  She had toiled at it with conscientious
effort, but, alas! the result was pathetically bad, the paint being laid
on in uncertain daubs, while carmine cheeks and scarlet lips laid the
buxom lady under suspicion of sickening for fever or some other deadly
complaint.  Pixie herself was vaguely disquieted by the general effect,
but, as she earnestly explained, you "got used to it after a bit, and it
didn't look so bad.  And even if it was only half price this time, it
would be encouraging to the family!"

Sylvia refrained from criticism, but helped to pack the work of art
between two sheets of cardboard in readiness for the post, and after
that was done, took her visitor downstairs to be introduced to Miss
Munns.

The old lady was sitting darning stockings, with a newspaper spread over
one half of the table and a little bowl standing ready to receive the
snippings of worsted.  On the baize cloth at the other end stood an
indiarubber plant and four little artificial ferns.  A gas fire
flickered in the grate, a wire blind shut out the view, the chairs stood
ranged in mathematical order against the walls, the very newspaper was
folded into an accurate square and put away in the rack, and Pixie
looked round with awed eyes the while she was introduced.

"This is Bridgie's youngest sister, Aunt Margaret--Pixie O'Shaughnessy."

"I hope you are quite well, my dear," said Miss Munns.

"Good morning, madame!" said Pixie in her most Parisian manner, not
attempting to shake hands, but bowing with an air of gracious effusion
from half-way across the room.

Aunt Margaret let the stocking drop in her lap and stared over her
spectacles, shaking her head solemnly as Sylvia related how the new-
comer had just returned from Paris, where she had been living under the
charge of an old governess.

"That accounts for it!" she said darkly, when the explanations were
finished.  "I never can understand why people want to go abroad when
there are so many good schools at their door.  When I was a girl I went
to Miss Banks at Peckham, and it was most select.  Every girl over
fifteen wore a bonnet; mine was white Dunstable, with check ribbons,
blue and white.  I wore it with a dress with silk pipings, and it was
very much admired.  My cousin Gertrude went to Paris, because her father
had business on the Continent, and she never got over it for years.
They gave her dreadful food, and when she could not eat it, it was put
aside and brought up meal after meal.  She told me as a solemn fact that
they used to put fruit in the soup, and there was something dreadful
made of cabbages.  Did they give you cabbages, my dear?"

"Mais oui, madame!" returned Pixie, involuntarily returning to the
language of the place of which they were speaking.  "But they were
delicious, those cabbage!  Mademoiselle has without doubt had an unhappy
experience.  The cabbage of France is a most excellent cabbage.  He
resembles himself absolutely to an English cabbage, but he is more well
prepared."

"Speak English, my dear, for pity's sake!  I never could understand that
gibberish.  My poor father paid extra for me to learn under a native,
but it seemed as if I always turned against it.  Well, I don't
understand about the cabbages; Gertrude certainly said they were quite
sour, and mixed with all manner of horrible things!"

"Perhaps you mean sauerkraut, Aunt Margaret.  She would hardly have that
in Paris.  Are you quite sure it was not Germany where she was at
school?"

"Berlin, was it?  Berlin!" said Miss Munns, meditating with her finger
to her lip.  "Yes, I think it was, because I remember I always
associated it with the wool.  All these foreign schools are alike.
Nothing comes of them but bowing and scraping.  Give me a good sound
English education!"

Miss Munns threaded her needle through the heel of the black stocking
with an expression which seemed to imply that the last word was spoken
on that subject, and Pixie put on her most engaging manner as she
replied, as if anxious to prove that she was not altogether ruined by
her Continental experiences--

"Madame is without doubt so clever that she does not need to be taught.
Sylvia has told us that you could teach Bridgie better than anyone else.
She is the best meaner in the world, is Bridgie, but it comes natural
to her to forget.  Sylvia said it was wonderful the way you managed the
house.  You could find the blue-bag in the dark!"

"Find--the blue-bag--in the--dark!  Why should I find the blue-bag in
the dark?  What do I want with it in the dark?  The blue-bag!  Why
should I look for the blue-bag?" cried Miss Munns, all anxiety to fathom
the meaning of this perplexing statement.

The most elaborate explanations on Sylvia's part failed to solve the
mystery, and she kept on reiterating, "Why blue-bag?" in tones of
baffled curiosity, while Sylvia lay back in her chair and sighed, and
raised her eyebrows and stared hopelessly at the corner of the ceiling.
It was a trying moment, but Pixie entered gallantly into the breach, and
succeeded in diverting attention into another channel.

"It was just to shame us beside you, because we couldn't find it in the
light.  The sugar-basin would have done just as well.  My family had
gone on spending money when there was none to spend, until now at last
it's all gone, and Jack says we must begin to be careful.  Bridgie
thought maybe if you would give her a hint it would be useful, as she
has no one to teach her."

"I never earned a sovereign in my life, but I should be afraid to say
how many I have saved!" said Miss Munns complacently.  "There is nothing
wasted in my house, my dear, and I should be only too thankful to tell
your sister the way your servants behave when her back is turned.  The
light is flaring in their bedroom until after eleven at night, and I've
seen them myself running after the grocer's lad to give him extra
orders.  Does your sister allowance them in butter and sugar?  Depend
upon it, if she doesn't, they eat twice as much as they should.

"If she brings her books over to me, I will tell her exactly what
quantities she ought to order.  It's hard on a young man like your
brother to have to provide for such a long family.  I suppose you will
be doing something for yourself in a couple of years when you are old
enough to go about alone.  You will be able to turn your education to
account, and give lessons in the French language.  You look more French
than English, as it is, and have just their way of twisting yourself
about as you talk."

"Aunt Margaret!" cried Sylvia reproachfully, but Pixie's eyes brightened
as at a sudden suggestion, and she cried eagerly--

"Do I?  Do I really?  Oh, I'm so glad!  If you saw me in the street,
would you think I was a Parisian?  Oh, thank you so much for saying so!"

"Humph!  You're easily pleased.  I should not take it as a compliment if
anyone said that to me.  I'm an Englishwoman, and a good subject of
Queen Victoria, and I'm thankful to say I look it.  No one would mistake
me for a French madam!"

"No, they wouldn't.  You are a different shape," said Pixie truthfully,
whereupon Miss Munns sent a sharp inquiry over the edge of her
spectacles, but the glance which met hers was so guileless that no
suspicions could live in its presence.  So she said, "Humph!" once more,
and that ended the discussion.

Pixie renewed her study of the newspapers with fresh interest after this
conversation, and made marks against quite a number of advertisements,
which, however, she took no active steps to answer, pending the verdict
from the photographic company.  It came at last, and proved to be a
judicious mingling of praise and blame.

The painting of the photograph, said the critic, displayed great taste
and artistic promise, though unfortunately the execution did not quite
come up to the high standard of excellence required by the firm.  No
doubt this deficiency was largely caused by a lack of proper materials,
and he would strongly recommend further expenditure of five shillings,
for a complete artist's outfit, given which, and a little more practice,
he had no doubt whatever of being able to send a constant supply of
work, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

Sylvia was shown this missive in due course, and tossed it from her with
impatient hand.

"You must not send it, Pixie!  You must not dream of sending it.  Don't
you see, dear, they only want to get money from you instead of giving it
themselves?  You have already sent three shillings, and now they want
five more, and probably next time there would be another excuse for
getting some more.  You can't afford to throw away money like that,
especially without Bridgie's knowledge or consent.  Give it up, dear,
and have no more to do with them."

"I will!" said Pixie sadly; "but you mustn't blame them, poor creatures,
for it's my own fault.  It's the truth that I was short of paints, for
the ones they sent were so dry I could hardly get them to mark, and the
colours wouldn't seem to come right.  It's very kind of them to promise
me work, but I must give it up, for I can't do better without taking
lessons, and where would be the profit in that?  I took hours, and
hours, and hours painting that lady, and ye saw yourself she looked more
like a beetroot than a human creature.  Don't you say a word to Bridgie,
and I'll promise you faithfully I won't send another penny.  I've a new
idea in my head, which maybe will turn out best of all."

She refused to say anything more explicit on the subject, but hinted
that definite information might be forthcoming on the following evening,
and Sylvia wondered what new web for the unwary had caught this most
innocent little fly in its meshes.  She concluded that Pixie must be
expecting another prospectus, but next day the two sisters came across
the road for a few minutes' chat _en route_ for a shopping expedition,
and all the time that the elder was speaking, the younger stood in the
background, rolling her eyes and mouthing unintelligible messages,
evidently intended to convey the information that some great issue was
at stake.

"Don't you envy me, me dear?  I am going to buy new clothes!" announced
Bridgie, beaming.  "Esmeralda gave me a five-pound note before she left,
and, `For pity's sake,' she said, `buy yourself a decent gown!  You're a
disgrace to be walking about the streets, and with Pixie so smart as she
is, too.  Now's your chance to get something cheap at the sales!' and
with that you should have heard her groan to think she'd lost all the
pleasure of hunting for bargains through marrying a rich man!  I want a
dress, and a jacket, and a hat, and a blouse or two for the house, and
gloves, and--"

"Don't you wish you may get them!" cried Sylvia mockingly.  She watched
the two girls walk down the road, and noted that Pixie was arrayed in
her very best clothes to do honour to the mysterious errand, whatever it
might be.  Her felt hat was tilted at an extraordinary angle; the smart
little jacket looked quite different from the ordinary bulky winter
garments which one was accustomed to see; her boots were of patent
leather, and her muff was decorated with a huge rosette, and ends of
ribbon.

Miss Munns might have truthfully declared that she looked French this
morning, and there was a suggestion of a strut in her walk which seemed
to speak of personal satisfaction in her appearance.  Bridgie did indeed
look shabby beside her, but then no clothes, however poor, could ever
make the sweet thing look anything but a lady, and she too held up her
head in triumphant fashion, for was she not going shopping with five
bright golden sovereigns in her purse?

When Oxford Street was reached, the novices eagerly examined the windows
of a famous drapery establishment, in which the most thrilling bargains
were displayed to decoy the passers-by, and on the happy Irish principle
of placing the pleasantest duty first on the list, elbowed their way
upstairs to the millinery department.  The room was blocked with a
throng of excited females all engaged in lifting hats from their pegs
and trying them on before the various mirrors.  Sometimes two of the
number would set their affections on the same treasure, and then the one
who had been unsuccessful in obtaining possession would stand gloomily
by ready to pounce upon it the moment her adversary laid it down.  Two
or three assistants stood at bay trying to answer a dozen questioners at
once, and experienced bargain-hunters were turning over the contents of
the drawers with one hand, and grasping four or five bonnets in the
other.

For a few moments the new-comers were too much bewildered to know what
to do first, but the spirit of plunder soon laid hold of them in their
turn, and they began to pounce upon the most fascinating of the spoils
and to try them on in breathless excitement.

Bridgie looked charming in all, her small head and cloud-like hair
making her an easy person to suit, but, alas! the prices still seemed
ruinous to her innocent mind, and she sadly turned her attention to the
more simple of the models.  These were by no means so becoming as their
predecessors, and Pixie's criticisms were as usual strictly truthful as
she regarded them.

"Ye look a fright.  Ye look old enough to be your own mother.  It takes
all the colour out of your face.  You look quite yellow!"

Bridgie tore the hat from her head, and seized upon a modest brown toque
which lay close at hand.

"Is that better, then?  Is that dowdy enough to suit you?"

"It's hidjus!" cried Pixie with emphasis.  "It's uglier than the other.
I wouldn't have it given to me as a present.  You look an object from
the side!"

"But it's useful--it is useful!" sighed Bridgie dejectedly.  Buying hats
was not so exciting as she had imagined if she were obliged to abjure
the pretty ones, and buy the useful in which she appeared to such
painful disadvantage.  "And I expect it is cheap, Pixie.  Very cheap!  I
have, to think of that, remember!"

She tilted the hand-glass to the side to study the effect which had been
condemned, and as she did so, a sepulchral voice said grimly in her ear,
"When you have quite finished with my hat!" and she turned to behold a
severe-looking, elderly lady staring fixedly at her headgear, and
holding out her hand to claim it as her own.  Poor Bridgie! her cheeks
flamed for the next hour.  She was so hot, and breathless, and agitated
that she would have rushed straightway from the department, but Pixie
stood her ground and remained serenely unperturbed.

"'Twas true!" she cried.  "'Twas only the truth she heard. _'Twas_
hidjus, and no words of yours would make it pretty.  And as for cheap,
she ought to take that for a compliment, seeing the pains she's taking
to get another like it!  Somebody must be trying on your own hat, I'm
thinking.  It was lying over the rail of that chair where the fat lady
is resting.  You'd better be asking her what she's done with it."

Bridgie walked forward and put an anxious Inquiry, whereupon the fat
lady leapt up in alarm, and there against the back of the chair lay a
poor flattened object, with battered crown and crestfallen bows--all
that was left of Bridgie's very best hat!  She was horrified at the
sight, but the fat lady was more horrified still, and so lavish in her
apologies that it was impossible to cherish anger against her.  She
insisted upon herself smoothing out the ribbons and moulding the crown
into something like the original shape, and in doing so bestowed the
information that there was another millinery department downstairs,
where there might possibly be less crowd and more chance of attention.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

"A FRENCH LADY."

The sisters agreed to adjourn forthwith, but just at the moment of
departing a hat was discovered which was in every way what was required,
so they proceeded straight to the remnant counter where a mountain of
material was being tossed about hither and thither by a crowd of
purchasers three rows deep.

"First catch your hare, then cook it," so runs the old proverb, and in
this case the adventure was by no means concluded when the selection was
made.  It was necessary to pay for what you had bought, and that
necessitated a wait of a long half-hour before anyone could be induced
to receive the money.  The glove department was, if possible, still more
crowded, and it was a relief to see through a doorway a vista of a great
hall filled with cases of beautiful ready-made dresses, where, despite
the presence of a goodly number of customers, there was still enough
room to move about, without pushing a way with your elbows.

"Let us come in here and breathe again!" cried Bridgie.  "I don't think
I was ever so tired during my life, but I'm enjoying myself terribly.
It's so exciting, isn't it, Pixie?--and those blouse lengths are quite
elegant.  They will take a lot of making, though.  Wouldn't it be nice
if I could buy a dress all ready, and be spared the work?"

"It would!" agreed Pixie.  "Tell one of the ladies what you're wanting,
and maybe she'll have the very thing.  Here is one coming this way.
Speak to her."

Bridgie cleared her throat nervously as she made her request, for the
show-woman was a most impressive figure, tall, incredibly slight, with
elaborately arranged hair, satin skirts sweeping the ground, and a
manner that was quite painfully superior.  She swept a scrutinising
glance over the sisters as she listened to the request for a simple
house dress, volunteered the information that, "Our cheapest costumes
are in this stand!" in a blighting tone, and began pulling out the
skirts and exhibiting them in professional manner.

"That is a very nice little dress, madam, very neatly made--quite in the
latest style!  Too light?  We are selling a great many light shades this
season.--Do you care for this colour?  This is a very well-cut gown.
Too dark?  I am afraid I have not many medium shades.--Here is a pretty
gown, very much reduced.  Quite a simple little gown, but it looks very
well on.  This embroidery is all hand-done.  The bodice is prettily
made."

Bridgie privately thought the simple little gown a most elaborate
creation, but her hopes went up as she heard that "very cheap," and she
asked the price with trembling hope, whereupon the show-woman referred
to the little ticket sewn on the belt, and said airily,--"Eight and a
half guineas, madam.  Reduced from twelve.  It really is quite a
bargain."

"Ye might as well say a thousand pounds!" said Bridgie hopelessly,
relapsing into a deep, musical brogue in the emotion of the moment, and,
wonder of wonders, the bored superiority of the great lady's manner gave
place to a smile of sympathetic amusement.

She was accustomed to customers who asked the prices of a dozen dresses
in succession, and then floated away declaring that they would "think it
over," never, as she knew well, to return again; but not one in a
thousand was honest enough to make a confession of poverty!  She lived
in an atmosphere of vanity and affectation, and put on her haughty
manners every morning with her black satin dress; but at night she was
only a poor, tired, working woman, going home to a dingy lodging, and
dividing her earnings with an invalid mother and a family of struggling
brothers and sisters.  Her heart went out to this other girl who was so
evidently a lady despite her poverty, and when Bridgie mentioned a
ludicrously small sum as the limit to which she was prepared to go, she
showed neither surprise nor the thinly-veiled contempt which is usual
under the circumstances, but volunteered some really useful information
in its place.

"You will not be able to buy any ready-made costume for that price,
madam, but there will be a special sale of dress materials on Tuesday
next.  If you could be here quite early in the morning, and go straight
to the counter under the clock, you would find some wonderful bargains.
I should advise you to leave it until then, but perhaps there is some
other department to which I could direct you."

"Thank you, I'm dreadfully tired.  Could we go somewhere, and have a cup
of tea?"

The way was pointed out, and the sisters mounted the stairs once more,
took possession of a little table in a corner, and leant back wearily in
their chairs.  The room was crowded like the others, but it was
comparatively quiet, for the ladies were resting after the fray,
stifling surreptitious yawns, and sipping tea with languid enjoyment.

It was a long time before Bridgie could find anyone to attend to her
wants, and meantime the temptation of the parcels lying before her was
too great to be resisted.  "I really must look at those gloves and the
lace ties that are wrapped up with them!  I never had so many new pairs
in my life, but they were so cheap that I hadn't the heart to leave
them.  'Twill be a refreshment to gloat over them until the tea comes!"
She untied the string and complacently folded back the paper, but, alas!
what was then revealed was the reverse of refreshing, for, in some
mysterious manner, the gloves and laces had disappeared, and in their
place lay a fragment of dull, prosaic flannel, at which the poor
bargain-hunter stared with dilated eyes.

"F-flannel!" she gasped.  "Flannel!  It was gloves when it was made up.
What's the matter with it--is it witchcraft?"

"I'd call it stupidity, if you asked my opinion," said Pixie calmly.
"You've stolen a poor creature's parcel, and perhaps she wanted to make
a poultice with it.  It will be awful for her when she goes home, and
her husband groaning in agony, and nothing to relieve him but two lace
ties!  I pity her when she finds it out."

"She has stolen my gloves.  I'm not sorry for her at all, and if she is
an honest woman she will bring them back at once and hand them in to the
office.  I shall take the wretched flannel there the moment we go
downstairs, but I've a conviction that I'll never see my parcel again.
I suppose they got changed at one of those crowded counters.  I don't
think I care for sales very much, Pixie; they are too expensive.  We
will go straight home after we have had tea."

"We will so, and make haste about it.  I wanted specially to be back by
four o'clock."

To Bridgie's surprise, however, ten minutes before the omnibus reached
the corner at which they were wont to alight, Pixie beckoned to the
conductor to stop, and announced her intention of walking the rest of
the way.  There was no time to discuss the point, and as she herself was
too tired to walk a step farther than she was obliged, she sat still and
watched the little figure affectionately until the omnibus rounded a
corner and it was hidden from sight.

She would have been astonished if she had seen the sudden energy with
which Pixie immediately turned right about face and walked away in the
opposite direction, taking a crumpled square of newspaper from her
pocket, and reading over a certain advertisement with eager attention.

"`Wanted a French lady.'--I'm not whole French, but I'm half.  Haven't I
been in their country nearly two years?  `To amuse two children.'--I'd
amuse a dozen, and never know I was doing it!  `And perfect them in the
language for a couple of hours every morning.'  Look at that, now, it's
better than the jetted lace!  Two hours wouldn't interfere with me one
bit, for I've all the day to do nothing.  `Apply personally between four
and six at Seven, Fitzjames Crescent.'  Only ten minutes' walk from me
own door, as if it had been made on purpose to suit me!  And quite a
good-looking house it is, with real silk curtains in the windows."

She tripped undauntedly up the steps and pressed the electric bell, and,
all unseen to her eyes, the little god of fate peered at her from behind
the fat white pillars of the portico, and clapped his little hands in
triumph.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

PIXIE SCORES A SUCCESS.

A butler came to the door, a solemn-looking butler, with a white tie and
immaculate black clothes, but he seemed rather stupid for his age, for
he asked twice over before he could grasp the fact that Pixie had called
in answer to the advertisement, and then stared fixedly at her all the
time he was escorting her to the room where the other lady applicants
were waiting their turns.

Pixie gasped as she looked round and saw ladies, ladies everywhere, on
the row of leather chairs ranged along by the wall, on the sofa, on the
two easy-lounges by the fireside,--old ladies, young ladies, middle-aged
ladies, elderly ladies, shabby and dressy, fat and thin, but all
distinctly past their first youth, and all most obviously French.  They
gaped at the new-comer, even as the butler had done, and she bowed
graciously from side to side, and said, "Bon jour, mesdames!" in her
most Parisian manner, then squeezed herself into a little corner by the
window and listened entranced to the never-ending stream of
conversation.

A room full of Englishwomen would under the circumstances have preserved
a depressed and solemn silence, but these good ladies chattered like
magpies, with such shruggings of shoulders, such waving of hands, such
shrillness of emphasis, that Pixie felt as if she were once more
domiciled in the Avenue Gustave.

The lady in the plaid dress, who occupied the next chair, asked her with
frank curiosity to recount then how she found herself in such a
position, and, being assured that she was indeed applying for the
situation, prophesied that it would never march!  She turned and
whispered loudly to her companion, "Behold her, the poor pigeon!  One
sees well that she has the white heart!"  But the companion was less
amiable, and enraged herself because there were already applicants
enough, and with each new-comer her own chance of success became less
assured.

At intervals of five or ten minutes the butler returned and marshalled
the next in order to the presence of the lady of the house, but, short
as were the interviews, it was a weary wait before it came to Pixie's
turn, and she wondered fearfully whether Bridgie had taken fright at her
absence, and was even now searching the streets in a panic of alarm.
The hands of the clock pointed to ten minutes to six before the butler
gave the longed-for signal, and she smiled at him in her most friendly
manner as she crossed the room towards him.  Without any exchange of
words she divined that he took more interest in herself than in any of
the other applicants, and also that for some mysterious reason he was
sorry for her, and imagined that she was making a mistake, and the smile
was meant at once as thanks and reassurement.

They walked together down the slippery floor, such a slippery, shiny
floor, that one felt as if skates would be almost more in keeping than
boots, and finally arrived at a cosy little room at the back of the
house, where a tired-looking gentleman and a bored-looking lady stood
ready to receive her.  They looked at each other, they looked at the
butler, they looked again at the little pig-tailed figure, with short
skirts and beaming, childlike face, and their faces became blank with
astonishment.

"Bon jour, mademoiselle!" began the lady uncertainly.

"Good day to ye!" said Pixie in response, and at that the bewilderment
became more marked than ever.  The lady sat down and drew a long, weary
sigh.  She was handsome and young, but very, very thin, and looked as if
she had hardly enough energy to go through any more interviews.

"Then--then you are not French after all?"

"I forgot!" sighed Pixie sadly.  She sat down and hitched her chair
nearer the fire in sociable fashion.  "It's just like me to make up me
mind, and then forget at the right moment!  I intended to let you hear
me speak French, before I broke it to you that I'm Irish and all my
people before me."

"I almost think I should have discovered it for myself!" said the lady,
looking as if she were not quite sure whether to be amused or irritated.
"But if that is so, what is your business here?  I advertised for a
French lady."

"You did.  I read the advertisement, but if I'm not French I'm just as
good, for I've just last month returned from Paris, and the lady where I
was staying was most particular about my accent.  Over in Ireland I was
so quick in picking up the brogue that I had to be sent to England to
get rid of it, and I was just as handy with another language.  If I'd
remembered to answer you in French, you would never have known the
difference between me and those old ladies who came in first."

"Old ladies, indeed!  I'll never advertise again if this is what it
means!" sighed the lady _sotto voce_.  She looked across the room, met a
gleam of amusement in her husband's eyes, and said in a tolerant voice,
"Well, then, let me hear you now!  I am a pretty good French scholar
myself, so you won't find me easy to deceive!"

"Perfectly, madam, perfectly!" cried Pixie, gesticulating assent.  She
found none of the difficulty in settling what to talk about which
handicaps most people under similar circumstances, but poured forth a
stream of commonplaces in such fluent, rapid French as showed that she
had good reason for boasting of proficiency.  When she finished, the
lady looked at her husband with a triumphant air, and cried--

"There!  It shows how important it is for children to learn a language
while they are still young.  It can never be mastered so well if it is
left until they are grown-up."

Then turning to Pixie--

"Yes, indeed, you speak French charmingly.  I congratulate you, and hope
you may find it very useful.  You are so young that you cannot have
finished your own education.  Perhaps you are going to school in
England?"

"'Deed I am not.  I want to teach instead.  My brother is a very grand
gentleman, but he's in difficulties.  He has a fine estate in Ireland,
but it is let, and he's over in London trying to make enough money to
get back again, and that's none too easy, as you may know yourself, and
if I can earn some money it will keep me from being a burden on me
friends.  I've answered quite a lot of advertisements, but there was
nothing really to suit me until I saw your own yesterday morning."

"I see!  May I ask if your mother knows what you are doing--if you are
here with her consent?"

Pixie sighed at that, and shook her head in melancholy fashion.

"I've no mother.  She died when I was young, and the Major's horse threw
him two years ago, and I've been an orphan ever since.  There's only
Bridgie now!"

"Poor child!"  The lady looked at the quaint figure with a kindly
glance, thinking of the two little girls upstairs, and picturing them
starting out to fight the world when they should still have been safe
within the shelter of the schoolroom.  "I'm sorry to hear that.
Bridgie, I suppose, is your sister?  Does she know what you are doing?
Would she be willing for you to apply for a situation in this manner?"

"Maybe not at first, but I'd beguile her.  I'm the youngest, and I
always get my own way.  I told Sylvia Trevor, who was staying with us,
and she was very kind, giving me good advice not to do it, but it is to
be a surprise for Bridgie to help her to pay the bills.  If ye want
money, what else can you do than try to earn it?"

"But not at your age, dear!  You are too young yet awhile!"  Mrs
Wallace crossed the room and seating herself in a chair by Pixie's side,
laid a hand on her shoulder with quite affectionate pressure.  "I
appreciate your kindly intention, but I am afraid it will be a good many
years before you are ready to take a governess's place.  You saw
yourself what a difference there was between yourself and the other
ladies who came to see me to-day!"

"I'm more amusing!  Ye wouldn't believe how amusing I can be when I try!
At school there was a prize which was given to the girl who was nicest
to the other girls, and they all voted for me, and I've got it now and
could bring it to show you if you liked.  I'm not exactly clever, and
there was no chance for anyone else at the bottom of the class, but you
didn't say a word about teaching, except French, and I could talk that
all day long!"

"Yes!  I should be quite satisfied if my girlies spoke as well as you
do.  Your accent is charming, and you have just the air, but--but you
are so young--so ridiculously young!"

"So are the children.  They'd like me best!" maintained Pixie sturdily,
and at that Mr Wallace burst into a laugh.  His eyes had been twinkling
for some time past, and he had been stroking his moustache as if to
conceal his amusement, but now he made no more disguise, but laughed and
laughed again, as if he were thoroughly enjoying himself.

"Upon my word, Edith, I believe she is right!  If you consider the
children's feelings, there is no doubt how they would decide.  If you
want them kept happy and bright, now's your chance!  After our earlier
experiences this is really quite refreshing, and I am beginning to think
your advertisement has been of some use after all.  How would it be if
you interviewed Miss Bridgie--I didn't catch the second name--and if she
is agreeable, you might perhaps make some temporary arrangement!"

"O'Shaughnessy.  It's Irish!  I'm sure Bridgie would say yes, for it
would be occupation for me in the mornings, and so near that I could
come by myself.  We live in Rutland Road, but the house is so small ye
would hardly notice it if you passed by.  Jack says if he could get
London rents in Ireland, he'd never do another honest day's work while
he lived.  You could put the whole place down in the hall at Knock
Castle, and never know it was there, and Bridgie says she knows every
blade of grass in the garden.  We had the loveliest grounds at Knock,
all the flowers coming up anyway, and volunteers drilling in the park,
and the glass-houses full of ferrets and white mice, and tomatoes, and
everything you can think of.  If I could make some money we should be
able to go back sooner than we thought, and Bridgie would be so pleased.
When shall I say you are coming to see her?"

"I have not promised to come at all.  You must not leap at conclusions.
It is a most ridiculous scheme, but really--"

Mrs Wallace laughed in her turn, and going up to where her husband
stood, exchanged a few whispered confidences, some scattered words of
which reached the listener's ear.  "Typically Irish!  Preposterous!  No
harm trying.  What about Viva?  So difficult to manage."

The discussion was still progressing when from above sounded a sudden
piercing cry, mounting ever higher and higher, the note sustained in
evident but determined effort.  Footsteps raced across the floor,
followed by a bang as of some heavy wooden structure, a murmured
protest, and two distinct sets of shrieks, each warring against the
other.

Mr Wallace pressed his hands to his head, Mrs Wallace sighed, "Oh
dear, dear, dear!" in tones of hopeless distress, but Pixie cried
eagerly--

"Will I run upstairs and try what I can do?  Will I make them stop, and
laugh instead?"

"You'd deserve the Victoria Cross!" the father declared, while the
mother hurried to the door, and led the way with rapid footsteps.

"They have been brought up by an Indian ayah, and this English nurse
doesn't understand them a bit.  They _have_ trying tempers, there is no
use denying it, but they are dear little creatures _if_ rightly managed.
Oh dear, dear, dear! these dreadful shrieks!  They go through my head."

"Let me go in alone.  They will listen better if they don't see you,"
said Pixie, and walked undauntedly on to the field of battle.  In this
instance it was represented by a remarkably handsome and well-filled
nursery, and the belligerents took the form of two little girls of four
and five, who were seated on the floor, dry-eyed, but crimson-faced from
the effort to sustain their shrieks.  A box of bricks lay scattered by
the window, and an anaemic nurse leant against the wall in an attitude
of despair.

Pixie walked forward, seated herself on the floor immediately in front
of the children, and gazed at them with benign curiosity.  There was no
anger in her face, no warning of punishment to come, her expression was
in such striking contrast with that which they were accustomed to behold
on such occasions, that from pure amazement they stopped crying to stare
at her in their turn.  The moment was hers, and she lost no time in
using it.

"The fat one," she said, pointing gravely to the younger of the sisters,
"the fat one shouts higher, but the thin one,"--the eloquent finger was
turned towards the maid with the golden locks,--"the thin one keeps on
longer.  You have both won!  The prize is that I tell you a story about
the Spoopjacks, when they went to fight the Bobityshooties in the
Christmas holidays!"

Silence.  Viva laid her head on one side and considered the project.
Inda pouted her lower lip, and burst into the story of her woes.

"An' I was jest finishin' ze house, and ze chimbleys was getting ready,
and she comed against me, an' I pinched her leg, and she throwed it
down, an' it was all spoiled, an' the dolls was going to live in it,
an'--"

"The Spoopjacks live in the lamp-posts.  There are seven of them, and
they have tin whiskers, and they went to war with the Bobityshooties
because they ate all the muffins, and there were none left for tea.  So
Nicholas Spoopjack bought six rolling-pins and a watering-cart, and
melted down his whiskers for guns, and they put on red gaiters and clean
pinafores, and marched across the park.  The Bobityshooties were resting
under the trees, and all the little birds were eating up the muffin
crumbs.  The Bobityshooties really live in the pantry cupboard, so that
was how they found the muffins, but they were spending the day in the
country, and Selina Bobityshooty said to her mother--"

"Is that in a book?" queried the elder Miss Wallace suddenly.  She was
an exceedingly precocious young lady, and quick to note the unusual
style of the narrative.  Sometimes the stories in books were about good
little girls with whom she had no sympathy, and even if the heroine were
naughty to begin with, she invariably improved at the end, and never,
never knocked down her sister's bricks.  The Spoopjacks and
Bobityshooties were new acquaintances and promised well, but she wished
to be reassured as regards the moral.  "Is that written in a book?"

"No, it's out of my head.  There are billions and billions of little
girls in the world, and not one of them has ever heard what Selina said
to her mother.  If you will kiss your sister and say you're sorry, I'll
tell you as a secret.  It's awful exciting!"

"All right, I'm sorry, only you pinched me too--go on about Selina!"
cried Viva in a breath.  She kissed her sister on the cheek, and fat
little Inda smiled complacently, and repeated, "Go on 'bout S'lina!"

Outside in the passage father and mother looked at each other with
sparkling eyes.

"My dear, she is worth a fortune to us!" cried Mr Wallace rapturously.
"She understands children, and they understand her; the girlies will be
as good as gold under her care.  I'll tell Spencer to bring round the
carriage and send her home in state, and to-morrow afternoon without
fail you must strike a bargain with Mistress Bridgie!"


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

VIVA'S STORY.

Pixie drove home in state, so puffed up with her own importance that it
was a distinct blow to find the curtains comfortably drawn, and hear the
echo of laughter from the drawing-room.  In all the books which she had
ever read, candles were left burning in the windows to guide the
footsteps of wanderers from the fold, to say nothing of bellmen parading
the streets, and anxious relatives rushing from one police station to
another.  Here, however, all was peace and contentment, and, incredible
as it appeared, no one seemed to have been the least agitated about her
prolonged absence.

Bridgie was perched on a stool in the centre of the fire rug, relating
the history of the day's shopping to the three brothers, and she nodded
cheerily at the little sister as she entered, and saluted her with
unconcerned composure.

"Well, dear, here you are!  Tired after your long day?"

Pixie sank down on the corner of the sofa, and yawned with a nonchalant
air.  If there was one thing which she loved above everything else in
the world, it was to make an impression and be the centre of attraction,
and it was not likely that she was going to let slip such an opportunity
as the present.

"'Deed I'm not tired," she said genially.  "Carriage exercise was always
more to my fancy than walking about the streets.  If we'd been meant to
walk, wouldn't we have had four legs the same as the horses, and if we
haven't, doesn't it show that they were meant to do it for us?  So when
he said the butler should get me the carriage, it wasn't likely I was
going to refuse, and up I drove to the very door!"

Jack stopped short in the middle of crossing the room, Pat peered round
the corner of his chair and twinkled with mischievous enjoyment,
Bridgie's eyes opened as wide as saucers.

"Which door?  What carriage?  What romance are ye telling me?  Haven't
you been with Sylvia since I left you?"

"'Deed I have not.  What made you fancy I had?"

"There was nowhere else to go, and you had not come home.  I made
certain you were with Sylvia!"

"It's a bad thing to be certain about what you don't know.  If any
mischief had happened to me, it would be annoying to you to remember how
you were laughing with your back to the fire, while I was run over in
the street, and having my legs sawed off at the hospital."

Jack frowned at that, and put a quick question.

"Have you been walking about by yourself?  I won't have it at this hour
of the night.  You can find your own way about the neighbourhood in the
daytime, but I won't have you going into town by yourself, or even
across the road in the dark.  London is not Knock, remember, and it
would be the easiest thing in the world to get lost.  Don't let her roam
about without you, Bridgie!"

"'Twas only a step, and barely four o'clock!"  Bridgie's forehead was
fretted with anxious lines, but Pixie nodded back cheery reassurement.

"Don't you repine about me, for I got on famously, and Mrs Wallace is
coming herself to see you in the afternoon.  I've engaged myself as a
French lady to amuse the children, and you shall have the money to pay
the bills.  It was an advertisement in the paper, and you had to call
between four and six, so I didn't want you to know before everything was
settled.  I don't know how much it will be, but Mr Wallace said I was
worth a fortune, because I made them stop howling.  There are only two,
but outside the door you would think they were a dozen, and I made them
laugh, and they sent me home in a carriage."

"What _is_ she talking about?"  Bridgie and Jack exchanged bewildered
glances, and stared in incredulous silence at the little figure on the
sofa.  She had pulled off her hat, and with it the bow of ribbon, and
the loosened hair hung down her back; her hands were crossed on her lap,
there were dark shadows under her eyes.  She looked so small and frail
and childlike that Bridgie felt a lump rising in her throat at the
thought of help coming from this strange and most unexpected quarter.
She rose, and, going over to the sofa, took Pixie's hand between her
own.

"Is it the truth that you are telling us?"

"It is, then!  The solemn truth!  Every word of it."

"What made you think there was any need for you to disturb yourself?
What put it in your head to answer an advertisement at all?"

"Because I didn't want to be a burden to ye, my dear, after all the
money you've spent on me education!"

"A little midget like you to speak of being a burden!  No one would
guess you were there if you weren't so upsetting!  It's no use fifty
Mrs Wallaces coming to see me.  Some other French lady will have to
amuse her children.  This one is wanted at home!"

Pixie smiled composedly, and squeezed the clinging hands.

"I knew you'd say `No' at the start.  So did she.  She was first cross,
and then she laughed, and said it would be a long, long time before I
was ready to teach.  But she didn't really want teaching, only someone
to be funny in French, and when she heard me telling tales, and the
little girls both laughing, she began to think she would love to have
me.  You remember the stories you used to tell me, Jack, about the
Spoopjacks and the Bobityshooties?  I made up a new bit, and they simply
loved it.  It's two hours every morning, and only ten minutes' walk, and
Therese says it's no use beginning to be proud till you've paid your
bills.  You would like me to help you, wouldn't you, Jack?"

"Shades of Mrs Hilliard!" muttered Jack, and shrugged his shoulders
recklessly.  "She will have a few volumes to write to me if I say `Yes!'
You are bound to help me, Piccaninny, whatever you are about, but I
can't bind myself to allow you to go out governessing before you are out
of short frocks.  It is Saturday to-morrow, so I shall be home in the
afternoon, and see this Mrs Wallace for myself.  It's a bad scheme on
the face of it, but it's just possible it may be more feasible than it
sounds."

That was all the length which he would go for the moment, and Pixie was
content to drop the subject, secure in her conviction that time and Mrs
Wallace would win the victory.  She was petted and fussed over to her
heart's content for the rest of the evening, and the story of her
various efforts to retrieve the family fortunes was heard with
breathless attention.  She wondered why the listening faces wore such
tender, pitiful expressions, why lazy Pat flushed, and Bridgie went over
to her desk and spent a whole half-hour sorting out her bills.  It never
occurred to her that her earnest effort to take her own share of
responsibility was a more eloquent stimulus than twenty lectures!

Next afternoon at three o'clock the two sisters and Sylvia Trevor
stationed themselves in positions of vantage behind the curtains, and
looked out eagerly for the advent of Mrs Wallace.  Bridgie could not
divest herself of a suspicion that the promise might have been given as
the easiest way out of a difficulty, but before the half-hour struck a
well-appointed carriage turned the corner of the road, the coachman
glanced at the number on the door, and drew up his horses, when a fluffy
head peered out of the window, and Pixie cried excitedly--

"That's the thin one!  That's Viva!  I expect she howled, and they could
not keep her away.  That's Mrs Wallace!  Isn't it an elegant hat?"

Bridgie peeped and grew quite pink with excitement, for, truth to tell,
mother and daughter made a charming picture as they came up the little
path.  Mrs Wallace looked almost like a girl herself in her becoming
hat and veil, while the golden-haired child wore a white coat and cap
edged with fluffy swan's-down.  Sylvia retreated to the dining-room.

Pixie ran to meet the visitors at the door, and the voice that
exclaimed, "Bon jour, Mamzelle Paddy!" was in itself an augury of
friendship.  The next moment they were in the drawing-room, and Mrs
Wallace was smilingly explaining the title.

"I am sure you must have been very much surprised to hear of yesterday's
interview, Miss O'Shaughnessy! `mamzelle Paddy,' as my husband has named
your small sister, has made quite a conquest of my little girls, and
Viva refused to be left behind when she heard where I was going.  I hope
you were not very anxious about her absence yesterday?"

"Indeed I was not, for I took it for granted she was with some friends
near by.  Please sit down, and get warm.  'Twas a ridiculous idea of the
child's to suppose for one moment that she could fulfil your
requirements; but she's the baby of the family, and has never been
thwarted, and such a kind little creature that she must try to help if
there is any difficulty.  It is good of you to take the trouble to come
and explain, but indeed we have decided already that it is quite, quite
impossible!"

Mrs Wallace gave a start of consternation, and the smile faded from her
lips.  She looked first at Bridgie, then across the room to where Viva
stood on tiptoe dragging at Pixie's sleeve, and reiterating, "Mamzelle!
Mamzelle Paddy, will you come again to my nursery?  Will you tell me
more stories about those peoples in the lamp-posts?"

"Oh, don't say it is impossible!" she said softly.  "I want her to help
me too, and I am so troubled about my children.  Could she--could they
both go into another room for a few minutes, while we talk it over
together?"

"Certainly they could!"  Bridgie raised her voice a tone higher.  "Pixie
dear, go to Sylvia in the dining-room and take the little girl with you.
Show her some of your treasures!"

"I like cake!" remarked Viva pointedly.  She skipped to the door, and
stared round the hall with curious eyes.  "You do live in a poky little
house, don't you?  My mamma's house is much bigger than your house.
Where does the dining-room live?  Is there a cupboard in it that you
keep cake in?  Is Sylvia your 'nother sister?  Who is the man?"

The man was none other than handsome Jack himself, who was enjoying the
rare luxury of a _tete-a-tete_ with Sylvia Trevor, and was not too well
pleased by this speedy interruption.  He frowned when he heard the
opening of the door, but when he turned round and saw the vision of pink
and white and gold, he smiled in spite of himself, as most people did
smile at the sight of Viva Wallace, and held out his hand invitingly.

"Hallo, whom have we here?"

"Quite well, thank you.  How are you?" replied Viva fluently.  She paid
no attention to Sylvia at the other side of the fireplace, but leant
confidingly against Jack's chair, staring at him with rapt attention.
His eyes looked as if they liked you very, very much; his moustache had
sharp little ends which stood out stiff and straight, there was a lump
in his throat which moved up and down as he spoke--altogether he was a
most fascinating person, and quite deserving of attention.  "Are you the
papa?" she asked enviously.  "My papa has got a brown face with lines in
it.  He is very old.  My muzzer is old too.  She is talking to the lady
in the 'nother room, and she said I was to be amused.  You are to amuse
me!"

"No, no, quite a mistake.  You must amuse me!" said Jack solemnly.  "I
have been out all day, and am tired and sleepy, so you must do something
to cheer me up.  What can you suggest, now, that would be really lively
and entertaining?"

Viva reflected deeply.

"I'm learning the `Pied Piper of Hamelin'!"

"You don't say so!"

"Yes, I am.  I'll say it to you now, from the beginning right to the
very miggle!"

"Thanks awfully.  I should be delighted--another time.  Not to-day, I
think, if you don't mind.  I have rather a sore throat."

Viva opened her eyes and stared at the Adam's apple which showed above
the white necktie.  She was trying to puzzle out the connection between
Mr O'Shaughnessy's throat and the Pied Piper, but the difficulty was
too great.  She heaved a sigh, and hazarded another suggestion.

"You tell _me_ a story!"

"That would never do.  I should be entertaining you, and it ought to be
the other way about."

"I'll tell you a story!"

"That's better.  Go ahead, then.  What is it to be about?  Fairies?"

"No, it's not going to be about fairies,--fairies is silly.  Giants are
more sensibler than fairies, because there was a giant once.  There was
Golosher!"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Golosher!"

"Don't know the gentleman."

"Oh, you naughty!  And David killed him in the Bible.  I'll tell you a
story about giants."

"I don't think I am interested in giants."

"Princesses, then, beautiful princesses, and cruel people trying to be
unkind to them, and princes running away and marrying them, and living
happily ever afterwards."

"That's the style for my money!  Fire away, and let us have plenty of
adventure.  I'll lean back in this chair and listen to you."

Viva moistened her lips, swallowed rapidly once or twice, and began her
story in a shrill, high-pitched voice.

"Once upon a long, long time ago, there was a princess, and she was the
most beautiful princess that was ever born.  Everyone said so, and her
face was as white as snow, and her hair as yellow as--"

"Excuse me--brown!"

"No, it wasn't brown.  Bright, curly, golden, down to her--"

"Then she couldn't have been the most beautiful princess in the world,
because I've seen the lady and her hair is brown."

Jack stroked his moustache with a look of lamb-like innocence, and
Sylvia could have shaken herself with annoyance because she could not
help blushing and looking stupid and self-conscious.  Pixie's melodious
gurgle sounded from the background, and Viva cried severely--

"You couldn't have seen her, because she lived hundreds and hundreds of
years ago, when you were a teeny baby.  Golden hair down to her feet,
and her teef were like pearls, and all the godfathers and godmuzzers
came to the christening and gave her nice presinks, only one wicked old
mugian who--"

"Pardon me!  One wicked old--?"

"Mugian!  He's a man what does things.  They always have them in
stories--that the mamma had forgotten to ask, so he was angry and said
she should tumble downstairs when she was grown-up and be lame ever
after till a beautiful prince made her better.  Oh, but I shouldn't have
told you that jest now.  You must pitend that you forget I have told
you.  So then the beautiful princess--her true name was Mabel, but only
I call her Norah because her hair was gold--"

Now it was Jack's turn to gasp and search in vain for the connection
between Norah and golden hair!  It proved as impossible to discover as
that between a sore throat and the Piper of Hamelin, but there was
another allusion in the story which was too fortunate to be allowed to
pass unnoticed.

"The princess was lame, was she? and no one could make her better but
the prince?  That's very interesting.  Could you tell me, now, how he
managed the cure?  It might be useful to me someday."

"Was your princess a lame princess?"

"I think you had better go on with your story, Viva!"  Jack said
hurriedly.  "Your mother may call you away before it is finished, and I
should be disappointed.  When did the prince arrive on the scene?"

"It doesn't get to that yet.  So the princess lived in a house where
there were no stairs.  Only one day when she was walking through the
wood, there was a little house and she went in, and she said, `Oh, what
funny things!' and she went up them, and she tumbled down, and her foot
was underneaf, so she was lame.  An' she lay on the sofa, and the queen-
mamma cried, and the godfathers and the godmuzzers came flying up, only
they could do nothing, and the king said anyone should have the land who
made her better, an' thousands an' thousands tried, an' at last the
prince came riding along on a white horse, an' he looked froo the
window--"

"Jack dear, will you please come to the drawing-room?  We want to
consult you!"  Bridgie's head peered round the corner of the door, her
cheeks quite pink, her eyes shining with excitement.  She gripped her
brother's arm as he came to meet her, and whispered, "It's the most
extraordinary thing--she really means it!  She is charming, Jack,
charming; I can't say `No' to her.  Come and try what you can do!"

But Jack was not a good hand at saying "No," least of all to charming
ladies, and Mrs Wallace took his measure at once, and felt that she had
gained a friend.

"I am trying to persuade Miss O'Shaughnessy to lend your little sister
to me for a short time every day, to help me with my children," she
said, smiling at him under lifted brows.  "I understand that you knew
nothing about her application, and when I first saw her I felt, as you
must have done, that the idea was preposterous, but Viva and Inda fell
desperately in love with her, and have talked of nothing else since she
left.  I think I followed their example, and I am quite sure my husband
did.  He thinks Mamzelle Paddy would be the solution of all our nursery
troubles, if you could be induced to spare her to us.  I would be very
careful of her; I promise you that!"

Jack looked at Bridgie; Bridgie looked at Jack.

"I'd be delighted that she should help you, and it would be an amusement
to her to play with the dear little girls.  If she might come as a
friend--"

"Oh, Miss O'Shaughnessy, how cruel of you, when her great idea was to
help you!  She would be a most welcome friend, but I could not consent
to using her time without paying for it."

Mrs Wallace had approached this question before, and had discovered
that Bridgie was no more embarrassed by a reference to her poverty than
had been Mamzelle Paddy herself.  "We should think any sum cheap which
ensured our little girls being happy and occupied, instead of crying and
quarrelling, as I am sorry to say they do now for the greater part of
the day.  They are too young for regular lessons, but they already know
French fairly well, and would soon be able to speak fluently."

"I can't judge of Pixie's French, but her English is so Irish that it
was a stroke of genius to offer herself in the character of a
foreigner!" said Jack, stroking his moustache, and smiling to himself in
whimsical fashion.  "Of course, she is quite confident that she could do
all you require, but you must not listen to her own account of herself.
If you offered Pixie the command of the Channel Fleet, she'd accept
without a qualm!  If you want the kindest-hearted, most mischievous
little ignoramus in the world, Mrs Wallace, it would be waste of time
to search any farther, for you have found her already!  She will keep
your children happy, and never say a word that they wouldn't be the
better for hearing, but it won't be the orthodox training!  I fancy
Pixie was a big surprise to the English boarding-school when she first
arrived."

"But she left with the prize for being the most popular and unselfish of
the girls!  Your sister has just shown me the books with the touching
inscription.  If she can teach my girlies to be as sweet and helpful, I
shall not mind a few eccentricities.  Two hours in the morning would not
take her away too much from home, and she would have plenty of time left
for her own music.  Her ambition seemed to be to pay for her own
lessons, so if I gave her thirty pounds, she could go to a really good
master without feeling that she was overtaxing you.  It would be such a
pleasure to me too, Miss O'Shaughnessy.  I feel sure your brother will
agree, if you consent.  Please say `Yes'!"

So it was left to Bridgie to make the final decision, and in after years
she used to wonder what would have happened if she had refused her
consent!  It was a difficult problem, for to her old-fashioned notions
it was a trifle _infra dig_ for a girl to work for herself, and it hurt
her tender heart that the Piccaninny of all others should be the one to
go out into the world.

What would the dear dead mother have said to such a project?  What would
the Major have said?  What would Esmeralda think now, and, thinking,
say, with all the impassioned eloquence of which she was mistress?
Bridgie reflected earnestly on the questions, while Mrs Wallace watched
her face with anxious eyes.

The dear mother had never been able to resign herself to the happy-go-
lucky Irish customs, and had died before her time, worn-out with the
strain of trying to make both ends meet.  When she looked down from
heaven with those clear angel eyes, would it seem more noble to her that
her baby should preserve a puny social distinction at the cost of a
purposeless life, or that she should use the talents which had been
given to her for her own good and the good of others?

There could be little doubt how the mother would have decided, and as
for the Major, Bridgie smiled with indulgent tenderness as she pictured,
one after the other, the swift stages of his behaviour if he had been
present to-day.  Horror and indignation at the possibility that the
Piccaninny should be in subjection to anyone but himself; irritated
impatience that the O'Shaughnessys should be expected to pay for what
they desired, like any ordinary, commonplace family; chuckling delight
over the smartness of the child; and finally an even greater inability
than his sons to say "No" to a charming woman!  Storm he never so
wildly, the Major would undoubtedly have ended by consenting to Mrs
Wallace's plea, while Esmeralda's wrath would be kept within bounds by
Geoffrey's strong common sense.

Bridgie sighed and looked across the room to where Jack sat.

"If it is left to me," she said slowly, "if I am to decide, I think I
will say `Yes'!  She shall come to you for a month on trial, Mrs
Wallace, and we can see how it works."

Mrs Wallace beamed with relief and satisfaction.

"That's very kind!" she said.  "I am truly grateful.  I realise that
your decision is unselfish, but believe me, you shall never regret it!"

And Bridgie remembered that prophecy, and smiled over it many times in
the happy years to come.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

JACK'S DISCOVERY.

Pixie received the intelligence that she was to begin her new duties on
the following Monday with the unruffled composure of one who has
expected no other decision.  She asked eagerly what salary she was to
receive, and was a trifle depressed to find that it did not run to three
figures.  Thirty pounds sounded very little, though she had only the
vaguest notion of its purchasing value, but her ambition had been to
supply the whole additional sum which was needed for the support of the
household.

Innocent Bridgie had no idea as to what might be expected under the
circumstances, but Miss Munns, who knew everything, declared that the
offer was a handsome one, and ten pounds in excess of the ordinary rate
of payment.  Still, as she sagely remarked, one could never tell!
People sometimes seemed very generous and pleasant-spoken at first, and
then turned out everything that was exacting and unreasonable.  Several
young friends of her own had gone out as governesses, and met with
tragic adventures.  Marianne Summers, the cousin of Summers' Celebrated
Snowflake Soap, was with a family at Rochester, and nursed a little boy
all through scarlatina, and when she had toothache herself the lady said
it was most inconvenient because a dinner-party was coming.  No
consideration whatever, and the food very poor.  She was never so much
as asked to have a second helping!

"Maybe the lady had so many to help that she forgot to ask her.
Couldn't she ask herself?  It would have been more friendly than
grumbling behind her back," said Pixie severely.  "When I go out to
meals with people I make myself at home.  I went to _dejeuner_ with some
friends in Paris, and I was so much at home that when they had cabbage,
I remarked that I wished it had been cauliflower.  They smiled, and
looked quite pleasant!"

Miss Munns looked over her spectacles, and grunted to herself.  She
considered Pixie O'Shaughnessy a most uncomfortable girl, and was never
at ease in her society.  She asked embarrassing questions, stared with
unconcealed curiosity, while her innocence had a trick of developing
into quite remarkable shrewdness at sudden and inappropriate moments.
Miss Munns recalled several incidents when the gaze of the childlike
eyes had filled her with a most unpleasant embarrassment, and declared
that not for fifty thousand pounds would she have that child living in
her house!

Bridgie was different.  She was invariably anxious to hear further
anecdotes concerning relations and friends, and was such a docile pupil
in domestic matters, that the old lady had the felicity of practically
ruling two households instead of one.  In the fervour of her resolve to
turn over a new leaf, Bridgie had made no reservations, but had placed
herself and her accounts in Miss Munns's hands, and from that moment
there was no drawing back.  The weekly orders were supervised and cut
down, the accounts carefully checked and paid to the hour, the receipts
were endorsed and filed, so that they could be produced at a moment's
notice; extras were faithfully entered into the housekeeping ledger at
the end of each day, and the whole account balanced to a laborious
penny.  When the penny was very difficult to find, Bridgie pleaded hard
to be allowed to supply it from her private purse, and could never be
quite brought to see that the result would not be the same, but it was a
proud moment when Jack surveyed the ledger on Saturday evenings and
wrote, "Examined, and found correct!" with a big flourish underneath the
final addition.  Then he would stroke his moustache and twinkle at her
with amused eyes, as he said--

"Bravo, Bridgie, right to a fraction!  I'll ask Miss Munns to take me in
hand next--since she has scored such a triumph out of you.  Evening
classes two or three times a week, with Sylvia to sit by me and sharpen
my pencils--that would be a happy way of combining instruction and
amusement for the winter evenings, wouldn't it?" and--shades of
Esmeralda!--Bridgie smiled, and ejaculated, "You naughty boy!" in a tone
as far removed from fault-finding as it is possible to imagine.

Sylvia Trevor, however, being a young woman of spirit, was by no means
disposed to provide amusement for Master Jack or any other masculine
flirt.  If any man wished to win her, she was worth wooing seriously, so
she told herself with a tilt of the pretty dark head, but when Jack said
one thing with his lips, beseeching Miss Munns to take pity on his
ignorance, and put him on the path whereon he should walk, and another
with his eyes, mutely inviting her to stay and flirt with him the while
he pretended to listen--then her pride was roused, and she determined to
teach him a wholesome lesson.  She waited until Miss Munns had produced
half a dozen ledgers to demonstrate the elaborate system of book-keeping
by which she conducted her miniature establishment--until Jack had
seated himself by her side and was irrevocably victimised for the
evening; then she rose from her chair and said amiably--

"I mustn't disturb you.  You will like to be quiet, so I'll run across
and chat to Bridgie for an hour, while you are away!"

The "running" was a polite fiction, for in spite of massage and the most
careful doctoring it would be many months before Sylvia could run again.
By walking very deliberately she could just conceal her limp, and now
as she turned towards the door she had a good view of Jack's petrified
glare of disgust.

The picture of him sitting by the old lady's side, while she prepared to
teach him what he himself knew a dozen times better than herself, was
too much for Sylvia's composure, and around the corner of the door,
where her aunt could not see her, she doubled up with silent laughter
and cast on him a glance of such mocking triumph, such sparkling,
dimpling, deliciously girl-like derision, as was more eloquent than a
thousand gibes.

Jack leapt to his feet; at that moment he would have given half he
possessed to have rushed after the tantalising creature, to have stood
over her, and watched her self-confidence give place gradually to
embarrassment, and the pink flush rise to the pale cheeks as it had a
trick of doing under his scrutiny, but, alas! the door was shut, and
Miss Munns's voice inquired soberly--

"Do you want the lamp?  Put it on the mat, please.  You can't be too
careful of lamps.  If the oil gets on the cloth, nothing will take it
out!"

"'Twill be a lesson to me while I live!" sighed Jack sorrowfully to
himself.  He was smarting with annoyance and impatience, but he managed,
as not one man in a hundred could have done, to keep his irritation to
himself, and be absolutely amiable and courteous to his instructress.
Miss Munns thought him a most well-disposed young man, and did not
discover one of the anxious glances at the clock, nor the yawns so
dexterously hidden beneath strokings of the moustache.

When three-quarters of an hour had passed by, Jack felt as if the
interview had lasted a fortnight, but fate was kinder to him than he
deserved, and sent relief in the person of the widow occupant of Number
Ten, who arrived to pay an evening call, cribbage-board in hand.  Then
Mr Jack departed, and paced up and down the road smoking cigarettes,
and meditating on revenge.  He caught the echo of girlish laughter from
within his own threshold, and could easily picture the scene within--the
two sisters huddling over the fire, Sylvia seated in state in the
grandfather chair, Pat, her devoted admirer, perched on the end of a
table, and placidly maintaining his position in spite of repeated
injunctions to run away.

He pictured Sylvia's face also as he had often seen it--the sharply-cut
little features, the suspicion of pride and self-will in aquiline nose
and firmly-moulded chin, the short, roughened hair, which was such a
cross to its owner, but which gave her a gallant, boyish air, which one
spectator at least found irresistibly piquant.  He saw the firelight
play upon the pretty pink dress and the rings on the restless hands, saw
the brown eyes sparkle with laughter, and grow suddenly soft and
wistful.  It seemed to him that they were turned towards himself, that
her thoughts were meeting his half-way, that she was already repenting,
and dreading the result of her hasty flight.

Jack O'Shaughnessy stopped short in his pacings up and down, and stood
staring before him with a strange, rapt expression.  Out there in the
prosaic street the greatest discovery of his life had come to him, and
the wonder of it took away his breath.  Young men often imagine
themselves in love with half a dozen pretty faces before they have
reached five-and-twenty, but to most of them there comes at last, in the
providence of God, the one woman who is as far removed from the passing
fancies of an hour as the moon from her attendant stars.  She has
appeared, and for him thenceforth there is no more doubt or change; his
life is, humanly speaking, in her hands, and her influence over him is
the greatest of all the talents which has been entrusted to her care.
Too often he is careless about religious matters, if not actively
antagonistic, and her light words may confirm him in a life of
indifference; but, on the other hand, his heart is never so tender and
ready to be influenced as at the moment when she has given her life into
his charge, and this golden opportunity is hers to seize and turn to
lasting good.  In the best sense of the word she is his Queen and he is
her knight, who will perform noble and gallant deeds at her behest.

Jack of the humbugging eyes, handsome, happy-go-lucky Jack
O'Shaughnessy, had been what he called "in love" since the days when he
wore pinafores and little round collars with frills at the edge, but he
had never known what love meant until this winter evening, when at the
vision of Sylvia's face his heart leapt with painful violence, and he
stood still appalled by the strength of his own emotions.

He had known Sylvia Trevor for one month, four short weeks in all, yet
now here she was occupying the foremost position in his thoughts, making
the past years seem blank and empty, blocking the gate of the future
with her girlish figure.  Jack felt dazed and bewildered, a trifle
alarmed, too, at the extent of the journey which he had travelled so
unthinkingly, but he never attempted to deny its reality.  He loved
Sylvia--that was an established truth; the only question which remained
concerned the next step in the drama.

When a man loved a girl, when a girl blushed when he appeared, and,
despite all her little airs of superiority, could not hide her pleasure
in his society, it was generally easy enough to prophesy a speedy
engagement and marriage, but what if Providence had made other ties for
the man before the Queen's appearance?  What if, though unmarried, he
was still master of a household, a bread-winner to whom brothers and
sisters looked for support?

Jack's thoughts drifted longingly towards a little home of his own,
where Sylvia reigned as mistress, and cast pretty, saucy glances at him
from the other side of the table, but he knew all the time that it was
the veriest castle of dreams.  He could not keep a wife who was hard
pressed to fulfil his present obligations; marriage was out of the
question until the boys were self-supporting, and the girls either
settled in homes of their own, or comfortably portioned off.  That being
so, it was plainly the duty of an honourable man to keep out of the
girl's way, to make no attempt to win her affections, but to hide his
love both from her and those at home, who would otherwise be made to
feel themselves in the way.

Jack turned and renewed his pacings up and down.  There was a heavy
weight of depression on his spirits, but he never flinched from the
right path, nor did it occur to him that there was anything heroic in
this simple accepting of a hard duty.  Family affection was very strong
among the O'Shaughnessys, and not even the glamour of first love could
make him grudge anything to Bridgie and Pixie, or the two big boys who
looked up to him with such touching confidence.  His first duty was to
them, and it would be "caddish" to let them suspect any sacrifice in its
fulfilment.  A poor, commonplace word, which it is safe to say would
have a nobler translation in the Great White Book, wherein are written
the records of men's lives!

Sylvia blushed as she heard the key turn in the latch, and cast an
apprehensive glance at the door.  Would Jack be angry?  How would he
look?  What would he say?  The first glance showed him graver than
usual, but with no shadow of offence in look or bearing, and for some
unaccountable reason her spirits sank as she met his unclouded smile.
He sat down and held out his hand to Pixie, who promptly seated herself
on the arm of his chair, and amused herself by trying the effects of
various arrangements of the curling brown hair.  Parted in the middle,
it gave a ridiculously dandified expression to the handsome face; pulled
forward in shaggy locks over the forehead, the dandy died a sudden
death, and Pat of the cabin and clay pipe appeared in his stead; combed
upward by ten little fingers until it stood erect above the forehead,
nationality underwent an even more startling change.

"_Voila_, Adolph!" cried Pixie triumphantly.  "Me I have seen a hundred
men, but a hundred, all the same as thou every day I promenade me in
Paris!"  And Jack smiled and, to Bridgie's surprise, allowed himself to
be disfigured without a protest--a surprising thing when a pretty girl
was among the spectators.

When the hairdressing operations were concluded, he held Pixie's hand in
his own, as if unwilling to let her go, and turned towards Sylvia with a
smile.

"I think your aunt quite enjoyed giving me a lesson, and I was very much
interested in her original system of book-keeping.  What a wonderful old
dear she is, so energetic and full of interest in her fellow-creatures!
I must go to see her again, and have a game of cribbage, which appears
to be her pet dissipation.  I'm fond of old people, but I daresay they
get a little trying if you have no variety.  If I relieve guard
sometimes, it will set you free to have a chat with the girls!"

Was he sarcastic?  Was he paying her back in her own coin?  Sylvia
stared dumbly, but could see no hidden meaning in the glance which met
hers so frankly.  "Thanks awfully.  You are kind!" she cried with
enthusiasm, but in her heart she thought the kindness the most cruel
treatment she had ever experienced.  As soon as she could leave
naturally she rose to say good-bye, and then came a fresh blow, for,
instead of escorting her across the road as he had insisted on doing
hitherto, Jack kept his arm round Pixie's shoulder, and deputed Pat to
take his place.

"Now, then, you lazy fellow, get your hat, and see Miss Trevor home!"

Pat was delighted, and after all it was natural enough that Jack should
not care to turn out in the cold so soon after coming in, and yet--and
yet--Sylvia stood at her bedroom window looking at the lights across the
road, and as she looked they grew strangely dull and faint.  Triumphs
are dearly won sometimes, and her mood to-night was the reverse of
victorious.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

AT THE CIRCUS.

Mamzelle Paddy began and continued her work in the Wallace nursery with
complete satisfaction to all concerned.  Esmeralda, it is true, had
surpassed herself in violence of diction in the letter which came in
answer to the one breaking the news; but while Bridgie shed tears of
distress, and Jack frowned impatience, the person against whom the
hurricane of invective was hurled, received it with unruffled and even
sympathetic composure.

As Pixie read over the crowded sheets her eye flashed approval of
dramatic points, she set her lips, and wagged her head, entering so
thoroughly into the spirit of the writer that she unconsciously adopted
her manner when aroused, and when the concluding words were read, heaved
a deep sigh of satisfaction.  "She'll feel a lot better after that!" she
remarked tersely, and the prophecy could not fail to be comforting to
those who knew Mrs Hilliard's temperament.

After such an outburst, repentance might be expected to set in even more
speedily than usual, and a peace-offering in the shape of a hamper
crowded with good things could be confidently looked for in the course
of the next few days.  Esmeralda disliked formal apologies, and from the
boys' point of view, at least, turkeys and game made a more eloquent
_amende_.

Viva and Inda Wallace were loving and lovable children, but possessed
with a nervous restlessness, an insatiable curiosity, and with such
easily-roused tempers as would have reduced an ordinary adult governess
to despair within a very short period.  Their delicate mother was
occupied with many social duties, and the father, though devoted to his
pretty daughters, had little patience with their vagaries, while the
frequent screaming attacks which sounded through the house had a trying
effect on nerves already strained by long residence abroad.

Parents and servants alike breathed sighs of relief when each morning
punctually as the clock struck ten, Mamzelle Paddy came running upstairs
primed with half a dozen thrilling devices for amusement and occupation.
Viva, as ringleader and rebel-in-chief, had flatly refused to speak, or
listen to, a word of French, but when it was presently revealed to her
that the Spoopjacks understood no other language, there was no course
left but to withdraw her opposition.  The Bobityshooties were English,
and stupid at that, but by the time that Nicholas Spoopjack had
succeeded in teaching them how to address him with propriety, the two
unsuspicious listeners to the conversation had themselves mastered the
lesson without once suspecting what they were about.

The adventures which those two enterprising and admirable families went
through, were as varied as they were endless, and each day brought a
thrilling development of the situation.  Nicholas Spoopjack thought
nothing of going out in a diving-bell in the morning, and a balloon in
the afternoon, while the Bobityshooties entertained royalty to dinner in
the kitchen cupboard, and feasted luxuriously on the cruets, and the
pinked-out paper which covered the shelves.

"She don't teach us nuffin': we only plays!" was little Inda's summing
up of the situation; but a moment later she would repeat a dialogue
which had taken place between the rival factions during the morning,
reproducing, with the wonderful imitative faculty of children, the very
accent and gesture with which it had been delivered, and her parents
would look at each other with delighted appreciation.

"You must not interrupt," cried Dudley. "This is _my_ story, remember.
You never teased me much, but the great thing I couldn't forgive
you was that uncle loved you best."
"No, I'm sure he didn't," cried Bernard.

"No more interruptions," said all the children, and Dudley went on.

"Well, you see I was very suspicious and miserable, and I always thought
Bernard wanted to make fun of me. When he first began to call me 'Dud,'
for _short_, I thought he meant that I was like the old rags that Joe
used to clean the carriages with, for he always used to call them 'old
duds.' And then sometimes when I came in from riding on Lightfoot's
bare back, with my hair blown every sort of a way, if he said,
'Shall we have our lessons now, uncle?

here comes _Wylde_,' I always thought he was trying to make uncle think
I was _wild_ like those horrid Indians we used to read about, while he,
Bernard, was always neat and smooth like a little gentleman. So you see
there was nothing that Bernard could do or say, that I did not
twist around to make myself miserable.

"One day, when I had been playing with my dog Sambo half the morning, and
riding Lightfoot the rest of the time, I was called on to recite
Latin to uncle, and didn't know one word.

But Bernard recited like a book, and when it was over, uncle did not
scold me, he never did, but just gave Bernard the pretty picture I
had long been wanting, of the boy climbing up over crag and ice,
shouting 'Excelsior.'
"That very afternoon we had planned to take a walk together to an old
ruined castle, but I was so cross and sullen I wonder Bernard did not
slip away and go alone. I can't begin to tell you how envious and unhappy
I felt, and I quarrelled so with him about every little thing, that
at last he scarcely opened his mouth."
"I don't believe this story is true," said Flaxy indignantly.

"I'm sure the Dudley Wylde _we_ know was never so bad and quarrelsome."

Dudley smiled, while Bettine whispered softly, "But he's different _now_,
Flaxy.

Do you know his uncle says he is trying to be a _Christian_?"

Flaxy looked up with a bright tear of sympathy, as Dudley continued.

"At last we reached the castle, where we had often been before, and
for a while I was more good-natured, for there was nothing I liked
better than climbing up and down the broken stairway, which wound
round and round like a great screw, or looking into every queer
little room hid away in the thick walls, or climbing to the turrets
to wave my handkerchief like the flag of a conquering hero.

"But this afternoon there was something new to see.

In the great hall just under the stairs, the floor had lately caved
away, and you could see down into a deep vault.

Bernard and I lay down with our faces just over the edge, and tried
to see the bottom, but it was dark as pitch, and we couldn't make
out anything.

"'I shouldn't wonder if they buried dead people there, a great while
ago,' said Bernard, with a little shiver; and when we both got up,
feeling very sober, he said, just to raise our spirits,--
"'Let's have a race up the steps, and see which will get to the
roof first.'

"Off we started. I could generally climb like a wild cat, but in some way
I stumbled and hurt my knee, and Bernard gained very fast.

I felt my quick temper rising again.

'Shall he beat me in everything?' I said to myself, and with a great
spring I caught up to him, and seized his jacket.

Then began a struggle.
She was silent for several minutes, and the supercilious
gentleman took advantage of the pause to examine the party with curious
eyes.  The elegant-looking woman was plainly the mother of the little
girls, but who was this, who was scarcely more than a child herself, who
was addressed as "Mamzelle" and spoke with a strong Irish accent?  He
stared at her, and Viva discovering his glance turned round with her
back to the ring, and stared back with leisurely enjoyment.

At first her face expressed nothing but curiosity, but gradually her
features became twisted, the lips down drawn, the eyebrows elevated to
an unnatural height, until the beholder realised with horror that she
was experimenting on his own expression, and endeavouring to copy it on
her own small visage.  Many a long year had passed since he had known
what it meant to blush, but he blushed then, and hitched round in his
seat to hide his scarlet face from view, while Viva once more turned her
attention to the ring.

The white-skirted lady had disappeared and another was cantering round,
clad in a riding habit and gentleman's hat.  The horse was black, and
shone like satin; he pawed the ground with dainty, cat-like tread; the
ring-master followed him as he went, and cracked his whip in encouraging
fashion.  Viva planted one foot on Pixie's toe, and jumped up and down
to attract attention.

"Is the gentleman really angry, that he cracks his whip?  Does he pitend
to be angry?  If he pitends to be angry, why do all the others pitend
that they think he doesn't pitend, but only,--Why does the gentleman
crack his whip?"

"Maybe he hears you talking!  I saw him cast his eye upon you," replied
Pixie sagely, and the supercilious gentleman pointed the sentence with a
sigh, and privately resolved to remove his seat at the first
opportunity.

The threat of the whip, however, had the effect of quietening Miss Viva
for a good two minutes, and in the meantime Fate sent an unexpected
deliverance.  Certain portions of the auditorium were portioned off into
squares, which did duty for private boxes, and into the nearest of these
there now entered a party of ladies and children, in whom he recognised
some intimate friends.  To advance towards them and beg the use of a
vacant chair was the work of a moment, when he proceeded to pour the
story of his woes into the ear of the young lady by his side.  She was
fair and pretty, charmingly dressed, and almost as supercilious in
expression as he was himself.

"Little wretch!  How impossible of her!" she ejaculated, and bent
forward to examine the wretch forthwith.

Viva had climbed on the empty seat, and was craning her little face to
right and left to discover where the deserter had fled.  With her great
blue eyes and rose-leaf complexion set in a frame of golden hair, she
looked like an angel from heaven, or one of the sweet-faced cherubs who
float in space at the top of Christmas cards and valentines.

But it was not on Viva that the young lady's attention was riveted, but
upon the figure by her side--Mamzelle Paddy in all the glory of a French
hat, wearing the very biggest hair-ribbon in her possession, in honour
of the occasion.  At sight of the profile the young lady started and
cried, "It is!  It must be!"  Then she dodged backwards, saw the hat,
and became filled with doubt.  "No, it can't be!  It's much too smart!"

Finally Pixie turned round to apostrophise Miss Viva, who was in the act
of striding the back of her chair, and immediately a flash of
recognition leapt from eye to eye.  The French hat nodded until the
feathers fairly quivered with the strain, and the face beneath became a
beam of delight, in which eyes disappeared and the parted lips stretched
back to a surprising distance.  The fair-haired young lady had more
respect to appearance in her recognition, but all the same she grew
quite pink with pleasure, and cried eagerly--

"It's my dearest friend!  We were at school together, but she has been
in Paris finishing her education, and I have not heard from her since
her return.  I must speak to her in the interval--I really must!  You
can't think what a fascinating little creature she is when you get to
know her."

"Ah, really!  She looks distinctly--er--out of the common," drawled the
supercilious man lazily.  "Rather interesting-looking woman, the
children's mother.  Some relation of your friend, I suppose?"

"Oh, I suppose so!  The O'Shaughnessys are a very good family.  Very
well connected.  Beautiful old place in Ireland," drawled the young lady
in her turn, and in the intervals of the performance she proceeded to
expatiate on the grandeur of the O'Shaughnessy family, the beauty of
Esmeralda, and the riches of her husband, until her companion looked
forward with increased interest to the coming introduction.

At the first interval Pixie came forward in response to eager
beckonings, and stood leaning against the side of the box talking to her
friend, with superb disregard of the more extended audience.

"Fancy, now, the two of us meeting without knowing that we were here!
You look quite old, Lottie, with your hair done up.  Turn your head and
let me see the back!  D'you still curl it with slate-pencils, like you
did at school?  I came home at Christmas, and I've thought of writing
ever since, but I've been too busy.  I suppose you're busy too, now you
are grown-up and living at home.  Have you come out, and gone to dances
in low necks?  We had an old servant at Knock, and one day a friend came
to lunch and she says to Bridgie, `That's a fine, handsome young lady!'
`She is,' says Bridgie.  `She's just come out!'  `Out of w'ere?' says
Molly, staring."

Pixie darted a quick glance round the box to enjoy the general
appreciation of her joke, then gave a low chuckle of satisfaction.
"Ye'll never guess what I'm doing!"

"No," said Lottie Vane complacently.  She too had noticed the smiles of
the audience, and was anxious to encourage her friend in her
reminiscences.  In society people were always grateful for being amused,
and if in her recital Pixie let fall further references to the standing
and importance of her family, why, so much the better for all concerned.

"What mischief are you up to now, you funny little thing?"

"I'm in service!" said Pixie proudly.

The shocked amaze of Lottie's expression, the involuntary rustle of
surprise which went round the box, were as so many tributes to the
thrilling nature of the intelligence, and she waited a moment to enjoy
it before pointing unabashed in the direction of the two children, and
condescending to further explanations.

"Me pupils!  I've been with them now for over a month."

"What do you mean?  How absurd you are, Pixie!" cried Lottie irritably.
"In service--you!  I never heard such nonsense.  As if you were a
servant!  I don't know what you are talking about!"

"I get wages, anyhow, and that's all I care about.  They are my pupils,
I tell you, and I've brought them here with their mother for a little
diversion.  I've the training of them every morning for a couple of
hours, and thirty pounds a year paid every month.  Jack and I make
enough between us to support the family."

"You don't really mean it?" gasped Lottie, horrified.  Her cheeks were
scarlet, and it was evident that she was profoundly uncomfortable, but
as she met the triumphant eyes her face softened, and she made a valiant
effort to retain composure.  "You mean to say you have turned into a
governess at sixteen--you who were always at the bottom of the class,
and couldn't get a sum right to save your life!  Poor little girls, I
pity their education!  How did you ever persuade the mother to take
you?"

Mamzelle Paddy tossed her head with complacent pride.

"'Deed, me dear, the room was packed with them, and natives at that, and
she chose me before the whole bunch.  I'm not supposed to teach them
anything but French, and I don't teach that except by playing games.
But I keep them from crying and quarrelling, and ye don't need to be
head of your class for that!  'Twasn't cleverness she took me for, as
she told me plainly the first day I went; 'twas m'influence!"

A smothered laugh went round the box at the sound of this curious
compound word, uttered in tones of complacent pride; but Lottie Vane did
not laugh, and her hand stretched out involuntarily and clasped the
little fingers which lay on the side of the box.  Her face lost its
supercilious expression, and grew sweet and womanly.

"Dear little Pixie," she said softly, "I don't pity the pupils after
all.  I think they are very well off.  May I come over and be introduced
to them and their mother?  She must be a very wise woman."

The two girls walked forward together towards the spot where Mrs
Wallace was sitting, and the supercilious man looked after them with
thoughtful eyes.  He had always admired Miss Lottie Vane, though he had
privately sneered at her snobbish tendencies, but it occurred to him to-
day that he had been over-hasty in judgment.  How sweet she had looked
as she answered her little friend, how kindly had been the tones of her
voice!  He felt his heart thrill with the beginning of a new and deeper
interest.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A TEA-PARTY.

Jack kept his resolve of avoiding dangerous _tete-a-tetes_ with Sylvia
Trevor, and kept it in so pleasant and friendly a manner that no one
suspected his motives save the person most concerned.  She knew only too
well that a wall of division had suddenly risen between them, but though
her heart ached she carried her proud little head more erect than ever,
and was so very, very lively and pleasant that Jack in his turn was
deceived, and believed that she was relieved by his absence.  When they
met, as meet they did from time to time, they laughed and joked, and
teased each other about little family jokes, and Bridgie listened
delightedly, and told herself that it did Jack all the good in the world
to meet Sylvia, for he was growing so much quieter, and seemed so
worried over that horrid old business.  Miss Munns, however, had the
same complaint to make about her niece, and delivered herself of many
homilies on the subject.

"Extremes," she said, "extremes, my dear, ought always to be avoided.
To be constantly running from one extreme to another shows an unbalanced
character.  A medium path is the wisest which one can choose, and one
should show neither undue elation nor foundless depression at the events
of life.  I remember a proverb which we used to quote as children:
`Laugh in the morning, cry before night!'--and there is a great deal of
truth in it, too.  High spirits are bound to be brought low before very
long."

"Well, I think it's a horrid proverb and a very wicked one into the
bargain!" cried Sylvia hotly.  "It sounds as if God disliked seeing one
happy, and I believe He loves it and means it, and tries to teach us
that it is a duty!  He made the world as bright as He could for us to
live in, with the sunshine and the flowers, and He made all the little
animals skip and bound, and play games among themselves, so it stands to
reason that He expects men and women to be happy too, especially young
ones."

"Exactly!  Precisely!  Just what I say!  I was just pointing out to you,
my love, that it is over an hour since you made a remark, and that such
depression of spirits was very trying to me as your companion," cried
Miss Munns, with an air of triumph.  "After the long period of anxiety
through which I have passed, I think I am entitled to expect some
cheering society."

"But then, you see, I might cry before evening!" retorted Sylvia pertly,
and had the satisfaction of feeling that she had been rude to her
elders, and put herself hopelessly in the wrong, as Miss Munns took up
her stocking-bag and began to darn, drooping her eyelids with an air of
stony displeasure.

Sylvia glanced at her from time to time during the next half-hour, and
felt ashamed of herself, and wished she were sweet-tempered like
Bridgie, and thought how nice it would be if she could learn to think
before she spoke, and be cautious and prudent, and never say what she
was sorry for afterwards.  She also wished that Aunt Margaret would not
look so particularly old and frail this morning of all others.  How thin
she was!  What great big hollows she had in her cheeks!  It was rather
dreadful to be old like that, and have no one to love and care for one
best of all, no one but a thoughtless girl, who was never so grateful as
she ought to be, and sometimes even really impertinent.  The wave of
penitence could not be repressed, and she jumped from her seat with her
characteristic impetuosity, and threw her arms round her aunt's
shoulders.

"I'm sorry I answered you back, auntie; it was horrid of me.  I've been
a great trouble to you this winter, but I really am awfully grateful for
all your goodness.  Do give me a kiss, and say you forgive me!"

"Well, well, well, my dear child, don't be so impetuous!  You have
nearly pulled the cap off my head.  Extremes, as I said before, always
extremes!  Do please try to exercise some self-control.  I quite
understand that you are troubled about your foot, but as the doctor says
it is only a question of time, and if you are patient for a month or two
more, you will be able to go about as well as ever.  There is no
necessity to brood about it as you do, no necessity at all!"

Sylvia was not brooding about her foot, but she did not choose to say so
to Miss Munns, and her silence being accepted as a sign of submission,
the old lady became so mollified as to suggest that the two Miss
O'Shaughnessys should be invited to tea forthwith.

Afternoon tea under Miss Munns's _regime_ was a more formal meal than is
usually the case, and also a trifle more solid, for it was followed by
no dinner, but a supper of cocoa and potted meat served at nine o'clock.
This arrangement was one of Sylvia's minor trials in life, but Pixie
O'Shaughnessy saw great compensations in a tea where you really sat up
to the table, and had jam in a pot, and a loaf, and scones, and eggs.
It fascinated her to see how the table was laid, with a white cloth
spread diamond-wise under the tea-tray, and the different viands dotted
about on the green baize.

Miss Munns boiled her own water, and ladled the tea out of a little
silver caddy, and dipped the bottom of each cup in water before it was
filled to prevent slippings on the saucer.  She had a kettle-holder
worked in cross-stitch--red wool roses on a black wool background--and a
cosy ornamented with a wreath of bead flowers.  The eggs were boiled to
order, hard or soft, just as you liked, in a silver pot filled with
methylated spirits out of a fascinating, thimble-like measure.  Pixie
watched the various preparations with rapt attention, while the two
elder girls chatted together at the end of the table.

"I want you to give me Whitey's address," Bridgie said, "so that I can
send her some flowers.  Esmeralda sent me a hamper this morning, so I am
rather rich and would like to share my goad things.  You said she was
nursing a case in the city, so she probably has no flowers, and it's
cheery to have boxes coming in as a surprise.  It's so hard for nurses
to live in a constant atmosphere of depression and sickness.  When one
is ill for a long time, as you were, one gets so bored and wearied by
the monotony of the sick-room, and it's such bliss to be free again, and
speak at the pitch of your voice, and be done with medicines, and
pulses, and temperatures, and tiresome rules and regulations, but the
nurse never gets free.  Just when things are beginning to get cheerful,
she goes away to another darkened room and another anxious household,
and the whole programme begins over again.  They love their work, of
course, but it must be very hard sometimes.  Don't you think so?"

"I--I--" Sylvia pursed up her lips and elevated her eyebrows in
deprecatory fashion.  "I never thought of it!  It does sound horrid when
you put it like that, but I'm afraid I just took it for granted that it
was their work.  Whitey never grumbled.  She left that to me, and was
always cheerful, though I found out afterwards that she had been awfully
anxious about her sister.  I wish I had thought of sending her flowers!"

"Send these--do!" cried Bridgie eagerly.  "She will like them better
from you, and I don't mind a bit so long as she gets them.  I'll send
over the box, and you shall address it and put in a little note.  Yes,
you must, because I felt rather mean about not bringing some for
yourself, but there were not very many, and as I was going into town I
couldn't resist taking some to the woman in the waiting-room."

"The woman in the-- What do you mean?"

Bridgie laughed easily.

"At London, of course.  There are several waiting-rooms at our station,
but I go to the dullest of all, where there is hardly a gleam of light,
and one day I saw the woman staring so longingly at some flowers which a
lady was carrying.  Since then I have generally taken her a little bunch
when I go up to town, and it is quite pathetic the way she grabs them.
She knows me now, and looks so pleased to see me!"

That was an easy thing to imagine.  Sylvia pictured to herself the long,
monotonous day in that dreary little room, the constant hope which
reached its fulfilment when the door swung open and Bridgie's face
smiled a greeting, leaving behind her the fragrant blossoms to sweeten
the hours with their own perfume, and the remembrance of another's care.
Such a simple thing to do!  Such an easy thing!  Why had she never
thought of it herself?  She would have done it gladly enough if it had
occurred to her mind: it was not heart that was wanted, but thought!
Oh, what a number of lives might be brightened, what an army of good
deeds would be accomplished if people would only "think!"

"Well, my dear, I only hope she was a decent woman, and worthy of your
kindness," said Miss Munns primly.  "A lazy life, I call it.  I've no
opinion of people who make their living by sitting still all day.  I had
occasion to wait at a station some little time ago, and entered into
conversation with the woman in charge.  She said she was a widow, and I
advised her to use my furniture-polish, for the woodwork was in a
disgraceful condition, and she answered me back in a most unbecoming
manner.  I have done a great deal of charitable work in my day, and am
on three committees at the present moment, so I am not easily taken in.

"I have been investigating cases for relief this very afternoon, and if
you'll believe me in one house where they asked for help there was a
musical-box upon the table!  The woman said it was given to her by an
old mistress, and that it amused the children while she did her work.  I
told her we did not undertake to relieve cases who could afford to keep
musical instruments.  I don't know what the poor are coming to in these
days.  She must dispose of it before I can have anything to do with
her."

"But 'twas a present to her!  It's not polite to give away presents.
Who do you want her to give it to?" queried Pixie, with the wide-eyed
stare which always made Miss Munns feel so hot and discomposed.  She
frowned and fidgeted with the kettle, while Pixie continued to discuss
the situation.  "I know what it is to have children about when there's
something to do.  Mrs Wallace gave me a book the other day, and the
schemes I made to get time to look at the pictures!  I was supposed to
have gone out for a walk, and they were to prepare a surprise for me
when I got back.  And 'twas a surprise!  They'd pretended to be savages,
and pulled all the feathers out of my hat to stick in their hair!"

"Very ill-mannered and impertinent I call it!  I hope you gave them a
good scolding?"

"I did not," said Pixie calmly.  "I don't like scolding meself, and it
makes me worse.  I merely remarked that it was a pity, as I'd have to
sew them back again instead of playing games.  'Twas dull work watching
me sew, and I didn't disturb myself with hurrying.  Ye couldn't bribe
them within yards of me hat this last week!"

"Humph!  When I was a child I was whipped when I did wrong, and that was
the end of it.  But things have changed since then, and time will prove
which was the best system.  Another cup of tea, Miss Bridgie?  I hope
you have good news of your sister and the little boy?"

"Yes, thank you, Miss Munns.  They are both well, and we are hoping to
see them quite soon.  They come up to their town house at the beginning
of May, and we expect to have quite a gay time.  Esmeralda is bringing a
house-party of old Irish friends with her, and it will be delightful to
meet again.  She always loved entertaining, and was clever in devising
novelties, and now that she has plenty of money she can do as she likes
without thinking of the cost.  You must get your fineries ready, Sylvia.
There will be lots of invitations for you next month."

Sylvia's smile was less whole-hearted than it would have been if one
sentence had been omitted from Bridgie's announcement.  "Old friends
from Ireland" would of a surety include Miss Mollie Burrell, and
Esmeralda would see that Jack made the most of his opportunity.  It
would not be exactly pleasure to accept invitations for the sake of
seeing other people flirting together, while she herself sat alone in a
corner.

"I shan't go!" she told herself.  "If she asks me I shall refuse.  I
don't care to be patronised at Park Lane or anywhere else.  I'd rather
stay at home and play cribbage in Rutland Road."  But all the same in
the depths of her heart she knew well that when the time came she would
not have enough resolution to say no.  The temptation to obtain a
glimpse of the fashionable world of which she had read so much and seen
too little would be too great to be resisted; she would go even if it
were to have her heart stabbed with a fresh pain, and to come home to
weep herself to sleep!

"My dear, your sister will have plenty of friends to ask without
thinking of Sylvia.  She won't find it plain sailing looking after a big
house like that.  I should advise her to engage a housekeeper if she
doesn't want to be cheated right and left.  I know what servants are
when the mistress is never in the kitchen to look after the scraps.  I
daresay I might be able to help her to find a suitable woman in
connection with our different agencies.  I'll inquire for you if you
think she would like it."

"Dear Miss Munns, how kind of you!  I'll write to Esmeralda at once, and
I daresay she would be most grateful.  You make me quite ashamed of
myself when I think of all the work you do, and how lazy and useless I
am in comparison!" cried Bridgie earnestly.  Her grey eyes were fixed on
Miss Munns's face with the sweetest, most unaffected admiration, and
Sylvia looked at them both and thought many thoughts.

You see, when he threw me over, my tippet caught on the rough edge of
the railing, and held me just a minute, but that minute saved me, for in
some way, I hardly know how, I swung in and dropped safely on the
steps just under 'Dud.'Bridgie thought she was not helping at all,
and was ashamed of herself because she was on no committees, and knew
nothing of authorised agencies.  Her ignorance was so sweet that it
would be a sin to enlighten it, but there was something in Sylvia's
expression which aroused her friend's curiosity.

"What are you thinking of, Sylvia?" she asked.  "Something nice?"

"Very nice!" said Sylvia, smiling.  She had just recalled a quotation
which seemed as though it might have been written to describe Bridgie
O'Shaughnessy--

  "Sweet souls without reproach or blot,
  Who do God's will and know it not!"


CHAPTER TWENTY.

A LUNCHEON BASKET.

Esmeralda announced her arrival in town on the first of May, a week in
advance of her house-party, so that she might have leisure to visit her
brothers and sisters, and put the final touches to her own preparations.
She did not mention the hour of her arrival, but this was easily
calculated, and at home in Rutland Road, Bridgie and Pixie held eager
committee meetings as to the best method of welcome.  It was decided not
to go to the station, as Esmeralda did not appreciate being taken
unawares, and would of a certainty be annoyed if her son and heir were
beheld at a disadvantage.

"Babies are bound to be cross at the end of a journey, and his little
frock would be soiled and crumpled, and she will want him to look his
very, very best.  No! we will go straight to Park Lane," Bridgie
decided, "and arrive an hour after they are due, so that they will have
had time to get tidy.  The house will be upset, of course, for it has
been closed for so long, and we may be able to help.  I shall never
forget the day we came here--all the furniture piled in the middle of
the rooms, and nowhere to sit down, and nothing to eat, and my poor back
aching as if 'twere broken.  That's another thing I was thinking about.
We'll take lunch with us all ready prepared--a cold chicken, I think,
and some fruit for dessert, and enjoy it together, we three girls, if we
have to sit on the floor to eat it.  How lovely it will be to meet
again!  It seems too good to be true."

Pixie was delighted at the idea of the luncheon basket, and when the
eventful day arrived one little extra after another was added to the
original list, until the weight became quite formidable, but Bridgie
declared that an omnibus ran to within but a short distance of their
destination, and the two girls set off in high spirits, each holding a
handle of the basket, and swinging it gaily to and fro.  Curious glances
were cast towards it _en route_, whereat Pixie beamed with pride.  It
looked so like a picnic basket, with the top bulging from the sides,
allowing glimpses to be seen of the fruit bags, and the white linen
serviette enfolding the chicken; she was convinced that the beholders
were consumed with envy and curiosity!

Arrived at Park Lane, Pixie was much concerned to realise that
Esmeralda's much vaunted town residence was situated in this dull and
narrow street!  In vain Bridgie represented that the site was famous the
world over; the little sister smiled quietly, and retained her own
opinion.  Bridgie as usual was making the best of the situation, but it
was evident that Geoffrey's riches had been much exaggerated, since this
was the best he could do for his wife.

Poor Esmeralda! how disappointed she would be!  What a good thing it was
that they had brought the cold chicken to take off the first edge of
disappointment!  The house itself looked dark and gloomy, but there were
a great many windows, and looking upwards Pixie espied a glimpse of a
graceful head inside the line of one of the curtains.  The travellers
had indeed arrived, and in another moment the three sisters would be
reunited, after four months' separation.

"Ring again, darling!  I can't.  This basket weighs me down!" said
Bridgie, straining at the heavy handle, and then came surprise number
one, for even as she spoke the door was flung back, and there appeared
on the threshold one immaculate-looking man-servant, while farther down
the hall stood two more in attitudes of attention.  Three whole men to
open one door!  This was indeed a height of luxury to which the simple
Irish mind had never soared; and where was the upset and confusion which
had been expected, where the signs of recent arrival, where the
smallest, most trifling evidence of confusion?  The stately hall looked
as if it had been undisturbed from immemorial ages, and the butler
stared at the two girls and their basket with lofty disdain.

"Not at home, madam!"

Bridgie gasped, and looked blank dismay, but Pixie's shrill protest
could not be restrained.

"Not at home, when I saw her meself not a second ago looking out of the
window?"

It would have made me happy for the whole day.

The crossing was prolonged, for we took a zig-zag course to avoid any
little remembrances Fritz might have left us in the form of mines.
When we were nearing land I saw Prior again. He was stretched out on
a deck-chair and looked up with a ghastly smile as he caught sight of
me.

"Hullo, you're alone!" I said rather cruelly. "Is this the stage where the
Captain goes to find the munitionnaire?"
Then he spoke, but it was not in the words of the phrase-book. It was
in clear, concise, unmistakable English.
"Can you tell me," he asked, and behind his words lay a suggestion
of quiet force of despair, "about what hour of the day or night
this cursed boat is likely to get to Boolong?"Everyone says he is a perfect beauty.
Oh, me dears, how glad I am to see you!  How sweet of you to come!"

"Of course we came; we thought perhaps we might be able to--help!"
Bridgie said, looking around the gorgeous staircase with pensive regret.
"We imagined you in such an upset, dear, with the carpets up, and the
furniture covered with dust-sheets, and we thought we could dust, and
put things straight as we used to do at Knock.  You told us you were
coming to open the house!"

"You didn't expect I was going to work myself?" drawled Esmeralda, her
impetuous manner changing suddenly to one of drawling affectation.  "The
servants have been here for a week, getting ready for our arrival.  I
have nothing to look after but a few frocks, and preparations for the
fray next week!  Did you expect to see me in an apron, with a duster
over my head?"

"It makes no difference to me what you wear!" said Bridgie quietly, and
at that Esmeralda laughed, and became herself once more.

"It does to me, though.  The best of everything is good enough for me,
nothing less!  You dear old thing, it's like old times to have you
looking at me with that solemn face.  No one keeps me in order now.
Geoff tries occasionally, but it's such an evident effort that it
doesn't have much effect.  It will be quite good for me to have some
family snubbings once more.  This is the way to the nursery--this door!
Now, my beauty, come to mother.  She's brought two new aunties to see
you!"

The beauty regarded his relations in stolid silence for a moment, then
hung his lower lip and began to howl.  His mother walked him up and down
the room, striving by various blandishments to win him back to smiles,
but he kept turning his head over his shoulder to gaze at his new
relatives with an expression of agonised incredulity, as though loath to
believe that such monsters could really exist on the earth.  He was very
fat and very bald, and, if the truth were told, not a beauty at all, but
Esmeralda made a fascinating mother, and was so happily deluded about
his charms that it would have been cruel to undeceive her.

Even Pixie managed for once to preserve a discreet silence, while
Bridgie's ejaculations of astonishment at size and weight passed muster
as admiration with the complacent mother and nurse.

"You shall see him again later on," Esmeralda announced, as though
anxious to soften the pain of separation, as she led her sisters from
the room.  "I must show you over the house before lunch.  Geoffrey had
the drawing-rooms redecorated before we were married, but this is the
first time I have been able to entertain.  I wish you could come and
stay here, Bridgie, but I suppose nothing would make you desert the
boys.  Never mind, you will be here every time that there is anything
going on, and it is not much fun preparing when one has a houseful of
servants.  Do you remember how we used to be making jellies and creams
all the day before, and running about arranging the house until a few
minutes before the time when the people arrived?  That's all over now,
and I do nothing but give orders and grumble.  This way!  There!  Then
I hurried into one of those queer little places in the wall, and
hid, for I was angry, and meant to give him a good fright; and as
I happened to have a little book in my pocket, I began to read, and
got so interested that I forgot everything till it began to grow dark.

The rooms were so huge, so lofty in stature, that Pixie was puzzled to
understand how the unimposing exterior could contain such surprises,
while Esmeralda strutted about displaying one treasure after another,
giving detailed descriptions of exactly how the rooms were to be
arranged for the contemplated entertainments, and glancing complacently
at her own reflection in the long mirrors.  She looked ridiculously
young to be the mistress of this fine establishment, and despite
occasional affectations, there was more of the schoolgirl than of the
woman of the world, in her happy voice and eager gestures.

From the reception-rooms the sisters adjourned to the dining-room, a
big, somewhat gloomy apartment facing the street, very handsome, very
severe, and evidently dedicated to one purpose only, and never by any
chance entered from the time one meal ended until another began.  The
butler was arranging dishes on the sideboard, the table was spread with
a glittering profusion of glass and silver, and an array of cold
dainties, at sight of which Bridgie blushed, and stared at the floor.
She waited, trembling, to hear Pixie's exclamation, but none came, and
as they adjourned towards the library she slipped her hand through
Esmeralda's arm, and said, half laughing, half nervous--

