Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


Blue Jackets; or, The Log of the Teaser, by George Manville Fenn.

________________________________________________________________________

Another very exciting nautical novel by this author, who is a master of
suspense.  HMS Teaser, a clipper-gunboat, is patrolling the China Seas
on the lookout for pirates.  At the time of the story she has proceeded
up the Nyho river, and is at anchor off the city of Nyho.  The teller
of the story is one of three young midshipmen, Nathaniel Herrick.  A
most important character is Ching, the Chinese interpreter, who would
love to be much more important than he is.  The boys and Ching find
themselves in various situations which look pretty terrifying at the
time, but the author manages to slip them out of these situations just
in the nick of time.  One particularly well-drawn scene is where the
boys beg Ching to take them to a Chinese theatre, and he decides upon
something that he thinks will really interest them.  Unfortunately it is
a public beheading of some pirates whom the Teaser has brought to
justice, but the boys do not enjoy the scene.  They realise that if they
tried to walk out they would most probably be beheaded themselves, so
they have to sit tight.

It's a full-length novel with a great deal of suspense, so there's
plenty to enjoy here.
NH
________________________________________________________________________

BLUE JACKETS; OR, THE LOG OF THE TEASER, BY GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.


CHAPTER ONE.

WE JOLLY SAILOR BOYS.

"Come along, boys; look sharp!  Here's old Dishy coming."

"Hang old Dishipline; he's always coming when he isn't wanted.  Tumble
over."

We three lads, midshipmen on board HM clipper gunboat the _Teaser_, did
"tumble over"--in other words, made our way down into the boat
alongside--but not so quickly that the first lieutenant, Mr Reardon,
who, from his slightly Hibernian pronunciation of the word discipline
and constant references thereto had earned for himself among us the
sobriquet of "Dishy," did catch sight of us, come to the gangway and
look down just as Double B had given the order to shove off, and was
settling the strap of the large telescope he carried over his shoulder.
I ought to tell you our names, though, in order of seniority; and it
will make matters more easy in this log if I add our second handles or
nicknames, for it was a habit among us that if a fellow could by any
possibility be furnished with an alias, that furnishing took place.

For instance, Bruce Barkins always went by the name of "Double B," when,
in allusion to the Bark in his family name, he was not called the
"Little Tanner," or "Tanner" alone; Harry Smith, being a swarthy,
dark-haired fellow, was "Blacksmith;" and I, Nathaniel Herrick, was
dubbed the first day "Poet"--I, who had never made a line in my life--
and later on, as I was rather diminutive, the "Gnat."

One can't start fair upon any voyage without preparations, so I must put
in another word or two to tell you that there were two logs kept on
board the good ship _Teaser_--one by the chief officer, and in which the
captain often put down his opinion.  This is not that, but my own
private log; and I'm afraid that if the skipper or Lieutenant Reardon
had ever seen it he would have had a few words of a sort to say to me--
words which I would rather not have heard.

It was a gloriously fine morning.  We had been dodging about the coast
on and off for a month on the look-out for piratical junks and lorchas,
had found none, and were now lying at anchor in the mouth of the Nyho
river, opposite the busy city of that name.  Lastly, we three had leave
to go ashore for the day, and were just off when the first lieutenant
came and stood in the gangway, just as I have said, and the Tanner had
told the coxswain to shove off.

"Stop!" cried our tyrant loudly; and the oars which were being dropped
into the pea-soupy water were tossed up again and held in a row.

"Oh my!" groaned Barkins.

"Eh?" cried the first lieutenant sharply.  "What say?" and he looked
hard at me.

"I didn't speak, sir."

"Oh, I thought you did.  Well, young gentlemen, you are going ashore for
the day.  Not by my wish, I can assure you."

"No, sir," said Smith, and he received a furious look.

"Was that meant for impertinence, sir?"

"I beg pardon, sir; no, sir."

"Oh, I'm very glad it was not.  I was saying it was not by my wish that
you are going ashore, for I think you would be all better employed in
your cabin studying navigation."

"Haven't had a holiday for months, sir," said Barkins, in a tone of
remonstrance.

"Well, sir, what of that?  Neither have I.  Do you suppose that the
discipline of Her Majesty's ships is to be kept up by officers thinking
of nothing else but holidays?  Now, listen to me--As you are going--
recollect that you are officers and gentlemen, and that it is your duty
to bear yourselves so as to secure respect from the Chinese inhabitants
of the town."

"Yes, sir," we said in chorus.

"You will be very careful not to get into any scrapes."

"Of course, sir."

"And you will bear in mind that you are only barbarians--"

"And foreign devils, sir."

"Thank you, Mr Smith," said the lieutenant sarcastically.  "You need
not take the words out of my mouth.  I was going to say foreign
devils--"

"I beg pardon, sir."

"--In the eyes of these self-satisfied, almond-eyed Celestials.  They
would only be too glad of an excuse to mob you or to declare that you
had insulted them, so be careful."

"Certainly, sir."

"Perhaps you had better not visit their temples."

Smith kicked me.

"Or their public buildings."

Barkins trod on my toe.

"In short, I should be extremely guarded; and I think, on further
consideration, I will go to the captain and suggest that you have
half-a-dozen marines with you."

"Captain's ashore, sir."

"Thank you, Mr Herrick.  You need not be so fond of correcting me."

I made a deprecatory gesture.

"I should have remembered directly that Captain Thwaites was ashore."

"Beg pardon, sir," said Barkins, touching his cap.  "Well, Mr Barkins."

"I hope you will not send any marines with us."

"And pray why, sir?"

"We should have to be looking after them, sir, as much as they would be
looking after us."

"Mr Barkins, allow me to assure you, sir, that the dishipline of the
marines on board this ship is above reproach."

"Yes, sir.  Of course, sir.  I only thought that, after being on board
the ship so long, sir, they might be tempted, sir."

"I hope that the men of Her Majesty's gunboat _Teaser_ are above all
temptations, Mr Barkins," said the lieutenant harshly.  "There, upon
second thoughts, I will not send a guard.  You can go."

The oars dropped with a splash on either side, and away we went among
the hundreds of native boats of all kinds going up and down the river,
and onward toward the crowded city, with its pagodas, towers, and
ornamental gateways glittering in the morning sunshine, and looking
wonderfully attractive to us prisoners, out for the day.

"Don't speak aloud," I whispered to Smith, who was gathering himself up
for an oration respecting the first lieutenant's tyranny.

"Why not?"

"Because the men are listening, and one of 'em may report what you say."

"He'd better," said Smith defiantly.  "I'm not afraid to speak.  It was
all out of his niggling meddlesomeness, so as to show off before the
men."  But all the same he spoke in a low voice that could only be heard
by our companion who held the lines.

"There, never mind all that bother," cried Barkins.  "I say, how would
you like to live in one of those house-boats?"

"I call it pretty good cheek of the pigtailed humbugs to set up
house-boats," cried Smith.  "They imitate us in everything."

"And we don't imitate them in anything, eh?" said Barkins.  "Hi! look
out, old Chin-chin, or we shall run you down," he shouted to a man in a
sampan.

"My! what a hat!" cried Smith.  "Why, it would do for an umbrella.
Port, Barkins."

"All right; I won't sink him.  Pull away, my lads."

"I say," I cried, as we rowed by an enormous junk, with high poop and
stern painted with scarlet and gold dragons, whose eyes served for
hawseholes; "think she's a pirate?"

"No," said Barkins, giving a look up at the clumsy rig, with the huge
matting-sails; "it's a tea-boat."

As she glided away from us, with her crew collected astern, to climb up
and watch us, grinning and making derisive gestures, Barkins suddenly
swung round the telescope, slipped the strap over his head, adjusted it
to the proper focus, as marked by a line scratched with the point of a
penknife, and raised it to his eye, when, to my astonishment, I saw all
the Chinamen drop down out of sight.

"Yes, she's a tea-boat," said Double B decisively, "and heavily laden.
I wish she had pirates on board."

"Why?" cried Smith.  "They'd kill all the crew."

"And then we should kill them, make a prize of the junk, and have a lot
of tin to share.  Bother this glass, though!  I wish I hadn't brought
it."

"Why?" said Smith; "we shall have some good views from up yonder, when
we get to the hills at the back of the town."

"Ain't got there yet.  It's so heavy and clumsy, and the sun's going to
be a scorcher."

"I'll carry it, Tanner," I said.

"You shall, my boy," he cried, as he closed it up, and rapidly slipped
the strap off his shoulder again.  "Catch hold.  Mind, if you lose it, I
value it at a hundred pounds."

"Say five while you're about it, Tanner," cried Smith.  "Why, it isn't
worth twopence--I mean I wouldn't give you a dollar for it.  But I say,
my lads, look here, what are we going to do first?" continued Smith, who
was in a high state of excitement, though I was as bad.  "Start off at
once for a walk through the city?"

"Shouldn't we be mobbed?"  I said, as I slung the heavy glass over my
shoulder.

"They'd better mob us!" cried Smith.  "If they give me any of their
nonsense, I'll take tails instead of scalps.  My! what fools they do
look, with their thick-soled shoes, long blue gowns, and shaven heads!"

"That fellow in the boat is grinning at us, and thinks we look fools, I
said."

"Let him!" said Barkins.  "We know better."

"But what are we going to do?"  I said.  "I hate being in a crowd."

"Oh, they won't crowd us," said Barkins contemptuously.  "Here, hi! you
sir; mind where you're going.  There, I thought you'd do it!"

This was to a young Chinaman, in a boat something like a Venetian
gondola, which he was propelling by one oar as he stood up in the bows
watching us, and was rowing one moment, the next performing a somersault
in the air before plunging into the water between the port oars of our
boat with a tremendous splash.

I did not say anything, thinking that it was a case of running up
against a man, and then crying, "Where are you shoving to?" but leaned
over the side, and caught at the first thing I saw, which happened to be
the long black plaited pigtail, and, hauling upon it, the yellow,
frightened face appeared, two wet hands clutched my arm, and, amidst a
tremendous outburst of shouting in a highly-pitched tone, boats crowded
round us, and the man was restored to his sampan, which was very little
damaged by the blow inflicted by our stem.

"Give way, my lads," cried Barkins, and we rowed on towards the
landing-place, followed by a furious yelling; men shaking their fists,
and making signs suggestive of how they would like to serve us if they
had us there.

"I'm sorry you knocked him over," I said.

"Who knocked him over, stupid?" cried Barkins.  "Why, he ran right
across our bows.  Oh, never mind him!  I daresay he wanted washing.  I
don't care.  Of course, I shouldn't have liked it if he had been
drowned."

Ten minutes later we were close in to the wharf, and Smith exclaimed--

"I say, why don't we get that interpreter chap to take us all round the
place?"

"Don't know where he lives," said Barkins, "or it wouldn't be a bad
plan."

"I know," I cried.

"How do you know?"

"He showed me when he was on board, through the little glass he wanted
to sell you."

"Why, you couldn't see through that cheap thing, could you?"

"Yes, quite plain.  It's just there, close to the warehouses, with a
signboard out."

"So it is," cried Smith, shading his eyes; and he read aloud from a red
board with gilt letters thereon--

  Ching
  Englis' spoken
  Interpret
  Fancee shop

Just then the boat glided up against the wood piles; we sprang out on to
the wharf, ordered the men back, and stood for two minutes watching them
well on their return for fear of any evasions, and then found ourselves
in the midst of a dense crowd of the lower-class Chinese, in their blue
cotton blouses and trousers, thick white-soled shoes, and every man with
his long black pigtail hanging down between his shoulders.

These men seemed to look upon us as a kind of exhibition, as they
pressed upon us in a semicircle; and I was beginning to think that we
should end by being thrust off into the water, when there was a burst of
angry shouting, a pair of arms began to swing about, and the owner of
the "fancee shop," whose acquaintance we had made on board, forced his
way to our side, turned his back upon us, and uttered, a few words which
had the effect of making the crowd shrink back a little.

Then turning to us, he began, in his highly-pitched inquiring tone--"You
wantee Ching?  You wantee eat, dlink, smoke?  Ching talkee muchee
Englis'.  Come 'long! hip, hip, hoolay!"


CHAPTER TWO.

A PIECE OF CHINA.

Ching flourished his arms to right and left, forming a lane for us to
pass along, and we followed him for the few dozen yards between the
landing-place and his place of business; but it was like passing through
so much human sand, which flowed in again behind us, and as soon as we
were in the shelter of the lightly-built bamboo place, crowded round the
door to stare in.

But Ching had regularly taken us under his protection, and, stepping
into the doorway, he delivered himself of a furious harangue, which grew
louder and louder, and ended by his banging to the door and fastening
it; after which he turned to us with his little black eyes twinkling,
and crying--

"Allee light.  Ching light man light place."

We all laughed, of course, and the Chinaman joined in.  Then, growing
serious directly, he looked from one to the other.

"You likee dlink?"

"No, no, not yet," cried Barkins.

"No likee dlink?" said the Chinaman wonderingly; and then in a voice
full of reproof, "Sailor boy likee dlink."

"Oh yes, by and by," cried Smith.

"Ah, you wantee buy fan, shawl, ivoly?  Fancee shop."

"No, no, we don't want to buy anything now," cried Barkins.  "We'll pay
you--"

"Allee light," cried the man, brightening up, for he had looked
disappointed, and he held out both hands for the promised pay.

"Oh, come, wait a bit," I said.  "We want you to take us and show us the
shops."

"No, no.  Shop no good.  Bess shop--fancee shop, Ching."

"Oh yes; but we want to see the others too, and the streets."

"Stleet allee full dust--allee full mud.  No good."

"Never mind," said Barkins; "we want to see them, and the temples and
mandarins' houses."

"Pliest shut up temple.  Want muchee money.  Mandalin call soldier man
muchee, put all in plison.  No good."

"They'd better," cried Smith; "why, the captain would blow all the place
down with his big guns."

"No blow Ching fancee shop down.  Englis' spoken.  Good fliend."

"Look here, Ching.  Shut up shop, and come and take us all round the
town to see everything, and we'll each give you a dollar."

"Thlee dollar?" cried the man, holding his head on one side, and raising
three fingers.

"Yes," we cried, and once more his hand went out.

"What can't you trust us?" cried Smith.

"No tlust.  All pay leady money.  Go 'board.  Fo'get."

"Oh no, we shan't," I cried.  "And look here, Ching, after we've been
round the town we want to go to the theatre."

"'Top flee day to go to fleatre?" he said.

"Three days! no.  We must be back on board at sundown."

"No go fleatre--no time."

"Never mind the theatre, then," cried Barkins.  "Now then, off we go.
And I say, boys, let's have something to eat first."

"Wantee something eatee?" cried Ching, making for a canister upon a
shelf.

"No, no," cried Smith, "not that.  We want a good dinner.  Do you know
what a restaurant is?"

"Lestaulant?"

The Chinaman shook his head.

"Wantee good din': eat muchee soup, fis', cakee?"

"Yes, that's right; come along."

The yellow-faced man went softly to the door and listened, while we
glanced round at the collection of common Chinese curios, carvings,
lanterns, sunshades, stuffed birds, bits of silk, and cane baskets which
filled the place, till he came back to us with a cunning look, and his
eyes twinkling, as Smith said, "like two currants in a penny bun."

"Too muchee men all wait," he whispered.  "No talkee talkee;" and,
making a gesture to us to be very silent, he led us through the back of
his shop into a smaller room, closed and fastened the door, and then led
us through another into a kind of yard full of boxes and old tea-chests,
surrounded by a bamboo paling.

There was a gate at the end of this, and he led us through, fastened it,
and, signing to us to follow, led us in and out behind houses, where we
sometimes saw a woman or two, sometimes children at play, all of whom
took refuge within till we had passed.

"Big clowd outside, wait long time," said Ching, with a laugh; and
directly after he led us along a narrow alley and out into a busy
street, which was crowded enough, but with people going to and fro,
evidently on business, and though all stopped to look, and some
followed, it was not a waterside crowd of loafers, but of respectable
people, moved by curiosity to watch the barbarian sailors passing along
their street, but paying most heed to me with the heavy glass.

I'm getting an old man now, my lads--the old boy who is writing this
log; but it all comes back as clear to my mind's eye as if it were only
yesterday: the narrow, busy street, with men shuffling along carrying
packages, baskets of fruit and vegetables or fish, cages too containing
birds, and all in the same way slung at the ends of a stout bamboo
placed across the bearer's shoulder, and swinging there as if the man
were carrying curious-looking pairs of scales.

The shops were as bright and gay as paint and gilding laid on their
quaint carvings could make them, while on their fronts hung curious
lanterns, banners, and signs covered with Chinese characters, all of
which I longed to decipher, and at which I was ready to stop and stare,
till Ching bade me imperatively, "Come 'long."

"Chinaman no fond love English sailor allee same Ching.  Don't know
better.  Come 'long."

This drew my attention to the fact that among the faces full of
curiosity there were plenty which greeted us with a heavy, dull scowl,
and, recalling the fact that we were only "foreign devils," according to
their teachings, it seemed better to obey our guide, though we were all
bitten by the same desire to stop and inspect the various shops and
stores we passed.

Ching led us farther and farther away from the riverside, and past
enclosures at whose gates stood truculent-looking, showily-dressed men,
who carried swords hung from a kind of baldrick, and scowled at us from
beneath their flat, conical lacquered hats.  And I noticed that our
guide always hurried us past these gateways, peeps through which were
wonderfully attractive, showing as they did glimpses of gardens which
looked like glorified, highly-coloured representations of our old
friends the willow-pattern plates.

One in particular was so open that Smith stopped short, heedless of the
presence of three fierce-looking Chinamen, with showy robes and long
pendent moustachios.

"Look here, boys," he cried.  "What a game!  Here's the old bridge over
the water, and the cannon-ball tree, and the gold-fish pond, and--"

"Come 'long," whispered Ching hurriedly; and he caught our comrade by
the arm, forcing him onward as the guards scowled at us fiercely.

"Here, what are you up to?" cried Smith, resenting the interference.

"Take velly much care of Englis' offlicers.  Big mandalin live there.
Men sword velly sharp--cut off head."

"Bosh!" said Smith shortly; "they'd better."

"Oh no, they hadn't," cried Barkins.  "We don't want to take you on
board without any head."

"But they daren't hurt us," cried Smith bumptiously.  "We're Englishmen,
and our gunboat is in the river.  I'm not afraid.  Why, there'd be a war
if one of these men interfered with us.  Our people would land and burn
up the place."

"No," said Ching quietly.  "Send letter to mandalin.  Why you men cut
off little offlicer head?"

"Here, who are you calling little officer, Pigtail?" cried Smith
indignantly.

"Mean young offlicer," cried Ching hastily.  "Say, Why you men cut chop
young offlicer head off?  Mandalin say, Velly solly.  He find out who
blave was who chop young offlicer head, and give him lichi."

"You mean toco?" said Barkins.

"No; lichi."

"What's lichi?"  I said.

"Tie blave up along post, and man come velly sharp sword, cut him all in
'lit pieces while he live."

"And do they do that?"  I asked, in horror.

"Neve' find out blave who chop off head," said Ching, with a queer
twinkle of the eyes.  "No find blave, no can give him lichi."

"Sounds pleasant, Poet, don't it?" said Barkins.

"Horrid!"  I cried, with a shudder.

"Moral: Don't try to peep into mandarins' gateways, Blacksmith,"
continued Barkins.

"Bosh! it's all gammon.  I should like to see one of them try to cut my
head off."

"I shouldn't," I cried, laughing; "and he wouldn't."

"No," said Ching perfectly seriously.  "Velly bad have head chop off.
Head velly useful."

"Very," said Barkins mockingly.  "Well done, Chinese Wisdom.  I say,
Herrick, why is a mandarin like the Grand Panjandrum?"

"Because he plays at the game of catch, catch, can and can't catch the
man who cuts off the English fellow's head," said Smith.

"Wrong!" cried Barkins.  "Now you, Poet."

"Because he's got a little round button on the top."

"Good boy, go up one," cried Barkins.

"Hallo! what place is this?"

"Velly good place, eatee drinkee.  All velly nicee nicee."

"Here, I say, Ching," cried Smith, "gently; any one would think we were
babies.  Stow some of that nicee nicee."

"Yes!  Stow all along inside, like ship.  Allee good.  Come 'long."

For we had reached a showy-looking open-sided building, standing a
little way back in a well-kept garden, with rockeries and tiny
fish-ponds, clipped trees and paved walks, while the large open house
displayed tables and neat-looking waiters going to and fro, attending
upon well-dressed Chinamen, whose occupation was so much in accordance
with our desires, that we entered at once, and Ching led the way to a
table; one of the waiters coming up smiling as soon as we were seated.

"Now then," cried Barkins, who was full of memories of hard biscuit and
tough salt beef, "what are we going to have to eat?"

"I don't know," I said, looking round uneasily.  "What have they got?"

"Here, let's make Ching order the dinner," cried Smith.  "Look here, old
chap.  We can have a good dinner for a dollar apiece, can't we?"

"Velly good dinner, dollar piecee," he replied.

"That's right," said Barkins; "we don't have a chance every day to spend
a dollar upon our dinner.  Go it, Ching.  Tell the waiter fellow, and
order for yourself too.  But I say, boys, we must have birds'-nest
soup."

"Of course," we chorussed, though Smith and I agreed afterwards that we
rather shrank from trying the delicacy.

Ching lost no time in giving the orders, and in a very few minutes the
man bustled up with saucers and basins, and we began tasting this and
tasting that as well as we could with the implements furnished to us for
the purpose, to wit chopsticks, each watching the apparently wonderful
skill with which Ching transferred his food from the tiny saucers placed
before him, and imitating his actions with more or less success--
generally less.

We had some sweet stuff, and some bits of cucumber cut up small, and
some thick sticky soap-like stuff, which rather put me in mind of melted
blancmange with salt and pepper instead of sugar, and when this was
ended came saucers of mincemeat.

"'Tain't bad," whispered Barkins, as we ate delicately.  "Peg away,
lads.  We're pretty safe so long as we eat what Pigtail does."

I did not feel so sure; but I was hungry, and as the food did not seem
to be, as Barkins said, bad, I kept on, though I could not help
wondering what we were eating.

"I say, Ching," said Smith suddenly, "when's the birds'-nest soup
coming?  Oughtn't we to have had that first?"

"Eat um all up lit' bit go," replied Ching.

"What, that sticky stuff?"  I cried.

"Yes.  No have velly bess flesh birds'-ness for dolla'; but all velly
good.  Nicee nicee, velly nicee."

"Don't!" cried Smith excitedly.

"Let him be, Blacksmith," said Barkins; "it's only his way.  Ah, here's
something else!"

I looked at the little saucers placed before us, in which, neatly
divided, were little appetising-looking brown heaps, covered with rich
gravy, and smelling uncommonly nice.

"What's this?" said Barkins, turning his over with the chopsticks.

"Velly good," said Ching, smiling, and making a beginning.

"Yes; don't smell bad," said Smith.  "I know: it's quails.  There's lots
of quail in China.  'Licious!"

I had a little bit of the white meat and brown gravy, which I had
separated from a tiny bone with the chopsticks, and was congratulating
myself on my cleverness, when it dropped back into my saucer, for Ching,
with his mouth full, said quietly--

"No, not lit' bird--lat."

"What's lat?" said Barkins suspiciously.

"No lat," said Ching smiling; "lat."

"Well, I said lat.  What is lat?"

Smith put down his chopsticks.  I had already laid down mine.

"What's the matter?" said Barkins, who kept on suspiciously turning over
the contents of his saucer.

"He means rat," whispered Smith in an awful tone.

"What!" cried Barkins, pushing himself back with a comical look of
disgust upon his face.

"Yes, lat," said Ching.  "Velly good fat lat."

Our faces were a study.  At least I know that my companions' were; and
we were perfectly silent while our guide kept on making a sound with his
mouth as he supped up the rich gravy.

"Here, hold hard a minute," said Smith.  "I mean you, Ching."

"Yes?" said the Chinaman, with a pleasant smile; and he crossed his
chopsticks, and looked at our brother middy inquiringly.

"What was that we were eating a little while ago?"

"Clucumber; velly good."

"No, no; before that."

"Birds'-ness soup; velly cost much.  Not all birds'-ness.  Some
shark-fis' fin."

"I don't mean that, I tell you," cried Smith in an exasperated tone of
voice.  "I mean that other brown meat cut up small into the brown sauce.
It was rabbit, wasn't it?"

"Oh no," said Ching decisively; "no labbit.  Lit' mince-up pup-dog.
Nicee nicee."

Smith turned green, and his eyes rolled so that he actually squinted;
while Barkins uttered a low sound-like gasp.  As for me, I felt as I
remember feeling after partaking meekly of what one of my aunts used to
call prune tea--a decoction made by boiling so many French plums along
with half an ounce of senna leaves.

"Oh gracious!" murmured Barkins; while Smith uttered a low groan.

"You both likee more?" said Ching blandly.

"No!" they cried so unanimously that it was like one voice; and in spite
of my own disgust and unpleasant sensations I felt as if I must laugh at
them.

"Oh, mawkish morsels!" muttered Barkins.

"You feel you have 'nuff?" said Ching, smiling.  "Oh no.  Loas' suck-pig
come soon.  You eat velly much more."

"Not if I know it," whispered Smith to me.  "I don't believe it'll be
pig."

"What then?"  I whispered back.

"Kid."

"Well, kid's nice."

"Get out!  I meant baby."

"Ugh!  Don't."

"It's too late to say don't," groaned Smith.  "We've done it."

"Hold up, old chap," I whispered.  "Everybody's looking at you."

"Let 'em," he groaned.  "Oh, I do feel so ill!"

"Nonsense!  Look at Tanner."

He turned his wild eyes upon Barkins, whose aspect was ludicrous enough
to make him forget his own sensations, and he smiled a peculiarly
saddened, pensive smile; for our messmate was leaning towards Ching.

"Don't eat any more of that," he said faintly.

"Eat um all up; velly good."

"Can one get a drop of brandy here?"

"Dlop blandy?  No.  Velly nicee 'lack."

"What's 'lack?"

"No, no 'lack! lice spilit."

"'Rack!"  I said--"arrack?"

"Yes, allack," said Ching, nodding.

"Let's have some--a glass each," said Barkins; "and look sharp."

Ching summoned one of the smiling waiters, and the order was given.
Then for the first time he noticed that we had not finished the contents
of our little saucers.

"No eat lat?" he cried.

I shook my head.

"Velly good!"

"We're not quite well," said Smith.

"Been out in the sun too much," added Barkins.

"Ah, sun too much bad!  Lit' dlop spilit make quite well.  No eat lat?"

"No, no!" we cried in chorus.

"Velly good," said our guide; and in alarm lest such a delicacy should
be wasted, he drew first one and then the other saucer over to his side,
and finished their contents.

Long before this, though, the attendant had brought us three tiny
glasses of white spirit, which we tossed off eagerly, with the result
that the qualmish sensations passed away; but no recommendations on the
part of our guide could induce us to touch anything that followed,
saving sundry preparations of rice and fruit, which were excellent.

The dinner over, Ching took us about the garden to inspect the lilies in
pots, the gold and silver fish, fat and wonderfully shaped, which glided
about in the tanks and ponds, and then led us into a kind of arbour,
where, beneath a kind of wooden eave, an instrument was hanging from a
peg.  It was not a banjo, for it was too long; and it was not a guitar,
for it was too thin, and had not enough strings; but it was something of
the kind, and evidently kept there for the use of musically-disposed
visitors.

"You likee music?" said Ching.

"Oh yes," I replied dubiously, as I sat using the telescope, gazing
right away over the lower part of the town at the winding river, with
its crowds of craft.

"Why, he isn't going to play, is he?" whispered Smith.  "We don't want
to hear that.  Let's go out in the town."

"Don't be in such a hurry," replied Barkins.  "The sun's too hot.  I
say, our dinner wasn't such a very great success, was it?"

Smith shook his head, and just then Ching began to tune the instrument,
screwing the pegs up and down, and producing the most lugubrious sounds,
which somehow made me begin to think of home, and how strange it was to
be sitting there in a place which seemed like part of a picture,
listening to the Chinese guide.

I had forgotten the unpleasantry of the dinner in the beauty of the
scene, for there were abundance of flowers, the sky was of a vivid blue,
and the sun shone down brilliantly, and made the distant water of the
river sparkle.

Close by there were the Chinese people coming and going in their strange
costume; a busy hum came through the open windows; and I believe that in
a few minutes I should have been asleep, if Ching had not awakened me by
his vigorous onslaught upon the instrument, one of whose pegs refused to
stay in exactly the right place as he kept on tuning.

@@@@

Then a little more screwing up.

_Peng_, _peng_, _pang_--_pong_.

Ching stopped, nursed the instrument upon his knee as if it were a baby,
pulled out the offending peg as if it were a tooth, moistened the hole,
replaced the peg, and began again--screw, screw, screw.

@@@@

Just a quarter of a tone out still, and he tried again diligently, while
my eyes half closed, and the Tanner and Blacksmith both nodded in the
heat.

@@@@

Right at last; and Ching threw himself back so that his mouth would open
to the widest extent, struck a chord on the three strings, and burst
forth with celestial accompaniment into what was in all probability a
passionate serenade, full of allusions to nightingales, moonbeams,
dew-wet roses, lattice-windows, and beautiful moon-faced maidens, but
which sounded to me like--

  "Ti ope I ow wow,
  Ti ope I ow yow,
  Ti ope I ow tow,
  Ti ope I ligh."

The words, I say, sounded like that: the music it would be impossible to
give, for the whole blended together into so lamentable a howl, that
both Barkins and Smith started up into wakefulness from a deep sleep,
and the former looked wildly round, as confused and wondering he
exclaimed--

"What's matter?"

As for Smith, he seemed to be still half-asleep, and he sat up, staring
blankly at the performer, who kept on howling--I can call it nothing
else--in the most doleful of minor keys.

"I say," whispered Barkins, "did you set him to do that?"

I shook my head.

"Because--oh, just look! here are all the people coming out to see
what's the matter."

He was right as to the people coming, for in twos and threes, as they
finished the refreshment of which they had been partaking, first one
path was filled and then another, the people coming slowly up and
stopping to listen, while Barkins stared at them in blank astonishment.

"Here Nat--Poet," he whispered, "look at 'em."

"I am looking," I said.  "Isn't it just like a picture?"

"It's like an old firescreen," he said; "but I don't mean that.  Look!
Hang me if the beggars don't seem to like it.  Can't you stop him?"

"No, of course not."

"But how long will it be before he has run down?"

"I don't know," I whispered.  "But look, aren't those like some of the
men we saw by the gates?"

I drew his attention to about half-a-dozen fierce-looking men in showy
coats and lacquered hats, who came up to the garden, stared hard at us,
and then walked in.  Each of them, I noticed, wore a sword, and a kind
of dagger stuck in his belt, and this made me at once recall their
offensive looks and contemptuous manner towards us, and think of how far
we were away from the ship, and unarmed, save for the ornamental dirks
which hung from our belts, weapons that would have been, even if we had
known how to use them, almost like short laths against the Chinamen's
heavy, broad-bladed, and probably sharp swords.

"I say, Gnat," whispered Barkins, "those must be the chaps we saw at the
mandarin's gate.  Never mind; we'll ask them to have something as soon
as old Ching has finished his howling."

But that did not seem likely to be for some time, and I began to think,
as I sat there noticing how the men were gradually closing in upon us,
that our position was not very safe, right away from the landing-place,
and that we had done wrong in stopping so long where we were.  I knew
that the Chinese were obsequious and humble enough so long as they were
face to face with a stronger power, but if they had the upper hand,
cruel and merciless to any one not of their own nation, and that it was
wiser to give them a wide berth.

Then I began to think that the captain had been too ready to believe in
our prestige in giving us leave to go, and that we should have been
wiser if we had stayed on board.  Finally, I had just come to the
conclusion that we ought to stop Ching in his howling or singing, which
grew more and more vehement as he saw that his audience was increasing,
when Smith jogged my elbow.

"I say," he whispered, "let's get away from here."

"Why?"  I said, to get to know what he thought.

"Because I'm afraid those chaps with the swords mean mischief."

"I say, lads," said Barkins, leaning towards us, "aren't those chaps
crowding us up rather?  What do they mean?  Here, I'm senior, and the
skipper said I was to take care of you youngsters.  We'll go back to the
wharf at once."

"What's the good?" said Smith.  "The boat won't be there to fetch us off
till sundown."

"Never mind, let's get away from here," said Barkins decisively; "we
don't want to get in a row with the Chinese, and that's what they want."

"But they're quiet enough," I said, growing nervous all the while.

"Yes, they're quiet enough now," whispered Barkins; "but you look at
that big fellow with the yellow belt, he keeps on making faces at us."

"Let him; that will not hurt us."

"I know that, little stupid," he cried, "but what follows may.  Look at
him now."

I looked up quickly, and saw the man turn away from looking at us, and
say something to his fierce-looking companions, who glanced towards us
and laughed.

"There," said Barkins, "I'm not going to be laughed at by those jolly
old pigtailed heathens.  Here, Ching, old chap, we want to go."

As he spoke he gave our guide a sharp nudge, which made him turn round
and stare.

"Ti--ope--I--ow!"

"Do you hear?  We want to go!"

"Ti--ope--I--ow!" howled Ching, beginning again.

"Yes, we want to go," I said anxiously.

"Ti--ope--I--ow!" he howled again, but as he gave forth his peculiar
sounds he suddenly struck--purposely--a false, jarring note, lowered the
instrument, seized one of the pegs as if in a passion, and began talking
to me in a low, earnest voice, to the accompaniment of the string he
tuned.

"Ching see now,"--_peng_, _peng_, _peng_--"bad men with
swords,"--_pang_, _peng_--"look velly closs,"--_pang_, _pong_--"wantee
fightee,"--_pang_, _pang_--"you no wantee fightee,"--_pung_, _pung_.

"No," I whispered anxiously; "let's go at once."

"No takee notice,"--_pang_, _peng_, _peng_.  "All flee, walkee walkee
round one sidee house,"--_pang_, _pong_--"Ching go long other
sidee,"--_peng_, _peng_.  "No make, hully--walkee velly slow over lit'
blidge,"--_ping_, _ping_, _ping_, _ping_, _pang_, _pang_.

The little bridge was just behind us, and I grasped all he said--that we
were to go slowly over the bridge and walk round the back of the house,
while he would go round the front and meet us on the other side.

_Bang_, _jangle_, _pang_, _pang_, _ping_, _ping_, _peng_, _peng_, went
the instrument, as Ching strummed away with all his might.

"Wait, Ching come show way," he whispered.  And as I saw that the
mandarin's men were coming nearer and evidently meant mischief, Ching
raised his instrument again, and, after a preliminary flourish, began
once more, to the delight of the crowd.  My messmates and I slowly left
our places and walked round the summer-house towards the little bridge
over one of the gold-fish tanks, moving as deliberately as we could,
while Ching's voice rang out, "Ti--ope--I--ow!" as if nothing were the
matter.

The little crowd was between us and the mandarin's retainers, but it was
hard work to appear cool and unconcerned.  Above all, it took almost a
superhuman effort to keep from looking back.

Smith could not resist the desire, and gave a sharp glance round.

"They're coming after us," he whispered.  "We shall have to cut and
run."

"No, no," said Barkins hoarsely.  "They'd overtake us directly.  They'd
come down like a pack of wolves.  We must be cool, lads, and be ready to
turn and draw at the last.  The beggars are awful cowards after all."

We went on over the bridge, and, in spite of my dread, I made believe to
look down at the gold-fish, pointing below at them, but seizing the
opportunity to look out for danger.

It was a quick glance, and it showed me that the crowd from the
eating-house were taking no notice of us, but listening to Ching, who
had left his seat, and, singing with all his might, was walking along
one of the paths towards the front of the low building, while we were
slowly making for the back, with the result of crowding the mandarin's
men back a little, for the whole of the company moved with our guide,
carefully making room for him to play, and thus unconsciously they
hampered the movements of our enemies.

The distance was not great, of course--fifty yards altogether, perhaps,
along winding and doubling walks, for the Chinese are ingenious over
making the most of a small garden, but it was long enough to keep us in
an intense state of excitement, as from time to time we caught sight of
the men following us.

Then we saw that they had stopped to watch which way we went, and
directly after we knew that they were only waiting for us to be behind
the house to go back and hurry round and meet us.

At last we had passed to the end of the maze-like walk, and were
sheltered by the house from the little crowd and our enemies, with the
result that all felt relieved.

"I say," said Smith, "isn't this only a scare?"

"Don't know," said Barkins.  "P'raps so; but I shan't be sorry to get on
board again.  They think nothing of cutting a fellow to pieces."

"Let's make haste, then," I said; and, nothing loth, the others hurried
on past the back of the house, where the kitchen seemed to be, and
plenty of servants were hurrying to and fro, too busy to take any heed
of us.  Then we turned the corner, and found that we were opposite to a
gateway opening upon a very narrow lane, which evidently went along by
the backs of the neighbouring houses, parallel with the main street,
which was, however, not such a great deal wider than this.

"Here's a way for us to go down, at all events," said Barkins, after we
had listened for a few moments for Ching's song, and the wiry notes of
his instrument.

"Yes, let's cut down at once," said Smith.

"Where to?"  I said excitedly.  "We can't find our way without Ching."

"No; and those beggars would hunt us down there at once," said Barkins.
"Won't do.  I say, though, why don't they give us better tools than
these to wear?"

"Hark!"  I said; "listen!"

We listened, but there was nothing but the murmur of voices in the
house, and not a soul to be seen on our side, till all at once I caught
sight of something moving among the shrubs, and made out that it was the
gay coat of one of the men from whom we sought to escape.

"Come on!" said Smith excitedly, and he threw open the gate leading into
the narrow lane, so that in another moment we should have been in full
retreat, had not a door behind us in the side of the house been opened,
and Ching appeared.

He did not speak, but made a sign for us to enter, and we were hardly
inside and the door thrust to--all but a chink big enough for our guide
to use for reconnoitring--when we heard the soft pat-pat of the men's
boots, then the rustle of their garments, and the tap given by one of
their swords as they passed through the gateway and ran down the narrow
lane.

"All gone along, catchee you," whispered Ching.  "Come 'long other way."

He stepped out, made us follow, and then carefully closed the door.

"Now, come 'long this way," he said, with his eyes twinkling.  "No
walkee fast.  Allee boy lun after."

We saw the wisdom of his proceedings, and followed him, as he took us by
the way our enemies had come, straight out into the main street, down it
a little way, and then up a turning, which he followed till we came to
another important street parallel to the one by which we had come, and
began to follow it downward toward the waterside.

"Muchee flighten?" he said.

"Oh, I don't know," growled Barkins, who had the deepest voice of the
three.  "It was startling.  Did they mean mischief?"

"Mean chop chop.  Allee bad wick' men.  No catchee now.  Ching velly
much flighten."

He did not look so, but chatted away with open, smiling face, as he
pointed first on one side then on the other to some striking-looking
shop or building, though he never paused for a moment, but kept on at a
good rate without showing a sign of hurry or excitement.

"How are we to get on board when we get to the river?"  I said, as we
went on.  "There'll be no boat till sundown."

"Ching get one piecee boat low all aboard ship."

"Can't you keep us in your place till our boat comes?"

The man shook his head.  "Mandalin boy come burn um down, makee all lun
out.  So velly hot.  No stay.  Get boat, low away."

"How far is it, do you think?" asked Smith.

"I don't know," said Barkins.  "We seemed to be walking for hours in the
hot sun coming up.  How far is it, Ching?"

"Velly long way.  No look at garden now."

He pointed to one of the handsome gateways about which a party of armed
retainers were hanging, and, whispering to us not to take any notice, he
walked us steadily along.

But we were not to get by the place without notice, for the loungers saw
us coming, and strode out in a swaggering way--three big sturdy fellows
in blue and scarlet, and pretty well blocked the way as they stood
scowling at us.

"Look out," whispered Barkins, "ready with your toasting-forks, and then
if it comes to it we must run."

"You'll stick by us, Gnat," whispered Smith in a hasty whisper.

"I'll try," I said.

"Keep velly close," whispered Ching.  "No takee notice.  No talkee
closs.  Ching speakee."

He said something in Chinese to the men, and led us in single file
between the two most fierce-looking, our prompt action taking them
somewhat by surprise, and, as we gave them no excuse for taking offence,
they only turned to gaze after us.

There were plenty of people in the street ready to stand and look at us,
and we met with no interruption from them, but I could not help seeing
the anxiety in Ching's face, and how from time to time he wiped his
streaming brow.  But as soon as he saw either of us looking at him he
smiled as if there was nothing the matter whatever.

"No velly long now," he said.  "Lot bad men to-day.  You come walkee
walkee 'gain?"

"It's not very tempting, Ching," I said.  "Why can't they leave us
alone?"

He tightened his lips and shook his head.  Then, looking sharply before
him, he hurried us along a little more.

"Wish got ten--twenty--piecee soldier man 'longside," he whispered to
me, and the next minute he grasped my arm with a spasmodic snatch.

"What's the matter?"  I said.



[118] _Ibid._, 54.

[119] _Congressional Globe_, Pt. 1, 3rd Session, 37th Cong.,
1862-63, 58.

[120] Hall, _The Rending of Virginia_, 485.

[121] _Ibid._, 490-494.

[122] _Ibid._, 488.

[123] _Ibid._, 496.

[124] Lewis, _How W. Va. Was Made_, 330-334.

CANADIAN NEGROES AND THE JOHN BROWN RAID

Canada and Canadians were intimately connected with the most dramatic
incident in the slavery struggle prior to the opening of the Civil War,
the attack of John Brown and his men on the federal arsenal at Harper's
Ferry, Virginia, on the night of Sunday, October 16, 1859.

The blow that Brown struck at slavery in this attack had been planned on
broad lines in Canada more than a year before at a convention held in
Chatham, Ontario, May 8-10, 1858. In calling this convention in Canada,
Brown doubtless had two objects in view: to escape observation and
to interest the Canadian Negroes in his plans for freeing their
enslaved race on a scale never before dreamed of and in a manner
altogether new.

It was Brown's idea to gather a band of determined and resourceful
men, to plant them somewhere in the Appalachian mountains near slave
territory and from their mountain fastness to run off the slaves,
ever extending the area of operations and eventually settling the
Negroes in the territory that they had long tilled for others.

He believed that operations of this kind would soon demoralize
slavery in the South and he counted upon getting enough help from
Canada to give the initial impetus.

What went on at Chatham in May, 1858, is fairly definitely
known.
Brown came to Chatham on April 30 and sent out invitations to what he
termed "a quiet convention ... of true friends of freedom," requesting
attendance on May 10. The sessions were held on May 8th and 10th,
Saturday and Monday, and were attended by twelve white men and thirty-three
Negroes. William C. Munroe, a colored preacher, acted as chairman.
Brown himself made the opening and principal speech of the convention,
outlining plans for carrying on a guerilla warfare against the
whites, which would free the slaves, who might afterwards be settled
in the more mountainous districts.

He expected that many of the free Negroes in the Northern States
would flock to his standard, that slaves in the South would do the
same, and that some of the free Negroes in Canada would also accompany
him.

The main business before the convention was the adoption of a constitution
for the government of Brown's black followers in the carrying out
of his weird plan of forcible emancipation.

Copies of the constitution were printed after the close of the Chatham
gathering and furnished evidence against Brown and his companions when
their plans came to ground and they were tried in the courts of Virginia.
Brown himself was elected commander-in-chief, J.

H. Kagi was named secretary of war, George B.

Gill, secretary of the treasury, Owen Brown, one of his sons,
treasurer, Richard Realf, secretary of state, and Alfred M.

Ellsworth and Osborn Anderson, colored, were named members of Congress.

It was more than a year before Brown could proceed to the execution of
his plan. Delays of various kinds had upset his original plans, but early
in June, 1859, he went to Harper's Ferry with three companions and
rented a farm near that town.

Others joined them at intervals until at the time of their raid he had
eighteen followers, four of whom were Negroes. The story of the attack
and its failure need not be told here.

It is sufficient to say that when the fighting ended on Tuesday
morning, October 18, John Brown himself was wounded and a prisoner;
ten of his party, including two of his sons, were dead, and the
others were fugitives from justice.

Brown was given a preliminary examination on October 25th and on the
following day was brought to trial at Charlestown. Public sentiment
in Virginia undoubtedly called for a speedy trial, but there was
evidence of panicky feeling in the speed with which John Brown was
rushed to punishment.

On Monday, October 31, the jury, after 45 minutes' deliberation,
returned a verdict of guilty of treason, conspiracy with slaves to
rebel and murder in the first degree.

On November 2nd, sentence was pronounced, that Brown should be
hanged on December 2nd.

As the trap dropped under him that day, Col. Preston, who commanded the
military escort, pronounced the words: "So perish all such enemies of
Virginia. All such enemies of the Union. All such foes of the human
race."

That was the unanimous sentiment of Virginia. But in the North
Longfellow wrote in his journal: "This will be a great date in our
history; the date of a new revolution, quite as much needed as the
old one

."[1] And Thoreau declared: "Some 1800 years ago Christ was crucified;
this morning, perchance, Captain Brown was hung.

These are the two ends of a chain that is not without its links."[2]
John Brown's raid on Harper's Ferry made a profound impression in Canada.
Although the Chatham convention had been secret there were some
Canadians who knew that Brown was meditating a bold stroke and could
see at once the connection between Chatham and Harper's Ferry.

The raid was reported in detail in the Canadian press and widely commented
upon editorially. In a leading article extending over more than one
column of its issue of November 4, 1859, _The Globe_, of Toronto, points
out that the execution of Brown will but serve to make him remembered
as "a brave man who perilled property, family, life itself, for an
alien race."

His death, continued the editor, would make the raid valueless as
political capital for the South, which might expect other Browns
to arise.

References in this article to the Chatham convention indicate that
George Brown, editor of _The Globe_, knew what had been going on
in Canada in May, 1858.

Three weeks later, _The Globe_, with fine discernment, declared that if
the tension between north and south continued, civil war would be
inevitable and "no force that the south can raise can hold the slaves
if the north wills that they be free

."[3] On the day of Brown's execution _The Globe_ said: "His death
will aid in awakening the north to that earnest spirit which can
alone bring the south to understand its true position," and added that
it was a "rare sight to witness the ascent of this fine spirit out
of the money-hunting, cotton-worshipping American world."[4] Once
again, with insight into American affairs it predicted that "if a
Republican president is elected next year, nothing short of a
dissolution of the union will satisfy them" (the cotton States).

The special interest taken by _The Globe_ in American affairs and its
sane comment on the developments in the slavery struggle were due to
George Brown's understanding of the situation, resulting from his
residence for a time under the stars and stripes before coming to
Canada.

The feeling of the public in Toronto over the execution of John Brown
was shown by the large memorial service held in St.

Lawrence Hall on Dec. 11, 1859, at which the chief speaker was Rev.
Thomas M. Kinnaird, who had himself attended the Chatham convention.[5]
In his address Mr. Kinnaird referred to a talk he had had with Brown,
in which the latter said that he intended to do something definite
for the liberation of the slaves or perish in the attempt.

The collection that was taken up at this meeting was forwarded to Mrs.
Brown. At Montreal a great mass meeting was held in St. Bonaventure
Hall, attended by over one thousand people, at which resolutions of
sympathy were passed. Among those on the platform at this meeting
were L. H.

Holton, afterwards a member of the Brown-Dorion and Macdonald-Dorion
administrations, and John Dougall, founder of _The Montreal Witness_.

At Chatham and other places in the western part of the province similar
meetings were held.

The slave-holding States were by no means blind to the amount
of support and encouragement that was coming from Canada for the
abolitionists.[6] They were quite aware that Canada itself had an
active abolitionist group.

They probably had heard of the Chatham convention; they knew of it,
at least, as soon as the raid was over.
In his message to the legislature of Virginia immediately after the
Harper's Ferry incident Governor Wise made direct reference to the
anti-slavery activity in Canada.

"This was no result of ordinary crimes," he declared. "...

It was an extraordinary and actual invasion, by a sectional
organization, specially upon slaveholders and upon their property
in negro slaves....

A provisional government was attempted in a British province, by our own
countrymen, united to us in the faith of confederacy, combined
with Canadians, to invade the slave-holding states ... for the
purpose of stirring up universal insurrection of slaves throughout
the whole south

."[7]
Speaking further of what he conceived to be the spirit of the North he
said: "It has organized in Canada and traversed and corresponded thence
to New Orleans and from Boston to Iowa.

It has established spies everywhere, and has secret agents in the
heart of every slave state, and has secret associations and 'underground
railroads' in every free state."[8]
Speaking on December 22, 1859, to a gathering of medical students who had
left Philadelphia, Governor Wise is quoted as saying: "With God's
help we will drive all the disunionists together back into Canada.
Let the compact of fanaticism and intolerance be confined to British
soil

."[9] _The New York Herald_ quoted Governor Wise as calling upon the
President to notify the British Government that Canada should no longer
be allowed, by affording an asylum to fugitive slaves, to foster disunion
and dissension in the United States.

Wise even seems to have had the idea that the President might be bullied
into provoking trouble with Great Britain over this question.

"The war shall be carried into Canada," he said in one of his outbursts.[10]

Sympathy for the South was shown in the comment of a part of the
Tory press in Canada, _The Leader_ declaring that Brown's attack
on Harper's Ferry was an "insane raid" and predicting that the South
would sacrifice the union before submitting to such spoliation.[11]
The viewpoint of _The Leader_ and its readers may be further
illustrated by its declaration that the election campaign of 1860
was dominated by a "small section of ultra-abolitionists who make
anti-slavery the beginning, middle and end of their creed."

As for Lincoln he was characterized as "a mediocre man and a fourth-rate
lawyer,"[12] but then some of the prominent American newspapers made quite
as mistaken an estimate of Lincoln at that time.

The collapse of John Brown's great adventure at Harper's Ferry furnished
complete proof to the South of Canada's relation to that event.

The seizure of his papers and all that they told, the evidence at
the trial at Charlestown and the evidence secured by the Senatorial
Committee which investigated the affair, all confirmed the suspicion
that in the British provinces to the north there was extensive
plotting against the slavery system.

The Senatorial Committee declared in its findings that the proceedings
at Chatham had had as their object "to subvert the government of
one or more of the States, and, of course, to that extent the
government of the United States

."[13] Questions were asked of the witnesses before the investigating
committee which showed that in the minds of the members of that
committee there was a distinctly Canadian end to the Harper's Ferry
tragedy.[14] Their suspicions may have been further confirmed by
the fact that Brown's New England confederates, Sanborn, Stearns
and Howe, all fled to Canada immediately after the raid.

In the actual events at Harper's Ferry the assistance given by Canada
was small. Of the men who marched out with Brown on that fateful October
night only one could in any way be described as a Canadian.
This was Osborn Perry Anderson, a Negro born free in Pennsylvania. He
was working as a printer in Chatham at the time of the convention and
threw in his lot with Brown. He was one of those who escaped at Harper's
Ferry. He later wrote an account of the affair, served during the latter
part of the Civil War in the northern army and died at Washington in
1871.

He is described by Hinton as "well educated, a man of natural
dignity, modest, simple in character and manners

."[15]

There naturally arises the question, why was the aid given John
Brown by the Canadian Negroes so meagre?

That Brown had counted on considerable help in his enterprise from the
men who joined with him in drafting the "provisional constitution"
is certain.

John Edwin Cook, one of Brown's close associates, declared in his confession
made after Harper's Ferry, that "men and money had both been promised
from Chatham and other parts of Canada."[16] Yet, apart from Anderson,
a Negro, only one other Canadian of either color seems to have had any
share in the raid.

Dr.

Alexander Milton Ross went to Richmond, Virginia, before the blow
was struck, as he had promised Brown he would do, and was there
when word came of its unhappy ending.

Brown evidently counted on Ross being able to keep him in touch with
developments at the capital of Virginia.

Chatham had been chosen as the place of meeting with special reference
to the effect it might have on the large Negro population resident
in the immediate vicinity.

There were more Negroes within fifty miles of Chatham than in any
other section of Canadian territory and among them were men of
intelligence, education and daring, some of them experienced in
slave raiding.

Brown was justified in expecting help from them. There is also evidence
that among the Negroes themselves there existed a secret organization,
known under various names, having as its object to assist fugitives
and resist their masters. Help from this organization was also expected.[17]
Hinton says that Brown "never expected any more aid from them than
that which would give a good impetus

."[18] John Brown himself is quoted by Realf, one of his associates, as
saying that he expected aid from the Negroes generally, both in Canada
and the United States,[19] but it must be remembered that his plans
called for quality rather than quantity of assistance.
A few daring men, planted in the mountains of Virginia, would have
accomplished his initial purpose better than a thousand.

The real reason why the Canadian Negroes failed to respond in the summer
of 1860 when Brown's men were gathering near the boundary line of
slavery seems to be that too great a delay followed after the Chatham
convention.

The convention was held on May 8 and 10, 1858; but Brown did not attack
Harper's Ferry until the night of October 16, 1859, nearly a year and
a half later. The zeal for action that manifested itself in May, 1858,
had cooled off by October, 1859, the magnetic influence of Brown
himself had been withdrawn, and the Negroes had entered into new
engagements.

Frank B. Sanborn says he understood from Brown that he hoped to
strike about the middle of May of 1858, that is about a week after the
convention or as soon as his forces could gather at the required
point.[20] The delay was caused by the partial exposure of Brown's
plans to Senator Henry Wilson by Hugh Forbes, who had been close to
Brown. Panic seized Brown's chief white supporters in New England,
the men who financed his various operations, and they decided that
the plans must be changed.

Brown was much discouraged by their decision, but being dependent upon
them for support in his work he submitted and went west to Kansas.
Among his exploits there was the running off of more than a dozen
slaves whom he landed safely at Windsor, Canada.

There was some effort made in the early summer of 1859 to enlist
the support of the Canadian Negroes,[21] the mission being in charge
of John Brown, Jr., who was assisted by Rev.

J. W. Loguen, a well-known Negro preacher and anti-slavery worker.
Together they visited Hamilton, St. Catharines, Chatham, London,
Buxton and Windsor, helping also to organize branches of the League of
Liberty among the Negroes.
The letters of John Brown, Jr., show that there was little enthusiasm
for the cause, which, indeed, could only have been presented in an
indefinite way.

There was more interest at Chatham than elsewhere, as might be expected,
but even there it was not sufficiently substantial to bring the men
that were needed. Against this rather dismal picture should be placed
some evidence that there were a few Canadians on the way South
when the end came.[22] 
FRED LANDON.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Longfellow, _Life of Longfellow_, vol. II, p. 347.

[2] Thoreau, _A Plea for Capt. John Brown, read at Concord, October 30,
1859_.

[3] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, Nov. 25, 1859.

[4] _Ibid._, Dec. 9, 1859, and Dec. 16, 1859.

[5] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, Dec. 12, 1859.

[6] "There is no country in the world so much hated by slaveholders
as Canada," Ward, _Autobiography of a Fugitive Negro_, London, 1855,
p.
158.

[7] _Journal of the Senate of Virginia_, 1859, see pp. 9-25.

[8] _The Toronto Weekly Globe_ of Dec. 6, 1859, reported Governor
Wise as saying: "One most irritating feature of this predatory war
is that it has its seat in the British provinces which furnish
asylum for our fugitives and send them and their hired outlaws upon
us from depots and rendezvous in the bordering states

."

[9] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, Dec. 28, 1859.

[10] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, Dec. 28, 1859

.

[11] _Ibid._, Dec. 23, 1859.

[12] _Ibid._, July 20, 1860.

[13] _Harper's Ferry Invasion, Report of Senatorial Committee_, pp. 2
and 7.

[14] _Harper's Ferry Invasion, Report of Senatorial Committee_, p. 99

.

[15] Hinton, _John Brown and His Men_, pp. 504-507

.

[16] _Ibid._, appendix, p. 704. See also report of Senatorial Committee,
p. 97.

[17] Hinton, _John Brown and His Men_, pp. 171-172

.

[18] _Ibid._, p. 175

.

[19] _Report of Senatorial Committee_, p. 97.

[20] Sanborn, _Life and Letters of John Brown_, pp. 457-8.

[21] Sanborn, _Life and Letters of John Brown_, pp. 536-538, 547.

[22] Hinton, _John Brown and His Men_, pp. 261-263.

THE NEGRO AND THE SPANISH PIONEER IN THE NEW WORLD
Negro slaves probably made their first appearance in the New World
in 1502.

Those who came in the beginning were Christians and personal servants
of masters who had acquired them in Spain, but soon afterwards,
thanks to the influence of the religious order of _Predicatores_
and of the more famous Las Casas, they began to be introduced
directly from Africa, in order that the sufferings of the Indians
who were dying out under the Spanish system of forced labor might
be alleviated.[1] By the close of the second decade of the sixteenth
century no inconsiderable number had been brought over, and a perusal
of the early accounts of the exploits of the _Conquistadores_ will
reveal the fact that the Negro participated in the exploration and
occupation of nearly every important region from New Mexico to Chile.

As personal attendants of the Spanish Pioneers, as burden-bearers and
drudges connected with exploration and the founding of colonies,
they played an indispensable though inconspicuous rôle in one of
the greatest achievements which history records.

Such accounts of their service as have been preserved are, for the
most part, accidental: only when he performed an act of unusual
heroism or connected himself with a strange or humorous occurrence
was the Negro's name placed alongside of that of his Spanish master
where it is destined to remain for all time.

When Balboa set out from Darién on the tour of exploration which resulted
in the discovery of the South Sea, at least one Negro, Nufio de Olano,
was numbered in his party. Three years later, when the timbers for the
four boats with which he intended to explore the Pacific had been
prepared, thirty Negroes were among those who carried them piece
by piece over mountain and jungle from Acla to San Miguel.

Moreover, when Balboa's successor constructed the first highway from ocean
to ocean he made use of Negro labor along with that of the Indian.[2]

Hernán Cortés carried with him from Cuba not only Indian servants
but Negro slaves who helped to drag along the artillery which he
used to strike mortal terror into the Indians of Mexico.

There has been preserved a list of those who set out on this famous
expedition, and among the names are those of two Negroes, one of
whom Saco claims to have been the first to sow and reap small grain
in Mexico.

Moreover, two Negroes were among the company sent out by Velásquez
in 1520 to punish Cortés for his insubordination.

One of these has the unenviable distinction of having introduced smallpox
among the Mexican Indians.
The other, who seems to have observed the fight between the men of
the agent of Velásquez (Narváez) from the safe and comfortable
distance of a neighboring tree, has, because of some witty and
flattering remarks which he made to Cortés, received the honor of
a paragraph in the _Decades_ of Herrera.[3]
It is not definitely known whether Pedro de Alvarado, one of the
bravest and most gallant lieutenants of Cortés, carried Negroes
with him into Guatemala in 1523, but it is certain that eleven years
later, when his ambition and love of gain led him to fit out that
ill-fated expedition to Quito, he saw fit to include in the company
two hundred black slaves, most of whom perished while making their
way through the blinding snows of the Andes.[4]
It is certain, moreover, that several Negroes were along with the
_Conquistadores_ of Perú and Chile.

The contract of Francisco Pizarro permitted him to introduce fifty
Negroes into Perú free of duty; and even before this, Negroes had
accompanied those who had spied out the land.

In 1525, when Diego de Almagro effected a landing near the port of
Quemado, on the west coast of South America, and attempted to penetrate
the adjacent country, he encountered rather severe opposition from the
Indians of the section. During the resulting skirmish one of his eyes was
crushed by a dart and he was saved from captivity and death only
by the valiant succor of his Negro slave.

A year later, the debarkation of a Spaniard and his slave at Tumbez
resulted in an amusing occurrence which once more gave the Negro a
few brief sentences in the _Decades_.

Astonished at the color of his face, the natives of the region had him
wash time after time in order to see if the black would disappear;
and the Negro, true to his good nature and love of a joke, complied
willingly while he grinned so as to display his pearly white teeth.[5]

Several Negroes assisted the Yanaconas Indians in carrying the
baggage of Diego de Almagro and Rodrigo Orgoñez during their perilous
journey along the frozen Andes from Cuzco to Chile; and many of
them perished on the way.[6] Moreover, upon at least one occasion
the forces of the great conqueror of Chile, Pedro Valdivia himself,
would probably have been destroyed, had it not been for the cool-headed
alertness of Captain Gonzalo de los Rios and a Negro who managed
to procure the saddle-horses of the Spaniards as soon as they saw
a band of Indians dart from their hiding places.[7]
Numerous African slaves were along with the Spanish pioneers in
Venezuela.

"You give Ching flee dollar," said a voice close behind us, and we
started round, to find that the object of our conversation had come up
silently in his thick, softly-soled boots, in which his tight black
trouser bottoms were tucked.

"Three dollars!" cried Smith; "what for?"

"Say all give Ching dollar show way."

"So we did," cried Barkins.  "I'd forgotten all about it."

"So had I."

"But you got us nearly killed," protested Smith.

"That was all in the bargain," cried Barkins.  "Well, I say he came out
well, and I shall give him two dollars, though I am getting precious
short."

"Flee dollar," said Ching firmly.  Then, shaking his head, he counted
upon his fingers, "One, two, flee."

"It's all right, Ching," I said.  "Two dollars apiece.  Come on,
Blacksmith."  I took out my two dollars.  "Come, Tanner."

"No, no," cried Ching; "tanner tickpence; two dollar tickpence won't do.
Flee dollar."

"It's all right," I said, and I held out my hand for my messmates'
contributions, afterward placing the six dollars in the Chinaman's hand.

His long-nailed fingers closed over the double amount, and he looked
from one to the other as if he did not comprehend.  Then he unwillingly
divided the sum.

"No light," he said.  "Flee dollar."

"The other for the fight," I said, feeling pleased to have met a
Chinaman who was not dishonest and grasping.

"You wantee 'nother fight morrow?" he said, looking at me sharply.
"Don't know.  Not aflaid."

"No, no; you don't understand," I cried, laughing.  "We give you six
dollars instead of three."

Ching nodded, and the silver money disappeared up his sleeve.  Then his
body writhed a little, and the arm and hand appeared again in the loose
sleeve.

"Sailor boy 'teal Ching dollar?"

"Oh no," I said confidently.

"No pullee tail?"

"Ah, that I can't answer for," I said.  "Twist it up tightly."

"To be sure," said Barkins.  "It don't do to put temptation in the poor
fellows' way.  I'm afraid," he continued, "that if I saw that hanging
out of a hammock I should be obliged to have a tug."

Ching nodded, and stole away again into the darkness, for night had
fallen now, and we were beginning to feel the waves dancing under us.

An hour later I was in my cot fast asleep, and dreaming of
fierce-looking Chinamen in showy-patterned coats making cuts at me with
big swords, which were too blunt to cut, but which gave me plenty of
pain, and this continued more or less all night.  In the morning I knew
the reason why, my left side was severely bruised, and for the next few
days I could not move about without a reminder of the terrible cut the
mandarin's retainer had made at me with his sword.


CHAPTER FIVE.

CHING HAS IDEAS.

Week had passed, during which we had cruised here and there, in the hope
of falling in with the pirates.  Once in the right waters, it did not
much signify which course we took, for we were as likely to come across
them sailing north as south.  So our coal was saved, and we kept
steadily along under canvas.

But fortune seemed to be still against us, and though we boarded junk
after junk, there was not one of which the slightest suspicion could be
entertained; and their masters, as soon as they realised what our
mission was, were only too eager to afford us every information they
could.

Unfortunately, they could give us none of any value.  They could only
tell us about divers acts of horrible cruelty committed here and there
within the past few months, but could not point out where the pirates
were likely to be found.

Ching, in spite of some rough weather, had never been obliged to leave
the deck, and had proved to be so valuable an acquisition, that he was
informed that he would have a certain rate of pay as interpreter while
he stayed on board; and as soon as he was made aware of this, he
strutted up to me and told me the news.

"Captain makee interpleter and have lot dollar.  Muchee better keepee
fancee shop."

This was after, at my suggestion to Mr Reardon, he had been sent out in
one of the boats to board a big junk, and from that time it became a
matter of course that when a boat was piped away, Ching's pigtail was
seen flying out nearly horizontally in his eagerness to be first in the
stern-sheets.

But it was always the same.  The boat came back with Ching looking
disappointed, and his yellow forehead ploughed with parallel lines.

"Ching know," he said to me one evening mysteriously.

"Know what?"  I said.

"Plenty pilate boat hide away in island.  No come while big ship
_Teasler_ here."

"Oh, wait a bit," I said; "we shall catch them yet."

"No, catchee," he said despondently.  "Pilate velly cunning.  See Queen
Victolia ship say big gun go bang.  'Top away."

"But where do you think they hide?"

"Evelywhere," he said.  "Plentee liver, plenty cleek, plenty hide away."

"Then we shall never catch them?"  I said.

"Ching wantee catchee, wantee plenty money; but pilate won't come.
Pilate 'flaid."

"And I suppose, as soon as we go away, they'll come out and attack the
first merchantman that comes along the coast."

"Yes," said Ching coolly; "cut allee boy float, settee fire junk, burnee
ship."

"Then what's to be done?"  I said.  "It's very disappointing."

"Ching go back fancee shop; no catchee pilate, no plize-money."

"Oh, but we shall drop upon them some day."

"No dlop upon pilate.  Ching not captain.  Ching catchee."

"How?"  I said.

"Take big ship back to liver.  Put big gun, put jolly sailor 'board two
big junk, and go sail 'bout.  Pilate come thinkee catchee plenty silk,
plenty tea.  Come aboard junk.  Jolly sailor chop head off, and no more
pilate."

"That sounds well, Ching," I said; "but I don't think we could do that."

"No catchee pilate?" he said.  "Ching velly tire.  No good, velly
hungry; wantee go back fancee shop."

I thought a good deal about what the Chinaman had said, for it was
weary, dispiriting work this overhauling every vessel we saw that seemed
likely to be our enemy.  It was dangerous work, too, for the narrow sea
was foul with reefs; but our information had been that it was in the
neighbourhood of the many islands off Formosa that the piratical junks
had their nest, and the risk had to be run for the sake of the possible
capture to be made.

"Ching says he wants to get back to the fancee shop," sad Smith one
morning.  "So do I, for I'm sick of this dreary work.  Why, I'd rather
have another of our days ashore."

"Not you," I said.  "But I say, look here, I haven't spoke about it
before, but Ching says--hi, Tanner, come here!"

"That he doesn't," cried Smith.

"Hallo! what is it?" said Barkins, whom I had hailed, and he came over
from the port side of the deck.

"I was going to tell Blacksmith what Ching says.  You may as well hear
too."

"Don't want to.  I know."

"What! has he been saying to you--"

"No, not again."

"What did he say?"

"Ti-ope-I-ow!" cried Barkins, imitating the Chinaman's high falsetto,
and then striking imaginary strings of a guitar-like instrument.
"_Peng_--_peng-peng_."

"I say, don't fool," I cried angrily.

"Gnat!" said Barkins sharply, "you're a miserably-impudent little scrub
of a skeeter, and presume upon your size to say insolent things to your
elders."

"No, I don't," I said shortly.

"Yes, you do, sir.  You called me a fool just now."

"I didn't."

"If you contradict me, I'll punch your miserable little head, sir.  No,
I won't, I'll make Blacksmith do it; his fists are a size smaller than
mine."

"Be quiet, Tanner!" cried Smith; "he knows something.  Now, then, Gnat:
what does Ching say?"

"That we shall never catch the pirates, because they won't come out when
the gunboat is here."

"Well, there's something in that.  Tell Mr Reardon."

"Is it worth while?  He says we ought to arm a couple of junks, and wait
for the pirates to come out and attack us."

"Ching's Christian name ought to be Solomon," said Smith.

"Thanky wisdom teeth," said Barkins sarcastically.  "I say, Gnat, he's
quite right.  They'd be fools if they did come out to be sunk.  I
daresay they're watching us all the time somewhere or other from one of
the little fishing-boats we see put out."

"Well, young gentlemen," said a sharp voice behind us; "this is contrary
to dishipline.  You can find something better to do than gossiping."

"Beg pardon, sir, we are not gossiping," said Barkins.  "We were
discussing the point."

"Oh, indeed," said the first lieutenant sarcastically; "then have the
goodness to--"

Barkins saw breakers ahead, and hastened to say--

"The Chinaman says, sir--"

"Don't tell me what the Chinaman says, sir!" cried the lieutenant
fiercely.

"But it was about the pirates, sir."

"Eh?  What?" cried our superior officer, suddenly changing his tone.
"Has he some idea?"

"Yes, sir.  No, sir."

"Mr Barkins!  What do you mean, sir?"

"He thinks we shall never catch them, sir," stammered my messmate, who
could see punishment writ large in the lieutenant's face.

"Confound the Chinaman, sir!" roared the lieutenant.  "So do I; so does
Captain Thwaites."

He spoke so loudly that this gentleman heard him from where he was
slowly marching up and down, talking to the marine officer, and he
turned and came towards us.

"In trouble, young gentlemen?" he said quietly.  "Pray what does Captain
Thwaites?" he added, turning to the chief officer.

"I beg your pardon, sir.  I was a little exasperated.  These young
gentlemen, upon my reproving them for idling, have hatched up a
cock-and-bull story--at least Mr Barkins has."

"I beg pardon, sir; it was not a--not a--not a--"

"Cock-and-bull story, Mr Herrick," said the captain, smiling at my
confusion, for I had rushed into the gap.  "Then pray what was it?"

I told him all that Ching had said, and the captain nodded his head
again and again as I went on.

"Yes," he said at last, "I'm afraid he is right, Reardon.  It is worth
thinking about.  What do you say to my sending you and Mr Brooke in a
couple of junks?"

They walked off together, and we heard no more.

"Oh, how I should like to punch old Dishy's head!" said Barkins between
his teeth.

"Don't take any notice," said Smith; "it's only because he can't get a
chance to sink a pirate.  I don't believe there's one anywhere about the
blessed coast."

"Sail ho!" cried the man at the mast-head, and all was excitement on the
instant, for after all the strange sail might prove to be a pirate.

"Away on the weather bow, sir, under the land!" cried the man in answer
to hails from the deck; and then, before glasses could be adjusted and
brought to bear, he shouted--

"She's ashore, sir--a barque--fore--topmast gone, and--she's afire."

The _Teaser's_ course was altered directly, and, helped by a favouring
breeze, we ran down rapidly towards the wreck, which proved to be
sending up a thin column of smoke, and soon after this was visible from
the deck.


CHAPTER SIX.

MY FIRST HORROR.

I was in a great state of excitement, and stood watching the vessel
through my spyglass, longing for the distance to be got over and what
promised to be a mystery examined.  For a wreck was possible and a fire
at sea equally so, but a ship ashore and burning seemed to be such an
anomaly that the officers all looked as if they felt that we were on the
high road to something exciting at last.

In fact, we had been so long on the station for the purpose of checking
piracy, but doing nothing save overhaul inoffensive junks, that we were
all heartily sick of our task.  For it was not, as Smith said, as if we
were always in some port where we could study the manners and customs of
the Chinese, but for ever knocking about wild-goose chasing and never
getting a goose.

"Plenty on board," cried Barkins.  "I say, Gnat, isn't he a humbug?  Ha,
ha!  Study the manners and customs!  Stuffing himself with Chinese
sweets and hankering after puppy-pie, like the bargees on the Thames."

"Oh, does he?" cried Smith.  "Who ate the fricassee of rats?"

"Oh, bother all that!"  I said.  "Here, Blacksmith, lend me your glass a
minute; it's stronger than mine."

"Ho, ho!" laughed Barkins.  "His!  The wapping whacker!  Why, it's a
miserable slopshop second-hand thing.  You should have had mine.  That
was something like, before you spoiled it."

"Here you are," said Smith, lending me his glass.  "It's worth a dozen
of his old blunderbuss."

I took the glass and had a good long inspection of the large barque,
which lay heeled over on the outlying reef of one of the many islands,
and could distinctly see the fine curl of smoke rising up from the deck
somewhere about the forecastle.

"Make out any one on board, Mr Herrick?" said a sharp voice behind me,
and I started round, to find that my companions had gone forward, and
the first lieutenant was behind me with his spyglass under his arm and
his face very eager and stern.

"No, sir; not a soul."

"Nor signals?"

"None."

"No more can I," my lad.  "Your eyes are younger and sharper than mine.
Look again.  Do the bulwarks seem shattered?"

I took a long look.

"No, sir," I said.  "Everything seems quite right except the
fore-topmast, which has snapped off, and is hanging in a tangle down to
the deck."

"But the fire?"

"That only looks, sir, as if they'd got a stove in the forecastle, and
had just lit the fire with plenty of smoky coal."

"Hah!  That's all I can make out.  We've come to something at last, Mr
Herrick."

"Think so, sir?"  I said respectfully.

"Sure of it, my lad;" and he walked off to join the captain, while just
then Ching came up softly and pointed forward.

"Big ship," he said.  "Pilate; all afire."

"Think so?"

Ching nodded.

"Hallo, Gnat, what does the first luff say?" asked Barkins, who joined
us then.

"Thinks it's a vessel cast ashore by the pirates."

"Maybe.  I should say it's one got on the reef from bad seamanship."

"And want of a Tanner on board to set them right," said Smith.

"Skipper's coming," whispered Barkins; and we separated.

For the next hour all was eager watchfulness on board, as we approached
very slowly, shortening sail, and with two men in the chains heaving the
lead on account of the hidden reefs and shoals off some of the islands.
But, as we approached, nothing more could be made out till the man aloft
hailed the deck, and announced that he could read the name on the stern,
_Dunstaffnage, Glasgow_.  Another hour passed, during which the island,
a couple of miles beyond, was swept by glass after glass, and tree and
hill examined, but there was no sign of signal on tree or hill.  All was
bare, chilly, and repellent there, and we felt that the crew of the
vessel could not have taken refuge ashore.

At last the crew of a boat was piped away, and, as I was gazing
longingly at the men getting in under the command of Mr Brooke, a
quiet, gentlemanly fellow, our junior lieutenant, Mr Reardon said, as
he caught my eye--

"Yes; go."

I did not wait for a second order, you may be sure, but sprang in, and
as the _Teaser_ was thrown up in the wind with her sails flapping, it
being deemed unsafe to go any nearer to the barque, the little wheels
chirrupped, and down we went, to sit the next moment lightly upon a
good-sized wave which rose up as if to receive us; the falls were cast
off, the oars dropped, and the next minute we glided away towards the
stranded vessel.

"Quite a treat to get a bit of an adventure, eh Herrick?" said Mr
Brooke.

"Yes, sir.  Been slow enough lately."

"Oh, you need not grumble, my lad.  You did have one good adventure.  By
the way, how are your sore ribs?"

"My ribs, sir?  Oh, I had forgotten all about them.  But do you think
this is the work of pirates, or that the ship has run ashore?"

"I'm not sure, my lad, but we shall soon know."

We sat watching the fine well-built barque, as the men pulled lustily at
their oars, making the water flash and the distance grow shorter.  Then
all at once my companion said shortly--

"Pirates."

"Where, where?"  I said eagerly, and my hand went to my dirk.

Mr Brooke laughed, and I saw all the men showing their teeth.

"No, no, my lad," he said.  "I meant this was the work of pirates."

"How do you know, sir?"

"Look at those ropes and sheets hanging loose.  They have been cut.  The
barque has not been in a storm either.  She has just gone on to the
rocks and the fore-topmast evidently snapped with the shock."

"And the smoke?  Is that from the forecastle?"

He shook his head, and stood up in the boat, after handing me the lines,
while he remained scanning the vessel attentively.

"Hail her, Jones," he said to the bowman; and the man jumped up, put his
hands to his mouth, and roared out, "_Ship ahoy_!"

This again and again, but all was silent; and a curious feeling of awe
crept over me as I gazed at the barque lying there on the reef as if it
were dead, while the column of smoke, which now looked much bigger,
twisted and writhed as it rolled over and over up from just abaft the
broken foremast.

"Steady," cried the lieutenant; "the water's getting shoal.  Keep a good
look-out forward, Jones."

For all at once the water in front of us, from being smooth and oily,
suddenly became agitated, and I saw that we had startled and were
driving before us a shoal of good-sized fish, some of which, in their
eagerness to escape, sprang out of the water and fell back with a
splash.

"Plenty yet, sir," said the man in the bows, standing up now with the
boat-hook.  "Good fathom under us."

"Right.  Steady, my lads."

We were only about a hundred yards from the barque now, and the water
deepened again, showing that we had been crossing a reef; but the bottom
was still visible, as I glanced once over the side, but only for a
moment, for there was a peculiar saddening attraction about the silent
ship, and I don't know how it was, but I felt as if I was going to see
something dreadful.

Under the lieutenant's directions, I steered the boat so that we glided
round to the other side, passing under the stern, and then ran
alongside, with the bulwarks hanging over towards us, and made out that
the vessel had evidently been in fairly deep water close by, and had
been run on to the rocks where two reefs met and closed-in a deep
channel.

How are we going to get on board?  I asked myself, as I looked upward;
but I was soon made aware of that, for right forward there was a
quantity of the top-hamper of the broken mast with a couple of the
square sails awash, so that there was no difficulty about scrambling up.

"I don't think there is any one on board, Herrick," said Mr Brooke,
"but sailors should always be on the _qui vive_.  Stay in the boat, if
you like."

"I don't like, sir," I said, as soon as he had given orders to four men
to follow us, and the next minute we were climbing up to stand upon the
deck.

"No doubt about it," said Mr Brooke through his teeth.  "She has been
plundered, and then left to drift ashore or to burn."

For there from the forehold curled up the pillar of smoke we had seen,
and a dull crackling noise came up, telling that, though slowly, the
fire was steadily burning.

We could not see much below for the smoke, and Mr Brooke led the way
forward to the forecastle hatch, which lay open.

"Below!  Any one there?" cried my officer, but all was silent as the
grave.

One of the men looked at him eagerly.

"Yes, jump down."

The man lowered himself down into the dark forecastle, and made a quick
inspection.

"Any one there?"

"No, sir.  Place clear and the men's kits all gone."

"Come up."

We went aft, to find the hatches all off and thrown about anyhow, while
the cargo had been completely cleared out, save one chest of tea which
had been broken and the contents had scattered.

"No mistake about it, Herrick," said Mr Brooke; and he went on to the
after-hatch, which was also open and the lading gone.

The next minute we were at the companion-way, and Mr Brooke hailed
again, but all was still.  Just then the man peering over my shoulder
sniffed sharply like some animal.

The sound sent a shudder through me, and Mr Brooke turned to the man
sharply--

"Why did you do that?"

"Beg pardon, sir," stammered the man; "I thought that--as if--there
was--"

He did not finish.

"Come on," said Mr Brooke sternly, while I shuddered again, and
involuntarily my nostrils dilated as I inhaled the air, thinking the
while of a butchered captain and officers lying about, but there was not
the faintest odour, and I followed my officer, and then for a moment a
horrible sickening sensation attacked me, and I shuddered.

But it all passed off, and, myself again directly, I was gazing with the
others at the many signs which told us as plainly as if it had been
written, that the crew of the unfortunate barque had barricaded
themselves in here and made a desperate resistance, for her broken doors
lay splintered and full of the marks made by axes and heavy swords.  The
seats were broken; and bulkheads, cabin windows, and floor were horribly
stained here and there with blood, now quite dry and black, but which,
after it had been shed, had been smeared about and trampled over; and
this in one place was horribly evident, for close up to the side, quite
plain, there was the imprint of a bare foot--marked in blood--a great
wide-toed foot, that could never have worn a shoe.

"Rather horrid for you, Herrick," said Mr Brooke in a low voice, as if
the traces of death made him solemn; "but you must be a man now.  Look,
my lad, what the devils--the savage devils--have done with our poor
Scotch brothers!"

"Yes, I see," I whispered; "they must have killed them all."

"But I mean this--there, I mean."

I looked at him wonderingly as he pointed to the floor, for I did not
understand.

The next moment, though, I grasped his meaning, and saw plainly enough
what must have happened, for from where we stood to the open stern
windows there were long parallel streaks, and I knew that, though they
were partially trampled out by naked feet, as if they had been passed
over dozens of times since, the savage wretches must have dragged their
victims to the stern windows and thrust them out; any doubt thereon
being cleared away by the state of the lockers and the sills of the
lights.

Just then a peculiar hissing sound came to my ears, and I faced round
quickly, as did Mr Brooke, for I felt startled.

For there behind me was one of our men--a fine handsome Yorkshire lad of
three or four and twenty--standing glaring and showing his set teeth,
and his eyes with the white slightly visible round the iris.  His left
fist was firmly clenched, and in his right was his bare cutlass, with
the blade quivering in his strong hand.

"Put up your cutlass, my lad," said Mr Brooke sternly; and the man
started and thrust it back.  "Wait a bit--but I don't know how I am to
ask you to give quarter to the fiends who did all this.  No wonder the
place is so silent, Herrick," he added bitterly.  "Come away."

He led us out, but not before we had seen that the cabins had been
completely stripped.

We did not stay much longer, but our time was long enough to show us
that everything of value had been taken, and nothing left in the way of
log or papers to tell how the barque had fallen in with the wretches.
The crew had probably been surprised, and after a desperate resistance,
when driven back into the cabin, fought to the last with the results we
had seen.

"But surely they must have killed or wounded some of the pirates?"  I
said.

"Possibly," replied Mr Brooke; "but there has been rain since; perhaps
a heavy sea, too, has washed over the deck and swept away all traces
here.  Let's hope they made some of them pay dearly for their work."

A short inspection below showed that the barque's planking was crushed
in, and that she was hopelessly damaged, even if she could have been got
off, so soon after Mr Brooke gave the word to return to the boat.

"I shall not touch the fire," he said.  "If the captain has any wishes
the boat can return.  For my part I should say, let her burn."

The captain listened with his brow contracted to Mr Brooke's recital,
when we were back on board; I being close at hand, ready to answer a few
questions as well.

"Yes, let her burn," said the captain; and then he turned his back to
us, but seemed to recollect himself directly, for he turned again.

"Thank you, Mr Brooke," he said.  "Very clear and concise.  You could
not have done better."

Then turning to the first lieutenant, he said in a low voice--

"Reardon, I'm at my wit's end.  The wretches are too cunning for us.
What are we to do?"


CHAPTER SEVEN.

BEING PRIMED.

There was a consultation in the cabin that evening, as we lay there
about four miles from the stranded barque.  It had fallen calm, and, as
there was no urgency, the captain preferred to spare the coals, and we
waited for a breeze.

I heard afterwards from Mr Brooke all that took place during the
discussion, during which the captain heard the principal officers'
opinions, and then decided what he would do.

There had been doubts before as to whether we were on the right track
for the pirates, who might be carrying on their murderous business
elsewhere, but the day's discovery had cleared away the last doubt; it
was plain that the information which had sent us up in the neighbourhood
of Amoy was perfectly correct, that the wretches were there, and that
our presence had kept them quiet till now.

The great difficulty, it was decided, lay in the manner of dealing with
people who without doubt had plenty of spies out in native craft, who
were passed unnoticed by us, and thus every movement was carefully
conveyed to the enemy.  As, then, the appearance of the gunboat was
sufficient to keep them in hiding, and also as the moment we were out of
sight the pirates issued from their lair, only two ways of dealing with
the fiends remained to us, and these means, after due consultation, were
to be adopted--one or both.

Then it had been arranged that the next morning at daybreak a couple of
boats were to be despatched to the Scotch barque, for a more thorough
investigation as to whether, in Mr Brooke's rather hurried visit, he
had passed over any cargo worthy of salvage, and to collect material for
a full report for the authorities and the owners.

This had just been decided upon, when there was a shout from one of the
look-out men.  It was quite unnecessary, for nearly every one on deck
saw the cause of the cry.

We three companions had been watching the wreck with its spiral of
smoke, which in the calm air rose up like the trunk of a tall tree, and
then all at once spread out nearly flat to right and left, giving it
quite the appearance of a gigantic cedar.  Then, as one of the witnesses
of the horrors on board, I had had to repeat my story again; and, while
matters were being discussed below, we in a low tone had our debate on
the question, and saw too how the men gathered in knots, and talked in
whispers and watched the barque.  And to us all one thing was evident,
that could our lads only get a chance at the pigtailed, ruffianly scum
of the east coast, it would go pretty hard with them.

"I'll bet many of 'em wouldn't go pirating again in a hurry," Barkins
said; and we agreed.

Then we fell to wondering how many poor creatures had been murdered by
them in their bloodthirsty career, and why it was that there should be
such indifference to death, and so horrible a love of cruelty and
torture, in the Chinese character.  All at once came the shout, and we
were gazing at the cause.

For a bright, clear burst of flame suddenly rose from the direction of
the ship--not an explosion, but a fierce blaze--and it was evident that
the parts around the little fire had grown more and more heated and dry,
and that the smouldering had gone on till some part of the cargo
beneath, of an inflammable nature, had caught at last, and was burning
furiously.

We expected that orders would be given for boats to be lowered, but we
had drifted in the current so far away that there was a risky row
amongst shoals, so no orders were given, the men gathering on deck to
watch the light glow which lit up the cloud of smoke hovering overhead.

We three watched it in silence for some time, with the other officers
near, and at last Smith said--

"I don't think I'm a cruel sort of fellow, but I feel as if I should
like to kill some one now."

He did not say a Chinese pirate, but he meant it; and I must confess to
feeling something of the kind, for I thought how satisfactory it would
be to aim one of our big guns at a pirate junk taken in some cruel act,
and to send a shot between wind and water that would sink her and rid
the seas of some of the fiends.

I quite started the next moment, for Barkins said, in a low, thoughtful
voice--

"How do you feel about it, Gnat?  Shouldn't you like to kill some of
'em?"

The question was so direct, and appealed to my feelings so strongly,
that for some moments I was silent.

"Not he," said Smith; "old Gnat wouldn't stick a pin in a cockroach."

"Of course I wouldn't," I said stoutly, "but I'd crush it under my foot
if I found one in the cabin."

"One for you, Blacksmith," said Barkins.  "Look here, Gnat, you would
like to kill some of the piratical beggars, wouldn't you?"

I remained silent again.

"There," said Smith, "I told you so.  If we caught a lot, Gnat would
give them a lecture, and tell them they had been very naughty, and that
they mustn't do so any more or he would be very angry with them indeed."

"Punch his head, Gnat."

I made no reply to their flippant remarks, for just then I felt very
solemn and thoughtful.  I hope I was not priggish.  No, I am sure I was
not; every word I uttered was too sincere, though they chaffed me
afterwards, and I have thought since that they felt more seriously than
they spoke.

"You chaps didn't go on board that barque," I said quietly; "I did."

"Yes; old Dishy's making a regular favourite of you, Gnat," said
Barkins.

But I went on without heeding, my eyes fixed on the burning vessel whose
flames shone brightly in the clear air.

"And when I saw the splintered wood and chopped doorway, and the smears
and marks of blood, it all seemed to come to me just as it must have
been when the poor fellows shut themselves up in the cabin."

"Did they?" said Smith eagerly.

"Yes, that was plain enough," I said; "and they must have fought it out
there till the pirates got the upper hand."

"I bet tuppence the beggars pitched stinkpots down through the cabin
skylight, and half-smothered them," said Barkins excitedly.

"I daresay they did," I replied thoughtfully, "for I did see one of the
lockers all scorched and burned just by the deck.  Yes, it all seemed to
come to me, and I felt as if I could see all the fighting, with the
Chinamen hacking and chopping at them with their long swords, the same
as those brutes did at us; and all those poor fellows, who were quietly
going about their business, homeward bound with their cargo, must have
had friends, wives or mothers or children; and it gets horrible when you
think of how they must have been in despair, knowing that those wretches
would have no mercy on them."

"Yes, but how it must have made 'em fight," cried Smith.  "I think I
could have done something at a time like that."

"Yes, it would make any fellow fight; even you, Gnat."

"I suppose so," I said, "for it made me feel as if there wasn't any room
in the world for such people."

"There ain't," said Barkins.  "Oh, if our chaps could only get a good go
at 'em!"

"And then I felt," I went on, "as if it couldn't all be real, and that
it was impossible that there could be such wretches on the face of the
earth, ready to kill people for the sake of a bit of plunder."

"But it's just precious possible enough," said Smith slowly.  "Why, out
here in China they do anything."

"Right," said Barkins; "and I hope the skipper will pay them in their
own coin.  My! how she burns."

"Yes," assented Smith, as the barque, after smouldering so long, now
blazed, as if eager to clear away all traces of the horrible tragedy.

"You'll recollect all about that cabin, Gnat, if we do get at the
beggars--won't you?"

"Recollect?"  I said, with a shiver; "I shall never be able to forget
it."

Then we relapsed into silence, and stood resting our arms over the
bulwarks, gazing at the distant fire, in which I could picture plainly
all the horrors and suggestions of the wrecked cabin.  I even seemed to
see the yellow-faced wretches, all smeared with blood, dragging their
victims to the stern windows.  And my imagination then ran riot for a
time, as I fancied I saw them seizing men not half-dead, but making a
feeble struggle for their lives, and begging in agonising tones for
mercy, but only to be struck again, and pitched out into the sea.

I fancy that I must have been growing half hysterical as the scene grew
and grew before me, till I had pictured one poor wretch clinging in his
despair to the edge of the stern window, and shrieking for help.  There
was a curious sensation as if a ball was rising in my throat to choke
me, and I was forgetting where I stood, when I was brought back to
myself by the voice of my messmate Smith, who said in a husky whisper--

"Think we shall come across any of the poor fellows floating about?"

"Not likely," replied Barkins.  "Too many sharks in these seas."

My throat felt dry at this horrible suggestion, but I knew how true it
was.  And then once more there was silence, and, like the rest--officers
and men--we stood there watching the burning wreck hour after hour, not
a soul on board feeling the slightest disposition to go below.

It must have been quite a couple of hours later, when I started in the
darkness, for something touched my arm, and, looking sharply to my
right, I could just make out the figure of Ching close to me, while on
looking in the other direction I found that I was alone, for Barkins and
Smith had gone forward to a group close to the bows.

"You, Ching?"  I said, "looking at the mischief your friends have done?"

"Fliends burnee ship?  No fliends.  Velly bad men.  Ching feel allee
shame.  Velly bad men evelywhere.  Killee, get dollar.  No velly bad
men, London?"

"I'm afraid there are," I said sadly.

"Yes; velly bad men, London.  Killee get dollar.  You choppee off bad
men head?"

"No," I said; "but they kill them if they commit murder."

"Commit murder?  You mean killee get dollar?"

"Yes."

"Allee light.  Plenty bad men evelywhere.  Captain going kill pilate?"

"If we can catch them," I said.

"Yes, velly hard catchee catchee.  Captain never catchee in ship.
Pilate allee lun away.  'Flaid of big gun.  Get two big junk, put plenty
sailor boy where pilate can't see.  Then pilate come along kill and
burnee.  Junk steal all along.  Jolly sailor jump up and cut allee
pilate head off."

"Send that boy forward!" cried a stern voice, which made me jump again.
"Who's that?"

"Herrick, sir," I said, touching my cap, for the captain came forward
out of the darkness.

"Then you ought to know better, sir.  The scoundrel has no business in
this part of the ship.  What does he want?"

"I beg pardon, sir; he came up to propose a way of trapping the
pirates."

"Eh, what?" said the captain eagerly.  "Bah! absurd.  Send him below; I
hate to see the very face of a Chinaman.  No; stop!  He ought to know
something of their tricks.  What does he say?"

I told him, and he stood there as if thinking.

"Well, I don't know, Mr Herrick.  We might perhaps lure them out of
their hiding-places in that way, with a couple of Chinese crews to work
the junks.  But no; the wretches would be equally strong, and would
fight like rats.  Too many of my poor lads would be cut down.  They
would have us at a terrible disadvantage.  We must keep to the ship.  I
can only fight these wretches with guns."

He was turning away, when a thought struck me, and, forgetting my awe of
the captain, and the fact that a proposal from a midshipman to such a
magnate might be resented as an unheard-of piece of impertinence, I
exclaimed excitedly--

"I beg pardon, sir."

"Yes?"

"I think I know how it could be done."

"Eh?  You, Mr Herrick!  Pooh!  Stop," he said sharply, as, feeling
completely abashed, I was shrinking away, when he laid his hand kindly
on my shoulder.  "Let's hear what you mean, my boy.  The mouse did help
the lion in the fable, didn't he?"

"Yes, sir."

"Not that I consider myself a lion, Mr Herrick," he said
good-humouredly, "and I will not insult you by calling you a mouse; but
these Chinese fiends are too much for me, and I really am caught in the
net.  Here, send that man forward, and come into my cabin."

"Ching, go right up to the forecastle," I said.

"No wantee go s'eep," he said angrily.  "Makee Ching bad see ship
burned."

"Never mind now; go and wait," I whispered; and he nodded and went off,
while I walked hurriedly back to the captain, who led the way to his
cabin.

Before I had gone many steps I had to pass Smith, who came quickly up to
me.

"Hallo! old chap," he whispered, "what have you been up to now?  Wigging
from the skipper?  I'll go and tell the Tanner, and we'll get clean
handkerchiefs for a good cry."


CHAPTER EIGHT.

MY PLAN.

"Shut the door, Mr Herrick," said the captain, as he threw himself into
a chair, and I obeyed and remained standing there.

"Come close up to the table, my lad, and I'll hear what you have to say,
for I should be sorry to discourage a young officer who was in earnest
about his profession, as I have noted that you seem to be."

"Thank you, sir," I faltered, as I walked forward to where the swinging
lamp cast its full light on my face, making my eyes ache, after being so
many hours in the darkness, while I noticed that the captain sat in the
shade.

"Now, Mr Herrick," he said, "I talked of one fable, let me say a word
about another.  I hope this is not going to be a case of the mountain in
labour, and out crept a mouse."

This put me quite out of heart, my hands grew damp, and I felt a
tickling sensation of dew forming upon my temples and at the sides of my
nose.  My throat felt dry, and my lips parted, but no words came.

"There, there," he said kindly, "don't be afraid.  Speak out."

"Yes, sir," I said hastily.  "It was only this.  I think I read
somewhere once, in a paper, about a Malay prahu being taken by the
captain of a ship pretending to be helpless, and this made the prahu,
which could sail twice as fast as his ship, come close up to attack
him."

"Yes; and what then?"

"The captain sunk the prahu, sir."

"Humph!" said Captain Thwaites, frowning and leaning back in his chair.
"That's what I should like to do to the piratical junks, Mr Herrick.
But--"

He stopped, and I saw that he was watching me keenly.  But he had not
ordered me out of the cabin, nor called me an impertinent puppy, so I
felt better.  The plunge had been made, and I waited not quite so
nervously for his next words.

"Yes--what I should like to do, Mr Herrick; but I am dealing with
cunning Chinese, and not with bold Malays."

"No, sir," I said; "but could not we--you--I mean we--I mean--" I
stammered.

"Come, come, Mr Herrick, there is no need for all this tremor.  Sit
down, my lad."

"Thank you, sir; I would rather stand, please.  I think I could talk
better."

"Very well, then," he said, smiling; "stand.  You have some notion in
your head, then?"

"Yes, sir," I said eagerly, for the nervousness all passed away in the
excitement I felt.  Scena Secunda.

Enter Prospero and Miranda.

Mira.

If by your Art (my deerest father) you haue Put the wild waters in this
Rore; alay them:
The skye it seemes would powre down stinking pitch, But that the
Sea, mounting to th' welkins cheeke, Dashes the fire out.

Oh! I haue suffered With those that I saw suffer: A braue vessell
(Who had no doubt some noble creature in her) Dash'd all to peeces: O
the cry did knocke Against my very heart: poore soules, they
perish'd.

Had I byn any God of power, I would Haue suncke the Sea within the
Earth, or ere It should the good Ship so haue swallow'd, and The
fraughting Soules within her 
Pros.

Be collected, No more amazement: Tell your pitteous heart there's
no harme done 
Mira.

O woe, the day

Pros. No harme:
I haue done nothing, but in care of thee (Of thee my deere one;
thee my daughter) who Art ignorant of what thou art. naught knowing
Of whence I am: nor that I am more better Then Prospero, Master of
a full poore cell, And thy no greater Father 
Mira.

More to know Did neuer medle with my thoughts 
Pros.

'Tis time I should informe thee farther: Lend thy hand And plucke
my Magick garment from me: So, Lye there my Art: wipe thou thine eyes,
haue comfort, The direfull spectacle of the wracke which touch'd
The very vertue of compassion in thee:
I haue with such prouision in mine Art So safely ordered, that there
is no soule No not so much perdition as an hayre Betid to any
creature in the vessell Which thou heardst cry, which thou saw'st
sinke: Sit downe, For thou must now know farther 
Mira.

You haue often Begun to tell me what I am, but stopt And left me to a
bootelesse Inquisition, Concluding, stay: not yet 
Pros.

The howr's now come The very minute byds thee ope thine eare, Obey, and
be attentiue. Canst thou remember A time before we came vnto this
Cell?

I doe not thinke thou canst, for then thou was't not Out three
yeeres old 
Mira.

Certainely Sir, I can
Pros. By what? by any other house, or person?
Of any thing the Image, tell me, that Hath kept with thy remembrance
Mira. 'Tis farre off:

And rather like a dreame, then an assurance That my remembrance
warrants: Had I not Fowre, or fiue women once, that tended me?

Pros. Thou hadst; and more Miranda: But how is it That this liues in
thy minde? What seest thou els In the dark-backward and Abisme of
Time?

Yf thou remembrest ought ere thou cam'st here, How thou cam'st here thou
maist

Mira. But that I doe not
Pros. Twelue yere since (Miranda) twelue yere since, Thy father was the
Duke of Millaine and A Prince of power:

Mira.

Sir, are not you my Father?

Pros. Thy Mother was a peece of vertue, and She said thou wast my daughter;
and thy father Was Duke of Millaine, and his onely heire, And
Princesse; no worse Issued 
Mira.

O the heauens, What fowle play had we, that we came from thence?

Or blessed was't we did?

Pros. Both, both my Girle.

By fowle-play (as thou saist) were we heau'd thence, But blessedly
holpe hither 
Mira.

O my heart bleedes To thinke oth' teene that I haue turn'd you to,
Which is from my remembrance, please you, farther; 
Pros.

My brother and thy vncle, call'd Anthonio:
I pray thee marke me, that a brother should Be so perfidious: he,
whom next thy selfe Of all the world I lou'd, and to him put The
mannage of my state, as at that time Through all the signories it
was the first, And Prospero, the prime Duke, being so reputed In
dignity; and for the liberall Artes, Without a paralell; those being
all my studie, The Gouernment I cast vpon my brother, And to my
State grew stranger, being transported And rapt in secret studies,
thy false vncle (Do'st thou attend me?)

Mira.

Sir, most heedefully

Pros. Being once perfected how to graunt suites, how to deny them: who
t' aduance, and who To trash for ouer-topping; new created The
creatures that were mine, I say, or chang'd 'em, Or els new form'd
'em; hauing both the key, Of Officer, and office, set all hearts
i'th state To what tune pleas'd his eare, that now he was The Iuy
which had hid my princely Trunck, And suckt my verdure out on't:
Thou attend'st not?

Mira. O good Sir, I doe

Pros. I pray thee marke me:

I thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated To closenes, and the
bettering of my mind with that, which but by being so retir'd
Ore-priz'd all popular rate: in my false brother Awak'd an euill
nature, and my trust Like a good parent, did beget of him A falsehood
in it's contrarie, as great As my trust was, which had indeede no
limit, A confidence sans bound.

He being thus Lorded, Not onely with what my reuenew yeelded, But
what my power might els exact.

Like one Who hauing into truth, by telling of it, Made such
a synner of his memorie To credite his owne lie, he did beleeue He
was indeed the Duke, out o'th' Substitution And executing th' outward
face of Roialtie With all prerogatiue: hence his Ambition growing:
Do'st thou heare ?

Mira. Your tale, Sir, would cure deafenesse

Pros. To haue no Schreene between this part he plaid, And him he plaid
it for, he needes will be Absolute Millaine, Me (poore man) my
Librarie Was Dukedome large enough: of temporall roalties He thinks
me now incapable.

Confederates (so drie he was for Sway) with King of Naples To giue
him Annuall tribute, doe him homage Subiect his Coronet, to his
Crowne and bend The Dukedom yet vnbow'd (alas poore Millaine) To
most ignoble stooping 
Mira.

Oh the heauens:

Pros. Marke his condition, and th' euent, then tell me If this might be a
brother

Mira. I should sinne To thinke but Noblie of my Grand-mother, Good
wombes haue borne bad sonnes 
Pro.

Now the Condition.

This King of Naples being an Enemy To me inueterate, hearkens my
Brothers suit, Which was, That he in lieu o'th' premises, Of homage,
and I know not how much Tribute, Should presently extirpate me and
mine Out of the Dukedome, and confer faire Millaine With all the
Honors, on my brother: Whereon A treacherous Armie leuied, one
mid-night Fated to th' purpose, did Anthonio open The gates of
Millaine, and ith' dead of darkenesse The ministers for th' purpose
hurried thence Me, and thy crying selfe 
Mir.

Alack, for pitty:
I not remembring how I cride out then Will cry it ore againe: it
is a hint That wrings mine eyes too't 
Pro.

Heare a little further, And then I'le bring thee to the present
businesse Which now's vpon's: without the which, this Story Were
most impertinent 
Mir.

Wherefore did they not That howre destroy vs?

Pro.

Well demanded, wench:
My Tale prouokes that question: Deare, they durst not, So deare the
loue my people bore me: nor set A marke so bloudy on the businesse;
but With colours fairer, painted their foule ends.

In few, they hurried vs aboord a Barke, Bore vs some Leagues to
Sea, where they prepared A rotten carkasse of a Butt, not rigg'd,
Nor tackle, sayle, nor mast, the very rats Instinctiuely haue quit
it: There they hoyst vs To cry to th' Sea, that roard to vs; to
sigh To th' windes, whose pitty sighing backe againe Did vs but
louing wrong 
Mir.

Alack, what trouble Was I then to you?

Pro.

O, a Cherubin Thou was't that did preserue me; Thou didst smile, Infused
with a fortitude from heauen, When I haue deck'd the sea with drops
full salt, Vnder my burthen groan'd, which rais'd in me An vndergoing
stomacke, to beare vp Against what should ensue 
Mir.

How came we a shore?

Pro. By prouidence diuine, Some food, we had, and some fresh water,
that A noble Neopolitan Gonzalo Out of his Charity, (who being
then appointed Master of this designe) did giue vs, with Rich
garments, linnens, stuffs, and necessaries Which since haue steeded
much, so of his gentlenesse Knowing I lou'd my bookes, he furnishd
me From mine owne Library, with volumes, that I prize aboue my
Dukedome 
Mir.

Would I might But euer see that man
Pro. Now I arise, Sit still, and heare the last of our sea-sorrow:

Heere in this Iland we arriu'd, and heere Haue I, thy Schoolemaster,
made thee more profit Then other Princesse can, that haue more time For
vainer howres; and Tutors, not so carefull
Mir. Heuens thank you for't.

And now I pray you Sir, For still 'tis beating in my minde; your
reason For raysing this Sea-storme?

Pro. Know thus far forth, By accident most strange, bountifull Fortune
(Now my deere Lady) hath mine enemies Brought to this shore: And by my
prescience I finde my Zenith doth depend vpon A most auspitious starre,
whose influence If now I court not, but omit; my fortunes Will
euer after droope: Heare cease more questions, Thou art inclinde
to sleepe: 'tis a good dulnesse, And giue it way: I know thou canst
not chuse:
Come away, Seruant, come; I am ready now, Approach my Ariel.

Come.

Enter Ariel.

Ari. All haile, great Master, graue Sir, haile: I come To answer thy
best pleasure; be't to fly, To swim, to diue into the fire: to
ride On the curld clowds: to thy strong bidding, taske Ariel, and
all his Qualitie 
Pro.

Hast thou, Spirit, Performd to point, the Tempest that I bad thee
Ar. To euery Article.

I boorded the Kings ship: now on the Beake, Now in the Waste, the Decke,
in euery Cabyn, I flam'd amazement, sometime I'ld diuide And burne
in many places; on the Top-mast, The Yards and Bore-spritt, would
I flame distinctly, Then meete, and ioyne.

Ioues Lightning, the precursers O'th dreadfull Thunder-claps more
momentarie And sight out-running were not; the fire, and cracks
Of sulphurous roaring, the most mighty Neptune Seeme to besiege,
and make his bold waues tremble, Yea, his dread Trident shake 
Pro.

My braue Spirit, Who was so firme, so constant, that this coyle Would
not infect his reason?

Ar.

Not a soule But felt a Feauer of the madde, and plaid Some tricks
of desperation; all but Mariners Plung'd in the foaming bryne, and
quit the vessell; Then all a fire with me the Kings sonne Ferdinand
With haire vp-staring (then like reeds, not haire) Was the first
man that leapt; cride hell is empty, And all the Diuels are heere
Pro.

Why that's my spirit:

But was not this nye shore?

Ar. Close by, my Master

Pro. But are they (Ariell) safe?

Ar. Not a haire perishd:

On their sustaining garments not a blemish, But fresher then before:
and as thou badst me, In troops I haue dispersd them 'bout the
Isle:
The Kings sonne haue I landed by himselfe, Whom I left cooling of
the Ayre with sighes, In an odde Angle of the Isle, and sitting His
armes in this sad knot 
Pro.

Of the Kings ship, The Marriners, say how thou hast disposd, And
all the rest o'th' Fleete?

Ar.

Safely in harbour Is the Kings shippe, in the deepe Nooke, where once Thou
calldst me vp at midnight to fetch dewe From the still-vext
Bermoothes, there she's hid; The Marriners all vnder hatches stowed,
Who, with a Charme ioynd to their suffred labour I haue left asleep:
and for the rest o'th' Fleet (Which I dispers'd) they all haue met
againe, And are vpon the Mediterranian Flote Bound sadly home for
Naples, Supposing that they saw the Kings ship wrackt, And his great
person perish 
Pro.

Ariel, thy charge Exactly is perform'd; but there's more worke:
What is the time o'th' day?

Ar. Past the mid season

Pro. At least two Glasses: the time 'twixt six & now Must by vs both
be spent most preciously
Ar.

Is there more toyle? Since y dost giue me pains, Let me remember thee
what thou hast promis'd, Which is not yet perform'd me
Pro. How now? moodie?
What is't thou canst demand?

Ar. My Libertie
Pro. Before the time be out? no more:

Ar. I prethee, Remember I haue done thee worthy seruice, Told thee no
lyes, made thee no mistakings, serv'd Without or grudge, or grumblings;
thou did promise To bate me a full yeere
Pro.

Do'st thou forget From what a torment I did free thee?

Ar. No

Pro. Thou do'st: & thinkst it much to tread y Ooze Of the salt deepe;
To run vpon the sharpe winde of the North, To doe me businesse in
the veines o'th' earth When it is bak'd with frost 
Ar.

I doe not Sir

Pro. Thou liest, malignant Thing: hast thou forgot The fowle Witch
Sycorax, who with Age and Enuy Was growne into a hoope?

hast thou forgot her?

Ar. No Sir

Pro. Thou hast: where was she born? speak: tell me:

Ar. Sir, in Argier

Pro. Oh, was she so: I must Once in a moneth recount what thou hast bin,
Which thou forgetst. This damn'd Witch Sycorax For mischiefes manifold,
and sorceries terrible To enter humane hearing, from Argier Thou
know'st was banish'd: for one thing she did They wold not take her
life: Is not this true?

Ar. I, Sir
Pro. This blew ey'd hag, was hither brought with child, And here was left
by th' Saylors; thou my slaue, As thou reportst thy selfe, was then her
seruant, And for thou wast a Spirit too delicate To act her earthy, and
abhord commands, Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee
By helpe of her more potent Ministers, And in her most vnmittigable
rage, Into a clouen Pyne, within which rift Imprison'd, thou didst
painefully remaine A dozen yeeres: within which space she di'd, And
left thee there: where thou didst vent thy groanes As fast as
Mill-wheeles strike: Then was this Island (Saue for the Son, that
he did littour heere, A frekelld whelpe, hag-borne) not honour'd
with A humane shape 
Ar.

Yes: Caliban her sonne 
Pro.

Dull thing, I say so: he, that Caliban Whom now I keepe in seruice,
thou best know'st What torment I did finde thee in; thy grones Did
make wolues howle, and penetrate the breasts Of euer-angry Beares;
it was a torment To lay vpon the damn'd, which Sycorax Could not
againe vndoe: it was mine Art, When I arriu'd, and heard thee, that
made gape The Pyne, and let thee out 
Ar.

I thanke thee Master
Pro. If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an Oake And peg-thee in
his knotty entrailes, till Thou hast howl'd away twelue winters
Ar.

Pardon, Master, I will be correspondent to command And doe my
spryting, gently 
Pro.

Doe so: and after two daies I will discharge thee
Ar. That's my noble Master:
What shall I doe? say what? what shall I doe?

Pro. Goe make thy selfe like a Nymph o'th' Sea, Be subiect to no sight
but thine, and mine: inuisible To euery eye-ball else: goe take this
shape And hither come in't: goe: hence With diligence.

Enter.

Pro.

Awake, deere hart awake, thou hast slept well, Awake
Mir.

The strangenes of your story, put Heauinesse in me 
Pro.

Shake it off: Come on, Wee'll visit Caliban, my slaue, who neuer
Yeelds vs kinde answere 
Mir.

'Tis a villaine Sir, I doe not loue to looke on 
Pro.

But as 'tis We cannot misse him: he do's make our fire, Fetch in our
wood, and serues in Offices That profit vs: What hoa: slaue: Caliban:
Thou Earth, thou: speake
Cal. within. There's wood enough within
Pro.

Come forth I say, there's other busines for thee:

Come thou Tortoys, when?

Enter Ariel like a water Nymph.

Fine apparision: my queint Ariel, Hearke in thine eare 
Ar.

My Lord, it shall be done.

Enter.

Pro.

Thou poysonous slaue, got by y diuell himselfe Vpon thy wicked Dam; come
forth.

Enter Caliban.

Cal.

As wicked dewe, as ere my mother brush'd With Rauens feather from
vnwholesome Fen Drop on you both: A Southwest blow on yee, And
blister you all ore 
Pro.

For this be sure, to night thou shalt haue cramps, Side-stitches,
that shall pen thy breath vp, Vrchins Shall for that vast of night,
that they may worke All exercise on thee: thou shalt be pinch'd As
thicke as hony-combe, each pinch more stinging Then Bees that made
'em 
Cal.

I must eat my dinner:

This Island's mine by Sycorax my mother, Which thou tak'st from me:
when thou cam'st first Thou stroakst me, & made much of me: wouldst
giue me Water with berries in't: and teach me how To name the bigger
Light, and how the lesse That burne by day, and night: and then I
lou'd thee And shew'd thee all the qualities o'th' Isle, The fresh
Springs, Brine-pits; barren place and fertill, Curs'd be I that did
so: All the Charmes Of Sycorax: Toades, Beetles, Batts light on
you:
For I am all the Subiects that you haue, Which first was min owne
King: and here you sty-me In this hard Rocke, whiles you doe keepe
from me The rest o'th' Island 
Pro.

Thou most lying slaue, Whom stripes may moue, not kindnes: I haue
vs'd thee (Filth as thou art) with humane care, and lodg'd thee In
mine owne Cell, till thou didst seeke to violate The honor of my
childe 
Cal.

Oh ho, oh ho, would't had bene done:
Thou didst preuent me, I had peopel'd else This Isle with Calibans
Mira.

Abhorred Slaue, Which any print of goodnesse wilt not take, Being
capable of all ill: I pittied thee, Took pains to make thee speak,
taught thee each houre One thing or other: when thou didst not
(Sauage) Know thine owne meaning; but wouldst gabble, like A thing
most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes With words that made them
knowne: But thy vild race (Tho thou didst learn) had that in't,
which good natures Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
Deseruedly confin'd into this Rocke, who hadst Deseru'd more then
a prison 
Cal.

You taught me Language, and my profit on't Is, I know how to curse:
the red-plague rid you For learning me your language 
Pros.

Hag-seed, hence:
Fetch vs in Fewell, and be quicke thou'rt best To answer other businesse:
shrug'st thou (Malice) If thou neglectst, or dost vnwillingly What I
command, Ile racke thee with old Crampes, Fill all thy bones with
Aches, make thee rore, That beasts shall tremble at thy dyn 
Cal.

I want to have twenty men looking like a Chinese crew by
to-morrow."

"Come along, Ching."

"Yes," he said.  "Do it velly well.  Chinese pilate velly cunning
fellow.  You go gettee two junk, put men on board."

"You go and get the men ready," said Mr Reardon shortly.  "That will
do."

Directly after I had Ching supplied from the purser's stores with plenty
of fine oakum and a couple of bottles of ink.  This latter he made
boiling hot and poured over the oakum, hanging it to dry by the cook's
fire; and while he was doing this I arranged with the cook to have a
bucket of tallow and whiting mixed ready for use when required, so that
then all necessary would be to warm it up.

I was just going aft again when "Herrick" was shouted, and I turned, to
see Barkins and Smith coming after me.  But Mr Reardon heard the hail,
and came striding after us.

"You leave Mr Herrick to the business he is on, young gentlemen, and
attend to your own," he cried.  "Go on, Mr Herrick.  This is no time
for gossiping."

I hurried off, and began my next task, that of selecting twenty men
without beards; and there was no difficulty, for I soon picked sixteen
and four big lads, upon whose heads the ship's barber was set to work to
cut the hair pretty short, the men submitting with an excellent grace,
Jack being ready enough to engage in anything fresh, and such as would
relieve the monotony of shipboard life.

They were ready enough to ask questions, but I had nothing to tell; and
the preparations went merrily on, but not without my having learned that
we were steaming right away out of sight of land.

But long before we had reached this pitch, I found that orders had been
given, and the men were busy up aloft, lowering down the main-topgallant
mast, and then laying the maintop mast all askew, as if it were snapped
off at the top.  After which the yards were altered from their perfect
symmetry to hang anyhow, as if the ship were commanded by a careless
captain.  The engine was set to work to squirt water thickened with
cutch, and the beautiful white sails were stained in patches, and then
roughly furled.

Towards evening, when the sea appeared to be without a sail in sight, we
lay-to; platforms were got over the side, and men hung over with their
paint-pots and brushes, working with all their might to paint out the
streak, while others smeared over the gilding and name at the stern, but
with a thin water-colour which would easily wash off.

Then came the turn of the great funnel, which was painted of a dirty
black.  The bright brass rails were dulled, ropes hung loosely, and in
every way possible the trim gunboat was disfigured and altered, so that
at a short distance even it would have been impossible to recognise her
as the smart vessel that had started from the neighbourhood of the
burned ship so short a time before.

But even then Mr Reardon did not seem to be satisfied, for he set the
men to work hauling water casks from the hold, and make a pile of them
amidships.  Lastly, a couple of the boats were turned bottom upward on
improvised chocks placed over the deck-house and galley.

I have not mentioned the guns, though.  These were completely hidden,
the lesser pieces being drawn back, and spare sails thrown over the two
big guns forward.

"There," said Mr Reardon quietly to me; "what do you say to that, Mr
Herrick?  Think this will deceive them?"

"There's one more thing I should do, sir," I said, as I looked aloft.

"One more?  Nonsense; there is nothing more to be done."

"Yes, sir," I said, smiling; "I'd have some shirts and trousers hung up
in the rigging to dry, just as if the men had been having a wash."

"To be sure," he cried.  "What else?"

"It wouldn't be bad if we could catch a few big fish, and let them be
hanging over the stern rail as if to keep them fresh."

"I'll set Mr Barkins and Mr Smith to try and catch some," he said
eagerly.  "The idea's splendid, my lad; and if it turns out to be
successful, I'll--there, I don't know what I won't do for you."

Soon after, I had the pleasure of seeing a lot of the men's garments
hung on a couple of lines in the rigging, and Barkins and Smith hard at
work fishing, in which they were so wonderfully successful that I longed
to go and join them; but I was too busy over my task of disguising the
twenty sailors, and consequently my two messmates had all the sport to
themselves, dragging in, every few minutes, an abundance of good-sized
fishes, which were at last strung upon a piece of stout line and hung
over the stern rail.

That night the crew were all in an intense state of excitement, and
roars of laughter saluted my party of sham Chinamen, some of whom were
paraded in the newly-made frocks, two being in the full dress of
whitened head and pigtail, and looked so exactly like the real thing at
a short distance that no doubt was felt as to the success of this part
of the proceedings.

Officers and men had been a little puzzled at first, but in a very short
time they were all talking about the cleverness of the "captain's
dodge," as they called it; and the low spirits of the morning gave place
to eager talk about the adventures which all felt sure must come now.

The ship's head had been turned and laid for the islands we had so
lately left; but our progress was purposely made exceedingly slow, the
screw just revolving, and the water parting with a gentle ripple to
right and left.

Meanwhile the tailor and his mates were hard at work by the light of the
swinging lanterns, and, upon my being sent by Mr Reardon to make
inquiries, the tailor answered that he should be up to time with the
twenty Chinee gownds, and went on stitching again as if for his very
life.

I was on the watch that night, and stood listening for long enough to
the yarns of one of the men, who had not been in Chinese waters before,
but "knowed a chap as had;" and he had some blood-curdling tales to tell
of the cruelties perpetrated by the desperate gangs who haunted the
coast in fast-sailing junks.

"But they're an awfully cowardly lot, arn't they, Billy?" said another.

"Well," said the man, "it's like this, messmet; they is and they arn't,
if you can make that out.  They'll scuttle away like rats if they can;
but if they can't, they'll fight that savage that nothing's like it; and
if it is to come to a fight, all I've got to say is, as the chap as
hasn't got his cutlash as sharp as ever it can be made 'll be very sorry
for it."

"Oh, I don't know," said another; "there won't be much cutlashing;
'tain't like it used to was in the old days.  Most everything's done
with the big guns now; and if they do get alongside to board, why, a
man's cutlash is always stuck at the end of his rifle, just as if it was
a jolly's bag'net growed out o' knowledge, and then it's all spick and
spike."

"Maybe," said the man; "but you mark my words, they're a nasty lot when
they gets wild, and you'll have to look pretty sharp if you don't want
to get hurt."

It was not cheering, after a very wearying day and a very short night
before, to listen to such talk, and I began to wonder whether the
captain would take sufficient precautions to keep the Chinese off, for I
felt that to properly carry out the plan, the fighting men must be kept
well out of sight till the very last; but I soon came to the conclusion
that I need not worry about that, from the spirited way in which
everything possible to disguise the ship had been done.

Then, as I leaned over the side looking over the black water, in which a
faint star could be seen from time to time, I began to smile to myself
at the quiet, dry way in which my ideas had been taken up; but I frowned
directly after, as I thought of what a little credit I was getting for
it all, and that the captain or Mr Reardon might have said an
encouraging word or two to show that they appreciated my efforts.

It was laughable, too, the way in which I had heard the captain's dodge
discussed by Barkins and Smith, who never once associated my summons to
the cabin with all that had been done.

The time was going along slowly, and I was beginning to feel very
drowsy, so I had a walk up and down a few times, and then came suddenly
upon something like a big bundle under the weather bulwark.

"Why, Ching," I said, "you here?"

"Yes; velly hot down below, no sleepee sleepee.  Come on deck, nicee
cool.  You have fightee morrow?"

"I hope so," I said; but asked myself the next moment whether I really
did hope so.

"Velly bad fightee, bad pilates come, and captain killee whole lot.
Allee velly bad man, killee evelybody."

"Do you think they will come out of hiding?"

"Ching don'tee know.  Ching thinkee muchee so.  Now go sleepee.  Velly
much tire."

He curled himself up, drawing his tail round out of the way, and seemed
to go off directly; while I rejoined the officer of the watch, who
happened to be Mr Brooke, and we walked right forward to the bows, and
saw that the men were keeping a bright look-out.

"Well, Herrick," he said, "got your dirk sharp?"

"No," I said.  "Don't laugh at me, please, Mr Brooke."

"Oh no, I will not laugh at you, my lad," he said; "but as it is quite
likely that we may have a bit of a scrimmage to-morrow, if the
scoundrels are lured out of their holes, and grow desperate on finding
that they have made a mistake, you had better keep out of the way."

"But--"

"Oh yes, I know what you are going to say; but you are very young yet,
and what chance would you have against a great strong savage Chinaman--
for there are plenty of powerful fellows among these scoundrels.  You
must wait a bit before you take to fighting."

I felt uncomfortable.  He seemed to be looking down upon me so, in spite
of my being an officer; but I could not boast of my strength, and
remained silent for a time.

"Do you think they are likely to get on board, sir?"

"Oh no," he said.  "We shall not give them a chance.  Once the captain
is sure that they are the pirates, if we are lucky enough to lure them
well out from the shore, the men will be ordered up to the guns, and we
shall give them a few broadsides, and sink them."

"It sounds horrid, sir," I said.  "Then they'll never have a chance to
fight us?"

"Not if we can help it, my lad.  But, as you say, it does sound horrid,
and rather cowardly; but what would you do with a poisonous snake?  You
would not give it a chance to strike at you first, if you met it and had
a loaded gun in your hands?"

"Of course not, sir," I said quickly.

"Well, these wretches are as dangerous as venomous serpents, and, after
what you saw on board that barque, you do not think we need be squeamish
about ridding the earth of such monsters?"

"No, sir, not a bit," I said quickly.

"Neither do I, Herrick.  I should like to aim the gun that sends a shot
through them between wind and water."

"Light on the port bow!" announced the look-out forward; and, upon using
his night-glass, Mr Brooke made out the vessel, which showed the light
to be a large junk, with her enormous matting-sails spread, and gliding
along faster than we were, and in the same direction.

As we watched the light, it gradually grew fainter, and finally
disappeared, while all through our watch the screw kept on its slow
motion, just sending the gunboat onward.

Toward what?  I asked myself several times; and, in spite of my
determination to acquit myself manfully if we did go into action, I
could not help hoping that the next night would find us all as safe as
we were then.  But all the same the thoughts of our preparations were
well in my mind, and never once did I hope that we should not encounter
the enemy.

All the same, though, when my watch was at an end and I went below,
perhaps it was owing to its being so hot, as Ching said, for it was a
long time before I could get off to sleep.


CHAPTER TEN.

THE ENEMY.

"Oh, I say, do wake up and come on deck.  It's such a lark."

"What is?"  I said, rolling out of the berth, with my head feeling all
confused and strange, to stare at Barkins.

"Why, everything.  You never saw such a miserable old rag-bag of a ship
in your life."

I hurriedly dressed and went on deck, to find the preparations complete,
and I could not help thinking that, if the pirates mistook the _Teaser_
for a man-of-war now, they must be clever indeed.

For on the previous day I had only seen the alterations in bits, so to
speak, but now everything was done, even to having a quantity of coal on
deck, and the clean white planks besmirched with the same black fuel.
The paint-pots had altered everything; the figure-head was hidden with
tarpaulin; the rigging, instead of being all ataunto, was what Smith
called "nine bobble square," and one sail had been taken down and
replaced by an old one very much tattered, so that up aloft we looked as
if we had been having a taste of one of the typhoons which visit the
Chinese seas.  These preparations, with the men's clothes hanging to
dry, the boats badly hauled up to the davits, and the fish hanging over
the stern (after the fashion practised in west-country fishing-boats),
completely altered the aspect of everything.  Then I found that the
officers were all in tweeds, with yachting or shooting caps; the bulk of
the crew below, and my twenty men and lads all carefully got up with
painted heads and pigtails complete, under the charge of Ching, who was
bustling about importantly, and he came to me at once and began
whispering--

"Captain say, Ching takee care allee men, and show himself evelywhere."

"Yes, of course," I said.  "Yes.  You wanted to say something?"

"Yes, Ching want say something."

"Well, what is it?  Quick, I must go."

"Ching want you tell sailor boy be velly careful.  Take care of Ching
when pilate come."

"All right," I said; "but they haven't come yet."

"Think big junk pilate."

"Which one? where?"  I said.

He pointed forward to where, about five miles off the lee-bow, a great
junk was slowly sailing in the same direction as we were.

"Is that the one which passed us in the night?"  I said.

"Yes."

"Why do you think she is a pirate?"

"Ching tink why she no sail light away and not stop while man-o'-war
clawl along velly slow.  You tellee captain."

I nodded, and found that there was no need, for the captain was
carefully observing the junk from where he was hidden by a pile of
casks, and Mr Reardon was with him.

"Here, Mr Herrick," he cried, "your eyes are young.  Have a look at
that junk.  Take your uniform cap off, my lad, and, as soon as you have
done, take off your jacket and put on a coloured suit."

I had a good look through the glass at the junk, and made my report.

"I think it's only a big trader, sir," I said.  "Looks like the boats we
saw at Amoy, and as if she were going up to Wanghai."

"Yes, that's it, I think," said Captain Thwaites to Mr Reardon.  Then
he sharply turned to me and gave me a dry look.  "Well, Mr Herrick, you
see I have taken your advice, and put my ship in this disgraceful
state."

"Yes, sir," I said eagerly; "and I hope it will prove successful."

"So do I," he said drily.  "That will do, Herrick.  Now, Mr Reardon, I
think we will keep on just as we are, just about four knots an hour.  It
gives the idea of our being in trouble; and if we keep on close outside
the islands, it may draw the scoundrels--that is, if they are there."

"Yes, sir, if they are there," said the lieutenant.

"How long do you reckon it will take us to get abreast of the reef where
that barque lay?"

"We ought to be there by noon, sir, I should say."

"That will do.  We shall seem to be making for Wanghai."

I heard no more, but went below, and directly after breakfast reappeared
in white flannels and a cricketing cap, a transformation which satisfied
the first lieutenant, but displeased Barkins and Smith, who had orders
to keep below in uniform.

"I hate so much favouritism," grumbled Barkins.  "Who are you, Gnat?
You're our junior; and here are we kept below, and my lord you parading
about the deck, and seeing everything."

"Why, you're in the reserve," I said banteringly, "and will have all the
fighting to do."

"Who wants all the fighting to do?" cried Smith.  "I don't.  I suppose
if we do take a lot of pirate junks, you'll be promoted, and we shan't
get a word."

"Stuff!"  I said.  "How can I get promoted?"

"But I want to know why you're to be picked out," cried Barkins.

"Go and ask the skipper," I said.  "Now, look here both of you; if
you're not civil, I won't come and report everything.  If you are, I'll
come down as often as I can to tell you all that is going on."

"Oh then, I suppose we must be civil, Smithy," said Barkins sourly, "but
we'll serve the beggar out afterwards."

I went up on deck again to find that our speed had been slightly
increased, but we drew no nearer to the junk, which sailed on exactly in
the same course as we were taking, and that seemed strange; but beyond
watching her through the telescopes, and seeing that she had only about
a dozen men on board--all blue-frocked Chinamen--no further notice was
taken of her.

Ching was seated right forward, with his blue frock showing well up
against the grey white of one of the hanging-down sails, and he had been
furnished with a pipe, which he smoked slowly and thoughtfully;
half-a-dozen men were in the fore-rigging, making believe to repair
damages up aloft; and soon after four more were sent up to begin
tinkering at the topmast, which they made great efforts to lower down on
deck, but of course got no further.

They had orders from the first lieutenant to take it coolly, and coolly
they took it, looking like a lazy, loafing set of Chinese sailors, whose
intentions were to do as little as they could for their pay.

Mr Reardon, in a shooting-suit and straw hat, went about giving orders,
and the captain and Mr Brooke had cane seats on the quarter-deck, with
a bottle and glasses, and sat sipping beer and smoking cigars, as if
they were passengers.

Then came long hours of patient--I should say impatient--crawling along
over the same course as we had followed the previous day, with no sail
in sight but the big junk, which took not the slightest notice of us,
nor we of it.

There was no doubt whatever, though, of her actions.  She kept sailing
on at about the same rate as we steamed, evidently for the sake of being
in company, and to have a European vessel close at hand to close up to
in case of danger from the shores of the mainland, or one of the islands
we should pass, for it was an established fact that the pirates seldom
attacked ships that were in company.

All through the early part of the morning the novelty of the affair
interested the men, and there was a constant burst of eager conversation
going on, but as noon came, and matters were in the same position, and
we still far away from the spot where the barque had been burned, every
one grew weary, and I fidgeted myself into a state of perspiration.

"It will all turn out wrong," I thought, "and then they will blame me."

With these fancies to worry me, I kept away from my messmates as much as
I could; and when by accident I encountered either of my superiors, I
saw that they looked--or I fancied they did--very stern.

"All these preparations for nothing," I said to myself, as I saw the
guns all ready, but covered over with tarpaulins, cartridges and shells
waiting, and the crews armed and impatient.

Dinner had been long over, and I need hardly say that I did not enjoy
mine.  Some of the men were having a nap, and the heat below must have
been very great, for it was scorching on deck.

At last we were abreast of the rocky islands dotted here and there, and
upon the reef I could just make out a few pieces of the burned vessel.

But as I swept the rocky islets and channels and then the horizon, I
could not make out a sail, only our companion the junk, with her bows
and stern high out of the water, sailing easily along that fine
afternoon.

Another hour passed, and there were rocky islands on our starboard bow
and two astern, but not a sign of inhabitant, only high bluffs, rugged
cliffs, and narrow channels between reefs whitened by the constant
breaking upon them of a heavy swell.

"Rather slow work, Reardon," said the captain, as they two came by where
I was at the bulwark, using a small glass.  "See anything, Mr Herrick?"

"No, sir," I said.

"No, sir, indeed; of course you don't," cried the captain impatiently.
"Nice trick you've played me, sir.  Made me dress up my men and the ship
in this tomfool way.  There you are using your glass.  What have you got
to say for yourself, eh?"

I could not tell whether he was speaking banteringly or really angrily,
and, keeping my glass to my eye in the hope of seeing something to
report, I mumbled out some excuse about meaning it for the best.

"Best, indeed!" he said pettishly.  "Nice objects we look.  What do you
think the First Lords of the Admiralty would say to me if they could see
Her Majesty's gunboat--the finest clipper in the service--in this state?
Eh?  Why don't you answer, sir?"

"I suppose, sir," I cried desperately, "that they would say you were
doing your best for the sake of trying to catch the pirates."

"Humph! do you, indeed?  Well?  Anything to report?  What's the use of
holding that glass to your eye if you can't see anything?  Anything to
report, I say?"

"Yes, sir," I cried breathlessly, and with my heart throbbing heavily,
"the junk has run up a little pennon to her mast-head."

"She has?" cried Mr Reardon excitedly, and he raised his own glass.
"Yes, you're right.  Well done, Herrick!  There, sir, I told you the lad
was right."

"Right? when they are signalling to us for water or a bag of rice."

"When they have only to heave-to and let us overhaul them, sir," cried
Mr Reardon, swinging his glass round and narrowly missing my head.
"No, sir, they're signalling to the shore; and before long we shall see
another junk come swooping out from behind one of those headlands, to
take us in the rear.  If they don't, I'm a Dutchman."

"Then Dutchman you are, Reardon," said the captain, smiling.  "I only
wish they would."

"Here they come, sir," I cried excitedly--"one--two--yes, there are
three."

"What?  Where?"

"You can only see the tops of their sails, sir, over that flat, low
island this side of the big cliffs."

"Eh! yes."

Only those two words, as the captain sighted the slowly-moving objects
just indistinctly seen, but they were enough to send a thrill all
through the ship.

For there was no mistaking the matter.  The junk that had been hanging
by us all night was a pirate after all, and she had signalled to
companions on shore.  I could see, too, that she was slightly altering
her course.

The enemy was at last in sight.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE FIGHT.

"Oh, if I only dared hooray!"  I said to myself; and then a flush of
pride rose to my cheeks, for the captain gave me a smart clap on the
shoulder.

"Bravo, Herrick!" he said in quite a whisper.  "I thought you were
right, my lad, or I shouldn't have done all this.  Mr Reardon and I
will make a fine officer of you before we have done."

"Shall I pass the word down for the men to be on the _qui vive_?" said
the lieutenant.

The captain laughed, and nodded his head in the direction of the
hatches, which were black with peeping heads.

"No need, Mr Reardon; there is not a soul on board who does not know.
It is no time for making fresh arrangements.  We'll keep exactly to our
plans.  Don't let a man show on deck, for depend upon it they will have
a look-out aloft ready to give warning of danger, and we must not give
them an excuse for signalling to their confederates to sheer off."

"Keep steadily on, then, sir?"

"Yes, steadily and stupidly.  Let the men go on as before up aloft, and
let the rest of the men show their white heads and pigtails at the
bulwarks as if they were wondering who the strangers were.  Good
pressure of steam below?"

"Yes, sir, almost too much," said the lieutenant, after communication
with the engine-room.

"Not a bit," said the captain, rubbing his hands.  "We shall want it
soon."

My heart began to beat as they passed on, and I wondered what would be
the first steps taken.  But I did not forget my promise.  My duties were
about nil, and as soon as I had seen the men staring over the bulwarks,
and noted that the sham repairs to the rigging were steadily going on, I
ran down the companion-way, and breathlessly told Barkins and Smith.

"Then there are four of them, Smithy," cried Barkins.  "Look here, Gnat;
he stuck out that there were only three.  But well done, old chap, you
are a good one to come and tell us.  Here, don't go yet; I want to--"

I never heard what he wanted to, for there was too much exciting
attraction on the deck, to which, being as it were licensed, I at once
returned.

The captain and Mr Reardon were on the quarter-deck, conscious that
savages as the Chinese or Formosan pirates were, they probably did not
despise the barbarian instruments known as telescopes, and that most
likely every movement on board the _Teaser_ was being watched.  Any
suspicious act would be quite sufficient to make them sheer off, and
consequently the strictest orders were given to the men to play their
parts carefully, and make no movement that was not required.

Dressed as I was in flannels, my appearance was thoroughly in keeping
with the assumed peaceful character of the ship, and hence I heard and
saw nearly everything.

Just as I went on the quarter-deck the captain was saying to the first
lieutenant--

"Don't be so excitable, man.  When I ask you a question, or give an
order, take it deliberately, and dawdle off to see it done."

"Right through, sir?" said Mr Reardon petulantly.

"No," said the captain quietly.  "When I give the order, `Full speed
ahead,' then you can act.  Till then you are mate or passenger,
whichever you like, of this dirty-looking trader.  Ah, those three low
junks, or whatever they are, can creep through the water pretty
quickly."

"Yes; and the big junk too," said Mr Reardon, using his glass.  "It is
astonishing how rapidly those great heavily-sailed craft can go.  She's
full of men, sir," he continued; "I can see more and more beginning to
show themselves.  Not much appearance of dishipline, though."

"So much the better for us," muttered Captain Thwaites, turning in his
cane arm-chair, and looking in the direction of the islands again, from
which the three smaller vessels were coming on rapidly.  "Yes,"--he
said, as if to himself, "a head keeps showing here and there; they are
full of men too."

I was not experienced, of course, that only being my third voyage, but I
knew enough of navigating tactics to grasp the fact that the four
vessels were carefully timing themselves so as to reach us together, and
this evidently was their customary mode of procedure, and no doubt
accounted for ship after ship being taken and plundered.  I felt
startled, too, as I realised the strength of the crews, and what a
simultaneous attempt to board might mean.  With an ordinary merchantman,
even with a strong crew, undoubtedly death and destruction, while even
with our well-armed men and guns I began to have doubts.  A slip in the
manoeuvres, ever so slight a mistake on Captain Thwaites' part, or a
blunder in the carrying out of his orders, might give one vessel the
chance to make fast, and while we were arresting their onslaught there
would be time for the others to get close in and throw their scores of
bloodthirsty savages upon our decks.

Mr Reardon had strolled forward, and returned just as the captain said
to me--

"You may as well fetch me my sword and cap from the cabin, Mr Herrick."

"Yes, sir," I said quickly, and I was off, but he stopped me.

"Not now, boy," he cried impatiently; "when the first gun is fired will
be time enough.  Well, Reardon, men all ready?"

"Ready, sir? they want wiring down.  I'm only afraid of one thing."

"What is that?"

"That they will jam one another in the hatches in their excitement."

"Give fresh stringent orders, sir," said the captain sternly; "every man
is to go quickly and silently to his post, as if on an ordinary drill.
By George! they are coming on quickly; we shall have it all over by
daylight."

"And they'll plunder the ship by lamplight, eh?" said Mr Reardon drily.

"Of course.  I think there is no need to feel any doubt now as to these
being the men we want?"

"I don't know, sir," said the lieutenant quietly; "but there is no doubt
about their meaning to try and take this peaceful merchantman.  Look,
they feel sure of us, sir, and are showing themselves.  Why, they swarm
with men."

"Poor wretches!" said the captain gravely.  "I don't like shedding
blood, but we must do it now, to the last drop."

The enemy were now less than a mile away, and coming on rapidly, the
smaller vessels helping their progress with long, heavy sweeps; and as I
stood behind the captain's chair, and looked round the deck from the
wheel, where one of our sham Chinamen stood, with another seated under
the bulwarks apparently asleep, but ready to spring up and join his
messmate at a word; round by the bulwarks where four or five stood
stupidly looking over the side; and then up aloft to the men making
believe to work very hard at the damaged spar--all looked peaceful
enough to tempt the wretches, without counting the most prominent figure
of all, Ching, as he sat high up, smoking placidly, and looking as calm
and contemplative as a figure of Buddha.

"The men ought to be called up now, and the guns set to work," I said to
myself, as every pulse throbbed with excitement, and in imagination I
saw, from the captain's neglect or dilatoriness, our deck running with
blood.

But I had to master these thoughts.

"They know better than I do when to begin," I said to myself, and, after
a sharp glance at the coming vessels, I began to pity my two messmates
who were cooped up below, and I thought of how excited they must be.
Then I thought of Mr Brooke, and hoped he would not be hurt; and
shuddered a little as I remembered the doctor, who would be all ready
below, waiting to attend upon the first wounded man.

"See that, sir?" said Mr Reardon quickly.

"What?" said Captain Thwaites in the most unmoved way.

"That smoke on board two of them."

"On board all," said the captain.  "I noticed it a minute ago.  They are
getting the stinkpots ready for us, I suppose."

"Yes, that's it, sir.  Do you think it necessary to have the hose ready
in case of fire?"

"No; if any come on board, the firemen can be called up from the
stokehole with their shovels.  I think we'll go now upon the bridge.
You can come too, Mr Herrick.  I may want you to take an order or two."

And as he walked quietly towards the bridge, where the speaking-tubes
and signals joined with the engine-room were, he was as calm and
deliberate as if there was not the slightest danger menacing the
_Teaser_; while for my part I could not help feeling that the position
there upon the bridge was a highly-exposed one, and that I should have
been much safer in the shelter of the bulwarks, or down below.

All this time we were gently forging ahead, and the junk was quietly
manoeuvring so that we should pass her so close that she could just
avoid our prow, and then close and grapple with us, for they were busy
on her starboard quarter, and through my glass I could make out great
hooks.

"Won't they think we are taking it too coolly, and grow suspicious,
sir?" whispered Mr Reardon excitedly.

"I hope not," said the captain.  "Perhaps one might show fight now, but
I am trusting to their believing that we are stupid, for I want to get
them all, Reardon, if I can.  Now, silence, if you please."

Mr Reardon drew back a step or two and waited during those terrible
minutes which followed, and I gave quite a start, for the enemy suddenly
threw off all reserve as a yell came from the junk, which was answered
from the other vessels, and, with their decks crowded with
savage-looking desperadoes, they swept down upon us literally from both
sides, bow and stern.

But still the captain did not make a sign; and, in the midst of the
horrible silence on board, I saw the dressed-up men turning their heads
to gaze at us anxiously, as if the suspense was greater than they could
bear, and their eyes implored their commander to give the word before
the wretches began swarming on board.

I glanced at Mr Reardon, whose face was white, and the great drops of
perspiration stood upon his cheeks, while his eyes, which were fixed
upon the captain between us, looked full of agony; for the great junk
with its wild crew was apparently only a hundred yards ahead, and the
others not much farther, coming rapidly on.

"It's all over," I thought, in my horror, "he will be too late;" and
that I was not alone in my thoughts obtained confirmation, for, though
the crew to a man stood fast, I saw Ching suddenly drop from his perch
and look round for a place of retreat.

At the same moment the captain moved his hand; there was a sharp tinging
of the gong in the engine-room, which meant full speed ahead; and, as
the vibration rapidly increased, he then gave a sharp order or two, and
in an instant almost the men came pouring up from the various hatches
upon deck, but so quickly and quietly that the transformation was almost
magical.

I don't think my eyes are peculiarly made, but I saw the various crews
muster round the guns, and the marines range up, and the men with their
rifles at their various posts, with each officer in his place, although
all the time I was standing with my gaze fixed upon the great junk.

I saw, too, my twenty pigtailed men come sliding down the ropes from
above, and snatch up the cutlasses and rifles laid ready beneath a
tarpaulin; but all the time I was seeing, in obedience to orders, two
parties of the crew going forward at the double, and I knew that the
captain was communicating with the two men at the wheel.

Quick as lightning there was another order as we began to leave the
three low vessels behind, and I involuntarily grasped the rail before me
as all the men on board lay down--crews of the guns, marines, and those
who had doubled forward under the command of Mr Brooke.

Hardly was the evolution performed, when there, right before us, were
the lowering mat-sails of the great junk, and then, crash! there was a
wild despairing yell, and we were into her amidships, the ponderous
gunboat literally cutting her down and going right over her; while at a
second command every man sprang up again, and for the next minute or two
bayonet and cutlass were flashing in the evening sunlight as the
wretches who climbed on board were driven back.

While this was going on, the bell in the engine-room rang out again and
again, and we began to move astern to meet the three low junks, which,
undismayed by the fate of their comrade, came at us with their crews
yelling savagely.

Then there was a deep roar as the first gun belched forth its flame and
smoke, with the huge shell hurtling through the air, dipping once in the
calm sea, and crashing through one of the junks, to explode with a
report like the echo of the first, far beyond.

Captain Thwaites turned quietly and looked at me.

"Yes, sir?"  I stammered.

"I said when the first gun was fired you could fetch my cap and sword,
Mr Herrick," he said quietly, and I ran down just as the second big gun
bellowed, but I did not see with what result.  I heard the sharp, short
order, though, and another gun roared, and another, and another, as the
junks came well into sight; for each gun I heard the crash of the shell
hitting too, and the fierce yells of the men, as I dashed into the
cabin, seized cap and sword, and then ran back to the bridge, eager to
see the fight, and in my excitement forgetting to feel afraid.

But a heavy smoke was gathering over us and the junks,--two were
indistinct, though they were close aboard of us.  Then, as the _Teaser_
glided astern, I saw that the third was smoking, while crash, crash, the
others struck our sides, and their crews grappled, hurled their
stinkpots on board, and began to swarm over the bulwarks.

But the guns were being steadily served with terrible effect; the few
poor wretches who reached the deck were bayoneted, and in how long or
how short a time I cannot tell, for everything seemed to be swept away
in the excitement; we steamed away out of the smoke into the ruddy
sunset, and there I saw in one place a mass of tangled bamboo and
matting, with men clustering upon it, and crowding one over the other
like bees in a swarm.  There was another mass about a quarter of a mile
away, and I looked in vain for the third junk; but a number of her crew
clinging to bamboos, sweeps, spars, and what looked to be wicker crates,
showed where she had been.  The last of the four, with her great
matting-sails hauled up to the fullest extent, was sailing away toward
the nearest island, and on either side they had sweeps over with two or
three men to each, tugging away with all their might to help their
vessel along.

"The brutes!"  I thought to myself, as I watched the glint of the ruddy
sun upon their shiny heads and faces, with their pig tails swinging
behind, as they hung back straining at the great oars.  For their sole
idea seemed to be escape, and not the slightest effort was made to pick
up any of their comrades struggling in the water.

It was wonderful how quickly they went, and I began to think that the
junk would escape.  Three miles would be enough to place her all amongst
the reefs and shoals, where the gunboat dare not follow; and I was
thinking, as we glided rapidly in her wake, that the _Teaser_ would
chase her swiftly for about half the distance, and then lower the boats
to continue the pursuit, but I was wrong; I saw that the captain gave
Mr Reardon some order, then the gong rang in the engine-room, the way
of the _Teaser_ was checked, a turn of the wheel made her describe a
curve, and she slowly came to a standstill broadside on to the flying
junk.

The next minute the crews were piped away to the boats with their
complement of marines to each; and as they were lowered down a steady
fire was maintained with shell upon the junk.

I stood watching the shots, and saw the first of the broadside from one
heavy and three smaller guns strike the water close to the junk's hull,
fly up, dip again, and then burst over the cliffs.

The second went wide to the left, while the third also missed; and I saw
the captain stamp impatiently as the fourth went right over her.

"She'll get away," I thought; and it seemed a pity for this junk to
escape and form a nucleus for another strong pirate gang.

The firing continued, another broadside being directed at the flying
pirates, who seemed to be certain now of escape, for the junk was end-on
to us, and moving rapidly, forming a very difficult object for our
marksmen; the gunboat, of course, rising and falling all the time upon
the heaving sea.

In the intervals between the shots I had caught a glimpse of Barkins and
Smith climbing into two of the boats, but it was only a glimpse; and
then I was watching the effects of the fire again, as the boats pushed
off to go to the help of the floating men.

Shot after shot had been fired most ineffectively, and I heard
expostulations and angry words used to the captains of the guns; while
at every ineffective shell that burst far away a derisive yell rose from
the crowded junk--the shouts increasing each time.

"Another broadside, Reardon," cried the captain; "and then we must run
in as far as we dare.  Pick out half-a-dozen of the best men with the
rifle to place on the bows to pick off the steersman."

"Ay, ay, sir," cried Mr Reardon; then directly, "All gone in the boats,
sir."

Just then, as I was thinking that the junk must escape, one of our big
guns was fired with a crash which made the deck vibrate.  There was a
tremendous puff of smoke, which was drawn toward us so that I could not
see the effect, but the shell seemed to burst almost directly with a
peculiar dull crash, and another yell arose from the distant vessel.
Only it was not a derisive cry like the last, but a faint startling
chorus of long-continued shrieks, despairing and wild.

"That's got her, sir," cried Mr Reardon; and we waited impatiently for
the smoke to float by.  But it still shut out the junk from where we
stood, while it passed away from the men forward at the gun, and they
gave us the first endorsement of Mr Reardon's words by bursting out
into a hearty cheer, which was taken up by the crews of the other guns.
Then we were clear of the smoke, looking landward to see a crowd of men
struggling in the water, swimming about to reach planks and pieces of
the junk, which had been blown almost to pieces by our great shell, and
had sunk at once, while yet quite a mile from the nearest rocks.

"Ha!" ejaculated the captain, "a good evening's work!  Now, Reardon,
down with the other two boats, and save every poor wretch you can."

"Only one left, sir," cried Mr Reardon; and in a few minutes, fully
manned, she was about to be lowered down, when I looked quickly at the
captain, and he read my meaning.

"Want to go?" he said, and then nodded sharply.

I dashed down, climbed upon the bulwark, seized the falls just as they
were about to be cast off, and slid down into the stern to take my
place.  Then the oars fell with a splash, and away we went over the
ruddy sea to try and save all we could of the wretches upon whom so
terrible a retribution had come.

One of the warrant officers was in command; he gave me a grim nod.

"Want to see the fun?" he said.

"I want to see the men saved," I replied; "I don't know where the fun
comes in."

"You soon will," he said.  "Look out for yourself, my lad; and don't be
too eager to help them."

"Why?"

"You'll soon see," he said gruffly.  Then turning to the four marines in
the stern-sheets--"fix bayonets, and keep a sharp look-out."

I looked at him wonderingly, for fixed bayonets did not seem very
suitable things for saving drowning men.  But I said nothing, only
sheltered my eyes from the level rays of the sun as we rowed swiftly on,
and gazed across the water at the despairing wretches fighting for their
lives upon the blood-red surface of the water.

It was very horrible after a time, for, as I looked with my heart
feeling contracted, I saw a man, who had been swimming hard, suddenly
throw up his hands and sink.

It was too much for me.

"Row, my lads, row," I cried; "we may catch him as he comes up."

"No," said the warrant officer grimly, "we shall never see him again."

"But try, try!"  I cried.

"Yes, we'll try our best," said the officer sternly; "but it's their
turn now.  Many a poor wretch have they seen drown, I know, and laughed
at when he cried for help."

I knew it was true; but all the same there was only one thought besides
in my breast, and that was to save all the poor wretches who were
clinging to the pieces of wreck.

As we drew nearer, we came upon the first of quite thirty, clinging to a
sweep which was under his left arm; while, to my horror, I had seen
three more swimming without support go down without a cry, and not one
rise again.

"Easy there," said the officer; "ready there, coxswain; can you reach
him with the hook?"

The man who was standing in the bows reached out to hook the pirate, but
just then the end of the floating sweep touched our boat, and turned
right off, so that the coxswain missed his stroke, and the result was
that the pirate glided aft.

The officer by my side leaned over, reached out, and, to my intense
satisfaction, caught the Chinaman by his left sleeve to draw him to the
boat; but in an instant the wretch threw his right arm out of the water,
and I saw the flash of a long knife in his fingers, as, with his teeth
grinning, he struck at my companion with all his might.

I was so taken by surprise that I sat as if paralysed; but I was
conscious of a quick movement from behind, something red passed over me,
and, all instantaneously, there was the flash of another blade, a
horrible thud--the pirate was driven under water; and I wrenched, as it
were, my eyes round from him to look up over my shoulder at the marine,
who with a dexterous twist of his rifle withdrew his bayonet from the
savage's chest.

"Hurt, sir?" he said.

"No thankye, marine.  Very quick and well done of you.  There, Mr
Herrick; now you see why I told you to look out."

"The brutes!"  I cried excitedly; "they're not worth trying to save."

"No," he said; "but we must do it.  I suppose they don't believe much in
the mercy they'll get from us; so there's no wonder.  Look at that!"

I turned my head in the direction in which he pointed, and saw what he
meant.  Five men were clinging to a piece of floating wreck about fifty
yards away, and three more left the plank to which they had been
clinging as we approached, and swam to join them.

I looked at the first group, fully expecting to see them hold out their
hands to help their comrades; but in place thereof, I saw one wretch,
who occupied the best position on the floating mass of wreck, raise a
heavy piece of bamboo with both hands, and bring it down with a crash
upon the head of the first man who swam up.

"Yah, you cowardly beggar!" roared one of the boat's crew.  "I've marked
you."

"Nice wild-beasts to save, Mr Herrick," said the warrant officer.  "I
feel as if I should like to open fire on them with my revolver."

"It's too horrible," I panted.  "Look, look, Mr Grey!"

"I'm looking, my lad," said my companion.  "Give way, my boys; let's
stop it somehow."

For there was a desperate fight going on at the piece of wreck; three
men, knife in hand, were trying to get upon the floating wood, and those
upon it stabbing at them to keep them off.

But, in their despair, the swimmers made a dash together, regardless of
the blows, climbed on, and a terrible struggle began.

"Starn all!" roared Mr Grey; and the boat's progress was checked.  We
were backed away just in time, for the pirates were all now on one side
of the piece of wreck, thinking of nothing but destroying each other's
lives, and heaped together in what looked like a knot, when the side
they were on slowly sank, the far portion rose up and completely turned
over upon them, forcing them beneath the water, which eddied and boiled
as the struggle still went on below the surface.

"Give way, my lads," said the officer sternly; "let's try and save some
of the others."

"Ay, ay," cried the man who had shouted before.  "These here arn't worth
saving."

The boat swept round in a curve, and we pulled off for another group,
kneeling and crouching upon what seemed to be a yard and a mass of
matting-sail.

Mr Grey stood up.

"Now, my lads," he shouted, "surrender."

For answer they bared their knives and defied us to come on, yelling and
striking at us with them.

Mr Grey looked round at me half-laughingly.

"Cheerful sort of prisoners to make.  If we go close in, some of us will
get knifed."

"You can't go close," I said.

"If I don't they'll drown," he cried; "and the captain will ask me what
I've been about."

"Hadn't you better let the jollies put 'em out of their misery, Mr
Grey, sir?" cried one of the men.  "They arn't fit to live."

"No," cried another fiercely.  "They arn't men; they're tigers."

"Silence!" said the officer sternly.  "There is a man yonder about to
sink; give way," he cried.

This man had left a barrel, to which he had vainly tried to cling, but
it kept on turning round; and at last, in his despair, he had left it to
try and swim to the nearest rocks.

His strength was failing, though, and he began to paddle like a dog, too
much frightened to try and swim.

A few strokes of the oar took us within reach, and this time the
coxswain succeeded in hooking his loose cotton jacket, and drawing him
to the side.

Hands seized him directly, and he was hauled in to lie down trembling,
and looking wildly from one to the other.

"Come; he's a quiet one," said the coxswain.  "Mind, sir!"

"Mind! look out!" roared the boatswain.

But he was too late.  One moment the Chinaman crouched, limp and
helpless, in the bottom of the boat forward, with his hands hidden in
his wet sleeves, the next he had made a frog-like leap at the coxswain,
driven a sharp knife in the muscles of his back, and leaped overboard.
Not into safety, though; for one of the men stood ready, and, as the
wretch rose, brought down the blade of his oar with a tremendous chop
across the head, and the pirate went down to rise no more.

I heard the boatswain utter a low fierce growl as he crept forward, and
I followed to try and help, for the injured man had sunk upon his knees,
with the boat-hook across the bows, and began to wipe the perspiration
from his forehead.

"Much hurt, my lad?" cried Mr Grey.

"Tidy, sir, tidy; makes one feel a bit sicky-like.  Any one like to have
the next turn with the boat-hook?  I'm going to miche a bit.--Do it
bleed?"

All thought of saving the pirates was given up till the wound, which
bled sharply, was carefully bandaged, and the man laid down in the
bottom of the boat.  Then the crew looked at their officer.

"Hadn't we better polish 'em off, sir?" growled one of the men.

"The captain's orders were to pick up all the drowning men we could,"
said the boatswain sternly.

"But they won't be picked up, sir."

"Give way."

The men rowed to another floating group of four, and I stood up and
called to them to surrender.

For answer they sprang into the water, and began to swim to some of
their comrades on the next piece of wreck.

"This is a puzzling job, Mr Herrick," said the boatswain.  "I'm not a
brute; I'd jump overboard to save any of the wretches, but it would be
like giving my life, or the lives of any of the crew, to set them the
job.  Those wretches will begin upon their mates, you'll see."

He was quite right, for the possessors of the next floating piece of
wreck yelled to their comrades to keep off, and, as they still swam on,
a fresh fight began of the most bloodthirsty nature, and one of our men
said drily--

"Take it coolly, sir.  If we lay on our oars a bit, there won't be none
to fish up."

The feeling of horror and pity for the drowning men began to wear off,
and I was glad when Mr Grey suddenly ordered the men to row hard, and I
saw him steer shoreward to cut off a little party of four, who, with a
thick bamboo yard between them, were swimming for the rocks.

"They must be saved as prisoners or not at all," he said sternly; "not a
man of them must land."

As soon as this last party saw us coming, we noticed that they drew
their knives to keep us off, but energetic measures were taken this
time.  We got between them and the shore; and then a rope was made
ready, one of the men stood up and dexterously threw it right over a
pirate's head, snatched it tightly to him, dragged him from his hold,
and he was at last drawn to the side half-drowned, hauled aboard, and
his hands and feet tied.

This successful plan was followed out with the others, with the result
that we had four prisoners lying safely in the bottom, and then turned
to capture some more in the same way.

But we had been so excited and taken up by this work that we had not
seen what was going on seaward, where a gun was fired for our recall.

"Where's the next of them?" said Mr Grey.

I did not answer, as I stood up looking round to see a few fragments of
wreck floating here and there, but there was not another pirate left to
save.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

REPAIRING DAMAGES.

For some moments I could not believe it true, and I stood on the thwart
and gazed carefully round, scanning every fragment of the wreck in the
expectation of seeing some trick to deceive us--men lying flat with only
their faces above the surface of the water, and holding on by sweep or
bamboo with one hand.  But in a very short time we were all certain that
not a living being was near; of the dead there were several, as we found
on rowing here and there.  One, as he was turned over, seemed to be
perfectly uninjured, but the others displayed ghastly wounds in face,
neck, and breast, showing how horribly fierce had been the encounter in
which they had been engaged.

Satisfied at last that our task was at an end, the word was given, and
the men began to row back to the _Teaser_, which still lay so
transformed in appearance, as seen from a distance, that I was thinking
that it was no wonder that the pirates had been deceived, when one of
the men, forgetful of all the horrors through which we had passed, of
his wounded comrade, and the dangerous prisoners under his feet, burst
out into a merry fit of laughter.

"Say, lads," he cried, "we shall have a nice job to-morrow, to wash the
old girl's face."

The rest of the crew laughed in chorus, till the boatswain sternly bade
them give way.

"I doubt it," he said in a low voice to me.  "I should say that the
captain will do a little more to make her less ship-shape, ready for the
next lot."

"But you don't think there are any more pirates, do you?"

"More!" he said, looking at me in surprise.  "Why, my lad, the coast
swarms with them.  We never hear a hundredth part of the attacks they
make.  It is not only European vessels they seize, but anything that
comes in their way.  It strikes me, Mr Herrick, that we have only just
begun what may turn out a very successful cruise."

Ten minutes later we were nearing the _Teaser_, and I saw the reason why
we could not see either of the other boats.  They were swinging to the
davits, and we were therefore the last.

Just then Mr Reardon hailed us.

"How many men hurt?" he shouted between his hands.

"Only one, sir; Barr--coxswain."

"Badly?"

"Oh no, sir," shouted the sufferer.  "Bit of a scrat on the back."

"How many prisoners?"

"Four, sir."

Then we were alongside, the boat was run up, and, after our wounded man
had been lifted out, I stepped on board, eager to know the result of the
action on the part of the other boats, and to learn this I went below,
and found Barkins alone.

"Well," I cried, "how many prisoners?"

"Round dozen," he cried.

"Any one hurt?"

"Round dozen."

"I know, twelve prisoners," I said impatiently.  "I asked you how many
were hurt."

"And I told you, stupid," he replied, "a round dozen."

"What! a man wounded for every prisoner?"

"That's it; and we shouldn't have taken any, the beggars were game for
fighting to the last, if Mr Brooke hadn't given the word for them to be
knocked on the head first with the thick end of the oars."

"To stun them?"

"Yes; and our lads got so savage after seeing their mates stabbed when
trying to save the brutes' lives, that they hit as hard as they could.
They killed two of 'em, or we should have had fourteen."

"How horrid!"

"Horrid?  Why, I enjoyed it," said my messmate.  "When I saw poor old
Blacksmith--"

"What!"  I cried excitedly, "he isn't hurt?"

"Not hurt? why, one yellow-faced savage, when poor old Smithy held out
his hand to pull him aboard, took hold of his wrist, and then reached up
and stuck his knife right through the poor old chap's arm, and left it
there."

"Poor old Smithy!"  I cried huskily, and a choking sensation rose in my
throat.  "I must go and see him."

"No, you mustn't.  I've just been, and they sent me away."

"But where is he?"

"Doctor's got him, and been mending him up.  He has gone to sleep now."

"Was he very bad?"

"Stick a stocking-needle through your arm, and then square it, cube it,
add decimal nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and
then see how you feel."

"Poor old boy!"  I said; "I am sorry."

"Well, so am I," said Barkins sourly; "but I don't keep on howling."

"Did they take the blackguard prisoner?"

"Well, they did, and hauled him aboard, but he was no good, and they
pitched him overboard again."

"Why?"  I said wonderingly.

"Why! because he was dead.  Bob Saunders, that red-haired chap, was in
the stern-sheets helping to catch the beggars with hitches, and as soon
as he saw the big yellow-faced wretch stick his knife into poor old
Blacksmith, he let drive at the brute with the boat-hook, twisted it in
his frock, and held him under water.  He didn't mean to, but he was
savage at what he had seen, for the lads like Smithy, and he held the
beggar under water too long."

I shuddered, and thought of the man being bayoneted from our boat, and
Mr Grey's narrow escape.

"Your fellows behaved better, I s'pose?" said Barkins.

"Not a bit," I said.  "We've got a man stabbed just in the same way--"
and I told him of our adventures.

"They're nice ones," said Barkins sourly.  "I don't think our chaps will
want to take many prisoners next time.  But I say, what a crusher for
them--all four junks, and not a man to go back and tell the tale."

"It's glorious," I cried, forgetting the horrors in our triumph.

"For you," said Barkins sourly.

"Why for me?  You and poor old Smith did your part.  Don't be so jolly
envious."

"Envious?  Come, I like that," he cried.  "If you felt as if something
red-hot was being stuck in your leg you'd feel envious too.  You're the
luckiest beggar that ever was, and never get hurt or anything."

"No more do you," I said, laughing.

"Oh, don't I?  What do you call that, then?" he cried, swinging his legs
round, for he was sitting with one of them under the table.

To my horror and astonishment, I saw that his leg was bandaged, and a
red stain was showing through.

"Why, Tanner, old chap," I cried, catching his hand as my eyes were
blurred; "I didn't know you were hurt."

He looked quite pleased at my weakness, and the emotion I showed.

"Oh, it ain't much," he said, smiling and holding on to my hand very
tightly; "but it pringles and sticks a bit, I mean stingles--no, I
don't!  My tongue's getting all in a knot, it tingles and pricks a bit.
I say, Gnat, old chap, you don't think those chaps carry poisoned
knives, do you?"

"What, like the Malays?  Oh no."

"I'm glad of that, because it made me feel a bit funky.  I thought this
stinging might mean the poison spreading."

"Oh no, don't think that," I cried; "and some one told me a Malay prince
said it was all nonsense about the knives being poisoned."

"He did?"

"Yes; he laughed, and said there was no need to poison them, they were
quite sharp enough to kill a man without."

"That depends on where you put it in," said Barkins grimly.

"Yes," I said; "but what did the doctor say?"

"What about?"

"Your leg."

"He hasn't seen it yet."

"Why, Tanner," I cried, "you haven't had it properly bandaged."

"No; I felt so sick when I got on board, that I sneaked off here to lie
down a bit.  Besides, he had poor old Blacksmith to see to, and the
other chaps."

"But didn't he see the bandage when you went there?"

"No; there was no bandage then.  It's only a bit of a scratch; I tied it
up myself."

"How was it?"

"I don't hardly know.  It was done in a scuffle somehow, when we had got
the first prisoner in hand.  Decimus Burton, aided by his ingenious employer,
Mr. Hornor, of whose taste and talents we have already spoken in terms
of high commendation. Its original name, or, we should say, its popular
name, was the _Coliseum_, evidently a misnomer, from its distant
resemblance to that gigantic work of antiquity.

The present and more appropriate name is the COLOSSEUM, in allusion to its
colossal dimensions; for it would not show much discernment to
erect a building like the Pantheon, and call it the Coliseum.

The term _Diorama_ has, likewise, been strangely corrupted since its
successful adoption in the Regent's Park--it being now almost
indefinitely applied to any number or description of paintings

.

* * * * *

SNEEZING AMONG THE ANCIENTS.

(_For the Mirror_.)

Among the Greeks, sneezing was reckoned a good omen.

The practice of saluting the person who sneezed, existed in Africa,
among nations unknown to the Greeks and Romans.

Brown, in his "Vulgar Errors," says, "We read in Godignus, that, upon
a sneeze of the emperor of Monumotata, there passed acclamations
successively through the city."

The author of the "Conquest of Peru" assures us, that the cacique
of Guachoia having sneezed in the presence of the Spaniards, the
Indians of his train fell prostrate before him, stretched forth
their hands, and displayed to him the accustomed marks of respect,
while they invoked the sun to enlighten him, to defend him, and to
be his constant guard.

The Romans saluted each other on sneezing. Plutarch tells us, the genius
of Socrates informed him by sneezing, when it was necessary to perform
any action. The young Parthenis, hurried on by her passions, resolved to
write to Sarpedon an avowal of her love: she sneezes in the most
tender and impassioned part of her letter.

This is sufficient for her; this incident supplies the place of an answer,
and persuades her that Sarpedon is her lover. In the Odyssey, we are
informed that Penelope, harassed by the vexatious courtship of her
suitors, begins to curse them all, and to pour forth vows for the
return of Ulysses.

Her son Telemachus interrupts her by a loud sneeze.

She instantly exults with joy, and regards this sign as an assurance of
the approaching return of her husband. Xenophon was haranguing his troops;
when a soldier sneezed in the moment he was exhorting them to
embrace a dangerous but necessary resolution.

The whole army, moved by this presage, determined to pursue the project
of their general; and Xenophon orders sacrifices to Jupiter, the
preserver.

This religious reverence for sneezing, so ancient and so universal
even in the time of Homer, always excited the curiosity of the Greek
philosophers and the rabbins.

These last spread a tradition, that, after the creation of the
world, God made a law to this purport, that every man should sneeze
but once in his life, and that at the same instant he should render
up his soul into the hands of his Creator, without any preceding
indisposition.

Jacob obtained an exemption from the common law, and the favour of being
informed of his last hour. He sneezed, and did not die; and this sign of
death was changed into a sign of life.

Notice of this was sent to all the princes of the earth; and they
ordained, that in future sneezing should be accompanied with _forms
of blessings_, and vows for the persons who sneezed.

Thus the custom of _blessing persons who sneeze_ is of higher antiquity
than some authors suppose, for several writers affirm that it
commenced in the year 750, under Pope Gregory the Great, when a
pestilence occurred in which those who sneezed died; whence the
pontiff appointed a form of prayer, and a wish to be said to persons
sneezing, for averting this fatality from them.

Some say Prometheus was the first that wished well to sneezers. For
further information on this _ticklish_ subject, I refer the reader
to Brand's "Observations on Popular Antiquities."

P. T. W.

* * * * *

STANZAS.

(_Written on a stone, part of the ruins of Chertsey Abbey, Surrey_.)

(_For the Mirror_.)

From gayer scenes, where pleasure's mad career Infects the milder avenues
of thought, Where secret Envy swells the note of Fear, And Hope
is in its own illusion caught.

Where, in Ambition's thorny path of power, Contending votaries bow
to toils of state, I turn, regardless of the passing hour, To trace the
havoc of avenging fate.

Ne'er may the wanton love of active life Control the sage's precepts of
repose, Ne'er may the murmurs of tumultuous strife Wreck the tranquillity
of private woes.

Here, on the crumbling relics of a stone, O'er which the pride of
masonry has smiled, Here am I wont to ruminate alone.

And pause, in Fancy's airy robe beguil'd.

Disparting time the towers of ages bends, Forms and indignant sinks
the proudest plan, O'er the neglected path the weed extends, Nor
heeds the wandering steps of thoughtful man.

Here expiation, murder has appeased, Treason and homicide have been
forgiven, Pious credulity her votaries eased, Nor blamed th'
indulgent majesty of heaven.

Some erring matron has her crimes disclosed, Some father conscious
of awak'ning fate, Safe from revenge, hath innocence reposed, Unseen
and undisturbed at others' hate.

Some sorrowing virgin her complainings poured With pious hope has
many a pang relieved; Here the faint pilgrim to his rest restored,
The scanty boon of luxury has received.

Sated with conquest from the noise of arms, The aged warrior with
his fame retired, Careless of thirsty spoil,--of war's alarms-- Nor
with imperial emulation fired.

Where once her orisons devotion paid By fear, or hope, or reverence
inspired, The sad solicitude of youth allay'd, And age in resignation
calm attired.

The houseless cottager from wind severe, His humble habitation oft
has made; Once gloomy penitence sat silent there, And midnight tapers
gleam'd along the shade.

The lonely shepherd here has oft retired, To count his flock and
tune his rustic lay, Where loud Hosannas distant ears inspired, And
saintly vespers closed the solemn day.

HUGH DELMORE

.

* * * * *
BOOK-MACHINERY.

(_To the Editor of the Mirror._)
The world being supplied with books by _machinery_ is almost,
literally, a fact.

Type-founding and stereotyping are, of course, mechanical processes;
and lately, Dr.

Church, of Boston, invented a plan for _composing_ (setting the types) by
machinery; the sheets are printed by steam; the paper is made by
machinery; and pressed and beaten for binding by a machine of very
recent date.

Little more remains to be done than to write by machinery; and, to
judge by many recent productions, a _spinning-jenny_ would be the best
engine for this purpose.

PHILO.

* * * * *

GRAVITATION.

(_For the Mirror._)

In a matter-of-fact age like the present, methinks it behoves every man
to apply the improvements of scientific research as much as possible
to the ordinary concerns of life.

Science and society may thus be called _at par_, and philosophical
theory will hence enlighten the practical tradesman.

To demonstrate the truth of the above remarks, I mean, with the editor's
leave, to prove the necessity of keeping a friend in one's pocket, upon
the principles of gravitation, according to Sir Isaac Newton's
"Principia."

The learned doctor has mathematically proved that all bodies gravitate
or incline to the centre.

It is on this principle only that we can account for our being fixed
to the earth; that we are surrounded by the atmosphere; and that
we are constantly attended by, and seem constantly to attend, the
planets around us.

Should any farther demonstration be necessary than the incomparable
Sir Isaac has himself furnished us with, let any sceptic who doubts
that the earth attracts all smaller bodies towards its centre, only
take a hop from the Monument or St.

Paul's, and he will soon find the power of gravitation, and die by the
truth of the experiment.

But what, methinks, exclaims the reader, has all this to do with the
proposition in hand, viz. the necessity of keeping a friend in
one's pocket?

Why, I'll tell you--from a due consideration of this very principle, you
will soon see the use of a man's keeping his _money_ in his pocket.

It is this alone (the pocket) which nowadays constitutes the centre of
friendship; there alone, therefore, must this most valuable, most faithful
of all friends (_money_) be deposited. Now if this friend be of magnitude,
he will soon collect many more around you, who, true as the needle
to the pole, will point to you from every quarter--friends who
will smile in your prosperity, bask in the sunshine of your glory,
dance while you pay the piper, and to the very ground will be "votre
très humble serviteur, monsieur."

But if by sickness, misfortune, generosity, or the like, this friend
be removed from your pocket, the centre is destroyed, the equilibrium
is lost, away fly your friends, and, like pelicans, turn their beaks
at your breast whenever you approach.

"It is your own fault, fellow; you might have done well if you would;
but you are an ass, and could not keep a friend when you had him;
and so you may die in a ditch, and go to the devil, my dear."

The man of affluence, who lavishes away his substance, may aptly
enough be likened to a porpoise sporting in the ocean--the smaller
fry play around him, admire his dexterity, fan his follies, glory
in his gambols; but let him once be enmeshed in the net of misfortune,
and they who foremost fawned under his fins, will first fall foul
of him.

Now, to illustrate the subject further, let us consider the advantages
arising from this practical use of gravitation, and the losses attendant
upon the neglect thereof. First, then, he who _has_ secured this friend
in his pocket, may go _when_ he pleases, and _where_ he pleases, and
_how_ he pleases, either on foot or on horseback, by barouche or
by boat, and he shall be respected and esteemed, and called _sir_,
and made welcome in every season and in every place, and no one
shall presume to say unto him, Why doest thou these things?

But a man that hath not this friend in his pocket, may not go when,
where, and how he pleases, but when, where, and how he is directed
by others.

Moreover he shall travel on foot, and perchance without shoes, and
not have the benefit of a horse, barouche, or boat; and moreover
he shall be called _sirrah_, and not _sir_; neither shall he be
esteemed nor respected, nor made welcome; and they shall say unto
him, "Don't be troublesome, fellow; get out of the way, for thou
hast no business here!"

The rich man shall be clothed in scarlet, and get whatsoever his
heart desires; and the people shall give him the wall, and bow
before him to the ground.

But the poor man shall be clad in rags, and walk in the dirt, regarded
by no man; nor shall he even purchase to himself a name, though
the composition thereof consist only of air!

This is the state of modern times--such our modern friendship; and
since, gentle reader, it is so, who, possessing one grain of common
sense, would not duly attend to the theory of gravitation, by taking
care of a friend while he has him, especially if he be so portable
as to be placed in one's pocket.

JACOBUS.

* * * * *
THE DREAM OF POESY.

--A FRAGMENT.

BY LEIGH CLIFFE,
_Author of "Parga," "Knights of Ritzberg," &c._
(_For the Mirror._)

I had a vision fair and bright, And when I waken'd I was griev'd
To own 'twas but a dream of night, And sigh'd to find my hopes
deceivd.

But then o'er my fancy crept, Those who hail'd me while I slept.

There were those; of olden time, Milton, wond'rous, wild, sublime--
Chaucer, of the many tales; Spenser, soft as summer gales, With a
mild and gracious mien Leading on his "Faery Queene."

Shakspeare, child of fancy, stood Smiling in a mirthful mood, As
tho' he that moment spied The fairy folk by Bottom's side, Or beheld
by Herne's old oak, Falstaff with his antler yoke.

Dryden, laurel-crown'd and hoary, Proudly stood in all his glory;
Pope, as if his claims to speak Rested on the ancient Greek; And
that prince of merry-men, Laughing, quaffing, "rare old Ben," Whose
quaint conceits, so gay, so wild, Have oft my heart from woe beguil'd,
Shone like a meteor 'midst the throng, The envy of each son of song.

There too were those of later years, Who've moved the mind to mirth
or tears:
Byron, with his radiant ray-- Scott, with many a magic lay-- The
gay and gorgeous minstrel, Moore, Rich in the charms of Eastern
lore-- Campbell, like a brilliant star, Shed the beams of "Hope"
afar-- Rogers, with a smiling eye Told the joys of "Memory," Southey,
with his language quaint, Describing daemon, sinner, saint--
Wordsworth, of the simpler strain, Clare, the young unletter'd
swain-- Wiffen, who in fairy bowers, Culls blossoms in "Aonian
hours," Shone like a star in dusky skies, When first the evening
shades arise.

Barton, the gentle bard, was there, And Hemans, tender as she's
fair-- And Croly, whose bright genius beams Ever on virtue's fairest
themes; With Burns, the muse's darling child-- And Luttrell, laughing,
sportive, wild, As when be penn'd for Julia's eye, His sweet "Advice"
for what?

for why?
And Crabbe, who misery portrays, With crowds of others, crown'd with bays,
Who shed around their bright'ning beams, And cheer'd a humbler
poet's dreams

.

* * * * *
ANCIENT SITE OF THE EXETER 'CHANGE, &c.

(_For the Mirror._)

Here was formerly the parsonage-house for the parish of St.

Clement Danes, with a garden and close for the parson's horse, till Sir
Thomas Palmer, knight, in the reign of Edward VI., came into the
possession of the living, and began to build a house; but upon his
attainder for high treason, in the first year of Queen Mary, it
reverted to the crown.

This house remained in the crown till Queen Elizabeth granted it to Sir
William Cecil, lord treasurer, who augmented and rebuilt it, when
it was called Cecil House, and Burleigh House.

It was said to have been a noble pile, and adorned with four square
turrets. It was afterwards called Exeter House, from the title of
his son and successor.

Lord Burleigh died here in 1598.

It fronted the Strand, and its gardens extended from the west side
of the garden-wall of Wimbledon House to the Green-lane, which is
now Southampton-street.

Lord Burleigh was in this house honoured by a visit from Queen
Elizabeth, who, knowing him to be subject to the gout, would always
make him to sit in her presence, which, it is probable, (says
Nightingale,) the lord treasurer considered a gteal indulgence from
so haughty a lady, inasmuch as he one day apologized for the badness
of his legs.

To which the queen replied, "My lord, we make use of you not for the
badness of your legs, but for the goodness of your head."

When she came to Burleigh House, it is probable she had that kind of
pyramidial head-dress then in fashion, built of wire, lace, ribands,
and jewels, which shot up to a great height; for when the principal
domestic ushered her in, as she passed the threshold he desired her
majesty to stoop.

To which she replied, "For your master's sake I will stoop, but
not for the king of Spain."

After the fire of London, this house was occupied by the doctors
of civil law, &c. till 1672; and here the various courts of arches,
admiralty, &c. were kept.

Being deserted by the family, the lower part was converted into shops of
various descriptions; the upper part, like Babylon of old, is a
nest of wild beasts, birds, and reptiles.

The present "march of intellect" will _march away_ these bipeds and
quadrupeds, and no doubt the noble Marquess of Exeter "would much
rather have their _room_ than their _company_."

P. T. W.

* * * * *

MANNERS & CUSTOMS OF ALL NATIONS

.

* * * * *

A DAY AT FONTAINBLEAU.

--THE ROYAL HUNT.

Having learned that the King and the Dauphin, with the _Duc de
Grammont_, and the rest of the royal suite, were about to proceed
to Fontainbleau, in order to enjoy the diversion of hunting, I
resolved to be there to meet them, to see with my own eyes a royal
personage of whom I had heard so much.

Accordingly I ordered post horses, and arrived in the town about six
hours after his Most Christian Majesty.

After breakfasting on a cold partridge and some excellent coffee, I set
out at eight o'clock for the forest. Even at that hour--a late one in
France, when compared with England--the roads were by no means
thronged, and I could very plainly perceive that the major part of
the equestrians were attached to the court, and that the pedestrians
were either such as had been in the enjoyment of some of the good
things of this life under the present family, or such as were in
expectancy of them.

There was a third class, altogether composed of the mob, who, partly
incited by the desire of plunder, the love of idleness, or an
indistinct hope of obtaining the entrails of the deer, flocked in
great numbers to witness the feats of the royal party.

Among this latter class, old men, old women, and very young boys
predominated.

The forest of Fontainbleau is in itself beautiful in the extreme.

The various alleys formed by the manner in which the oak trees are planted,
create an imposing and majestic _coup d'oeil_, which is only bounded
almost by the horizon. At the bottom and in the middle of these alleys
were placed mounted _gendarmes_ to restrain the intrusion of the populace,
and to prevent them from coming--such is French curiosity--within
shot of the hunters.

At the end of one of these alleys, to my left, the great body of the
crowd was stationed, and at the top of it was an enclosed space, somewhat
like a stand on a race course, on which the royal party took their
station, while the carriages and servants remained quietly behind.

But the last breath
had passed the pirate's lips; and, while the sentry drew back to his
place by one side of the door and stood ready, his comrade fell back to
the other, and the corporal and the fourth man seized the pirate, and
rapidly drew him forth through the doorway; we followed, the place was
closed and fastened, and I stood panting, as if I had been running hard,
and could not recover my breath.

The next moment I was clinging to Mr Reardon, trying to hold him up,
but he misinterpreted my action, and seized and gave me a rough shake.

"Don't, boy," he cried in an angry, excited tone.  "Stand up; be a man."

"Yes, yes," I gasped; "but quick, corporal! never mind--that wretch--
run--the doctor--fetch Mr Price."

"Bah!" cried Mr Reardon roughly, and trying to hide his own agitation,
"the man's dead."

I stared at him in horror.

"He don't know!"  I gasped.  "Mr Reardon--sit--lie--lay him down, my
lads.  Don't you know you are badly hurt?"

"I! hurt?" he cried.  "No; I felt him hit me, but it was nothing."

I reached up my trembling hand, but he caught it as it touched his
shoulder, and was in the act of snatching it away, when his own came in
contact with the handle of the knife.

"Great heavens!" he ejaculated, as he drew it forth from where it was
sticking through the stiff collar of his coat; "right through from side
to side--what a narrow escape!"

"I--I thought he had killed you," I cried faintly, and a deathly
sensation made me feel for the moment as if I must fall.

"No, not a scratch," he said firmly now.  "A little memento," he
muttered, as he took out his handkerchief and wrapped it round the blade
before thrusting the knife in his breast-pocket.  "I must keep that for
my private museum, Herrick.  Here, my lads, throw something over that
wretch.  Sentry, I'll talk to you later on.  You saved my life."

"Officer's orders, sir," said the man, looking uncomfortable and stiff
as he drew himself up.

"What, to save my life?" said Mr Reardon, smiling, and trying to look
as if everything had been part of the ordinary business of life.

"No, sir; to keep my eye on the Chinees.  I had mine on that chap, for
he looked ugly at you, and I see him pull himself together, shuffle in
his blue jacket, and then make a jump at you, just like a cat at a rat."

"What?"

"Beg pardon, sir," said the man awkwardly; "I don't mean to say as you
looked like a rat."

"I hope not, my lad."

"I meant him jumping like a cat."

"Yes; and you saw him springing at me?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, what then?"

"Only bayonet practice, sir--point from guard, and he came right on it."

"Yes?"

"Then I held him down, sir."

I saw Mr Reardon shudder slightly.

"That will do, sentry," he said shortly.  "I will see you another time.
Come, Mr Herrick."

I followed him on deck, and saw him take off his cap and wipe his
forehead, but he turned consciously to see if I was looking.

"Rather warm below," he said drily.  "I'd better have kept to my first
answer to you, my lad.  You see it's dangerous to go into a wild-beasts'
cage."

"Yes, sir, I'm very sorry," I said; then, anxiously, "But you are sure
you are not hurt, sir?"

"Tut, tut!  I told you no, boy.  There, there, I don't mean that.  Not
even scratched, Mr Herrick.  You can go to your messmates now with an
adventure to tell them," he added, smiling; "only don't dress it up into
a highly-coloured story, about how your superior officer relaxed the
strict rules of dishipline; do you hear?"

"Yes, sir, I hear," I said, and I left him going to join the captain,
while I went down and told Barkins what had been going on, but I had not
been talking to him five minutes before I heard a heavy splash as if
something had been thrown over the side.

"What's that?" said Barkins, turning pale.

I did not answer.

"Sounds like burying some one," he whispered.  "Don't say poor old
Blacksmith has gone?"

"No no," I said.  "I know what it is.  Wait till I've told you all I
have to tell, and then you'll know too."

He looked at me wonderingly, and I completed my account of the scene in
the black-hole place.

"Oh, I see," he cried; "it was the Chinaman?"

I nodded carelessly, but I felt more serious than ever before in my
life, at this horrible sequel to a fearful scene.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A DISAPPOINTMENT.

"Very jolly for you," said Barkins, as we cast anchor off Tsin-Tsin a
couple of mornings later.  "You'll be going ashore and enjoying
yourself, while I'm condemned to hobble on deck with a stick."

"I say, don't grumble," I cried.  "Look how beautiful the place seems in
the sunshine."

"Oh yes, it looks right enough; but wait till you go along the narrow
streets, and get some of the smells."

"Hear that, Smithy?"  I said to our comrade, who was lying in his berth.
"Grumbles because he can't go ashore, and then begins making out how
bad it is.  How about the fox and the grapes?"

"If you call me fox, my lad, I'll give you sour grapes when I get
better.  Where's your glass?"

I took down my telescope, adjusted it for him, and pushed his seat
nearer to the open window, so that he could examine the bright-looking
city, with the blue plum-bloom tinted mountains behind covered with
dense forest, and at the shipping of all nations lying at the mouth of
the river.

"S'pose that tower's made of crockery, isn't it?" said Barkins, whose
eye was at the end of the telescope.

I looked at the beautiful object, with its pagoda-like terraces and
hanging bells, and then at the various temples nestling high up on the
sides of the hills beyond.

"I say," said Smith, "can't you tell Mr Reardon--no, get the doctor to
tell him--that I ought to be taken ashore for a bit to do me good?"

"I'll ask him to let you go," I said; but Smith shook his head, and then
screwed up his white face with a horrible look of disgust.

"Oh, what a shame!" he cried.  "He gets all the luck;" for a message
came for me to be ready directly to go ashore with the captain in the
longboat.

It meant best uniform, for the weather was fine, and I knew that he
would be going to pay a visit to some grand mandarin.

I was quite right; for, when I reached the deck a few minutes later,
there was Mr Brooke with the boat's crew, all picked men, and a strong
guard of marines in full plumage for his escort.

The captain came out of his cabin soon after, with cocked hat and gold
lace glistening, and away we went for the shore soon after; the last
things I saw on the _Teaser_ being the two disconsolate faces of my
messmates at the cabin window, and Ching perched up on the hammock-rail
watching our departure.

I anticipated plenty of excitement that day, but was doomed to
disappointment.  I thought I should go with the escort to the mandarin's
palace, but Mr Brooke was considered to be more attractive, I suppose,
and I had the mortification of seeing the captain and his escort of
marines and Jacks land, while I had to stay with the boat-keepers to
broil in the sunshine and make the best of it, watching the busy traffic
on the great river.

Distance lends enchantment to the view of a Chinese city undoubtedly,
and before long we were quite satiated with the narrow limits of our
close-in view, as well as with the near presence of the crowd of
rough-looking fellows who hung about and stared, as I thought, rather
contemptuously at the junior officer in Her Majesty's service, who was
feeling the thwarts of the boat and the hilt of his dirk most
uncomfortably hot.

"Like me to go ashore, sir, to that Chinesy sweetstuff shop, to get you
one o' their sweet cool drinks, sir?" said one of the men, after we had
sat there roasting for some time.

"No, thank you, Tom Jecks," I said, in as sarcastic a tone as I could
assume.  "Mr Barkins says you are such a forgetful fellow, and you
mightn't come back before the captain."

There was a low chuckling laugh at this, and then came a loud rap.

"What's that?"  I said sharply.

"This here, sir," said another of the men.  "Some 'un's been kind enough
to send it.  Shall I give it him back?"

"No, no!"  I cried, looking uneasily shoreward; and at that moment a
stone, as large as the one previously sent, struck me a sharp blow on
the leg.

"They're a-making cockshies of us, sir," said Tom Jecks; "better let two
of us go ashore and chivvy 'em off."

"Sit still, man, and--"

_Whop_!

"Oh, scissors!" cried a sailor; "who's to sit still, sir, when he gets a
squad on the back like that?  Why, I shall have a bruise as big as a
hen's egg."

"Oars! push off!"  I said shortly, as half-a-dozen stones came rattling
into the boat; and as we began to move away from the wharf quite a burst
of triumphant yells accompanied a shower of stones and refuse.

"That's their way o' showing how werry much obliged they are to us for
sinking the pirates," growled Tom Jecks.  "Oh, don't I wish we had
orders to bombard this blessed town!  Go it!  That didn't hit you, did
it, sir?"

"No, it only brushed my cap," I said, as the stones began to come more
thickly, and the shouting told of the keen delight the mob enjoyed in
making the English retreat.  "Pull away, my lads, and throw the grapnel
over as soon as we are out of reach."

"But we don't want to pull away, sir.  They thinks we're fear'd on 'em.
There's about a hundred on 'em--dirty yaller-faced beggars, and there's
four o' us, without counting you.  Just you give the word, sir, and
we'll row back in spite o' their stones, and make the whole gang on 'em
run.  Eh, mates?"

"Ay, ay!" said the others, lying on their oars.

"Pull!"  I cried sharply, and they began rowing again; for though I
should have liked to give the word, I knew that it would not only have
been madness, but disobedience of orders.  My duty was to take care of
the boat, and this I was doing by having it rowed out beyond
stone-throwing reach, with the Union Jack waving astern; and as soon as
the stones fell short, and only splashed the water yards away, I had the
grapnel dropped overboard, and we swung to it, waiting for the captain's
return.

The men sat chewing their tobacco, lolling in the sun, and I lay back
watching the crowd at the edge of the water, wondering how long the
captain and his escort would be, and whether the prisoners would be
given up.

"Hope none o' them pigtailed varmint won't shy mud at the skipper," said
one of the men, yawning.

"I hope they will," said Tom Jecks.

"Why, mate?"

"'Cause he'll order the jollies to fix bayonets and feel some o' their
backs with the p'ints."

The conversation interested me, and I forgot my dignity as an officer,
and joined in.

"Bayonets make bad wounds, Jecks," I said.

"Yes, sir, they do; nasty three-side wounds, as is bad to get healed up
again.  They aren't half such a nice honest weapon as a cutlash.  But I
should like to see them beggars get a prod or two."

"It might mean trouble, Jecks, and a big rising of the people against
the English merchants and residents."

"Well, sir, that would be unpleasant for the time, but look at the good
it would do!  The British consul would send off to the _Teaser_, the
skipper would land a lot on us--Jacks and jollies; we should give these
warmint a good sharp dressing-down; and they'd know as we wouldn't stand
any of their nonsense, and leave off chucking stones and mud at us.
Now, what had we done that we couldn't be 'lowed to lie alongside o' the
wharf yonder?  We didn't say nothing to them.  Fact is, sir, they hates
the British, and thinks they're a sooperior kind o' people altogether.
Do you hear, mates?--sooperior kind o' people; and there ain't one as
could use a knife and fork like a Chrishtian."

"And goes birds'-nestin' when they wants soup," said another.

"Well, I don't fall foul o' that, matey," said Jecks; "'cause where
there's nests there's eggs, and a good noo-laid egg ain't bad meat.
It's the nastiness o' their natur' that comes in there, and makes 'em
eat the nest as well.  What I do holler at, is their cooking dog."

"And cat," said another.

"And rat," cried the third.

"Yes, all on 'em," said Jecks; "and I don't want to use strong language
afore one's orficer, who's a young gent as is allers thoughtful about
his men, and who's beginning to think now, that with the sun so precious
hot he'll be obliged to order us ashore soon for a drop o' suthin' to
drink."

I laughed, and Tom Jecks chuckled.

"But what I do say about their eatin' and cookin' is this, and I stands
by what I says, it's beastly, that's what it is--it's beastly!"

"Ay, ay," was chorussed, "so it is;" and then there was silence, while
we all sat uneasily in the broiling sun.

"Wish I was a gal," growled one of the men at last.

"Ain't good-looking enough, matey," said Jecks.  "Why?"

"'Cause then I s'ould have a sunshade to put up."

"Ay, 'tis warm--brylin', as you may say.  Any on you know whether the
Chinese is cannibals?  You know, sir?"

"I have heard that they cook very strange things now and then," I said,
laughing.

"Then they is," said Jecks; "and that being so, they'll have a fine
chance to-day.  Hadn't you better send word to some on 'em to lay the
cloth, sir?"

"What for?"

"'Cause I'm nearly done, sir; and Billy Wakes looks quite.  Billy ought
to eat nice and joocy, messmates."

"And old Tom Jecks tough as leather," cried Wakes.

"That's so, matey," growled Jecks, who began to pass his tongue over his
lips, and to make a smacking sound with his mouth.

"My hye, matey, you do seem hungry," said one of the others.  "Look out,
Billy, or he won't leave John Chinaman a taste."

"Get out!" growled Jecks; "that don't mean hungry, messmate--that means
dry.  Beg pardon, sir, we won't none on us try to slope off; but a good
drink o' suthin', if it was on'y water, would be a blessin' in disguise
just now."

"Yes, Jecks, I'm thirsty too," I said.

"Then why not let us pull ashore, sir, and get a drink at one o' them
Chinee imitation grog-shops yonder?"

"Because it would be a breach of discipline, my man," I said, trying to
speak very sternly.  "I should look nice if the captain came back and
found me with the boat and no men."

"Hark at that now!" cried Jecks.  "Just as if we'd be the chaps to get a
good-natured kind young orficer into a scrape.  Look here, sir, put
Billy Wakes ashore to go and fetch some drink.  My hye, what we would
give for half-a-gallon o' real good cool solid old English beer."

"Ha!" came in a deep sigh, and I could not help feeling that a glass
just then would be very nice.

"Will you give the order, sir?" said Jecks insinuatingly.  "Billy Wakes
is a werry trustworthy sort of chap."

"Yes," I said; "but he'd forget to come back, and then I should have to
send you to find him, and then the others to find you.  I know.  There,
you can light your pipes if you like."

"And werry thankful for small mussies," said the old sailor, taking out
his pipe.  "You won't want no matches, lads.  Fill up and hold the bowls
in the sun."

They lit up, and began smoking, while I watched the long narrow street
down which the captain and his escort must come.

"Think we shall have to land the prisoners, sir?" said Jecks, after a
smoky silence.

"I suppose so," I replied.  "I expect that is what the captain has gone
ashore about."

"Don't seem much good, that, sir.  We takes 'em, and they'll let 'em go,
to start a fresh lot o' plundering junks."

"Thundering junks, matey?" said Billy Wakes.

"I said plundering, Billy, and meant it.  Your eddication ain't what it
oughter be."

"No, Jecks," I said; "if the pirates are given up, they'll be executed
for certain."

"Who says so, sir?"

"First lieutenant," I said.

"Well, he ought to know, sir.  Been on the Chinee station afore.  P'raps
it's best, but I don't want 'em to be hung."

"Don't hang 'em here, Tommy," growled one of the two silent men.

"What do they do, then, old know-all?"

"Chops their heads off, I've heerd."

"Oh, well, I don't want 'em to have their heads chopped off.  How should
we like it if we was took prisoners?"

"Oh, but we arn't Chinees," growled Billy Wakes.

"Nor arn't likely to be, mate; but we've got heads all the same.  I know
how I should like to be executed if it was to-day."

The others looked up, and I could not help turning my head at the
strangely-expressed desire.

"I'll tell yer," said Jecks, looking hard at me.  "I should like it to
be same as they did that young chap as we reads of in history.  They
drowned him in a big tub o' wine."

"Grog would do for me," said Billy Wakes.

"Or beer," cried the others.

"Ask the captain to let you have some tea," I cried, "Quick, haul up the
grapnel!  Here they come!"

Pipes were knocked out on the instant, the grapnel hauled up, and oars
seized; but, in spite of urging on the men, I saw to my vexation that
the captain had reached the landing-place first, and I kept him waiting
nearly five minutes in the broiling sun.

He did not say anything, only glared at me as he stepped in, followed by
his escort.  The oars were dropped, and, as we began to row back to the
_Teaser_, I saw that his face was scarlet with the heat, and he looked
in a regular temper.

"I shall catch it," I thought to myself; but the very next moment my
attention was taken to the shore, where a yell of derision arose from
the crowd gathered to see the officers embark.

"Brutes!" muttered the captain; and then he sprang up in a rage, for a
shower of stones came pattering into the boat, and splashing up the
water all round.

He was so enraged by the insult, that he ordered the marines to load,
and a volley of twelve rifles was fired over the people's heads.

The result was that they all ran helter-skelter, tumbling over each
other, and by the time they returned and began throwing again we were
out of their reach, but they kept on hurling stones and refuse all the
same, and shouting "Foreign devils!" in their own tongue.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

AN INTERVIEW.

"Mr Herrick!  Come to my cabin," said the captain as he stepped on
deck, and I followed him.

"You stupid fellow," whispered Mr Brooke as I passed him, "why didn't
you keep the boat by the wharf?"

I gave him a comical look, and followed the captain; but I was kept
waiting for a few moments at the door while the servant was summoned,
and when I did go in my officer was lying back in his chair, with ice on
the table, and a great glass of what seemed to be soda-water and brandy
before him, but which proved by the decanter to be sherry.

"Oh," he cried angrily, "there you are, sir!  Why didn't you come at
once, sir?"

"I did, sir; but was kept waiting till you were ready."

"Well, sir, don't answer in that pert way.  It sounds like insolence.
That will not do, Mr Herrick, if you wish to get on in your profession.
Now, sir, your orders were to stop by the landing-place, with the boat
in charge, ready for my return, were they not?"

"Yes, sir; but--"

"Silence, sir!  How dare you interrupt me?  I go up through the broiling
heat to have an interview with that wretched, stolid, obstinate
mandarin, with his confounded button and peacock-feather; and when I do
get back, perfectly exhausted by the heat, half-dead, I find no boat."

"No, sir; but--"

"Silence, sir!  Will you let me speak?  The consequence is that, because
you choose to disobey orders, and take the men off to indulge in some of
the disgusting drinks of this wretched country--"

"I beg pardon, sir," I cried; "I--"

"Mr Herrick! am I to place you under arrest?  Be silent, sir.  I say, I
return with my escort from an important diplomatic visit, arranged so as
to impress the people, and when I return, almost fainting with the heat,
there is no boat, because you have allowed the men to impose upon you;
and you are away drinking with them, I suppose?"

"No, sir; I--"

"Mr Herrick!" he roared, "I will not bear it.  I say there was no boat;
and not only am I forced to submit to the indignity of waiting, and
listening to the gibes of the low-class Chinese, and to see their
scowls, but our delay there--through you, sir--results, I say results,
in the miserable wretches taking advantage thereof, and, thinking me
helpless, working themselves up to an attack.  When at last you do come
crawling up with those four men, they are purple-faced from drinking,
every one threatened by apoplexy--why, your own face is crimson, sir;
and I could smell the men when I stepped on board."

"No, sir--the dirty harbour, sir," I said.  "Smells horrid."

"You are under arrest, sir.  Go!  No; stop and hear me out first, sir.
I say that, through your delay, I am kept there on that wretched wharf;
and when I do push off, I have--I, Her Majesty's representative, in the
sight of these Chinese scoundrels--I have, I say, to suffer from the
insult and contumely of being pelted, stoned, of having filth thrown at
me.  Look at my nearly new uniform coat, sir.  Do you see this spot on
the sleeve?  A mark that will never come out.  That was a blow, sir,
made by a disgusting rotten fish's head, sir.  Loathsome--loathsome!
While the insult to Her Majesty's flag called upon me to fire upon the
mob.  Do you know what that means, sir?"

"Yes, sir; a good lesson.  They won't be so saucy again."

"You ignorant young puppy!" he cried; "it may mean a serious
international trouble--a diplomatic breach, and all through you.  There,
I was hot and bad enough before, now you have made me worse."

He stretched out his hand for the glass, but did not drink; and the
sight of the cool liquid half-maddened me, for the heat and emotion had
made my throat very dry.

"Now, sir," he cried, "I am your commanding officer, and no one on board
Her Majesty's cruiser shall ever say that I am not just.  Now then,
speak out; what have you to say?  How came you to let the men go away to
drink?"

"I didn't, sir," I said huskily.  "They wanted to go, for they were
choking nearly, but I wouldn't let them."

"What?  Don't seek refuge in a lie, boy.  That's making your fault ten
times worse.  Didn't I see you returning to the wharf?"

"Yes, sir," I cried indignantly; "but the men had not been to drink."

"Then how dared you disobey my orders, and go away?" he roared, furious
at being proved wrong.

"I went, sir, because it was my duty."

"What!"

"We stayed till the stone-throwing grew dangerous for us, and then I had
the boat rowed out and anchored."

"Oh!"

"But I kept watch till you came in sight, sir; and we were as quick as
we could be."

"The mob pelted you too, Mr Herrick?"

"Yes, sir," I said; "and we couldn't fire over their heads, nor yet row
right away."

He looked at me angrily, and then his countenance changed.

"Pert, Mr Herrick," he said, "but very apt.  You have me there on the
hop.  Dear me!  I've made a great mistake, eh?"

"Yes, sir," I said hoarsely.

"And you sat out there in the broiling sun, and the miserable savages
pelted you as they did me?"

"Yes, sir."

"Tut, tut, tut! and the heat was maddening.  Terribly irritating, too; I
felt excessively angry.  I really--dear me, Mr Herrick, I'm afraid I
spoke very unjustly to you, and--I--ought a captain to apologise to a
midshipman?"

"I really don't know, sir," I said, feeling quite mollified by his tone.

"Well, I think I do," he said, smiling.  "Decidedly not.  As Mr Reardon
would say, it would be totally subversive of discipline.  It couldn't be
done.  But one gentleman can of course apologise to another, and I do so
most heartily.  My dear Mr Herrick, I beg your pardon for being so
unjust."

"Pray don't say any more about it, sir," I cried.

"Well, no, I will not.  But all the same I am very sorry--as a
gentleman--that I--as your superior officer--spoke to you as I did."

"Thank you, sir."

"And, dear me, my lad, you look terribly hot and exhausted.  Let me
prescribe, as Mr Price would say."

He quickly placed a lump of ice in a tumbler, and, after pouring in a
little sherry, filled it up with soda-water.

I grasped the glass, and drank with avidity the cool, refreshing draught
to the last drop.

"Humph! you were thirsty."

"I was choking, sir," I said, with a sigh, as I placed the glass upon
the table.

"And now, Mr Herrick, perhaps it would be as well not to talk about
this little interview," he said quietly.  "I rely upon you as a
gentleman."

"Of course, sir," I replied; and feeling, in spite of the severe wigging
I had had, that I never liked the captain half so well before, I backed
out and hurried to my own cabin.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

WE LOSE OUR PRISONERS.

"Here he is," cried Barkins, who was resting his leg; while Smith was
sitting by the open window so as to catch all the air he could.  "Got
your promotion?"

"Got my what?"  I cried.

"Promotion.  I never saw such favouritism.  Always being sent for to the
skipper's cabin.  I wonder Reardon stands it."

"Don't talk nonsense," I cried.  "Phew, isn't it hot?"

"Yes, for us.  Regular prisoners, while you have all the fun--"

"Of being roasted, and then stoned by the Chinese."

"That's right," said Smith sulkily, "make as little as you can of it.
Did the skipper consult you about our next movement?"

"He gave me a good bullying for not having the boat ready when he wanted
to come on board."

"Was that why you went in the cabin?" cried Barkins.

"Of course."

"Oh then, if that's the case, we'll let you off.  Eh, Blacksmith?"

"Well, I suppose so."

"Let me off what?"

"We had been discussing the matter," said Barkins, "Smithy and I, and
come to the conclusion that as you were such a swell you were too good
for us, and we were going to expel you; but, under the circumstances, I
think we'll let you off this time.  Oh!"

"What's the matter?"

"My leg!  There's that horrible tingling and aching again.  I'm sure
that knife was poisoned."

"Hi! look here," cried Smith just then; "here are two big row-boats
coming out to us."

We both made for the window, and there, in the bright sunshine, were two
large barges, gay with gilding and showy ensigns, coming pretty swiftly
in our direction, while, as they drew nearer, we could see that their
occupants were in brilliant costumes and fully-armed, swords and spears
flashing, and gold and silver embroidery lending their glow to the
general effect.

"Why, those must be all the big pots of the city," said Barkins--"these
in the first boat."

"And the second is full of soldiers."

"I know," I cried; "they're coming to fetch the prisoners.  I must go on
deck."

"And we shall see nothing of the fun again," cried Barkins.

"Why not?"  I said; "I'll help you on deck."

"Come on, then," cried Barkins eagerly.  "Oh, hang this wound!"

He caught hold of my shoulder, and with a little pulling and hauling I
got him on deck, hurting him a good deal, I'm afraid, but he bore it
like a martyr, till I had him seated upon a place near the starboard
gangway.

I then turned to go and help up Smith, but found he had called in the
aid of a couple of the sailors, and the next minute he too was seated by
Barkins.

Meanwhile the drum had called the men to quarters, the officers were on
deck in uniform, and the marines drawn-up to form a guard of honour,
sufficiently smart and warlike, with the white-ducked Jacks, and big
guns bright as hands could make them, to impress the barbaric party
coming on board.

The boats were rowing very near now, and the captain came on deck, to
stand under the awning which had been stretched out since the _Teaser_
had been restored to order.  Then the gangway was opened, the steps were
lowered, and half-a-dozen Jacks descended to help the visitors to mount,
while the marines stood at attention.

The boatmen managed to fall foul of the side, and nearly upset the
barge, but our lads saved them from that disaster; and the mandarin and
his suite, who had come off, soon mounted to the deck, to stand
haughtily returning the salutes of the officers.

Then there was an awkward pause, for our officers only knew a few words
of Chinese, while the mandarin's party, although they had had Englishmen
in their city for nearly a hundred years, could not speak a word of our
tongue, and they had brought no interpreter.

There was an awkward pause, broken by a high-pitched voice just outside
the gorgeous-looking throng.

"You wantee Ching?"

"Yes," cried the captain; "tell these gentlemen that they are heartily
welcome on board Her Majesty's ship."

Ching nodded, and, bowing down humbly, gazed at the white deck, and
squeaked out a long speech to the contemptuous-looking Chinese official,
who stood in front of his attendants, each in his long, stiff,
embroidered silk dressing-gown; and what seemed the most comically
effeminate was that the gorgeous officers, with rat-tail moustachios and
armed with monstrous swords, each carried a fan, which he used
constantly.

"He's putting an awful lot of fat in the captain's speech," whispered
Barkins, who was just behind me.

Then the chief of the party said a few words, without condescending to
notice the interpreter, and Ching backed away, to turn to the captain.

"His most noble excellency the big-buttoned mandalin has come on board
the gleat fine ship with his genelals, and blavest of the blave, to
fetch the most wicked and double-bad plisoners whom the gleat sea
captain of the foleign devils--"

"Eh! what?" said Captain Thwaites.  "Did he say that?"

"Yes.  Come fetch allee bad bad plisoners velly much all together."

"Very well," said the captain; "tell him he can have them, and welcome."

Ching approached the mandarin again, in his former humble form, and made
another long speech; after which the great official turned to one of his
attendants and said something; this gorgeous being turned and spoke to
another; and he went to the gangway and stood fanning himself as he
squeaked out something to the soldiers in the second boat.

Then an order was given, and in a curious shambling way about forty
soldiers came up the steps, and ranged themselves in a double row,
something after the fashion of our drilling.

I was watching these men with their heavy swords and clumsy spears, when
there was a clanking sound, and a dozen more men came on deck with quite
a load of heavy chains, which at a word of command they banged down with
a crash upon the deck, and then stood waiting.

At the same moment the captain gave an order, and our marine officer
marched off with a strong detachment of his men right forward; and after
a pause, during which Englishmen and Chinamen stood staring at each
other and the grandees used their fans, the first prisoner was brought
forward by a couple of marines, strolling along in a heavy, careless way
till he was abreast of his fellow-countrymen.

Then at a word from an officer four soldiers seized the unfortunate
wretch and threw him heavily down upon his face; two knelt upon him, and
in a trice heavy chains were fitted to his legs and wrists, the latter
being dragged behind his back.  Then, by one consent, the four Chinamen
leaped up, and waited for the prisoner to follow their example, but he
lay still.

"If he has any gumption he won't move," whispered Barkins, who like
myself was an interested spectator.

Mr Reardon walked to us.

"Silence, young gentlemen," he said sternly.  "Let us show these
barbarians what dishipline is.--Brute!"

This last applied to one of the Chinamen, who said something to the
prisoner, who merely wagged his tail, and then received a tremendous
kick in the ribs.

He sprang up then like a wild-beast, but he was seized by as many as
could get a grip of him, bundled to the gangway, and almost thrown down
into the barge, where other men seized him and dragged him forward to
where some spearmen stood ready on guard.

By this time another had been thrown down and chained.  He made no
scruple about rising and walking to the side to be bundled down.

Another followed, and another, the grandees hardly glancing at what was
going on, but standing coolly indifferent and fanning away, now and then
making some remark about the ship, the guns, or the crew.

Seven had been chained, and the eighth was brought forward by two
marines, seized, thrown down, and fettered.  Then, instead of allowing
himself to be bundled into the boat as apathetically as the others, he
gazed fiercely to right and left, and I saw that something was coming.

So did the indifferent-looking Chinese, for one of the most gorgeously
dressed of the party whipped out a heavy curved sword, whose blade was
broader at the end than near the hilt, and made for him; but, active as
a cat, and in spite of the weight of his chains, the man made a series
of bounds, knocked over two of the soldiers, and leaped at the gangway
behind them, reached the top, and fell more than jumped over, to go down
into the water with a heavy splash.

Half-a-dozen of the men leaped on to the rail, and stood looking down,
before the captain could give an order; while a few words were shouted
from the barge below.

The officer returned his sword, and began fanning himself again; the
soldiers seized the next prisoner and began chaining him, but no one
stirred to save the man overboard, and we all grasped the reason why,--
twenty pounds of iron fetters took him to the bottom like a stone.

I saw the captain frown as he said something to Mr Reardon, who merely
shook his head.

"Ain't they going to lower a boat, sir?"  I whispered to Mr Brooke.

"We could do no good," he said.  "There are twenty fathoms of water out
there, Herrick, and the man could not rise."

The incident did not seem to discompose the Chinese, who disposed of the
next prisoner.  And then I saw that the marines had charge of another,
who suddenly made an attempt to escape, and our men only having one
hand, at liberty, the other holding a rifle, he would have succeeded,
had not six or seven of the soldiers rushed at and seized him, dragging
him to the lessening heap of chains, when he suddenly threw up his hands
and dropped upon his knees, throwing them off their guard by making
believe to resign himself to his fate.

But before the first fetter could be dragged to where he knelt, he
sprang up with the fire of fury in his eyes, and made a rush at the
mandarin, seized him, and it would have gone ill with his gaudy costume,
had not a couple of the officers dragged out their swords.

What followed took only a moment or two.  I saw the blades flash, heard
a sickening sound, and saw the prisoner stagger away, while the second
of the two officers followed him, delivering chop after chop with his
heavy blade, till the unfortunate wretch dropped upon the deck, where he
was at once seized and pitched overboard without the slightest
compunction.

"Here, interpreter, tell the chief I cannot have my deck turned into a
butcher's shamble like this," cried the captain angrily.

Ching shuffled forward, and advanced towards the mandarin, spoke at
length; the mandarin replied with a haughty smile, and Ching backed away
again.

"Gleat big-button mandalin say he velly much 'blige captain big fine
ship, and he allee light, no hurtee 'tall by killee badee bad men."

"Bah!" ejaculated the captain, turning angrily away; and I saw Mr
Reardon's face grow fixed, as if carved in wood, in his efforts to keep
from smiling.

The last of the prisoners had been brought out of confinement, thrown
down, chained, and bundled into the barge, half the soldiers followed,
orders were given, and the second barge pushed off, when the captain
once more had recourse to Ching's help.

"Ask the mandarin if he will come into the cabin and take a glass of
wine."

But this was declined, and Ching communicated the fact that the great
man "would not eatee dlinkee, but wantee velly much see ship."

He was taken round, the whole following keeping at his heels, and his
officers and soldiers scowling fiercely, or looking about with supreme
contempt, as they made a great display of their weapons, and acted
generally as if they were condescending to look round, so as to be civil
to the Western barbarians.

At last they went over the side, and the gorgeous barge was rowed away.

"Thank goodness, Reardon," I heard the captain say; and directly after,
as I was passing, Tom Jecks' voice was heard in the midst of a group of
the Jacks.

"Say, messmate," he said, "fancy, stripped and fists only, how many
Chinese could you polish off?"

"Dunno," said a voice, which I knew to be that of Billy Wakes, a big
manly-looking young Plymouth fellow.  "'Course I could do one, and I
think I could doctor two on 'em; I'd have a try at three; and I'm blest
if I'd run away from four.  That is about as fair as I can put it,
messmate."

I was helping Barkins to the companion-way, and Smith was walking very
slowly by us.  But as we heard this we stopped to laugh, just as Mr
Brooke came up and asked what amused us.  We told him, and he laughed
too.

"That means one of our fellows would try at four Chinamen.  He's too
modest.  Four to one, lads! why, if it came to real righting, ten of
them would follow me against a hundred of the enemy.  Ten to one.--News
for you."

"News, sir; what?"  I said.

"We sail again directly.  There is another gang at work south, and we
have a hint of the whereabouts of their nest."


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

IN A TRAP.

"Ever feel at all uncomfortable about--that--Chinaman, Morris?"  I said
one day, after we had been coasting along the shore southward for about
a week.  I had not encountered that marine sentry alone since the
terrible scene in the place where the prisoners were confined; and now,
as soon as I saw him, the whole affair came back with all its shuddering
horrors, and I felt quite a morbid desire to talk to him about it.

"What, bayoneting him, sir?" said the man quietly.  "Well, no, sir, it's
very odd, but I never have much.  I was so excited when I see him with
his knife ashining by the light o' the corporal's lantern, that all the
bayonet practice come to me quite natural like, and, as you know, I give
point from the guard, and he jumped right on it, and I held him down
after as you would a savage kind of tiger thing, and felt quite pleased
like at having saved the first luff's life.  After you'd gone all the
lads got talking about it, and I felt as proud as a peacock with ten
tails.  And I got wondering, too, about what Mr Reardon would do, for
he said he would see me again.  It was all very well then, but that
night when I turned in I felt quite sick, and I couldn't sleep a wink.
The more I turned about in my hammock, the hotter and worser I got.
There it all was before me, I could see myself holding that pirate chap
pinned down, and there was his eyes rolling and his teeth snapping as he
twisted about.  Ugh! it was horrid, sir; and I felt as I was in for it,
and began to understand what one has read about chaps as commits murder
always being haunted like with thoughts of what they've done, and never
being happy no more.  Then it got worse and worse, and I says to myself,
`If it was as bad as that for just doing your duty, and saving your
officer's life, what must it be when you kills a man out o' sheer
wickedness to get his money?'"

The man stopped then, and looked round to see if any one was within
hearing, but we were quite alone, and he went on quietly--

"You won't laugh at me, sir, will you?"

"Laugh?"  I cried wonderingly.  "It's too horrible to laugh about."

"Yes, sir; but I meant, feel ready to chaff about it, and tell the other
young gentlemen, and get thinking me soft."

"Of course not, Morris."

"No, sir, you ain't that sort.  You've got a mother, too, ain't you?"

"Yes; but I shouldn't have liked her to see all we saw that day."

"No, sir, you wouldn't.  I haven't got no mother now, sir, but I did
have one once."

I felt ready to smile, but I kept my countenance.

"Seems rum of a big ugly fellow like me talking about his mother, sir;
but, Lor' bless you! all us chaps has got a bit of a soft spot somewhere
insides us for our old woman, even them as never talks about it; and do
you know, sir, that night just when I felt worst as I rolled about in my
hammock, and was going to get out and find the bucket of water for a
drink, I got thinking about my old mother, and how she used to come and
tuck me up in bed of a night, and kiss me and say, Gawd bless me, and
then of how she used to talk to me and tell me always to do what was
right, and, no matter what happened, I should feel at rest.  And then I
got thinking as I must have done very wrong in killing that Chinee, to
feel as bad as I did.  And I got arguing it over first one way and then
the other for a minute or two, and the next thing I remember is it being
tumble-up time, and till you spoke to me about it just now, I've never
hardly thought about it since.  It was doing my duty, sir, of course;
now, warn't it?"

"Of course, Morris," I said importantly; and the man nodded, looked
satisfied, and then glanced to right and left again before unbuttoning
his jacket and cautiously pulling out an old-fashioned gold watch.

"Why, hallo, Morris!"  I cried.

"Hush, sir; keep it quiet.  Mr Reardon give it to me the day afore
yesterday, and said I wasn't to talk about it, for it was just between
ourselves."

"It's a fine old watch," I said, feeling glad that the man we lads
looked upon as such a stem tyrant could show so warm and generous a side
to his nature.

"Said, sir, he gave it to me for attending so well to dishipline, as he
called it, for he said if I had not attended well to my drill, there
would have been no first lieutenant to give me a watch out of gratitude
for saving his life."

"You must take care of that, Morris," I said.

"Yes, sir," he said dolefully.  "That's the worst of it.  Gold watch is
an orkard thing for a marine, but I mean to try."

"And be very careful to wind it up regularly every night."

He looked at me with his face all wrinkled up.

"Would you, sir--would you wind it up?"

"Why, of course; what's a watch for?"

"Well, that depends, sir.  It's all right for a gentleman, but don't
seem no good to me.  We allus knows how many bells it is, and the
sergeants takes good care that we're in time for everything.  It's
rather in my way, too.  Look here, sir; s'pose you took care of it for
me to the end of the voyage?"

"Oh no, Morris.  You'll soon get used to having a watch," I said.  "Take
care of it yourself."

He shook his head.

"I don't know as I can, sir," he said.  "If it had been a silliver one,
I shouldn't so much have minded.  I was thinking of sewing it up in the
padding of my jacket."

"No, no; keep it in your pocket and never part with it," I said.  "It's
a watch to be proud of, for it was earned in a noble way."

"Thankye, sir," he cried, as I stood wondering at my own words; "that's
done me good;" and he buttoned his jacket up with an intense look of
satisfaction.

"I'm beginning to think the doctor was right, Gnat," said Barkins one
morning.

"What about?"  I said.

"My wound; I don't think the knife was poisoned."

"Why, of course it wasn't; you fancied it all."

"Well, I couldn't help that, could I?  You wait till you get your wound,
and then see how you'll begin to fancy all sorts of things.  I say,
though, Smithy's getting right pretty quick.  The doctor's pitched him
over.  I should have sent him back to his duty before, if I'd been old
Physic.  He was all right yesterday."

"How do you know?"

"Because he was so nasty tempered.  Nothing was good enough for him."

"Oh, come, I like that," cried Smith, who overheard him.  "Why, I was as
patient as could be; I appeal to the Poet.  Did I ever go fussing about
telling people I was wounded by a poisoned knife?"

"No," I said; "you were both magnificent specimens of brave young
midshipmen, and behaved splendidly."

"Oh, did we?" cried Barkins.  "Look here, Blacksmith, we'll remember
this, and as soon as we're strong enough we'll punch his head."

"Agreed.  He's been growing as cocky as a bantam since we've been ill.
We must take him down."

"Why, what for?"  I cried.

"Making game of your betters.  Sarce, as Tom Jecks calls it."

We had something else to think of three days later, and in the
excitement both my messmates forgot their wounds, save when some quick
movement gave them a reminder that even the healing of a clean cut in
healthy flesh takes time.

For we overhauled a suspicious-looking, fast-sailing junk, which paid no
heed to our signals, but was brought to after a long chase, and every
man on board was chuckling and thinking about prize-money.

But when she was boarded, with Ching duly established as interpreter,
and all notion of returning to the "fancee shop" put aside for the
present, the junk turned out to be a peaceful trader trying to make her
escape from the pursuit of pirates, as we were considered to be.

Ching soon learned the cause of the captain's alarm.  The day before he
had come upon a junk similar to his own, with the crew lying murdered on
board, and, judging from appearances, the wretches who had plundered her
could not have gone long.

Mr Brooke was the officer in charge of the boat, and he told Ching to
ask the master of the junk whether he had seen any signs of the pirates.

The man eagerly replied that he had seen three fast boats entering the
Ayshong river, some thirty miles north of where we then were, and as
soon as he found that we really were the boat's crew of a ship working
for the protection of the shipping trade, his joy and excitement were
without bounds, and showed itself in presents,--a chest of tea for the
crew, and pieces of silk for Mr Brooke and myself; parting with us
afterwards in the most friendly way, and, as Ching afterwards told me,
saying that we were the nicest foreign devils he ever met.

Our news when we went on board made the captain change our course.  We
were bound for a river a hundred miles lower down, but it was deemed
advisable to go back and proceed as far up the Ayshong, as a fresh nest
of the desperadoes might be discovered there.

By night we were off the muddy stream, one which appeared to be of no
great width, but a vast body of water rushed out from between the rocky
gates, and from the desolate, uninhabited look of the shores it seemed
probable that we might find those we sought up there.

It was too near night to do much, so the captain contented himself with
getting close in after the boat sent to take soundings, and at dark we
were anchored right in the mouth, with the watch doubled and a boat out
as well to patrol the river from side to side, to make sure that the
enemy, if within, did not pass us in the darkness.

All lights were out and perfect silence was maintained, while, excited
by the prospect of another encounter, not a man displayed the slightest
disposition to go to his hammock.

It was one of those soft, warm, moist nights suggestive of a coming
storm, the possibility of which was soon shown by the faint quivering of
the lightning in the distance.

"Storm before morning," whispered Barkins.

"Yes," said Smith; "storm of the wrong sort.  I want to hear our guns
going, not thunder."

From time to time the boat which was on the patrol duty came alongside
to report itself, but there was no news; in fact, none was expected, for
such a dark night was not one that would be chosen by vessels wishing to
put to sea.

I had been disposed to ask for permission to go in the boat, but Mr
Reardon's countenance looked rather stormy, so I had given up the idea,
and contented myself with stopping on board with my two messmates, to
watch the dark mouth of the river.

It soon grew very monotonous, having nothing to see but the shapes of
the distant clouds, which stood out now and then like dimly-seen
mountains high up above the land.  But by degrees the distant flickering
of the lightning grew nearer, and went on slowly growing brighter, till
from time to time, as we leaned over the bulwarks, listening to the
faint rushing sound of the river, sweeping past the chain cable, and
dividing again upon our sharp bows, we obtained a glimpse of the shore
on either side.  Then it glimmered on the black, dirty-looking stream,
and left us in greater darkness than ever.

Once we made out our boat quite plainly, and at last there came so vivid
a flash that we saw the river upward for quite a mile, and I made out
the low shores, but could see no sign of house or vessel moored anywhere
near where we lay.

Another hour must have passed, during which we made out that the country
on either side was flat and marshy, but we could see no sign of human
habitation.  As far as could be made out, the river was about three
hundred yards broad, and about this time we became aware that it must be
very nearly low tide, for the stream which passed us was growing more
and more sluggish, till at last it ceased ebbing, and the _Teaser_ began
to swing slowly round, a sufficient indication that the tide had turned.

We had swung to our anchor till we were right across the stream, when
from higher up a shot was fired, and, as if caused by the report, a
dazzling flash cut right across the heavens, lighting up the river with
its muddy sides, and there, not five hundred yards away, we made out two
large junks that had come down with the tide, which had now failed them,
just as they were close to the mouth.

All had been perfectly silent so far, but as the intense darkness
succeeded the brilliant flash, there was a loud gabbling and shouting
from the direction of the junks, then came the splashing of great oars,
followed by their regular beating, and, as we swung further round with
the men hurrying to their quarters, the boat came alongside, and was
hoisted.

"Well, Mr Brooke?"

"Two large junks, sir; come down with the tide; they've put about, sir,
and are going back."

"Sure?"

"Yes, sir, certain.  Hark!"

The hissing sound of the tide had recommenced, and above it we could
hear the splash, splash of great sweeps, sounding hurried and irregular,
as if the men at them were making all the haste they could.  Every now
and then, too, came a curious creaking sound, as wood was strained
against wood.

"Tide's setting in very hard, sir," said Mr Brooke.

"Yes," said the captain.  "Come on board; ha!"

There was another vivid flash, and we distinctly saw the great
matting-sails of two junks for a moment, and again all was black.

"Come on board, Mr Brooke; they could not sweep those great craft out
against such a tide as this, and there is no wind to help them even if
they wished."

Then the falls were hooked on, after the coxswain had with some
difficulty drawn the cutter up to where the light of a lantern was
thrown down for his guidance, the men stamped along the deck, and the
cutter rose to the davits for the men to spring on board.

Daylight found us lying head to sea, with the tide rushing up, a
beautifully verdant country spreading out on either side, but no
habitation in sight, and our men in great glee, for it was pretty
evident that unless the junks should prove to be merchantmen, we had
come upon a little-known river, up which we had trapped the pirates, who
had been to land plunder at their nest, and were about to make their way
again to sea.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

UP THE RIVER.

The threatening of a storm had passed away, and the sun rose upon us,
showing distant mountains of a delicious blue, and the river winding
inland broader than at its mouth, and, as far as could be seen, free of
additional entrances through which an enemy could escape to sea.

Steam was got up, the _Teaser's_ head swung round, and, after the lead
had shown great depth and a muddy bottom, we began to glide steadily up
with the tide.

Our progress was very slow, for, as you will easily understand, and must
have noted scores of times in connection with some wreck, a ship is of
immense weight, and, even if moving ever so slowly, touching a rock at
the bottom means a tremendous grinding crash, and either the vessel
fixed, perhaps without the possibility of removal, or a hole made which
will soon cause it to sink.  Navigation, then, is beset with dangers for
a captain.  If he is in well-known waters, matters are simple enough;
every rock will be marked upon his chart, every mile near shore will
have been sounded, and he will know to a foot or two how much water is
beneath his keel.  But as soon as he ventures up some strange creek or
river, paradoxically speaking, "he is at sea."  In other words, he would
be journeying haphazard, if the greatest precautions were not taken.

These precautions were soon taken, a couple of boats being sent on ahead
with a man in each taking soundings, while we had this advantage--we
were journeying with a rising tide, and the river naturally grew deeper
and deeper.

But we encountered no difficulty; we steamed on just fast enough to give
the vessel steerage way, while the boats went on, the leads were heaved,
and the result was always the same; plenty of water, and so soft and
muddy a bottom, that even if we had gone aground, all that would have
happened would have been a little delay while we waited for the tide to
lift us off.

The course of the river was so winding that we could not see far ahead.
Hence it was that a careful look-out was kept as we rounded each bend,
expecting at every turn to see a kind of port to which the piratical
junks resorted, and with a village, if not a town, upon the shore.  But
we went on and on without success, the river, if anything, growing
wider, till all at once, as we were slowly gliding round a bend, leaving
a thick track of black smoke in the misty morning air, one of the men in
the top hailed the deck.

"Sail ho, sir!"

"Where away?"

"Dead astarn, sir!"

"What?"

"Dead astarn, sir!"

Two of the men near me burst into a laugh, which they tried to hide as
the first lieutenant looked sharply round.  But there, sure enough, were
the tops of the junk's masts dead astern, for the course of the river
proved to be just there almost exactly like that piece of twisted flat
wire which ladies fasten on the backs of their dresses, and call an eye;
the great stream forming first a small circle, and then going right away
to form the large loop of the eye, while the junks were lying at the far
side of the loop, so that to reach them where they lay, right across an
open plain about two miles in width, we had to sail for some distance
right away, apparently leaving them right behind.

A little use of the telescope soon showed that we were going quite
right, though, and we went steadily on with the boats ahead sounding,
and the men waiting to be called to quarters.

"I don't believe it's going to be a fight, Gnat!" cried Smith.

"Why not?"

"Can't smell anything like prize-money in it.  They're only a couple of
big trading junks."

"Then why did they run away from us as they did?"

"Same reason as the one did last time.  Thought we meant mischief.  How
stupid it is taking all this trouble to crawl up a muddy river."

"What's he talking about?" said Barkins, stepping over to our side for a
moment before every one would have to be in his place, and unable to
stir.

"Says they're trading junks."

"Then it's all up.  He knows.  Either his wound or the doctoring has
made him go better.  He's awfully sharp now.  I'll go and tell the
skipper to turn back."

"That's right; chaff away," cried Smith.  "Look at the place we're in!
There isn't a sign of a town.  What would bring pirates up here?"

"Pirates don't want towns, do they, stupid?" cried Barkins; "they want a
place to lay up their ships in, and here it is.  I'll bet anything those
are pirates, but we shan't catch 'em."

"Why?"  I asked.  "Think they'll go up higher where we can't follow?"

"Could follow 'em in the boats, couldn't we, clever?  Hi! look! they're
on the move!  They're pirates, and are going up higher because they see
us.  But we shan't catch 'em.  If they are getting the worst of it,
they'll run themselves aground, and get ashore to make a dash for it."

Barkins was right; they were on the move, as we could distinctly see
now, and my messmate said again--

"Yes, it's all over; they'll follow this river right away to the other
side, and come out in the Black Sea, or somewhere else.  We draw too
much water to follow them farther."

But we did follow them a great deal farther, and found that on the
whole, in spite of our careful progress, we gained upon the junks,
getting so near them once from their position across a bend of the river
that a discussion took place as to whether it would not be advisable to
open fire at long range.

But no gun spoke, and we kept on slowly, carried by the tide, and with
the screw revolving just sufficiently for steering purposes, till once
more the course of the river grew pretty straight, and the junks were in
full view, our glasses showing the men toiling away at the long sweeps,
and that the decks were crowded.

This last was intensely satisfactory, for it swept away the last doubts
as to the character of the vessels.  Up to this point it was possible
that they might have been trading junks whose skippers had taken alarm,
but no mercantile junks would have carried such crews as we could see,
with their bald heads shining in the sun.

Just about that time Smith and I passed Tom Jecks, who gave me a
peculiar look.

"What is it?"  I said, stopping to speak.

"Can't you put in a word to the skipper, sir, and get him to stir up the
engyneers?"

"What for, Tom?"

"To go faster, sir.  It's horrid, this here.  Why, I could go and ketch
'em in the dinghy."

"Do you want the _Teaser_ stuck in the mud?"  I said.

"No, sir, o' course not; but I say, sir, do you think it's all right?"

"What do you mean, Jecks?"

"This here river, sir.  I ayve read in a book about Chinee Tartars and
magicians and conjurors.  There was that chap in `Aladdin' as left the
boy shut up down below.  He were a Chinee, wasn't he?"

"I think so, Tom; but what have the _Arabian Nights_ got to do with our
hunting these pirates?"

"Well, that's what I want to know, sir.  If there was magic in them days
in China, mayn't there be some left now?"

"No, Tom," I said.  "We've got more magic on board the _Teaser_ in the
shape of steam, than there is of the old kind in all China."

"Well, sir, you've had more schooling than ever I've had, but if it
ain't a bit magicky about them boats, I should like to know what it is."

"What's he talking about?" said Smith.  "What do you mean?"

"They're will-o'-the-wispy sort o' boats, sir," replied Jecks.  "Don't
you see how they keep dodging on us?  Just now they was in easy shot,
now they're two mile away.  What does that mean?"

"Physical conformation of the road," said Smith importantly.

"Oh, is it, sir?" said Jecks, scratching his head, with a dry smile on
his face.  "Well, I shouldn't have thought as physic had anything to do
with that, but I daresay you're right, sir.  Wish we could give them
junks physic."

"I don't believe we shall get near enough to give them a dose," said
Smith discontentedly.  "If I were the skipper, I'd--"

Smith did not say what he would, for just then there was a shout from
the boat, the man with the lead giving such shallow soundings that we
heard the gongs sound in the engine-room, and the clank of the machinery
as it was stopped and reversed.

Then orders were given for soundings to be taken right across the river,
but the result was always the same; the stream had suddenly shallowed,
and it was at first supposed to be a bar; but sounding higher up proved
that the shoal water was continuous, and though the lighter-draft junks
had gone on, they had now come to a standstill, which suggested that
they too had been stopped.

"Told you so," grumbled Barkins, joining us.  "All this trouble for
nothing.  Why didn't the skipper open fire and blow 'em out of the water
when he had a chance?"

"Go and ask him, Mr Barkins," said Mr Brooke, who overheard his
remark.  "And if I were you, I'd ask him at the same time why it is
amateurs can always manage better than the leader."

Mr Brooke nodded, and I saw that he looked very serious as he walked
aft, and a minute later I knew why.

"Bah!" growled Smith, as soon as he was out of hearing.  "Shouldn't have
listened."

"No," said Barkins.  "It isn't quite manly to play the spy.  Talk about
snubbing, why is it officers should think it so precious fine to be
always dropping on to their juniors?  Now, then, look out! there's
orders coming.  The old _Teaser's_ going to waggle her tail between her
legs, and we're going back again.  More waste of Her Majesty's coals."

"If we don't lie-to till the tide turns," I said.  "Oh, I say, you two
look sharp and get quite well again; I didn't know that having wounds
would make fellows so sour."

"Who's sour.  Here, let's get aft; quick, or we shall be out of the
fun."

For the whistles were going, and the men springing to the boats, three
of which were manned, and the one lying alongside being filled with a
strong, well-armed crew.

We all three did press forward, in the full hope of being sent as well,
and made ourselves so prominent that I saw Mr Reardon frown.  But no
orders came; and at last, in a great state of excitement, Barkins seized
the opportunity to speak.

"May I go in the longboat, sir?"

"You--lame still from your wound, sir?  Absurd!  No, nor you neither,
Mr Smith."

He caught my eye just then, but turned away, and I could not help
feeling disappointed, though I knew well enough that the risk would have
been great.

"Oh, I do call it a shame," grumbled Barkins, as the order was given,
the men cheered, and, under the command of Mr Brooke, the four boats
pushed off, the oars dropped, the oily water splashed in the bright
sunshine, and each boat with its colours trailing astern glided rapidly
up-stream.

"Yes, it's too bad," grumbled Smith in turn, who unconsciously began
nursing his arm as if it pained him.

"Why, it's worse for me," I cried.  "I'm quite strong and well.  I ought
to have gone."

Barkins exploded with silent laughter, laid his hand on Smith's
shoulder, and said huskily, as if he were choking with mirth--

"I say, hark at him!  What for?  There'll be plenty of mosquitoes up
there to sting the poor fellows; they don't want a gnat to tickle them
and make them fight."

"No," said Smith.  "Never mind, little boy, be good, and we'll take you
on an expedition some day."

"All right," I replied; "I don't mind your chaff, only you needn't be so
nasty because you are disappointed."

"Mr Herrick!  Where's Mr Herrick?" cried the first lieutenant.

"Here, sir," I shouted; and I could not help giving my companions a look
full of triumph as I dashed aft.

"Oh, there you are, sir.  Now look here, I'm going to mast-head you.
Got your glass?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then up with you, right to the main-topgallant cross-trees.  Notice
everything you can."

My heart began to beat before I reached the main shrouds, and it beat
more heavily as I toiled up the rattlins, reached the top, and then went
on again, too much excited to think of there being any danger of
falling, my mind being partly occupied with thoughts of what Barkins and
Smith were saying about my being favoured in this way.

"Just as if they could have come up," I said half-laughing; "one with a
game leg, the other with a game arm."

My thoughts ran, too, as much upon what I was about to see, so that
beyond taking a tight hold, and keeping my spyglass buttoned up in my
jacket, I paid little heed to the height I was getting, I reached the
head of the topmast, and then began to mount the rattlins of the
main-topgallant mast, whose cross-trees seemed to be a tremendous height
above my head.

But I was soon there, and settled myself as comfortably as I could,
sitting with an arm well round a stay, and one leg twisted in another
for safety; but the wood did not feel at all soft, and there was a
peculiar rap, rap, rap against the tapering spar which ran up above my
head to the round big wooden bun on the top of all, which we knew as the
truck.

For a moment or two I couldn't make out what the sound was.  Then I saw
it was caused by the halyards, the thin line which ran up through the
truck and down again to the deck, for hoisting our colours.  This
doubled line, swayed by the breeze, was beating against the tall pole,
but I checked the noise by putting my arm round it and holding the thin
halyard tight.

I looked down for a moment or two at the deck which lay beneath, giving
me a bird's-eye view through the rigging of the white decks dotted with
officers and men, and the guns glistening in the sunshine.  There were
several faces staring up at me, and I made out Barkins and Smith, and
waved my hand.  But these were only momentary glances; I had too much to
see of far more importance.  For there, spread out round me, was a grand
view of the low, flat, marshy country, through which the river wound
like a silver snake.  Far away in the distance I could see villages, and
what seemed to be a tower of some size.  Beyond it, cultivated land and
patches of forest; behind me, and to right and left, the shimmering sea,
and straight in front the two junks; while almost at my feet, in spite
of their hard rowing, there were our four boats, with the oars dipping
with glorious regularity, and making the water flash and glitter, but
not so brightly as did the bayonets of the few marines in each, as they
sat in the stern-sheets with their rifles upright between their legs,
and the keen triangular blades at the tops of the barrels twinkling at
every movement of the boats.

It was a sight to make any one's heart throb, and in spite of my
splendid position for seeing everything I could not help wishing I was
there to help make a part of the picture I saw, with the men in their
white ducks and straw hats, the marines glowing like so many patches of
poppies, and the officers with their dark blue coats faintly showing a
lace or two of gold.

How I longed to be with them bound upon such an exciting trip, and all
the time how glad I was to be up there in so commanding a position, as,
after watching the progress of the boats for a few moments, I opened and
focussed my glass, rested it against a rope, and fixed it upon the
junks.

The first thing I noticed was that one of them lay a little over to
port, as if from being too heavily laden on one side; while, as I gazed,
the other was evidently settling in the other direction.

I wondered what they were doing to them, and whether it meant changing
heavy guns over to one side, when I grasped the fact,--they had gone as
high up-stream as they could, and then run aground, and were fixed in
the sticky mud of which the bottom of the river was composed.

"Ahoy! there aloft," shouted Mr Reardon.  "What do you make out?"

I did not take the glass from my eye, but shouted down to him--

"Both junks fast aground, sir.  Chinese crews running backwards and
forwards, trying to work them off, sir."

An eager conversation ensued between Mr Reardon and the captain, during
which I carefully scanned the two Chinese vessels, and could see the men
swarming here and there, as if in an intense state of agitation, but
they soon ceased trying to rock the junks, and, as I judged, they were
waiting for the tide to rise higher and float them off.

There was nothing between to hinder my having a thoroughly good view of
where they lay, just round a slight bend, but I felt certain that they
could not see our boats, and I had proof that this was the case, on
noticing that a group of men had landed, and were running towards a
clump of tall trees, where they disappeared amongst the growth.

"Cowards!"  I said to myself, for I felt that they were deserters, and,
after watching for their reappearance, I was about to turn the glass
upon the junks again, when I noticed a peculiar agitation of the
branches of one tree, which stood up far above the others.

"Well, Mr Herrick, I am waiting for your reports," cried the first
lieutenant.

"Yes, sir," I shouted.  "Half-a-dozen men landed from one of the junks,
and ran across to a patch of wood."

"Deserters?  Any more leaving the ship?"

"No, sir."

"Ah, they saw the boats coming, I suppose?"

"No, sir, but they soon will.  One of them is climbing a big tree, much
higher than the junk's masts."

"For a look-out, eh?"

"Yes, sir, I think so," I shouted; and then to myself, "Oh, bother!
It's hard work talking from up here.  There he is, sir, right up at the
top.  You could see him from the deck."

"No, I can see nothing from here.  Well, what is he doing?"

"Making signals with his hands, sir, and now he's coming down again."

"Then you think he has seen the boats?"

"No, sir; they are following one another close in under the bank."

"Then they can't see them," cried Mr Reardon, "and Mr Brooke will take
them by surprise."

He did not shout this, but said it to the captain.  Still the words rose
to where I sat watching, till the Chinamen ran out from among the bushes
at the foot of the trees, and I saw them making for the junks again.

I could not see them climb on board, but I felt that they must have
jumped into a boat and rowed off to their friends, and, fixing my glass
upon the deck of first one and then the other, I began to make out more
and more clearly the actions of the crews, and, judging from the
glittering, I saw some kind of arms were being distributed.

I announced this at first as a supposition, telling Mr Reardon what I
thought it was.

"Yes, very likely," he replied; and a few minutes after I saw something
else, and hailed.

"Yes," he said, "what now?" and I saw that, though he did not speak, the
captain was listening attentively.

"They're burning something, sir."

"Confound them!  Not setting fire to the junks?"

"I don't know, sir; I think so," I replied, still watching intently;
and, as I gazed through my glass, I saw black smoke rising in little
coils from both junks, at first very thick and spreading, then growing
smaller.

"I think, sir, they've set fire to the junks in several places," I said.

He asked me why, and I told him.

"Watch attentively for a few minutes."

I did so, and felt puzzled, for it seemed so strange that the fire
should grow smaller.

"Well," he said, "are the junks burning?"

"The little curls of smoke are rising still, sir."

"Have the men left the decks?"

"Oh no, sir!  They're running here and there, and seem very busy still."

"Then they have not set fire to the vessels," he cried decisively.
"Pirates, without a doubt.  Those are stink-pots that they have been
getting ready.  Go on watching, and report anything else."

A noise below, familiar enough, with its rattle and splash, told me that
an anchor had been dropped from the bows; and as the _Teaser_ slowly
swung round from the force of the tide, I also had to turn, so as to
keep the telescope fixed upon the enemy, who were as busy as ever,
though what they were doing I could not make out.  The flashes of light
came more frequently, though, as the sun played upon their weapons; and
now I had something else to report--that they had both assumed a
different position, being lifted by the tide and floated upon an even
keel.

My first idea was, that now they would sail on beyond our reach; in
fact, one moved a good deal, but the other stopped in its place, so that
at last they were so close together that they seemed to touch.

"Make out the boats?" came from the deck.

"No, sir; they're close under the bank."  Yes, I caught a glimpse of the
marines' bayonets just then.

"How far are they away from the junks, do you think?"

"I can't tell, sir; about a quarter of a mile, I think."

Mr Reardon was silent while I gazed intently at a patch of open water
just beyond a curve of the bank, hoping to see the boats there, though I
felt that as soon as they reached that spot, if the enemy had not seen
them before, they would be certain to then, for beyond that the junks
lay clearly to be seen from where I sat.

"Well?  See the boats?" came from the deck.

"No, sir, not yet."

I glanced down to answer, and could see that every one who possessed a
glass was gazing anxiously aft, the only face directed up to me being
the first lieutenant's.  Then my eye was at the glass again.

"More smoke from the junks, sir," I cried; but there was no sign of
fire, and I felt that Mr Reardon must be right, for if they had set a
light to the inflammable wood of the vessels, they would have blazed up
directly.

"Can't you see the boats yet?" cried the first lieutenant impatiently,
and his voice sounded as if he were blaming me.

"No, sir, but the junks are more out in the middle of the stream.  I can
see them quite clearly now, away from the trees.  They are crowded with
men, and--"

"The boats--the boats?"

"No, sir;--yes, hurrah!  There they go, sir, all abreast, straight for
the junks."

"Ha!" came in one long heavy breath from below, as if all left on board
had suddenly given vent to their pent-up feelings.

"How far are they away from the junks?" cried Mr Reardon.

"About two hundred yards, sir; you'll see them directly."

"Yes, I see them now, sir," cried Barkins, who was a little way up the
mizzen-shrouds, where I had not seen him before.

"Silence!" cried the captain sternly.  "Go on, Mr Herrick; report."

"Smoke from the junks, sir--white," I cried, and the words were hardly
out of my mouth when there came the report of guns--first one and then
another; then two together; and I fancied that I could see the water
splashing up round about the boats, but I could not be sure.

"Boats separating," I shouted.

"Go on."

"Pulling hard for the junks."

"Yes, go on; report everything."

I needed no orders, for I was only too eager to tell everything I saw.

"Two boats have gone to the right; two to the left.--More firing from
the junks.--Boats separating more.--Two going round behind.--Both out of
sight."

By this time, in addition to the sharp reports of the small guns on
board the junks, the sharper crackle of matchlocks and muskets had
begun; but so far I had not seen a puff of smoke from our boats.

"Are our men firing?"

"No, sir; the two boats I can see are pulling straight now for the
junks.--Now the water splashes all about them."

"Yes?  Hit?"

"Don't think so, sir.--Now.--Ah!"

"What--what is it, boy?"

"Can't see anything, sir; they've rowed right into the smoke."

My hands which held the telescope were quite wet now with the excitement
of the scene I had tried to describe to my superior officer, and I
thrust the glass under my left arm, and rubbed them quickly on my
handkerchief, as I gazed at the distant smoke, and listened to the
crackle of musketry alone, for the guns had now ceased from fire.

This I felt must be on account of the boats coming to closer quarters,
and then to the men boarding.  But I could see nothing but the smoke,
and I raised the glass to my eye again.

Still nothing but smoke.  I fancied, though, that the firing was
different--quicker and sharper--as if our men must have begun too.

"Well, Mr Herrick?" now came from below.  "Surely you can see how the
fight is going on?"

"No, sir, nothing but smoke,--Yes," I cried excitedly, "it's lifting
now, and floating away to the left.  I can see close up to the junks.
Yes; now the decks.  Our right boat is empty, and there is a great fight
going on upon the junk."

"And the other?"

"There are two boats close up, and our men are firing.  There is black
smoke coming out of one boat.  Now the men are climbing up, and--now,
the smoke is too thick there."

"Go on, boy; go on," shouted the first lieutenant, stamping about, while
the captain stood perfectly still, gazing at the rising smoke, from the
bridge.

"They seem to be fighting very hard, sir," I said, trembling now like a
leaf.  "I can see quite a crowd, and that some of the people are in
white."

"But who is getting the best of it?"

"I can't see, sir," I said sadly.

"Then for goodness' sake come down, and let some one else come up,"
roared Mr Reardon.

"Yes, sir."

"No, no; stay where you are, boy.  But use your glass--use your glass."

I tried my best, but I could only make out a blurred mass of men on
board both junks.  They seemed to be swaying to and fro, and the smoke,
instead of passing off, once more grew thicker, and in place of being
white and steamy, it now looked to be of a dirty inky black, completely
enveloping the vessels and our boats.

This I reported.

"They surely cannot have set them on fire?" said Mr Reardon.

"I can't see any flames, sir."

Silence again; and we found that the firing had ceased, all but a sharp
crack from time to time, sounds evidently made by rifles.  But there was
nothing more to see, and, in spite of the angry appeals of the
lieutenant, I could report no more than that the black smoke was growing
thicker, and hanging down over the water, hiding everything, to the
bushes and trees upon the bank.

And now, as I gave one glance down, I saw that the captain was walking
to and fro upon the bridge, evidently in a great state of excitement,
for there was not a sound now; the firing had quite ceased; the black
cloud seemed to have swallowed up our four boats and men; and a chilly
feeling of despair began to attack me, as I wondered whether it was
possible that our poor fellows had been beaten, and the boats burned by
the stink-pots the pirates had thrown in.

The thought was almost too horrible to bear, and I stared hard through
the glass again, trying to make out the junks beyond the smoke, and
whether it was really our boats which where burning, and raising the
black cloud which hid all view.

"I can see a boat now, sir," I cried excitedly, as one of them seemed to
glide out of the end of the cloud; but my heart sank as I made the
announcement, for I saw only that which confirmed my fears.

"Well, go on, lad," cried Mr Reardon, stamping with impatience, "what
are they doing in her?"

"She's empty, sir, and floating away, with a cloud of black smoke rising
from her."

"Ah!" he exclaimed, with quite a savage snarl, and I saw the captain
stop short and raise his glass again, though I knew that from where he
stood he could see nothing.

"We're beaten," I said to myself.  "Oh, our poor lads--our poor lads!"

A mist rose before my eyes, and I nearly dropped the glass, but I passed
my hand across my face and looked again, sweeping the telescope from the
left side, where the boat was gliding up-stream smoking more than ever,
to the right and the shore.

"Hooray!"  I yelled.

"Yes! what?" roared the captain and Mr Reardon together.

"Chinese running in a regular stream away from the shore; making for the
woods.  One down--another down."

At the same moment almost came a couple of volleys, then several men
went down, and the crackle of firing commenced again.

"Go on, Herrick!" cried Mr Reardon.

"Our fellows ashore, and running Jacks and jollies together, sir.
Stopping to fire.  Running again."

"And the enemy?"

"Running like deer, sir.  More of them down.  Making for the wood."

"One man stopped, sir, and returning."

"Yes, yes, that's good.  What now?"

"Boat out from the smoke, rowing after the other one, sir.  They've got
it.  Yes, I can see.  They're throwing something out that smokes--now
something more."

"Bah! stink-pots!" roared Mr Reardon.  "Now then, quick!--quick!
Don't, go to sleep, sir.  What next?"

"I'll shy the spyglass at you directly," I muttered; and then aloud,
"Fire, sir; both junks blazing."

"Hurrah!" came from the deck as the rest of the crew set up a tremendous
cheer, for the smoke had suddenly grown less dense; and the junks
gradually grew visible as it floated away; while even in the bright
sunlight the flames were visible, and I could now make out that they
were two floating furnaces with the great tongues of fire licking the
broad matting-sails: and, best news of all, there, quite plainly, were
our four boats, with the men just visible above their sides.

I reported this, and cheer after cheer rose again.  After which there
was dead silence once more, so that my reports could be heard.

"Now, Mr Herrick, what now?" cried Mr Reardon.

"Two boats lying in mid-stream, sir; the others are rowing to the side."

"To pick up the men who were sent ashore, I suppose.  Good."

"Junks burning very fast, sir; and they're floating across to the other
side.  The wind's taking them straight, for the smoke floats that way."

"Very likely," said Mr Reardon; and there was a long pause.

"One junk has taken the ground, sir," I said, "and--"

"Yes, well, what?"

"Her masts and sails have fallen over the side."

"And our boats?"

"Lying-to, sir, doing nothing."

But that was as far as I could see, for they were doing a good deal, as
we afterwards heard.

"Other junk has floated over, sir, nearly to the same place."

"Good; burning still?"

"Oh yes, sir--very fast."

He need not have asked; for, as Barkins told me afterwards, they could
see the flames from the deck, though our boats were invisible.

"Well, what now?" cried Mr Reardon, as I saw the captain quietly pacing
to and fro on the bridge.

"Other two boats pushed off from the shore, sir."

"Ha! that's right.  See anything of the Chinamen?"

"No, sir; the forest goes right away for miles.  There isn't one to be
seen."

"And the boats?"

"All rowing back, sir, close under the left bank."

"Can you see them?"

"Only three of them, sir," I replied.  "Now another is out of sight."

"Then, as soon as they are all invisible, you can come down," cried Mr
Reardon.

"Yes, sir; all out of sight now."

"Then come down."

"Thankye for nothing," I muttered; and then aloud, "Yes, sir;" and I
closed my glass, and wiped my wet forehead, feeling stiff and sore, as
if I had been exerting myself with all my might.

"I suppose I'm very stupid," I said to myself, as I began to descend
slowly, "but I did try my best.  What a height it seems up here!  If a
fellow slipped and fell, he would never have another hour up at the
mast-head."

I went on downward, with my legs feeling more and more stiff, and a
sense of heavy weariness growing upon me.  My head ached too, and I felt
a pain at the back of my neck, while mentally I was as miserable and
dissatisfied as ever I remember being in my life.

"I hope he'll send old Barkins up next time," I thought.  "He wouldn't
feel so precious jealous then.  Nice job, squinting through that glass
till one's almost blind, and nothing but bullying for the result."

It seemed to be a very long way down to the deck, but I reached the
remaining few rattlins at last, and I was nearly down to the bulwarks,
meaning to go below and bathe my head, if I could leave the deck, when I
was stopped short, just in my most gloomy and despondent moments, by the
captain's voice, his words sounding so strange that I could hardly
believe my ears.

For, as I held on to the shrouds, and looked sharply aft at the mention
of my name, he said--

"Thank you, Mr Herrick; very good indeed;" while, as I reached the
deck, Mr Reardon came up--

"Yes, capital, Mr Herrick.  A very arduous task, and you have done it
well."


CHAPTER TWENTY.

AFTER THE FIGHT.

"Bravo, Gnat!  Well done, little 'un!" whispered Barkins the next
minute, as I walked aft, feeling quite confused, while my headache and
sensation of misery passed off as if by magic.  "Blacksmith would have
done it better, of course; wouldn't you, Smithy?"

"Done it as well as you would," said my messmate sulkily; and there was
a heavy frown on his brow; but, as he met my eyes, it cleared off, and
he smiled frankly.  "I say: Well done our side!" he whispered.  "What
would they do without midshipmen!"

"I say, though," said Barkins, "we've given John Pirate another
dressing-down; but what about the plunder?"

"Ah, of course," said Smith.  "Junks both burned, and no swag.  What
about our prize-money?  Eh, Gnat?"

"I wasn't thinking about that, but about our poor lads.  They must have
had a sharp fight.  I hope no one is hurt."

My companion were silent for a moment or two.  Then Barkins said
quietly--

"I thought it would be only the teapots that were broken.  Think our
chaps were hurt?  You couldn't see?"

"I could see that there was a big fight going on; and look here!"

I nodded in the direction of one of the companion-ways, from which the
doctor suddenly appeared with his glasses on, and an eager, expectant
look in his eyes as he bustled up to us.

"I'm all ready," he said.  "Boats in sight yet?"  I shuddered, and I
noticed that Smith looked white.  "Well, why don't you answer?  What's
the matter, my lads?  Oh, I see."  He laughed.

"Horrible sort of person the doctor, eh?  But you didn't look like that
when I tackled your wounds the other day.  But if you people will fight,
the surgeon must be ready.  Oh, let's see: you were up at the
cross-trees, Mr Herrick, with your glass, and saw all.  Will there be
much work for me to do?"

"I don't know, sir," I said, trying hard to speak quietly.  "I couldn't
see much for the smoke.  I hope not."

"So do I, boy, heartily.  I don't mind the wounds so long as they're not
too bad.  It's painful to have fine strong lads like ours slip through
one's fingers.  But we must do our best.  Any Chinese prisoners?  Sure
to be, I suppose."

"I should think so, sir."

"And wounded.  Well, if there are, you three lads ought to come and be
my body-guard with your dirks.  Like to see the operations, I daresay?"

"Ugh!"  I said, with a shudder.

"Bah!  Don't act like a great girl, Herrick," said the doctor
scornfully.  "You would never have done for a doctor, sir.  I never
shudder at the worst cases."

"But then you are hardened, sir," said Barkins.

"Hardened be hanged, sir!" cried the doctor indignantly.  "A clever
surgeon gets more and more softened every time he operates, more
delicate in his touches, more exact in his efforts to save a limb, or
arrange an injury so that it will heal quickly.  Hardened, indeed!  Why,
to judge from your faces, any one would think surgery was horrible,
instead of one of the greatest pleasures in life."

"What, cutting and bandaging wounds, and fishing for bullets?" blurted
out Smith; "why, sir, I think it's hideous."

"And I think you are an impertinent young coxcomb, sir," cried the
doctor indignantly.  "Hideous, indeed!  Why it's grand."

He looked round at us as if seeking for confirmation of his words, but
neither spoke.

"Hideous? horrible?" he said, taking off his glasses and thrusting his
hand into his pocket for his handkerchief to wipe them, but bringing out
something soft and white, which proved to be a piece of lint.  "Oh, I do
call it cool.  If there's anything hideous it's your acts, sir; having
those thundering guns fired, to send huge shells shivering and
shattering human beings to pieces for the doctor to try and mend; your
horrible chops given with cutlasses and the gilt-handled swords you are
all so proud of wearing--insolent, bragging, showy tools that are not to
be compared with my neat set of amputating knives in their mahogany
case.  These are to do good, while yours are to do evil.  Then, too,
your nasty, insidious, cruel bayonets, which make a worse wound than a
bullet.  Oh, it's too fine to call my work horrible, when I try to put
straight all your mischief."

"Here they are," cried Barkins excitedly, as a hail came from the top.

We ran aft to see the first boat come steadily along close in shore,
which was being hugged so as to avoid the full rush of the tide.

Directly after the others came in sight, and glasses were all in use
from the bridge and quarter-deck.

I adjusted mine directly, and saw at the first glance that there was
plenty of work for Dr Price, for men were lying in the stern-sheets
with rough bandages on limbs and heads, while several of those who were
rowing had handkerchiefs tied round their foreheads, and others had
horrible marks upon their white duck-frocks, which told tales of injury
to them as well as to their enemies.

The third boat was given up to men lying down or sitting up together,
leaving only just room for the rowers, while the fourth and largest boat
was being towed; the thwarts, that in an ordinary way would have been
occupied by rowers, now holding the marines, who sat with their rifles
ready, and fixed bayonets, while the stern-sheets were filled
with Chinamen, seated in three groups, and all in the most
uncomfortable-looking way.  I could see that their hands were tied
behind their backs, and it was horribly plain that several of them were
wounded; but why they should have formed these three groups, and sat
there with their heads laid close together, was what puzzled me.

A loud cheer rose from our deck as the boats came near; and this was
taken up directly by the returning party, the men rowing harder as they
shouted, and the little triumphant procession reached the side.

The first hail came from the captain.

"Mr Brooke--where's Mr Brooke?"

"Here, sir," cried that officer, standing up with a stained handkerchief
about his head, and his uniform all black and scorched.

"Any fatalities?"

"No, sir; not one."

I saw the captain's lips move, but no one heard him speak.  I guessed,
though, what he said, and I felt it.

Then as quickly as possible the boats were run up to the davits, and the
uninjured men leaped on deck.  Next the wounded, such as could stir,
descended from the boats, one poor fellow staggering and nearly falling
as soon as he reached the deck.  After which the badly wounded were
carefully lifted out and carried below, to be laid in a row to wait the
doctor and his assistant make their first rapid examination, to apply
tourniquets and bandaged pads to the most serious injuries.

"Good heavens, Mr Brooke, what a condition you are in!  The doctor must
take you first."

"Oh no, sir," said the young lieutenant quietly.  "I'm not very bad; a
cut from a heavy sword through my cap.  It has stopped bleeding.  My
hands are a little bruised."

"But how was this?"

"As we advanced to board, they threw quite a volley of stink-pots
fizzing away into us.  I burned myself a little with them."

"Chucking 'em overboard, sir," cried the boatswain.  "Splendid it was."

"Nonsense!" cried Mr Brooke.  "You threw ever so many.  But it was hot
work, sir."

"Hot! it is horrible.  How many prisoners have you there?"

"Eighteen, sir; the survivors escaped."

"But you shouldn't have fired the junks, man," said the captain testily.
"There may have been wounded on board."

"Yes, sir," said Mr Brooke, with his brow puckering; "wounded and dead
there were, I daresay, thirty; but the enemy set fire to their vessels
themselves before they leaped overboard, and it was impossible to save
them: they burned like resin.  We saved all we could."

"I beg your pardon; I might have known," cried the captain warmly.
"Come to my cabin.  Mr Reardon, be careful with those prisoners; they
are savage brutes."

"Enough to make 'em, Gnat.  Look!  What a shame!"

I looked, but I could not see any reason for Smith's remark.

"Beg pardon, sir," growled one of the men, who had a bandage round his
arm; "you wouldn't ha' said so if you'd been there.  They was all alike.
The junk we took was burning like fat in a frying-pan, and me and my
mate see one o' them chaps going to be roasted, and made a run for it
and hauled him away--singed my beard, it did; look, sir."

Half of his beard was burned off, and his cheek scorched.

"Then my mate gets hold of his legs, and I was stooping to get my fists
under his chest, when he whips his knife into my arm 'fore I knowed what
he was up to.  But we saved him all the same."

"Here," cried Mr Reardon, as the marines descended from the third boat,
and stood at attention in two parties facing each other; "who was
answerable for this?  Why, it is an outrage.  Brutal!"

"S'pose it was my doing, sir," said the boatswain, touching his cap;
"but I asked leave of Mr Brooke first, and he said yes."

"What, to tie the poor wretches up like that, sir, and half of them
wounded!"

"Beg pardon, sir; there was no other way handy.  We lashed their arms
behind 'em to keep 'em from knifing us, and then they kept on jumping
overboard, and trying to drown themselves.  We haven't hurt them."

"Cast them loose at once."

"Yes, sir; I should like half-a-dozen strong chaps in the boat, though."

"Well, take them," said Mr Reardon, who was speaking less severely now.
"I'll have the uninjured men in irons this time.  Be careful."

"And if I'd my way, I'd have 'em all in iron boxes, 'cept their hands."

The boatswain said this to me, with a nod, as the first lieutenant
turned away, and, unable to control my curiosity, I sprang up on the
bulwark to look into the boat.

"Let's have a look too," cried Smith, and he jumped up to gain a
position much closer than mine, but quitted his hold and dropped back on
deck, lost his footing, and came down sitting; for, as he leaned over
the boat's gunnel, one of the prisoners made a sudden snap at him, after
the fashion of an angry dog, and the marines burst into a roar of
laughter.

Smith got up scowling and indignant.

"My hands slipped," he said to me aloud.  And then, to carry off his
confusion, "How many are there, Herrick?"

"Three lots of six," I said, as I now saw plainly enough how it was that
the prisoners were in such a strange position.  A large wadded
dress, made of silk or cotton, according to the circumstances of the
wearer, serves for bed-clothes--which seem to be quite unknown;
and while the poorer classes have only a piece of wood for a pillow,
the richer fasten a cushion on the neat boxes which contain their
razors, scissors, pomatum, tooth-brushes, and other toilet
requisites.

But while the comfort of the captives was attended to in many minor
matters, there was no relaxation of the vigilance used to preclude
the possibility of self-destruction.

They were not allowed scissors or knife to cut their nails, but were
obliged to thrust their hands through the palisades, to get this
office performed for them.

When they were indulged with smoking, it was with a very long pipe
held between the spars, and furnished with a wooden ball fixed about
the middle, to prevent its being drawn wholly within the cage.

For weeks together they were brought daily before the bunyo (governor
of the town, and probably lord-lieutenant of all the Japanese Kurile
Islands), bound and harnessed like horses as before.

The ostensible object of these examinations, which frequently lasted the
whole day, was to ascertain for what purpose they had come near Japan,
and what they knew of Resanoff and Chwostoff--for a singularly
unfortunate combination of circumstances had arisen to give colour
to the suspicion, that some of their party had been connected with
that expedition.

But for one inquiry connected with the case, there were fifty that
were wholly irrelevant, and prompted by mere curiosity. The most
trivial questions were put several times and in different forms, and
every answer was carefully written down. Golownin was often puzzled,
irritated, and quite at the end of his stock of patience; but that
of the interrogators appeared interminable.

They said, that by writing down everything they were told, whether
true or false, and comparing the various statements they
received, they were enabled through time to separate truth from fiction,
and the practice was very improving. At the close of almost every
examination, the bunyo exhorted them not to despair, but to offer up
prayers to Heaven, and patiently await the emperor's decision.

Presently new work was found for them. An intelligent young man was
brought to their prison, to be taught the Russian language. To this the
captain consented, having no confidence in the Kurile Alexei as an
interpreter, and being desirous himself to gain some knowledge of
Japanese.

Teske made rapid progress, and soon became a most useful and kindly companion
to the captives. Books, pens, and paper were now allowed them in
abundance; and their mode of treatment was every way improved. But
by and by, they were threatened with more pupils; a geometrician
and astronomer from the capital was introduced to them, and would
gladly have been instructed in their mode of taking observations.

Other learned men were preparing to follow, and it was now evident that
the intention of the Japanese government was to reconcile them to their
lot, and retain them for the instruction of the nation. Indeed, this
appears to be the great secret of the policy of detaining for life
instead of destroying the hapless foreigners that light on these shores;
as the avowed motive for tolerating the commercial visits of the
Dutch is, that they furnish the only news of public events that
ever reach Japan.

Fearful of becoming known to other nations for fear of invasion, they are
yet greedy of information respecting them, and many were the foolish
questions they asked Golownin about the emperor of Russia, his
dress, habitation, forces, and territories.

Golownin, on his part, endeavoured to elicit all the information he could
gain with respect to the numbers, resources, government, and
religion of this singular people.

He found it impossible to ascertain the amount of the population;
indeed, it seems it would be very difficult for the government
itself to obtain a census, for millions of the poor live abroad in
the streets, fields, or woods, having no spot which they can call
a home.

Teske shewed a map of the empire, having every town and village
marked on it; and though on a very large scale, it was thickly
covered.

He pointed out on it a desert, which is considered immense, because
litters take a whole day to traverse it, and meet with only one
village during the journey.

It is perhaps fifteen miles across.

The city of Yedo was usually set down by Europeans as containing
1,000,000 inhabitants; but Golownin was informed, that it had in
its principal streets 280,000 houses, each containing from 30 to
40 persons; besides all the small houses and huts.

This would give in the whole a population of above 10,000,000 souls--about
a fourth part of the estimated population of this country! The
incorporated society of the blind alone is affirmed to include
36,000.

The country, though lying under the same latitudes as Spain and Italy,
is yet very different from them in climate.

At Matsmai, for instance, which is on the same parallel as Leghorn,
snow falls as abundantly as at St Petersburg, and lies in the valleys
from November till April.
Severe frost is uncommon, but cold fogs are exceedingly prevalent.
The climate, however, is uncommonly diversified, and consequently
so are the productions, exhibiting in some places the vegetation
of the frigid zone, and in others that of the tropics.

Rice is the staple production of the soil.

It is nearly the only article used instead of bread, and the only one
from which strong liquor is distilled, while its straw serves for
many domestic purposes. Besides the radishes already mentioned, there is
an extensive cultivation of various other esculent roots and
vegetables.
There is no coast without fisheries, and there is no marine animal
that is not used for food, save those which are absolutely poisonous.

But an uncommonly small quantity suffices for each individual.

If a Japanese has a handful of rice and a single mouthful of fish, he makes
a savoury dish with roots, herbs, or mollusca, and it suffices for
a day's support.

Japan produces both black and green tea; the former is very inferior,
and used only for quenching thirst; whereas the latter is esteemed
a luxury, and is presented to company.

The best grows in the principality of Kioto, where it is carefully
cultivated for the use both of the temporal and spiritual courts.

Tobacco, which was first introduced by the European missionaries, has
spread astonishingly, and is so well manufactured, that our author
smoked it with a relish he had never felt for a Havana cigar.

The Japanese smokes continually, and sips tea with his pipe, even
rising for it during the night.

All articles of clothing are made of silk or cotton.

The former appears to be very abundant, as rich dresses of it are
worn even by the common soldiers on festive days; and it may be
seen on people of all ranks even in poor towns.

The fabrics are at least equal to those of China.

The cotton of Japan seems to be of the same kind as that of our West Indian
colonies.

It furnishes the ordinary dress of the great mass of the people,
and also serves all the other purposes for which we employ wool,
flax, furs, and feathers.

The culture of it is, of course, very extensive; but the fabrics
are all coarse: Golownin could hardly make himself believe that his
muslin cravat was of this material.

There is some hemp, which is manufactured into cloth for sails,
&c.; but cables and ropes, very inferior to ours, are made from the
bark of a tree called kadyz.

This bark likewise supplies materials for thread, lamp-wicks,
writing-paper, and the coarse paper used for pocket-handkerchiefs.

There is no lack of fruit-trees, as the orange, lemon, peach, plum, fig,
chestnut, and apple; but the vine yields only a small, sour grape, perhaps
for want of culture. Timber-trees grow only in the mountainous districts,
which are unfit for cultivation. Camphor is produced abundantly in
the south, and large quantities of it are exported by the Dutch and
Chinese. The celebrated varnish of Japan, drawn from a tree called
silz, is so plentiful, that it is used for lacquering the most ordinary
utensils.

Its natural colour is white, but it assumes any that is given to it by
mixture. The best varnished vessels reflect the face as in a mirror, and
hot water may be poured into them without occasioning the least smell.

The chief domestic animals are horses and oxen for draught; cats
and dogs are kept for the same uses as with us; and swine furnish
food to the few sects who eat flesh.

Sheep and goats seem to be quite unknown:
the Russian captives had to make drawings of the former, to convey
some idea of the origin of wool.

There are considerable mines of gold and silver in several parts of the
empire, but the government does not permit them to be all worked,
for fear of depreciating the value of these metals.

They supply, with copper, the material of the currency, and are
also liberally used in the decoration of public buildings, and in
the domestic utensils of the wealthy.

There is a sufficiency of quicksilver, lead, and tin, for the
wants of the country; and one island is entirely covered with
sulphur.

Copper is very abundant, and of remarkably fine quality.

All kitchen utensils, tobacco-pipes, and fire-shovels, are made of it;
and so well made, that our author mentions his tea-kettle as
having stood on the fire, like all other Japanese kettles, day and
night for months, without burning into holes.

This metal is likewise employed for sheathing ships, and covering
the joists and flat roofs of houses.

Iron is less abundant, and much that is used is obtained from the Dutch.
Nails alone, of which immense numbers are used in all carpentry-work,
consume a large quantity.

Diamonds, cornelians, jaspers, some very fine agates, and other
precious stones, are found; but the natives seem not well to
understand polishing them.

Pearls are abundant; but not being considered ornamental, they are
reserved for the Chinese market.

Steel and porcelain are the manufactures in which the Japanese
chiefly excel, besides those in silk-stuffs and lacquered ware
already mentioned.

Their porcelain is far superior to the Chinese, but it is scarce
and dear.

With respect to steel manufactures, the sabres and daggers of Japan
yield only perhaps to those of Damascus; and Golownin says their
cabinet-makers' tools might almost be compared with the English.

In painting, engraving, and printing, they are far behind; and they
seem to have no knowledge of ship-building or navigation beyond
what suffices for coasting voyages, though they have intelligent
and enterprising sailors.

There is an immense internal traffic, for facilitating which there
are good roads and bridges where water-carriage is impracticable.

These distant Orientals have likewise bills of exchange and commercial
gazettes.

The emperor enjoys a monopoly of the foreign commerce.

It is popularly said, that Japan has two emperors--one spiritual,
and the other temporal.

The former, however, having no share in the administration of the empire,
and seldom even hearing of state affairs, is no sovereign according
to the ideas we attach to that term.

He seems to stand much in the same relation to the emperor that the
popes once did to the sovereigns of Europe.

He governs Kioto as a small independent state; receives the emperor
to an interview once in seven years; is consulted by him on extraordinary
emergencies; receives occasional embassies and presents from him, and
bestows his blessing in return.

His dignity, unlike that of the Roman pontiffs, is hereditary, and he
is allowed twelve wives, that his race may not become extinct.

According to Japanese records, the present dynasty, including about
130 Kin-reys, has been maintained in a direct line for above
twenty-four centuries.

The person of the Kin-rey is so sacred, that no ordinary mortal
may see any part of him but his feet, and that only once a year;
every vessel which he uses must be broken immediately; for if another
should even by accident eat or drink out of it, he must be put to
death.

Every garment which he wears must be manufactured by virgin hands,
from the earliest process in the preparation of the silk.

The adherents of the aboriginal Japanese religion, of which the
Kin-rey is the head, adore numerous divinities called Kami, or
immortal spirits, to whom they offer prayers, flowers, and sometimes
more substantial gifts.

They also worship Kadotski, or saints--mortals canonised by the
Kin-rey--and build temples in their honour. The laws concerning
personal and ceremonial purity, which form the principal feature
of this religion, are exceedingly strict, not unlike those imposed
on the ancient Jews.

There are several orders of priests, monks, and nuns, whose austerity,
like that of Europe, is maintained in theory more than in practice.

Three other creeds, the Brahminical, the Confucian, and that which
deifies the heavenly bodies, have many adherents; but their priests
all acknowledge a certain religious supremacy to exist in the
Kin-rey.

There is universal toleration in these matters; every citizen may profess
what faith he chooses, and change it as often as he chooses, without
any one inquiring into his reasons; only it must be a spontaneous
choice, for proselyting is forbidden by law.

Christianity alone is proscribed, and that on account of the
political mischief said to have been effected through its adherents
in the seventeenth century.

There is a law, by which no one may hire a servant without receiving a
certificate of his not being a Christian; and on New-Year's Day,
which is a great national festival, all the inhabitants of Nangasaki
are obliged to ascend a staircase, and trample on the crucifix, and
other insignia of the Romish faith, which are laid on the steps as
a test.

It is said that many perform the act in violation of their feelings.
So much of the religious state of the empire Golownin elicited in
conversation with Teske and others; but everything on this subject
was communicated with evident reluctance; and though in the course
of the walks which they were permitted to take in harness, the
Russian captives sometimes saw the interior of the temples, they
were never permitted to enter while any religious rites were
celebrated.

With respect to the civil administration of Japan, our author seems to
have gathered little that was absolutely new to us. The empire comprises
above 200 states, which are governed as independent sovereignties by
princes called Damyos, who frame and enforce their own laws.

Though most of these principalities are very small, some of them are
powerful: the damyo of Sindai, for instance, visits the imperial
court with a retinue of 60,000. Their dependence on the emperor
appears chiefly in their being obliged to maintain a certain number
of troops, which are at his disposal.

Those provinces which belong directly to the emperor, are placed under
governors called Bunyos, whose families reside at the capital as
hostages. Every province has two bunyos, each of whom spends six months
in the government and six at Yedo.

The supreme council of the emperor consists of five sovereign princes, who
decide on all ordinary measures without referring to him. An inferior
council of fifteen princes or nobles presides over important civil and
criminal cases. The general laws are few and well known.
They are very severe; but the judges generally find means of evading them
where their enforcement would involve a violation of those of
humanity.

In some cases, as in conjugal infidelity or filial impiety, individuals
are permitted to avenge their own wrong, even to the taking of life.
Civil cases are generally decided by arbitrators, and only when
they fail to settle a matter is there recourse to the public courts
of justice.

Taxes are generally paid to the reigning prince or emperor, in tithes of
the agricultural, manufactured, or other productions of the
country.

Such were some of the leading particulars ascertained by Golownin
concerning the social and civil condition of this singular people.

He says, they always appeared very happy, and their demeanour was
characterised by lively and polite manners, with the most imperturbable
good temper.

It seems at length to have been through fear of a Russian invasion,
rather than from any sense of justice, that his Japanese majesty,
in reply to the importunities of the officers of the _Diana_,
consented to release the captives, on condition of receiving from
the Russian government a solemn disavowal of having sanctioned the
proceedings of Chwostoff.

Having obtained this, the officers repaired for the fourth time to
these unfriendly shores, and enjoyed the happiness of embracing
their companions, and taking them on board.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Japan and the Japanese._ By Captain Golownin.

London: Colburn & Co. 1852.

[2] Sagi is the strong drink of Japan, distilled from rice.

THINGS TALKED OF IN LONDON.

_July 1852._

When we shall have a constant supply of pure water--a complete system of
efficient and innoxious sewers--a service of street hydrants--when
the Thames shall cease to be the _cloaca maxima_, are questions to
which, however seriously asked, it is not easy to get an answer.

Add to these grievances, the delay of proper regulations for abolishing
intramural interments, and the fact that Smithfield is not to be removed
further than Copenhagen Fields--a locality already surrounded with
houses--and it will occasion no surprise that the authorities are
treated with anything but compliments.

The laying down of an under-sea telegraph wire across the Irish
Channel, may be taken as a new instance of the indifference consequent
on familiarity.

When the line was laid from Dover to Calais, the whole land rang
with the fact; but now the sinking of a wire three times the length,
in a channel three times the width, excites scarcely a remark, and
seems to be looked on as a matter of course.

The wire, which is eighty miles in length, is said to weigh eighty
tons.

It was payed out and sunk from the deck of the _Britannia_, at the
rate of from three to five miles an hour, and was successfully laid,
from Holyhead to Howth, in from twelve to fifteen hours; and now a
message may be flashed from Trieste to Galway in a period brief
enough to satisfy the most impatient.

The means of travel to the East, too, are becoming tangible in the Egyptian
railway, of which some thirty miles are in a state of forwardness,
besides which a hotel is to be built at Thebes; so that travellers,
no longer compelled to bivouac in the desert, will find a teeming
larder and well-aired beds in the land of the Sphinxes.

And, better still, among a host of beneficial reforms to take place in
our Customs' administration, there is one which provides that the
baggage of travellers arriving in the port of London shall be
examined as they come up the river, instead of being sent to the
Custom-house.

By a report of the Astronomer-royal to the Board of Visitors, who have
lately made their annual inspection of the Greenwich Observatory, we
are informed, of a singular fact, that observations of the pole-star
shew that its position varies some three or four seconds on repeating
the observations at intervals of a few months, and this notwithstanding
the extreme accuracy of the transit circle.

The only explanation which can as yet be given for this phenomenon is,
that the earth, solid as it appears, is liable to slight occasional
movements or oscillations.

We shall know, in a few weeks, the result of the telegraphic correspondence
with the Observatory at Paris--one interesting point being, as to
whether the respective longitudes, as at present determined, will
be verified by the galvanic test.

Besides which, Greenwich time is to be sent every day to London, where
a pole, with a huge sliding-ball, has been fixed on the top of the Telegraph
Office, near Charing Cross.

This ball is to be made to descend at one o'clock simultaneously
with the well-known ball which surmounts the Observatory; and thus
scientific inquirers--to say nothing of the crowds who will daily
throng the footways of the Strand to witness the downcome--will be
informed of the true time, while, by means of the wires, it may be
flashed to all parts of the kingdom.

The lecture with which Professor Faraday wound up the course at the Royal
Institution may be mentioned here, seeing that it adds somewhat to our
knowledge of the theory and phenomena of magnetism. As usual, the
lecture-room was crowded; and those who could not understand, had at
least the satisfaction of being able to say they were present. Mr Faraday,
who, enlarging upon his view, announced, a short time since, that
there are such things as magnetic lines of force, now contends that
these lines have a 'physical character'--a point most satisfactorily
proved by sundry experiments during the lecture.

The inquiry is one, as Mr Faraday observes, on the 'very edge of science,'
trenching on the bounds of speculation; but such as eminently to
provoke research.

The phenomena, he says, 'lead on, by deduction and correction, to the
discovery of new phenomena; and so cause an increase and advancement
of real physical truth, which, unlike the hypothesis that led to it,
becomes fundamental knowledge, not subject to change.' A chief point of
discussion to which the investigations have led is: Whether the phenomena
of what we call gravity may not be resolvable into those of
magnetism--a force acting at a distance, or by lines of power.

'There is one question,' continues Mr Faraday, 'in relation to
gravity, which, if we could ascertain or touch it, would greatly
enlighten us.

It is, whether gravitation requires _time_. If it did, it would shew
undeniably that a physical agency existed in the course of the line of
force.

It seems equally impossible to prove or disprove this point; since there
is no capability of suspending, changing, or annihilating the power
(gravity), or annihilating the matter in which the power resides.'

The lines of magnetic force may have 'a separate existence,' but as yet
we are unable to tell whether these lines 'are analogous to those of
gravitation, acting at a distance; or whether, having a physical
existence, they are more like in their nature to those of electric
induction or the electric current.'

Mr Faraday inclines at present to the latter view.
"Lie down all who can," cried the lieutenant; and we waited for the next
shot, which, to be rather Irish, was half-a-dozen in a scattered volley.

But though the twigs and leaves came showering down, no one was hit; and
the coxswain steadily poled us along as fast as the progress of the
other boat would allow.

I saw that Mr Reardon was on the _qui vive_ to order a return of the
fire; but so far we could not see from whence it came, and it seemed as
if nothing could be done but keep steadily on with our retreat.

"They might have given us another half-hour, Herrick," he said.  "I
should like to get the boys on board unhurt."

"Think they can get on ahead, sir?"  I whispered.

"I hope not.  The forest on each side is so dense that I don't fancy
they can get along any faster than we do.  Make haste, my lads, make
haste," he said, almost in a whisper; "we shall have it dark here under
these trees before long."

Crash came another volley, accompanied by a savage yelling, but we were
so low down between the muddy banks that again the slugs went pattering
over our heads.

"Would you mind passing the word to the other boat, messmate," said a
familiar voice.  "Tell 'em not to hurry themselves, as we're very
comfortable."

"Who's that?  Silence!" cried Mr Reardon.

No reply came to his question, but I could hear the men chuckling.

The next minute they were serious enough, for there was a burst of
voices from very near at hand.

"Aim low, my lads," said Mr Reardon.  "You six in the stern-sheets, as
near to where the shooting is as you can."

The rifles were levelled, three of the barrels being passed over our
shoulders.  Then came the usual orders, and the pieces went off like
one.

This silenced our pursuers for a few minutes, during which we continued
our progress, snail-like at the best, for the boat in front looked like
a slug.

"I'd give the order to them to draw aside and let us pass, Herrick,"
whispered the lieutenant, who now, in this time of peril, grew very warm
and friendly; "but--ah, that's getting dangerous."

For another volley from very near at hand rattled over us, and was
answered by our men.

"What was I going to say?" continued the lieutenant coolly, "Oh, I
remember!  If we tried to get by them they might take the ground with
all that load, and be stuck."

"And it would be a pity to have to leave that load, sir," I said.

"Velly best load--allee best silk!" cried Ching excitedly, "Good, velly
good plize-money!"

There was a roar of laughter at this, and Mr Reardon cried--

"Silence!"

Then, sharply, "Fire, my lads, if you see any one following."

"Ay, ay, sir."

"Yes, it would be a pity," said the lieutenant thoughtfully; "but it's
tempting.  If we could get in front, Herrick, we could tow the load, and
it would shelter us all from the firing."

"Unless they got to be level with us, sir," I said.

"And--quick! right and left, my lads.  Fire!" cried the lieutenant; for
there was the breaking of undergrowth close at hand on either side, and
a savage yelling commenced as our pursuers forced their way through.

The men, who had been like hounds held back by the leash, were only too
glad to get their orders; and in an instant there was quite a blaze of
fire from both sides of the boat, the bullets cutting and whistling
through the thick trees and undergrowth; and the movement on the banks,
with the cracking and rustling of the bushes and tufts of bamboo,
stopped as if by magic.

"Cease firing!" cried Mr Reardon; and then, as if to himself, "Every
shot is wasted."

I did not think so, for it had checked the enemy, who allowed us to go
on slowly another hundred yards or so.

"Allee velly dleadful," whispered Ching to me, as he crouched in the
bottom of the boat.  "You tinkee hit Ching?"

"I hope not," I said.  "Oh no; we shall get out into the river
directly."

"No," he said; "velly long way yet."

"But who are these?"  I said--"some village people?"

"Pilate," he cried.  "Allee come home not kill, and findee plize-money
gone.  Makee velly angly.  Wantee chop off sailor head."

"Like to catch 'em at it," growled Tom Jecks, who had been very silent
for some time.

"Silence there!" cried Mr Reardon sternly.  Then to me, "We seem to
have checked them, Herrick."

At that moment there was a sudden stoppage in front, and our coxswain
growled--

"Starn all!"

"What is it?" cried Mr Reardon, rising.

There was a rattle of matchlocks from our right, and Mr Reardon fell
sidewise on to me.

"Hurt, sir?"  I cried in agony.

"Yes, badly--no--I don't know," he cried, struggling up with his hand to
his head.  "Here! why has that boat stopped?"

His voice was drowned by the reports of our men's rifles, as they fired
in the direction from which the shots had come; and just then a voice
from the laden boat came through the semi-darkness--

"Ahoy!"

"Yes; what is it?"  I said, as I saw that a man had crawled over the
stack-like load.

"There's a gang in front, sir; and we're aground."

"And the tide falling," muttered Mr Reardon.  "Herrick, I'm a bit hurt;
get our boat close up; half the men are to come astern here, and check
the enemy; the other half to help unload and get enough into our boat to
lighten the other."

"Yes, sir," I said; and I gave the orders as quickly and decisively as I
could.

The men responded with a cheer; and, with scarcely any confusion, our
boat's head was made fast to the other's stern, and the men swarmed on
to the top of the load, and began to pass down the bales rapidly from
hand to hand.

Crash came a ragged volley from right ahead now; but this was answered
by three rifles in the stern of the laden boat, and repeated again and
again, while the strong party in the stern of ours kept up a fierce fire
for a few minutes.

It was a perilous time, for we knew that if the enemy pushed forward
boldly we should be at their mercy.  They could come right to the edge
of the bank unseen, so dense was the cover; and, working as our men were
at such a disadvantage in the gloom, which was rapidly growing deeper,
there was no knowing how long it would be before the first boat was
sufficiently lightened to float again; it even seemed to be possible
that we might not keep pace with the fall of the tide, and then perhaps
we should also be aground.

"Hurt much, sir?"  I said to Mr Reardon, who was now seated resting his
head upon his hand.

"Don't take any notice of me, my lad," he said, pressing my hand.  "Hit
by a bullet.  Not very bad; but I'm half stunned and confused.  The men
and boats, Herrick; save them."

"If I can," I thought, as I hurried forward again, and gave orders to
the men to pass the silk bales that were nearest to the bows.

"Ay, ay, sir," they shouted, as readily as if I had been the captain.

From here I went back to the stern, where I found that Mr Reardon was
seated now in the bottom of the boat, supported by Ching, while the men
were keeping up a steady fire at every spot from which a shot or yell
came.

"We're hard at it, sir," said Tom Jecks, who was handling his rifle as
coolly as if it had been a capstan bar; "but I don't think we're hitting
any of 'em.  How's the first luff seem?"

"I don't know," I said excitedly.

"Well, sir, we're all right," said the man, "and are doing our best.
You needn't stop if you can hurry the boys on forward."

It was a fact; I could do no good at all, so I hurried forward again.
But even here I could do nothing; the men had their task to do of
lightening the first boat, and they were working as hard as if they had
been lying down in the shade all day, and just as coolly, though every
now and then the rough slugs the pirates fired from their clumsy
matchlocks went spattering through the trees overhead and sent down
fresh showers of leaves and twigs.

But I was obliged to say something, and I shouted first one order and
then another.

"That's your sort, lads," cried a cheery voice.  "Down with 'em, and
I'll stow.  It's like bricklaying with big bricks."

"Who's that?"  I said sharply, for the man's back was towards me, and it
was getting quite dark where we were.

"Me it is, sir--Bob Saunders, sir.  Beg pardon, sir."

"Yes; what is it?"

"Tide's going down very fast, sir, arn't it?"

"Yes; why?"

"'Cause we don't seem to get no forrarder.  Hi! steady there!  D'yer
want to bury yer orficer?"

"Never mind me, man.  Stow away; she must soon be lightened enough to
make her float."

"Then we'll lighten her, sir; but don't you go and give orders for any
of the stuff to be chucked overboard.  It's too vallerble for that."

"Only as a last resource, Bob," I replied.

"Beg pardon, sir."

"Don't," I cried to the man who touched me.  "Never mind ceremony now;
go on firing."

"Yes, sir; but Tom Jecks says, sir, would you like six on us to land and
have a go at the beggars?"

"No," I cried.  "Keep together; we may be afloat at any moment."

"Right, sir; on'y we're all willing, if you give the word."

"I know that," I cried.  "But be careful, my lads.  It's a terrible
position, with our chief officer down like this."

"So it is, sir," said the man, taking careful aim at a part of the bank
where he thought that he saw a movement.  Then, almost simultaneously,
there was a flash from the place, and another from his rifle muzzle.

"Either on us hit?" he said coolly, as I clapped my hand to my ear,
which felt as if a jet of cold air had touched it.  "Don't think I
touched him, sir, but he has cut off.  I can hear him going.  Not hurt,
are you, sir?"

"No; a bullet must have gone close to my ear," I said.

"Oh yes; I felt that, sir.  It went between us.  But it's no use to take
no notice o' misses."

"Well?"  I said; for one of the men behind me now touched my arm, and I
found it was Bob Saunders.

"We're getting dead down at the head, sir; hadn't we better begin
stowing aft?"

"Yes, yes, of course," I said excitedly, and feeling annoyed that I had
not thought of this myself.

"Then, if you'll make the lads ease off to starboard and port, sir,
we'll soon pack a row of these here little bales between 'em.  Or look
here, sir! how would it be to bring 'em a bit amidships, and let us
begin right astarn, and build up a sort o' bulwark o' bales?  They could
fire from behind it when we'd done."

"Yes, capital!"  I cried, once more annoyed with myself because I, a
mere boy, had not the foresight of an experienced man.

"No, no," I cried the next moment.  "How could we get at the tiller?"

"You won't want no tiller, sir; we can row aboard easy enough, once we
get out o' this fiddling little drain."

"You are right, Saunders," I said.  "Go on."

All the while the men astern were keeping up a steady fire, which
certainly had one effect, that of checking the enemy's advance.  And now
Saunders came aft with a bale on his head, keeping his balance
wonderfully as he stepped over the thwarts.

"Mind yer eye, Pigtail," he cried.

"Keep back!  Where are you coming?" growled a man who was loading.

"Here, matey," cried Saunders; and he plumped the bale down right across
the stern.

"Hooroar!" cried Tom Jecks, stepping behind it, and resting his rifle on
the top.

No more was said, the men easing off out of the way as bale after bale
was brought and planted in threes, so that when six had been placed
there was a fine breast-work, which formed a splendid protection for
those in the stern, and this was added to, until we were fairly safe
from enemies behind.  But once more we could hear them creeping nearer
through the bushes on our right; the firing grew more dangerous, and
there was nothing for it, I felt, but to order every man in the two
boats to take his piece, shelter himself behind the bales, and help to
beat the enemy back.

It was a sad necessity, for I knew that the tide was falling very fast,
and that before long we should be immovable; but to have kept on
shifting the load and allow the enemy to get close in over our heads on
the densely-clothed sides of the stream would, I knew, be madness; and
the men showed how they appreciated the common-sense of the order by
getting at once under cover, and then the sharp rattle of our fire was
more than doubled.

But, enraged by their defeat, and doubly mortified to find that we had
discovered their treasure, the pirates seemed now to have cast aside
their cowardice, and were creeping in nearer and nearer, yelling to each
other by way of encouragement; and, in addition to keeping up an
irregular fire, they strove, I suppose, to intimidate us by beating and
making a deafening noise on gongs.

"They will be too much for us," I thought, when we seemed to have been
keeping up the struggle for hours, though minutes would have been a more
correct definition; and, with the longing for help and counsel growing
more and more intense, I was about to kneel down and speak to Mr
Reardon, and ask him to try and save himself.

But I started to my feet, for there was a louder yelling than ever, and
the pirates made quite a rush, which brought them abreast of us.

"Cutlasses!"  I cried; and there was the rattle made in fixing them,
bayonet fashion, on the rifles, when--_boom_!--_thud_!--came the roar of
a heavy gun; there was a whistling shrieking in the air, and then
somewhere overhead an ear-splitting crash, followed by the breaking of
bushes and trampling down of grass and bamboo.

Then perfect silence, followed by a cheer from our men.

"Well done, _Teaser_!" shouted Tom Jecks.

It was a diversion which, I believe, saved us, for the enemy fled for
some distance, and gave us time to go on lightening the foremost boat.

But before we had been at work many minutes there was a cheer from close
at hand, and upon our answering it, another and another, with splashing
of oars, and the next minute I heard Mr Brooke's voice from beyond the
first boat.


CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

SAVED.

"Look sharp, sir," I said, after going forward, and in a few words
explaining our position.

"Right, my lad.  Get your men together in the stern of your boat, and
keep up the fire, while we make fast and try and tow you off.  Hi! quick
there!" he roared; and a cheer told us that another boat was close at
hand.

But my work was cut out, the men placed well under cover, and we waited
listening for the first sounds of the returning enemy, while from time
to time Mr Brooke's clear, short orders came out of the darkness behind
us, and we knew that he had sent a party into the fixed boat to rock it
from side to side.  Then came a cheer, as the water rolled hissing and
whispering among the reeds; there was the simultaneous plash of oars,
and a creaking sound.

Then another sound from the bank of the creek, which I knew well enough.

"Say when, sir," whispered Tom Jecks.  "They're a-coming on."  To our
astonishment, for the enemy had crept forward so silently that we had
hardly heard a sound, there was a hideous yell, and a crashing volley,
the bullets hissing over our heads again, and once more the gong-beating
began.

"Fire!"  I said.

"Yes, fire, my lads, steady--where you see the flashes of their
matchlocks."

The voice came from close to my ear.

"Mr Reardon!"  I cried in astonishment.

"Yes, Herrick; that bullet quite stunned me for a minute or two.  I'm
better now.  But hasn't it grown dark rather suddenly?"

"Yes, sir," I said; for I felt in my excitement as if it would be
impossible to enter into explanations then.

"But we're in motion."

"Hooray!"

Every one took up that cheer; for the combined efforts of the men who
rowed the laden craft, and the tugging of two boats' crews of men
straining with all their might at their stout ashen blades, had the
required effect.  We were indeed in motion, and going steadily down the
stream.

"Ahoy, there: Mr Reardon!"

"Answer him, Herrick," said Mr Reardon; and I hailed again.

"Can you keep them off with your fire?"

"Say, yes."

"Yes; all right," I cried.

"Then we'll tow you out as fast as we can."

"Thank Heaven," I heard Mr Reardon whisper, as he crouched there,
listening to the yelling, gong-beating, and firing, and with our men
replying from time to time whenever there seemed a chance.

And now the bullets from the matchlocks began to patter upon the bales;
for the banks were growing lower and lower, and the trees more open, but
not a man was hit; and after another quarter of an hour's sharp replying
we heard fresh cheering, the overshadowing trees on the banks suddenly
began to grow distant.  Then it became lighter still, with the stars
twinkling over head and the lights of the _Teaser_ apparently close at
hand.

But the enemy, enraged at our escape, now crowded down to the bank and
began to fire rapidly, while the men replied till the _crack crack_ and
_ping ping_ of the rifles was silenced,--the men stopping as if by
mutual consent.  For there was a flash from the side of the _Teaser_
right in front of us, a shell whistled over our heads and crashed in
among the trees where the petty firing of the matchlocks was kept up.
Then--_crash_! the shell sent shrieking amongst them exploded, and all
was still but the steady beating of our oars.

"Are you much hurt, sir?"  I said to Mr Reardon; but Ching took the
inquiry to himself.

"Velly stiff; velly hungly," he said.

"I wasn't speaking to you," I cried angrily; for my temper seemed to
have suddenly grown painfully acid, and a titter rose from among the
men.

"No, Mr Herrick, scarcely at all.  The bullet struck my cap-band, just
above my temple, and glanced off.  I can think more clearly now.  How
many men are hurt in this boat?"

There was no reply; and as we at the same moment glided alongside, the
question seemed to be echoed from the _Teaser's_ side high above our
heads.

Still no reply, and the captain said sharply--

"Who is below there, Mr Reardon--Mr Brooke?"

"Ay, ay, sir," cried the latter.

"How many men did you find they had lost?"

"None, sir."

"Brought all off safely?"

"Yes, sir."

A tremendous cheer arose from the deck.

"I felt too giddy to speak just then, Herrick," said Mr Reardon.  "Not
one man injured except myself.  It is marvellous, my lad.  But there; we
had plenty of poor fellows wounded aboard."

Ten minutes later two of the boats were swinging at the davits, and our
two were being towed astern, as the head of the _Teaser_ once more swung
round, and we went down with the tide.  We anchored off the mouth of the
muddy river till morning, to which time was put off the hoisting on deck
of the rest of the loot, the account of whose amount and probable value
did more, they said, toward helping on the wounded than any of Dr
Price's ministrations.

But he had serious work with two of the wounded men, who tried very
hard, as he put it, to go out of hand; but he wouldn't let them.  Two of
the pirates did die, though, and were cast overboard, sewn up decently
in hammocks, and with shot at their heels.

Seven days later we came to an anchor again off Tsin-Tsin, by which time
Mr Reardon's right eye and temple were horribly discoloured, but in
other respects he was quite well, and was present at what he called our
second gaol delivery, for he came on deck to see the prisoners, wounded
and sound, handed over to the Chinese authorities; but there was no such
display of pomp as on the first occasion, one row-boat only coming
alongside, with a very business-like officer, who superintended the
chaining of the pirates, and bundled them down.

"Just as if they had been so many sacks," Barkins said; and he was very
apt in his comparison.

I only said one word in allusion to the Chinese soldiery and their
officers.  That word was--

"Brutes!"


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A SURPRISE.

I don't think the Chinese authorities were very grateful to us of the
_Teaser_,--there, you see, I say _us_, for I did do something to help in
routing out and destroying two nests of pirates; but the merchants, both
Chinese and English, feted us most gloriously, and if it had not been
for Mr Reardon we three middies might have always been ashore at
dinners and dances.

"But," cried Barkins, "so sure as one gets an invitation he puts his
foot down."

"Yes," said Smith; "and it is such a foot."

"But it's such a pity," grumbled Barkins; "for Tsin-Tsin is after all
rather a jolly place.  Mr Brooke says the ball at the consul's last
night was glorious, no end of Chinese swells there, and the music and
dancing was fine."

"Don't be so jolly envious, Tanner," sneered Smith.  "You couldn't have
danced if you had gone."

"Dance better than you could," cried Barkins hotly.

"No, you couldn't.  Fancy asking a young lady to waltz, and then going
dot-and-go-one round the room with your game leg."

"You've a deal to talk about, Smithy; why, if you asked a lady to dance
you couldn't lift your right arm to put round her waist."

"Couldn't I?" cried Smith.  "Look here."

He swung his arm round me, took three steps, and dropped on to the
locker, turning quite white with pain.

"Told you so," cried Barkins, springing up.  "Waltz?  I should just
think!--oh, murder!"

He sat down suddenly to hold his leg tightly with both hands, giving
Smith a dismal look.

"Oh dear!" he groaned; "what a long time it does take a wound to get
well in this plaguey country.  I know that knife was poisoned."

"Nonsense!"  I cried, unable to restrain my mirth.  "Why, you are both
getting on famously."

"But Dishy might have let us go to the ball last night."

"Play fair," I said; "we've been out to seven entertainments."

"Well, what of that?  They've been to a dozen.  It's all old Dishy's way
of showing his authority.  I'm sure we all work hard when we're on duty,
and run risks enough."

"Go on, you old grumbler.  Aren't we to go up the river shooting on
Thursday with Mr Brooke and the doctor?"

"Yes, that's right enough; but we shall be off again soon on another
cruise, and get no more fun for long enough."

"I say, let's ask for a run ashore to-day."

"And get chivvied by the pigtails, same as we did down at that other
place."

"Oh, but perhaps they'll be more civil here," I said.

Smith burst out laughing.

"Why, didn't they pelt you, and shy mud at the skipper?"

"Oh, if you're afraid, you can stop," I said.  "Tanner and I can go."

"Afraid!" cried Smith, doubling his fist and holding it within an inch
of my nose.  "Say afraid again, you miserable insect, and I'll flatten
you."

"Couldn't with that hand," I said, and I caught his wrist.

"Oh, don't!  Murder!" he roared.  "I say, you shouldn't.  It's like
touching one's arm with red-hot iron."

"Then be civil," I said.

"Ah, only wait.  I say, Tanner, our day's coming.  As soon as we're both
quite strong he has got to pay for all this, hasn't he?"

"Oh, bother!  I say, the skipper and Dishy are both going ashore to-day
with an escort of Jacks and marines."

"Are they?"  I said eagerly.

"Yes; there's some game or another on.  Let's ask leave, and take old
Ching with us."

"Want to try puppy-pie again?" said Smith, grinning.

"I want to do something for a change.  I know!  I'll go and see the
doctor, and tell him we want a walk in the country to collect flowers,
and ask him if he'll name them."

"Well, he can't give us leave."

"No; but he'll ask Dishy to let us off."

"Bravo!" cried Smith.  "Off you go.  I say, though, we must have old
Ching too.  You see if he don't come out in his new gown!"

"What new gown?"  I said.

"Hallo! didn't you know?  He went ashore yesterday and bought himself a
new blue coat.  Not a cotton one, but silk, real silk, my boy, and
beckoned me to come and see it,--beckoned with one of his long claws.
He's letting his fingernails grow now, and getting to be quite a swell."

"Oh yes; old Ching's getting quite the gentleman.  He says he wrote home
to his broker to sell the fancee shop.  What do you think he said,
Gnat?"

"How should I know?"  I replied.

"That it wasn't proper for a gentleman in Queen Victolia's service to
keep a fancee shop."

"Murder!  Look at that!" cried Smith.  "Why, you yellow-skinned old
Celestial, you were listening!"

Barkins and I picked up each something to throw at the round, smooth,
smiling face thrust in at the door, which was held close to the neck, so
that we saw a head and nothing more.

"No flow thing at Ching," the Chinaman said softly.  "Offlicer don't
flow thing.  Ching come in?"

"Yes," said Barkins, "come in.  What is it?"

Ching entered looking very important, and gave his head a shake to make
his tail fall neatly between his shoulders, and drew the long blue
sleeves of his gown over the backs of his hands till only the tips of
his fingers, with their very long nails, were visible.

He advanced smiling at us each in turn, and bowing his round head like a
china mandarin.

"You all velly good boy?" he said softly.

"Oh yes; beauties," said Barkins.  "What's up?"

"You likee ask leave go for bit walkee walkee?"

"Don't!" roared Smith.  "Don't talk like a nurse to us.  Why don't you
speak plain English?"

"Yes; Ching speak ploper Inglis.  No speakee pigeon Englis.  All ploper.
Interpleter.  You likee go shore for walkee, see something?"

"You beggar, you were listening," cried Barkins.  "How long had you been
there?"

"Ching just come ask young genelman likee walkee walkee."

"Yes, allee likee walkee walkee velly much," said Barkins, imitating the
Chinaman's squeak.  "Why?  Can you give us leave?"

Ching shook his head.

"Go ask offlicer.  Go for walkee walkee, take Ching; you likee see
something velly nice ploper?"

"Yes," I cried eagerly.  "Can you take us to see a Chinese theatre?"

Ching closed his eyes and nodded.

"You come 'long o' Ching, I showee something velly nice ploper."

"All right," I cried.  "Now, Tanner, go and try it on with the doctor."

"No, no.  Ask offlicer.  Doctor only give flizzick.  Velly nastee.
Ugh!"

Ching's round face was a study as he screwed it up to show his disgust
with the doctor's preparations.

Barkins went off and returned directly.

"Well," we cried; "seen Price?" and Ching, who was squatted on the
floor, looked up smiling.

"No."

"Not seen him?"

"No; I ran against Dishy, and thought I'd ask him plump."

"And you did?"

"Yes."

"What did he say?"

"I know," cried Smith; "that we were always going out."

"That's it exactly."

"And he won't let us go?"  I said in a disappointed tone.

"Who says so?" cried Barkins, changing his manner.  "The old chap was in
splendid fettle, and he smiled,--now, now, don't both of you be so jolly
full of doubts.  On my honour as an officer and a gentleman, he smiled
and clapped me on the shoulder."

"Yes, my lad, of course," he said.  "We shall be off again soon, and
then it will be all work and no play again, and we mustn't make Jack a
dull boy, must we?"

"He's going off his head," said Smith.

"Let him go, then," I cried, "if it makes him like this."

"Don't chatter so, Gnat," cried Smith.  "I say, did he really say we
might go?"

"Yes; and that we ought to start at once before the day grew hotter, and
that we were to take great care of ourselves."

"Hurra!"

"And be sure and wash our faces and our hands before we started," added
Barkins.

"Get out; I can see where it joins," I cried.  "But did he say any
more?"

"Only that we were to mind and not get into any trouble with the people,
and that we had better take Ching."

"Yes," said that individual gravely.  "Much better take Ching.  Velly
useful take care."

"To be sure," I cried, full of excitement at the idea of a run through
the mazes of the quaint town, and the prospect of seeing a Chinese
performance.  "I say, Ching," I cried, striking an attitude, "take us
where you can give us a tune, `Ti--ope--I--ow.'"

"Yes; velly nicee music," he said, nodding and smiling.  "Ching takee
see something velly good.  You leady?"

"In five minutes," cried Barkins.  "Gnat, go and tell them to have the
boat ready.  Mr Reardon said we were to be rowed ashore."

"Ching leady in five minutes," said the interpreter, running towards the
door.

"Eh?  Why, you are ready," said Smith.

"No.  Go put on new blue silk flock.  Leady dilectly."

Ten minutes later we were being rowed ashore, to be landed at the wharf
where we met with so unpleasant an attack a short time before.  But
there was no mob of idlers there now, and we stepped ashore, leaving the
good-natured-looking crew smiling at us, and giving the shops many a
longing look, as they pushed off and began to row back at once.

"Plenty time," said Ching.  "You likee fust go lestaulant--eatee,
dlinkee, spend plize-money?"

"Can't spend what we haven't yet got, Ching," said Barkins.  "What do
you say, lads?  I'm hungry again, aren't you?"

Smith sighed.

"I'm always hungry," he said.

"Of course you are.  I believe he's hollow all through, Gnat.  How do
you feel?"

"As if I haven't had any breakfast," I said earnestly.

Ching smiled.

"Velly much nicee bleakfast all along o' Ching."

He led the way in and out among the narrow streets, apparently again as
much at home as in his own city; and it was hard work to keep from
stopping to gaze at the hundreds of objects which attracted and set me
longing to make purchases to take home for curiosities.  But Ching
bustled us along.

"No time now.  Come along get good bleakfast.  Wantee good bleakfast
before go to see gland show."

"Here, what is it you are going to take us to see, Ching?" cried
Barkins--"all right; I wasn't talking to you," he added, as a couple of
Chinamen turned round to gaze at the young outer barbarian.

"You waitee," cried Ching, smiling; "all velly ploper gland.  You likee
see the show."

"Oh, all right.  Where's the restaurant?"

"Nex' stleet," said Ching; and after a few minutes he turned into a
showy-looking eating-house, where his blue silk gown and long nails
seemed to command the most profound respect from the attendants; and
where, after laying down the law very stringently to Ching, that we were
to have neither dog, cat, nor rat, we resigned ourselves to our fate,
and ate birds'-nest soup, shark-fin, and a variety of what Barkins
called messes, with midshipmen appetites.

Ching smiled, and seemed to be very proud of our performance.

"You all eat dlink velly much," he said, as we gave up, defeated.  "You
all velly quite full?" he said, rubbing his hands carefully, so as not
to injure his long nails.

"Yes, full up, and the hatches battened down," cried Barkins.  "Now
then, ask for the bill.  How much apiece?"

Ching smiled and nodded his head.

"You come have bleakfast 'long o' Ching.  Ching velly glad to see you;
Ching pay."

"What? nonsense!" cried Smith, while we others stared.

"Yes; Ching plenty money.  Captain gave Ching plenty plize-money; make
him velly happy to see young offlicer to bleakfast."

"Oh, but we can't let him pay for us, Smithy," cried Barkins.

"No, of course not," we chorussed.

"Ching velly much hurt you want to pay," he said, with dignity.

"But--" I cried.

"You ask Ching bleakfast like Chinese genelman another time, make Ching
velly glad.  Come along, makee haste, see gland show."

"But the bill isn't paid," I cried.

"Ching pay long time 'go," he said, rising; and there was nothing for it
but to follow him out and along three or four streets to where there was
a dense crowd in front of a gateway in a high mud wall.

There were some soldiers there too, and Ching walked up full of
importance, showed them some kind of paper, when one, who appeared to be
their officer, spoke to those under him, and they cleared a way for us
to pass to the gate.

Here Ching knocked loudly, and the gate was opened by another soldier;
the paper was shown; and an important-looking official came up, looked
at us, and made way for us to enter.

"It's all right," said Smith.  "Ching knows the manager.  It will be a
private box."

The official pointed to our left, and Ching led the way behind a kind of
barricade where there were seats erected, and, selecting a place, he
smilingly made us sit down.

"Ching know gleat mandalin," he said.  "Askee let come see gland show."

"But what's it going to be?"  I asked, as I looked curiously round the
square enclosure surrounded by a high wall, and with seats and pens on
three sides.  "I thought we were coming to a theatre!"

"No," said Ching, smiling.  "Velly gland show; wait."

We waited, and saw that the space in front of us was neatly sanded, that
posts stood up here and there.  In other places there were cross bars,
and in two there were ropes hanging.

"I know!" cried Barkins; "he needn't make such a jolly mystery of it.
It's Chinese athletic sports.  Look, there's the band coming."

He pointed to a military-looking party marching in with drums, gongs,
and divers other instruments; and almost at the same time quite a crowd
of well-dressed people entered, and began to take the different places
reserved behind the barriers.

Then a body of soldiers, with clumsy spears and shields, marched in and
formed up opposite the band, the place filling up till only the best
places, which were exactly opposite to us, remained empty.

"You're right, Tanner," said Smith just then; "but they're military
athletic sports.  I say, here come the grandees."

For in procession about twenty gorgeously-arrayed officials came
marching in, and the next moment I gave Barkins a dig in the ribs.

"Look," I said.

"All right; I see.  Well, we needn't mind.  But I say, what a game if we
hadn't got leave!"

"I say," whispered Smith, "look over there.  The skipper and old Dishy!
This was where they were coming, then; they'll see us directly."

"Let 'em," said Barkins, as the party settled themselves.  "Now then,
we're all here.  All in to begin.  We ought to have a programme.  Here,
Ching, what's the first thing they do?"

"Ching no quite sure; p'laps lichi."

"Lichi?"  I said.

"You don't know?  You see velly gland--velly ploper for bad, bad man."

He turned away to speak to a Chinese officer close at hand, while we
began to feel wondering and suspicious, and gazed at each other with the
same question on our lips.

Ching turned to us again, and I being nearest whispered--

"I say, what place is this?  What are they going to do?"

"Bring out allee wicked men.  Choppee off head."


CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE ENTERTAINMENT.

I felt as it were a sudden jar run through me when I heard Ching's
words.  It was as if I had been awakened by a sudden revelation.  This,
then, was the grand show he had contrived for us as a treat!  It was all
clear enough: our officers had been invited to the execution of the
pirates we had taken, and conceiving, with all a Chinaman's indifference
to death, that we three lads, who had been present at their capture,
would consider it as a great treat to be witnesses of the punishment
awarded by the Government, Ching had contrived to get permission for us
to be present.

I glanced at the Tanner, who had grasped the situation, and was screwing
his face up so as to look perfectly unconcerned; but it was a dismal
failure, for I could see a peculiar twitching going on at the corners of
his eyes, and he passed his tongue rapidly over his lips and went
through the action of swallowing as if his mouth and throat were dry.

I next looked at Smithy, whose eyes showed more white than usual, and
whose complexion was of a sickly-green, just as I had seen it during
some very rough weather we had going down the Channel on first starting
for this voyage.

How I looked I have only Barkins' word for, and he told me afterwards
that I seemed as if I was waiting for my turn to suffer with the
pirates.

After the sharp glance I gave at my fellows neither of us stirred, but
sat there as if petrified.  I was horror-stricken, and there was a
strong impulse upon me to jump up and run out, but shame and the dread
of being considered cowardly kept me in my place.  In fact, as
after-confessions made clear, we were absolutely stunned, and I don't
think we could have stirred had we made up our minds to go.

Then I felt dizzy, and the brilliant group of officials and military
magnates and judges opposite to where we sat grew blurred and
strange-looking in the bright sunshine.

At last I felt as if I must argue out the question, and with my teeth
set firm, and my eyes fixed upon the sandy ground of the enclosure, some
such thoughts as these ran through my brain--"It is only just that these
men should suffer for their horrible crimes, for they are more dangerous
than venomous serpents, and I suppose that Captain Thwaites and
Lieutenant Reardon are obliged to come as a kind of duty; but we three
came under the idea that we were to see some kind of exhibition, and old
Ching did it out of kindness, not knowing of what kind of stuff we were
made.  I shan't stop."

There I paused to fight with other ideas.

"Tanner and Blacksmith will laugh at me and think I am a coward.  Well,
let them," I said to myself at last.  "It isn't cowardice not to wish to
see such a horror as this.  I didn't feel cowardly when they were
shooting at us down in the creek, and it would be far more cowardly to
sit here against my will without speaking.  I will tell them I want to
go."

I should think that every lad of the age I then was, will pretty well
understand my feelings, and what a bitter thing it was to turn and
confess what they would jeer at and call "funk."  It was hard work
indeed.

"I don't care," I muttered.  "I know they'll protest and say they don't
want to come, but be very glad to come away all the time.  I will
speak."

Just then that horrible Chinaman turned to me with his round fat face,
all smiling and delighted.

"You velly glad you come?" he said.  "You feel velly happy?"

My mind was made up at this, and I spoke out.

"No," I said in a husky whisper.  "I didn't know we had come to see
this.  I shall go."

"What?" said Barkins, with a forced laugh.  "Look here, Blacksmith, he's
showing the white feather."

"Ho! ho!" laughed Smith.  "Come, Gnat, I thought you had a little more
spirit in you.  Serve the beggars right."

"Yes, I know that," I said firmly enough now, as I looked at their
faces, which, in spite of the masks they had assumed, looked ghastly;
"and I daresay I haven't pluck enough to sit it out.  But I don't care
for your grins; I'm not ashamed to say that I shall go."

"Oh, well, if you feel that it would upset you," said Barkins, in a tone
of voice full of protest, "I suppose that we had better see you off, and
go somewhere else."

"Poof!" ejaculated Smith in a low tone.  "Look at him, Gnat; he's in
just as much of a stew as you are.  Well, it's too bad of you both, but
if you must go, why, I suppose we must."

"You beggar!" snarled Barkins angrily.  "Why, you're worse than I am.
Look at him, Gnat!  There, I will own it.  I felt sick as soon as I knew
what was going to happen, but I won't be such a bumptious, bragging
sneak as he is.  Look at his face.  It's green and yellow.  He wants to
go worse than we do."

Smith did not seem to be listening, for his starting eyes were fixed
upon the far right-hand gate, over which there was a kind of pagoda, and
he rose from his seat.

"Come on at once," he whispered, "they're going to begin."

"Confessed!" whispered Barkins, pinching my knee.  "Come on then quick,
Gnat, old man; it's too horrid."

We all rose together, and were in the act of turning when a low hoarse
murmur rose from behind, and we saw that a crowd of angry faces were
gazing at us, and that they were nearly all armed men.

But before we had recovered from our surprise, Ching had caught my arm
and pressed me to my seat.

"No go now," he whispered, with a look of alarm in his face, and he
leaned over me and dragged my companions down in turn.  "No can go now.
Allee gate fasten.  Makee blave velly angly and dlaw sword; fightee
fightee.  Ching velly solly.  Must stop now."

There was a low hissing noise all about us, and threatening looks, while
a fierce man in embroidered silk said something in his own tongue to
Ching, who answered humbly, and then tamed to us and whispered--

"Small-button mandalin say make big-button peacock-feather mandalin
velly angly.  You no sit still.  Sh! sh!"

"We must sit it out, boys," I said, with a shudder; "but we need not
look."

My words were quite correct to a certain extent, but as my companions,
who now looked more ghastly than ever, sank back in their seats, I felt
compelled to gaze across to where I could now see a red table exactly
facing me.  Then a movement to the right caught my attention, and
through the far gateway, and lowering it a little as he passed under the
archway, rode an officer with a yellow silk banner, upon which were
large black Chinese characters.  Behind him came some more
showily-dressed officials; and then, in a kind of sedan chair, one whom
I at once saw to be the chief mandarin, for whom we had been waiting.

He was carried across to the front, where he alighted and walked slowly
across to the red table, followed by sword, spear, and matchlock men,
who, as he took his place at the table, ranged themselves on either side
facing us, and completing a spectacle that, seen there in the bright
light, strongly suggested the opening of some grand pantomime.

I remember thinking this, and then shuddering at the horrible thought,
and at the same time I began wondering at the intense interest I could
not help taking in what was going on.

Two more grandees in chairs of state followed, and then there was a
pause.  I could see that our officers were politely saluted, and that
care was taken that no one should be in front of them.  And now came the
more exciting part of the terrible exhibition.

Suddenly there was the loud booming of a gong, and the head of an escort
of spearmen marched through the gateway, followed by a group of men in
twos, each pair bearing a long bamboo pole, from which, hanging in each
case like a scale, was a large basket, and heavily chained in each
basket was a man, whom we knew at once to be one of the pirates we had
captured, without Ching whispering to us--

"Velly bad men, killee evelybody.  They killee now."

My eyes would not close.  They were fascinated by the horrible
procession; and I now saw, just in front of the bearers, a tall-looking
bare-headed man carrying a large bright sword, curved in the fashion we
see in old pictures of the Turkish scimitar, a blade which increases in
width from the hilt nearly to the end, where it is suddenly cut off
diagonally to form a sharp point.

Behind this man marched five more, the procession moving right to the
front between us and the brilliant party whose centre was the principal
mandarin.

I now saw, too, that every one of the miserable culprits was ticketed or
labelled, a bamboo upon which a piece of paper was stuck being attached
to his neck and head.

A low murmur ran round among the spectators, as, at a signal from the
man with the great sword, who I saw now must be the executioner, the
bearers stopped, and with a jerk threw the poles off their shoulders
into their hands, bumped the baskets heavily down upon the ground, and
shot the malefactors out as unceremoniously as if they had been so much
earth.

I heard Barkins draw a deep breath, and saw Smith leaning forward and
gazing wildly at the scene, while I felt my heart go _throb throb_
heavily, and found myself wishing that I had not shared in the capture
of the wretched men.

The chief mandarin then turned to the officer on horseback, who carried
the imperial yellow flag, said a few words in a low tone, and he in turn
pushed his horse a little forward to where the executioner was waiting,
and evidently conveyed the mandarin's orders.

Then suddenly the pirates, as if moved by one consent, struggled to
their feet and began shouting.

Ching placed his lips close to my ear--

"Say, please no choppee off head.  Velly bad men, killee lot always;
velly bad."

And now I felt that the time had come to close my eyes, but they
remained fixed.  I could not avert my gaze from a scene which was made
more horrible by a struggle which took place between the first pirate of
the long row in which they stood and the executioner.

The man shouted out some words angrily, and Ching interpreted them in my
ear, his explanation being in company with a strange surging noise--

"Say he come back and killee him if he choppee off head.  Oh, he velly
bad man."

But quickly, as if quite accustomed to the task, two of the
executioner's assistants rushed at the pirate; one of them forced him
down into a kneeling position; they then seized his long tail, drew it
over his head and hung back, thus holding the pirate's neck
outstretched; lastly, I saw the executioner draw back, the sword
flashed, I heard a dull thud--the head fell, and the body rolled over on
one side.

Before I could drag my eyes from the horror there was the same terrible
sound again, and another head fell upon the ground, while, with a
rapidity that was astounding, the assistants passed from one culprit to
the other in the long row, the miserable wretches making not the
slightest resistance, but kneeling patiently in the position in which
they were thrust, while _whish, whish, whish_, the executioner lopped
off their heads at one blow.

"Allee done," said Ching.  "Execution man have velly much plactice."

He said this to me, but I made no reply, for the whole place seemed to
be going round and round.

"You thinkee they all come back again and have junk?  Go kill shoot
evelybody, pilate ghost-man?"

"No," I said hoarsely; "can we go now?"

"Velly soon.  Gleat clowd all along gate.  Lookee, Mis' Tanner go
s'eep."

These words roused me, and I turned to Barkins, who was lying back with
his eyes nearly closed and looking ghastly, while Smith sat staring
straight before him, with his hands grasping the seat on either side, in
a stiff, awkward position.

"Here, Smithy," I said, "quick, Tanner has fainted;" but he took no
notice, and I whispered to him angrily--

"Get up.  It's all over now.  Come and help me.  Don't let these
horrible people see Tanner like this."

He turned to me then, and let his eyes fall on our messmate.

"Can you get me a drink of water, Ching?" he murmured.

"Yes, d'leckly; wait lit' bit.  Po' Mr Barki' Tanner leg velly bad,
makee sick.  You' alm velly bad still?"

"Very bad; it throbs," murmured Smith.

"Ah, yes!  Wait lit' bit and no clowd.  Ching take you have cup flesh
tea, and quite well d'leckly.  You not likee execution?"

I shook my head.

"Velly good job cut allee head off.  No go killee killee, burn ship no
more."

"We're not used to seeing such things," I said weakly, as I supported
Barkins to keep him from slipping to the ground.

Val. Please it your Grace, there is a Messenger That stayes to beare
my Letters to my friends, And I am going to deliuer them 
Duk.

Be they of much import?

Val. The tenure of them doth but signifie My health, and happy being
at your Court

Duk.

Nay then no matter: stay with me a while, I am to breake with thee of
some affaires That touch me neere: wherein thou must be secret.
'Tis not vnknown to thee, that I haue sought To match my friend Sir
Thurio, to my daughter 
Val.

I know it well (my Lord) and sure the Match Were rich and honourable:
besides, the gentleman Is full of Vertue, Bounty, Worth, and
Qualities Beseeming such a Wife, as your faire daughter:
Cannot your Grace win her to fancie him?

Duk.

No, trust me, She is peeuish, sullen, froward, Prowd, disobedient,
stubborne, lacking duty, Neither regarding that she is my childe, Nor
fearing me, as if I were her father:

And may I say to thee, this pride of hers (Vpon aduice) hath drawne
my loue from her, And where I thought the remnant of mine age Should
haue beene cherish'd by her child-like dutie, I now am full resolu'd
to take a wife, And turne her out, to who will take her in:
Then let her beauty be her wedding dowre:
For me, and my possessions she esteemes not 
Val.

What would your Grace haue me to do in this?
Duk. There is a Lady in Verona heere Whom I affect: but she is nice,
and coy, And naught esteemes my aged eloquence.

Now therefore would I haue thee to my Tutor (For long agone I haue
forgot to court, Besides the fashion of the time is chang'd) How,
and which way I may bestow my selfe To be regarded in her sun-bright
eye 
Val.

Win her with gifts, if she respect not words, Dumbe Iewels often in their
silent kinde More then quicke words, doe moue a womans minde
Duk.

But she did scorne a present that I sent her, Val.

A woman somtime scorns what best co[n]tents her.
Send her another: neuer giue her ore, For scorne at first, makes
after-loue the more.

If she doe frowne, 'tis not in hate of you, But rather to beget
more loue in you.

If she doe chide, 'tis not to haue you gone, For why, the fooles
are mad, if left alone.

Take no repulse, what euer she doth say, For, get you gon, she doth not
meane away.
Flatter, and praise, commend, extoll their graces:

Though nere so blacke, say they haue Angells faces, That man that
hath a tongue, I say is no man, If with his tongue he cannot win
a woman 
Duk.

But she I meane, is promis'd by her friends Vnto a youthfull Gentleman
of worth, And kept seuerely from resort of men, That no man hath accesse
by day to her
Val. Why then I would resort to her by night
Duk.

I, but the doores be lockt, and keyes kept safe, That no man hath recourse
to her by night

Val. What letts but one may enter at her window?
Duk.

Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground, And built so sheluing,
that one cannot climbe it Without apparant hazard of his life 
Val.

Why then a Ladder quaintly made of Cords To cast vp, with a paire of
anchoring hookes, Would serue to scale another Hero's towre, So bold
Leander would aduenture it
Duk. Now as thou art a Gentleman of blood Aduise me, where I may
haue such a Ladder 
Val.

When would you vse it? pray sir, tell me that
Duk. This very night; for Loue is like a childe That longs for euery
thing that he can come by
Val. By seauen a clock, ile get you such a Ladder
Duk But harke thee: I will goe to her alone, How shall I best conuey
the Ladder thither?

Val. It will be light (my Lord) that you may beare it Vnder a cloake,
that is of any length 
Duk.

A cloake as long as thine will serue the turne?

Val. I my good Lord
Duk. Then let me see thy cloake, Ile get me one of such another length

Val. Why any cloake will serue the turn (my Lord) Duk. How shall I
fashion me to weare a cloake?

I pray thee let me feele thy cloake vpon me.
What Letter is this same? what's here? to Siluia?

And heere an Engine fit for my proceeding, Ile be so bold to breake
the seale for once.

My thoughts do harbour with my Siluia nightly, And slaues they are to me,
that send them flying.

Oh, could their Master come, and goe as lightly, Himselfe would lodge where
(senceles) they are lying.

My Herald Thoughts, in thy pure bosome rest-them, While I (their King)
that thither them importune Doe curse the grace, that with such grace
hath blest them, Because my selfe doe want my seruants fortune.
I curse my selfe, for they are sent by me, That they should harbour where
their Lord should be.
What's here? Siluia, this night I will enfranchise thee.
'Tis so: and heere's the Ladder for the purpose.

Why Phaeton (for thou art Merops sonne) Wilt thou aspire to guide the
heauenly Car?
And with thy daring folly burne the world?
Wilt thou reach stars, because they shine on thee?
Goe base Intruder, ouer-weening Slaue, Bestow thy fawning smiles
on equall mates, And thinke my patience, (more then thy desert) Is
priuiledge for thy departure hence.

Thanke me for this, more then for all the fauors Which (all too-much)
I haue bestowed on thee.

But if thou linger in my Territories Longer then swiftest expedition
Will giue thee time to leaue our royall Court, By heauen, my wrath
shall farre exceed the loue I euer bore my daughter, or thy selfe.

Be gone, I will not heare thy vaine excuse, But as thou lou'st thy
life, make speed from hence 
Val.

And why not death, rather then liuing torment?

To die, is to be banisht from my selfe, And Siluia is my selfe: banish'd
from her Is selfe from selfe.

A deadly banishment:
What light, is light, if Siluia be not seene?

What ioy is ioy, if Siluia be not by?

Vnlesse it be to thinke that she is by And feed vpon the shadow of
perfection.

Except I be by Siluia in the night, There is no musicke in the
Nightingale.

Vnlesse I looke on Siluia in the day, There is no day for me to
looke vpon.

Shee is my essence, and I leaue to be; If I be not by her faire
influence Foster'd, illumin'd, cherish'd, kept aliue.

I flie not death, to flie his deadly doome, Tarry I heere, I but
attend on death, But flie I hence, I flie away from life 
Pro.

Run (boy) run, run, and seeke him out
Lau. So-hough, Soa hough- Pro. What seest thou?
Lau. Him we goe to finde, There's not a haire on's head, but 'tis a
Valentine

Pro. Valentine?
Val.

No
Pro. Who then? his Spirit?

Val. Neither, Pro. What then?
Val. Nothing

Lau. Can nothing speake? Master, shall I strike?
Pro. Who wouldst thou strike?
Lau.

Nothing
Pro. Villaine, forbeare
Lau. Why Sir, Ile strike nothing: I pray you
Pro. Sirha, I say forbeare: friend Valentine, a word
Val.

My eares are stopt, & cannot hear good newes, So much of bad already
hath possest them 
Pro.

Then in dumbe silence will I bury mine, For they are harsh,
vn-tuneable, and bad 
Val.

Is Siluia dead?
Pro. No, Valentine 
Val.

No Valentine indeed, for sacred Siluia, Hath she forsworne me?
Pro. No, Valentine
Val. No Valentine, if Siluia haue forsworne me.
What is your newes?
Lau. Sir, there is a proclamation, y you are vanished

Pro. That thou art banish'd: oh that's the newes, From hence, from
Siluia, and from me thy friend
Val.

Oh, I haue fed vpon this woe already, And now excesse of it will make
me surfet.
Doth Siluia know that I am banish'd?

Pro.

I, I: and she hath offered to the doome (Which vn-reuerst stands
in effectuall force) A Sea of melting pearle, which some call teares;
Those at her fathers churlish feete she tenderd, With them vpon her
knees, her humble selfe, Wringing her hands, whose whitenes so
became them, As if but now they waxed pale for woe:
But neither bended knees, pure hands held vp, Sad sighes, deepe
grones, nor siluer-shedding teares Could penetrate her vncompassionate
Sire; But Valentine, if he be tane, must die.

Besides, her intercession chaf'd him so, When she for thy repeale
was suppliant, That to close prison he commanded her, With many
bitter threats of biding there 
Val.

No more: vnles the next word that thou speak'st Haue some malignant
power vpon my life:
If so: I pray thee breath it in mine eare, As ending Antheme of my
endlesse dolor 
Pro.

Cease to lament for that thou canst not helpe, And study helpe for
that which thou lament'st, Time is the Nurse, and breeder of all good;
Here, if thou stay, thou canst not see thy loue:
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life:
Hope is a louers staffe, walke hence with that And manage it, against
despairing thoughts:
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence, Which, being writ
to me, shall be deliuer'd Euen in the milke-white bosome of thy Loue.

The time now serues not to expostulate, Come, Ile conuey thee through
the City-gate.

And ere I part with thee, confer at large Of all that may concerne
thy Loue-affaires:
As thou lou'st Siluia (though not for thy selfe) Regard thy danger,
and along with me 
Val.

I pray thee Launce, and if thou seest my Boy Bid him make haste, and meet
me at the North-gate
Pro. Goe sirha, finde him out: Come Valentine
Val. Oh my deere Siluia; haplesse Valentine
Launce. I am but a foole, looke you, and yet I haue the wit to thinke
my Master is a kinde of a knaue: but that's all one, if he be but one
knaue: He liues not now that knowes me to be in loue, yet I am in
loue, but a Teeme of horse shall not plucke that from me: nor who
'tis I loue: and yet 'tis a woman; but what woman, I will not tell
my selfe: and yet 'tis a Milke-maid: yet 'tis not a maid: for shee
hath had Gossips: yet 'tis a maid, for she is her Masters maid, and
serues for wages.

Shee hath more qualities then a Water-Spaniell, which is much in a
bare Christian: Heere is the Catelog of her Condition.

Inprimis.

Shee can fetch and carry: why a horse can doe no more; nay, a horse
cannot fetch, but onely carry, therefore is shee better then a Iade.
Item.
She can milke, looke you, a sweet vertue in a maid with cleane hands

Speed. How now Signior Launce? what newes with your Mastership?
La. With my Mastership? why, it is at Sea:
Sp. Well, your old vice still: mistake the word: what newes then in
your paper?
La. The black'st newes that euer thou heard'st
Sp.

Why man? how blacke?
La. Why, as blacke as Inke
Sp. Let me read them?
La. Fie on thee Iolt-head, thou canst not read
Sp. Thou lyest: I can

La. I will try thee: tell me this: who begot thee?
Sp. Marry, the son of my Grand-father
La. Oh illiterate loyterer; it was the sonne of thy Grand-mother: this
proues that thou canst not read
Sp.

Come foole, come: try me in thy paper

La. There: and S[aint]. Nicholas be thy speed

Sp. Inprimis she can milke
La. I that she can

Sp. Item, she brewes good Ale

La. And thereof comes the prouerbe: (Blessing of your heart, you brew good
Ale.) Sp. Item, she can sowe

La. That's as much as to say (Can she so?) Sp. Item she can knit
La. What neede a man care for a stock with a wench, When she can
knit him a stocke?

Sp. Item, she can wash and scoure

La. A speciall vertue: for then shee neede not be wash'd, and scowr'd
Sp.

Item, she can spin

La. Then may I set the world on wheeles, when she can spin for her
liuing 
Sp.

Item, she hath many namelesse vertues

La.

That's as much as to say Bastard-vertues: that indeede know not
their fathers; and therefore haue no names 
Sp.

Here follow her vices
La. Close at the heeles of her vertues

Sp. Item, shee is not to be fasting in respect of her breath
La.

Well: that fault may be mended with a breakfast:
read on

Sp. Item, she hath a sweet mouth

La. That makes amends for her soure breath
Sp. Item, she doth talke in her sleepe 
La.

It's no matter for that; so shee sleepe not in her talke

Sp. Item, she is slow in words
La.

Oh villaine, that set this downe among her vices; To be slow in words,
is a womans onely vertue:
I pray thee out with't, and place it for her chiefe vertue 
Sp.

Item, she is proud

La. Out with that too:
It was Eues legacie, and cannot be t'ane from her 
Sp.

Item, she hath no teeth

La. I care not for that neither: because I loue crusts
Sp. Item, she is curst

La.

Well: the best is, she hath no teeth to bite
Sp. Item, she will often praise her liquor
La.

If her liquor be good, she shall: if she will not, I will; for
good things should be praised 
Sp.

Item, she is too liberall

La.

Of her tongue she cannot; for that's writ downe she is slow of: of
her purse, shee shall not, for that ile keepe shut: Now, of another
thing shee may, and that cannot I helpe.

Well, proceede

Sp. Item, shee hath more haire then wit, and more faults then haires,
and more wealth then faults
La.

Stop there: Ile haue her: she was mine, and not mine, twice or
thrice in that last Article: rehearse that once more 
Sp.

Item, she hath more haire then wit

La.

More haire then wit: it may be ile proue it: The couer of the salt, hides
the salt, and therefore it is more then the salt; the haire that
couers the wit, is more then the wit; for the greater hides the
lesse: What's next?

Sp. And more faults then haires 
La.

That's monstrous: oh that that were out
Sp. And more wealth then faults
La.

Why that word makes the faults gracious:

Well, ile haue her: and if it be a match, as nothing is impossible
Sp.

What then?
La.

Why then, will I tell thee, that thy Master staies for thee at the North
gate

Sp. For me?

La. For thee? I, who art thou? he hath staid for a better man then thee

Sp. And must I goe to him?
La. Thou must run to him; for thou hast staid so long, that going will
scarce serue the turne 
Sp.

Why didst not tell me sooner?

'pox of your loue Letters
La.

Now will he be swing'd for reading my Letter; An vnmannerly slaue, that
will thrust himselfe into secrets:
Ile after, to reioyce in the boyes correctio[n].

Exeunt.

Scena Secunda.

Enter Duke, Thurio, Protheus.

Du.

Sir Thurio, feare not, but that she will loue you Now Valentine is
banish'd from her sight 
Th.

Since his exile she hath despis'd me most, Forsworne my company, and
rail'd at me, That I am desperate of obtaining her 
Du.

This weake impresse of Loue, is as a figure Trenched in ice, which
with an houres heate Dissolues to water, and doth loose his forme.

A little time will melt her frozen thoughts, And worthlesse Valentine
shall be forgot.

How now sir Protheus, is your countriman (According to our Proclamation)
gon?

Pro. Gon, my good Lord

Du. My daughter takes his going grieuously?
Pro. A little time (my Lord) will kill that griefe
Du. So I beleeue: but Thurio thinkes not so:
Protheus, the good conceit I hold of thee, (For thou hast showne some signe
of good desert) Makes me the better to confer with thee 
Pro.

Longer then I proue loyall to your Grace, Let me not liue, to looke
vpon your Grace 
Du.

Thou know'st how willingly, I would effect The match betweene sir
Thurio, and my daughter?

Pro. I doe my Lord

Du. And also, I thinke, thou art not ignorant How she opposes her against
my will?
Pro. She did my Lord, when Valentine was here
Du. I, and peruersly, she perseuers so:

What might we doe to make the girle forget The loue of Valentine, and
loue sir Thurio?
Pro.

The best way is, to slander Valentine, With falsehood, cowardize, and
poore discent:

Three things, that women highly hold in hate 
Du.

I, but she'll thinke, that it is spoke in hate
Pro. I, if his enemy deliuer it.
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken By one, whom she esteemeth
as his friend

Du. Then you must vndertake to slander him
Pro. And that (my Lord) I shall be loath to doe:

'Tis an ill office for a Gentleman, Especially against his very friend

Du. Where your good word cannot aduantage him, Your slander neuer can
endamage him; Therefore the office is indifferent, Being intreated
to it by your friend 
Pro.

You haue preuail'd (my Lord) if I can doe it By ought that I can speake
in his dispraise, She shall not long continue loue to him:
But say this weede her loue from Valentine, It followes not that
she will loue sir Thurio 
Th.

Therefore, as you vnwinde her loue from him; Least it should rauell, and
be good to none, You must prouide to bottome it on me:
Which must be done, by praising me as much As you, in worth dispraise,
sir Valentine
Du. And Protheus, we dare trust you in this kinde, Because we know (on
Valentines report) You are already loues firme votary, And cannot
soone reuolt, and change your minde.

Vpon this warrant, shall you haue accesse, Where you, with Siluia, may
conferre at large.
For she is lumpish, heauy, mellancholly, And (for your friends
sake) will be glad of you; Where you may temper her, by your perswasion,
To hate yong Valentine, and loue my friend
Pro. As much as I can doe, I will effect:
But you sir Thurio, are not sharpe enough:
You must lay Lime, to tangle her desires By walefull Sonnets, whose
composed Rimes Should be full fraught with seruiceable vowes 
Du.

A crew leaped into the boat; the falls were
seized; and in a minute the keel touched the water, and I found myself,
as I stood on the bulwark holding on by a rope, called upon to direct
those who had gone.

"Which way, sir?  See him?"

I could only answer no, and then reply to Mr Reardon, who came up
panting.

"Who is it?" he cried.  "Mr Herrick?"

"No, sir, I'm here," I shouted.  "It's the interpreter."

"And what business had he up on the hammock-rail?" roared the lieutenant
as he climbed up there himself.  "Steady, my lads, he can't be far."

At that moment there was a flash, and a brilliant blue-light burst out
on the surface of the black water, sending a glare all round from where
it floated on the trigger life-buoy, which had been detached and glided
away astern, while directly after a second blue-light blazed out from
the stern of the boat, showing the men dipping their oars lightly, and
two forward and two astern shading their eyes and scanning the flashing
and sparkling water.

"Can't you see him?" roared the lieutenant.

"No, sir."

We leaped downward, hurried right aft where the captain and the other
officers were now gathered, and the orders were given for a second boat
to be lowered and help to save the poor fellow.

"He ought to float, sir," said Mr Reardon in answer to some remark from
the captain.  "He's fat enough."

Then he began shouting orders to the men to row to and fro; and my heart
sank as I vainly searched the lit-up water, for there was no sign of the
unfortunate Chinaman.

"What a horrible ending to a practical joke!"  I thought, and a bitter
feeling of disappointment assailed me, as I asked myself why I had not
gone in the second boat to help save the poor fellow.

Perhaps it was vanity, but in those exciting moments I felt that if I
had been there I might have seen him, for it never occurred to me that I
had a far better chance of seeing him from my post of vantage high up on
that quarter-deck rail.

"See him yet?"

"No, sir!"--"No, sir!"

The first hail loudly from close by, the other from far away where the
blue-lights shone.

"Bless my soul!" cried Mr Reardon, with an angry stamp.  "I can't
understand it.  He must have come up again."

"Unless his pockets were heavily laden," said the captain, going to
where Mr Reardon stood.  "These men carry a great deal about them under
their long loose clothes.  Some heavy copper money, perhaps.  A very
little would be enough to keep a struggling man down."

"Ha!" ejaculated Mr Reardon, while I shivered at the idea of poor old
Ching coming to so terrible an end.

"A glass here!" cried Mr Reardon, and one was handed up to him.

"Try the life-buoy," cried the captain.

"Bless me, sir, I was going to," retorted the lieutenant irritably; "but
the idiot who uses this glass ought to be turned out of the service for
being short-sighted.  I shall never get it to the right focus."

The captain gave a dry cough, and I turned round sharply, expecting to
hear some angry exclamation.

"No," cried Mr Reardon, "he is not clinging to the life-buoy.  I
wouldn't for anything that it should have happened.  Poor fellow!  Poor
fellow!"

"Ay, poor fellow!" muttered Captain Thwaites.  "Any use to lower another
boat, Reardon?"

"No, sir, no," cried the lieutenant, "or I would have had one down.
Ahoy there!" he roared.  "Light another blue!"

"Ay, ay, sir!" came from far away, for the tide ran hissing by our sides
in full rush for the sea, and the third blue-light which blazed out
looked smaller and smaller, while those of the first boat and the
life-buoy began to show faint, and then all at once that on the buoy
seemed to go out.

"That blue-light ought to have burned longer on the buoy," cried Mr
Reardon.

"They've picked up the buoy and laid it across the bows of the boat,"
said Mr Brooke, who was watching through his night-glass, and at that
moment the light blazed out again like a star.

And still the halos shed by the lights grew fainter and fainter.  Then
one light burned out, and the lieutenant stamped with anger, but there
was no cause for his irritation.  Another flashed out directly.

The boats were too far away now for us to see much of what was going on,
the heads of the men growing blurred, but we saw that they were
zig-zagging across the tide, and we listened in vain for the hail and
the cheer that should accompany the words--

"Got him, sir!"

The buzz of conversation among the men, who clustered on deck, in the
shrouds and tops, grew fainter, and I was thinking whether I was very
much to blame, and if I could in any way have saved the poor fellow.
Then I began thinking of the men in the forecastle, and their punishment
for being the cause, in their boyish way of playing tricks, of the poor
Chinaman's death.

I wouldn't be Tom Jecks for all the world, I muttered, and then I turned
cold and shuddered, as the hope, faint though it was, of Ching being
picked up went out like one of the lights that now disappeared; for
Captain Thwaites said sadly--

"I'm afraid we must recall the boats, Mr Reardon."

"Yes, sir," said the lieutenant in a husky voice.  "I don't think any
one is to blame about the attempt to save the poor fellow, sir.  The
life-buoy was let go, and the boat lowered promptly; the dishipline of
the men was good."

"Excellent, Mr Reardon.  I have nothing to say there.  It would have
been better perhaps to have lowered down the second boat sooner.  But I
think we have done our best.  Can you make them hear from this
distance?"

"Yes, I think so; a voice will travel far over the smooth water on a
still night like this.  Shall I recall them?"

Captain Thwaites was silent for a full minute, and we all stood gazing
aft at the faint stars on the black water, while to right and left were
those that were more dim and distant, being the paper lanterns of the
house-boats moored a short distance from the bank.

Then the captain spoke again, and his words re-illumined the parting
light of hope which flashed up like an expiring flame.

"Do you think he has struck out straight for the shore?"

"He may have done so, sir," replied Mr Reardon, as we all stood in a
knot together on the quarter-deck, "but he could never have reached it."

"Not in this mill-race of a tide!" said Captain Thwaites.  "Recall the
boats."

But Mr Reardon made no sign.  He stood there gazing through the
night-glass for some moments, and the captain spoke again.

"Recall the boats, Mr Reardon."

"I beg your pardon, sir," said the lieutenant, with quite a start.
"Aloft there!  Who's in the foretop?"

"Ay, ay, sir; Jecks, sir."

I shivered.

"Hail the boats to come back."

The man did not answer for a moment, and Mr Reardon made an angry
gesture, but just then Tom Jecks, with his hands to his mouth, sent
forth a hoarse deep-toned roar.

Then there was a pause and a faintly-heard hail came from far away, the
zig-zagging movement of the boats ceased, and we saw one of them, that
is to say one of the lights, glide slowly toward the other, till one was
apparently only a short distance in front, and the other following.

"Let me know when the boats come alongside, Mr Reardon," said the
captain quietly.

"Yes, sir."

"And, by the way, I'll trouble you for my night-glass."

Mr Reardon gave a violent start.

"Your night-glass, sir?" he said.

"Yes, mine; you borrowed it."

The lieutenant handed the telescope without a word, and at another time
we should all have had to turn away to smother the desire to burst out
laughing, as we recalled the irritable remarks about the idiot to whom
the glass belonged, and the wretchedness of his eyesight, coupled with
an opinion that he ought to be dismissed the service.

But it was not a time for mirth: we were all too sad, and Barkins
contented himself with whispering--

"I say, I'm jolly glad it wasn't I who said that.  Don't the skipper
take it coolly now?  But he'll give old Dishy a talking-to for it when
he gets him alone."

Mr Reardon's face was not visible to us, but we could see his
movements, which were, so to speak, fidgety, for he began to walk up and
down hastily, and once or twice I heard him mutter--

"How could I be such a fool?"

A dead chill had settled down upon the ship, and I felt as I stood there
as if eight or nine years had suddenly dropped away from me--that I was
a little child again, and that I should like to creep below somewhere
out of sight, or sit down and cry and sob.

For it was such a horrible lesson to me of the nearness of death, and I
felt as if it was impossible for it all to be true--that it must be some
terrible dream.

And now for the first time it dawned upon me that I had a liking for the
strange, simple-hearted Chinaman, who had always shown himself to be
frank, honest, and brave in our service.  He had been comic and
peculiar, but always devoted to me as a faithful servant; and now, just
too as I was joining in the mirth against him, instead of being
indignant on behalf of one who had been insulted by the men's horseplay,
he was as it were snatched from life to death.

I was brought back to the present by a voice at my ear--

"Poor old Ching!  I am sorry, Gnat."

"Yes, and so am I."

I had not seen my messmates all through the trouble, and now they
appeared close to me in the darkness in a way which made me start.

I turned to them, and I don't know how it was, but as we three stood
there in the darkness, which was hardly relieved by a lantern here and
there, Barkins held out his hand and shook mine, holding it tightly
without letting go.  Directly after, Smith took my other hand to give it
a warm, strong pressure; and then we three parted without a word more,
Barkins going one way, Smith another, while I went to the stern rail and
leaned my arms upon it, and then rested my chin upon my arms to gaze out
over the rushing water at the two blue stars.

But they were not there now.  They had burned out some time before, and
I could see nothing, only take it for granted that the boats were being
slowly rowed back against the heavy tide, our anchor-lights acting as
their guide.

"Is it possible that they have found him after all?"  I thought, and for
a minute I was hopeful.  But once more the hope died out, for I knew
well enough that if they had picked the poor fellow up they would have
cheered.


CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

A SURPRISE.

That night had set in very dark.  The clouds were heavy overhead, and
the river now looked intensely black, but toward the shore there were
the dull lights of the Chinese town glimmering in the water, while from
some building, whether on account of a religious ceremony or a festival,
a great gong was being beaten heavily, its deep, sonorous, quivering
tones floating over the place, and reaching my ears like the tolling of
a church bell.

It only wanted that depressing sound to make my spirits at the lowest
ebb, and set me thinking of home, the perils of the career in which I
was engaged, and wondering whether I should ever see England again.

The watch had been set, and from time to time Mr Reardon came aft to
look anxiously astern.

The last time Mr Brooke was with him, and they stopped near where I was
standing.

"But they ought to be back by now," Mr Reardon said.

"It's a long pull," Mr Brooke replied, "and the tide is terribly sharp
at this time."

"Yes, yes--it is; but I want to see them back.  Who's that?"

"Herrick, sir."

"Oh!  Looking out for the boats?"

"Yes, sir."

"That's right.  I like to see a young officer take an interest in the
men."

They moved away to walk forward, while my face burned, for I did not
deserve the praise, and my words had not been quite so honest as I could
have wished.

All at once, from out of the blackness astern, I heard the regular dip
of oars, and at the same moment one of the watch challenged and received
an answer.  A minute later they were close up, and I shouted--

"Found him?"

"No, sir; not a sign of him anywhere."

I uttered a low groan, and the boats separated, one going to starboard
and the other to port, to be hauled up to their quarters, and there was
the customary trampling of the men going to their positions to run them
up.

"Poor old Ching!"  I said aloud; and then I started back as if I had
received a stroke, for my name was uttered from below in a sharp
whisper.

"Mister Hellick!  Mister Hellick!"

"Ching!"  I cried, leaning over as far as I could reach, and gazing down
at the water.  "Help!--help!"  I shouted.  "Here he is!"

Mr Brooke ran to me.

"What do you mean, my lad?"

"He's down here," I cried, "clinging to the chains."

"Nonsense! the boats would have seen him."

"But he is," I cried.  "He has just called me.  Below there!  Ching!"

"Yes; help!  Velly cold," came up in a piteous wail.

"Hold hard there!" shouted Mr Brooke.  "Port boat back here under the
counter."

The falls were unhooked, and the boat drawn back by the coxswain till
she passed round close to the rudder.

"Any one there?" cried Mr Brooke.

"Ay, ay, sir!" and a cheer broke out from the men hurrying aft.

"Help! help!" came in a sharp wail.  "No cut tow-chang!  No cut
tow-chang!"

"Nobody's going to cut it, my lad.  All right, we've got you," came up
from close under the stern windows, where even if it had been light we
could not have seen.

"Found him?" cried the captain, who now came up.

"Ay, ay, sir!  Will you lower us down a lantern, sir?  He's tied up
somehow to the chain and a ring-bolt.  We can't quite lee."

The next minute, as I stood there longing to lower myself down into the
boat, a lantern was swung over to them; while the men came swarming up
the hatchway, for the news had soon spread, and they came running as far
aft as they dared.

"Now then, steady," came from beneath us.  "Let go; we've got you, I
say."

"No cuttee tow-chang!  No cuttee tow-chang!"

"Then he must have caught at the rudder-chains as he was swept along the
side," said the captain.  "Why didn't the fellow hail us, instead of
letting the boats go on such a fool's errand?"

"Too much scared, sir," replied Mr Reardon.  "Below there!  Got him in
the boat?"

"Got him, sir, and we can't get him," said one of the men.  "He's all
twissen up round the chain in a knot somehow."

"What?"

"He's tied hisself up somehow."

"Well, then, cut him loose, man," cried Mr Reardon.

"No cuttee tow-chang!  No cuttee tow-chang!" cried Ching in a piteous
wail.

"Not cut his toe?" said the captain in a tone full of disgust.  "What
does he mean?  He can't have tied his foot to the chain."

"Hold still, will yer!" growled a deep voice; "I'm only untwisten on it.
Nobody wants to cut yer pigtail."

"Oh, no cuttee tow-chang!" wailed Ching piteously.

"Tow-chang?" said the captain.

"Yes, sir; his tail," I said.

"Oh, I see!  They're very proud of the length."

"Well, I'm blessed if ever I see such a snarl," cried the man below.
"That's it.  There you are.  Here, cut this hankychy thing."

"Got him now?"

"Ay, ay, sir! all right," came from the boat; and at this the men burst
out cheering again like mad, while the boat was drawn along the side
with difficulty till the falls were reached, hooked on, and with a stamp
and a run she was hauled up, and I was close up to the side as she was
swung in, and Ching lifted out dripping, and sank down in a heap as soon
as the men tried to set him on his feet.

"Here, let me have a look at him," said the doctor.

"But first of all, why did you cling there instead of calling for help?"
cried Mr Reardon angrily.

"Bah! don't worry the man, sir," said the doctor sharply.  "He's nearly
insensible.  What's this canister doing at the end of his tail?"

"Bah!" ejaculated the captain angrily, and he said something to Mr
Reardon, and then went down to the cabin.

"Look here," cried the lieutenant angrily, "I want the names of the men
who played this blackguardly trick upon the poor fellow."

"Yes, afterwards," said the doctor.  "He's insensible, poor fellow.
Here, one of you, a knife?"

Half-a-dozen jack-knives were opened and presented to the doctor, but I
sprang forward.

"Don't do that, sir, please!"  I cried excitedly.

"Eh?  Not cut off this absurd thing?"

"No, sir.  The poor fellow went overboard to escape having the pigtail
cut, and it would break his heart."

Mr Reardon turned upon me sharply, and I anticipated a severe reproof,
but he only gave me a nod.

"Carry him below," he said.  And I walked beside the men to save the
poor fellow from any fresh indignity, while half-an-hour later he had
had a good rubbing and was lying in hot blankets fast asleep, partly
from exhaustion, partly consequent upon having had a tumbler of mixture,
steaming and odorous, which the doctor had administered with his own
hands.

"Not to be taken every three hours, Herrick," he said, with a curious
dry smile.  "Fine mixture that, in its proper place.  Know what it was?"

"It smelt like grog, sir," I replied.

"Oh, did it?  Now, do you for a moment suppose that when a
carefully-trained medical man of great experience is called in to a
patient suffering from shock and a long immersion he would prescribe and
exhibit such a commonplace remedy as grog?"

The evaporative condenser simply consists of a series of pipes, in
which is the steam to be condensed, and over which the water is
allowed to fall in a continuous rain.

By this arrangement there is evaporated from the outside of the condenser
a weight of water which goes away in a cloud of vapor, and is nearly equal
to that which is condensed, and is returned as feed into the boiler.
The same water is pumped up and used outside the condenser, over and
over, needing no more to supply the waste than would be needed as
feed water.

Although this condenser has, as I have said, been in use for thirty
or forty years, one still sees engines working without condensation
at all, or with waterworks water, purchased at a great cost, and
to the detriment of other consumers who want it for ordinary domestic
purposes; or one sees large condensing ponds made, in which the
injection water is stored to be used over and over again, and
frequently (especially toward the end of the week) in so tepid a
state as to be unfit for its purpose.

The governing is now done by means of quick-running governors, which have
power enough in them to raise not merely the weight of the pendulum
ball, which is now small, but a very heavy weight, and in this way
the governing is extremely effective.

I propose to say no more, looking at the magnitude of the whole of
my subject, upon the engine used for manufacturing purposes, but
rather to turn at once to those employed for other objects.

STEAM NAVIGATION.

In 1831, there were a considerable number of paddle steamers running along
some of the rivers in England, and across the Channel to the
Continent.

But there were no ocean steamers, properly so-called, and there
were no steamers used for warlike purposes.

As in the case of the wagon boilers, the boilers of the paddle
steamers of 1831 were most unsuited for resisting pressure.

They were mere tanks, and there was as much pressure when there was
no steam in the boiler from the weight of the water on the bottom,
as there was at the top of the boiler from the steam pressure when
the steam was up.

Under these circumstances, again, from 3½ lb. to 5 lb. was all the
pressure the boilers were competent to bear, and as the engines ran
at a slow speed, they developed but a small amount of horse-power
in relation to their size.

"O' course, sir," he replied, with a solemn wink.  "I'm just the man to
go and split upon my messmates."

"But you'll be punished if you don't tell.  You can't get out of it,
because it's known that you were teasing him; and it wouldn't be fair
for you to be punished and for them to escape."

"No, sir, it wouldn't; but sech is life.  Wrong chap generally gets the
kick as some one else ought to have ketched, but 'tarn't your fault, and
it's no use to grumble."

"But it is your fault, if you know who were the offenders and will not
tell."

"Is it?  Humph!  S'pose it is, sir.  You're right.  That's where you
gents as is scholards gets over the like of me.  I see it now; you are
right, sir.  What a wonderful head you've got for arguing, sewerly!"

"Then you'll tell Mr Reardon in the morning?"

"I didn't say as I would, sir."

"No; but you will?"

"No, sir, but I won't!" he said emphatically.  "But I say, sir, do you
think if I was to go overboard, and then hitch myself on to the
rudder-chains till I was took aboard, the doctor'd give me a dose of
that same physic as he give him?"

"Very likely, Tom," I said.  "But you'd rather be without, wouldn't
you?"

He smiled.

"But it was physic?"

"Oh yes, sir, it was physic.  But then you see there's physic as he
takes out of one of his little bottles with stoppers, and there's physic
as he makes out of the ship's rum, hot with sugar.  I could take a dose
now easy, and it would do me good."

"Nonsense!"  I said, after a glance at the sleeping Chinaman.  "But I
say, Jecks, how did he manage?"

"Oh, easy enough, sir.  Tide would suck him right along the side, and
he'd catch the chains."

"But how did he get in such a tangle?"

"Tied hisself on, sir, with a handkerchy round his left arm, to the
chain; and then Dick Spurling says he twissened his tow-chang, as he
called it, round and round, and tucked the canister in at the neck of
his frock and buttoned it.  Dick had no end of a job, as you know, to
get him undone."

"Yes," I said thoughtfully, "I know that; but a man couldn't hang by his
hair."

Tom Jecks laughed softly.

"Oh yes, he could, sir.  There's no knowing how little a man can hang by
when he's obliged.  Why, ain't you heard how we men hangs on to the
yards when we're aloft?"

"Oh yes, I've heard," I said; "by your eyelids."

"That's it, sir," he said, with a dry grin; "and that's harder than a
man hanging on by his hair."

Ching was still sleeping heavily, and our conversation did not disturb
him, and after a few moments' thought I said--

"But I don't feel at all sure why he did not hail the boats when they
were going off."

"Oh, I do, sir," replied Tom Jecks.  "I wouldn't ha' thought it
possible, but the poor fellow was regularly scared, and wouldn't speak
at first, because he thought that if he was hoisted on board the first
thing we would do would be to go for his tail."

"Yes," I said, "that sounds likely; but he did hail after all."

"And enough to make him, sir; poor chap.  Do you know why?"

"Well, not exactly," I said.

"A'cause the first fright had gone, and the bigger one had come.  At
first he was all in a squirm about losing his tail, but after a bit he
got wacken up to the fact that if he didn't get took aboard he'd
precious soon lose his life."


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

CHING HAS A NOTE.

I suppose that Mr Reardon thought better of his threat, or probably he
came to the conclusion that the expectation of punishment would prove as
effective as the punishment itself.  At all events nothing was said, and
the routine of the ship went on as usual.  The decks were scrubbed, the
guns polished, and the marines drilled, till, as Barkins said, they
could walk up to the top of a ladder and down the other side without
touching.

The Jacks, too, had their gun drill and sword exercise, till their
cutlasses flashed about with an exactness that promised to shave a head
without cutting off an ear--promised: the performance might have been
another thing.

As soon as I had an opportunity I started to go below and see Ching, but
before I was half-way there I ran against Smith.

"Where are you going in such a hurry?"

"To see how Ching's getting on."

"Did you put on a clean shirt?"

"No," I said innocently.  "I can't stand one every day."

"Oh, come, this won't do!" cried Smith.  "Here, hi, Barkins!"

"What's the row?" said our messmate, coming up.

"Row enough.  Look here, this won't do.  The Gnat's going below to see
His Excellency Ching Baron fancee shop, and Knight of the Tow-chang,
without putting on a clean shirt."

"Go and report him to the captain.  Why, worse and worse, he hasn't
shaved!"

"No, that he hasn't."

"Well, I haven't got any razors like you fellows have," I retorted.  "I
say, Tanner, have you stropped yours up lately?  Smithy's are getting
rusty with the sea air."

"You're getting rusty with the sea air," grumbled Smith, who was very
proud of the possession of a pair of razors with Sunday and Monday
etched on the blades.  He had once or twice shown them to me, saying
that they were a present from his father, who was going to leave him the
other five, which completed the days of the week, in his will.

I remember how I offended him at the time by saying--

"Well, that will be quite as soon as you want them."

"Look here," said Smith rather haughtily, after a look at Barkins;
"we've been talking this business over, and it is time it was stopped."

"What do you mean?"  I said.

"Oh, you know well enough.  You came on board the _Teaser_ to take your
place as an officer and a gentleman, and we your seniors received you in
a gentlemanly way."

"Yes, you were right enough," I said.  "A bit cocky and bounceable at
first, till you found that I wouldn't stand it, and then you were both
civil."

"Well, I _am_ blessed!" cried Barkins, blowing out his cheeks and
looking down at me.  "Of all the impudent little cockboats of boys you
are about the most cheeky.  Pretty strong turn that for a Gnat, Smithy."

"Yes; we shall have to put him down, and the sooner the better.  Will
you speak to him, or shall I?"

"Oh, I'm just in the humour for it," said Barkins; "so I'll give him his
dose at once.  Look here, young fellow: as aforesaid, when you
interrupted, we received you as gentlemen should, and have taken great
care of you, and tried to smooth you down into something like a budding
officer."

"Thank you," I said humbly; "I'm so grateful."

"And so you ought to be, sir.  But look here, what in the name of
thunder do you mean by forsaking us and taking to bad company?"

"Who does?"

"Why, you do, sir.  Smithy and I talked it over last night, and we both
agreed that you're never happy unless you're along with the forecastle
Jacks, or sneaking about with old Ching."

"Get out!"  I said indignantly.

"None of your impudence, sir, because that won't do.  It's come to this:
either you've got to give up low society, or high."

"Which is which?"  I said.

"What?"

"I said which is which?  Do you mean you two fellows are high society?"

"Do you hear this beggar, Smithy?"

"Oh yes, I hear him.  Isn't it awful to find so much depravity in such a
small body?  But keep him to it, and make him speak.  He has got to
choose."

"Yes, you've got to choose, Gnat.  We can't have a brother officer
always associating with the low Chinee."

"Do you mean that I oughtn't to go and see the poor fellow now he's
below ill?"

"Something of the sort: you're not a doctor.  Of course he ought to
visit the men."

"So ought an officer when his men are in trouble."

"Yes; but not to make friends of them.  It won't do, Gnat, and we've
made up our minds not to stand it.  That will do now.  You have heard
what I had to say, and I hope you will profit by it."

I burst out into a roar of laughter, for Barkins' assumption of dignity
was comic.

"What do you mean by that, sir?" he cried in an offended tone.

"Second-hand captain's rowing!"  I cried.  "Why, I heard him say those
very words to you."

"Hi! stop!" cried Smith, as Barkins turned red with annoyance.  "Where
are you going, sir?"

"Down below to see Ching," I replied coolly; and I descended the
companion-ladder to where the man lay.

He was looking very yellow and gloomy, but as soon as he caught sight of
me his face lit up.

"You come along see Ching?" he said in his high voice; and upon my
nodding--"Velly glad.  Doctor say stop along, velly much, not gettee up
to-day."

"But you are ever so much better?"

"Yes, quite well.  Not velly wet now.  Captain velly closs Ching tumb'
overboard?"

"No, he hasn't said anything."

"Ching velly glad.  You go tell captain something?"

"What about?"  I said.

"Ching get lettee flom fliend."

"That's right," I said.  "How is he?"

Besides all this, they tied our legs in two places--above the knees
and above the ankles; they then passed ropes from our necks over
the cross-beams of the building, and drew them so tight, that we
found it impossible to move.

Their next operation was searching our pockets, out of which they
took everything, and then proceeded very quietly to smoke tobacco.

While they were binding us, the lieutenant-governor shewed himself
twice, and pointed to his mouth, to intimate, perhaps, that it was
intended to feed, not to kill us.'

After some hours, the legs and ankles of the prisoners were partially
loosed, and preparations were made for removing them to Matsmai,
which seems to be the head-quarters of government for the Kurile
dependencies of Japan.

The journey, which occupied above a month, was performed partly in
boats, which were dragged along the shore, and even for miles over
the land; and partly on foot, the captives being marched in file,
each led with a cord by a particular conductor, and having an armed
soldier abreast of him.

It was evident, however, that whatever was rigorous in their
treatment, was not prompted by personal feelings of barbarity, but
by the stringency of the law, which would have made the guards
answerable for their prisoners with their own lives.

They were always addressed with the greatest respect; and, as soon
as it was deemed safe, their hands, which were in a dreadfully
lacerated state, were unbound, and surgically treated; but not till
their persons had been again most carefully searched, that no piece
of metal might remain about them, lest they might contrive to destroy
themselves.

Suicide is, in Japan, the fashionable mode of terminating a life
which cannot be prolonged but in circumstances of dishonour: to rip
up one's own bowels in such a case, wipes away every stain on the
character.

The guards of the Russian captives not only used every precaution
against this, but carefully watched over their health and comfort,
carrying them over the shallowest pools and streamlets, lest their
feet should be wet, and assiduously beating off the gnats and flies,
which would have been annoying.

At every village, crowds of both sexes, young and old, turned out
to see these unfortunate men; but there was nothing like insult
or mockery in the demeanour of any--pity appeared to be the universal
feeling: many begged permission from the guards to offer sagi,
comfits, fruits, and other delicacies; and these were presented
often with tears of compassion, as well as gestures of respect.

The prison to which Golownin and his companions were finally committed
had been constructed expressly for their habitation in the town of
Matsmai.

It was a quadrangular wooden building, 25 paces long, 15 broad, and
12 feet high.

I suppose the rules of the service will not
allow us to use such weapons as officers are accustomed to."

"Do you mean officers like you?"  I said contemptuously.

"Yes, sir; officers like me."

"Oh, you mean knives and forks, then," I said carelessly.  "I say,
Barkins, I didn't think you could have been such a jerry sneak."

He turned upon me with an apologetic look, but his lips began to
bluster.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Oh, nothing; I am not going to quarrel with old Barkins.  He wouldn't
have done this, if it had not been for Blacksmith."

"Go and obey the first lieutenant's orders, sir," said Smith haughtily.
"We will talk to you later on."

"You go and show Doctor Price your arms and legs," I said contemptuously
and spitefully; for, to use a common phrase, my monkey was up.  "Fight?
With fists?  Where are your muscles?  Why, I could upset you both with a
swab."

I hurried aft, and ran up the steps to the quarter-deck in time to
encounter the first lieutenant, who was coming from the wheel with an
angry look upon his face.


CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

A QUEER QUARREL.

"I sent a message to you, Mr Herrick," he cried angrily, and I could
then guess that he had been coming to see why I had delayed.  "I have
something to say to you, sir, respecting the company you keep, and the
society you affect, which I am given to understand is not that which
conduces to good dishipline."

"Oh, that's what Mr Smith thinks, sir," I said coolly.

"Oh, indeed!" he cried sarcastically.

"Yes, sir; he said something about it to me this morning, but he does
not know."

"Indeed!" he cried, growing black as a thundercloud; "then I am to take
it, sir, that you do?"

"I hope so, sir; I try to know."

"Then you know, sir, possibly why it was that when I sent you a summons
I am kept waiting?"

"Yes, sir; I was delayed a little--"

"Oh, thank you.  I am glad to hear that, Mr Herrick.  Perhaps you have
something else of importance to communicate?"

"Yes, sir, very."

"Thank you.  I am sorry I cannot ask you to sit down."

"Don't name it, sir," I said quietly, while he began to breathe very
hard.

"I was down with Ching the interpreter, sir, this morning--"

"Were you really, Mr Herrick?" he said sarcastically.  "Dear me, I hope
he is much better?"

"Yes, sir, he's nearly all right.  I was coming to you when I met Mr
Barkins, and Smith."  I couldn't say Mr Smith, I felt so exasperated
against him.

"What a curious coincidence, Mr Herrick!  If I had known I might have
spared myself the trouble of sending."

"Yes, sir."

"And pray, may I know for what reason I was to be honoured?"

"Of course, sir," I said coolly enough, for I was enjoying the way in
which he was working himself up for an explosion to fall upon my
unfortunate head.  "The fact is, sir--"

"Oh, it is a fact, is it?"

"Yes, sir--Ching has friends ashore."

"And wants leave of absence?  Are you his envoy?"

"Oh no, sir.  One of his friends sent him an important letter this
morning by the vegetable boat."

"Eh? letter?" said Mr Reardon, beginning to grow interested.

"Yes, sir.  This friend is a kind of a merchant or something; and he has
news of two big junks--piratical junks--lying in this very river."

"The dickens he has!  Here, Herrick, come down to my cabin."

He took my arm and marched me quickly to the ladder and down to his
cabin.  On the way I caught sight of Barkins and Smith watching us, and
I gave them a nod.

"Now, my lad, sit down," cried Mr Reardon excitedly.  "Let's hear."

I sat down, and he walked to and fro--two steps and turn.

"There's very little more to tell you, sir," I said; "but there are two
very large junks assuming to be merchantmen.  They are anchored close by
here somewhere."

"You don't know which two?"

"No, sir; but we shall know them by their sailing at once, and I should
say by boats coming off to them with extra men directly after."

"Yes, that's good, Herrick--very good.  But you have no other
information about them?"

"Only, sir, that they are just off on a cruise, and if we could catch
them--"

"We will catch them, my lad.  But is that all?"

"Yes, sir, that's all; I thought it rather big news."

"So it is, Herrick--very big news.  Just what we wanted.  It's time we
made another capture.  And to Ching has a friend on shore who sent this
information?"

"Yes, sir."

"Not a trap, is it--to get us away?"

"Oh no, sir; Ching is as honest as the day."

"Humph, yes," said Mr Reardon, with his fingers to his lips.  "I think
he is, for he seems to have taken to us and to be working hard in our
service.  But he may have been deceived.  He is cunning enough; but so
are his countrymen, and they would glory in tricking the man who has
taken up with the English.  I don't know what to say to it, Herrick."

"But suppose we see two big junks setting sail, watch them with a boat,
sir, and find that they take others on board, there could be no mistake
then."

"Oh yes, there could, my boy.  We might follow these junks, seize them,
and spend a long time in their capture and bringing back into port.
Then we should apply to the authorities, and find that we had got into
sad trouble, for we had seized two vessels which the occupants could
prove were intended for peaceable pursuits.  We could not contradict
them possibly, and all the time the scoundrels we wanted to take had
sailed off upon a piratical expedition, consequent upon our absence.
Now, sir, what do you say to that?"

I shook my head.

"I think Ching ought to know best," I said.

"Perhaps so," he replied.  "We shall see.  Come on now to the captain."

He opened the door, and I followed.  I had forgotten all about Barkins
and Smith for the time, but now all that had passed occurred to my mind,
and I felt certain that they would be waiting somewhere to meet me and
make sport of the tremendous setting-down which I had had.

I was not wrong: they were talking together amidships, just where they
could command the companion-way, and as soon as we appeared I saw
Smith's features expand into a malicious grin, while Barkins remained
perfectly stolid.

As we passed to the ladder Smith looked after us wonderingly, and I saw
him turn and whisper something, which I felt sure was--

"Taking him to the skipper."

For the captain was not in his cabin, but walking up and down the
quarter-deck with his hands clasped behind him, and the telescope which
had made Mr Reardon so angry under his left arm.

As we reached the deck he was going aft, so we followed him, and timed
our pace so that when he turned we had only a step or two to take to be
facing him.

"Yes, Mr Reardon," he said in response to our salute, "anything fresh?"

"Yes, sir, something very fresh.  Will you listen to what Mr Herrick
has to say?"

"Certainly," he replied, and he made room for me on his right Mr
Reardon placed himself on my right, and as I narrated all I had said
before as nearly as I could, they marched me up and down between them,
from the binnacle to the end of the quarter-deck, turned and marched me
back again.

As we approached the rail I could see Barkins and Smith watching us with
all their eyes, and as we came in sight again they were still watching
intently, evidently in the full belief that I was being, as we should
have called it, wigged tremendously.  And certainly they had some excuse
for this idea, for I had been summoned by the first lieutenant, taken
into his cabin, talked to, and then marched off to the captain.  It
almost looked like being dismissed from the ship in their eyes, and now
I could see them scanning my features with intense interest for sight of
my breaking down.

The captain heard me out, and then listened to Mr Reardon's objections.

"Yes," he said quietly at last, "that's very true, Mr Reardon, but we
must not let an opportunity slip.  I was intending to sail to-morrow for
the north; now we will sail which way the junks lead.  That will do for
the present, Mr Herrick, and I thank you for your diligence in Her
Majesty's service."

I touched my cap and went to the ladder, and as I descended there were
my two messmates coming towards me.

Trying to make my face as mobile as possible, I stretched it here and
there into wrinkles, and was walking straight along the deck looking the
image of despair, when they stopped me.

"Serve you right!" said Smith exultantly.  "There, be off below, and
don't let the men all see what a setting-down you have had."

I gave each of them a piteous look, turned as they had suggested, and
hurried down to our cabin to have a good laugh all to myself.

To my surprise, though, they followed me, Barkins to seat himself on the
table, and Smith to lean up against the door.

"Well, Skeeter," said the latter, "you've had it pretty hot.  Serve you
right for being sarcy; you'll behave better next time."

"I hope so," I said meekly.

"Dishy gave you his lecture, then, and walked you off to the skipper,
eh?"

"Yes," I said.

"Well, it's of no use for you to be grumpy.  You've had your lesson, and
now you've got to behave yourself."

"Yes."

"And I am very glad to see you are so humble.  Aren't you, Tanner?"

"Yes," said Barkins gruffly.

"You see it won't do for a little gnat of a fellow to think he is going
to do what he likes on board one of Her Majesty's ships.  It was quite
time you were taken down a few pegs--wasn't it, Tanner?"

"I suppose so," said Barkins.

"Then I don't see that it's any use for us to jump upon him, and show
bad blood."

"No, not a bit," cried Barkins, with more animation.  "We won't."

"No, I said we wouldn't; so look here, youngster: we're going to forgive
you, if you promise to behave better and do as you're bid.  This isn't
school, you know, where a boy can set himself up against his elders, but
the Queen's service, where every one has his place, and has to keep it
too--mind that.  There, that's all I've got to say."

"And very nicely said too," I replied.

He looked at me sharply, but my face was like marble, and he concluded
that I had spoken seriously, for he turned to Barkins--

"There, Tanner, I've done; now it's your turn."

"What for?"

"To give him a few words."

"Oh, I don't think I want to say anything," said Barkins slowly.  "I'm
sorry the poor little beggar got into such a row."

"It'll do him good."

"I hope so," said Barkins slowly and reluctantly, and there was rather a
mournful look in his eyes as he spoke.

"You'd better give him a few words of advice," said Smith in an off-hand
tone.

"Oh no, he's had enough jawing.  I shan't say anything."

"Thank you, Tanner," I said.

"Oh, all right," he cried, and he held out his hand and shook mine,
brightening up the next moment, and looking as pleased as if he had just
got a great trouble off his mind.

"You needn't be in such a jolly hurry to forgive him," said Smith in a
remonstrant tone; "he has been a cheeky little beggar, and deserved all
he got."

"But it isn't nice to be wigged, all the same," said Barkins sharply.

"No, but it don't matter if you deserved it.  Now then, Gnat, tell us
what Dishy said."

"What about?"  I asked innocently.

"What about?  Why, your associating with Ching so much."

"Oh, that!"  I cried.

"Oh, that!" he said, mocking my way of speaking.  "Why, what did you
think I meant?"

"I don't know."

"Well, what did he say?"

"Nothing at all."

"What! no lies now."

"Who's telling lies?  He didn't say a word about it.  We had something
of more consequence to talk about."

"Now, Tanner, hark at that.  Did you ever hear such a miserable cheeky
little beggar in your life?  It's of no use; we must give him a regular
good towelling."

"Better tell us what the luff said, Gnat," growled Barkins, in so
strange an accession of gruffness that I began to laugh.

"Why, what's the matter with you?"  I said.  "Don't gruff and grow
hoarse like that."

"Can't help it; got a cold, I s'pose," he cried.  "But I say, stop it
now; we want to be friends.  Tell us what the luff said."

"Precious little," I replied.  "I did all the speaking till we went up
on the quarter-deck."

"Don't listen to him," cried Smith, growing wroth with me.  "I never saw
such cheek.  One tries to be friends with him, but it's of no use;
directly you open your mouth he jumps down your throat."

"Then you shouldn't have such a big mouth, Smithy," I said sharply, and
then the storm burst.

Tanner roared with laughter, for the width of Smith's mouth had often
been food for our mirth; and, as Barkins afterwards said, my remark came
out so pat.

"Look here," cried Smith, "I'm not going to stand this sort of thing.
You may be fool enough to put up with it, but I won't."

"If you call me a fool I'll punch your head, Smithy," growled Barkins.

"No, you won't," was the retort; "and that's the way you take sides
against me, and encourage the miserable little beggar in his impudent
ways?  Now then, you Herrick, you've got to go down on your knees and
beg my pardon, and then tell me everything the skipper and the first
luff said."

"When?"  I asked coolly.

"When?  Why, now, directly," cried Smith fiercely.  "Now then, no
nonsense," he cried, seizing me by the collar; but I wrested myself
away, and in the slight struggle sent him staggering against Barkins.

"Now then, keep off me, please," growled Barkins.

"Keep off yourself; why don't you get out of the way?"

"How was I to know that a blundering idiot was coming up against me?"

"It'll tell you when I've done with the Gnat," said Smith angrily; for I
had unintentionally hurt his arm.  "Now you, Skeeter."

"Let him alone," said Barkins gruffly.

"When I've done with him," said Smith; "you could have had first go at
him if you had liked."

"I don't want to hit the little fellow, I'm not overbearing like you
are.  Let him alone, I say."

"I shall let him alone when I choose," retorted Smith fiercely.  "I'm
not going to let our junior ride roughshod over me, if you're fool
enough to."

"I shall be fool enough to kick you out of the cabin if you touch him,"
cried Barkins angrily.  "I won't have him bullied; and it was a mean
sneaking thing to go telling tales as you did to old Dishy."

"Look here," cried Smith, "if any one is a sneak it's you, for harking
back and taking the miserable little beggar's side."

"Never mind about that; you let him alone."

"Oh, I say, Tanner," I said, "don't quarrel with him about me.  What he
said did no harm.  Mr Reardon was as friendly as could be."

"That's a cracker," cried Smith sharply.

At that moment a marine came to the door.

"First lieutenant wants to see Mr Herrick directly."

"Yes; where is he?"  I said, smiling--purposely, of course.

"With the cap'n, sir, on the quarter-deck."

"All right; I'll be there directly."

The man saluted and marched off, while I followed to the door, where I
turned, thrust in my head, and said banteringly--

"Now be good boys and don't fight while I'm gone."

_Bang_!

A book off the table, flung by Smith, struck the door which I was
holding half open, for I saw the missile coming, and dodged it.  Then I
popped my head in again.

"Don't take any notice of him, Tanner," I cried; "he's bilious.  Thankye
for sticking up for me.  Can I say a word for you to the captain?"

"Here, get up," cried Smith, with a snarl.  "Touch your hat to him.
He's promoted; and they'll send poor old Brooke a step lower.  All hail,
Lieutenant Skeeter!"

"All right!"  I cried, and I hurried away, leaving Barkins looking as if
he could not believe his ears.

The next minute I was facing the captain and Mr Reardon.


CHAPTER THIRTY.

A FRESH START.

"Mr Herrick," said the captain, as I saluted, "I have decided that, as
you know so much about this business, you shall go with Mr Brooke in
one of the boats; but I wish you to observe what I say: the success of
our expedition depends a great deal upon secrecy, so do not chatter
anything about your mission in the hearing of the men."

"No, sir, certainly not," I said, wondering what the mission might be,
and whether we were going to cut out the junks.

"That's right; you had better take the interpreter with you."

"To search for the junks, sir?"

"Hush; guard your tongue, sir.  You are ostensibly going up the river
with Mr Brooke upon a little shooting expedition for wild-fowl, so get
rid of your uniform.  I daresay we can lend him a gun, Mr Reardon?"

"If he'll take care of it, he can have mine, sir," said Mr Reardon.

"Then off with you, my lad, and be as observant as you can.  Mr Brooke
will tell you, I daresay, all about his instructions."

I saluted, and darted away in time to see that Smith had been watching
me, for he drew back as I approached, and I found him standing by where
Barkins sat, looking exceedingly glum.

I daresay it was very petty, but Smith had been so malicious, and had so
often made himself disagreeable, that I could not help feeling a
delicious sensation of triumph as I bustled into the cabin and rushed to
my locker, without taking any notice whatever of Smith, while I felt
sorry for big burly Barkins, who I felt would not say an unkind word if
it were not for Smith's influence.

I remember Charles Dickens saying in one of his tales something about it
being hard enough to live with any one who had a bad temper in a large
house, but to be shut up with the said person in a cart or travelling
van was terrible.  Of course I am not giving his exact words, only
making the allusion to illustrate the fact that it is quite as bad to
exist with an ill-tempered person in the small cabin of a vessel at sea.
For you may depend upon it there is no better--or worse--way of finding
out a companion's peculiarities than that.

I acted pettily, but then I was only a boy; and now I am a man, getting
on in years, I don't know that I am much better.  But it was very comic
all the same to see those two fellows try to ignore my proceedings, poor
old Barkins following Blacksmith's lead once more.  They did not want to
know what I was going to do--not a bit.  And I laughed to myself as I
hurriedly kicked off my shoes and put on a pair of strong boots,
carefully took off my uniform jacket and replaced it by a thin tweed
Norfolk, after which I extricated a pith helmet from its box, having to
turn it upside down, for it was full of odds and ends.

Smith had taken up a book and pretended to read, while Barkins sat back
on a locker with his hands in his pockets, and his lips thrust out and
screwed as if he were whistling, but no sound came, and he stared hard
at the bulkhead facing him.

But try how he would he could not keep his eyes fixed there--they would
follow my movements; and twice over I caught Smith peeping round the
side of the book with which he was screening his face.

I began to whistle as I rapidly made my preparations, and at last Smith
could bear it no longer.

"What's the idiot dressing himself up for?" he cried contemptuously.

That started Barkins, and he burst out with--

"What's up, Gnat?  Shore leave?"

"Eh!  Didn't you know?"  I said coolly.  "Shooting."

"What!" they exclaimed in a breath, and Smith's eyes were more wide open
than I had ever seen them.

"Shooting," I said coolly.  "Brooke and I are going after ducks."

"Gammon!" cried Barkins.  "Why, you have no gun."

"No," I said.  "Reardon is going to lend me his double breech-loader,
central fire, number twelve."

Barkins gave his leg a sharp slap.

"We're going up the river; plenty of sport up there among the marshes."

"Going to walk?" said Barkins.

"Oh no; we're to have a crew and one of the cutters."

"Don't you believe him, Barkins, it's all gammon.  The little humbug
can't deceive me."

"All right, call it gammon," I said, stooping to tighten my boot-laces.
"Roast duck for dinner, Tanner, to-morrow."

Barkins rushed on deck, leaving me with Smith, and the next minute he
was back again.

"It's all right, Smithy," he cried; "and they're shoving in a basket of
prog for the beggars."

"What!" yelled Smith.  "Do you mean to say that Brooke and this--this--
thing are going off wasting Her Majesty's time shooting?"

"Yes; I saw Brooke, and he said it was so."

"Then I shall resign.  Hang me if I'll stop in a service where such
beastly favouritism is shown.  Profession for gentlemen's sons, is it?
I call it a mockery!"

"Oh, don't be so snaggy, Smithums," I said banteringly; "wait till his
poor old wing's all right again, and he shall go a shooting too."

That was too much.  He made a rush at me, but Barkins flung an arm round
his waist, and as they struggled together I dodged to the other side of
the table and escaped from the cabin, but popped my head in again.

"Don't hit him, Tanner," I cried; "he ain't got no friends.  Good-bye,
old chap, I wish you were coming too."

Our eyes met, and I suppose my tone and the look I gave him seemed
sincere, for, as he held Smith, his arms tightly round him from behind,
and his chin resting upon our messmate's shoulder, he gave me a friendly
nod.

"All right, old chap," he said; "I hope you'll enjoy yourself."

"And I hope the John Teapots 'll get hold of you, you miserable little
cad!" cried Smith.  "I shan't be there to help you this time."

I burst out laughing and ran on deck, to find the men mustered ready,
and Mr Brooke standing there in sun helmet and gaiters, looking as
unlike a naval officer as he could be.

"Oh, there you are, Herrick," he said, giving me a look over.  "Yes,
that will do."

"But the men," I whispered.  "Oughtn't they to be armed?"

"All right, my lad; plenty of tackle in the boat under the thwarts."

"But my gun--I mean Mr Reardon's?"

"In the stern-sheets, with plenty of cartridges.  Where's Ching?"

"I don't--down below, I suppose."

"Fetch him up; we're off at once."

There was no need, for the interpreter appeared smiling and happy,
looking as if he had not passed through such a terrible ordeal a short
time before.

The captain and Mr Reardon came up then.

"Ready, Mr Brooke?"

"Yes, sir."

"Order the crew into the boat, Mr Reardon."

As the men sprang in, the captain came close to us.

"You'll keep up the appearance of a sporting expedition, Mr Brooke," he
said in a low voice.  "I expect you'll find the junks in the river off
some village.  The rest I must leave to you."

"Take them, sir, if I feel pretty certain?"

Captain Thwaites knit his brows, and stood as if thinking for a few
moments.

"No," he said at last; "but that I leave all to your discretion.  Don't
risk your men, if they are strong.  I'm afraid some of these mandarins
are mixed up with the piratical expeditions, and share in the plunder,
and I am certain that every movement we make is watched.  There, off
with you; don't let Mr Herrick get hurt.  I trust you to do your best."

We sprang into the boat, which was lowered down; the falls were
unhooked; and as Tom Jecks, who was coxswain, gave us a shove off, the
tide, which was running up, bore us right aft; then the oars dropped
with a splash, the rudder lines were seized, and away we went up-stream
on as glorious a day as ever made a dirty Chinese city look lovely.

I looked back, and there were Barkins and Smith leaning over the side
watching us, but I hardly noticed them, for something else caught my
eye.

"Why, they're getting up steam, Mr Brooke!"  I said.

"Yes, my lad, they're getting up steam, and I hope your information may
mean some good active service for us.  The pending question was the
amendment of Mr. Sumner.

The vote was taken and the amendment was rejected.[90] Mr.

Willey then offered the amendment already herein noted. He was followed
by Mr. Wade, who, expecting the State to be admitted, if at all,
under the amendment of Mr.

Willey, moved to amend the amendment by inserting at the proper
place the words: "And that all slaves within the State who shall
at the aforesaid time be under twenty-one years, shall be free when
they arrive at the age of twenty-one years

.

"[91] Despite the anti-slavery principle here involved, Mr. Wade was
convinced that some provision was necessary to facilitate the running of
the bill in the Senate and in the House. He thought, too, that the
harshness and abruptness of the bill would be thereby smoothed
down, softened and rendered harmonious.[92]
It was no easy task, however, that the Senator from Ohio had essayed
to accomplish.

His proposal brought from Mr. Willey the personal conviction of the man.
Mr.

Willey preferred that the State be admitted under the constitution precisely
as submitted by the people. That not being possible, he wished that his
amendment (which was not to his personal tastes) be carried.

He deplored the situation that would follow should the amendment
of Mr.

Wade be passed. He pointed out: (1) that the majority of slaves
were in counties contiguous to what would be the borders of the
old State of Virginia; (2) that many of them ranged in age from one
to twenty-one years; (3) that when they should arrive at a convenient
age for sale, they would be silently transferred across the border
into Kentucky or Virginia or the further South, if needs be, and
there sold into the cotton fields of the South or the tobacco
plantations of the East, where slavery was admittedly at its worst;
(4) that many of the slaves were females, the offspring of whom
would be free, were the mothers allowed to remain in the State, but
upon the passage of the amendment even those would be doomed to the
perpetual slavery of the far South.

Replying to an inquiry made by Mr. Lane, of Kansas, as to whether or not
public sentiment would condone such action, he asked if public
sentiment would be likely to influence those slave owners who lived
in territory contiguous to Virginia.

The loyalty and fidelity of West Virginia should, in Mr. Willey's opinion,
guarantee the safe manner in which the commonwealth would handle
the question.

Never before in similar situations, he argued, had slaves _in esse_ been
freed; freedom extended only to those unborn at the passage of the
constitution or to those born on or after a date therein designated.[93]
Again joining issue with Senator Willey, Mr.

Lane pointed out that the same situation arose in Kansas when in February,
1856, the people adopted a constitution providing for the emancipation
of the slaves on the fourth of the following July.

The slaves, however, handled the situation.

They told their masters that since they should become free after the date
designated, they would not permit themselves to be taken out of the
State prior to that date.[94] Mr.

Lane did not doubt the capacity to do likewise on the part of the
slaves then being considered.

An interesting spectacle presented itself when the two Senators from
Virginia engaged in spirited debate. Mr. Carlile desired that the State
be admitted under the terms of the constitution framed at Wheeling,
the alternative being that the people of the State should have the
new terms submitted to them for approval.

He believed that Mr.

Willey's amendment was incomplete as it stood, and that an amendment
in conformity with the one presented by Mr. Wade was necessary,
providing, of course, that it was the sense of the Senate to admit the
State only upon conditions. He took issue with Mr.

Willey's assertion that the passage of Mr.

Wade's amendment would be followed by a wholesale delivery of slaves to
purchasers further South.[95] In the meanwhile Mr.

Wade's amendment was agreed to.

Mr.

Carlile now began overtly his campaign of obstruction and opposition
to the admission of the State into the Union.

He offered as an amendment to that of his colleague to be inserted
at the end of the sixteenth line, the following words: "After the
said ordinance shall be submitted to the vote of the people in the
said State of West Virginia and be ratified by the vote of the
majority of the people thereof."

The sinister motive underlying his proposal was clearly perceived and
ably met by Mr. Willey.

He opposed the measure: first, because of the unusual requirement
of the majority vote of the people, and, second, because of the new
convention that would be required to assent to the fundamental
proposition, and the consequent new election and additional costs
to the people.

The constitutional convention, he argued, was still in existence,
was still a legal body, and that, therefore, there was no sufficient
reason for the reference of the matter beyond the jurisdiction
thereof.[96] 
Dissatisfied but not discouraged, Mr.

Carlile explained away the objection to the words "majority of the
people."

He maintained, however, that the changes contemplated would affect
the fundamental law and that they should, therefore, be ratified
by the people subsequent to being assented to by the Convention.

It was, he argued, a departure from and in derogation of the customs
and ideas of Virginia to change the organic law without first
submitting the proposed new law to the people.

Setting forth more clearly his position on the whole matter Carlile said:
"Supposing--as I suppose, I will see when I move this test amendment,
which I shall, to this proposition--that the Senate is unwilling
to admit us without conditions, I shall vote against any bill, if
it is pressed, exacting conditions, for the purpose of going home
to my people asking them to assemble a Convention between this and
the first Monday in December, and act upon the suggestion which we
have received here from the Senate, if they desire to do so and
come here with a constitution that will enable Congress, without
such arbitrary stretch of power to admit us at once without delay

."[97]

It was evident that Carlile was committed to a proslavery program
and that his plan, if adopted, would result in the indefinite
postponement of the admission of the new State.

His colleague, therefore, with an apparently sincere effort to meet
the wishes of the Senate and to satisfy the objections of Mr.

Carlile, read the bill which was presented in the House by Mr. Brown,
of Virginia.

At the same time he announced that that bill, if agreeable to the
Committee and to his colleagues, would be acceptable to him as a
compromise.[98] This assented to, Mr. Willey withdrew his original
amendment and offered the Brown bill as a substitute for the whole bill,
striking out all after the word "whereas" in the preamble and substituting
this measure in lieu of the Committee's bill.[99] The bill as
finally presented follows:

"Section 1.

That the State of West Virginia be and is hereby declared to be one of
the United States of America, and admitted into the Union on an equal
footing with the original States in all respects, whatever, and until the
next general census shall be entitled to three members in the House
of Representatives of the United States:
Provided always that this act shall not take effect until after the
proclamation of the President of the United States hereinafter provided
for.

"Section 2.

It being represented to Congress that since the Convention of the 26th
of November, 1861, that framed and proposed the Constitution, for
the said State of West Virginia, the people thereof have
expressed a wish to change the seventh section of the eleventh article
of the said Constitution by striking out the same and inserting
the following in its place, namely, 'The children of slaves born
within the limits of this State after the fourth day of July, 1863,
shall be free, and no slave shall be permitted to come into the
State for permanent residence therein.'

Therefore be it enacted, that whenever the people of West Virginia shall,
through their said convention, and by a vote to be taken at an
election to be held within the limits of the State at such time as the
Convention may provide, make and ratify the change aforesaid and properly
certify the same under the hand of the President of the Convention,
it shall be lawful for the President of the United States to issue
the proclamation stating the fact and thereupon this act shall take
effect and be in force from and after sixty days from the date of
said proclamation

."[100]

It will be observed that the terms of the amendment made no provision for
the subsequent freedom of those slaves _in esse_. It was the sense of
the committee of the whole, expressed in its action on Mr. Wade's
amendment, that a specified class of slaves _in esse_ should be
given their freedom upon their arrival at a designated age.

In conformity with this view, Mr. Lane, of Kansas moved to amend the
second section by inserting after the word _free_ the following: "And
that all slaves within the State who shall at the time aforesaid be
under ten years of age shall become free when they arrive at the age
of twenty-one years, and all slaves over ten years and under twenty-one
years of age, shall become free when they arrive at the age of
twenty-five years

."[101] This amendment was accepted.

After the passage of the above amendment, Mr. Carlile, persistent in his
policy of opposing admission, proposed to amend Mr. Willey's last
proposition. His amendment was to the effect that the proposed new
State be admitted without conditions. In speaking thereupon, Mr.
Willey affirmed that this amendment conformed to his personal views,
but that as a matter of good faith and honor he was precluded from
espousing its cause.[102] The amendment was rejected.

Following the report of the bill to the Senate and the concurrence of
the latter in the compromise amendment of Mr.

Willey as amended by Mr.

Lane, Mr. Sumner advised that he had proposed to offer to the Senate
his amendment lately rejected in Committee.

Referring to this proposal, Mr. Lane asserted his assurance that
the insertion of the provision in question would cause the bill to
fail before the House of Representatives and to merit the disapproval
of the people of West Virginia.

He urged, therefore, that it would be the better policy to vote for the
bill as already amended and to endure slavery in the State for another
generation, if need be.

Despite the conformity of this view with those of a majority of his
colleagues, Mr.

Sumner, though declining to offer the amendment, stated his irrevocable
opposition to the admission of another slave State, even though
the term of slavery be for but twenty-one years.

He considered it his duty, therefore, to vote against the measure as
it then stood.[103]

The engrossment of the bill for a third reading found its opponents
still unweary in their efforts to obstruct or defeat its passage.

Senator Trumbull, of Illinois, summed up his opposition to the
bill in two objections, namely: (1) since all persons over twenty-one
years of age were thereby doomed to perpetual slavery, the new State
would be in theory and in practice a slave State; and (2) he failed
to see the necessity for or wisdom in dividing any of the old States
until the situation could be seen as a whole.

He let it be known, however, that this statement should not be construed
to commit him to the position of opposing the admission of a slave
State under all circumstances whatever.

In conformity with his conviction, he moved that all consideration
of the bill be postponed until the first Monday of December next.

The Senator from Illinois was ably supported by Mr.
Carlile, who, failing in his last attempt to amend the bill to the
effect that the State should come in without conditions, affirmed
his opposition to any proceedings whereby the organic law of a State
is framed by Congress and asserted that he would support the Trumbull
motion at the risk of misconstruction.[104]
Those Senators who favored the immediate passage of the bill were
not unprepared for the most determined attacks of its opponents.

Mr.
Howard, of Michigan, requested of the Senators from Virginia, whether
the Wheeling Legislature had taken any action on the "Joint Resolution
passed by Congress suggesting that the so-called border slave States
take some action in reference to the final emancipation of their
slaves."

Replying thereto, Mr.

Willey asserted that the Legislature was entirely favorable to a
program involving final emancipation.

He took occasion, moreover, to add that "his colleague, Mr. Carlile, was
misrepresenting the attitude of the legislature that sent him there
in interposing the objection that was calculated to thwart the
whole movement

."[105]
Agreeing with the remarks of Mr.

Willey, Mr.

Wade, while opposing the motion of Senator Trumbull, explained that
Mr.

Carlile had penned all the bills and drawn them up; that he was the
hardest worker and the most cheerful of them all, that he was the
most forceful among them in pressing his views upon the Committee.

"Whence," asked he, "came this change of heart? For indeed his conversion
was greater than that of St. Paul."

"Now," said Mr. Wade, "is the time for West Virginia to be admitted
into the Union." "Let us not postpone the action for the next session,
but let us reject the motion of the gentleman from Illinois and pass the
bill.

"[106]
Continuing the debate, Mr. Ten Eyck affirmed the legality and
the expediency of admitting the new State.

His arguments were substantially as follows: (1) that the legal
question, that is, the right of the legislature to give assent to
the division of the State, was settled when the Senate accepted as
members the two men appointed by the said legislature; (2) as a
matter of policy he urged that the people of Western Virginia should
not be forced to run the risk of having the whole State, because
of the collapse of the rebellion, repeal the act of the legislature
and thereby continue a domination of tyranny over them.

The vote was taken and the motion to postpone was rejected.[107]
The final objection prior to the passage of the bill, came from Mr.

Powell, of Kentucky.

Asserting, in substance, that since ten of the forty-eight counties to
be included in West Virginia were unrepresented in the Convention
and in the Legislature, and since less than one-fourth of the people
gave their consent to the formation of a new State, he held that
there was no constitutional right to act.

He was, therefore, unalterably opposed to the admission of the new
State.

Unswerved from his position, by the assurances of Mr.

Willey, that (1) the absence of ten thousand men under arms, and
(2) the foregone conclusion that separation would be effected jointly
accounted for the small number of nearly nineteen thousand votes, Mr.

Powell called for the yeas and nays. The motion was put and the bill
to admit was passed.[108]
Even the passage of the bill did not cause Mr. Carlile's opposition
to cease. Determined in his efforts to make a final plea for the
slave-holding interests, he introduced Senate Bill No. 531[109]
supplemental to the act for the admission of West Virginia into
the Union and for other purposes.

This bill sought, of course, to make effective his plan that the whole
work of the Constitutional Convention be reenacted.
We glanced back, and there, sure enough, were the sailing craft, which
had been hanging about in front and aft, coming steadily along in our
wake.  A moment or two later Ching spoke again--

"Look over boat side, see jolly sailor boy."

"Never mind those boats," said Mr Brooke impatiently.

"Steady, my lads, hold hard now; that's right," he continued, as the
oars were held, and checked the boat's progress.  "Now, Mr Herrick,
take a good look at them.  Do you think we should know them again if you
saw them coming down the river?"

"Yes, sir," I said; "the stern of this one and bows of the other would
be unmistakable.  I don't think I could make a blunder."

"No; almost impossible; pull starboard, back water, port side.  Now,
we'll just turn and row gently back.  I don't see any men on board."

"All lie down flat," said Ching sharply.  "Plenty men aboard."

"Ah, well, it does not matter.  I'm not going to run risks by attacking
the savages.  Lift your gun and look about, Herrick.  Let them keep in
the same mind."

I stood up in the boat at this, and noted how rapidly the tide was
running up as Mr Brooke gave the word to pull again.

The movement of the boat brought me in full view of the two sampans
which had followed us, each with a man and boy aboard; and now, as I
looked, I was surprised to see a yellow head raised and begin watching
us.  Then another; and Ching said quickly--"Lot men in both boats."

I don't know how they had stowed themselves, but now, to our intense
astonishment, head after head appeared, till Mr Brooke exclaimed--

"Why, the boats are packed full of men."

"Yes, and the junks too," I whispered hastily; for their decks, which a
few moments before had appeared to be bare, were now crowded.

"Trapped, Herrick!" said Mr Brooke through his set teeth.  "Is this a
trick on the part of Mr Ching?"

The men were looking hard at us, and they did not have long to wait.

"Arms ready, my lads?"

"Ay, ay, sir."

"That's right.  Now then, lay your backs to it, and row with all your
might."

"Ay, ay, sir."

"What are you going to do?"  I said huskily.

"Run for it.  The junks can't follow against this tide.  We must row out
into the river.  Keep your fire till I give orders.  They may not try to
stop us.  If they do, I shall try and ram one.  We have four barrels for
the other, without troubling the men."

"You don't think it's a false alarm?"

"No," he said sternly; "the falsity lies somewhere else."

"He means Ching," I said, but there was no time for much thought, not
even to see a great deal.  The men grasped the situation as soon as the
boat's head was straight, and Mr Brooke took the tiller in his left
hand, his gun in his right, and cocked it, while I followed suit.

Then I felt disposed to laugh as Ching made a dive down, and began to
crawl under the thwarts among the men's legs, but the laugh changed to a
serious grin as Mr Brooke steered to pass between the two boats, when
the course of one was changed so as to throw her right athwart our way,
and quite a dozen men rose up in each, armed with clumsy swords, yelling
at us, and dancing about as they gesticulated and seemed to be trying to
frighten us back.

"Very well, if you will have it," said Mr Brooke between his teeth.
"Be ready, my lads.  Cutlasses, if they try to board."

A sound like the exhaustion of a heavy breath escaped from the men, and
Mr Brooke roared at them to pull, while I sat with my finger on the
first trigger and the gun lowered a little, gazing wildly at the savage
crew before us.

Those moments were like long minutes, but I could make out that, instead
of frightening us, the men in the boat which crossed us were now
frightened themselves, and they made an effort to give us room.

But there were too many of them--they got in each other's way.  Then
there was a wild shriek, a crash, and the head of our fast cutter
crashed into them, driving their bows round, partly forcing them under
water, and the flimsily-built boat began rapidly to fill.

The second party held a little aloof, too much startled by the boldness
of our manoeuvre to attempt to help their companions, so that we had
only the first boat to tackle, as such of the men as could trampled over
one another in their struggle to get on board us.

But the moment the crash had come our lads sprang up with a cheer, and,
forgetting their proper weapons, let go at the enemy with their oars,
using them as spears and two-handed swords, and with such effect that in
less than a minute the wretches were driven back or beaten into the
water, to swim to and cling to their half-sunken boat, whose light
bamboos refused to go right down.

"Now pull--down with you--pull!" roared Mr Brooke, and, thanks to Mr
Reardon's grand "dishipline," every man dropped into his place, and the
boat, which had come to a standstill, now began to move forward, while
the tide carried the enemy towards their junks, from whence came now as
savage a yelling as that from the boats.

"Without firing a shot," cried Mr Brooke exultantly.  "Pull, boys.
Now, a cheer! they can't follow us against this tide."

The men sent up a triumphant shout, and, as we swept round the next
bend, we lost sight of the junks, and directly after of the two boats,
the last I saw of them being that the crew of the second were dragging
their companions of the first out of the water, and loading their own
down to the gunwale edge.

"Now," cried Mr Brooke, "who's hurt?"

There was no answer for a moment or two.  Then one of the men said, with
a grin--

"I arn't drownded, sir; but I shall ketch cold if something arn't done--
my feet's wet."

"Yes, so velly wet," cried a plaintive voice, and Ching struggled up
from the bottom of the boat, and stood up, showing his blue cotton
garments to be drenched with water.

"What, have we sprung a leak?" cried Mr Brooke.

"Yes, sir," said Tom Jecks, "she's got a hole in her skin here forrard;
but if I might be so bold, sir, if you was to send Mr Ching to lean up
agin it, we shouldn't hurt much."

"Pull--pull steady," cried Mr Brooke.  "Here, take the tiller, Mr
Herrick."

He laid his gun behind us and handed me the rudder, before going right
forward to the coxswain, while I sat envying the men their coolness as
they sat pulling away nonchalantly enough, though the water was rising
fast and nearly covered their bare feet and ankles, while it soon
invaded the grating upon which my own boot-covered feet were placed.

"Much injured, sir?"  I shouted; and Mr Brooke gave me back poor
Mercutio's answer to his friend, in _Romeo and Juliet_--

"'Tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door: but 'tis
enough; 'twill serve."

"Here, my lads, one of you; I must have a frock."

"Right, sir, mine'll do," said the coxswain, unfastening and dragging
his white duck garment over his head.

This was soaked and wrung out to make it softer, and then thrust into
the hole in our bows.

"There, you must sit forward here, and plant both feet against it, my
lad," said Mr Brooke.

"Ay, ay, sir.  Men never knows what he may come to.  Fancy my toots
being used to caulk a leak!"

He, laughing, sat down on the forward thwart, and pressed his feet
against the jacket.

"Now then, a man to bale," cried Mr Brooke, and the coxswain fished the
tin baler out of the locker forward.  "No; pass it here," continued our
leader.  "Pull away, my lads, and Mr Herrick and I will take it in
turns to bale.  We must get out of this narrow creek as soon as we can."

"Me balee water out," squeaked Ching, who looked very wet and miserable.

"No, thank you," said Mr Brooke coldly.

"Beg pardon, sir; I've got nothin' to do but sit here like a himage,"
said the coxswain; "I can reach down and bale."

"Without shifting your feet?"

"Yes, sir; look here."

The man took the baler, and began to send the water, which still came in
but slowly, over the side; while, after satisfying myself that we should
not be obliged to run our boat ashore and tramp back to the city, I kept
on directing anxious glances backward to see if we were pursued.

"We shan't sink, Herrick," said Mr Brooke, returning to my side; while,
after glancing at my very serious, and at the young lieutenant's stern
countenance, Ching crept forward under the oars to where the coxswain
was baling, and, getting a second tin from the locker, he seated
himself, tucked his loose things out of the way, and began meekly to
toss out the water as fast as he could scoop it up.

"That fellow's a traitor," said Mr Brooke to me in a low voice, after a
glance back by Ching.

"Oh no, I hope not, sir," I said.

"I wish I could hope so too, my lad.  There's a deal of cunning in his
plans, and he tried hard to make it seem that he was all the time
working upon our side; but I feel as if he has led us into a trap, and
we were very nearly coming to our end in it without a man left to tell
the tale."

"But why, sir?  What object could he have?"

"Plunder, for one thing; our boat, and weapons such as they cannot get.
Yes, I believe that he is in league with those pirates."

"Oh, I can't think it, Mr Brooke," I cried.  "He has served us so
well."

"Yes, to gain his own ends."

"But surely he wouldn't do such a base thing for the sake of getting a
paltry share in these rifles and cutlasses?"

"He would have the satisfaction of seeing us massacred."

"But what satisfaction could that be, sir?"  I cried.  "We have always
been his friends."

"The Chinese hate the outer barbarians and foreign devils, as they call
us, my lad.  They are obliged to tolerate our presence, but the common
people, as you know well, would feel an intense pleasure in murdering
every European they came across."

"All the same, sir," I said, "I don't believe poor old Ching would do
anything that was against us."

"Well, we shall see.  But what an escape, my lad!  What a trap we were
in!"

"And how capital to get out of it without having a man hurt."

"It's splendid, my lad.  The captain will be delighted at that, and
forgive me about the boat."

"But we had to run away, sir," I said.

"Rather strange running away to charge that boat as we did!  But don't
you take it into your head, my lad, that it is cowardly to retreat at
the proper time.  It is madness to go throwing away the lives of your
men when you can do no good by fighting.  It might sound very grand and
heroic for us to have fought both those boats, and then tried to capture
the junks; but we must have been cut to pieces in the attempt, and what
then--"

"We should have been able to say that we did not turn tail upon our
enemies."

"No, we should not, my boy, because there would not have been a soul
left to tell the story.  There, my lad, don't indulge in romance.  He is
the best commander who gains victories at the smallest cost of blood to
his country.--Ha, at last! how much longer the creek seems coming back
than it did going up."

"Running against the tide, too," I cried; and the next minute we glided
out into the big stream, crossed the river, and settled down to a quiet,
steady row on the far side, where the eddy enabled us to make a very
fine rate of speed.

But our rate did not satisfy Mr Brooke, who kept on looking at his
watch as the time went on, and we found that the swift tide had carried
us much farther than we thought for.

"We shall never get back at this rate," said Mr Brooke, "and it can't
be very long before the tide turns, and then those scoundrels will come
sailing down, perhaps pass us before we can get to the _Teaser_."

"Hardly," I ventured to observe.

"Well, no; you are right," he said.  "I am too impatient.  We have a
good start, and must get to the gunboat long before they can."

Meanwhile Tom Jecks sat fast, pressing his feet against the jacket
placed over the hole, and kept baling, while Ching took his time from
him, and used his baler with enough skill to help get rid of a great
deal of water, so that the boat was freed to an extent which set aside
all danger of our sinking; but with all their efforts they never got
beyond a certain point, for the water oozed in pretty constantly through
and round the extempore plug.

At last, faint with heat and nearly exhausted, we came in sight of the
first straggling houses, then they grew more close together, and fields
and gardens gave place to the closely-packed habitations.  For we had
reached the town, though even then we had quite a long row before we
could reach the _Teaser_.

The final stretch came at last--just about a quarter of a mile to
traverse, and then we should be alongside.

"Thank goodness!" said Mr Brooke, drawing a deep breath; "I don't know
when I have felt so anxious.  Now, my lads, only another five minutes--a
long pull and a strong pull, and all together."

The men cheered and pulled, sending the boat merrily along now, for the
tide was close upon its highest point, and for some little time it grew
more and more sluggish before the coxswain cried out--

"She's swung round, sir; tide's with us."

"Ha!" ejaculated Mr Brooke.  "Then we shall get to the _Teaser_ in
time.  They couldn't start from the creek with those light junks till
now."

"How much farther is it, sir?"  I said, as he stood up and shaded his
eyes with his hand.

"It can't be many hundred yards," he replied.  "It must be just beyond
that head where the boats lie so thick.  Yes, off that temple there up
on the hill."

The men gave a cheer, and the boat sped on fast now, feeling the push
given by the falling tide, and the short distance that lay between us;
and the spot where we had lain at anchor so many days was soon
traversed--the latter part in perfect silence, with Mr Brooke standing
in the stern-sheets gazing straight ahead, and turning his eyes from
side to side of the busy water thoroughfare.

"She has shifted her moorings," he said at last.

"Has she, sir?"  I replied, as I recalled how the furnace fires were
going and the _Teaser_ was getting up steam when we started.

"Yes; how tiresome!" he muttered.  "Just, too, when we want to
communicate at once."

"But you can see her, sir?"

"No, my lad, no," he cried.  "How can I see her if she is not here?"

"But I thought you said she had shifted her moorings, sir?"

"Yes, and gone down the river somewhere.  Hang it all, she can't have
sailed without us."

"They wouldn't do that, sir," I cried, feeling quite startled at the
idea of the ship leaving us with our small boat in the midst of
strangers.  "Why, she must have had news of some other junks, sir, and
gone in pursuit, or is it a mistake?  We can't have come far enough.
No; this is the spot."

The men were looking at me inquiringly, just as men accustomed to be led
lean on their superiors for orders, even if one of those superiors be a
mere boy, while I, acting in precisely the same spirit, looked up to Mr
Brooke, and listened excitedly for what he would say next.

It seemed to be a long time before he spoke, and then it was between his
teeth and with angry vehemence, as he dropped down into his seat.

"After all this hard struggle to get back with our news," he muttered,
in so low a tone that I only heard his words, while the men sat with
their oars balanced gazing forward to see if they could make out the
_Teaser's_ funnel and tall spars.  "They ought not to have stirred; it's
playing at dog and the shadow.  Here have we brought the substance, and
they are snapping at the reflection."

"Mr Brooke!"  I said in a whisper.

"All right, my boy; don't be down-hearted.  It's the fortune of sea
life.  Here we are, tired, hungry, and hot, with a badly leaking boat,
and a far from friendly place to land in and get her repaired."

"But they can't have gone far," I said.

"I don't know, my lad.  Had some news of pirates, perhaps.  All I know
now is that they've left us in the lurch."


CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

AN EXCHANGE.

"Now then," said Mr Brooke, after a few minutes' pause, "what's the
first thing, Herrick?  We can't keep watch for the junks in this boat."

"The first thing is to get her mended, sir."

"Yes; but how?"

"Let's ask Ching."

"Ching!" said Mr Brooke angrily.

"You wantee Ching?" came in the familiar highly-pitched voice from
forward.  "You wantee Ching go buy new boatee?"

He came hurrying aft, nearly tumbling once; while, left to his own power
alone, the coxswain redoubled his efforts to keep down the water, and
the tin baler went _scoop scroop, scoop scroop_, and _splash splash_, as
he sent the water flying.

But the dark, angry expression of Mr Brooke's countenance repelled the
Chinaman, and he stopped short and looked from one to the other in a
pleading, deprecating way, ending by saying piteously--

"You no wantee Ching?"

Mr Brooke shook his head, and our interpreter went back over the
thwarts, reseated himself, and began to bale again, with his head bent
down very low.

"Give way, my lads," said Mr Brooke, bearing hard on the tiller, and
the boat began to bear round as he steered for the landing-place a
quarter of a mile away.

I looked up at him inquiringly, and he nodded at me.

"We can't help it, Herrick," he said; "if we stop afloat with the boat
in this condition we shall have a serious accident.  But we shall lose
the junks."

"Oh!"  I ejaculated, "and after all this trouble.  We had been so
successful too.  Couldn't we repair the boat?"

"If we could run into a good boat-builder's we might patch it up, but we
can do nothing here."

"Couldn't Ching show us a place?"

"I can't ask the scoundrel."

I winced, for I could not feel that Ching had deceived us, and for a few
moments I was silent.  Then a thought struck me.

"May I ask him, sir?"

Mr Brooke was silent for a while, but he spoke at last.

"I hate risking his help again, but I am ready to do anything to try and
carry out my instructions.  We ought to patrol the river here to wait
for the junks coming down, and then follow them, even if it is right
down to sea.  Well, yes; ask him it he can take us to a boat-builder's,
where we can get some tarpaulin or lead nailed on."

I wasted no time.  "Ching!"  I cried; and he looked up sadly, but his
face brightened directly as he read mine.

"You wantee Ching?"

"Yes; where is there a boat-builder's where they will mend the boat
directly?"

"No," he said; "takee velly long time.  Boat-builder same slow fellow.
No piecee work along.  Take boatee out water, mend him to-mollow, next
week."

"Then what are we to do?"  I cried.  "We want to watch the junks."

"Why no takee other fellow big boatee?  Plenty big boatee evelywhere.
Get in big sampan junk, pilate man no sabby jolly sailor boy come along.
Think other piecee fellow go catch fish."

"Here, Mr Brooke," I cried excitedly; "Ching says we had better take
one of these boats lying moored out here, and the pirates won't think of
it being us.  Isn't it capital?"

Mr Brooke gazed sharply at us both for a few moments, and then directed
the boat's head as if going up the river again.

"Where is there a suitable boat?" he said hoarsely, and speaking
evidently under great excitement, as he saw a means of saving the chance
after all.

"Velly nice big boat over 'long there," said Ching, pointing to a native
craft about double the size of our cutter, lying moored about a hundred
yards from the shore, and evidently without any one in her.

"Yes, that will do," cried Mr Brooke.  "Anything fits a man who has no
clothes.  Pull, my lads--give way!"

The men dragged at the oars, and I saw that since Ching had left off
baling the water was gaining fast, and that if more power was not put on
it would not be long before the boat was waterlogged or sunk.

In a minute we were alongside the boat, one of a superior class,
possibly belonging to some man of consequence, and Mr Brooke had run
the cutter along her on the side farthest from the shore, so that our
proceedings were not noticed, as we made fast.

"Now then, tumble in, my lads," he cried; "take the oars and everything
movable.  Throw them in, our game and all.  Here, Herrick, take both
guns."

Everything was transferred in a very short time; and this done, Mr
Brooke stepped aboard the little junk-like craft, gave his orders, and a
line was attached to a grating, the other end to one of the ring-bolts.
Then the craft's anchor-line was unfastened, and our painter hitched on
to it instead.  Next the grating was tossed overboard, with plenty of
line to float it as a buoy and show where the boat had sunk, as it was
pretty certain to do before long; and we, in our tiny junk, began to
glide away with the tide, furnished with a serviceable boat, boasting of
sails, even if they were not of a kind our men were accustomed to
manage.

"Why, it is grand, Herrick!" cried Mr Brooke excitedly.  "We shall get
them after all."

"And all Ching's doing, sir," I said quietly.

"Ah, yes, perhaps; he is repentant now he has been found out.  But we
shall see--"

"That he is quite innocent, sir," I said.

"I hope so, my lad.  Now, let's make sail, and beat about here, to and
fro.  We must keep a good watch for our two friends, and if they come
down we can follow till we see the _Teaser_ in the offing.  We may, I
say, capture them yet."

A sail was hoisted, and in a few minutes we found that the craft went
along easily and well, answering to her helm admirably.  Her high
bulwarks gave plenty of shelter, and would, I saw, well conceal our men,
so that we had only to put Ching prominently in sight to pass unnoticed,
or as a Chinese fishing or pleasure boat.

Just then I turned and found him close behind me, rubbing his hands.

"You ask Mr Blooke he likee Ching sit where pilate see him 'gain?" he
said.

"I am sure he would," I replied.

He looked sad again directly, and just touched the sleeve of my Norfolk
jacket with the long nail of his forefinger.

"Ching velly solly," he said.

"What about?"

"Mr Blooke think Ching fliends with pilates.  Velly shocking; Ching
hate pilates dleadfully; hollid men."

"Yes, I am sure you do," I said.

The Celestial's face lit up again directly, and he rubbed his hands.

"Ching velly--"

"Yes?"  I said, for Mr Brooke called to me from the little cabin
contrived for shelter in the after part of the vessel.

"Look here," he said, as I joined him, "we can keep below here, and
command the river too, without being seen.  Why, Herrick, my lad, this
is capital; they will never suspect this Chinese boat to be manned by a
crew of Her Majesty's Jacks."

"Then everything has turned out for the best," I cried eagerly.

"Humph! that remains to be proved, my lad.  We've got to return and face
Mr Reardon and the captain, and the first question asked of an officer
who has been entrusted with one of Her Majesty's boats, and who returns
without it, is--What have you done with the boat or ship?  We--yes, you
are in the mess, sir--have to go back and say that we have lost it."

"Why, the captain owned to Pat that a thing couldn't be lost when you
knew where it was."

"I don't understand you, my lad," said Mr Brooke.

"Don't you remember about the captain's tea-kettle, sir, that Pat
dropped overboard?  It was not lost, because Pat knew where it was--at
the bottom of the sea."

"Oh yes, I remember; but I'm afraid Captain Thwaites will not take that
excuse."

"Why, she has gone down already, sir," I said, as I looked over the side
for the boat we had left.

"Yes; but I can see the grating floating.  The coxswain took his jacket
out of the hole."

He pointed to the stout piece of woodwork which we had turned into a
buoy, but I could not make it out, and I thought it did not much matter,
for something else had begun to trouble me a great deal just then, and I
waited very anxiously for my officer to make some proposal.

But it did not come at once, for Mr Brooke was planning about the watch
setting, so as to guard against the junks coming down the river and
passing us on their way out to sea.

But at last all was to his satisfaction, one man keeping a look-out up
the river for the descending junks, the other downward to the mouth for
the return of the _Teaser_, whose coming was longed for most intensely.

Then, with just a scrap of sail raised, the rest acting as a screen
dividing the boat, we tacked about the river, keeping as near as was
convenient to the spot where the _Teaser_ had anchored, and at last Mr
Brooke said to me, just in the grey of the evening--

"I'm afraid the lads must be getting hungry."

"I know one who is, sir," I said, laughing.

He smiled.

"Well, I have been too busy and anxious to think about eating and
drinking," he said; "but I suppose I am very hungry too.  Here, my lad,
pass that basket along, and serve out the provisions."

"You likee Ching serve out plovisions?"

Mr Brooke frowned, and the Chinaman shrank away.  I noticed too that
when the food was served round, the men took each a good lump of salt
pork and a couple of biscuits, Ching contented himself with one biscuit,
which he took right forward, and there sat, munching slowly, till it was
dark and the shore was lit up with thousands of lanterns swinging in
shop, house, and on the river boats moored close along by the shore.

"Bad for us," said Mr Brooke, as we sat together astern steering, and
keeping a sharp look ahead for the expected enemy.

"Why?"  I asked.

"Getting so dark, my lad.  We shall be having the junks pass us."

"Oh no, sir.  Ching is keen-sighted, and all the men are looking out
very eagerly."

"Ah, well, I hope they will not slip by.  They must not, Herrick.  There
is one advantage in this darkness, though: they will not find us out."

The darkness favouring the movement, and so as to save time, ready for
any sudden emergency, he ordered the men to buckle on their
cutlass-belts and pouches, while the rifles were hid handy.

"In case we want to board, Herrick."

"Then you mean to board if there is a chance?"  I said.

"I mean to stop one of those junks from putting to sea, if I can," he
replied quietly.  "The _Teaser_ having left us, alters our position
completely.  She has gone off on a false scent, I'm afraid, and we must
not lose the substance while they are hunting the shadow."

Very little more was said, and as I sat in the darkness I had plenty to
think about and picture out, as in imagination I saw our queer-looking
boat hooked on to the side of a great high-pooped junk, and Mr Brooke
leading the men up the side to the attack upon the fierce desperadoes
who would be several times our number.

"I don't know what we should do," I remember thinking to myself, "if
these people hadn't a wholesome fear of our lads."

Then I watched the shore, with its lights looking soft and mellow
against the black velvety darkness.  Now and then the booming of gongs
floated off to us, and the squeaking of a curious kind of pipe; while
from the boats close in shore the twangling, twingling sound of the
native guitars was very plain--from one in particular, where there was
evidently some kind of entertainment, it being lit up with a number of
lanterns of grotesque shapes.  In addition to the noise--I can't call it
music--of the stringed instruments, there came floating to us quite a
chorus of singing.  Well, I suppose it was meant for singing; but our
lads evidently differed, for I heard one man say in a gruff whisper--

"See that there boat, messmate?"

"Ay," said another.  "I hear it and see it too."

"Know what's going on?"

"Yes; it's a floating poulterer's shop."

"A what?"

"A floating poulterer's shop.  Can't you hear 'em killing the cats?"

This interested me, and I listened intently.

"Killing the cats?" said another.

"Ay, poor beggars.  Lor' a mussy! our cats at home don't know what
horrible things is done in foreign lands.  They're killing cats for
market to-morrer, for roast and biled."

"Get out, and don't make higgerant observations, messmate.  It's a
funeral, and that's the way these here heathens show how sorry they
are."

"Silence there, my lads," said the lieutenant.  "Keep a sharp look-out."

"Ay, ay, sir."

Just at that moment, as the lit-up boat glided along about a couple of
hundred yards from us, where we sailed gently up-stream, there was a
faint rustling forward, and Tom Jecks' gruff voice whispered--

"What is it, messmate?"

"Ching see big junk."

There was a dead silence, and we all strained our eyes to gaze
up-stream.

"Can't see nought, messmate," was whispered.

"Yes; big junk come along."

_Plash_! and a creaking, rattling sound came forth out of the darkness.

"It is a big junk," said Mr Brooke, with his lips to my ear; "and she
has anchored."

Then from some distance up the river we saw a very dim lantern sway here
and there, some hoarse commands were given, followed by the creaking and
groaning of a bamboo yard being lowered, and then all was perfectly
still.

What strange work it seemed to be out there in the darkness of that
foreign river, surrounded by curious sights and sounds, and not knowing
but what the next minute we might be engaged in deadly strife with a
gang of desperadoes who were perfectly indifferent to human life, and
who, could they get the better of us, would feel delight in slaughtering
one and all.  It was impossible to help feeling a peculiar creepy
sensation, and a cold shiver ran through one from time to time.

So painful was this silence, that I felt glad when we had sailed up
abreast of the great vessel which had dropped anchor in mid-stream, for
the inaction was terrible.

We sailed right by, went up some little distance, turned and came back
on the other side, so near this time that we could dimly make out the
heavy masts, the huge, clumsy poop and awkward bows of the vessel lying
head to stream.

Then we were by her, and as soon as we were some little distance below
Mr Brooke spoke--

"Well, my lads, what do you say: is she one of the junks?"

"No pilate junk," said Ching decisively, and I saw Mr Brooke make an
angry gesture--quite a start.

"What do you say, my lads?"

"Well, sir, we all seem to think as the Chinee does--as it arn't one of
them."

"Why?"

"Looks biggerer and clumsier, and deeper in the water."

"Yes; tlade boat from Hopoa," said Ching softly, as if speaking to
himself.

"I'm not satisfied," said Mr Brooke.  "Go forward, Mr Herrick; your
eyes are sharp.  We'll sail round her again.  All of you have a good
look at her rigging."

"Ay, ay, sir," whispered the men; and I crept forward among them to
where Ching had stationed himself, and once more we began gliding up
before the wind, which was sufficiently brisk to enable us to easily
master the swift tide.

As I leaned over the side, Ching heaved a deep sigh.

"What's the matter?"  I whispered.

"Ching so velly mislable," he whispered back.  "Mr Blooke think him
velly bad man.  Think Ching want to give evelybody to pilate man.  Ching
velly velly solly."

"Hist! look out!"

I suppose our whispering had been heard, for just as we were being
steered pretty close to the anchored junk, a deep rough voice hailed us
something after this fashion, which is as near as I can get to the
original--

"Ho hang wong hork ang ang ha?"

"Ning toe ing nipy wong ony ing!" cried Ching.

"Oh ony ha, how how che oh gu," came from the junk again, and then we
were right on ahead.

"Well," whispered Mr Brooke, "what does he say?  Is it one of the
pirate vessels?"

"No pilate.  Big boat come down hong, sir.  Capin fellow want to know if
we pilate come chop off head, and say he velly glad we all good man."

"Are you quite sure?" said Mr Brooke.

I heard Ching give a little laugh.

"If pilate," he said, "all be full bad men.  Lightee lantern; thlow
stink-pot; make noise."

"Yes," said Mr Brooke; "this cannot be one of them.  Here, hail the man
again, and ask him where he is going."

"How pang pong won toe me?" cried Ching, and for answer there came two
or three grunts.

"Yes; what does he say?"

"Say he go have big long sleep, 'cause he velly tired."

Mr Brooke said no more, but ran the boat down the river some little
distance and then began to tack up again, running across from side to
side, so as to make sure that the junks did not slip by us in the
darkness.  But hour after hour glided on, and the lights ashore and on
the boats gradually died out, till, with the exception of a few lanterns
on vessels at anchor, river and shore were all alike one great expanse
of darkness, while we had to go as slowly as possible, literally
creeping along, to avoid running into craft moored in the stream.

And all this time perfect silence had to be kept, and but for the
intense desire to give good account of the junks, the men would soon
have been fast asleep.

"Do you think they will come down and try to put to sea, Ching?"  I said
at last, very wearily.

"Yes, allee 'flaid Queen Victolia's jolly sailor boy come steam up liver
and send boat up cleek, fight and burn junks.  Come down velly quick."

"Doesn't seem like it," I said, beginning at last to feel so drowsy I
could not keep my eyes open.

"So velly dark, can't see."

"Why, you don't think they will get by us in the darkness?"  I said,
waking up now with a start at his words, and the bad news they conveyed.

"Ching can't tell.  So velly dark, plenty junk go by; nobody see if
velly quiet.  Ching hope not get away.  Wantee Mr Brooke catchee both
junk, and no think Ching like pilate man."

"Here, I must go and have a talk to Mr Brooke," I said; and I crept
back to where he sat steering and sweeping the darkness he could not
penetrate on either side.

"Well, Herrick," he said eagerly.  "News?"

"Yes, sir; bad news.  Ching is afraid that the junks have crept by us in
the night."

"I have been afraid so for some time, my lad, for the tide must have
brought them down long enough ago."

He relapsed into silence for a few minutes, and then said quietly--

"You can all take a sleep, my lads; Mr Herrick and I will keep watch."

"Thankye, sir, thankye," came in a low murmur, and I went forward to
keep a look-out there; but not a man lay down, they all crouched
together, chewing their tobacco, waiting; while Ching knelt by the bows,
his elbows on the gunwale, his chin resting upon his hands, apparently
gazing up the river, but so still that I felt he must be asleep, and at
last startled him by asking the question whether he was.

"No; too much head busy go sleep.  Want findee allee pilate, show Mr
Blooke no like pilate.  Velly 'flaid all gone."

How the rest of that night went by, I can hardly tell.  We seemed to be
for hours and hours without end tacking to and fro, now going up the
river two or three miles, then dropping down with the tide, and always
zig-zagging so as to cover as much ground as possible.  The night
lengthened as if it would never end; but, like all tedious times of the
kind, it dragged its weary course by, till, to my utter astonishment,
when it did come, a faint light dawned away over the sea beyond the
mouth of the river, just when we were about a mile below the city.

That pale light gradually broadened, and shed its ghastly chilly beams
over the sea, making all look unreal and depressing, and showed the
faces of our crew, sitting crouched in the bottom of the boat, silent
but quite wide-awake.

Then all started as if suddenly electrified, for Ching uttered a low
cry, and stood up, pointing right away east.

"What is it?"  I said.

"Two pilate junk."

We all saw them at the same time, and with a miserable feeling of
despondency, for there was no hiding the fact.  The river was wide, and
while we were close under one bank they had glided silently down under
the other, and were far beyond our reach.


CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

THE UNTRUSTWORTHY AGENT.

"Eaten, Herrick," said Mr Brooke in a low voice.

"Not yet, sir," I said.

I don't know how it was that I said those words.  They came to my lips
and I uttered them, making Mr Brooke turn round upon me sharply, in the
grey light of dawn.

"What do you mean by that, boy?" he said.

"Mean?  I don't--I--that is,"--I stammered; "I wouldn't give up yet,
sir."

"What would you do? wait for them to come back?" he said bitterly.

"No," I cried, gaining courage; "go after them, sir."

"And attack and take them with this boat, Herrick?" he said, smiling at
me rather contemptuously.

"Of course we couldn't do that, sir," I said, "but we might follow and
keep them in sight.  We should know where they went."

"Yes," he said, after a moment's thought; "but we may be away for days,
and we must have provisions.  What is to be done?"

"You likee me buy blead and fish, and plenty good to eat?" said Ching in
rather a shrinking way.

"Yes," said Mr Brooke, turning upon the Celestial sharply.  "Where
shall we land you?"

"There," said Ching, pointing to the shore about a mile up from where we
lay.

"But it's going back, and we shall lose sight of the junks, Ching," I
said.

"Plenty blead there.  Ching know the way."

"But one moment, Mr Brooke," I said; "are we sure that those are the
right junks?"

"I feel sure," he said.  "What do you say, my lads?"

"Ay, ay, sir, them's right," chorussed the men.

"Yes, Ching velly sure those pilate junk."

"I know one on 'em, sir," said Jecks, "by her great yard.  I never see a
junk with such a big un afore.  Talk about the cut of a jib--I says,
look at the cut of her mainsail."

"Well, we must have food and water, if we are going out of the mouth of
the river," said Mr Brooke, and he turned the boat's head shoreward.

"No makee haste," said Ching deprecatingly.  "Too soon, evelybody fas'
asleep."

Mr Brooke gave an impatient stamp on the frail bamboo half-deck, but
said no more for a few moments.

"We must wait if we are too soon, for it would be madness to go without
food and water."

He was silent for a time, during which the men watched the distant
junks, and as they stood out more and more boldly in the morning light,
we compared notes, and made comments upon them, all growing more and
more satisfied that these were the two of which we were in search.

"Yes, they must be," said Mr Brooke at last, after listening for some
time to the men's conversation.  "The very fact of their sailing in
company is suggestive.  Seems odd, though, doesn't it, Herrick?" he half
whispered.

"What? their getting by us, sir, in the dark?"

"No; I mean, after making up my mind that this fellow Ching was a
traitor, and that I would have no more to do with him, to find myself
forced at every turn to rest upon him for help.  Lesson for you, lad."

"In what way, sir?"

"Not to have too much faith in yourself.  I am beginning to hope that I
have been deceived about him, but we shall soon have proof."

"I feel sure you are misjudging him, sir," I said eagerly.

"Yes, with a boy's readiness to trust."

"But I feel sure he is honest, sir."

"Well, we shall soon see."

I looked at him for an explanation, and he smiled.

"I am going to give him some money, and send him ashore to buy
provisions.  If he is dishonest he will not come back."

"But he will come back," I said confidently.

"We shall see, my lad," he replied; and once more he was silent, after
handing the tiller to me, and looking back longingly at the two junks,
which were apparently making no way, for the wind was blowing dead now
into the mouth of the river.

Early as it was, there were people stirring as we approached the
landing-place Ching had pointed out, and he nodded with satisfaction.

"Allee light," he said, smiling.  "Get plenty blead, meat.  You fillee
big tub with water;" and he pointed to a large rough vessel, and another
which was a great earthenware jar.

"But where are we to get the water?"  I said.

"Out o' liver.  Plenty water in liver."

"We can't drink that peasoup," I said, as I looked over the side in
disgust at the yellow solution of mud.

"Velly good water.  Allee salt gone now.  Plenty clear by and by."

"We must make the best of it, Herrick," said my companion; and then
turning to Ching, he said rather sternly--

"Here are eight dollars: buy as much bread and cooked meat as you can,
and get back as quickly as possible, when we set you ashore."

Ching nodded and smiled.

"Be velly quick," he said; "and you take boat lit' way out, and stop
till come back."

"Of course; trust us for that, my man."

Ten minutes later we ran alongside some rough bamboo piles, to which
about half-a-dozen Chinamen hurried, to stand staring at us.  But Ching
paid no attention to them.  He only made a leap from the boat when we
were a couple of yards from the platform, landed safely but with tail
flying, and his blue cotton garment inflating balloon-like with the
wind.  Then he walked away among the houses, and one of our men pushed
the boat off again, evidently to the intense wonder of the people, who
stared hard to see a British sailor managing a native vessel; while two
others, in a costume perfectly new to them, sat looking on.

Then our men were packed out of sight, some in the little cabin, others
hidden at the bottom of the boat, beneath a matting-sail.

When we were about a hundred yards from the shore, a clumsy wooden
grapnel, to which a heavy stone was bound with a twisted rope of bamboo,
was dropped overboard, and then we lay in the swift tide, with the boat
tugging at the line as if eager to be off on the chase the stern
necessity concerning food kept us from carrying on at once.

"How these people do seem to detest us, Herrick!" said Mr Brooke, after
we had been waiting patiently for about a quarter of an hour,
impatiently another, but not quite in idleness, for, after tasting the
river water to find that it was very slightly brackish now, the tub and
the jar were both filled and left to settle.

"Yes, they're not very fond of us," I replied, as I noted how the
numbers were increasing, and that now there was a good deal of talking
going on, and this was accompanied by gesticulations, we evidently being
the objects of their interest.  "They can't have much to do."

Mr Brooke made no reply, but moment by moment he grew more uneasy, as
he alternately scanned the people ashore and the junks in the offing.

"Oh," I said at last, "if we could only see the _Teaser_ coming up the
river!"

"I'd be content, Herrick," said Mr Brooke bitterly, "if we could only
see the messenger coming back with our stores."

"Yes," I said uneasily, for I had been fidgeting a good deal; "he is a
long time."

"Yes," said Mr Brooke, looking at me very fixedly, till I avoided his
gaze, for I knew he was thinking of my defence of Ching.

"Perhaps the bakers' shops are not open," I said at last.

"Perhaps this is not London, my lad.  It's of no use for you to defend
him; I begin to feel sure that he has left us in the lurch."

"Oh, wait a little longer, please, Mr Brooke," I cried; and I vainly
scanned the increasing crowd upon the platform and shore, and could see,
instead of Ching, that the people were growing more and more excited, as
they talked together and kept pointing at us.

"I shall not wait much longer," said Mr Brooke at last.  "He has had
plenty of time.  Look here, my lads, we have plenty of water, and the
business is urgent.  You'll have to be content with a drink and a pull
at your waistbelts."

"All right, sir," said the coxswain; "what's good enough for the
orficers is good enough for us.  We won't grumble, eh, mates?"

There was a low growl here, but not of discontent.

"Then in another five minutes, if our Celestial friend does not come
back, we shall start.  I'll give him that time."

"Beg pardon, sir; they're a siggling of us."

"Signalling! who are?"

"The Chinees, sir."

"Yes, look," I said; for, after a good deal of talking and shouting, one
man was standing close at the edge of the landing-place, and beckoning
to us to come closer in.

"Likely," I heard one of our men whisper.  "Ducks."

"Eh?" said another.

"Dill, dill, dill; will yer come and be killed?"

"What do they want, Herrick?  To inveigle us ashore?"

"I know, sir for the reason of their excitement now came to me like a
flash, and I wondered that I had not thought of it before."

"Well, then.  Speak out if you do know, my lad."

"That's it, sir.  We've got a boat they know, and they think we're
stealing it."

"Tut, tut, tut.  Of course.  That explains it.  Very sorry, my friends,
but we cannot spare it yet.  You shall have her back and be paid for the
use of it, when we've done with her."

The shouts, gesticulations, and general excitement increased, two men
now beckoning imperiously, and it was evident that they were ordering us
to come to the landing-place at once.

"No, my friends," said Mr Brooke, "we are not coming ashore.  We know
your gentle nature too well.  But Ching is not coming, Herrick, so we'll
heave up the grapnel and be off."

The crowd was now dense, and the excitement still increasing, but the
moment they saw our coxswain, in obedience to an order given by Mr
Brooke--in spite of an appealing look, and a request for another ten
minutes--begin to haul up the rough grapnel, the noise ashore was
hushed, and the gesticulations ceased.

"Five minutes more, Mr Brooke," I whispered; "I feel sure that Ching
will come."

"Silence, sir," he said coldly.  "It is only what I expected.  The man
knows he is found out."

By this time the boat was hauled up over the grapnel, and I shrank away
in despair, feeling bitterly disappointed at Ching's non-appearance, but
full of confidence in him--faith the stronger for an intense desire to
make up to the man for misjudging him before.

Then the grapnel was out of the mud, and hauled over the side; the boat
began to yield to the tide; and Mr Brooke stepped to the mast himself,
being unwilling to call the men in the cabin into the people's sight.

"Come and take a hand at the rope here, coxswain," said Mr Brooke.
"Mr Herrick, take the tiller."

But at the first grasp of our intention, as they saw the preparation for
hoisting the sail, there was a fierce yell from the shore, and the
people scattered to right and left.

"What does that mean?"  I said to myself.  But the next instant I knew,
for they were making for different boats, into which they jumped, and
rapidly began to unmoor.

"Humph! time we were off," said Mr Brooke.  "Hoist away, man, I cannot
do it alone."

"I am a-hysting, sir, but the tackle's got foul somehow.  It's this here
rough rope.  The yard won't move."

"Tut tut--try, man, try."

"All right, sir, I'll swarm up the the mast, and set it free."

"But there is no time, my man.  Haul--haul."

The man did haul, but it was like pulling at a fixed rope, and the sail
obstinately refused to move, while to my horror there were no less than
six boats pushing off, and I foresaw capture, a Chinese prison, and
severe punishment--if we could not get help--for stealing a boat.

"All hands on deck," cried Mr Brooke, making use of the familiar
aboard-ship order, and just as the first two boats were coming rapidly
on, and were within a dozen yards, our Jacks sprang up armed and ready.

The effect was magical.  Evidently taken by surprise, the Chinamen
stopped short, and the boats all went on drifting slowly down the
stream.  But at the end of a minute, as we made no attack, but all stood
awaiting orders, they recovered their confidence, uttered a shout to
encourage one another, and came on.

"I don't want to injure them," Mr Brooke muttered, but he was forced to
act.  "Give them the butts of your pieces, my lads, if they try to lay
hold of the boat.  Mind, they must be kept off."

He had no time to say more, but seized the fowling-piece as the first
boat was rowed alongside, and amidst a fierce burst of objurgations, in
a tongue we could not understand, a couple of men seized the gunwale of
the boat, while two more jumped aboard.

The men who caught hold let go again directly, for the butts of the
men's rifles and the gunwale were both hard for fingers, and the Chinese
yelled, and the two who leaped aboard shrieked as they were seized and
shot out of the boat again.

But by this time another craft of about our own size had come alongside,
and was hanging on to us, while four more were trying to get in, and
others were pushing off from the shore.

We were being surrounded; and, enraged by our resistance, while gaining
courage from their numbers and from the fact that we made no use of
cutlass or rifle, they now made desperate efforts to get aboard.

Our men were getting desperate too, and in another minute there must
have been deplorable bloodshed, the more to be regretted as it would
have been between our sailors and a friendly power, when Jecks, after
knocking a Chinaman back into his own boat with his fist, stooped and
picked up the boat-hook we had brought on board from our now sunken
cutter.  With this he did wonders, using it like a cue, Barkins
afterwards said, when I described the struggle, and playing billiards
with Chinese heads.  But, be that as it may, he drove back at least a
dozen men, and then attacked one of the boats, driving the pole right
through the thin planking and sending the water rushing in.

But we were still in imminent danger of being taken prisoners, and, as
he afterwards told me, Mr Brooke was thinking seriously of sending a
charge of small-shot scattering amongst the crowd, when two of our lads
seized the sheet and began to try and hoist the matting-sail, and to my
intense delight I saw it begin to go up as easily as could be.

I flew to the tiller, but found a big Chinaman before me, and in an
instant he had me by the collar and was tugging me over the side.  But I
clung to it, felt a jerk as there was a loud rap, and, thanks to Tom
Jecks, the man rolled over into the water, and began to swim.

"Now for it, my lads," shouted Mr Brooke.  "All together; over with
them!"

The men cheered and struck down with the butts of their rifles, the
boat-hook was wielded fiercely, and half-a-dozen of our assailants were
driven out of the boat, but not into the others, for they fell with
splash after splash into the river.  For our vessel careened over as the
sail caught the full pressure of the wind, and then made quite a bound
from the little craft by which she was surrounded.

Then a cheer arose, for we knew we could laugh at our enemies, who were
being rapidly left behind; and, while some dragged their swimming
companions into their boats, the others set up a savage yelling;
gesticulating, and no doubt telling us how, if they caught us, they
would tear us into little bits.

"Well done, my lads," cried Mr Brooke.  "Splendid, splendid.  Couldn't
have been better.  Excellent, Mr Herrick; ease her a little, ease her.
We must have a reef in that sail.  All left behind, then; no pursuit?"
and he looked astern as our boat rushed through the water, and then he
frowned, for one of the men said--

"Yes, sir; here's one on 'em from the shore coming arter us full sail,
and she's going as fast as we."

And once more, as I looked behind me, holding on the while by the
tiller, I seemed to see the inside of a Chinese prison after we had been
pretty well stoned to death; for it was a good-sized boat that was
gliding after us at a rapid rate, and threatening to overtake us before
long.


CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

MR. BROOKE'S ERROR.

"I did not see either of those craft with sails," I said to Tom Jecks,
as we stood watching the following boat, which was evidently making
every possible effort to come up with us.

"No, sir, 'twarn't neither o' them.  I see 'em put off from a bit higher
up," said Jecks.  "My hye! they are in a hurry, sir.  You'd better tell
Mr Brooke he must shake out a reef instead o' taking one up."

"No; leave it to him, he doesn't like interference."

"No, sir, orficers don't, and it is their natur' to.  But I say, sir,
what a--_murder_!--what a wrench I give my shoulder."

"How?"

"Hitting one o' them pudding-headed Teapots, sir.  Didn't hurt my
knuckles, because his head was soft.  Just like punching a bladder o'
lard, but the weight on him wrenched the jynte."

"Wait till we get on board," I said, "and Mr Price will soon put you
right."

"Bah! not him, sir," said the man scornfully.  "I shouldn't think o'
going to a doctor for nothing less than losing my head.  It'll soon get
right.  Exercise is the thing, sir, for a hurt o' that sort.  You and
Mr Brooke give us a good job at them pirates out yonder, and I shall
forget all about my shoulder."

"We'll try," I said laughingly.  "But what were you going to say just
now?"

"I, sir? nothin', sir."

"Oh yes; when you broke off."

"I broke off, sir?"

"Yes."

"To be sure.  Yes, sir, I was going to say what a lesson it is for you,
sir, as a young orficer, not to go pickling and stealing other folkses'
boats.  This here all comes o' taking boats as don't belong to you."

"Better than sitting in another till she sinks, Tom Jecks."

"Not so honest, sir."

"Rubbish!  We haven't stolen the boat; only borrowed it."

"Ah, that's what them heathens don't understand, sir; and I don't know
as I blames 'em, for it is rather hard for 'em to take hold on.  S'pose,
sir, as you was in London town, and a chap was to take your dymon'
ring--"

"Haven't got one, Tom Jecks."

"Well, s'pose you had one, and he took it and sailed away as hard as he
could go, sir.  It wouldn't be very easy for you to tell whether he'd
stole it or borrowed it, eh, sir?"

"Oh, bother I don't ask riddles now, we're so busy.  Here: over we go."

"Lie to the windward, all of you," shouted Mr Brooke, who was now at
the tiller.  "More aft there; that's better."

For the boat had careened over to so great an extent that she had taken
in a little water, and I felt that we were about to be capsized.

But she rose again and skimmed along rapidly for the mouth of the river,
and I crept close to my officer again.

"Shall I take the tiller, sir?"  I said.

"No, Herrick, I'll keep it for the present.  I want to get all I can out
of the boat, and keep up as much sail as possible without capsizing.
It's wonderful what these clumsy things can do."

"Yes, sir, we're going pretty fast, but I'm afraid the one behind goes
faster."

"She does, my lad, for her crew know exactly how to manage.  I don't
want any more fighting if I can help it, but if they do overtake us I
think we can soon send them back again.  Men seem much hurt?  Do they
complain?" he whispered.

"Only about bruises, sir.  They seem to treat it as so much fun.  I say,
how that boat does sail!"

"Yes, and we can do no more here but keep steadily on.  Yes, we can.
Take a pull at that sheet, my lads, and flatten out the sail a bit."

"Ay, ay, sir;" and the sail was hauled a foot higher, and the sheet
tightened, with the effect that we raced along with the water parting
like a broad arrow before our prow, so that we seemed to be sailing
along in quite a trough, and at times I wondered that we were not
swamped.

But it was very exciting, and, like the others, I forgot all about a few
contusions in the intense interest of the chase.

I went forward again to where Tom Jecks sat on the port gunwale, which
was formed of one bamboo carefully lashed on with strips of the same
material, and as there was nothing else to do, I shaded my eyes from the
nearly level rays of sunlight, and had a good look at the distant junks.

"Yes, sir, that's them, sure enough," said the coxswain.  "Wish we was
twice as many, and had a good-sized gun in the bows."

"Why, it would kick the boat all to pieces, or sink her," I said.

"Oh, that wouldn't matter, sir."

"But it's some one else's boat that we've borrowed," I said, with a
laugh.

"Ay, so it is; I forgot, sir.  But we ain't got a gun, and I'm afraid we
can't take them two junks alone."

"So am I, Tom Jecks," I said; "but we can follow them."

"Arter we've had another naval engagement, sir.  I say, look astern; I
do like the impidence of these here savages, chasing on us like this,
and they're gaining on us fast."

"No; only just holding their own."

"Gaining, sir."

"No."

"Yes, sir."

I took a long look back at the boat, and counted the black caps and
flattened limpet-shaped straw hats of the blue-jacketed men on board.

"Seven of 'em," I said half aloud.

"Eight, sir; I counted 'em twice.  One on 'em is a-lying down now, but
he was a-setting up a little while ago.  Afraid we shall open fire, I
expect."

"And that's what we shall have to do," I said.  "A rifle bullet or two
sent over their heads would make them give up."

"But they arn't pirates, sir, and you mustn't fire at 'em.  Look at that
now."

The pursuing boat was about two hundred yards behind us, and one of the
Chinamen now stood up in the bows, holding on by a stay, waving his
straw hat and gesticulating furiously.

"All right, Mr Shing po Num, or whatever your name is," said the
coxswain in a low voice, "can't stop this time, we're in a hurry."

The man kept on gesticulating.

"Can't you hear what I say?" continued Jecks in a whisper.  "We're in a
hurry.  Say, sir, that's the chap as belongs to our boat--I mean his
boat, and he's getting wilder and wilder now to see us carry it off.
Say, sir, arn't it a bit--what you may call it--to take it away?"

"A bit what?"

"Well, sir, what do you grand folks call it when some one does what
we're a-doing on?"

"Unkind."

"No, sir; it arn't an un-anything."

"Cruel?"

"No, sir.  Cause you see a boat arn't a beast."

"Oh, I don't know what you mean," I said impatiently.

"Yes, it is an un-something; I forgot, sir.  I meant undignified--that's
the word."

"He shall have his boat when we've done with it, and be paid for it
too," I said.  "English officers don't do undignified things."

"But it strikes me, sir, as there won't be no boat to pay for when the
pirates have done with us.  If we go alongside, do you know what they'll
do?"

"Shoot."

"No, sir; pitch ballast into us, and sink us, as sure as we're here."

"Don't talk so much," I said impatiently.  "Why, they've got another
sail up, and are coming on faster."

"Yes, sir, that's right; and they'll be alongside on us in another ten
minutes.  Shall I pass the word along to the lads to spit in their
fists?"

"What?"

"I mean, sir, I s'pose it won't be cutlasses but fisties, sir, eh?"

"Mr Herrick, you had better come and take the tiller," said Mr Brooke
just then.  "Don't attend to anything else.  Your duty is to keep the
boat running; we'll do what fighting there is."

"Very well, sir," I said, and I felt disappointed as I took the tiller,
but felt better a minute later as I felt how I could sway the racing
boat by a touch.

"Now, my lads, cutlasses and rifles under the thwarts.  You take the
oars to these men.  Don't attack them, they are ignorant of our power.
Only keep them off with a few blows."

The men eagerly responded to the words of command, and stood and sat
about in the boat, each man armed with a stout, strong ashen blade, a
blow from which would have sent any one overboard at once.

The chase, with our boat playing the part of hare, was exciting enough
before, but it grew far more so now, for the men in the other boat were
evidently determined, and two of them stood up with clumsy-looking
hooks, and another with a coil of rope ready to lasso us, as it seemed
to me.  And as I sat there I felt how awkward it would be if the man
threw a loop over my head or chest, and dragged me out of the boat.

Naturally enough, the thought of this alone was enough to produce in me
an intense desire to stand up, instead of crouching down there holding
the tiller, and forced into a state of inaction, wherein I was forbidden
to move or raise a hand in my defence.

"I hope they'll give a thought to me," I said to myself, as I felt that
in a very few minutes they would be alongside trying to leap on board,
and from my position I knew that I must be in the thick of the fight,
perhaps trampled upon, and pretty sure to receive some of the blows
which came flying about.

I gazed firmly forward, knowing how much depended upon my keeping the
boat's head straight, and determined, as I set my teeth, to do my duty
as well as possible, but I could not help turning my head from time to
time to look back at the pursuers, who began shouting to us, and
jabbering in their own tongue, as they were evidently now at the highest
pitch of excitement.

Not many yards behind now, and gradually lessening the distance.  All
was ready on board, and I saw Mr Brooke looking stern, and the men as
they grasped their oars grinning at one another, and then looking aft at
the enemy.

And as we raced, the water foaming behind, the bamboo mast creaking and
bending, the mat-sail cracking and making curious noises as the wind
hissed through the thick stuff, the trough we ploughed through the water
seemed deeper, and my temples throbbed and my heart beat, while from
time to time the water lipped over the bows, but not enough to warrant
any change of course.  And nearer and nearer the enemy came, their boat
literally skimming over the water, six feet to our five, and I felt that
the time had arrived.

One more quick glance over my shoulder at the eager faces of the
Chinamen as they uttered a loud shout, another at the men ready for
action; another over my left shoulder to see that the enemy was close
upon us, and then I uttered a strange cry, and, bearing hard upon the
tiller, threw the boat right up into the wind, the sail easing as we
formed a curve in the water, our speed checked, and then we lay nose to
wind, with the boat seeming to quiver and pant after her heavy run.

"Are you mad?" roared Mr Brooke, rushing at me, thrusting me aside so
that I went down upon my back, and he was about to seize the tiller,
when I shouted out, half-choking with laughter, panting too with
triumphant delight--

"Don't, don't, don't!  Can't you see--it is Ching!"


CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

REST AND REFRESHMENT.

Ching it was, and the men sent up a cheer as out pursuers grappled the
side of our boat, held on, and our messenger came on board smiling.

"Velly muchee big job you catchee," he said.  "Why, what fo' you lun
along so fast?"

"Why, Ching," cried Mr Brooke, "what does this mean?"

"No get away.  Muchee velly bad man.  No get to boat.  Allee fightee.
Get 'nother boat, and come along."

"You couldn't get on board us again?"

"No; too many velly bad men.  Plenty blead; plenty fish; plenty meat.
Velly nice.  All in boat.  Velly long time catchee."

Our men laid down the oars with a great deal of care and precision, as
if it was important that they should not be a quarter of an inch wrong,
and our coxswain doubled himself up to indulge in a good long
comfortable chuckle, while I could not help whispering to the young
lieutenant--

"I say, Mr Brooke, I wasn't very far wrong?"

"No, my lad," he said, with a smile; "I give in.  I was all prejudice
against the poor fellow, but I was justified in a great deal that I
said.  Appearances were dead against him.  There, I was too hasty."

Meanwhile the stores Ching had bought had been transferred to our boat,
and he had told us a little about his adventures--how, when he had made
his purchases, he had returned to the landing-place and found the crowd
gathering, and heard the men declaiming against the foreign devils who
had stolen the boat they were using.  The people were growing so much
excited that he soon found it would be impossible for him to go off with
his load to join us, and as soon as he heard the most prominent of the
men shouting to us to come ashore, he felt that his first duty was to
warn us not to.

"Catchee allee.  Takee off to plison.  In plison velly hard get out
again," he said, and then went on to tell us how he felt it would be
best to hire a boat to come off to us from higher up the river, but in
spite of all his efforts he could not get one and his stores on board
till he saw the other boats push off to the attack; and then, when his
men willingly tried to overtake us, urged on by promises of good pay,
they had been mistaken by us for enemies.

"But velly good boat, sail velly fast.  You tink it Ching coming?"

"No, of course not," I said.

"No, not tink it Ching.  Send boat 'way now?  Ching go?"

"No, no," said Mr Brooke eagerly.  "You will stop with us."

"You no velly closs with Ching now?"

"Cross?  No; very grateful."

"You no tink Ching like velly bad man pilate?"

"I think you a very good, faithful fellow," said Mr Brooke, and the
Chinaman's face lit up.

"Send boat 'way now?"

"Stop; I must pay the men."

Ching shook his head.

"No, Ching pay.  Velly clebby pay money.  Two dollar pay men."

He went back into the other boat, and, producing some money from up his
sleeve, he settled with the men, who nodded, smiled, and, as soon as
Ching had returned on board, were about to push off, when Mr Brooke
stopped them.

"Tell them we shall return the boat as soon as we have done with it."

"Yes; no go steal boat.  Plenty boat in steamy-ship.  Tell them capen
give dollar, eh?"

"Yes, tell them that."

"You likee other boat and men?"

"Well, I don't know," said Mr Brooke, hesitating, as if he thought some
use might be made of such a fast-sailing craft.

"Ching askee."

He entered into a short conversation with the boatmen, who smiled at
first, then scowled, stamped, and gesticulated.

Ching nodded and turned to us.

"Say, go to big steamy-ship and Queen Victolia jolly sailor, but no to
see pilate.  'Flaid cut off head."

"Then they must go; send them off."

The men laughed, nodded at us in the most friendly manner, then hoisted
their sail and went back up the river.  Then, provisions being served
out, our lads sat eating and chatting, while our boat sped seaward
towards where the two junks lay windbound not many miles away, or else
waiting for some reason, one which Mr Brooke decided at last to be for
reinforcements.

"Yes," he said, as I sat munching away at some pleasantly sweet-tasted
bread which Ching had brought on board, "depend upon it, we shall see
boats or a small junk go out and join them by and by."

It is curious how old tunes bring up old scenes.  Most people say the
same, but at the risk of being considered one who thinks too much of
eating, I am going to say that nothing brings up old scenes to my memory
more than particular kinds of food.

For instance, there is a flat, square kind of gingerbread which we boys
used to know as "parliament."  I cannot ever see that without thinking
of going to school on sunny mornings, and stopping by one particular
ditch to bang the wasps with my school-bag, swung round by its string.
It was only the seniors who sported a strap for their books; and in
those days my legs, from the bottom of my drawers to the top of my white
socks, were bare, and my unprotected knees in a state of chip, scale,
and scar, from many tumbles on the gravelly path.

Then, again, pancakes will bring up going round the stables and cowhouse
in search of stray new-laid white eggs, which I bore off, greatly to the
disgust of the great black cock, with the yellow saddle-hackles and the
tall red serrated comb.

Fish naturally bring up the carp in the muddy pond which we used to
catch, and gloat over their golden glories; or the brazen small-scaled
tench, with all the surroundings at Norwood, where the builder has run
riot, and terraces and semi-detached villas--I hope well drained--cover
the pool whence we used to drag forth miniature alligators with a worm.

I could go on for pages about those recollections, but one more will
suffice:--Sweet cakey bread always brings up Mother Crissell, who must
have made a nice little independence by selling us boys that sweet cake
dotted with currants, some of which were swollen out to an enormous
size, and lay in little pits on the top.  These currants we used to dig
out as _bonnes bouches_ from the dark soft brown, but only to find them
transformed into little bubbles of cindery lava, which crunched between
the teeth.

And so it was that, as I sat sailing along at the mouth of that swift,
yellow, muddy Chinese river, munching the sweet cakey bread Ching had
brought on board, and gazing from time to time at the geese we had shot
and had no means of cooking, memory carried me back to Mother Crissell's
shop, and that rather bun-faced old lady, who always wore a blue cotton
gown covered with blue spots and of no particular shape, for the amiable
old woman never seemed to have any waist.  There was the inside of her
place, and the old teapot on the chimney-piece, in which she deposited
her money and whence she drew forth change.

And then, in a moment, I seemed to be back in the great playground; then
away on to the common, where we hunted for lizards amongst the furze,
and got more pricks than reptiles.  I saw, too, the big old
horse-chestnuts round by the great square pond where you could never
catch any fish, but always tried for them on account of the character it
had of holding monsters, especially eels as big and round as your arm.
I never knew any one catch a fish in that pond, but we did a deal of
anticipation there, and watched the dragon-flies flit to and fro, and
heard the rustle of they transparent wings.  Splendid ones they were.
First of all, there came early in the summer the thin-bodied ones, some
of a steely-blue, some dark with clear wings, and with them those with
the wings clouded with dark patches.  Then came the large, short,
flat-bodied, pointed-tailed fellows, some blue, some olive-green.  Late
in the season, affecting the damp spots of the common among the furze
bushes more than the pond, came the largest long-bodied flies, which
hawked to and fro over the same ground, and played havoc among their
prey.

You could hear the school-bell from there--the big one in the turret on
the top of the great square brick mansion; and in imagination I saw that
pond, and the dragon-flies, lizards, and furze, the shady finger-leaved
chestnuts, and even heard that bell, while the sweet cakey bread lasted;
and then I was back in the Chinese boat on the Chinese river, for Ching
leaned over me with something in rice-paper.

"You likee bit piecee flesh meat?"

"What is it?"  I said, looking hard at the rather tempting brown meat
with its white fat.

"Velly nice," he said.  "Got pep' salt.  Velly good."

"Yes," I said; "but is it good?  I mean something I should like to eat?"

"Yes; loast lit' piggee; velly nice."

He was quite right--it was; and after I had finished I went forward to
see if I could get something to drink.  Jecks was inspecting the big
earthen vessel with a tin baler, and I appealed to him.

"How is the water?"  I said.

"Well, sir, yer can't say quite well thankye, 'cause it arn't right
colour yet, and it's got a sort o' fishing-boat flavour in it, as puts
yer in mind o' Yarmouth market at herring time, but it ain't so
pea-soupy as it were, and it might be worse.  Try a tot, sir?"

"Yes," I said; "I'm so thirsty, I must have a drop."

He dipped the baler in carefully, and brought it out dripping.

"Has anybody else drunk any?"  I said.

"Oh yes, sir, all on us; and I says to you as I says to them, you shut
your eyes, sir, and think you've been eating bloaters, or codfish, or
fried sole.  Then tip it down quick, and you'll says it's lovely."

"Ugh!"  I ejaculated, as I looked down into the baler, "why, it looks
like a dose of rhubarb."

"Well, it do, sir, a little; but you're a spyling of it a deal by
looking at it first.  You shut your eyes, sir, as I said; me and my
mates thought as it's good strong water with a deal o' what some people
calls nootriment in it."

"None for me, thank you," I said, handing back the tin.

"Bring me some water, Mr Herrick, when you've done," said Mr Brooke
from where he sat holding the tiller.

"Yes, sir," I said; and, holding the baler to my lips, I took a hearty,
hasty draught, for it was cool and refreshing to my dry mouth and
throat, and, that done, I refilled the baler and took it aft.

"Humph! rather muddy, Herrick," said Mr Brooke, smiling; "but one can't
carry a filter about at a time like this."

He tossed off the water without hesitation, gave one of the men the tin
to take back, and then altered the course of the boat a little, so as to
hug the shore.

"We must not let the pirates suspect that we are following," he said.

"What are we going to do, Mr Brooke?"  I said.

"You should never question your commanding-officer about his strategy,"
he replied, with a smile; and I was about to apologise, but he went on,
"There's only one thing to do, my lad, keep them in sight, and I hope
that at any time the _Teaser_ may appear.  When she does, she will in
all probability run by those junks without suspecting their nature, then
we come in and let them know the truth."

"But suppose the _Teaser_ does not come into sight?"

"Then our task is clear enough.  We must hang on to the track of the
junks till we see where they go.  Depend upon it, they have two or three
rendezvous."

"Think they have telescopes on board?"  I said.

"It is extremely doubtful; and if we keep Ching always well in sight, I
don't suppose they will notice us.  They will take us for a
fishing-boat, that's all."

By this time the sun was pouring down his beams with scorching violence,
and we were glad to give up the tiller to one of the men, and get into
the shelter of the cabin, just beyond which we found that Ching was busy
at work plucking one of the geese.

"Why are you doing that?"  I asked.

"Velly good to loast."

"But we've got no fire."

"Go 'shore, make fi', loast all, and come back on board."

"Yes, it will be a good addition to our stock of provisions, Herrick,"
said Mr Brooke, smiling.  "Your friend Ching is going to turn out a
benefactor after all."


CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

JACK ASHORE.

All was quiet on the junks, not a man being visible as we sailed out of
the river and along the south shore of the estuary; and now, after a
long examination, Mr Brooke declared that there couldn't be a doubt as
to their being the ones we had seen up the branch river when we were in
the trap.

"The rig is too heavy for ordinary traders, Herrick," he said; and he
pointed out several peculiarities which I should not have noticed.

Ching had been watching us attentively, and Mr Brooke, who evidently
wanted to make up now for his harsh treatment of the interpreter, turned
to him quietly--

"Well, what do you say about it, Ching?"

The interpreter smiled.

"Ching quite su'e," he replied.  "Seen velly many pilate come into liver
by fancee shop.  Ching know d'leckly.  Velly big mast, velly big sail,
go so velly fast catchee allee ship.  You go waitee all dalk, burn all
up."

"What! set fire to them?"

"Yes; velly easy.  All asleep, no keepee watch like Queen ship.  No
light.  Cleep velly close up top side, big wind blow; make lit' fire
both junk and come away.  Allee 'light velly soon, and make big burn."

"What! and roast the wretches on board to death?"

"Some," said Ching, with a pleasant smile.  "Makee squeak, and cly `Oh!
oh!' and burn all 'way like fi'wo'k.  Look velly nice when it dalk."

"How horrid!"  I cried.

"Not all bu'n up," said Ching; "lot jump ove'board and be dlown."

"Ching, you're a cruel wretch," I cried, as Mr Brooke looked at the man
in utter disgust.

"No; Ching velly glad see pilate bu'n up and dlown.  Dleadful bad man,
bu'n ship junk, chop off head.  Kill hundleds poo' good nicee people.
Pilate velly hollid man.  Don't want pilate at all."

"No, we don't want them at all," said Mr Brooke, who seemed to be
studying the Chinaman's utter indifference to the destruction of human
life; "there's no room for them in the world, but that's not our way of
doing business.  Do you understand what I mean?"

"Yes, Ching understand, know.  Ching can't talk velly quick Inglis, but
hear evelyting."

"That's right.  Well, my good fellow, that wouldn't be English.  We kill
men in fair fight, or take them prisoners.  We couldn't go and burn the
wretches up like that."

Ching shook his head.

"All velly funnee," he said.  "Shoot big gun and make big hole in junk;
knockee all man into bit; makee big junk sink and allee men dlown."

"Yes," said Mr Brooke, wrinkling up his forehead.

"Why not make lit' fire and bu'n junk, killee allee same?"

"He has me there, Herrick," said Mr Brooke.

"Takee plisoner to mandalin.  Mandalin man put on heavy chain, kick flow
in boat, put in plison, no give to eat, and then choppee off allee head.
Makee hurt gleat deal mo'.  Velly solly for plisoner.  Bette' make big
fi' and bu'n allee now."

Mr Brooke smiled and looked at me, and I laughed.

"We'd better change the subject, Herrick," he said.  "I'm afraid there
is not much difference in the cruelty of the act."

"No, sir," I said, giving one of my ears a rub.  "But it is puzzling."

"Yes, my lad; and I suppose we should have no hesitation in shelling and
burning a pirates' nest."

"But we couldn't steal up and set fire to their junks in the dark, sir?"

"No, my lad, that wouldn't be ordinary warfare.  Well, we had better run
into one of these little creeks, and land," he continued, as he turned
to inspect the low, swampy shore.  "Plenty of hiding-places there, where
we can lie and watch the junks, and wait for the _Teaser_ to show."

"Velly good place," said Ching, pointing to where there was a patch of
low, scrubby woodland, on either side of which stretched out what seemed
to be rice fields, extending to the hills which backed the plain.
"Plenty wood makee fire--loast goose."

I saw a knowing look run round from man to man.

"But the pirates would see our fire," I said.

"Yes, see fi'; tink allee fish man catch cookee fish."

"Yes, you're right, Ching.  It will help to disarm any doubts.  They
will never think the _Teaser's_ men are ashore lighting a fire;" and,
altering our course a little, he ran the boat in shore and up a creek,
where we landed, made fast the boat under some low scrubby trees, and in
a very short time after a couple of men were placed where they could
watch the junks and give notice of any movement.  The others quickly
collected a quantity of drift-wood, and made a good fire, Ching tucking
up his sleeves and superintending, while Mr Brooke and I went out on
the other side of the little wood, and satisfied ourselves that there
was no sign of human habitation on this side of the river, the city
lying far away on the other.

When we came back, Ching was up to the elbows in shore mud, and we found
by him a couple of our geese and a couple of ducks turned into
dirt-puddings.  In other words, he had cut off their heads, necks, and
feet, and then cased them thickly with the soft, unctuous clay from the
foot of the bank; and directly we came he raked away some of the burning
embers, placed the clay lumps on the earth, and raked back all the
glowing ashes before piling more wood over the hissing masses.

"Velly soon cook nicee," he said, smiling; and then he went to the
waterside to get rid of the clay with which he was besmirched.

Mr Brooke walked to the sentinels, and for want of something else to do
I stood pitching pieces of drift-wood on to the fire, for the most part
shattered fragments of bamboo, many of extraordinary thickness, and all
of which blazed readily and sent out a great heat.

"Makes a bit of a change, Mr Herrick, sir," said Jecks, as the men off
duty lay about smoking their pipes, and watching the fire with eyes full
of expectation.

"Yes; rather different to being on shipboard, Jecks," I said.

"Ay, 'tis, sir.  More room to stretch your legs, and no fear o' hitting
your head agin a beam or your elber agin a bulkhead.  Puts me in mind o'
going a-gipsying a long time ago."

"`In the days when we went gipsying, a long time ago,'" chorussed the
others musically.

"Steady there," I said.  "Silence."

"Beg pardon, sir," said one of the men; and Tom Jecks chuckled.  "But it
do, sir," he said.  "I once had a night on one o' the Suffolk heaths
with the gipsies; I was a boy then, and we had hare for supper--two
hares, and they was cooked just like that, made into clay balls without
skinning on 'em first."

"But I thought they always skinned hares," I said, "because the fur was
useful."

"So it is, sir; but there was gamekeepers in that neighbourhood, and if
they'd found the gipsies with those skins, they'd have asked 'em where
the hares come from, and that might have been unpleasant."

"Poached, eh?"

"I didn't ask no questions, sir.  And when the hares was done, they
rolled the red-hot clay out, gave it a tap, and it cracked from end to
end, an' come off like a shell with the skin on it, and leaving the
hares all smoking hot.  I never ate anything so good before in my life."

"Yah!  These here geese 'll be a sight better, Tommy," said one of the
men.  "I want to see 'em done."

"And all I'm skeart about," said another, "is that the _Teaser_ 'll come
back 'fore we've picked the bones."

I walked slowly away to join Mr Brooke, for the men's words set me
thinking about the gunboat, and the way in which she had sailed and left
us among these people.  But I felt that there must have been good cause
for it, or Captain Thwaites would never have gone off so suddenly.

"Gone in chase of some of the scoundrels," I thought; and then I began
to think about Mr Reardon and Barkins and Smith.  "Poor old Tanner," I
said to myself, "he wouldn't have been so disagreeable if it had not
been for old Smith.  Tanner felt ashamed of it all the time.  But what a
game for them to be plotting to get me into difficulties, and then find
that I was picked out for this expedition!  I wish they were both here."

The Committee appointed to consider on and report what measures, &c.
made the following report.

_To the American Convention for promoting the Abolition of Slavery,
&c._
The Committee appointed "to consider of and report what measures are
necessary to be taken to promote the Abolition of the Domestic
Slave Trade, and to protect free persons of color from being
kidnapped, and whether any regulations might be adopted to prevent
their being carried off in steam boats, stages, and coasting vessels,"
Report, that although in their opinion the intimate connexion
existing between the Domestic Slave Trade and the system of slavery
generally, precludes the expectation of applying a very efficient
check to the one, except by a reduction of the other, yet they
indulge the hope that the united influence of the several Abolition
and Anti-Slavery Societies throughout the Union, directed to
memorializing Congress, might procure some wholesome restraint upon
a traffick fraught with such aggravated evil, and productive of
such complicated misery.

In relation to the other subject submitted to them, viz.

"the protection of free persons of color against kidnappers," the Committee
are of opinion that the existing laws appear to be amply sufficient,
if properly executed.

They have, therefore, no other measures to recommend than the less
obtrusive, but persevering exertions, of the several associations
now formed, and which may be hereafter instituted, in the different
sections of our country.

On behalf of the Committee,
DAVID SCHOLFIELD, _Chairman_.[15]

_To the Abolition, Manumission, and Anti-Slavery Societies in the
United States of America._ 
FELLOW LABORERS.

--In reviewing the labors of the several Anti-Slavery Societies in the
United States, there is much to cheer and gratify us.

In looking over the different sections of our extended country, we
find the cause of truth and humanity has slowly, but regularly
advanced, in the minds of our fellow citizens generally.

And we think nothing remains but perseverance in presenting the subject
of slavery in its native deformity and its hideous aspect, to convince
its advocates of their error, and to overcome all the opposition which
can be arrayed against us.
We are satisfied that to the perseverance of its advocates alone, we are
indebted in a considerable degree for the change of opinion in
the Northern, Middle, and some of the Western States:
and we sincerely hope that a similar change will be ultimately made
in the southern sections of our county.

Let us never relax in our exertions to promote the emancipation, and
meliorate the condition of slaves, till every human being in these
United States shall equally enjoy, all the blessings of our free
Institutions.

How can we feel apathy or indifference while we can almost see from
the windows of the room in which we are now deliberating, a receptacle
for slaves, in which they are thrust, manacled and bound, all ready
to ship by their avaricious owner in the first vessel whose master
or owners are as hard hearted and unprincipled as himself!

Yes!

A dungeon, the horrors of which has called forth deep emotions of
regret from all who are permitted to see the misery and wretchedness
of its inmates, and particularly the tears and great agitation of
a benevolent aged stranger, who, in visiting this country, which
has always professed "That all men are by nature, and of right ought
to be free," was surprised and shocked to find in the precincts of
one of the most professedly enlightened and patriotic cities in the
Union, a storehouse of human flesh!

Slavery in whatever point of light considered, is a revolting
subject, repugnant to the best feelings of our nature, as inconsistent
with the rights and happiness of man.

We therefore, urge the respective Societies to renewed exertions, in
behalf of our colored population, and to petition Congress to abolish
Slavery in the District of Columbia, and also to prevent its further
extension in the territories of the United States.

Deeply injured as they have been by the whites, the colored people
certainly claim from us some degree of retributive justice; we
would, therefore, at this time particularly and earnestly recommend
to the renewed attention of all the Abolition, Manumission and
Anti-Slavery Societies in this country, the all-important subject
of giving the colored children literary instruction, and placing
them as apprentices to useful trades.

For, unquestionably, the most efficient means of promoting the moral
improvement of this degraded portion of the human family is the
institution of schools.

And it must be obvious to every thinking mind, that a portion of
education will be absolutely necessary to prepare the slave for the
enjoyment of freedom; and such has been the happy influence of it
on the scholars in the New York African Free School, that the
Trustees in that city, state, that no scholar who has been regularly
educated in their school, has ever been convicted of crime in any
of their courts of justice.

We have no doubt that if similar means were used in other places,
the like happy result would be obtained.

And it is equally certain, that facts like these do more to obliterate
idle prejudice than all abstract reasoning on the subject.

The Convention have been highly pleased at this time by the exhibition
of some handsome specimens of the skill and talent of some of the
boys in the African school under the charge of _Charles C.

Andrews_, in New York; creditable alike to the Teacher and the scholar.
For a more particular description of these articles, we refer to page 20
of the minutes of this Convention.

We again call your attention to the following extract from our Address
last year, particularly applicable to the present subject.

"As an incipient step to the Abolition of Slavery, we earnestly
recommend, that immediate application be made to the Legislatures of
States where Slavery exists, to prohibit the sale of slaves out of the
state. The traffic which is thus carried on from state to state, is
fruitful of evil consequences, not only depraving the
minds of those engaged in it, but producing the most cruel separation
of near connexions, and depriving its victims of almost every
incentive to conjugal fidelity or correctness of conduct.

Perhaps next in importance in meliorating the condition of slaves, is the
adoption of regulations for their religious instruction, and the
education of their children."
"And while the members of the several Societies are laboring in the
good work of universal emancipation, the Convention would particularly
urge them to use all suitable endeavours, mildly yet earnestly, to
prevail upon slave holders to consider the injustice and impolicy
of tolerating Slavery; and prevail, if possible, upon such individuals,
to fall into some plan for its gradual and entire abolition in our
otherwise free and favoured country."

We conclude with exhorting all those who are engaged with us in this
important cause, to persevere, with the hope and confidence, that although
our progress may be apparently slow, and our prospects sometimes
appear discouraging, conformably to the dispensations of a Gracious
Providence, truth and justice must, and will ultimately prevail.

All of which is respectfully submitted.

EDMUND HAVILAND, _Chairman_.[16]

_To the Manumission, Anti-Slavery Societies, &c, throughout the United
States._
FELLOW CITIZENS,--The American Convention for promoting the Abolition
of Slavery, &c. now sitting at Washington, in the District of
Columbia, having seriously taken into consideration the state of
slavery in the said district, and in the United States generally,
and viewed what furtherance the cause of freedom has received for
some time past, are decidedly of opinion, that increasing efforts
are at this time, emphatically called for, on the part of those who
really think that "all men are created free and equal."

Memorial after memorial has been presented to Congress, but as
yet they have produced but little visible effect. Small progress
has been made towards abolishing slavery at the seat of our National
Government.

It has been a subject of much reflection what measures would be most likely
to accomplish the grand object of our labours; and we would
suggest whether greater success would not be likely to crown our
efforts, by more widely disseminating a knowledge of the objects
and principles of the different Anti-Slavery Societies throughout
the Union.

The subject has been referred at this session of our Acting Committee,
but our funds are too limited to act as extensively as the great
importance of the object requires.

It is believed that a very large portion of the citizens of the
United States are favorable to the emancipation of the people of
colour, if it could be done upon legitimate principles, without
infringing upon the rights of individuals or endangering the safety
of the community; and if the dissemination of our principles was
more generally attended to, co-adjuting societies would doubtless
increase, and this Convention eventually become a body so numerous
and respectable, that the National Government would not withhold
its attention.

The proper education of the African race should form a prominent feature
in all our efforts.

It is with much gratification we are enabled to state that the address
from New York, mentions a continued advancement in the literary
improvement of the coloured children, and that from Philadelphia holds
out the prospect of the establishment of a school for teaching
them the higher branches of an English education and thus enabling
them to act as teachers of their own isolated race.

To break up the fallow ground, to sow the seed, and rear the tender
plants of virtue in this degraded people, should be the wish of
every heart and the effort of every hand.

Let us establish schools, instruct the children, and show to the world
that the mind of the African is not a soil where genius sickens
and every virtue dies.

When we reflect that man is a being whose own interest generally forms
the alpha and omega, beginning and end of life, a centre around
which every passion and affection of his heart revolves, a boundary
beyond which he seldom ventures, we are rather encouraged at the
progress of our cause, than deterred by the magnitude of the work
to be yet accomplished.

Have not thousands been liberated, and the condition of tens of thousands
improved?
We believe there is a secret fire enkindled in the public bosom
which will never be extinguished, until liberty be given to the
captive and freedom to the oppressed.

But this glorious principle needs to be encouraged and kept alive
by the increasing efforts of its friends, to show to the world that
they themselves are not weary of well-doing.

Prejudices imbibed in youth and strengthened by age are to be broken
down, and many an objection to be overcome.

In conclusion we would remark that although much censure has been cast
upon us, we are renewedly convinced of the goodness and the justice of
our cause.

Let us exhort you to a patient continuance in your labours; and
"the bread cast upon the waters, shall be found after many days

."[17]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from
the Abolition Societies, 1794, pp. 18-21

.

[2] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1795, pp. 26-31.

[3] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1796, pp. 23-25.

[4] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1796, p. 28.

[5] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1797, pp. 22-25.

[6] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from
the Abolition Societies, 1798, pp. 15-20

.

[7] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from
the Abolition Societies, 1800, pp. 20-23

.

[8] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from
the Abolition Societies, 1801, pp. 42-46

.

[9] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1803, pp. 29-34.

[10] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1804, pp. 35-39.

[11] Minutes of Proceedings of Tenth American Convention for the Abolition
of Slavery, 1805, pp. 26-35.

[12] Minutes of the Proceedings of the Twelfth American Convention
for promoting the Abolition of Slavery and improving the condition
of the African Race Assembled at Philadelphia, 1809, pp. 26-31

.

[13] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1812, pp. 25-28.

[14] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1827, pp. 20-22.

[15] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from
the Abolition Societies, 1827, pp. 22-25

.

[16] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from the
Abolition Societies, 1828, pp. 28-30.

[17] Minutes of the Proceedings of a Convention of Delegates from
the Abolition Societies, 1829, pp. 19-21.

CORRESPONDENCE

245 WEST 139TH ST., NEW YORK CITY, January 11, 1920.

CARTER G. WOODSON, Ph.D., Editor, THE JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY, Washington,
D. C.

_Dear Sir_:

In the January, 1920, number of _The Journal of Negro History_ there is
an affidavit of Kelly Miller and Whitefield McKinlay to the effect that
Mr. Cardoza, at one time secretary of State for South Carolina, stated
to them that a number of colored men met and appointed a committee which
was sent to Washington to get the advice of Charles Sumner and
Thaddeus Stevens concerning the formation of the political organization
for the newly enfranchised Negro shortly after the adoption of the
14th Amendment, pains being taken to keep the plans from both the
native whites and the so-called carpet-baggers from the North, and
that both Mr.

Sumner and Mr. Stevens advised the committee to tender the leadership
to native whites of the master class of conservative views, but that
the plan was frustrated because they were unable to secure the consent
of desired representatives of the former class to assume the proffered
leadership.

I accept the fact that Mr. Cardoza made the statement as sworn to by
Prof. Miller and Mr. McKinlay, but I must state with all of the emphasis
that is possible that it is inconceivable to me how Mr.
Sumner or Mr. Stevens could give such advice that would give the leadership
of the newly enfranchised Negroes to native whites of the master class,
however conservative. All rebels were alike to Mr.
Sumner and Mr. Stevens.

No reference to conservative men of the master class will be found in
the speeches or writings of either one.

I have read the speeches of both men on the Reconstruction measures as
published in the _Congressional Globe_ and I have failed to find one
word uttered by either one that would lead me to believe that they
would give the advice as stated in the affidavit.

Both men held radical views as to reconstruction plans for the rebel
States and were chiefly instrumental in having the Reconstruction Acts
and the 14th Amendment passed. If it had not been for their untiring and
persistent efforts, especially of Mr.

Stevens, who practically dominated the House of Representatives from
1861 to the date of his death, I venture the assertion that the Reconstruction
Acts and the 14th Amendment as passed could not have been passed.

It is possible that there were Negroes in South Carolina who had
never felt the lash of the master class who were willing to curry
favor with that class, regardless of the gratitude due the Northern
men, white and colored, but I do not believe that the Northern
Negroes (R.

B.
Elliott, Judge Wright, Judge Whipper, Henry W. Purvis, S. A. Swails,
Dr. B. A. Bosemon, R. H. Gleaves, B. F. Randolph and others) would have
deserted their Northern brethren, nor do I believe that the great
men of the Republican Party (Conkling, Fessenden, Wade, Morton,
Weed, Seward, Stanton, Chase, Boutwell, Washburne, Blaine, Sherman,
Schurz, Phelps, Morrill, Bingham, Henry Wilson, Hoar and others)
would have stood for the consummation of such a plan.

I am sure, from what I knew of the Negroes of South Carolina, that
they would have rebelled against the plan.

If any committee went on to Washington it is possible that the
members suggested the plan to Mr.

Sumner and Mr.
Stevens, but for them to advise along that line, a thousand times,
no.

Everything done by Mr. Sumner and Mr.

Stevens was done openly and above board and if they had given the advice
as stated in the affidavit they would have had the courage of their
convictions to have stated so publicly. It was not in their nature
to play the cards from under the table.

Mr.

Stevens, who was the author of the Reconstruction Act and most of
the Reconstruction measures, ranking next to Alexander Hamilton as
a constructive statesman, had embodied in the Act an oath that would
have precluded men of the former master class, radical or conservative,
from having anything to do with the Reconstruction legislation for
the former rebel States.

They could not register; therefore, they could not vote nor hold
office until all of the provisions of the Reconstruction Acts,
including the ratification of the 14th Amendment, were complied
with, and their political disabilities removed.

Practically all of the "cracker" element or "poor buckra" as designated
by the Negroes could vote but the statement does not include that
element.

The Republican Party was organized in South Carolina in July, 1867,
and Northern men, white and colored, took an active part in the
deliberations, R.

H. Gleaves, a Northern Negro, being the President of the convention.

The Constitutional Convention met in Charleston, January 14, 1868, the
Northern men practically dominating the proceedings, and before
adjournment a State ticket was nominated.

R. K. Scott, a Northern white man, was nominated for Governor.

There were other white men (Northern) on the ticket. The Governor and
Lieutenant-Governor were elected for two years and the other State
officers for four years.

This would indicate that the Northern men held the situation well
in hand.

The South Carolina legislature under the Constitution of 1865, refused
to ratify the proposed 14th Amendment on December 20, 1866.

This legislature was composed of Democrats, all of the master class,
conservative and radical, and in view of this it is incomprehensible
to me how intelligent Negroes could have thought of tendering the
leadership to any men of the master class.

The conditions were such that men of the master class could not have
accepted the leadership had they so desired after repudiating the
14th Amendment.

I have read Rhodes, Dunning, Burgess, Hart, Hollis, Pike, and
Schouler, on Reconstruction, also S.

W. McCall's _Biography of Thaddeus Stevens_, E. B. Callender's _Thaddeus
Stevens, the Commoner_, and E. L.

Pierce's _Memoirs and Letters of Charles Sumner_, and cannot find
anything that would indicate that either Mr.

Sumner or Mr.
Stevens would give the advice as stated in the affidavit.

When Mr.

Stevens introduced the proposed 14th Amendment it contained the
following section:

Section 3.

--Until July 4, 1870, all persons who voluntarily adhered to the
late insurrection, giving it aid and comfort, shall be excluded
from the right to vote for Representatives in Congress and for
Electors for President and Vice-President.

This section was defeated but relative to it Mr.

Stevens in a speech said:

"The 3rd section may encounter more difference here. Among the people I
believe it will be the most popular of all the provisions; it
prohibits rebels from voting for members of Congress and electors
of President until 1870.

My only objection to it is that it is too lenient.

I would be glad to see it extended to 1878, and to include all State and
municipal as well as national elections."
There are two things about the advice that seem incongruous. First that
intelligent Negroes would think that any men of the master class would
join hands with them, some of whom had probably been their slaves,
to govern the State. In the second place it is hard to believe that Sumner
and Stevens, men of brilliant legal minds, would give advice that
could not be carried out, even if practicable.

No man of the master class in South Carolina, however conservative,
would stand for being called a scalawag.

There were practically no Union men in South Carolina. There were
a few men who opposed secession at the time but when the ordinance
of secession was passed a man who did not go with the State was
considered a traitor.

South Carolina was not considered a safe place for a white man who was
opposed to secession after the ordinance was passed. This probably accounts
for the statement in the last part of the affidavit relative to the
frustration of the plans.

I regard the statement in reference to Messrs.
"We said a rope, not a hawser," growled the man, hauling in the rope.
"Better shy a few anchors down too, you bladder-headed lubbers!"

"Now, say I want to speak to the captain," said Mr Brooke.

A showily-dressed Chinaman leaned over the side of the huge tower of a
poop, and smiled down on us.

"Are you the captain?" cried Mr Brooke, and Ching interpreted.

"Say he the captain," said Ching; "and you please walkee up top sidee
big junk."

"Yes, it will be better," cried Mr Brooke.  "Come with me, Herrick.
You too, Ching, of course.  There, keep her off a bit, Jecks, or you'll
have the boat swamped."

He seized the right moment, and began to climb up the junk's side.  I
followed, and Ching was close at my heels, the clumsy vessel giving
plenty of foothold; and we soon stood upon the deck, where some dozen or
so Chinese sailors pointed aft to where the captain stood, bowing and
smiling.

We had a rough set of bamboo steps to mount to the clumsy poop-deck, and
there found the captain and half-a-dozen more of his men waiting.

"Now, Ching, forward," I said.  But he hung back and looked strange.

"Don't be so jolly modest," I whispered; "we can't get on without you to
interpret."

At that moment there came a loud hail from our boat, invisible to us
from where we stood, and there was a tremendous splash.

"What's the matter?" cried Mr Brooke, making for the side; but in an
instant the attitude of the Chinaman changed.  One moment the captain
was smiling at us smoothly; the next there was an ugly, look in his
eyes, as he shouted something to his men, and, thrusting one hand into
his long blue coat, he made a quick movement to stop Mr Brooke from
going to the side.

The various incidents took place so quickly that they almost seemed to
be simultaneous.  One moment all was peace; the next it was all war, and
the warnings I heard came together.

"Pilate! pilate!" shouted Ching.

"Look out for yourself, my lad!  Over with you!" roared Mr Brooke, as I
saw him dash at the Chinese captain, and, with his left fist extended,
leap at the scoundrel, sending him rolling over on the deck.

"Now!" cried Mr Brooke again, "jump!"

"Jlump! jlump!" yelled Ching; and with a bound I was on the great carven
gangway, just avoiding three men who made a rush for me, and the next
moment I had leaped right away from the tower-like stern of the huge
junk, and appeared to be going down and down for long enough through the
glowing air before striking the water with a heavy splash, and
continuing my descent right into the darkness, from which it seemed to
me that I should never be able to rise again.

At last my head popped out of the dark thundering water, and, blinking
my eyes as I struck out, I was saluted with a savage yelling; the water
splashed about me, and I heard shots; but for a few moments, as I looked
excitedly round, I did not realise that I was being pelted with pieces
of chain, and fired at as a mark for bullets.

But in those brief moments I saw what I wanted: Mr Brook and Ching safe
and swimming towards me, and the boat not many yards behind them, with
two of our men at the oars, and the others opening fire upon the people
who crowded the side of the junk, and yelled at us and uttered the most
savage throats.

"This way, Herrick, my lad," panted Mr Brooke, as he reached me.  "Ah!
did that hit you?"

"No, sir, only splashed up the water; I'm all right!"  I cried; "the
bullet didn't touch."

"Swim boat! swim boat!" cried Ching excitedly.

But our danger was not from the water but the sharp fire which the
Chinese kept up now, fortunately without killing any of us.  Then the
boat glided between us and the junk, ready hands were outstretched from
the side, and I was hauled in by Tom Jecks, who then reached over and
grasped Ching by the pigtail.

"No, no touchee tow-chang!" roared the poor fellow.

"All right; then both hands and in with you."

"Lay hold of the sheet, Jecks!" cried Mr Brooke, who sprang over the
thwart to the tiller, rammed it down, and the sail began to fill, but
only slowly, for the towering junk acted as a lee, and all the time the
men yelled, pelted, and fired at us.

"Look out, my lads; give it to them now.  Make fast the sheet, Jecks,
and get your rifle.  Ten pounds to the man who brings down the captain!"
roared Mr Brooke.  "Here, Herrick, my gun!" he cried; and, handing it
to him, I seized mine, thrust in two wet cartridges with my wet fingers,
and, doubting whether they would go off, I took aim at a man on the
poop, who was holding a pot to which another was applying a light.

The next minute the pot was in a blaze, and the man raised it above his
head to hurl it right upon us, but it dropped straight down into the sea
close to the junk, and the man staggered away with his hands to his
face, into which he must have received a good deal of the charge of
duck-shot with which my piece was charged.

Excited by my success, I fired the second barrel at a man who was
leaning over the bulwarks, taking aim at us with his great clumsy
matchlock, and his shot did not hit any one, for the man dropped his
piece overboard and shrank away.

As I charged again, I could hear and see that our lads were firing away
as rapidly as they could up at the crowded bulwarks, while Tom Jecks was
making his piece bear upon the deck of the high poop whenever he could
get a shot at the captain; and now, too, Mr Brooke was firing off his
small-shot cartridges as rapidly as possible, the salt water not having
penetrated the well-wadded powder enclosed in the brass cases.

By this time we were fifty yards away from the junk, and gliding more
rapidly through the water, which was splashed up about us and the boat
hit again and again with a sharp rap by the slugs from the Chinamen's
matchlocks.

The men were returning the fire with good effect as we more than once
saw, and twice over one of the wretches who sought to hurl a blazing pot
of fire was brought down.

"They can't hurt us now," I thought, as I ceased firing, knowing that my
small-shot would be useless at the distance we now were, when I saw a
spark of light moving on the poop, and then sat paralysed by horror as I
grasped what was going to take place.  It was only a moment or two
before there was a great flash and a roar, with a puff of
sunset-reddened smoke, hiding the poop of the junk; for they had
depressed a big swivel gun to make it bear upon us, and then fired,
sending quite a storm of shot, stones, and broken pieces of iron
crashing through the roof of our little cabin, and tearing a great hole
in our sail.

"That's done it!" shouted Tom Jecks, giving the stock of his rifle a
heavy slap.

"You've hit him?" cried Mr Brooke.

"Yes, sir; I caught him as he stood by watching the cannon fired."

"Yes, that's right," cried Mr Brooke, shading his eyes and gazing hard
at the scene on the high poop, where, in the last rays of the setting
sun, we could see men holding up their captain, who was distinctive from
his gay attire and lacquered hat, which now hung forward as the
scoundrel's head drooped upon his breast.

"Cease firing!" said Mr Brooke, for we were a hundred yards away now,
and rapidly increasing the distance.  "We can do no more good.  Thank
you, Jecks.  Now then, who is hurt?"

There was no reply.

"What, no one?" cried Mr Brooke.

"Yes, sir: why don't you speak out, Tom Jecks?  You got it, didn't you?"

"Well, so did you; but I arn't going to growl."

"More arn't I, messmate.  It's nothing much, sir."

"Let me see," said Mr Brooke, as we sailed steadily away, while the
junk still remained stationary; and, after a rapid examination, he
plugged and bound a wound in the man's shoulder, and performed a similar
operation upon Tom Jeck's hind-leg, as he called it, a bullet or slug
having gone right through the calf.

I could not help admiring the calm stolidity with which the two men bore
what must have been a painful operation, for neither flinched, but sat
in turn gazing at his messmate, as much as to say, "That's the way to
take it, my lad; look at me."

This done, Mr Brooke turned his attention to the wound received by the
boat, where the charge from the swivel gun had gone crashing through the
top of the cabin and out at the side.  It was a gaping wound in the
slight planking of the boat, but the shot had torn their way out some
distance above the water-line, so that unless very rough weather came on
there was no danger, and we had other and more serious business now to
take up our attention.

For Ching pointed out to us a certain amount of bustle on board the
junk, which was explained by a puff of smoke and a roar, as
simultaneously the water was ploughed up close to our stern.

"Not clever at their gun drill," said Mr Brooke coolly, as he took the
helm himself now, and sent the boat dancing along over the waves, so as
to keep her endwise to the junk, and present a smaller object for the
pirate's aim.

"That's bad management under some circumstances, Herrick," he said,
smiling.  "It's giving an enemy the chance of raking us from stern to
stem, but I don't believe they can hit us.--I thought not."

He said this smiling, as the water was churned up again by another shot,
but several yards away upon our right.

Another shot and another followed without result, and by this time we
were getting well out of range of the swivel gun, a poor, roughly-made
piece, and our distance was being rapidly increased.

"Going away!" said Ching, as we saw the great mat-sails of the junk
fill.

"Or to come in chase--which?" said Mr Brooke quietly.  "It does not
matter," he added; "we shall soon have darkness again, and I think we
shall be too nimble for them then."

"Beg pardon, sir," said Tom Jecks.

"Yes, what is it?  Your wound painful?"

"Tidy, sir; but that warn't it.  I was only going to say, look yonder."

He pointed right away east, and, as we followed his finger with our
eyes, they lit upon a sight which would have even made me, inexperienced
as I was, think it was time to seek the shelter of some port.  And that
something unusual was going to happen, I knew directly from Mr Brooke's
way of standing up to shelter his eyes, and then, after gazing for some
time in one direction, he turned in that of the great Chinese port we
had so lately left.


CHAPTER FORTY.

ANOTHER ENEMY.

For as I looked towards the horizon away to the east, a curious lurid
glow spread upward half-way to the zenith, and for the moment I thought
that in a short time we should see the full-moon come slowly up out of
the sea.  But a few moments' reflection told me that we were long past
the full-moon time, and that it would be the last quarter late on in the
night.  The sea, too, began to wear a singular aspect, and great frothy
clouds were gathering rapidly in the south.  And even as I looked there
was a peculiar moaning sigh, as if a great wind were passing over us at
a great height, though the sea was only just pleasantly rippled, and a
gentle breeze was sweeping us rapidly along and away from the great
junk, which now seemed hazy and distant, while those we had watched so
long were quite out of sight.

"Feel cold?" said Mr Brooke quietly.  "I ought to have told you to take
off and wring out your clothes."

"Cold, sir!"  I said wonderingly.  "I hadn't thought about it; I was so
excited."

"Yes; we had a narrow escape, my lad.  It is a lesson in being careful
with these cunning, treacherous wretches.  You made sure it was a
trader, Ching?"

"Ching neve' quite su'e--only think so," was the reply, accompanied by a
peculiar questioning look, and followed by a glance over his right
shoulder at the sky.

"No, I suppose not.  I ought to have been more careful.  They threw
something down at the boat as soon as we had mounted: did they not,
Jecks?"

"Yes, sir; I see it coming.  Great pieces of ballast iron, as it took
two on 'em to heave up over the bulwarks.  I just had time to give the
boat a shove with the hitcher when down it come.  Gone through the
bottom like paper, if I hadn't.  But beg pardon, sir, arn't we going to
have a storm?"

"Yes," said Mr Brooke quietly; "I am running for the river, if I can
make it.  If not, for that creek we were in last night.  Take the
tiller, Mr Herrick," he said, and he went forward.

"Going blow wind velly high.  Gleat wave and knock houses down," said
Ching uneasily.

"Yes, my lad; we're going to have what the Jay-pans calls a tycoon."

"No, no, Tom Jecks," I said, smiling.

"You may laugh, sir, but that's so.  I've sailed in these here waters
afore and been in one.  Had to race afore it with bare poles and holding
on to the belaying-pins.  Tycoons they call 'em, don't they, Mr Ching?"

"Gleat blow storm," said Ching, nodding.  "Hullicane."

"There you are, sir," said Jecks.  "Hurricanes or tycoons."

"Typhoons," I said.

"Yes, sir, that's it, on'y you pernounces it different to me.  Don't
make no difference in the strength on 'em," he continued testily, for
his wound was evidently painful, "whether you spells it with a kay or a
phoo.  Why, I seed big vessels arterwards, as had been blowed a quarter
of a mile inland, where they could never be got off again."

"Yes, I've heard of that sort of thing," I said.  "They ride in on a
great wave and are left behind."

"Lookye here, sir," whispered the coxswain, who seemed to ignore his
wound; "I don't want to show no white feathers, nor to holler afore I'm
hurt, but if I was you, I should ask Mr Brooke to run straight for the
nearest shore--say one o' them islands there, afore the storm comes; you
arn't got no idea what one o' them tycoons is like.  As for this boat,
why, she'll be like a bit o' straw in a gale, and I don't want to go to
the bottom until I've seed you made a skipper; and besides, we've got
lots more waspses' nests to take, beside polishing off those three
junks--that is, if they're left to polish when the storm's done."

"Stand up, Mr Herrick," cried the lieutenant.  "Look yonder, due north.
What do you see?"

I held the tiller between my knees as I stood up and gazed in the
required direction, but could see nothing for a few minutes in the dusk.

"Can't you see?"

"Yes, sir, now.  Small round black cloud."

"Yes, of smoke."

"Ay, ay, sir, I see it," said one of the sailors.  "Hooray! it's the
_Teaser_ with the wind blowing hard astern and carrying the smoke of her
funnel right over her and ahead."

"The _Teaser_ or some other steamer; and she's running fast for harbour.
Let's see: those are the Black Gull Islands to port there.  Were you
with us when the cutter's crew landed, Jecks?"

"Yes, sir; I rowed stroke-oar, sir."

"To be sure.  The second one from the north had the highest ground."

"Yes, sir; but you couldn't land for the surf and the shark-fin rocks,
if you remember."

"Exactly; and we rowed along the south channel till we found a sheltered
sand-cove, where we beached the cutter, and then explored the island.
We must make for that channel, and try to reach it before the storm
comes down.  We could not get half-way to the river, and, thank heaven,
the _Teaset_ will soon be in safety."

"No, sir, you couldn't make no river to-night."

"It will be dark too soon."

"Not to-night, sir," said Jecks sturdily.

"Yes, man; there will be no moon."

"No, sir; but in less nor an hour's time the sea 'll be white as milk,
and all of a greeny glow, same as it is some still nights in port.
There won't be no difficulty, sir, about seeing."

"But you think it will be hard to make the channel?"

"I hope not, sir, but I'm afraid so; we can only try."

"Yes, we can only try," said Mr Brooke slowly, as he came and sat
beside me.  "And we must try, Herrick--our best.  For this is no night
to be out in almost an open boat."

"Then you think there is danger, sir?"  I said anxiously.

"No, Herrick," he replied, smiling; "sailors have no time to think of
danger.  They have enough to think about without that.  We must get in
the lee of that island to-night, and it the storm holds back, and the
little boat spins along like this, we ought to do it."

"And if it doesn't, sir?"

"If it doesn't?  Ah, well, we shall see.  Stand by, two of you, ready to
lower that sail at a moment's notice."

"Ay, ay, sir," was the ready reply as two of the men changed their
places; and just then I looked at Ching, to see that his face was lit up
by the reflection of the strange light on our right and behind, which
grew more striking, while away before us the land disappeared, and we
were gazing at a bank of clouds of an inky black.

The effect was very curious: behind us the dull coppery glow becoming
fainter minute by minute, as the darkness increased the blackness before
us; and one's instinct seemed to warn one to turn from the black
darkness to sail away towards the light.  Tom Jecks took the same idea,
and said, in an irritable whisper, exactly what I thought--

"Seems rum, sir, don't it, sir?--makes believe as that's the best way,
when all the time the wussest looking is the safest."

Just then, after a glance round, Mr Brooke uttered another warning to
the men to be ready, and settled himself down to the tiller.

"Sit fast, all of you; the hurricane may be down upon us at any moment
now."

I looked at him wonderingly, for it was painfully still, though the
darkness was growing intense, and the great junk seemed to have been
swallowed up by the clouds that hung low like a fog over the sea.

"There will be such a turmoil of the elements directly," continued Mr
Brooke in a low voice, but only to me, "that I don't suppose a word will
be heard."  Then aloud, "Look here, my lads; I shall try and run the
boat high upon the sands at the top of some breaker.  Then it will be
every man for himself.  Never mind the boat--that is sure to be
destroyed--but each man try to save his arms and ammunition; and if the
two wounded men are in difficulties, of course you will lend a hand.
Now then, one more order: The moment I say, `Down with the sail,' drag
it from the mast, and two oars are to be out on either side.  The wind
will catch them and send us along, and I want them to give a few dips to
get on the top of a roller to carry us in."

"Ay, ay, sir."

"That's all."

His words in that terrible stillness sounded to me as almost absurd, for
the sea was still calm, and save that sighing in the air of which I have
before spoken, there was no further sound; and at last I said to him--

"Do you really think we shall have a hurricane?"

"Look at the sky, my lad," he replied; "and take this as a lesson to one
who will have men's lives depending upon his knowledge and skill some
day.  If ever there were signs of an awful night in the Chinese seas, it
is now.  Hark at that!"

"Guns!  The _Teaser_!"  I exclaimed excitedly.

"Heaven's artillery that, my lad," he said solemnly.  Then in a whisper,
"Shake hands!  I'll help you all I can, Herrick, but heaven knows how we
shall be situated soon."

I felt a strange sensation of awe creep over me, as he gripped my hand
warmly, and then snatched his away, and sat up firm and rigid, turning
his head to the east as all now became suddenly black--so dark that I
could hardly see the men before me and the sail.  But still we glided
rapidly on over the long smooth rollers, on and on toward the islands,
which lay a short distance from the mainland.

"It will be all guess work," whispered Mr Brooke.  "I am keeping her
head as near as I can guess for the channel, but the breakers will soon
be our only guide."

Then came the heavy roar again, which I had taken for guns, but it did
not cease as before, when it sounded like a sudden explosion.  It was
now continuous, and rapidly increasing.

"Thunder?"  I asked in a low voice.

"Wind.  Tremendous.  It will be on us in five minutes."

But even then it seemed impossible, for we were still sailing swiftly
and gently along towards the channel between the islands, and the roar
like distant thunder or heavy guns had once more ceased.

"We shall get to the shore first after all," I whispered.

"No."

At that moment there was a sensation as of a hot puff of air behind us.
It literally struck my head just as if a great furnace door had been
opened, and the glow had shot out on to our necks.

"Here she comes," growled Tom Jecks; "and good luck to us."

And then, as if to carry out the idea of the opened furnace, it suddenly
grew lighter--a strange, weird, wan kind of light--and on either side,
and running away from us on to the land, the sea was in a wild froth as
if suddenly turned to an ocean of milk.

"Down with the sail!" shouted Mr Brooke, who had held on to the last
moment, so as to keep the boat as long as possible under his governance;
and quickly as disciplined men could obey the sail was lowered, and as
far as I could see they were in the act of stowing it along the side,
when it filled out with a loud report, and was snatched from their hands
and gone.

"Any one hurt?"

"No, sir," in chorus.

"Oars."

I heard the rattle of the two pairs being thrust out.  Next Mr Brooke's
words, yelled out by my ear--"sit fast!" and then there was a heavy
blow, heavy but soft and pressing, followed by the stinging on my neck
as of hundreds of tiny whips, and then we were rushing along over the
white sea, in the midst of a mass--I can call it nothing else--of spray,
deafened, stunned, feeling as if each moment I should be torn out of my
seat, and as if the boat itself were being swept along like lightning
over the sea, riding, not on heavy water, but on the spray.

Then all was one wild, confusing shriek and roar.  I was deafened;
something seemed to clutch me by the throat and try to strangle me; huge
soft hands grasped me by the body, and tugged and dragged at me, to tear
me from my hold; and then, two arms that were not imaginary, but solid
and real, went round me, and grasped the thwart on which I sat, holding
me down, while I felt a head resting on my lap.

I could see nothing but a strange, dull, whitish light when I managed to
hold my eyelids up for a moment, but nothing else was visible; and above
all--the deafening roar, the fearful buffeting and tearing at me--there
was one thing which mastered, and that was the sensation of being
stunned and utterly confused.  I was, as it were, a helpless nothing,
beaten and driven by the wind and spray, onward, onward, like a scrap of
chaff.  Somebody was clinging to me, partly to save himself, partly to
keep me from being dragged out of the boat; but whether Mr Brooke was
still near me, whether the men were before me, or whether there was any
more boat at all than that upon which I was seated, I did not know.  All
I knew was that I was there, and that I was safe, in spite of all the
attempts made by the typhoon to drag me out and sweep me away like a
leaf over the milky sea.

It cannot be described.  Every sense was numbed.  And if any lad who
reads this were to take the most terrible storm he ever witnessed,
square it, and then cube it, I do not believe that he would approach the
elemental disturbance through which we were being hurled.

There was a rocky shore in front of us, and another rocky island shore
to our left; and between these two shores lay the channel for which we
had tried to make.  But Mr Brooke's rule over the boat was at an end
the moment the storm was upon us, and, as far as I could ever learn
afterwards, no one thought of rocks, channel, saving his life, or being
drowned.  The storm struck us, and with its furious rush went all power
of planning or thinking.  Every nerve of the body was devoted to the
tasks of holding on and getting breath.

How long it lasted--that wild rush, riding on the spray, held as it were
by the wind--I don't know.  I tell you I could not think.  It went on
and on as things do in a horrible dream, till all at once something
happened.  I did not hear it, nor see it, hardly even felt it.  I only
know that something happened, and I was being strangled--choked, but in
another way.  The hands which grasped my throat to keep me from
breathing had, I believe, ceased to hold, and something hot and terrible
was rushing up my nostrils and down my throat, and I think I then made
some effort with my hands.  Then I was being dragged along through water
and over something soft, and all at once, though the deafening,
confusing noise went on, I was not being swept away, but lying still on
something hard.

I think that my senses left me entirely then for a few moments--not
more, for I was staring soon after at the dull light of white water
sweeping along a little way off, and breathing more freely as I
struggled hard to grasp what it all meant, for I did not know.  I saw
something dim pass me, and then come close and touch me, as if it sank
down by my side; and that happened again and again.

But it was all very dream-like and strange: the awful, overwhelming,
crushing sound of the wind seemed to press upon my brain so that I could
not for a long time think, only lie and try to breathe without catching
each inspiration in a jerky, spasmodic way.

I suppose hours must have passed, during which I stared through the
darkness at the dull whitish phosphorescent glow which appeared through
the gloom, and died out, and appeared and died out again and again,
passing like clouds faintly illumined in a ghastly way, and all mingled
with the confusion caused by that awful roar.  Then at last I began to
feel that the rush of wind and water was passing over me, and that I was
in some kind of shelter; and when I had once hit upon this, I had as it
were grasped a clue.  I knew that I was lying on stones, and saw that
rising above me was a mass of rock, which I knew by the touch, and this
stone was sheltering me from the wind and spray.

"We must have reached the shore safely, then," I said to myself, for my
head was getting clearer; "and--yes--no--I was not hurt.  We were all
saved, then."

At that point a terrible feeling of dread came over me.  I was safe, but
my companions?

The shock of this thought threw me back for a bit, but I was soon
struggling with the confusion again, and I recalled the fact that I had
felt some one touch me as he sank down by my side.

Arrived at this point, I turned a little to look, but all was perfectly
black.  I stretched out my hand and felt about.

I snatched it back with a cry of horror.  Yes, a cry of horror; for,
though I could not hear it, I felt it escape from my lips.  I had
touched something all wet and cold lying close beside me, and I felt
that it was one of my companions who had been cast up or dragged
ashore--dead.

Shivering violently, I shrank away, and stretched out my hand in the
other direction--my left hand now, with my arm numbed, and my shoulder
aching when I moved it, as if the joint had become stiffened and would
not work.

I touched somebody there--something cold and smooth and wet, and drew my
hand away again, when, as it glided over the sand, it touched something
else round and soft and long, and--yes--plaited.  It was a long tail.

"Ching!"  I ejaculated; and, gaining courage, I felt again in the
darkness, to find that it grew thinner.  I tried again in the other
direction, and once more touched the round wet object, which did not
seem so cold, and then the next moment a hand caught mine and held it.

I was right; it was Ching.  I knew him by his long nails.

Not alone!  I had a companion in the darkness, one who was nearly as
much stunned as I, for he moved no more, but lay holding on by my left
hand, and for a time I was content to listen to the savage roar of the
wind.  But at last, as my brain worked and I mastered the sensation of
horror, I began to feel about again with my right hand, till I touched
the same cold, wet object I had encountered before.

First, noble Frend, Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot Be
measur'd, or confin'd
Gonz. Whether this be, Or be not, I'le not sweare
Pro.

You doe yet taste Some subtleties o'th' Isle, that will nor let you
Beleeue things certaine: Wellcome, my friends all, But you, my brace
of Lords, were I so minded I heere could plucke his Highnesse
frowne vpon you And iustifie you Traitors: at this time I will tell no
tales

Seb.

The Diuell speakes in him:

Pro.

No:
For you (most wicked Sir) whom to call brother Would euen infect my
mouth, I do forgiue Thy rankest fault; all of them: and require
My Dukedome of thee, which, perforce I know Thou must restore 
Alo.

If thou beest Prospero Giue vs particulars of thy preseruation, How thou
hast met vs heere, whom three howres since Were wrackt vpon this shore?
where I haue lost (How sharp the point of this remembrance is) My
deere sonne Ferdinand
Pro. I am woe for't, Sir
Alo. Irreparable is the losse, and patience Saies, it is past her cure

Pro.

I rather thinke You haue not sought her helpe, of whose soft grace
For the like losse, I haue her soueraigne aid, And rest my selfe
content

Alo. You the like losse?

Pro. As great to me, as late, and supportable To make the deere losse,
haue I meanes much weaker Then you may call to comfort you; for I Haue
lost my daughter

Alo. A daughter?
Oh heauens, that they were liuing both in Naples The King and Queene
there, that they were, I wish My selfe were mudded in that oozie
bed Where my sonne lies: when did you lose your daughter?

Pro. In this last Tempest. I perceiue these Lords At this encounter
doe so much admire, That they deuoure their reason, and scarce thinke
Their eies doe offices of Truth: Their words Are naturall breath:
but howsoeu'r you haue Beene iustled from your sences, know for certain
That I am Prospero, and that very Duke Which was thrust forth of
Millaine, who most strangely Vpon this shore (where you were wrackt)
was landed To be the Lord on't: No more yet of this, For 'tis a
Chronicle of day by day, Not a relation for a break-fast, nor
Befitting this first meeting: Welcome, Sir; This Cell's my Court:
heere haue I few attendants, And Subiects none abroad: pray you
looke in:
My Dukedome since you haue giuen me againe, I will requite you with
as good a thing, At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye As
much, as me my Dukedome.

Here Prospero discouers Ferdinand and Miranda, playing at Chesse.

Mir. Sweet Lord, you play me false
Fer. No my dearest loue, I would not for the world
Mir. Yes, for a score of Kingdomes, you should wrangle, And I would
call it faire play
Alo. If this proue A vision of the Island, one deere Sonne Shall I
twice loose
Seb. A most high miracle
Fer. Though the Seas threaten they are mercifull, I haue curs'd them
without cause 
Alo.

Now all the blessings Of a glad father, compasse thee about:
Arise, and say how thou cam'st heere
Mir. O wonder!
How many goodly creatures are there heere?

How beauteous mankinde is? O braue new world That has such people in't

Pro. 'Tis new to thee
Alo. What is this Maid, with whom thou was't at play?
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three houres:
Is she the goddesse that hath seuer'd vs, And brought vs thus
together?

Fer. Sir, she is mortall; But by immortall prouidence, she's mine; I
chose her when I could not aske my Father For his aduise: nor thought
I had one: She Is daughter to this famous Duke of Millaine, Of whom, so
often I haue heard renowne, But neuer saw before: of whom I haue
Receiu'd a second life; and second Father This Lady makes him to me
Alo. I am hers.
But O, how odly will it sound, that I Must aske my childe
forgiuenesse?

Pro. There Sir stop, Let vs not burthen our remembrances, with A
heauinesse that's gon
Gon. I haue inly wept, Or should haue spoke ere this: looke downe you gods
And on this couple drop a blessed crowne; For it is you, that haue
chalk'd forth the way Which brought vs hither
Alo. I say Amen, Gonzallo
Gon. Was Millaine thrust from Millaine, that his Issue Should become
Kings of Naples? O reioyce Beyond a common ioy, and set it downe
With gold on lasting Pillers: In one voyage Did Claribell her husband
finde at Tunis, And Ferdinand her brother, found a wife, Where he
himselfe was lost: Prospero, his Dukedome In a poore Isle: and all of vs,
our selues, When no man was his owne
Alo. Giue me your hands:
Let griefe and sorrow still embrace his heart, That doth not wish
you ioy
Gon. Be it so, Amen.

Enter Ariell, with the Master and Boatswaine amazedly following.

O looke Sir, looke Sir, here is more of vs:
I prophesi'd, if a Gallowes were on Land This fellow could not
drowne: Now blasphemy, That swear'st Grace ore-boord, not an oath
on shore, Hast thou no mouth by land?

What is the newes?

Bot.

The best newes is, that we haue safely found Our King, and company:
The next: our Ship, Which but three glasses since, we gaue out split,
Is tyte, and yare, and brauely rig'd, as when We first put out to
Sea
Ar. Sir, all this seruice Haue I done since I went 
Pro.

My tricksey Spirit
Alo. These are not naturall euents, they strengthen From strange, to
stranger: say, how came you hither?

Bot.

If I did thinke, Sir, I were well awake, I'ld striue to tell you: we
were dead of sleepe, And (how we know not) all clapt vnder hatches,
Where, but euen now, with strange, and seuerall noyses Of roring,
shreeking, howling, gingling chaines, And mo diuersitie of sounds,
all horrible.

We were awak'd: straight way, at liberty; Where we, in all our trim,
freshly beheld Our royall, good, and gallant Ship: our Master Capring
to eye her: on a trice, so please you, Euen in a dreame, were we diuided
from them, And were brought moaping hither
Ar. Was't well done?

Pro. Brauely (my diligence) thou shalt be free

Alo.

This is as strange a Maze, as ere men trod, And there is in this businesse,
more then nature Was euer conduct of: some Oracle Must rectifie our
knowledge

Pro.

Sir, my Leige, Doe not infest your minde, with beating on The
strangenesse of this businesse, at pickt leisure (Which shall be
shortly single) I'le resolue you, (Which to you shall seeme probable)
of euery These happend accidents: till when, be cheerefull And
thinke of each thing well: Come hither Spirit, Set Caliban, and his
companions free:
Vntye the Spell: How fares my gracious Sir?

There are yet missing of your Companie Some few odde Lads, that you
remember not.

Enter Ariell, driuing in Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo in their
stolne Apparell.

Ste. Euery man shift for all the rest, and let No man take care for
himselfe; for all is But fortune: Coragio Bully-Monster Coragio
Tri. If these be true spies which I weare in my head, here's a goodly
sight
Cal. O Setebos, these be braue Spirits indeede:
How fine my Master is?

I am afraid He will chastise me

Seb. Ha, ha:
What things are these, my Lord Anthonio?

Will money buy em?

Ant.

Very like: one of them Is a plaine Fish, and no doubt marketable
Pro. Marke but the badges of these men, my Lords, Then say if they be true:
This mishapen knaue; His Mother was a Witch, and one so strong That
could controle the Moone; make flowes, and ebs, And deale in her command,
without her power:
These three haue robd me, and this demy-diuell; (For he's a bastard
one) had plotted with them To take my life: two of these Fellowes,
you Must know, and owne, this Thing of darkenesse, I Acknowledge
mine 
Cal.

I shall be pincht to death
Alo. Is not this Stephano, my drunken Butler?

Seb. He is drunke now; Where had he wine?

Alo.

And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they Finde this grand Liquor
that hath gilded 'em?
How cam'st thou in this pickle?

Tri. I haue bin in such a pickle since I saw you last, That I feare me
will neuer out of my bones:
I shall not feare fly-blowing 
Seb.

Why how now Stephano?

Ste. O touch me not, I am not Stephano, but a Cramp 
Pro.

You'ld be King o'the Isle, Sirha?

Ste. I should haue bin a sore one then
Alo. This is a strange thing as ere I look'd on
Pro. He is as disproportion'd in his Manners As in his shape: Goe Sirha,
to my Cell, Take with you your Companions: as you looke To haue my pardon,
trim it handsomely

Cal. I that I will: and Ile be wise hereafter, And seeke for grace:
what a thrice double Asse Was I to take this drunkard for a god?

And worship this dull foole?

Pro.

Goe to, away
Alo. Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it
Seb. Or stole it rather 
Pro.

Sir, I inuite your Highnesse, and your traine To my poore Cell: where
you shall take your rest For this one night, which part of it, Ile
waste With such discourse, as I not doubt, shall make it Goe quicke
away: The story of my life, And the particular accidents, gon by
Since I came to this Isle: And in the morne I'le bring you to your
ship, and so to Naples, Where I haue hope to see the nuptiall Of
these our deere-belou'd, solemnized, And thence retire me to my
Millaine, where Euery third thought shall be my graue 
Alo.

I long To heare the story of your life; which must Take the eare strangely

Pro. I'le deliuer all, And promise you calme Seas, auspicious gales,
And saile, so expeditious, that shall catch Your Royall fleete farre
off: My Ariel; chicke That is thy charge: Then to the Elements Be
free, and fare thou well: please you draw neere.

Exeunt. omnes.

EPILOGVE, spoken by Prospero.

Now my Charmes are all ore-throwne, And what strength I haue's mine
owne.
Which is most faint: now 'tis true I must be heere confinde by you, Or
sent to Naples, Let me not Since I haue my Dukedome got, And pardon'd
the deceiuer, dwell In this bare Island, by your Spell, But release
me from my bands With the helpe of your good hands:
Gentle breath of yours, my Sailes Must fill, or else my proiect
failes, Which was to please: Now I want Spirits to enforce: Art to
inchant, And my ending is despaire, Vnlesse I be relieu'd by praier
Which pierces so, that it assaults Mercy it selfe, and frees all
faults.

As you from crimes would pardon'd be, Let your Indulgence set me
free.

Enter.

The-, an vn-inhabited Island
Names of the Actors.

Alonso, K[ing]. of Naples:
Sebastian his Brother.

Prospero, the right Duke of Millaine.
Anthonio his brother, the vsurping Duke of Millaine.
Ferdinand, Son to the King of Naples.

Gonzalo, an honest old Councellor.
Adrian, & Francisco, Lords.

Caliban, a saluage and deformed slaue.
Trinculo, a Iester.
Stephano, a drunken Butler.

Master of a Ship.

Boate-Swaine.

Marriners.
Miranda, daughter to Prospero.
Ariell, an ayrie spirit.
Iris Ceres Iuno Nymphes Reapers Spirits.

FINIS. THE TEMPEST.

The Two Gentlemen of Verona
Actus primus, Scena prima.

Valentine: Protheus, and Speed.

Valentine. Cease to perswade, my louing Protheus; Home-keeping youth,
haue euer homely wits, Wer't not affection chaines thy tender dayes
To the sweet glaunces of thy honour'd Loue, I rather would entreat
thy company, To see the wonders of the world abroad, Then (liuing
dully sluggardiz'd at home) Weare out thy youth with shapelesse
idlenesse.

But since thou lou'st; loue still, and thriue therein, Euen as I would,
when I to loue begin

Pro. Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine adew, Thinke on thy Protheus, when
thou (hap'ly) seest Some rare note-worthy obiect in thy trauaile.
Wish me partaker in thy happinesse, When thou do'st meet good hap; and
in thy danger, (If euer danger doe enuiron thee) Commend thy grieuance
to my holy prayers, For I will be thy beades-man, Valentine
Val. And on a loue-booke pray for my successe?

Pro. Vpon some booke I loue, I'le pray for thee 
Val.

That's on some shallow Storie of deepe loue, How yong Leander crost
the Hellespont 
Pro.

That's a deepe Storie, of a deeper loue, For he was more then
ouer-shooes in loue 
Val.

'Tis true; for you are ouer-bootes in loue, And yet you neuer swom the
Hellespont
Pro.

Ouer the Bootes? nay giue me not the Boots
Val. No, I will not; for it boots thee not
Pro. What?

Val. To be in loue; where scorne is bought with grones:
Coy looks, with hart-sore sighes: one fading moments mirth, With twenty
watchfull, weary, tedious nights; If hap'ly won, perhaps a haplesse
gaine; If lost, why then a grieuous labour won; How euer: but a
folly bought with wit, Or else a wit, by folly vanquished 
Pro.

So, by your circumstance, you call me foole
Val. So, by your circumstance, I feare you'll proue

Pro. 'Tis Loue you cauill at, I am not Loue
Val.

Loue is your master, for he masters you; And he that is so yoked
by a foole, Me thinkes should not be chronicled for wise 
Pro.

Yet Writers say; as in the sweetest Bud, The eating Canker dwels; so
eating Loue Inhabits in the finest wits of all 
Val.

And Writers say; as the most forward Bud Is eaten by the Canker
ere it blow, Euen so by Loue, the yong, and tender wit Is turn'd to
folly, blasting in the Bud, Loosing his verdure, euen in the prime, And
all the faire effects of future hopes.
But wherefore waste I time to counsaile thee That art a votary to
fond desire?

Once more adieu: my Father at the Road Expects my comming, there
to see me ship'd 
Pro.

And thither will I bring thee Valentine
Val.

Sweet Protheus, no: Now let vs take our leaue:
To Millaine let me heare from thee by Letters Of thy successe in loue;
and what newes else Betideth here in absence of thy Friend:
And I likewise will visite thee with mine 
Pro.

All happinesse bechance to thee in Millaine

Val. As much to you at home: and so farewell.

Enter
Pro.

He after Honour hunts, I after Loue; He leaues his friends, to dignifie
them more; I loue my selfe, my friends, and all for loue:
Thou Iulia, thou hast metamorphis'd me:
Made me neglect my Studies, loose my time; Warre with good counsaile;
set the world at nought; Made Wit with musing, weake; hart sick
with thought 
Sp.

Sir Protheus: 'saue you: saw you my Master?

Pro. But now he parted hence to embarque for Millain 
Sp.

Twenty to one then, he is ship'd already, And I haue plaid the Sheepe
in loosing him

Pro. Indeede a Sheepe doth very often stray, And if the Shepheard be
awhile away

Sp. You conclude that my Master is a Shepheard then, and I Sheepe?

Pro. I doe

Sp. Why then my hornes are his hornes, whether I wake or sleepe
Pro. A silly answere, and fitting well a Sheepe
Sp. This proues me still a Sheepe

Pro. True: and thy Master a Shepheard
Sp. Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance
Pro. It shall goe hard but ile proue it by another
Sp.

The Shepheard seekes the Sheepe, and not the Sheepe the Shepheard; but I
seeke my Master, and my Master seekes not me: therefore I am no Sheepe

Pro.

The Sheepe for fodder follow the Shepheard, the Shepheard for foode
followes not the Sheepe: thou for wages followest thy Master, thy
Master for wages followes not thee: therefore thou art a Sheepe
Sp. Such another proofe will make me cry baa
Pro. But do'st thou heare: gau'st thou my Letter to Iulia?

Sp.

I Sir: I (a lost-Mutton) gaue your Letter to her (a lac'd-Mutton) and
she (a lac'd-Mutton) gaue mee (a lost-Mutton) nothing for my labour
Pro. Here's too small a Pasture for such store of Muttons
Sp. If the ground be ouer-charg'd, you were best sticke her
Pro. Nay, in that you are astray: 'twere best pound you
Sp. Nay Sir, lesse then a pound shall serue me for carrying your
Letter 
Pro. You mistake; I meane the pound, a Pinfold
Sp. From a pound to a pin? fold it ouer and ouer, 'Tis threefold
too little for carrying a letter to your louer
Pro. But what said she?

Sp. I 
Pro. Nod-I, why that's noddy
Sp. You mistooke Sir: I say she did nod; And you aske me if she did
nod, and I say I 
Pro. And that set together is noddy
Sp. Now you haue taken the paines to set it together, take it for
your paines
Pro. No, no, you shall haue it for bearing the letter
Sp. Well, I perceiue I must be faine to beare with you
Pro. Why Sir, how doe you beare with me?
Sp. Marry Sir, the letter very orderly, Hauing nothing but the word
noddy for my paines
Pro. Beshrew me, but you haue a quicke wit
Sp. And yet it cannot ouer-take your slow purse
Pro. Come, come, open the matter in briefe; what said she
Sp. Open your purse, that the money, and the matter may be both at
once deliuered
Pro. Well Sir: here is for your paines: what said she?
Sp. Truely Sir, I thinke you'll hardly win her
Pro. Why? could'st thou perceiue so much from her?
Sp. Sir, I could perceiue nothing at all from her; No, not so much
as a ducket for deliuering your letter:
And being so hard to me, that brought your minde; I feare she'll
proue as hard to you in telling your minde.
Giue her no token but stones, for she's as hard as steele
Pro. What said she, nothing?
Sp. No, not so much as take this for thy pains:
To testifie your bounty, I thank you, you haue cestern'd me; In
requital whereof, henceforth, carry your letters your selfe; And
so Sir, I'le commend you to my Master
Pro. Go, go, be gone, to saue your Ship from wrack, Which cannot
perish hauing thee aboarde, Being destin'd to a drier death on
shore:
I must goe send some better Messenger, I feare my Iulia would not
daigne my lines, Receiuing them from such a worthlesse
post.

Enter.

Scoena Secunda.

Enter Iulia and Lucetta.
Iul. But say Lucetta (now we are alone) Would'st thou then counsaile
me to fall in loue?
Luc. I Madam, so you stumble not vnheedfully
Iul. Of all the faire resort of Gentlemen, That euery day with
par'le encounter me, In thy opinion which is worthiest loue?
Lu. Please you repeat their names, ile shew my minde, According to
my shallow simple skill
Iu. What thinkst thou of the faire sir Eglamoure?
Lu. As of a Knight, well-spoken, neat, and fine; But were I you,
he neuer should be mine 
Iu.Arn't got your
dirk, have you?"

"No; why?"

"'Cause it would ha' been an act o' kindness to put me out of my misery,
and save me from being cut to pieces by them there wretches.  Now, sir,
good-bye, and God bless you, once more!  Tell the skipper I did my duty
to the last."

I broke down as I sank on my knees by the poor fellow; and I didn't know
my voice--perhaps it was being husky from the heat-as I said to him,
very chokily--

"And if you get away, tell the captain I did my duty to the last."

"Yes, sir; but do go now."

I jumped up again, ashamed of the blinding tears that came for a few
moments into my eyes.

"Look here," I said; "if you weren't so weak, I'd kick you, old a man as
you are.  Likely thing for a British officer to sneak off and leave one
of his men like this!"

"But the beggars are coming, I'm sure, sir."

"Very well," I said gloomily, "let them come.  It's all very well for a
full-moon-faced Chinaman to go off and take care of himself, but it
isn't English, Tom Jecks, and that you know."

The poor fellow hoisted himself a little round, so that he could hide
his face on his uninjured arm, and as I saw his shoulders heave I felt
weaker than ever; but I mastered it this time, and knelt there with a
whole flood of recollections of home, school, and my ambitions running
through my brain.  I thought of my training, of my delight at the news
of my being appointed to the _Teaser_, of my excitement over my uniform;
and that now it was all over, and that in all probability only the
sea-birds would know of what became of me after the Chinamen had done.

Then I thought of Ching's cowardice in leaving me alone with the poor
wounded fellow like this.

"I knew he wasn't a fighting man," I said sadly; "but I couldn't have
believed that he was such a cur."

At that moment there was a quick scrambling sound, which made me start
to my feet, and Tom Jecks started up on his elbow.

"Here they come, sir," he gasped.  "Now, sir," he whispered wildly, "do,
pray, cut and run."

"With you," I said resolutely.

He made an effort to rise, but fell back with a groan.

"Can't do it, sir.  Without me.  Run!"

I put my hands in my pockets without a word, and then started, for a
voice said--

"You think Ching lun away allee time?"

"Ching!"  I cried, grasping his arm.

"Yes; no good.  Can't findee big hole to hide.  Ching tumblee down off
rock, and hurt him."

"Much?"  I said.

"Yes, plentee plentee.  Time to go now.  Pilate all come along this
way."

He passed his hand involuntarily straight round his neck edgewise, as if
thinking about how a knife or sword would soon be applied.

"You saw them?"  I cried.

"Yes," he said sadly.  "Allee come along.  You lun away now with Ching?"

"I can't leave Tom Jecks," I said.  "Off with you, and try and save
yourself.  Never mind us."

Ching looked at the injured sailor.

"You no get up, lun?" he said.

"Can't do it, mate," groaned the poor fellow.  "I want Mr Herrick to
make a dash for his life."

"Yes, velly good.  You makee dashee you life, Mr Hellick."

"No, I stay here.  Run for it, Ching; and if you escape and see the
captain or Mr Reardon again, tell him we all did our duty, and how Mr
Brooke was drowned."

"Yes, Ching tellee Mr Leardon evelyting."

"Then lose no time; go."

"No; Ching velly tire, velly hot; wantee bleakfast, flesh tea, nicee new
blead.  Too hot to lun."

"But I want you to save yourself," I said excitedly.

"Yes; allee save evelybody, alleegether.  Ching won't go leave Mr
Hellick."

"Ching!"  I cried.

"Hush!  No makee low.  Lie down likee lit' pigee in sand.  Pilate come
along."

His ears were sharper than mine; for, as I dropped down at full length
in the sand upon my chest, I saw him drag a good-sized stone in front of
his face to screen it, while I, in imitation, rapidly scooped up some of
the sand and spread it before me, so as to make a little mound of a few
inches high, just as a couple of the junk's crew came into sight about a
hundred and fifty yards on our left, and as close down to the sea as the
billows would allow.  Then a few more appeared; and at last the whole
party, walking almost in single file, and looking sharply from left to
right as they came.

There was a space of about sixty yards from the face of the cliff to the
edge of the water, and the shore, after about twenty yards of perfect
hard level, rapidly rose, the interval being a rugged wilderness of rock
half buried in the driven sand.

It was up nearly at the highest part of this chaos of rocks, where we
had been seeking along the cliff face for a cavern, that we three lay,
many feet above the level strip by the sea; and there were plenty of
rocks protruding from the sand big enough to hide us; but it could only
be from a few of the men at a time.  To the others I felt that we must
be so exposed that some one or other must of necessity see us if he
looked our way.

There was no need to whisper, "Be silent," for we lay there perfectly
motionless, hardly daring to breathe, but forced, fascinated, as it
were, into watching the long procession of our enemies, walking along,
chattering loudly, and every now and then stooping to pick up something
which had been driven up by the sea.

At times I saw them gazing right in our direction, and then up, over us,
at the cliff with its patches of grey-green vegetation; but fully half
of them passed by without making a sign of being aware of our presence,
and hope began to spring up of the possibility of their all going by
without noticing us.

The next moment it seemed impossible, and my heart sank as one active
fellow stepped toward us, apparently coming straight to where we lay,
and appearing to be watching me all the time.

And now more strongly than ever came the feeling that I must leap up and
run for my life, though I knew that if I did the mob of Chinamen would
give chase, like the pack of savage hounds that they were, and never
give up till they had run me down; and then--

I felt sick with the heat of the sun, and the horror of my position.
There, say it was all from the latter cause; and the rocks, sea,
pirates, all swam before me in a giddy circle, with only one clear
object standing out distinct upon the sands--imagination, of course, but
so real and plain before my dilated eyes, that I shuddered at its
reality--it was myself, lying in the baking sunshine, after the pirates
had overtaken me and passed on!

It was very curious in its reality, and so clear before me that I could
hardly believe it true, when the man who was coming toward us suddenly
stooped, picked up something, and then turned and went back to his
position in the line.

For I had not calculated in my excitement upon the deceptive nature of
the ground upon which we lay, with its large masses of rock and
scattered fragments of endless shapes, some partly screening, some
blending with our clothes as we lay motionless; and above all, upon the
fact that our presence there was not expected.  Otherwise there might
have been quite another tale to tell.

Even when I knew that they were passing on, I hardly dared to draw my
breath, and lay still now, with my head pressed down sidewise in the
sand; till at last I could keep from breathing no longer, and the dry
sand flew at one great puff.

I lay trembling the next moment, fearing that the sound would bring the
bloodthirsty wretches back, hot and eager to hack to pieces the foreign
devil who had escaped from their clutches the day before; but the sound
of their voices grew more and more faint, till the last murmur died
away, and I raised my head slowly, an inch at a time, till I could gaze
along the strand.

There was nothing visible but the scattered rocks, sun-bleached sand,
and the dark, smooth surface over which the foaming water raced back
each time a glistening billow curved over and broke.  And in proof that
the enemy were some distance away, I could see the pale-feathered,
white-breasted gulls passing here and there in search of food, while
able at any moment to spread their wings and escape.


CHAPTER FORTY THREE.

OUR REFUGE.

"Oh deah me!" said Ching in his most squeaky tones, "I velly hungly.
You like nicee bleakfast, Mis' Hellick?"

"Don't speak to me as if I were a baby, Ching," I cried angrily.

"No; speak like to offlicer, Mr Hellick.  You likee bleakfast--
something good eat?"

"I hadn't thought of it before, Ching," I said, feeling rather ashamed
of my angry tone; "but I am faint, and I suppose that is through being
hungry."

"Yes; Ching go down among locks and sand, see if he find something eat."

"No, no," I cried excitedly; "it would be madness."

"Eh? you tinkee Ching mad?" he said, with a smile.

"Oh no; but you would meet some of the pirates."

"No; allee gone 'long shore.  Not come back long time."

"But it is too risky.  Perhaps some of the wretches are waiting."

"No; allee velly wicked--velly bad men.  Feel 'flaid stop all alone.
'Flaid see men again headee chop off.  Pilate allee keep together.  No
come long time; Ching go find something good eat."

"But if they come on the cliffs and look back, they might see you."

"Yes; might see Ching flom velly long way topside lock chop.  Then
think--"

"Think, yes, of course."

"Not allee same you think.  See Ching?  Yes; see John Chinaman in blue
flock allee torn, long tow-chang; that's all."

I did not grasp his meaning for a moment.

"Oh, I see," I cried at last; "you mean that if they did see you, they
would think it was one of their own crew?"

"Yes; think one of own clew.  But Ching not pilate."

"Of course.  Then there would be no risk.  You shall go, but we must
find some place where we can hide."

"Mis' Hellick help soon makee velly nicee place."

"Wait a minute," I said.  "Couldn't we climb up on the cliff like you
did?"

"Yes, Mr Hellick climb, but no cally jolly sailor boy, Tom Jeck, allee
way."

"No; we must make a place here if we cannot find one."

He walked up to the face of the cliff, but there was no spot at all
likely to answer the purpose till he had gone about fifty yards, when he
turned and signalled to me.

I crept close up to the cliff, and then stooped down, after a timid look
in the direction taken by the pirates, and found Ching standing by a
piece of the rock which had split away from above, fallen clear, and
then its top had leaned back against the rock face, leaving a narrow
rift between its base and the cliff, through which we could see the
light dimly, some twelve or fourteen yards away, but it was only a faint
gleam showing that the far end was nearly closed.

"Velly nice beautiful place; ought to come here last night."

"Yes, capital.  We can hide here; and once inside, if we had arms, we
could keep the wretches at a distance."

"Don'tee want fight now," said Ching, quietly.  "No swold, no shoot gun,
no jolly sailor boy.  Wantee eat and dlink."

"Yes; let's get poor Jecks here at once."

"You go fetch him; tly to walkee now: Ching go fetch eat, dlink."

He hurried off toward the ridge, while I went back to my wounded man,
who seemed to be lying asleep, but he opened his eyes as I approached.

"We've found a place," I said.  "Do you think you can limp a little
way?"

He tried to rise, and fell back with a moan, but upon my placing my arm
under his, he made a fresh effort, and stood upright, taking step for
step with mine, till I had him right up to the narrow opening of our
shelter, into which he slowly crawled, and then spoke for the first
time, but in a hoarse voice I did not know--

"Water."

"I'll try," I said; "don't stir from there till I come back."

Creeping along close under the cliff, I soon reached the ridge, and was
about to mount, but dropped down and hid, for I saw something move in
the direction taken by the pirates.

A minute's investigation, however, showed it to be some bird on the
strand, and I began to climb, reached the top, took a careful
observation in both directions, and then up at the cliff, and,--lastly,
looked out for Ching.

I soon espied him running out after a retiring billow, then running in
again, and continuing this several times as if he were a boy at play.
Finally, however, I saw him go splashing in after a wave, and then come
hurrying back dragging something, which he drew right ashore.

There he stopped, panting, and looking back, caught sight of me, and
signalled to me to come.

I hurried down, reached him amongst the piles of broken timber and
rubbish, and found that he had secured a wooden box, one end of which
had been battered upon the rocks, laying bare the bright glistening tin
with which it was lined; and I realised directly that he had found what
for us was a treasure, if we could tear open the tin, for the case bore
the brand of a well-known firm of English biscuit-makers, and doubtless
it was part of the loot taken from some unfortunate British merchantman.

"You helpee me cally?" he said.

For answer I took hold of one end of the case, and we bore it right up,
through the thick sand, close under the cliff, where we placed it behind
a big stone.

"You gottee big stlong knife?" cried Ching.

I took out a big-bladed knife, opened it, and found no difficulty in
thrusting it through the soft tin and cutting a long gash.  Then I cut
another, parallel, and joined two of the ends, making a lid, which, upon
being raised, showed that the biscuits were perfectly unharmed by the
salt water.

"Fillee allee pockets," cried Ching; and I proceeded to do so, while
twice as many as I could stow away disappeared under his garments.

"Now," I said, "we must find water and get back."

"Waitee minute; p'laps pilate come back; no have bliskit."

He dropped down upon his knees, and began tearing away the sand from
behind the stone, after which he dragged the case into the hole, and
tossed the sand over it at a tremendous rate, ending by completely
covering it and looking up at me with a smile of satisfaction.

"Now for water," I said eagerly.

"Yes, Ching find water;" and we tramped back, the loose dry sand falling
in and obliterating our footprints.

Ching led the way to a pile of tangled wreck-wood, and took out a jar
covered with bamboo basket-work, and having a cross handle--a vessel
that would probably hold about half a pailful.

"Ching find--float flom junk," he said; and then, with a knowing smile,
he led the way to where the ridge joined the cliff; and, unable to
contain myself when, he stopped and pointed down triumphantly, I fell
upon my knees, and placed my lips to a tiny pool of clear cool water,
which came down from a rift about forty feet above my head in the
limestone rock, and, as I drank the most delicious draught I ever had in
my life, the water from above splashed down coolly and pleasantly upon
the back of my head.

"Ching hear can go _tlickle, tlickle_," he said, stooping in turn to get
a deep draught before filling the vessel, and then leading the way back
over the ridge, and out of the hot sunshine into the place where our
poor companion lay upon his back, muttering hurriedly words of which we
could not catch the import.

This was a fresh difficulty, for he could not be roused into sitting up
to drink; and at last, in despair, I scooped up some water in my hand,
and let it trickle upon his half-parted lips.

The effect was instantaneous; they moved eagerly, and, ceasing his
muttering, he swallowed more and more of the water, till he must have
drunk nearly a pint, and now sank into a more easy position fast asleep,
and breathing easily.

"Ha!"  I exclaimed.  But I said no more, Ching's hand was placed over my
lips, and he held me back, staring hard all the time towards the tall
narrow outlet of our shelter.

For the moment I thought that this was some cowardly attack--one is so
prone to think evil of people rather than good; but he stooped down,
placed his lips to my ear, and whispered the one word--

"Pilate."

Then a loud burst of talking came upon us, sounding as it doubled by
striking and echoing from the rocks.  My blood ran cold once more, for I
thought that my exclamation had been heard, and that the enemy was
talking about and watching the opening of our shelter.

Then the noise grew louder, and some dispute seemed to be on the way,
while, what was worse, the sounds did not pass on, showing that the crew
of the junk, for I felt that it must be they, had returned and stopped
just in front of where we crouched.

Where we were was dark enough to keep any one from seeing us if he
looked in from the bright sunshine; but I knew that, sooner or later, if
the men stayed where they were, some one was sure to come prying about,
and would see the place.  How long, then, would it be ere we were
discovered, and had to meet our terrible fate after all?

"You thinkee get out other way?" said Ching at last, with his lips to my
ear.

"I think not," I whispered back.

"Mustn't look out this way," he whispered again.  "You go light to end
and look see if pilate going stop."

I was so eager to get an observation of the enemy, that I hurriedly
crept along the narrow passage.  I say hurriedly, but my progress was
very slow, for I had to worm my way over fallen stones, some of which
were loose, and I was in constant dread of making a sound which might
betray us.

But I got to the end in safety, and had to mount up over a large narrow
wedge-like piece which filled up the end; the opening, dim and partly
stopped with some kind of growth outside, being quite ten feet from the
sandy bottom.

And all this while the murmur of voices from outside came indistinctly,
till I was at the top of the wedge, when the talking grew suddenly
louder.

I hesitated for a few moments, and then, feeling sure that I was safe, I
placed my face to the opening, parted the tough plant a little, and then
a little more, so as not to attract attention; and at last, with a
bright yellow daisy-like growth all about my face, I peered out, to see
that the enemy had quietly settled down there to smoke, not thirty yards
from our hiding-place, while some were settling themselves to sleep, and
again others to eat biscuits similar to those we had found.

They evidently meant to stay, and if our wounded companion began his
delirious mutterings again, I knew that, although a fellow-countryman
might be spared, my career was at an end.

I crept down cautiously, and told Ching all I had seen; whereupon he
nodded his head sagely, and placed his lips to my ear.

"Plenty big stone," he whispered.  "Plenty sand; velly quiet; 'top up
hole."

I shrank from making any movement, but, softly and silently, Ching crept
nearly to the opening by which we had entered, and began moving the
fragments embedded in sand, which formed the flooring of our narrow
refuge, turning over peat shaley pieces, and laying them naturally
between us and the light, and, after planting each heavy piece, scooping
up the dry sand with both hands, and pouring it over the stone.  Then
another piece and another followed, awkward bits so heavy that he could
hardly lift them; and, gaining courage, I let to as well, pulling blocks
from out of the sand where I knelt, and passing them to him.

He nodded his satisfaction, and we both worked on slowly and silently,
building up till the erection became a breast-work, rapidly growing
narrower as it rose higher; the sand poured in, filling up the
interstices and trickling down on the other side, thus giving our rugged
wall the appearance of being a natural heap, over which the dried sand
had been swept in by the storm.

I was in agony as we worked on, expecting moment by moment to hear a
stone fall, or a loud clap of one against another; but Ching worked in
perfect silence, while the busy chattering of the men without kept on,
and then by slow degrees grew more smothered as our wall arose; while as
it progressed our shelter grew more gloomy.

There was plenty of material to have made a wall ten times the size,
whereas, roughly speaking, ours was only about four feet in length from
the fallen rock to the base of the cliff, and sloped inward till, at
breast height, it was not more than two feet, and from there rapidly
diminished till Ching ceased, and breathing hard, and wet with
perspiration, he whispered to me--

"No leach no higher; can'tee find now."

It was so dark that we could only just see each other's faces, but in a
short time we became so accustomed to the gloom, that we could watch the
changes in Tom Jecks' countenance as he lay sleeping, by the faint rays
which stole in over the top of our cavern, and through the tuft of
herbage which grew high up at the other end.  But the heat was terrible
in so confined a space, and, exhausted as I was with lifting stones and
scooping up sand, there were moments when everything appeared dreamy and
strange, and I suppose I must have been a little delirious.

I was sitting panting with the heat, resting my head against the rock,
listening to the breathing of Tom Jecks, and wondering why it was that
something hot and black and intangible should be always coming down and
pressing on my brain, when I started into wakefulness, or rather out of
my stupor, for Ching touched me, and I found that he had crept past Tom
Jecks to where I had made my seat, and had his lips close to my ear.

"Hoolay!" he whispered.  "Flee cheahs!  Pilate all go away!  Go up see."


CHAPTER FORTY FOUR.

WITHIN AN ACE.

Ching's words sent a thrill of delight through me, rousing me, and
bringing me out of my half-delirious state.

Without a word, I crept cautiously up to my look-out place, listening to
the loud shouting and gabbling of the Chinamen as I got nearer to the
tuft of greeny growth, which I parted without so much hesitation now,
and, looking out, I could see that by the warm glow of the late
afternoon sun which made me shrink back with my heart sinking, and creep
down again to Ching.

"Yes?" he whispered.  "Allee going 'way?"

"No," I replied, with my lips to his ear; "they are carrying up boards
and pieces of the wreck and sails, and making themselves a shelter.
They are going to stay."

Ching drew his breath with a low hiss, and was silent for a few minutes.
Then, quite cheerfully, he whispered--

"Velly bad job.  Don'tee want bad wicked pilate here.  Nevy mind: come,
eat blisket, dlink watee.  Muchee best place.  Muchee better than
pilate.  Then go have good long s'eep."

We stole back to where the biscuit and water vessel had been placed for
safety; but when Ching handed me some biscuits I felt as if I could not
eat, though a little water refreshed me.

"No dlinkee much; no get more till pilate gone."

I shuddered as I thought of the consequences of being without water in
that stifling place, but the simple refreshments did me a wonderful
amount of good, and, after dipping my handkerchief in the vessel and
squeezing a few drops from time to time between Tom Jecks' lips as he
began to mutter, he dropped off to sleep again.

I sat listening then to the smothered sounds from without, where the
enemy were evidently very busy, and I was just dropping off again into
an uneasy slumber, when I started into wakefulness, for there was a loud
shout from the opening we had blocked up, and I felt that all was over.
They had found the way in, and in a few moments we should be dragged
out.

Directly after there was the babble of several other voices, and a
discussion went on in Chinese, not a word of which could I understand.
Then, to my utter wonder, the voices which had come over the top as if
speaking close by me, suddenly ceased, and I could hear the _pad pad_ of
bare feet on the sands.

"Velly neally catchee catchee, and choppee off head," said Ching softly.
"Begin to be velly solly for poor Mis' Hellick.  Pilate say, `Heah good
place, make hole s'eep in.'  'Nothee pilate say, `Big fool; allee wet
damp; wildee beast live in hole, and allee 'tink.  Come back, makee
better place.'"

It was a narrow escape, and it was long enough before my heart calmed
down, left off throbbing, and I fell asleep.

Utter exhaustion had done its work, and my sleep was deep and dreamless.
Once my eyes had closed, they did not open again till long after
sunrise the next morning, when I lay there puzzled, and wondering where
I was and what was the meaning of the murmur of voices apparently from
somewhere overhead.

Ching's voice chased away the remaining mists.

"You had velly good s'eep?" he whispered.  "Feel muchee better?"

I did not answer, only squeezed his hand, and turned to see how Tom
Jecks was, but he did not seem to have stirred, and we then ate
sparingly of our biscuits, and drank more sparingly of the water.

"Must be velly careful," Ching said again; "no get more till pilate gone
'way."

That day went by like a portion of some feverish dream.  My head burned
and throbbed; my thirst grew terrible in the hot, close place, and Ching
owned to suffering terribly in the same way; but the faithful fellow
never touched a drop of the water, save when the evening came, and we
partook together of our rapidly-diminishing store of biscuits, the very
touch of which on my lips increased the agony of my thirst.

And all the while we were awake to the fact that the Chinamen had an
ample supply of food and water, for they kept dragging up to the camp
they had formed casks and chests which had been washed up from the wreck
of their junk; and when I climbed up and looked out, I could see them
apparently settled down and resigned to their fate, until some friendly
junk came along or they could surprise another, feasting away, or
playing some kind of game with stones.

"Waitee lit' bit," Ching whispered.  "Allee s'eep, and Ching get eat
dlink."

But I felt certain that he would be caught, and begged him not to go
till we were absolutely driven by hunger and thirst; and so that day
passed, with the rock growing hotter, and the air too stifling almost to
breathe, while, to my horror, I found that Tom Jecks was growing more
and more feverish.  At times he began to mutter so loudly that we were
obliged to throw my jacket over his face to prevent the sounds from
drawing the attention of the enemy.

I believe I was half-delirious all that day, and when the night came our
little supply of water was running so low that Ching asked if he had not
better climb over the wall and go and fetch some more.

"No," I said; "it means discovery.  We must wait."

I dropped soon after into a heavy stupor-like sleep, and this time I was
the first to wake and see the sun's rays stealing in through the growth
in the rift.  Ching was sleeping calmly enough, but Tom Jecks had been
tossing about, and lay in a very peculiar position, which startled me--
it looked so strange.  But Ching woke just then, and, nodding and
smiling, he helped me to turn our poor companion back, when we found him
flushed and excited, muttering angrily, quite off his head.

"Nevy mind; pilate get tired; go to-day," whispered Ching.  "Get bettee
soon.  Now have bleakfast.  Waitee bit: Ching makee butiful bleakfast,
chicken, toast, egg, nice flesh tea.  There.  On'y 'nuff blisket for
to-day.  Ching go out to-night get plenty blisket, plenty watee,
plenty--plentee--oh, deah--oh, deah!"

"What is it?"  I whispered.

"Oh deah!  Not drop watee left.  You get up dlink allee watee?"

"No; did you?"

"No.  Ching see.  Pooh Tom Jeck knock over with arm."

It was only too evident, for the water vessel had been laid upon its
side, and the sand beneath was soaked.

"Ching velly solly," said the Chinaman softly.  "No gettee more watee
till quite dalk."

My head sank against the rock, and I hardly stirred the whole of that
day.  Ching pressed me to eat some of the remaining biscuits, but I
could not touch them, only rest my burning head there, and try to think
of what was to come.  Ching would certainly be caught if he ventured
out, for the enemy never all lay down to sleep together; and, what was
worse, I felt convinced, though in a confused way, that sooner or later
the delirious mutterings and talkings of Tom Jecks must be heard.

I can only remember patches of that day.  The rest is all burning heat
and wandering away amongst grass and flowers and purling streams, whose
trickling I seemed to hear.

It was getting well on in the afternoon, I suppose, that Tom Jecks'
fever came to a height.  He muttered, and then began to talk angrily,
but in an incoherent way, and his voice grew so loud that at last I
roused myself and went up to the look-out, to watch whether it was heard
without.

But the Chinamen heard nothing, only sat or lay about, talking or
sleeping.  It was getting close upon evening, for the sunshine was warm
and golden, and cast long shadows from the rocks and the cliff above us
over the level sand.

How beautiful it all looked! that golden sea, with a distant sail here
and there.  And now suddenly I found that there was a great deal of
excitement amongst the Chinamen, who were talking loudly.

My head was hot and confused, but I soon saw the reason why, and hope
began to revive, for about a couple of miles out I could see two junks
standing in, and my heart throbbed again with excitement as I noted
their rig, and could feel certain they were the pair we had watched
through that strange night.

"I must go and tell Ching," I said to myself.  "Those junks will take
the wretches off.  Only a few more hours, and we shall be safe."

"Stand by, my lads!  Look out!  Storm's coming down upon us.  Now then;
every man for himself."

I turned cold with horror.  Just then, too, when we were so near to
safety.  For the words were Tom Jecks', roared in a hoarse voice in the
height of his delirium, and I saw that they were heard outside.

For the Chinamen who were sitting sprang up, sword or knife in hand;
those who were looking out to sea or making signals faced round, stood
staring at the cliff for a few moments as if startled, and then, as Tom
Jecks' voice rose again, but in muffled tones, for Ching had thrown
himself upon the poor fellow to stifle his utterances, the pirates
uttered a yell, rushed to the opening, tore down the sand and stones,
and Ching and Tom Jecks were dragged out on to the sand.

They had not seen me for the moment, but there was a shout directly, a
man jumped up, caught me by the leg, and I was dragged along and out
into the soft evening sunshine, to be forced down upon my knees close to
where Tom Jecks lay, and Ching was being held, for he was struggling
wildly with his captors, and talked excitedly to the fierce wretches who
crowded round us.

Ching was evidently pleading for mercy, not for himself but for me.  I
knew it, for he kept pointing to me; and finally he made a bound, got
free, and leaped to me, throwing his arms about my waist.

"No killee; shan't killee," he cried wildly; and then, turning round, he
yelled at our captors in his own tongue, abusing them in his rage, and
threatening them with his clenched fist.

But it was all in vain: a dozen hands were at him; others seized and
held me.  Ching was dragged away vociferating wildly, thrown down, and
three men sat upon him, while another knelt down, twisted his hand in
the poor fellow's tail, and held his head fast.

I don't think they meant to kill him, their rage being evidently
directed at us; and I saw, with a peculiar kind of fascination, one man
with a big sword come close to me; another, armed with a similar blade,
go to where Tom Jecks lay, held down by three others.

I can hardly describe my sensations.  Five minutes before, I was
horribly frightened; the cold perspiration stood upon my forehead; my
hands were wet, and my legs sank under me.  But now, all the fear had
gone.  I knew I was to die, and I remembered the execution I had seen in
that great enclosure, when with one _whisk_ of the sword the executioner
had lopped off head after head.  It would not take long, I thought, and
a curious exaltation came over me as I began to think of home, and at
the same time my lips uttered the word "Good-bye," which was followed by
a prayer.

I did not cease muttering those words as I felt myself forced into a
kneeling position, and saw that Tom Jecks was being treated in the same
way.  And somehow, as I prayed, the thought would come to me that the
poor fellow would not feel or know anything about what was going to
happen.

Just then, as the man with the big sword approached Tom Jecks, and I was
watching, I did not see but I knew that the other was close behind me
and a little on my left.  But it did not trouble me any more than it did
to know that the fierce wretches were all gazing excitedly at us, and in
a high state of delight at being able to slay two of their foes.

It takes long to describe all this, but it happened very quickly.

The man had raised his sword to strike at Tom Jecks, and I shuddered and
looked aside, to see the great shadow of a man on the sand at my feet,
and there was a sword raised close by me.

At the same time Ching uttered a wild shriek, and the man who held his
tail forced the poor fellow's head down in the sand, but in vain; he
wrenched his head sidewise, raised it, and looked towards the cliff,
while I flinched slightly, for the shadow moved, as he who made it drew
back to strike.

_Crash_!

No: it was not the falling of the sword on my poor outstretched neck,
but a volley from the top of the cliff, fired by twenty of our brave
blue-jackets, and half-a-dozen of the pirates fell shrieking on the
sands.

I turned faint, but I recovered my senses as I saw Ching spring up, rush
at a man on the sand, snatch up his sword and run to me.

"Quick!" he cried; "jump up; fight!"

Almost mechanically I obeyed him, and snatched a knife from the hands of
one of the fallen men to defend my life, just as a second volley rolled
forth from the cliff, directed at the pirates as they ran toward the
ridge.

For there was no need for us to fight--our enemies were in full retreat;
and, as I looked up at the cliff, I could see our men drawn-up, and they
were signalling evidently to some one out of sight.

The next minute we were hailed.

"Which is the way down?"

"This way," cried Ching excitedly; and he ran south, pointing to the
rift by which he had climbed the cliff, while I stood there--giddy,
helpless, and at last sank down on my knees beside poor Tom Jecks, who
was still muttering something about the storm.

I recovered, however, enough to watch our men descending the rift--a
perilous, break-neck place; but they did not hesitate, and in a few
minutes all were down, formed up, and came toward us at the double.

And now for the first time, at the head of those familiar faces, I saw
Mr Reardon, who thrust his sword into his sheath as he drew near and
literally rushed at me.

"My dear boy!" he cried, giving me quite a fatherly hug; "thank God, we
were just in time."

I could not speak--I was too giddy; but I tried to look my thanks.

"Not hurt, are you?"

"No, sir; only faint."

By this time the last of the pirates had passed over the ridge, and I
felt irritated with Mr Reardon for not going in pursuit.  But he did
not read my countenance; he called one of the men out of the line, made
him give me some water from his bottle, and bent down on his knees by
poor Tom Jecks.

"Ha!" he said; "fever from a wound.  Give him some water too, my lad."

He sprang to his feet then, and I understood why he had not gone in
pursuit of our enemies, for just then there was a sharp volley from over
the ridge somewhere.

"Ha! that's got them," said Mr Reardon, turning to me.  "We divided, my
lad! half of us came along the top of the cliff, the other half along
the shore."

There was another volley, and I saw Mr Reardon smile as he gave the
orders, and out flashed the men's cutlasses, and were fixed with a quick
tingling rattle on the muzzles of their rifles.

"Here they come, sir," cried the warrant officer at the far end of the
line.

"Yes, my lad, and we're ready for them.  Now, one volley as soon as they
are together, boys, and then the blades.  Bayonet every wretch who does
not throw down his arms."

A low murmur ran along the little line, and I saw our men's eyes flash
in the evening sun.

But the excitement was not complete, for, gathering strength now, and
recovering from the shock I had received, I was watching the pirates
scrambling over the ridge in haste, as if pursued, when there was a
concussion of the air, a heavy boom, and I saw the _Teaser_ come into
sight, passing through the channel south of where we stood.  Then there
was a quick puff of smoke, another heavy boom, and I saw that she was
going full speed, leaving a black stream of smoke behind her, in chase
of the two junks, one of which was about a quarter of a mile away, the
other about a mile farther.

They were evidently taken by surprise, for the men were hurriedly
hoisting sail, and, as I learned afterwards, the _Teaser_ had been quite
hidden till she rounded a little promontory at the mouth of the channel
between the first and second islands--the channel for which we had so
vainly steered on the night of the storm.

The firing went on steadily, the crash of the great shell following the
report of the piece, but I had nearer and more exciting work to see
close at hand; and once more my heart beat high, as the pirates gathered
together, and, seeing the danger before them, paused for a moment or two
at the foot of the ridge slope, looked to right to see only the
perpendicular cliff, to left to see the sea, and then, uttering a savage
yell, came tearing on.

Ste. Out o'th Moone I doe assure thee. I was the Man ith' Moone, when
time was

Cal. I haue seene thee in her: and I doe adore thee:
My Mistris shew'd me thee, and thy Dog, and thy Bush

Ste. Come, sweare to that: kisse the Booke: I will furnish it anon with
new Contents: Sweare
Tri. By this good light, this is a very shallow Monster:
I afeard of him? a very weake Monster:

The Man ith' Moone?
A most poore creadulous Monster:
Well drawne Monster, in good sooth
Cal. Ile shew thee euery fertill ynch o'th Island: and I will kisse
thy foote: I prethee be my god
Tri. By this light, a most perfidious, and drunken Monster, when's
god's a sleepe he'll rob his Bottle
Cal. Ile kisse thy foot, Ile sweare my selfe thy Subiect 
Ste.There was a strange fascination in the scene, and I watched the six
shaven heads of the swimming pirates till the first threw up his hands,
battled the air for a few moments, and went down.  The others turned and
slowly swam shoreward till they could wade, when they approached our men
and flung their weapons on the sand in token of surrender.

There was a triumphant shout at this, and then another--a loud and
frantic cheer.  For the firing of the _Teaser_ had been going on
rapidly, and all at once the first junk was seen to heel over, and
gradually settle down, leaving the sea strewn with fragments of timber,
to which the crew were left clinging; while the gunboat raced on,
sending shell after shell rapidly at the other, till she was nearly
alongside, when there was a tremendous roar, following the crashing into
her of a shell, and the second junk flew up in fragments.

The shell had reached her little magazine of powder; and then the work
of mercy began.

I was watching the boats being lowered when I heard a shout from behind,
and, looking round, saw the second line of our blue-jackets advancing
from the ridge.  To my great joy, I saw with them those whom we had
mourned as drowned, while the next minute Mr Brooke had me by the
hands, and I heard a strange gulping noise, ending in quite a howl.

I looked sharply round, and saw Ching seated on the sand, wiping his
eyes with his sleeves.

"What's the matter, Ching--hurt?"  I asked.

"No, not hurt, Mis' Hellick; Ching so velly glad."


CHAPTER FORTY FIVE.

"HUZZA!"

By the time the _Teaser's_ boats had picked up those of the wretches who
wished to be saved, I had learned from Mr Brooke how, when the boat
struck, he and the others had clung to her and been swept along through
the channel, the fierce current carrying them round the point, and at
last into comparative shelter, where finally they reached the shore
right on the far side of the island.

Thence, after a great deal of climbing, they made their way toward the
channel to come in search of us; but they had to fly for their lives,
finding that the island was in possession of the wrecked crew of the
junk.

They lay in hiding all that day and the next.  I ken the wight: he is
of substance good
Fal. My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about
Pist. Two yards, and more
Fal. No quips now Pistoll: (Indeede I am in the waste two yards
about: but I am now about no waste: I am about thrift) briefely: I doe
meane to make loue to Fords wife: I spie entertainment in her:
shee discourses: shee carues: she giues the leere of inuitation: I
can construe the action of her familier stile, & the hardest voice
of her behauior (to be english'd rightly) is, I am Sir Iohn Falstafs
Pist.

He hath studied her will; and translated her will:
out of honesty, into English
Ni. The Anchor is deepe: will that humor passe?
Fal. Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her husbands
Purse: he hath a legend of Angels 
Pist.They were dismissed with a promise of full restitution, and, while steam
was being got up, a boat was lowered, the floating grating which acted
as a buoy found, the cutter recovered, and then the _Teaser_ sailed for
the river's mouth and came in search of us, Mr Brooke still clinging to
the hope that we had escaped.  In the offing the two junks were seen and
recognised, evidently on their way to pick up their shipwrecked friends.

First of all, the strong party of blue jackets and marines was landed,
while the _Teaser_ went round the back of the island, to reach the
channel and take the pirate junks by surprise.

Thorough success, as I have shown, attended the manoeuvre, and soon
after we were on board, where, after a few congratulatory words from our
busy captain, I found Barkins and Smith eager to welcome me back, and
quite ready to forgive me for having what they called "such a glorious
lot of adventures," on account of the share they had had in the sinking
and blowing up of the two pirate junks.

"Yes," said Barkins, after I had told my experiences on the island,
"that was all very well; but oh, my lad, you should have been here when
we attacked those junks!  It was glorious--wasn't it, Blacksmith?"

"Lovely!  But don't say any more to the poor fellow; it will only make
him mad."

We returned to the river, where our prisoners were landed, and we three
lads had more than one spell on shore before we left that port, notably
being in the city on the night of the Feast of Lanterns; but though we
had several more brushes with pirates, they were all trivial affairs
with small junks, the destruction of the last three being the crowning
point of our achievements.  The engagement is by mutual consent declared
off.

Realising, however, in Chapter III., that she needs _Robert's_ devotion
more than anything else, she conceives a plot. _Dr. Cornish_ makes
an opportune call, not this time as a doctor, but as a whole-hearted
admirer.We remained upon the coast for another six months, and then: were
ordered home, to the great delight of everybody but Ching, who parted
from us all very sadly.

"You think Mr Leardon like to take Ching see Queen Victolia?" he said
to me one day in confidence.

"I'm afraid not," I replied seriously.

"Ching velly solly," he said.  "Plenty lich man now! plenty plize-money!
Ching wear silk evely day in Queen Victolia countly.  You no tink
captain take Ching?"

"I'm sure he would not," I said.

"Ching velly good interpleter; velly useful man."

"Very; you've been a splendid fellow, Ching!"

He smiled, and a fresh idea struck him.

He objects to her Futurist bathroom; she to his, which is so like a tube
station that she would bathe in constant apprehension of the sudden
appearance of a young man demanding tickets.

_Robert_ begins to assert his masculine rights to control these and
sundry matters.

Sell muchee tea, basket, shell, culios, fo'
Inglis people.  Glow tow-chang velly long.  Wait till Mr Hellick come
back with jolly sailo' boy, fight pilate."

And with that understanding, which was doomed never to be fulfilled, we
parted.

For the next morning the men were singing--

"Huzza! we're homeward bou-ou-ound.  Huzza! we're homeward bound."

And homeward we all--including Tom Jecks, who soon recovered from his
injury--returned in safety, HMS _Teaser_ steaming gently one summer day
into Plymouth Sound; and this is her log--my log--written by a boy.  But
that was years ago, and I'm an old boy now.

THE END.