E-text prepared by Al Haines


THE PURCHASE PRICE

OR, THE CAUSE OF COMPROMISE

By

EMERSON HOUGH

AUTHOR OF
THE MISSISSIPPI BUBBLE
54-40 OR FIGHT

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY

M. LEONE BRACKER AND EDMUND FREDERICK

1910


TO

HON. ALBERT J. BEVERIDGE
A PROGRESSIVE IN THE CAUSE OF
ACTUAL FREEDOM


CONTENTS

Chapter
     I  A LADY IN COMPANY
    II  THE GATEWAY AND SOME WHO PASSED
   III  THE QUESTION
    IV  THE GAME
     V  SPOLIA OPIMA
    VI  THE NEW MASTER
   VII  A CONFUSION IN CHATTELS
  VIII  THE SHADOW CABINET
    IX  TALLWOODS
     X  FREE AND THRALL
    XI  THE GARMENTS OF ANOTHER
   XII  THE NIGHT
  XIII  THE INVASION
   XIV  THE ARGUMENT
    XV  THE ARBITRAMENT
   XVI  THE ADJUDICATION
  XVII  THE LADY AT TALLWOODS
 XVIII  ON PAROLE
   XIX  THE ENEMY
    XX  THE ART OF DOCTOR JAMIESON
   XXI  THE PAYMENT
  XXII  THE WAY OF A MAID
 XXIII  IN WASHINGTON
  XXIV  IN THE NAME OF ALTRUISM
   XXV  THE ARTFUL GENTLEMAN PROM KENTUCKY
  XXVI  THE DISTINGUISHED GENTLEMAN FROM NEW YORK
 XXVII  A SPLENDID FAILURE
XXVIII  IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT
  XXIX  IN OLD ST. GENEVIEVE
   XXX  THE TURNCOAT
  XXXI  THE SPECTER IN THE HOUSE


CHAPTER I

A LADY IN COMPANY

"Madam, you are charming!  You have not slept, and yet you smile.
No man could ask a better prisoner."

She turned to him, smiling faintly.

"I thank you.  At least we have had breakfast, and for such mercy I
am grateful to my jailer.  I admit I was famished.  What now?"

With just the turn of a shoulder she indicated the water front,
where, at the end of the dock on which they stood, lay the good
ship, _Mount Vernon_, river packet, the black smoke already pouring
from her stacks.  In turn he smiled and also shrugged a shoulder.

"Let us not ask!  My dear lady, I could journey on for ever with
one so young and pleasant as yourself.  I will give you my promise
in exchange for your parole."

Now her gesture was more positive, her glance flashed more keenly
at him.  "Do not be too rash," she answered.  "My parole runs only
while we travel together privately.  As soon as we reach coach or
boat, matters will change.  I reserve the right of any prisoner to
secure life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.  I shall
endeavor, believe me--and in my own way."

He frowned as she presently went on to make herself yet more clear.
"It was well enough when we traveled in our own private express,
from Washington here to Pittsburgh for then there was no chance for
escape.  I gave my parole, because it pleased you and did not
jeopardize myself.  Here my jailer may perhaps have some trouble
with me."

"You speak with the courage and fervor of the true leader of a
cause.  Madam," he rejoined, now smiling.  "What evil days are
these on which I have fallen--I, a mere soldier obeying orders!
Not that I have found the orders unpleasant; but it is not fair of
you to bring against mankind double weapons!  Such is not the usage
of civilized warfare.  Dangerous enough you are as woman alone,
without bringing to your aid those gifts of mind suited to problems
which men have been accustomed to arrogate to themselves."

"Arrogate is quite the right word.  It is especially fit for a
jailer."

This time the shaft went home.  The florid countenance of young
Captain Carlisle flushed yet ruddier beneath its tan.  His lips set
still more tightly under the scant reddish mustache.  With a
gesture of impatience he lifted his military hat and passed a hand
over the auburn hair which flamed above his white forehead.  His
slim figure stiffened even as his face became more stern.  Clad in
the full regimentals of his rank, he made a not unmanly figure as
he stood there, though hardly taller than this splendid woman whom
he addressed--a woman somewhat reserved, mocking, enigmatic; but,
as he had said, charming.  That last word of description had been
easy for any man who had seen her, with her long-lashed dark eyes,
her clear cheek just touched with color, her heavy dark hair
impossible to conceal even under its engulfing bonnet, her wholly
exquisite and adequate figure equally unbanished even by the trying
costume of the day.  She stood erect, easy, young, strong, fit to
live; and that nature had given her confidence in herself was
evidenced now in the carriage of head and body as she walked to and
fro, pausing to turn now and then, impatient, uneasy, like some
caged creature, as lithe, as beautiful, as dangerous and as
puzzling in the matter of future conduct.  Even as he removed his
cap, Carlisle turned to her, a man's admiration in his eyes, a
gentleman's trouble also there.

[Illustration: Carlisle turned, a man's admiration in his eyes]

"My dear Countess St. Auban," said he, more formally, "I wish that
you might never use that word with me again,--jailer!  I am only
doing my duty as a soldier.  The army has offered to it all sorts
of unpleasant tasks.  They selected me as agent for your
disappearance because I am an army officer.  I had no option, I
must obey.  In my profession there is not enough fighting, and too
much civilian work, police work, constable work, detective work.
There are fools often for officers, and over them politicians who
are worse fools, sometimes.  Well, then, why blame a simple fellow
like me for doing what is given him to do?  I have not liked the
duty, no matter how much I have enjoyed the experience.  Now, with
puzzles ended and difficulties beginning, you threaten to make my
unhappy lot still harder!"

"Why did you bring me here?"

"That I do not know.  I could not answer you even did I know."

"And why did I come?" she mused, half to herself.

"Nor can I say that.  Needs must when the devil drives; and His
Majesty surely was on the box and using his whip-hand, two days
ago, back in Washington.  Your own sense of fairness will admit as
much as that."

She threw back her head like a restless horse, blooded, mettlesome,
and resumed her pacing up and down, her hands now clasped behind
her back.

"When I left the carriage with my maid Jeanne, there," she resumed
at length; "when I passed through that dark train shed at midnight,
I felt that something was wrong.  When the door of the railway
coach was opened I felt that conviction grow.  When you met me--the
first time I ever saw you, sir,--I felt my heart turn cold."

"Madam!"

"And when the door of the coach closed on myself and my maid,--when
we rolled on away from the city, in spite of all I could do or
say--, why, then, sir, you were my jailer.  Have matters changed
since then?"

"Madam, from the first you were splendid!  You showed pure courage.
'I am a prisoner!' you cried at first--not more than that.  But you
said it like a lady, a noblewoman.  I admired you then because you
faced me--whom you had never seen before--with no more fear than
had I been a private and you my commanding officer."

"Fear wins nothing."

"Precisely.  Then let us not fear what the future may have for us.
I have no directions beyond this point,--Pittsburg.  I was to take
boat here, that was all.  I was to convey you out into the West,
somewhere, anywhere, no one was to know where.  And someway,
anyway, my instructions were, I was to lose you--to lose you.
Madam, in plain point of fact.  And now, at the very time I am
indiscreet enough to tell you this much, you make my cheerful task
the more difficult by saying that you must be regarded only as a
prisoner of war!"

Serene, smiling, enigmatic, she faced him with no fear whatever
showing in her dark eyes.  The clear light of the bright autumn
morning had no terrors for youth and health like hers.  She put
back a truant curl from her forehead where it had sought egress to
the world, and looked him full in the face now, drawing a deep
breath which caused the round of her bosom to lift the lace at her
throat.  Then, woman-like, she did the unlocked for, and laughed at
him, a low, full ripple of wholesome laughter, which evoked again a
wave of color to his sensitive face.  Josephine St. Auban was a
prisoner,--a prisoner of state, in fact, and such by orders not
understood by herself, although, as she knew very well, a prisoner
without due process of law.  Save for this tearful maid who stood
yonder, she was alone, friendless.  Her escape, her safety even,
lay in her own hands.  Yet, even now, learning for the first time
this much definitely regarding the mysterious journey into which
she had been entrapped--even now, a prisoner held fast in some
stern and mysterious grasp whose reason and whose nature she could
not know--she laughed, when she should have wept!

"My instructions were to take you out beyond this point," went on
Carlisle; "and then I was to lose you, as I have said.  I have had
no definite instructions as to how that should be done, my dear
Countess."  His eyes twinkled as he stiffened to his full height
and almost met the level of her own glance.

"The agent who conveyed my orders to me--he comes from Kentucky,
you see--said to me that while I could not bow-string you, it would
be quite proper to put you in a sack and throw you overboard.
'Only,' said he to me, 'be careful that this sack be tightly tied;
and be sure to drop her only where the water is deepest.  And for
God's sake, my dear young man,' he said to me, 'be sure that you do
not drop her anywhere along the coast of my own state of Kentucky;
for if you do, she will untie the sack and swim ashore into my
constituency, where I have trouble enough without the Countess St.
Auban, active abolitionist, to increase it.   Trouble '--said he to
me--'thy name is Josephine St.  Auban!'

"My dear lady, to that last, I agree.  But, there you have my
orders.  You are, as may be seen, close to the throne, so far as we
have thrones in this country."

"Then I am safe until we get below the Kentucky shore?" she queried
calmly.

"I beg you not to feel disturbed,--" he began.

"Will you set me down at Louisville?"

"Madam, I can not."

"You have not been hampered with extraordinary orders.  You have
just said, the carte blanche is in your hands."

"I have no stricter orders at any time than those I take from my
own conscience, Madam.  I must act for your own good as well as for
that of others."

Her lip curled now.  "Then not even this country is free!  Even
here there are secret tribunals.  Even here there are hired bravos."

"Ah, Madam, please, not that!  I beg of you--"

"Excellently kind of you all, to care so tenderly for me--and
yourselves!  I, only a woman, living openly, with ill will for
none, paying ray own way, violating no law of the land--"

"Your words are very bitter, Madam."

"The more bitter because they are true.  You will release me then
at Cairo, below?"

"I can not promise, Madam.  You would be back in Washington by the
first boats and trains."

"So, the plot runs yet further?  Perhaps you do not stop this side
the outer ways of the Mississippi?  Say, St. Louis, New Orleans?"

"Perhaps even beyond those points," he rejoined grimly.  "I make no
promises, since you yourself make none."

"What are your plans, out there, beyond?"

"You ask it frankly, and with equal frankness I say I do not know.
Indeed, I am not fully advised in all this matter.  It was
imperative to get you out of Washington, and if so, it is equally
imperative to keep you out of Washington.  At least for a time I am
obliged to construe my carte blanche in that way, my dear lady.
And as I say, my conscience is my strictest officer."

"Yes," she said, studying his face calmly with her steady dark eyes.

It was a face sensitive, although bony and lined; stern, though its
owner still was young.  She noticed the reddish hair and beard, the
florid skin, the blue eye set deep--a fighting eye, yet that of a
visionary.

"You are a fanatic," she said.

"That is true.  You, yourself, are of my own kind.  You would kill
me without tremor, if you had orders, and I--"

"You would do as much!"

"You are of my kind, Madam.  Yes; we both take orders from our own
souls.  And that we think alike in many ways I am already sure."

"None the less--"

"None the less, I can not agree to set you down at Cairo, or at any
intermediate point.  I will only give my promise in return for your
own parole.  That, I would take as quickly as though it were the
word of any officer; but you do not give it."

"No, I do not.  I am my own mistress.  I am going to escape as soon
as I can."

He touched his cap in salute.  "Very well, then.  I flattered
myself we had done well together thus far--you have made it easy.
But now--no, no, I will not say it.  I would rather see you defiant
than to have you weaken.  I love courage, and you have it.  That
will carry you through.  It will keep you clean and safe as well."

Her face clouded for the first time.

"I have not dared to think of that," she said.  "So long as we came
in the special train, with none to molest or make me afraid--afraid
with that fear which a woman must always have--we did well enough,
as I have said; but now, here in the open, in public, before the
eyes of all, who am I, and who are you to me?  I am not your
mother?"

"Scarcely, at twenty three or four."  He pursed a judicial lip.

"Nor your sister?"

"No."

[Illustration:  The _Mount Vernon_]

"Nor your wife?"

"No."  He flushed here, although he answered simply.

"Nor your assistant in any way?"

His face lighted suddenly.

"Why not?" said he.  "Can't you be my amanuensis,--that sort of
thing, you see?  Come, we must think of this.  This is where my
conscience hurts me--I can't bear to have _my_ duty hurt _you_.
That, my dear Countess, cuts me to the quick.  You will believe
that, won't you?"

"Yes, I believe that.  Jeanne," she motioned to her maid who stood
apart all this time, "my wrap, please.  I find the air cool.  When
the body is weak or worn, my dear sir, the mind is not at its best;
and I shall need all my wits."

"But you do not regard me as your enemy?"

"I am forced to do so.  Personally, I thank you; professionally, I
must fight you.  Socially, I must be--what did you say,--your
amanuensis?  So!  We are engaged in a great work, a treatise on our
river fortifications, perhaps?  But since when did army officers
afford the luxury of amanuenses in this simple republic?  Does your
Vehmgerichte pay such extraordinary expenses?  Does your carte
blanche run so far as that also?"

"You must not use such terms regarding the government of this
country," he protested.  "Our administration does not suit me, but
it has pleased a majority of our people, else it would not be in
power, and it is no Vehmgerichte, The law of self preservation
obtains in this country as with all nations, even in Europe.  But
we have planned no confiscation of your property, nor threatened
any forfeiture of your life."

"No, you have only taken away that which is dearer than anything
else, that which your government guarantees to every human being in
this country--liberty!"

"And even that unconstitutional point shall remain such no longer
than I can help, Madam.  Do not make our journey longer by leaving
it more difficult.  God knows, I am beset enough even as it is now.
But be sure our Vehmgerichte, as you are pleased to call it, shall
never, at least while I am its agent, condemn you to any situation
unsuited to a gentlewoman.  A very high compliment has been paid
you in holding you dangerous because of your personal charm.  It is
true, Madam, that is why you were put out of Washington--because
you were dangerous.  They thought you could get the ear of any
man--make him divulge secrets which he ought to keep--if you just
asked him to do it--for the sake of Josephine St. Auban!"  He
jerked out his sentences, as though habitual reticence and lack of
acquaintance with women left it difficult for him to speak, even
thus boldly.

"Oh, thank you, thank you!"  She clapped her hands together,
mockingly.

"Before now, women less beautiful than you have robbed men of their
reason, have led them to do things fatal as open treason to their
country.  These men were older than you or I.   Perhaps, as you
will agree, they were better able to weigh the consequences.  You
are younger than they, younger than I, myself; but you are
charming--and you are young.  Call it cruel of me, if you like, to
take you by the hand and lead you gently away from that sort of
danger for just a few days.  Call me jailer, if you like.  None the
less it is my duty, and I shall call it in part a kindness to you
to take you away from scenes which might on both sides be
dangerous.  Some of the oldest and best minds of this country have
felt--"

"At least those minds were shrewd in choosing their agent," she
rejoined.  "Yes; you are fanatic, that is plain.  You will obey
orders.  And you have not been much used to women.  That makes it
harder for me.  Or easier!"  She smiled at him again, very blithe
for a prisoner.

"It ought to have been held down to that," he began disconsolately,
"I should have been all along professional only.  It began well
when you gave me your parole, so that I need not sit nodding and
blinking, over against you also nodding and blinking all night
long.  Had you been silly, as many women would have been, you could
not this morning be so fresh and brilliant--even though you tell me
you have not slept, which seems to me incredible.  I myself slept
like a boy, confident in your word.  Now, you have banished sleep!
Nodding and blinking, I must henceforth watch you, nodding--and
blinking, unhappy, uncomfortable; whereas, were it in my power, I
would never have you know the first atom of discomfort."

"There, there!  I am but an amanuensis, my dear Captain Carlisle."

He colored almost painfully, but showed his own courage.  "I only
admire the wisdom of the Vehmgerichte.  They knew you were
dangerous, and I know it.  I have no hope, should I become too much
oppressed by lack of sleep, except to follow instructions, and cast
you overboard somewhere below Kentucky!"

"You ask me not to attempt any escape?"

"Yes."

"Why, I would agree to as much as that.  It is, as you say, a
matter of indifference to me whether I leave the boat at Cairo or
at some point farther westward.  Of course I would return to
Washington as soon as I escaped from bondage."

"Excellent, Madam!  Now, please add that you will not attempt to
communicate with any person on the boat or on shore."

"No; that I will not agree to as a condition."

"Then still you leave it very hard for me."

She only smiled at him again, her slow, deliberate smile; yet there
was in it no trace of hardness or sarcasm.  Keen as her mind
assuredly was, as she smiled she seemed even younger, perhaps four
or five and twenty at most.  With those little dimples now rippling
frankly into view at the corners of her mouth, she was almost
girlish in her expression, although the dark eyes above,
long-lashed, eloquent, able to speak a thousand tongues into shame,
showed better than the small curving lips the well-poised woman of
the world.

Captain Edward Carlisle, soldier as he was, martinet as he was,
felt a curious sensation of helplessness seize upon him as he met
her, steady gaze, her alluring smile; he could not tell what this
prisoner might do.  He cursed the fate which had assigned such a
duty, cursed especially that fate which forced a gallant soldier to
meet so superb a woman as this under handicap so hard.  For almost
the first time since they had met they were upon the point of
awkwardness.  Light speech failed them for the moment, the gravity
of the situation began to come home to both of them.  Indeed, who
were they?  What were they to the public under whose notice they
might fall--indeed, must fall?  There was no concealing face and
figure of a woman such as this; no, not in any corner of the world,
though she were shrouded in oriental veil.  Nay, were she indeed
tied in a sack and flung into the sea, yet would she arise to make
trouble for mankind until her allotted task should be complete!
How could they two answer any question which might arise regarding
their errand, or regarding their relations as they stood, here at
the gateway of the remoter country into which they were departing?
How far must their journey together continue?  What would be said
regarding them?

Carlisle found it impossible to answer such questions.  She herself
only made the situation the more difficult with her high-headed
defiance of him.

Hesitating, the young officer turned his gaze over the wide dock,
now covered with hurrying figures, with massed traffic, with the
confusion preceding the departure of a river boat.  Teams
thundered, carts trundled here and there, shoutings of many minor
captains arose.  Those who were to take passage on the packet
hurried forward, to the gangway, so occupied in their own affairs
as to have small time to examine their neighbors.  The very
confusion for the time seemed to afford safety.  Carlisle was upon
the point of drawing a long breath of relief; but even as he turned
to ask his companion to accompany him aboard the boat he caught
sight of an approaching figure which he seemed to recognize.  He
would have turned away, but the keen-witted woman at his side
followed his gaze and paused.  There approached these two now, hat
in hand, a gentleman who evidently intended to claim acquaintance.

This new-comer was a man who in any company would have seemed
striking.  In complexion fair, and with blue or gray eyes, he was
tall as any Viking, as broad in the shoulder.  He was smooth-faced,
and his fresh skin and well-developed figure bespoke the man in
good physical condition through active exercise, yet well content
with the world's apportionment.  His limbs were long, his hands
bony and strong.  His air, of self-confident assurance, seemed that
of a man well used to having his own way.  His forehead was high
and somewhat rugged.  Indeed, all his features were in large mold,
like the man himself, as though he had come from a day when skin
garments made the proper garb of men.  As though to keep up this
air of an older age, his long fair hair was cut almost square, low
down on the neck, as though he were some Frank fresh from the
ancient forests.  Over the forehead also this square cut was
affected, so that, as he stood, large and confident, not quite
_outre_, scarce eccentric, certainly distinguished in appearance,
he had a half-savage look, as though ignorant or scornful of the
tenderer ways of civilization.  A leader this man might be, a poor
follower always.

Yet the first words he uttered showed the voice and diction of a
gentleman.  "My dear Captain," he began, extending his hand as he
approached, "I am indeed charmed!  What a delight to see you again
in our part of the world!  I must claim the pleasure of having met
you once--two years ago, in St. Louis.  Are you again on your way
to the frontiers?"

The tone of inquiry in his voice was just short of curious, indeed
might have been called expectant.  His gaze, admiring yet polite,
had not wholly lost opportunity to list the attractions of this
lady, whose name had not yet been given him.

The gentleman accosted declined to be thus definite; adding only,
after the usual felicitations, "Yes, we are going down the river a
little way on the Vernon here."

"For some distance?"

"For quite a distance."

"At least, this is not your first journey down our river?"

"I wish it might be the last.  The railway is opening up a new
world to us.  The stage-coach is a thing of the past."

"I wish it might be, for me!" rejoined the stranger.
"Unfortunately, I am obliged to go West from here over the National
Road, to look at some lands I own out in Indiana.  I very much
regret--"

There was by this time yet more expectancy in his voice.  He still
bowed, with respectful glances bent upon the lady.  No presentation
came, although in the easy habit of the place and time, such
courtesy might perhaps have been expected.  Why this stiffness
among fellow travelers on a little river packet?

[Illustration:  He still bowed, with respectful glances.]

The tall man was not without a certain grave audacity.  A look of
amusement came to his face as he gazed at the features of the
other, now obviously agitated, and not a little flushed.

"I had not known that your sister--" he began.  His hand thus
forced, the other was obliged to reply: "No, the daughter of an old
friend of mine, you see--we are _en voyage_ together for the
western country.  It has simply been my fortune to travel in
company with the lady.  I present you, my dear sir, to Miss Barren.
My dear Miss Barren, this is State Senator Warville Dunwody, of
Missouri.  We are of opposite camps in politics."

The tall man bowed still more deeply.  Meantime, Josephine St.
Auban in her own way had taken inventory of the new-comer.  Her
companion hastily sought to hold matters as they were.

"My dear Senator Dunwody," he said, "we were just passing down to
the boat to see that the luggage is aboard.  With you, I regret
very much that your journey takes you from us."

The sudden consternation which sat upon Dunwody's face was almost
amusing.  He was very willing to prolong this conversation.  Into
his soul there had flashed the swift conviction that never in his
life had he seen a woman so beautiful as this.  Yet all he could do
was to smile and bow adieu.

"A fine man, that Dunwody, yonder," commented the young captain, as
they parted, and as he turned to his prisoner.  "We'll see him on
in Washington some day.  He is strengthening his forces now against
Mr. Benton out there.  A strong man--a strong one; and a heedless."

"Of what party is he?" she inquired, as though casually.

"What a man's party is in these days," was his answer, "is
something hard to say.  A man like Dunwody is pretty much his own
party, although the Bentonites call him a 'soft Democrat.'  Hardly
soft he seems, when he gets in action at the state capital of
Missouri yonder.  Certainly Dunwody is for war and tumult.  None of
this late weak-kneed compromise for him!  To have his own way--that
is Dunwody's creed of life.  I thank God he is not going with us
now.  He might want his own way with you, from the fashion of his
glances.  Did you see?  My word!"  Young Carlisle fumed a shade
more than might have seemed necessary for military reasons.

Josephine St. Auban turned upon him with her slow smile, composedly
looking at him from between her long, dark lashes.

"Why do you say that?" she inquired.

"Because it is the truth.  I don't want him about."

"Then you will be disappointed."

"Why do you say that?  Did you not hear him say that he was going
West by coach from here?"

"You did not give him time.  He is not going West by coach."

"What do you mean?"

"He will be with us on the boat!"


CHAPTER II

THE GATEWAY, AND SOME WHO PASSED

When Captain Edward Carlisle made casual reference to the
"weak-kneed compromise," he simply voiced a personal opinion on a
theme which was in the mind of every American, and one regarded
with as many minds as there were men.  That political measure of
the day was hated by some, admired by others.  This man condemned
it, that cried aloud its righteousness and infallibility; one
argued for it shrewdly, another declaimed against it loudly.  It
was alike blessed and condemned.  The southern states argued over
it, many of the northern states raged at it.  It ruined many
political fortunes and made yet other fortunes.  That year was a
threshold-time in our history, nor did any see what lay beyond the
door.

If there existed then a day when great men and great measures were
to be born, certainly there lay ready a stage fit for any mighty
drama--indeed, commanding it.  It was a young world withal, indeed
a world not even yet explored, far less exploited, so far as were
concerned those vast questions which, in its dumb and blind way,
humanity both sides of the sea then was beginning to take up.
America scarce more than a half century ago was for the most part a
land of query, rather than of hope.

Not even in their query were the newer lands of our country then
alike.  We lay in a vast chance-medley, and never had any country
greater need for care and caution in its councils.  By the grace of
the immortal gods we had had given into our hands an enormous area
of the earth's richest inheritance, to have and to hold, if that
might be; but as yet we were not one nation.  We had no united
thought, no common belief as to what was national wisdom.  For
three quarters of a century this country had grown; for half a
century it had been divided, one section fighting against another
in all but arms.  We spoke of America even then as a land of the
free, but it was not free; nor on the other hand was it wholly
slave.  Never in the history of the world has there been so great a
land, nor one of so diverse systems of government.

Before these travelers, for instance, who paused here at the head
of the Ohio River, there lay the ancient dividing line between the
South and the North.  To the northwest, between the Great Lakes and
the Ohio, swept a vast land which, since the days of the old
Northwest Ordinance of 1787, had by _national_ enactment been
decreed for ever free.  Part of this had the second time been
declared free, by _state_ law also.  To the eastward of this lay
certain states where slavery had been forbidden by the laws of the
several states, though not by that of the nation.  Again, far out
to the West, beyond the great waterway on one of whose arms our
travelers now stood, lay the vast provinces bought from Napoleon;
and of these, all lying north of that compromise line of thirty-six
degrees, thirty minutes, agreed upon in 1820, had been declared for
ever free by _national_ law.  Yet beyond this, in the extreme
northwest, lay Oregon, fought through as free soil by virtue of the
old Northwest Ordinance, the sleeping dog of slavery being evaded
and left to lie when the question of Oregon came up.  Along the
Pacific, and south of Oregon, lay the new empire of California,
bitterly contended over by both sections, but by her own
self-elected _state_ law declared for ever free soil.  Minnesota
and the Dakotas were still unorganized, so there the sleeping dog
might lie, of course.

To the south of that river on which our voyagers presently were to
take ship, lay a section comprising the southern states, in extent
far larger than all the northern states, and much stronger in
legislative total power in the national halls of Congress.  Here
slavery was maintained by laws of the _states_ themselves.  The
great realm of Texas, long coveted by the South, now was joined to
the ranks of the slave-holding states, by virtue of a war of
somewhat doubtful justice though of undoubted success.  Above
Texas, and below the line of thirty-six degrees, thirty minutes,
lay a portion of what was known as the Indian country, where in
1820 there had been made no _prohibition_ of slavery by the
_national_ government.

Above the line of thirty-six degrees, thirty minutes, there thrust
up a portion of Texas which had no law at all, nor had it any until
a very recent day, being known under the title of "No Man's Land."
Yet on to the westward, toward free California, lay a vast but
supposedly valueless region where cotton surely would not grow,
that rich country now known as Utah, Nevada, Arizona and New
Mexico.  This region, late gained by war from Mexico, soon to be
increased by purchase from Mexico on the South, was still of
indeterminate status, slavery not being prohibited but permitted,
by _federal_ action, although most of this territory had been free
soil under the old laws of Mexico.  Moreover, as though
sardonically to complicate all these much-mingled matters, there
thrust up to the northward, out of the permitted slavery region of
the South, the state of Missouri, quite above the fateful line of
thirty-six degrees, thirty minutes, where slavery was permitted
both by _federal_ and _state_ enactment.

Men spoke even then, openly or secretly, of disunion; but in full
truth, there had as yet been no actual union.  In such confusion,
what man could call unwise a halting-time, a compromise?  A country
of tenures so mixed, of theories so diverse, could scarcely have
been called a land of common government.  It arrogated to itself,
over all its dominion, the title of a free republic, yet by its own
mutual covenant of national law, any owner of slaves in the
southern states might pursue what he called his property across the
dividing line, and invoke, in any northern state, the support of
the state or national officers to assist him in taking back his
slaves.  As a republic we called ourselves even then old and
stable.  Yet was ever any country riper for misrule than ours?
Forgetting now what is buried, the old arguments all forgot, that
most bloody and most lamentable war all forgot, could any mind, any
imagination, depict a situation more rife with tumult, more ripe
for war than this?  And was it not perforce an issue, of compromise
or war; of compromise, or a union never to be consummated?

Yet into this heterogeneous region, from all Europe, itself
convulsed with revolution, Europe just beginning to awaken to the
doctrine of the rights of humanity, there pressed westward ever
increasing thousands of new inhabitants--in that current year over
a third of a million, the largest immigration thus far known.  Most
of these immigrants settled in the free country of the North, and
as the railways were now so hurriedly crowding westward, it was to
be seen that the ancient strife between North and South must grow
and not lessen, for these new-comers were bitterly opposed to
slavery.  Swiftly the idea national was growing.  The idea
democratic, the idea of an actual self-government--what, now, was
to be its history?

North of the fated compromise line, west of the admitted slave
state of Missouri, lay other rich lands ripe for the plow, ready
for Americans who had never paid more than a dollar an acre for
land, or for aliens who had never been able to own any land at all.
Kansas and Nebraska, names conceived but not yet born,--what would
they be?  Would the compromise of this last summer of 1850 hold the
balances of power even?  Could it save this republic, still young
and needy, for yet a time in the cause of peace and growth?  Many
devoutly hoped it.  Many devoutly espoused the cause of compromise
merely for the sake of gaining time.  As neither of the great
political parties of the day filled its ranks from either section,
so in both sections there were many who espoused, as many who
denied, the right of men to own slaves.  We speak of slavery as the
one great question of that day.  It was not and never has been the
greatest.  The question of democracy--that was even then, and it is
now, the greatest question.

Here on the deck of the steamer at the little city of Pittsburg,
then gateway of the West, there appeared men of purposes and
beliefs as mixed as this mixed country from which they came.  Some
were pushing out into what now is known as Kansas, others going to
take up lands in Missouri.  Some were to pass south to the slave
country, others north to the free lands; men of all sorts and
conditions, many men, of many minds, that was true, and all
hurrying into new lands, new problems, new dangers, new remedies.
It was a great and splendid day, a great and vital time, that
threshold-time, when our western traffic increased so rapidly and
assuredly that steamers scarcely could be built rapidly enough to
accommodate it, and the young rails leaped westward at a speed
before then unknown in the world.

Carried somehow, somewhither, for some reason, on these surging
floods, were these travelers, of errand not wholly obvious to their
fellows, yet of such sort as to call into query alike the nature of
their errand and their own relations.  It is easily earned
repetition to state that Josephine St. Auban's was a presence not
to be concealed.  Even such a boat as the Mount Vernon offered a
total deck space so cramped as to leave secrecy or privacy well out
of the question, even had the motley and democratic assemblage of
passengers been disposed to accord either.  Yet there was something
in the appearance of this young woman and her companion which
caused all the heterogeneous groups of humanity to make way for
them, as presently they approached the gang-plank.

Apparently they were not unexpected.  The ship's clerks readily led
the way to apartments which had been secured in advance.  Having
seen to the luggage of his charges, whom he disposed in a good
double state-room, the leader of the party repaired to his own
quarters.  Tarrying no longer than to see his own luggage safe
aboard, he commanded one of the men to fetch him to the office of
the captain.

The latter gentleman, busy and important, dropped much of his
official way when he found whom he was accosting.  "This is quite
unexpected, sir," he began, removing his cap and bowing.

"Captain Rogers," began the other, "you have been advised to some
extent of my plans by telegram from Washington."

The captain hesitated.  "Is this with the lady's consent?  I must
consider the question of damages."

"There will be no damages.  Your owners will be quite safe, and so
will you."

"Are there any charges of any kind against----?"

"That is not for you to ask.  She is under my care, and must not
disembark until I say the word.  You will kindly give her a place
at my table.  There must be no idle curiosity to annoy her.  But
tell me, when shall we reach the mouth of the river? Is it not
possible to save some time by avoiding some of the smaller stops?"

"But our freight, our passengers--"  The captain passed a hand
across his brow, much perplexed.  The other showed a sudden
firmness.

"My errand demands secrecy and speed alike.  There must be no
communication between this boat and the shore, so far as this young
lady is concerned.  Meantime, if all is ready, it would please me
mightily if we could start."

The captain pulled a bell rope.  "Tell the mate to cast off," he
said, to the man who answered.  An instant later the hoarse boom of
the boat's whistles roared out their warning.  There came a crush
of late-comers at the gangway.  Shouts arose; deck hands scrambled
with the last packages of freight; but presently the staging was
shipped and all the lines cast free.  Churning the stained waters
into foam with her great paddles, the _Mount Vernon_ swung slowly
out into the narrow stream.

[Illustration:  The Captain pulled a bell rope.]

"Now, Captain Rogers," went on Captain Carlisle, tersely, "tell, me
who's aboard;" and presently he began to ponder the names which, in
loose fashion, the clerk assembled from his memory and his personal
acquaintance.

"Hm, Hm!" commented the listener, "very few whom I know.  Judge
Clayton from the other side, below Cairo.  State Senator Jones,
from Belmont--"

"You know Mr. Jones?  Old 'Decline and Fall' Jones?  He never reads
any book excepting Gibbon's _Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_.
Always declines a drink when offered, but he's sure to fall a
moment later!"  Thus the smiling clerk.

"Well, I may see Mr. Jones, possibly Judge Clayton.  There's no one
else."  He seemed not dissatisfied.

Alas! for human calculations and for human hopes!  Even as he left
the captain's room to ascend the stair, he met face to face the
very man whose presence he least desired.

"Dunwody!" he exclaimed.

The gentleman thus addressed extended a hand.  "I see you are safe
aboard.  Myself, too, I am very glad."

"I thought you said you were going--"

"I was, but I changed my mind at the last moment.  It is far more
comfortable going down by boat than it is by stage.  Then, the
thought of the pleasure of your society on the journey--"  He was
smiling, rather maliciously.

"Yes, yes, of course!" somewhat dismally.

"But now, to be frank with you, you don't seem altogether happy.
Why do you want to be rid of me?  What harm have I done?" smiled
Dunwody.

"Oh, my dear sir!"

"May not one change his mind if he likes?"

"My dear sir, there is no argument about that."

"Certainly not!  The only argument is on the previous
question--When are you going to introduce me as you should, to that
extremely beautiful young lady who is with you?"

"Good God, my very dear sir!"

"You are not 'my dear sir' at all, so long as you try to hoodwink
me," persisted Dunwody, still smiling.  "Come, now, what are you
doing here, west bound with a young and charming person who is not
your wife, widow, mother, daughter, _fiancee_ or sister--who is
not--"

"That will do, if you please!" Carlisle's hot temper named into his
freckled face.

"Why so touchy?"

"It is within a man's rights to choose his own company and his own
ways.  I am not accountable, except as I choose."

The other man was studying him closely, noting his flush, his
irritation, his uneasiness.  "But what I am saying now is that it
is cruel, unusual, inhuman and unconstitutional to be so selfish
about it.  Come, I shall only relent when you have shown yourself
more kind.  For instance, in the matter of her table in the
dining-room--"

"The lady has expressed a desire to remain quite alone, my dear
sir.  I must bow to her will.  It is her privilege to come and go
as she likes."

"She may come and go as she likes?" queried Dunwody, still smiling.
There was a look on his face which caused Carlisle suddenly to turn
and examine him sharply.

"Naturally."

"Without your consent, even?"

"Absolutely so."

"Then why should she have sent me this little message?" demanded
Dunwody suddenly.  He presented a folded bit of paper, snapping it
on the back with a finger.

A still deeper flush spread over the young officer's telltale face.
He opened and read: "If you care to aid a woman who is in trouble,
come to me at room 19 when you can."

"When did you receive this?" he demanded.  "By God!" he added, to
himself, "she did it, too!"

"Within the moment.  Her maid brought it."

"You didn't have this before you came on board--but of course, that
wasn't possible."

Dunwody looked at him keenly.  "You have just heard me," he said.
"No, I don't deny there are some things here which I can't
understand.  You are covering up something, my dear Captain, of
course, but just what I do not know.  Your station in life, your
presence in this country, so far from home!--" He smiled now in a
way which his antagonist considered sinister.  Yet what defense
could be made without exposing secrets which were not his to
uncover?

"Come," went on Dunwody, "let's be frank about it.  You may trust
me, of course.  But--neither sister, wife, nor servant--could you
blame any man, especially any man who had a direct message like
this, for wanting, or, say, even demanding a meeting?  Haven't I
the right?  Come, now!"

Carlisle made no immediate answer, and was about to turn on his
heel, finding it hard to restrain himself.  He paused, however.

"Very good, then.  To show how little you know me, and how much you
wrong both this lady and myself, you shall meet her, as you say.
Not that you have earned the right."


CHAPTER III

THE QUESTION

The _Mount Vernon_, favored by a good stage of water, soon cleared
the narrow Monongahela channel, passed the confluence, and headed
down under full steam, all things promising well for a speedy and
pleasant run.  The sky was blue and cloudless, and the air fresh
with the tang of coming autumn.  Especially beautiful were the
shores which they now were skirting.  The hues of autumn had been
shaken down over mile after mile of wide forest which appeared in a
panorama of russet and gold and red, to grow the more resplendent
when they should arrive opposite the high bluffs which line the
stream almost to the town of Wheeling.

Below these upper reaches, then the least settled and wildest
portion of the country along the Ohio, the river flattened and
widened, the current becoming more gentle, and the shores, though
not yet wholly cleared of their forests, presenting here and there
scenes of rural rather than of savage beauty.  Civilization had not
as yet taken full hold along this rich valley.  The old town of
Marietta, the cities of Louisville and Cincinnati, the villages
huddled at mouths of such rivers as came down from the Virginia
hills, or the larger settlements marking points near the
debouchments of slower streams like the Muskingum and Wabash, which
crossed the flatter lands beyond, made the chief points of traffic
and of interest in those days of west bound travel.

On the upper deck or along the rails of the lower deck, many
passengers were gazing out at the varying pictures of the passing
shores.  Not so the young officer, erstwhile accosted as jailer of
a woman, later hinted to be something else than jailer.  With eyes
cast down, he spent most of his time pacing up and down alone.  Yet
it was not an irresolute soul which reposed beneath the half-frigid
exterior.  He presently arrived upon a plan of action.

The public, too, had its rights, he concluded, and the woman as a
woman had her rights also to her good fame.  He must not harm her
name.  Best then, to disarm suspicion by playing the game wholly in
the open.  The midday meal now being announced by loud proclamation
of the boat's gong, he turned, and soon rapped at the door of room
nineteen.

Jeanne, the tearful but faithful maid who shared her mistress'
fortunes, by this time had done what she could to mend her lady's
appearance.  The traces of travel had been quite removed, by virtue
of the contents of such valises as they had with them.  Good health
and youth, as well as good courage, fought for Josephine St. Auban,
as well as good sense and a philosophy of travel learned by
experiences in other lands.  If indeed she had not slept, at least
her face did not betray that fact.  Her color was good, her eye was
clear.  Her dark hair, brushed low over the temples in the fashion
of the day, was fresh and glossy.  Moreover, her habiliments were
such as to cause most of the feminine occupants of the boat to make
careful note, when she had accepted Carlisle's escort and entered
the dining-room.  She walked with calmness to the table reserved
for her, and with inclination of the head thanked him as he
arranged her chair for her.  Thus in a way the gauntlet was by both
thrown down to all present.

Most of those present without hesitation showed their interest.
The hum of the dingy tables slackened and ceased.  A score of women
frowned at a score of men whose glances wandered undutifully.  Who
was she, and what?  That question certainly passed in the minds of
most in the crowded little room.  Meantime, Josephine St. Auban's
own eyes were not unregardful.

"I see that my guess was quite correct," she said at length,
smiling full at her guardian.

At once he caught her thought.  "Oh, about Mr. Dunwody," he
assented, assuming a carelessness which she read through at once.
"Yes, I met him--a while ago.  He told me he had suddenly decided
to change his plans and take the Vernon down the river, instead of
going by stage.  Very natural of him, too, I should say.  I would
be much distressed to think of myself traveling by coach, even in
weather pleasant as this.  He has keen eyes, though, has he not?"
he added resentfully.

"That is to say--"

"So hard hit that he threatens a duel or worse if I do not at once
further his desire to pursue his acquaintance.  It's not myself
he's so eager to meet.  He has no love for me, that's sure, long
ago."

"Indeed?"  She kept her eyes fixed on her plate.  If a slight flush
tinged her cheek it scarce was visible.  "Is that all?" she asked
at length.

"Madam, you yourself could best answer your own question."  He
looked at her keenly, not showing his case; not telling her that
Dunwody had shown him her hasty note.  Not the flicker of an
eyelash betrayed her own thought.  Surely, she had courage.
Surely, she meant trouble.

"How delightful!" she resumed at length calmly.  "Not that I weary
of your company, sir; but I told you my parole was ended when we
reached the boat.  Suppose, now, I should stand up here and cry out
that I am being restrained of my liberty.  What would be the
result?"

"I should be hung at the yard-arm instantly!  I should be lynched.
Dunwody would come in the lead, crashing over the tables.  I fear
Dunwody, even bearing a rope, as we used to say--in Virgil, was it?"

"Admirable! Now, since that is true, suppose you and I make some
sort of terms!  I'm tired of being jailed, even in a traveling
jail.  I told you fairly I should try to escape; and so I shall."

He needed no second look to catch the resolution in her glance.
"Our game is somewhat desperate, Madam, I admit," said he, "I
scarcely know whether you are in my hands or I in yours.  As I have
already given you consideration, let us hope you will do as much
for me, remembering at least the delicacy of my position.  I'm
under orders; and I'm responsible for you."

"Yes?" she rejoined.  "Now, as to what I suggest, it is this: You
shall leave the boat at Louisville or Cincinnati.  Your errand is
already sufficiently well done.  You have got me out of Washington.
Suppose we set Cincinnati as the last point of our common journey?"

"But what then for you.  Madam?"

"As to that, I can not tell.  Why should you care?  Do not be
concerned over details.  You have brought me into this situation.
I must escape from it in my own way."

"You sting me deeply.  I've had to do this, just as an executioner
may have to cut off a head; but a thousand times I ask your pardon.
A thousand times you, yourself, have made me ashamed.  Come, when
we part, shall it not be as friends?  You have won my respect, my
admiration.  I wish I were entitled to your own.  You've been
perfect.  You've been splendid."

"Look," she said, without raising her eyelids.

He turned.  Dunwody was making his way toward them among the tables.

"My dear Senator," said Carlisle, choking down his wrath as the
Missourian reached them and bowed his salutations, "I have the
greatest pleasure in the world in keeping my promise to you.  I am
delighted to have you join our little party at this time.  You
remember the Countess--I would say, Miss Barren?"

"I have not so soon forgotten," answered Dunwody.  His commanding
eyes still sought her face.  Beyond a slight bow and one upward
glance, she did not display interest; yet in truth a sudden shiver
of apprehension came into her heart.  This was a different sort of
man she now must endeavor to handle.  What was it that his straight
glance meant?

It was a singular situation in which these three found themselves.
That she had asked the aid of this new-comer was a fact known to
all three of them.  Yet of the three, none knew precisely the
extent of the others' knowledge.  Dunwody at least was polite, if
insistent, in his wish to learn more of this mysterious young woman
who had appealed to him for aid, yet who now made no further sign.
Who was she?  What _sort_ was she? he demanded of himself.  God! if
she was one sort.  And why should she _not_ be that sort?  Did not
the River carry many sorts?  Was not the army ever gallant?  What
officer ever hesitated in case of a fair damsel?  And what fair
damsel was not fair game in the open contest among men--that old,
old, oldest and keenest of all contests since this hoary world
began?

"I am sure the fatigue of the journey across the mountains must
have left you quite weary," he ventured, addressing her.  "There's
only the choice of sleeping, or of hanging over the deck rail and
looking at these hills."  He waved a hand toward a window, whence
might be seen the near-by shores.

Josephine St. Auban showed no sign of perturbation as she answered:
"Not so weary as busy.  The duties of an amanuensis leave one small
time for recreation."  Her face was demureness itself.

[Illustration: Josephine showed no sign of perturbation.]

The situation assumed swift complications.  Carlisle caught his
cue, with alertness fairly to be called brilliant.  "Yes," said he,
"the young lady is of foreign education and family, and is most
skilful in these respects.  I should find it difficult to carry
forward my literary work without her able assistance.  It is a boon
which even few public men have shared with myself.  You know, I am
in the West in view of certain writings."  He virtuously sat erect,
with a fine air, presently pushing back his chair.

Dunwody looked from one to the other in perplexity.  He had
expected to find a woman claiming his aid, or rather his
acquaintance under excuse of a plea for aid.  He found both these
apparently in league against him, and one of these apparently after
all not what he had thought!  His face flushed.  Meantime Josephine
St. Auban arose, bowed, and left them.

When the two men found themselves alone, Dunwody, for a time lost
in moody silence, at length broke out into a peal of laughter.
"Well, human nature is human nature, I suppose.  I make no comment,
further than to say that I consider all the lady's fears were
groundless.  She has been well treated.  There was no need to call
for _my_ aid.  The army is hard to defeat, Captain, and always was!"

"I had not myself regarded any officer in the light of an oppressor
of the distressed amanuensis," he went on.  "But come now, who is
she?  You started to call her 'Countess.'  Since when have
countesses gone into secretarying?  Tut!  Tut! and again, my dear
man, Tut!"

"Sir," replied Carlisle, "I recall that when I was a youth, some of
us, members of the Sabbath-school class, occasionally would ask our
teacher a question on the Scriptures which he could not answer.  In
that case he always said, 'My dear young friends, there are some
things which are not for man to know.'"

"I accept my temporary defeat," said Dunwody slowly.  "We'll see.
But come, now, Captain, time is passing and the tables are yearning
for trouble.  The army is distinguished not alone in love.
Draw-poker hath its victories, not less than war.  I told Jones and
Judge Clayton and one or two others that I was pining for a little
game of draw.  What do you say?  Should not all lesser questions be
placed in abeyance?"

"That," said the other, "comes to me at the present moment in the
nature of an excellent compromise measure.  I am agreed!"

Fencing thus, neither sure of his adversary, they now made their
way to one of the larger saloons, which ordinarily was devoted to
those who preferred to smoke, mayhap to chew, perhaps even to do
worse; for the door leading to the bar-room of the boat was near at
hand.  A darky boy stood grinning, arranging a table, offering
cards and tobacco in a tempting tray.  The two drew up leisurely to
the table, and presently were joined by the gentlemen whom Dunwody
had mentioned.  For the time, then, as two of the four reflected,
there was a truce, a compromise.


CHAPTER IV

THE GAME

They made a group not uninteresting as they gathered about the
table in the deck saloon.  The youngest of the four received the
deference generally accorded the uniform he wore, and returned the
regard due age and station in the civilian world.  For the moment
rid of one annoying question, he was quite his better self, and
added his quota in the preliminary badinage of the game.  Across
the table from him sat Judge Henry Clayton of New Madrid, a tall
and slender gentleman with silky white mustaches and imperial,
gentle of speech, kindly of countenance, and with soft, white
hands, whose long fingers now idly raised and let fall some of the
parti-colored tokens of the game.

[Illustration: They made a group not uninteresting.]

At Clayton's side, Dunwody, younger, larger and more powerful, made
something of a contrast.  Both these gentlemen had removed their
coats and hung them across the backs of chairs, evidently intending
a serious session.  In this procedure the last of the party now
followed suit,--the Honorable William Jones, state senator from
Belmont, Missouri.  Seating himself, the latter now in turn began
shuffling a pack between fingers short, puffy, freckled and
experienced.  His stooped shoulders thrust forward a beardless
round face, whose permanently arched eyebrows seemed to ask a
continuous question, his short, dark hair receded from a high
forehead, and a thick mid-body betokened alike middle age and easy
living.  A planter of the back country, and a politician, his
capital was a certain native shrewdness and little else.  Of
course, in company such as this, and at such a day, the
conversation must drift toward the ever fruitful topic of slavery.

"No, sir," began the Honorable William Jones, indulging himself in
the luxury of tobacco as he addressed his companions, "there ain't
no doubt about it.  Us Southerners orto take all that new country
west of the Missoury, clean acrost to the Pacific."

The older gentleman smiled at him.  "You forget California," said
he.  "She is already in, and free by her own vote."

"An' a crime aginst the natural rights of the South!  Sir, the
institution of slavery is as old as history.  It is as old as the
first settlement of agricultural man upon one piece of ground.
It's as old as the idea of sovereignty itself."

Dunwody gave a sly wink at his neighbor, Judge Clayton.  The latter
sank back in his chair resigned.  Indeed, he proceeded to
precipitate what he knew was to come.

"Sir, England herself," he assented gravely, "is the oldest of
slavers.  The Saxons, of whom we speak as the fathers of freedom,
were the worst slave masters in the world--they sold their very kin
into slavery at times."

The Honorable William Jones was impatient of interruption.  "Comin'
to our own side of the sea, gentlemen, what do we find?  New
England foremost in the slave trade!  New York, ownin' onct more
slaves than Virginny ever did!  Georgia was fo'ced to take on slave
labor, although she had tried to do without it.  _Every_ race,
_every_ nation, sirs, has accepted the theory of slave labor.  What
says Mr.  Gibbon in his great work--in his remarkable work, his
treasure house of learnin'--_The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire_--if I had my copy here I could put my finger on to the very
place where he says it, sirs.  Why, sirs, in the _Decline and
Fall_--I could show you the very line and chapter if I had my copy
here--but it's up in my room--I could show you the very chapter on
slavery, by the Lord Harry! sir, where Mr.  Foote, of the state of
Mississippi, in his last speech down in that country, sirs,--"

"Now, now, Jones," Dunwody raised a restraining hand at length,
"just sit down.  Don't go get your copy of the _Decline and Fall_.
We're willing to take some of that for granted.  Let's get at the
pleasant task of taking away all the money of this Free Soil
gentleman from the North.  _Non_ politics, _non_ religion, _sed_
poker!  That's why we're here."

The Honorable William Jones, his eloquence thus dammed up, seemed
to experience a sudden restriction of the throat, and coughed once
or twice.  "I will go against the said poker just onct," said he;
"but, ahem!"

"I would suggest," said Dunwody, "that before we tempt the gods of
fortune we should first pour a libation for their favor.  What do
you say, sir?"  He turned to Jones and winked at Clayton.

"No, no, no, sir!  No, I thank you just as much, but I never drink
more than onct in a day.  At home it varies.  On some days I like
my liquor in the mornin', some days just before bedtime, especially
if there is any malary about, as there is in most of my
country--indeed, I think there is some malary in these Ohio bottoms
up here."

"That fact is beyond dispute," ventured Judge Clayton gravely.  "In
short, I myself feel in danger as we pass through these heavy
forests."

"Quite so," assented the Honorable William Jones.  "Sometimes I
take a drink in the mornin' before breakfast, especially if there
is malary around, as I said; sometimes before dinner, but only one;
or, sometimes right after dinner, like now.  Difference among men,
ain't there?  Some say it's wrong to drink before breakfast.
Others say one drink then goes farther'n six later in the day.  For
me, now, only one drink a day.  Unless--that is, of course--unless
there is some very special occasion, such as--"

"Such as that offered by this most malarious country," ventured the
judge gravely.

"Well, yes, since you mention it, on such an occasion as this.  But
Tom--" turning to the colored boy, "Make it very light; ver-r-ry
light.  Hold on thah, you rascal, not too light!"

The Honorable William Jones set an example in which he was joined
temperately by the judge, the others contenting themselves in
completing their arrangements for the game.  The tokens were
distributed, and in accordance with the custom of the time, the
table soon was fairly well covered with money of divers sorts, gold
coin, a lesser amount of silver, bills issued by many and divers
banks in this or that portion of the country.

Silence fell when the game really began.  The Honorable William
Jones at first ever and anon threatened to erupt into Roman facts
and figures, but chilly glances made his answer.  Half an hour, and
the passing of time was forgot.

At first the cards ran rather severely against the judge, and
rather in favor of the historian, who played "the said poker" with
such thoroughness that presently there appeared before him a ragged
pile of currency and coin.  Dunwody and Carlisle were losers, but
finally Dunwody began to edge in upon the accumulated winnings of
his neighbor on the right.  An hour passed, two hours, more.  The
boat plowed on down-stream.  Presently the colored boy began to
light lamps.  There came to the faces of all the tense look, the
drawn and lined visage which is concomitant to play for
considerable stakes.  A frown came on the florid countenance of the
young officer.  The pile of tokens and currency before him lessened
steadily.  At last, in fact, he began to show uneasiness.  He
thrust a hand into a pocket where supplies seemed to have grown
scarce.  There is small mercy in a game of poker hard played, but
at least one of his opponents caught some such signal of distress.
Dunwody looked up from his own last hand.

"Don't leave us just yet, friend," he said.  "You may draw on me
for all you like, if you care to continue.  We shall see that you
get a ticket back home.  No man can ask more than that!"

"I have a thousand acres of cotton land 'n a hunnerd niggers
waitin' for me to git home," said the Honorable William Jones, "an'
by hockey, I raise the ante to twenty dollars right hyer!  Are you
all comin' in?"

"I have at least that much left in my locker," answered Judge
Clayton.  "What do you say to doubling that?"

"Suit me," said Dunwody briefly; they nodded assent all around, but
the younger man ventured:

"Suppose I sit with you for one jack-pot, gentlemen.  The hour is
growing late for me, and I must plead other duties.  When a man is
both busy and broke, it is time for him to consider."

"No, no," expostulated the Honorable William Jones, who long since
had forgotten his rule regarding one drink a day.  "No, no, not
broke, and not busy!  Not at all!"

"I don't know," said Dunwody.  "Suppose we make it one more
jack-pot all around?"  They agreed to this.  It was Judge Clayton's
deal.

"Gimme at least three," began the senator from Belmont, puckering
out his lips in discontent.

"Three good ones," consented the judge.  "How many for the rest of
you?"

Dunwody shook his head.  "I'll stand as it is, please."

The judge quietly discarded two cards, Carlisle having done the
same.  The betting now went about with more than one increase from
the Honorable William Jones, whose eyes apparently were seeing
large.  At last the "call" came from Carlisle, who smilingly moved
the bulk of his remaining fortune toward the center of the table.
Thereupon, with a bland and sane smile, the Honorable William Jones
shook his head and folded his cards together.  The judge displayed
queens and tens, the gentleman opposite queens and deuces.  Dunwody
laid down his own hand, which showed aces and fours.  They all
sighed.

"Gentlemen, you all deserve to win," said Dunwody.  "I feel like a
thief."

"I have a thousand acres of niggers 'n four hunnerd cotton lands,"
remarked the Honorable William Jones, amiably, "says you can't do
it again.  I can prove it from Mr. Gibbon's _'Cline 'n Fall_."

Judge Clayton rose, laughing, slapping Dunwody on the shoulder and
giving an arm to Mr. Jones, whom he assisted to his room.


CHAPTER V

SPOLIA OPIMA

Dunwody remained seated at the table, carelessly shuffling the
cards between his fingers.  Once in a while he cast an amused
glance toward Carlisle, and at last remarked, as though continuing
an arrested thought:

"Amanuensis, is she?"  He chuckled.  The other ventured no reply.

"My dear sir, at your age, I congratulate you!  The choice of an
amanuensis is one very important for a public man, not less so, I
imagine, for a military man.  Consider the need--"

"I think that will do, my dear Dunwody," rejoined Carlisle at
length, the hot blood in his face.  "Frankly, this conversation is
unwelcome to me."

"I'll tell you what I'll do with you," exclaimed the Missourian
suddenly.  "I'll bet you every cent in this pile of my winnings
here that that young lady isn't your amanuensis, and never has
been.  I'll bet its like that she is no relative of yours.  I'll
bet it all over again that she is the most beautiful woman that
ever set foot on a boat on this river, or ever set foot on any
land.  Moreover, I'll bet again--"

"You might win a certain share of these wagers," smiled the young
officer, willing to pass by a possible argument.  "Moreover, I am
quite willing to discuss arrangements for changing the term of
servitude of this young lady.  I've been doing a little thinking
about one or two matters since this morning."

"What!"

"Quite right.  I wouldn't care to restrain her in any way, if she
cared to travel in other company.  Our work is well advanced toward
completion, as it is."

"Yet you came here with her?  Then what--?"

"Never mind what the relation may have been, my dear fellow.  It
irks me now.  Especially does this sort of conversation irk me,
because it is not fair to the young lady herself."

Dunwody drew in his breath with a strong sigh.  He sat up straight
in his chair, then rested an arm on the table, as he leaned forward
toward the other.  "A young lady has had a poor protector who would
not protect her name.  Of course!"

"In any case," smiled Carlisle, forcing the frown away from his
face, "my fortunes need mending now.  Do you think I could continue
a journey down the river in company so strong at cards as yours?
At a later time, if you like, I will endeavor to get my revenge."

"Suppose you have it now," said Dunwody calmly.  "Haven't you just
heard me say I haven't the means?"

"You have as much as I have."

"Tut! tut!  I don't borrow to play cards."

"You do not need to borrow.  I say, your stake equals mine, and we
will play at evens, too.  Come, deal one hand, poker between two,
and to the hilt."

The other man looked at him and gazed at the heaped pile of coins
and notes which lay before him.  He himself was no pale-blooded
opponent, nor usually disposed to slight the opportunities of the
game.  "I don't understand," said he finally.  "Certainly I am not
willing to pledge my land and 'niggers,' like our friend from
Belmont here.  Perhaps my fall has been hard enough not to tempt me
to go on with my sort of luck.  Suppose I decline!"

"You don't understand me," said Dunwody, looking him fair in the
face.  "I said that your stake can easily be equal with this on the
table.  I'll play you just two out of three jack-pots between the
two of us.  You see my stake."

"But mine?"

"You can make it even by writing one name--and correctly--here on a
piece of paper.  Full value--yes, ten times as much as mine!  You
are giving odds, man!"

"I don't understand you."

"You don't want to understand me.  Come, now.  You, as an army man,
ought to know something of the history of poker in these United
States.  Listen, my friend.  Do you recall a certain game played by
a man higher in authority--younger than he is to-day--a game played
upon a snowbound train in the North country?  Do you remember what
the stakes were--then?  Do you recall that that man later became a
president of the United States?  Come.  There is fine precedent for
our little enterprise."

The swift flush on the face of the other man made his answer.
Dunwody went on mercilessly:

"He played then much as you do now.  There was against him then, as
there is now against you, a man who admired not so much just one
woman in all the world as, let us say, one particular woman then
and there present.  Perhaps you remember his name--Mr. Parish--later
ennobled by the German government and long known as a land baron in
New York.  Come!  Think of it!  Picture that snowbound train, that
great citizen, and Parish, playing and playing, until at last it
came to the question of a woman--not so beautiful as this one here,
but in her own way shrewd, _the same sort of woman_, I might
say--mysterious, beautiful, and--no, don't protest, and I'll not
describe.  You remember very well her name. It was pleasant
property not so long ago for everybody.  They played for the _love_,
not for the hand, of that woman.  Parish won her.  Do you remember
now?"

The younger man sat looking at him silently, his face now grown
quite pale.  "I am unwilling, sir, to allow any man to mention such
details regarding the past life of my commander-in-chief, a
president of the United States.  It is not seemly.  My profession
should free me, by its very nature, from conversation such as this.
My errand should free me.  My place as a gentleman should free me,
and her, from such discussion.  It must, it shall, sir!"

"Forgive me," said Dunwody, coloring.  "Your rebuke is just.  I ask
your pardon freely; but remember, what I say here is between us
two, and no one else.  Why deny yourself the luxury of remembering
such a game as that?  It was a man's game, and well worth the
playing.  Your former head of the army, at least, lost; and he
paid.  The other won.  All Ogdensburg can tell you about that
to-day.  They lived there--together--Parish and the woman, till he
went abroad.  Yes, and she was a prisoner there not simply for a
short time; she lived and died there.  Whatever Parish did, whoever
he was, he never loved any other woman as he did that one.  And by
the Lord! when it comes to that, no other woman in that town ever
was loved more than she by everybody.  Odd creatures, women, eh?
Who can find them out?  Who can weigh them, who can plumb their
souls?  But, my God! who can do without them?"

Carlisle made no answer, and Dunwody went on.  "She had political
intrigues back of her, just as this woman here has, for all I know.
But one lost in that game, and the other, won.  I've often wondered
about that particular game of cards, my friend,--whether after all
she loved the man who won her, right or wrong,--what became of
her,--who she was?  But now, tell me, was not our drunken friend
right?  Has human nature changed since Rome?  And has not the
conqueror always ruled?  Have not the _spolia opima_, the rarest
prizes, always been his?"

Carlisle only sat silent, looking at him, pale now, and rigid.  He
still made no comment.

"So now I say," went on Dunwody, "here is that same situation,
twice in one lifetime!  It's ominous, for somebody.  There is
trouble in the air, for some or all of us.  But I say I offer you
fair play, even, man to man.  I ask no questions.  I will not take
any answers, any more than those two would have allowed any, that
day on the train there, when they played, ten years or more ago.
That was a foreign woman.  So is this, I think.  She is the most
beautiful woman I have ever seen.  I have looked her in the face.
I shall never see such another face again.  Man, I'm mad over her.
And you've just said you'd loose your hold on her, whatever it
is--for her sake.  By God!  once my hold was on her, she never
should get away--again."

"What do you propose?" asked the other hoarsely.

"I propose only to offer you that same game over again!" replied
Dunwody.  "Man, what an uncanny thing this is!  But, remember one
thing,--no matter what comes, I shall never mention our meeting
here.  I am not your keeper."

"Sir," broke out the other, "you embarrass me unspeakably.  You do
not know the circumstances.  I can not tell--"

"Pardon me, I make no taunts, and I have said I tell no tales.  But
my word of honor, man,--I will play you,--two out of three, to
see--who takes her." His voice was low, tense, savage.

The younger man sat back in his chair.  One knowing his tempestuous
nature might have expected anger, consternation, resentment, to
remain on his face.  On the contrary, a sudden light seemed to come
into his countenance.  Suddenly he stifled a smile!  He passed a
hand across his brow, as though to assure himself.  It was not so
much confidence or resolution as half deliberation which shone in
his eye as he cast a glance upon the heap of money on the opposite
side of the table.  Yet no sordid thought, no avarice was in his
gaze.  It was the look of the fanatic, the knight errant, resolved
upon deed of risk or sacrifice for sake of a woman's wish; but with
it was the amusement of a man who foresaw that difficulties lay
ahead of him who essayed the role of jailer to Josephine, Countess
St. Auban.  What now passed across his countenance, little by
little, therefore, was relief, relaxation from a strain, a solution
of some doubtful problem.  In brief, there seemed offered to him
now the opportunity to terminate an errand which suddenly had grown
distasteful to him and dangerous both to him and to his charge.  At
one stroke he might secure for himself riddance of the company of
an embarrassing companion who already had served notice of her
intention to desert him; and might also keep silent this man, whom
she had asked for aid.  As for him, she would take his measure
quickly enough if he presumed in any way.  Would not the purpose of
his journey have been accomplished, might not he himself return to
his work, would not each of these three have been served to his or
her own liking, should now the suggestion of this eager man be
accepted?  If he won at the cards, why then--if he lost--but that
he resolved not to do!  The greatest misfortune possible, to his
perplexed soul, was that the cards should not be against him.  As
he reflected upon these things, he hesitated.  It was but to gain
time.

"Senator Dunwody," said he, at length, "you and I are from
different parts of the country--from two different worlds, you
might say.  You believe in slavery and the extension of it--I
believe in just the reverse.  I would sacrifice my professional
future, if need were, in that belief."  The other nodded, but his
eyes did not waver.

"Very good! Now, I want to say to you this much.  The young lady
who has been with me is dangerous.  She is an abolitionist of the
strictest sect.  She is very likely an European revolutionist,
among other things.  She is dangerous as such.  I think I can say
this much, and break no pledge of confidence."

"That isn't how she is dangerous to me.  But is that the crime for
which you transport her for life?" smiled the other.  His shot came
so close that his companion raised a hand.

"I don't deny, don't explain, don't argue," he retorted curtly.  "I
only say that I shall be willing to part with her services and turn
her over to your own care, if you _both_ so like.  We know she has
appealed to you for aid.  My own errand, if you please, is near to
its close.  It has been--"

"Cut the cards, man!" cried the Missourian.  It was lucky that he
interrupted.  He was just in time to prevent the other from making
the mistake of saying what was the truth--that he was in any case
about to leave the young lady to her own devices, and by her own
request.  The game which he most valued now was not on the table
before him.  He was playing it in his own mind.  In short, duty or
no duty, he was resolved to end the role of jailer and prisoner,
for sake of the prisoner herself.  Let others attempt the
unpleasant task if they liked.  Let others condemn if they liked.
He, Carlisle, could be jailer no longer.  Yet he deliberated well
the risk he ran.

"It would be ruin to me if this were known, Senator Dunwody, and of
that you are perfectly aware."'

"I know that as well as you, but there can be honor even in
politics, war, or--love.  I have given you my word.  Deal!"

"You are impatient.  You rejoice as a strong man to run a race, my
dear sir."

"I _do_ run a race.  I _am_ strong.  Play!  It is in the cards that
I must win."

"But if you should lose?"

"I shall not lose!"

His insistence, his confidence, almost caused the older man to
laugh.  "No, my friend," said he to himself, "you shall not lose!"
But what he said aloud was, "You must not be excited, Dunwody.  You
may need all your nerve.  I thought you cooler in times of stress."

"You don't know me.  I don't know myself.  Perhaps it is ice in
your blood--I don't know,--it's fire in mine."

"Very well,--I hope you like the cards I have given you."  But
there was no ice in the red flush on Carlisle's sanguine face,

"Give me four more," cried the Missourian, flinging down his own
cards with hands that trembled.

"Quite right, sir, you shall have them.  But how you tremble! I
wouldn't have so poor a nerve as yours for all the money in the
world, my dear Senator.  You act as though there were four hundred
acres of niggers at stake, as Mr. Jones would say!"

"Go on!  You don't know what there is at stake."

"So, now.  You have your four cards.  For myself--though you are so
excited you wouldn't notice it if I did not call your attention to
it--I take but three.  You are an infant, man.  See that you be not
delivered into the hands of the enemy."

They looked now each into his renewed hand of five cards.  Dunwody
swept a stack of money toward the center of the table.  "A thousand
dollars against one look from her eye!"

"My dear sir," rejoined the other calmly, "you are raised to the
extent of two glances--one from each eye."

"Another thousand for the touch of her glove."

"I come back.  You shall have a pair."

"A thousand more to hear the sound of her step--another thousand
for one smile!"

Carlisle's voice trembled, but he forced himself under control.
"My dear sir, you shall have all you wish! I am sure if she could
see you now she herself would be disposed to smile.  You do not yet
understand that woman.  But now, suppose that the betting has gone
far enough?  What cards have you?  For myself, I discover that I
have drawn four kings.  I trust that you have four aces of your
own."

There was sincerity in this wish, but Dunwody answered gloomily:
"You gave me three tens and a pair of fives, with what I held.  You
have won the first round."

He dashed a hand, and cleared the square of matted hair from his
forehead, which now was beaded.  Red, florid, full-blooded, balked
in his eagerness, he looked as savage as some denizen of the
ancient forest, in pursuit as reckless, as ill-suited with
ill-fortune.

"My deal," said he, at length, in a voice half a growl.  And later,
"How many?"

"I shall, if you please, require but one card," was the quiet
answer.  Dunwody himself required two.  They sat narrowly eying
each other, although there was in this close duel small advantage
for either except in the run of the cards themselves.

"It is perhaps needless for us to waste time, since I can not
divide my stakes," smiled the younger gentleman.

Again with a half growl, Dunwody threw down his cards, face upward.
His teeth were clenched, all his muscles set, all his attitude
strained, tense.

"You have won, my dear Senator!  I failed to improve my four cards,
which, it is true, were of one color, but which I regret to say
still remain of the one color and of no better company!"

"It is even!" exclaimed Dunwody.  "Come!"

The cards went around once more, and once more the officer asked
for a single card.  Once again he lost.

Dunwody drew back with a deep sigh.  "Look!" he said, "of my three
cards, two were what I wanted--aces, aces, man!--four of them!  By
every token, I have won.  It's fate!"

The face of his opponent was a study.  His eyebrows went up in
pleasant expostulation at the other's eagerness.  "So, then," said
he, "I suppose I must pay my stake, much to my regret.  Ah! how
fortune has run against me to-day.  And so, here it is,--I write
her name for you once more--this time her real name, so far as any
in America know it--thus,--Josephine, Countess St. Auban, of
France, of Hungary, of America, abolitionist, visionary, firebrand.
There, then,--though I think you will find the matter of taking
possession somewhat difficult to compass--so far as I am concerned,
she is, with all my heart, yours to have and to hold, _if you can_!
My duty to her is over.  Yours begins, I hope!"

Dunwody found no speech.  He was pale, and breathing fast.

Gravity increased in the other's demeanor.  His face now looked
drawn, weary.  But come along here."
But when Tom tried to get up, he was so tired and giddy that she had
to help him and lead him.

She put him in an outhouse upon soft sweet hay and an old rug, and
bade him sleep off his walk, and she would come to him when school
was over, in an hour's time.

And so she went in again, expecting Tom to fall fast asleep at once.

But Tom did not fall asleep.

Instead of it he turned and tossed and kicked about in the strangest
way, and felt so hot all over that he longed to get into the river
and cool himself; and then he fell half asleep, and dreamt that he
heard the little white lady crying to him, "Oh, you're so dirty;
go and be washed;" and then that he heard the Irishwoman saying,
"Those that wish to be clean, clean they will be."

And then he heard the church-bells ring so loud, close to him too,
that he was sure it must be Sunday, in spite of what the old dame
had said; and he would go to church, and see what a church was
like inside, for he had never been in one, poor little fellow, in
all his life. But the people would never let him come in, all over
soot and dirt like that. He must go to the river and wash
first.
And he said out loud again and again, though being half asleep he
did not know it, "I must be clean, I must be clean."

And all of a sudden he found himself, not in the outhouse on the
hay, but in the middle of a meadow, over the road, with the
stream just before him, saying continually, "I must be clean, I
must be clean."

He had got there on his own legs, between sleep and awake, as
children will often get out of bed, and go about the room, when
they are not quite well.

But he was not a bit surprised, and went on to the bank of the
brook, and lay down on the grass, and looked into the clear, clear
limestone water, with every pebble at the bottom bright and clean,
while the little silver trout dashed about in fright at the sight
of his black face; and he dipped his hand in and found it so cool,
cool, cool; and he said, "I will be a fish; I will swim in the
water; I must be clean, I must be clean."

So he pulled off all his clothes in such haste that he tore some
of them, which was easy enough with such ragged old things. And he
put his poor hot sore feet into the water; and then his
legs; and the farther he went in, the more the church-bells rang
in his head.

"Ah," said Tom, "I must be quick and wash myself; the bells
are ringing quite loud now; and they will stop soon, and then the
door will be shut, and I shall never be able to get in at all."

Tom was mistaken: for in England the church doors are left open all
service time, for everybody who likes to come in, Churchman or
Dissenter; ay, even if he were a Turk or a Heathen; and if any
man dared to turn him out, as long as he behaved quietly, the good
old English law would punish that man, as he deserved, for ordering
any peaceable person out of God's house, which belongs to all alike.

But Tom did not know that, any more than he knew a great deal more
which people ought to know.

And all the while he never saw the Irishwoman, not behind
him this time, but before.

For just before he came to the river side, she had stept down into
the cool clear water; and her shawl and her petticoat floated off
her, and the green water-weeds floated round her sides,
and the white water-lilies floated round her head, and the fairies
of the stream came up from the bottom and bore her away and down
upon their arms; for she was the Queen of them all; and perhaps of
more besides.

"Where have you been?" they asked her.

"I have been smoothing sick folks' pillows, and whispering sweet
dreams into their ears; opening cottage casements, to let out the
stifling air; coaxing little children away from gutters, and foul
pools where fever breeds; turning women from the gin-shop door, and
staying men's hands as they were going to strike their wives; doing
all I can to help those who will not help themselves: and little
enough that is, and weary work for me.

But I have brought you a new little brother, and watched him safe
all the way here."
Then all the fairies laughed for joy at the thought that they had
a little brother coming.

"But mind, maidens, he must not see you, or know that you are
here.

He is but a savage now, and like the beasts which perish; and
from the beasts which perish he must learn.

So you must not play with him, or speak to him, or let him see
you: but only keep him from being harmed."
Then the fairies were sad, because they could not play with their
new brother, but they always did what they were told.

And their Queen floated away down the river; and whither she
went, thither she came.

  But all this Tom, of
  course, never saw or heard:
  and perhaps if he had it would have made little difference
  in the story; for was so hot and thirsty, and longed so to
  be clean for once, that he tumbled himself as
  quick as he could into the clear cool stream.
  
  And he had not been in it two minutes before he fell fast asleep,
into the quietest, sunniest, cosiest sleep that ever he had in his
life; and he dreamt about the green meadows by which he had walked
that morning, and the tall elm-trees, and the sleeping cows; and
after that he dreamt of nothing at all.

  The reason of his falling into such a delightful
  sleep is very simple; and yet hardly any one has
  found it out. It was merely that the fairies
  took him.
  
    Some people think that there are no fairies.

Cousin Cramchild tells little folks so in his Conversations.
Well, perhaps there are none--in Boston, U.S., where he was raised.

There are only a clumsy lot of spirits there, who can't make people hear
without thumping on the table: but they get their living thereby,
and I suppose that is all they want. And Aunt Agitate, in her Arguments
on political economy, says there are none. Well, perhaps there are
none--in her political economy. But it is a wide world, my little
man--and thank Heaven for it, for else, between crinolines and
theories, some of us would get squashed--and plenty of room in it
for fairies, without people seeing them; unless, of course, they
look in the right place.

The most wonderful and the strongest things in the world, you know,
are just the things which no one can see. There is life in you; and
it is the life in you which makes you grow, and move, and think:
and yet you can't see it. And there is steam in a steam-engine;
and that is what makes it move:
and yet you can't see it; and so there may be fairies in the world,
and they may be just what makes the world go round to the old tune
of

"C'est l'amour, l'amour, l'amour Qui fait la monde a la ronde:"

and yet no one may be able to see them except those whose hearts
are going round to that same tune.

At all events, we will make believe that there are fairies in the
world. It will not be the last time by many a one that we shall
have to make believe. And yet, after all, there is no need for that.
There must be fairies; for this is a fairy tale: and how can one
have a fairy tale if there are no fairies?

You don't see the logic of that? Perhaps not. Then please not to see
the logic of a great many arguments exactly like it, which you will
hear before your beard is gray.

The kind old dame came back at twelve, when school was over, to
look at Tom: but there was no Tom there. She looked about for his
footprints; but the ground was so hard that there was no slot, as
they say in dear old North Devon.

And if you grow up to be a brave healthy man, you may know some
day what no slot means, and know too, I hope, what a slot does
mean--a broad slot, with blunt claws, which makes a man put out his
cigar, and set his teeth, and tighten his girths, when he sees it;
and what his rights mean, if he has them, brow, bay, tray, and
points; and see something worth seeing between Haddon Wood and
Countisbury Cliff, with good Mr.

Palk Collyns to show you the way, and mend your bones as fast as
you smash them.

Only when that jolly day comes, please don't break your neck; stogged
in a mire you never will be, I trust; for you are a heath-cropper
bred and born.

So the old dame went in again quite sulky, thinking that little Tom
had tricked her with a false story, and shammed ill, and then run
away again.

But she altered her mind the next day. For, when Sir John and the
rest of them had run themselves out of breath, and lost Tom,
they went back again, looking very foolish.

And they looked more foolish still when Sir John heard more of the
story from the nurse; and more foolish still, again, when they
heard the whole story from Miss Ellie, the little lady in white.

All she had seen was a poor little black chimney-sweep, crying and
sobbing, and going to get up the chimney again.

Of course, she was very much frightened: and no wonder. But that
was all. The boy had taken nothing in the room; by the mark of his
little sooty feet, they could see that he had never been off the
hearthrug till the nurse caught hold of him. It was all a mistake.

So Sir John told Grimes to go home, and promised him five shillings
if he would bring the boy quietly up to him, without beating him,
that he might be sure of the truth.

For he took for granted, and Grimes too, that Tom had made his way
home.

But no Tom came back to Mr. Grimes that evening; and he went
to the police-office, to tell them to look out for the boy. But
no Tom was heard of. As for his having gone over those great fells
to Vendale, they no more dreamed of that than of his having gone
to the moon.

So Mr.

Grimes came up to Harthover next day with a very sour face; but when
he got there, Sir John was over the hills and far away; and Mr.

Grimes had to sit in the outer servants' hall all day, and drink
strong ale to wash away his sorrows; and they were washed away long
before Sir John came back.

For good Sir John had slept very badly that night; and he said to his
lady, "My dear, the boy must have got over into the grouse- moors,
and lost himself; and he lies very heavily on my conscience, poor
little lad.

But I know what I will do."
So, at five the next morning up he got, and into his bath, and into
his shooting-jacket and gaiters, and into the stableyard, like a
fine old English gentleman, with a face as red as a rose, and a
hand as hard as a table, and a back as broad as a bullock's; and
bade them bring his shooting pony, and the keeper to come on his
pony, and the huntsman, and the first whip, and the second whip,
and the under-keeper with the bloodhound in a leash--a great dog
as tall as a calf, of the colour of a gravel-walk, with mahogany
ears and nose, and a throat like a church-bell.

They took him up to the place where Tom had gone into the
wood; and there the hound lifted up his mighty voice, and told
them all he knew.

Then he took them to the place where Tom had climbed the wall; and
they shoved it down, and all got through.

And then the wise dog took them over the moor, and over the fells,
step by step, very slowly; for the scent was a day old, you know,
and very light from the heat and drought.

But that was why cunning old Sir John started at five in the
morning.

And at last he came to the top of Lewthwaite Crag, and there he bayed,
and looked up in their faces, as much as to say, "I tell you
he is gone down here!"
They could hardly believe that Tom would have gone so far; and when
they looked at that awful cliff, they could never believe that
he would have dared to face it. But if the dog said so, it must be
true.

"Heaven forgive us!"

said Sir John. "If we find him at all, we shall find him lying at
the bottom."

And he slapped his great hand upon his great thigh, and said -
"Who will go down over Lewthwaite Crag, and see if that boy is alive?

Oh that I were twenty years younger, and I would go down myself!"
And so he would have done, as well as any sweep in the county.
Then he said -

"Twenty pounds to the man who brings me that boy alive!"

and as was his way, what he said he meant.

Now among the lot was a little groom-boy, a very little groom
indeed; and he was the same who had ridden up the court, and told
Tom to come to the Hall; and he said -
"Twenty pounds or none, I will go down over Lewthwaite Crag, if
it's only for the poor boy's sake. For he was as civil a spoken
little chap as ever climbed a flue."
So down over Lewthwaite Crag he went: a very smart groom he was at
the top, and a very shabby one at the bottom; for he tore his
gaiters, and he tore his breeches, and he tore his jacket, and he
burst his braces, and he burst his boots, and he lost his hat, and
what was worst of all, he lost his shirt pin, which he prized very
much, for it was gold, and he had won it in a raffle at Malton, and
there was a figure at the top of it, of t'ould mare, noble old
Beeswing herself, as natural as life; so it was a really severe
loss: but he never saw anything of Tom.

And all the while Sir John and the rest were riding round, full three
miles to the right, and back again, to get into Vendale, and to the
foot of the crag.

When they came to the old dame's school, all the children came out
to see.

And the old dame came out too; and when she saw Sir John, she curtsied
very low, for she was a tenant of his.

"Well, dame, and how are you?" said Sir John.

"Blessings on you as broad as your back, Harthover," says she--she
didn't call him Sir John, but only Harthover, for that is the
fashion in the North country--"and welcome into Vendale: but you're
no hunting the fox this time of the year?"

"I am hunting, and strange game too," said he.

"Blessings on your heart, and what makes you look so sad the
morn?"
"I'm looking for a lost child, a chimney-sweep, that is run away."

"Oh, Harthover, Harthover," says she, "ye were always a just man
and a merciful; and ye'll no harm the poor little lad if I
give you tidings of him?"
"Not I, not I, dame.

I'm afraid we hunted him out of the house all on a miserable mistake,
and the hound has brought him to the top of Lewthwaite Crag,
and--"

Whereat the old dame broke out crying, without letting him finish his
story.

"So he told me the truth after all, poor little dear! Ah, first
thoughts are best, and a body's heart'll guide them right, if
they will but hearken to it." And then she told Sir John
all.

"Bring the dog here, and lay him on," said Sir John, without
another word, and he set his teeth very hard.

And the dog opened at once; and went away at the back of the cottage,
over the road, and over the meadow, and through a bit of alder
copse; and there, upon an alder stump, they saw Tom's clothes lying.

And then they knew as much about it all as there was any need to
know.

And Tom?

Ah, now comes the most wonderful part of this wonderful
story.

Tom, when he woke, for of course he woke--children always wake
after they have slept exactly as long as is good for them--found
himself swimming about in the stream, being about four inches, or--
that I may be accurate--3.87902 inches long and having round the
parotid region of his fauces a set of external gills (I hope you
understand all the big words) just like those of a sucking eft,
which he mistook for a lace frill, till he pulled at them, found
he hurt himself, and made up his mind that they were part of himself,
and best left alone.

In fact, the fairies had turned him into a water-baby.

A water-baby? You never heard of a water-baby. Perhaps not. That
is the very reason why this story was written.

There are a great many things in the world which you never heard
of; and a great many more which nobody ever heard of; and a great
many things, too, which nobody will ever hear of, at least until
the coming of the Cocqcigrues, when man shall be the measure of all
things.

"But there are no such things as water-babies."
How do you know that? Have you been there to see? And if you
had been there to see, and had seen none, that would not prove
that there were none.

If Mr. Garth does not find a fox in Eversley Wood--as folks sometimes
fear he never will--that does not prove that there are no such
things as foxes.

And as is Eversley Wood to all the woods in England, so are the waters
we know to all the waters in the world.

And no one has a right to say that no water- babies exist, till
they have seen no water-babies existing; which is quite a different
thing, mind, from not seeing water-babies; and a thing which nobody
ever did, or perhaps ever will do.

"But surely if there were water-babies, somebody would have caught
one at least?"
Well. How do you know that somebody has not?

"But they would have put it into spirits, or into the Illustrated
News, or perhaps cut it into two halves, poor dear little thing,
and sent one to Professor Owen, and one to Professor Huxley, to see
what they would each say about it."

Ah, my dear little man!

that does not follow at all, as you will see before the end of the
story.

"But a water-baby is contrary to nature."

Well, but, my dear little man, you must learn to talk about such
things, when you grow older, in a very different way from that.

You must not talk about "ain't" and "can't" when you speak of this
great wonderful world round you, of which the wisest man knows
only the very smallest corner, and is, as the great Sir Isaac
Newton said, only a child picking up pebbles on the shore
of a boundless ocean.

You must not say that this cannot be, or that that is contrary to
nature. You do not know what Nature is, or what she can do; and
nobody knows; not even Sir Roderick Murchison, or Professor Owen,
or Professor Sedgwick, or Professor Huxley, or Mr. Darwin, or
Professor Faraday, or Mr. Grove, or any other of the great men whom
good boys are taught to respect. They are very wise men; and you
must listen respectfully to all they say: but even if they should
say, which I am sure they never would, "That cannot exist. That is
contrary to nature," you must wait a little, and see; for perhaps
even they may be wrong.

It is only children who read Aunt Agitate's Arguments, or Cousin
Cramchild's Conversations; or lads who go to popular lectures, and
see a man pointing at a few big ugly pictures on the wall, or making
nasty smells with bottles and squirts, for an hour or two, and
calling that anatomy or chemistry- -who talk about "cannot exist,"
and "contrary to nature."

Wise men are afraid to say that there is anything contrary to
nature, except what is contrary to mathematical truth; for two and
two cannot make five, and two straight lines cannot join twice, and
a part cannot be as great as the whole, and so on (at least, so
it seems at present): but the wiser men are, the less they talk
about "cannot." That is a very rash, dangerous word, that "cannot";
and if people use it too often, the Queen of all the Fairies, who
makes the clouds thunder and the fleas bite, and takes just as much
trouble about one as about the other, is apt to astonish them
suddenly by showing them, that though they say she cannot, yet she
can, and what is more, will, whether they approve or not.

And therefore it is, that there are dozens and hundreds of things
in the world which we should certainly have said were contrary
to nature, if we did not see them going on under our eyes all day
long. If people had never seen little seeds grow into great plants
and trees, of quite different shape from themselves, and these
trees again produce fresh seeds, to grow into fresh trees, they
would have said, "The thing cannot be; it is contrary to nature."

And they would have been quite as right in saying so, as in saying
that most other things cannot be.

Or suppose again, that you had come, like M. Du Chaillu, a
traveller from unknown parts; and that no human being had
ever seen or heard of an elephant. And suppose that you described
him to people, and said, "This is the shape, and plan, and anatomy
of the beast, and of his feet, and of his trunk, and of his grinders,
and of his tusks, though they are not tusks at all, but two fore
teeth run mad; and this is the section of his skull, more like a
mushroom than a reasonable skull of a reasonable or unreasonable
beast; and so forth, and so forth; and though the beast (which I
assure you I have seen and shot) is first cousin to the little hairy
coney of Scripture, second cousin to a pig, and (I suspect) thirteenth
or fourteenth cousin to a rabbit, yet he is the wisest of all beasts,
and can do everything save read, write, and cast accounts."

People would surely have said, "Nonsense; your elephant is
contrary to nature;" and have thought you were telling stories--as
the French thought of Le Vaillant when he came back to Paris and
said that he had shot a giraffe; and as the king of the Cannibal
Islands thought of the English sailor, when he said that in his
country water turned to marble, and rain fell as feathers.

They would tell you, the more they knew of science, "Your elephant
is an impossible monster, contrary to the laws of comparative anatomy,
as far as yet known." To which you would answer the less, the more
you thought.

Did not learned men, too, hold, till within the last twenty-five
years, that a flying dragon was an impossible monster?

And do we not now know that there are hundreds of them found fossil
up and down the world?

People call them Pterodactyles: but that is only because they
are ashamed to call them flying dragons, after denying so long that
flying dragons could exist.

The truth is, that folks' fancy that such and such things cannot
be, simply because they have not seen them, is worth no more than
a savage's fancy that there cannot be such a thing as a locomotive,
because he never saw one running wild in the forest.

Wise men know that their business is to examine what is, and
not to settle what is not. They know that there are elephants;
they know that there have been flying dragons; and the wiser they
are, the less inclined they will be to say positively that there
are no water-babies.

No water-babies, indeed? Why, wise men of old said that everything
on earth had its double in the water; and you may see that that
is, if not quite true, still quite as true as most other theories
which you are likely to hear for many a day. There are land-babies--then
why not water-babies? Are there not water-rats, water-flies,
water-crickets, water-crabs, water-tortoises, water-scorpions,
water-tigers and water-hogs, water-cats and water-dogs, sea-lions
and sea-bears, sea-horses and sea-elephants, sea-mice and sea-
urchins, sea-razors and sea-pens, sea-combs and sea-fans; and of
plants, are there not water-grass, and water-crowfoot, water-
milfoil, and so on, without end?

"But all these things are only nicknames; the water things
are not really akin to the land things."
As much as though this were the Middle Ages, as
though these were implacable armed enemies who stood about her, and
not commonplace, every-day individuals in a commonplace land, she
was a prisoner.

"You shall suffer for this!" she exclaimed.  "There must be a law
somewhere in this country."

"That is true, Madam," said the captain, "and that is the trouble.
I'm told that my orders come from the _highest_ laws.  Certainly I
have no option in the matter.  I was told distinctly not to let you
off without his orders--not even to allow you to send any word
ashore."

"But the gentleman who accompanied me is no longer on the boat.  He
left me word that our journey in common was ended.  See, here is
his note."

"All I can say, Madam, is that this is not signed, and that he did
not tell me he was going to leave.  I can not allow you to go
ashore at this point.  In fact, I should consider you safer here on
the boat than anywhere else."

"Are there then no gentlemen in all the world?  Are you not a man
yourself?  Have you no pity for a woman in such plight as mine?"

"Your words cut me deeply, my dear lady.  I want to give you such
protection as I can.  Any man would do that.  I am a man, but also
I am an officer.  You are a woman, but apparently also some sort of
fugitive, I don't know just what.  We learn not to meddle in these
matters.  But I think no harm will come to you--I'm sure not, from
the care the gentlemen used regarding you.  Please don't make it
hard for me."

The boat was now alongside the dock at the river settlement, and
there was some stir at the gangway as room was made for the
reception of additional passengers.  As they looked over the rail
they discovered these to be made up of a somewhat singular group.
Two or three roughly dressed men were guarding as many prisoners.
Of the latter, two were coal black negroes.  The third was a young
woman apparently of white blood, of comely features and of composed
bearing in spite of her situation.  A second glance showed that all
these three were in irons.  Obviously then the law, which at that
time under the newly formed Compromise Acts allowed an owner to
follow his fugitive slaves into any state, was here finding an
example, one offering indeed all the extremes of cruelty both to
body and to soul.

"For instance, young lady, look at that," went on the boat captain,
turning to Josephine, who was carried back by the incoming rush of
the new passengers.  "It is something we see now and again on this
river.  Sometimes my heart aches, but what can I do?  That's the
law, too.  I have learned not to meddle."

[Illustration: "That's the law, too"]

"My God! My God!" exclaimed Josephine St. Auban, her eyes dilating
with horror, forgetting her own plight as she looked at the
spectacle before her.  "Can these things really be in America!  You
submit to this, and you are men?  Law?  Is there _any_ law?"

She did not hear the step behind them, but presently a voice broke
in.

"If you please, Captain Rogers," said Warville Dunwody, "I think it
will not be necessary to restrain this lady in any way.  By this
time she knows it will be better not to make any attempt to escape."

Jeanne, the maid, was first to see the distress in the face of her
mistress.

"_Infame_! _Infame_!" she cried, flying at them, her hands
clenched, her foot stamping.  "Dogs of pigs, you are not men, you
are not gentlemen!  See now!  See now!"

Tears stood in the eyes of Jeanne herself.  "Come," said she, and
put an arm about her mistress, leading her back toward the door of
the cabin.

"This is bad business, sir," said the older man, turning to
Dunwody.  "I don't understand all this case, but I'm almost ready
to take that girl's part.  Who is she?  I can't endure much longer
seeing a woman like that handled in this way.  You'll some of you
have to show me your papers before long."

"You ask me who she is," replied Dunwody slowly, "and on my honor I
can hardly tell you.  She is temporary ward of the government, that
much is sure.  You know very well the arm of the national
government is long.  You know, too, that I'm a state senator and
also a United States marshal in Missouri."

"But where do you come into this case, Senator?"

"I came into it last night at a little after nine o'clock,"
rejoined Dunwody.  "Her former guardian has turned her over to me.
She does not leave the boat till I do, at Cairo, where I change for
up-river; and when I go, she goes.  Don't pay any attention to any
outcry she may make.  She's my--property."

Captain Rogers pondered for a time, but at length his face broke
out into a sort of smile.  "There may be trouble ahead for you," he
began.  "It is like my old friend Bill Jones in there.  He buys him
a young filly last spring.  Goes over to bring the filly home, and
finds she isn't broke, and wild as a hawk.  So he puts a halter on
her and starts off to lead her home.  The filly rears up, falls
over and breaks her neck; so he's out his money and his pains.
Some sorts of women won't lead."

"They all do in time," rejoined Dunwody grimly.  "This one must."
The old boat captain shook his head.

"Some of them break their necks first," said he.  "This one's got
blood in her too, I tell you that."

Dunwody made no answer except to turn and walk down the deck.  The
captain, pondering on matters entirely beyond his comprehension,
but forced to accept the assurances of men such as these who had
appeared as guardians of this mysterious young woman, now returned
to his own quarters.  "I reckon it's none of my business," he
muttered.  "Some high-class forger or confidence worker that's beat
the government somehow, maybe.  But she don't look it--I'll be
damned if she looks it.  I wonder--?"

Dunwody, left to himself, began moodily to walk up and down the
narrow deck, his hands behind his back.  On his face was the red
fighting flush, but it was backed by no expression of definite
purpose, and his walk showed his mental uncertainty.  All at once
he turned and with decision passed down the stairs to the lower
deck.  He had heard voices which he recognized.

Judge Clayton had joined the party in charge of the fugitives, and
was now in conversation with the overseer, a short man clad in a
coarse blue jacket, with high boots and greasy leather trousers.
The latter was expatiating exultantly upon his own bravery and
shrewdness in effecting the recapture of his prisoners.

"Why, Jedge," said he, "fust off it di'n't look like we'd ever git
track of 'em at all.  I cotched the trail at Portsmouth at last,
and follered 'em back into Ohio.  They was shore on the
'underground' and bound for Canada, or leastways Chicago.  I found
'em in a house 'way out in the country--midnight it was when we got
thar.  I'd summonsed the sher'f and two constables to go 'long.
Farm-house was a underground railway station all right, and the
farmer showed fight.  We was too much fer him, and we taken 'em out
at last, but one of the constables got shot--some one fired right
through the winder at us.  This Lily gal was the wust of the lot,
and I don't put it a-past her to 'a' done some of the shootin'
herself.  But we brung 'em all along.

"Now, Jedge," he continued, "of co'se, I think I can do something
for these two bucks Bill and Jim--this gal only persuaded 'em to
run away with her.  But if I was you, I shore would sell that Lily
gal South, right away.  She's bound fer to make trouble, and
nothin' but trouble, fer you as long as you keep her round the
place."

The speaker, coarse and ignorant, presented a contrast to the tall,
dignified and quiet gentleman whom he accosted, and who now stood,
with hands in pockets, looking on with genuine concern on his face.

"Lily," said he at length, "what makes you act this way?  Haven't
you always been treated well down there at home?"

"Yas, sir, I reckon so," replied the girl sullenly; "well as
anybody's niggahs is!"

"Then why do you want to run off?  This is the third time in the
last year.  I've been kind to you--I say, Dunwody," he went on,
turning suddenly as he saw the latter approach--"haven't I always
treated my people right?  Haven't I always given them everything in
the world they ought to have?"

"Yes, Judge, that's the truth, and any neighbor of yours will say
it," assented Dunwody as he joined the group.  "What's wrong then?
This Lily girl run off again?  Seems to me you told me about her."

"Yes," said Judge Clayton, rubbing a finger across his chin in
perturbation, "the poor thing doesn't know when she's well off.
But what am I to do with her, that's the question?  I don't believe
in whipping; but in this case, Wilson, I'm going to turn over those
two boys to you.  I won't have the girl whipped even yet.  I'll see
you when we get down to Cairo," he added, turning away.  "We'll
have to change there to the Sally Lee, for the Vernon doesn't stop
at our landing.  She's going straight through to Memphis."

As Judge Clayton walked away, Dunwody turned to the overseer, whom
he had seen before on the Clayton plantations.

"So you had trouble this time?" he ventured.

"Heap of it, sir," replied the overseer, taking off his cap.  "It
was that fine yaller lady there that made most of it.  She's the
one that's a-fo_mint_in' trouble right along.  She's a quiet
lookin' gal, but she ain't.  It's all right what the jedge says to
me, but I'm goin' to have a little settle_ment_ with this fine lady
myself, this time."

The girl heard him plainly enough, but only turned moodily back
toward the coil of rope where sat the two blacks who had been her
companions.  From these she kept her skirt as remote as though they
were not of her station.  Dunwody approached the overseer, and put
a gold double-eagle in his hand.

"Listen here, Wilson," said he, "you seem to be able to handle such
people discreetly.  Now I've got a prisoner along, up-stairs,
myself--never mind who she is or how she comes here.  As you know,
I'm a United States marshal for this district, and this prisoner
has been turned over to me.  I'm going on up home, beyond St.
Genevieve, and I've got to change down there at Cairo myself, to
take the up-river boat."

"Mulattress?" listlessly inquired Wilson, after grinning at the
coin.  "They're the wust.  I'd rather handle straight niggers my
own self."

"Well," said Dunwody, "now that you mention it, I don't know but
they would be easier to handle.  This prisoner is about as tall as
that girl yonder, and she's a whole lot lighter, do you understand?
Of a dark night--say about the time we'd get down to Cairo,
midnight--well wrapped up, and the face of neither showing, it
might be hard to tell one of them from the other."

"How'll you trade?" grinned Wilson.  "Anybody kin git a mighty good
trade for this yaller lady of ours here.  If she was mine I'd trade
her for a sack of last year potatoes.  I reckon Jedge Clayton'll be
sick enough of her, time he gets expenses of this last trip paid,
gittin' her back."

"I'm not trading," said Dunwody, frowning and flushing.  "But now
I'll tell you what I want you to do, when we get into Cairo.  I may
have trouble with my prisoner, and I don't know any better man than
yourself to have around in a case like that.  Do you think, if I
left it all to you, you could handle it?"

"Shore I could--what's the use of your troublin' yourself about it,
Colonel Dunwody?  This here's more in my line."

Dunwody turned away with a sudden feeling of revulsion, almost of
nausea at the thought now in his mind.  It was a few moments later
that he again approached Wilson.

"There's a French girl along with this prisoner of mine," said he.
"Just take them both along together.  I reckon the French girl
won't make any disturbance--it's the other--the lady--her mistress.
She's apt to--to 'fomint' trouble.  Handle her gently as you can.
You'll have to have help.  The captain will not interfere.  You
just substitute my prisoner for yours yonder at Cairo--I'll show
you where she is when the time comes.  Once you have her aboard my
boat for St. Genevieve, you can come back and take care of your own
prisoners here.  There may be another eagle or so in it.  I am not
asking questions and want none asked.  Do your work, that's all."

"You don't need to be a-skeered but what I'll do the work,
Colonel," smiled Wilson grimly.  "I've had a heap o' trouble the
last week, and I'm about tired.  I'll not stand no foolishness."

Had any friend seen Warville Dunwody that night, he must have
pronounced him ten years older than when the Mount Vernon had begun
her voyage.


CHAPTER VIII

THE SHADOW CABINET

"All very well, gentlemen!  All very well!" repeated the man who
sat at the head of the table.  "I do not deny anything you say.
None the less, the question remains, what were we to do with this
woman, since she was here?  I confess my own relief at this message
from our agent, Captain Carlisle, telling of her temporary
disappearance."

As he spoke, he half pushed back his chair, as though in impatience
or agitation over the problem which evidently occupied his mind.  A
man above medium height, somewhat spare in habit of body, of
handsome features and distinguished presence, although with hair
now slightly thinned by advancing years, he seemed, if not by
natural right, at least by accorded authority, the leader in this
company with whose members he was not unwilling to take counsel.

Those who sat before him were his counselors, chosen by himself, in
manner ratified by law and custom.  They made, as with propriety
may be stated, a remarkable body of men.  It were less seemly
openly to determine their names and their station, since they were
public men, and since, as presently appeared, they now were engaged
on business of such nature as might not be placed in full upon
public records.

At least it may be stated that this meeting was held in the autumn
of the year 1850, and in one of the great public buildings of the
city of Washington.  Apparently it was more private than official
in its nature, and apparently it now had lasted for some time.  The
hour was late.  Darkness presently must enshroud the room.  Even
now the shadows fell heavy upon the lofty portraits, the rich
furnishings, the mixed assemblage of somewhat hodgepodge
decorations.  Twice an ancient colored man had appeared at the door
with lighted taper, as though to offer better illumination, but
each time the master of the place had waved him away, as though
unwilling to have present a witness even so humble as he.  Through
the door, thus half opened, there might have been seen in the hall
two silent and motionless figures, standing guard.

Obviously the persons here present were of importance.  It was
equally obvious that they sought no intrusion.  Why, then, in a
meeting so private and so serious, should there come a remark upon
a topic certainly not a matter of state in the usual acceptance of
the term?  Why should the leader have been concerned over the
slight matter of a woman's late presence here in Washington?

As though to question his associates, the speaker turned his glance
down the long table, where sat figures, indistinct in the gathering
gloom.  At his right hand, half in shadow, there showed the bold
outlines of a leonine head set upon broad shoulders.  Under
cavernous brows, dark eyes looked out with seriousness.  Half
revealed as it was, here was a countenance fairly fit to be called
godlike.  That this presence was animated with a brain whose
decision had value, might have been learned from the flitting gaze
of the leader which, cast now on this or the other, returned always
to this man at the right.  There were seven gentlemen of them in
all, and of these all were clad in the costume of the day, save
this one, who retained the fashion of an earlier time.  His coat
might have come from the Revolution, its color possibly the blue of
an earlier day.  The trousers fitted close to massive and shapely
limbs, and the long waistcoat, not of a modish silk, was buff in
color, such as might one time have been worn by Washington himself.
This man, these men, distinguished in every line, might have been
statesmen of an earlier day than that of Calhoun, Clay and Benton.
Yet the year of 1850, that time when forced and formal peace began
to mask the attitude of sections already arrayed for a later war,
might have been called as important as any in our history.

The ranks of these men at the table, too, might have been called
arranged as though by some shrewd compromise.  Even a careless eye
or ear might have declared both sections, North and South, to have
been represented here.  Grave men they were, and accustomed to
think, and they reflected, thus early in Millard Fillmore's
administration, the evenly balanced political powers of the time.

The headlong haste of both sections was in the year 1850 halted for
a time by the sage counsels of such leaders as Clay, in the South,
even Webster, in the North.  The South claimed, after the close of
the Mexican War and the accession of the enormous Spanish
territories to the southwest, that the accepted line of compromise
established in 1820, by which slavery might not pass north of the
parallel of latitude thirty-six degrees, thirty minutes, should be
extended westward quite to the Pacific Ocean.  She grumbled that,
although she had helped fight for and pay for this territory, she
could not control it, and could not move into it legally the slaves
which then made the most valued part of a southern man's property.
As against this feeling, the united politicians had thrown to the
hot-headed Southerners a sop in the form of the Fugitive Slave Act.
The right for a southern owner to follow and claim his slave in any
northern state was granted under the Constitution of the United
States.  Under the compromise of 1850, it was extended and
confirmed.

The abolitionists of the North rose in arms against this part of
the great compromise measure; a law which, though constitutional,
seemed to them nefarious and infamous.  The leaders in Congress,
both Whig and Democrat, feared now, therefore, nothing in the world
so much as the outbreak of a new political party, which might
disorganize this nicely adjusted compromise, put an end to what all
politicians were fond of calling the "finality" of the arrangement,
and so bring on, if not an encounter of armed forces, if not a
rupture of the Union, at least what to them seemed almost as bad,
the disintegration of the two great parties of the day, the Whigs
and Democrats.

If compromise showed in this meeting of men from different
sections, it was, therefore, but a matter in tune with the time.
Party was at that day not a matter of geography.  There existed
then, however, as there exists to-day, the great dividing line
between those who are in and those who are out.  Obviously now,
although they represented different sections of the country, these
men likewise represented the party which, under the adjusted vote
of the day, could be called fortunate enough to dwell within the
gates of Washington and not in the outer darkness of political
defeat.

The dark-browed man at the leader's right presently began to speak.
His voice, deep and clear as that of a great bronze bell, was slow
and deliberate, as fittingly voicing an accurate mind.

"Sir," he said, "this matter is one deserving our most careful
study, trivial though at first blush it would seem.  As to the
danger of this woman's machinations here, there is no question.  A
match may produce convulsion, explosion, disaster, when applied to
a powder magazine.  As you know, this country dwells continually
above an awful magazine.  At any time there may be an explosion
which will mean ruin not only for our party but our country.  The
Free Soil party, twice defeated, does not down.  There is a
nationalist movement now going forward which ignores the
Constitution itself.  With you, I dread any talk, any act, of our
own or another nation, which shall even indirectly inflame the
northern resentment against the fugitive law."

"On that, we are perfectly agreed, sir," began the original
speaker, "and then--"

"But then, sir, we come to the question of the removal of this
unwelcome person.  She herself is a fugitive from no law.  She has
broken no law of this land or of this District.  She has a right to
dwell here under our laws, so long as she shall obey them, and
there is no law of this District, nor this republic, nor of any
state, any monarchy, not even any law of nations, which could be
invoked to dismiss her from a capital where, though unwelcome, she
has a right to remain.  I may be unwelcome to you, you to me,
either of us to any man; yet, having done no treason, so long as we
pay our debts and observe the law, no man may raise hand or voice
against us."

"Quite right!" broke in the leader again.  "But let us look simply
at the gravity of it.  They say it is treason not only against our
own country but against a foreign power which this woman is
fomenting.  The Austrian attache, Mr. Hulsemann, is altogether
rabid over the matter.  He said to me privately--"

"Then most improperly!" broke in the tall dark man.

"Improperly, but none the less, insistently, he said that his
government will not tolerate her reception here.  He charges her
with machinations in Europe, under cover of President Taylor's
embassy of investigation into Hungarian affairs.  He declares that
Russia and Austria are one in their plans.  That, I fear, means
also England, as matters now stand in Europe."

"But, sir," broke in the vibrant voice of a gentleman who sat at
the left of the speaker, concealed in the shadow cast by the heavy
window drapings, "what is our concern over that?  It is our boast
that this is a free country.  As for England, we have taken her
measure, once in full, a second time at least in part; and as for
Austria or Russia, what have we to do with their territorial
designs?  Did they force us to fight, why, then, we might fight,
and with proper reason."

"True again, sir!" said the leader, recognizing the force of the
murmur which greeted this outburst.  "It is not any of these powers
that I fear.  They might bluster, and still not fight; and indeed
they lack any rational cause for war.  But what I fear, what all of
us fear, gentlemen, is the danger here, inside our own walls,
inside our own country."

Silence again fell on all.  They looked about them, as though even
in this dimly lighted room they felt the presence of that ominous
shadow which lay over all the land--the menace of a divided country.

"That is the dread of all of us," went on the leader.  "The war
with Mexico showed us where England stands.  She proved herself
once more our ancient enemy, showed that her chief desire is to
break this republic.  Before that war, and after it, she has
cultivated a friendship with the South.  Why?  Now let the
abolitionist bring on this outbreak which he covets, let the North
and South fly at each other's throats, let the contending powers of
Europe cross the seas to quarrel over the spoils of our own
destruction--and what then will be left of this republic?  And yet,
if this compromise between North and South be broken as all Europe
desires, and as all the North threatens, precisely those matters
will come hurrying upon us.  And they will find us divided,
incapable of resistance.  That is the volcano, the magazine, over
which we dwell continually.  It passes politics, and puts us as
patriots upon the question of the endurance of our republic.

"And I tell you now, gentlemen," he concluded, "as you know very
well yourselves, that this woman, here in Washington, would hold
the match ready to apply to that magazine.  Which of you does not
see its glimmering?  Which of you doubts her readiness?  There was
not twenty-four hours to argue the matter of her--her temporary
absence.  We'd have had Austria all about our ears, otherwise.
Gentlemen, I am mild as any, and most of any I am sworn to obey the
laws, and to guarantee the safeguards of the Constitution; but I
say to you--" and here his hand came down with an emphasis unusual
in his nature--"law or no law, Constitution or no Constitution, an
exigency existed under which she had to leave Washington, and that
upon that very night."

"But where is she now?" ventured another voice.  "This young army
captain simply says in his report that he left her on the _Mount
Vernon_ packet, en route down the Ohio.  Where is she now; and how
long before she will be back here, match in hand?"

"It is the old, old case of Eve!" sighed one, who leaned a bony arm
upon the walnut, and who spoke in the soft accents which proclaimed
him of the South.  "Woman!  It is only the old Garden over again.
Trouble, thy name is Woman!"

"And specifically, its name is Josephine, Countess St. Auban!"
drawled another, opposite.  A smile went around among these grave
and dignified men; indeed, a light laugh sounded somewhere in the
shadow.  The face of the leader relaxed, though not sufficiently to
allow light comment.  The dark man at the right spoke.

"The great Napoleon was right," said he.  "He never ceased to prove
how much he dreaded woman at any juncture of public affairs.
Indeed, he said that all the public places of the government should
be closed to them, that they should be set apart and distinguished
from the managers of affairs."

"And so do we say it!" broke in the leader.  "With all my heart, I
say it."

The tall man bowed, "It was the idea of Napoleon that woman should
be distinguished always by a veil and gown, a uniform of
unworthiness and of danger.  True, Napoleon based his ideas on his
studies in the Orient.  Us he accused of treating woman much too
well.  He declared woman, by virtue of her birth, to be made as
man's inferior and his slave, and would tolerate no other
construction of the relation of the sexes.  According to Napoleon,
women tyrannize over us Americans, whereas we should tyrannize over
them.  It was plain, in his conception, that the main province of
woman is in making fools of men."

"In some ways, Napoleon was a thoughtful man," remarked, a voice to
the left; and once more a half subdued smile went around.

"I yield to no man in my admiration for the fair sex--" began the
tall, dark man.  The smile broke into open laughter.  The leader
rapped sharply on the table edge, frowning.  The tall man bowed
once more, as he resumed.

"--but, viewed from the standpoint, of our diplomacy, the matter here
is simple.  Last week, at the reception where the representatives of
Austria were present this woman appeared, properly introduced,
properly invited, it is true, but wholly unwelcome socially, in
certain quarters.  The attache and his wife left the roof, and made
plain to their host their reasons for doing so."

"Yes, and it was public shame that they should take such action.
The woman had the right of her host's protection, for she was there
by invitation!" Thus the bony man in the shadows.

Again the leader rapped on the table.  "Gentlemen, gentlemen!" he
began, not wholly humorously.  "Let us have a care.  Let us at
least not divide into factions here.  We all of us, I trust, can
remember the case of Peggy O'Neil, who split Washington asunder not
so long ago.  She was the wife of one of President Jackson's
cabinet members, yet when she appeared upon a ball-room floor, all
the ladies left it.  It was Jackson and Eaton against the world.
That same situation to-day, granted certain conditions, might mean
a war which would disrupt this Union.  In fact, I consider
Josephine St. Auban to-day more dangerous than Mrs. Eaton at her
worst."

"But we have just heard what rights we have before the law, sir,"
ventured a hesitating, drawling voice, which had earlier been
heard.  "How can we take cognizance of private insult given by a
foreign power in only quasi-public capacity?  I conceive it to be
somewhat difficult, no matter what the reception in the society of
Washington, to eject this woman from the city of Washington itself;
or at least, very likely difficult to keep her ejected, as you say,
sir."

"Where should she go?" demanded yet another voice.  "And why should
she not come back?"

Impatiently, the leader replied: "Where?  I do not know.  I do not
_want_ to know.  I _must_ not know!  Good God, must we not bear
ourselves in mind?"

"Then, sir, in case of her sudden return, you ask an agent?" said a
keen, clear, and incisive voice, which had not yet been heard.
"Gentlemen, shall we cast lots for the honor of watching the
Countess St. Auban in case of her undesired return?"

The grim demand brought out a hasty protest from a timid soul: "To
that, I would not agree."  A sort of shuffle, a stir, a shifting in
seats seemed to take place all about the table.

"Very well, then," went on the clear voice, "let us employ
euphemism in terms and softness in methods.  If we may not again
kidnap the lady, why may we not bribe her?"

"It could not be done," broke in the dark man toward the head of
the table.  "If I know the facts, this woman could not be bought
for any ransom.  She has both station and wealth accorded her, so
the story goes, for some service of her family in the affairs of
France.  But she will none of monarchies.  She turned democrat,
revolutionist, in France, and on the hotter stage of Hungary--and
so finally sought this new world to conquer.  She is no artless
miss, but a woman of the world, brilliant and daring, with ideas of
her own about a world-democracy.  She is perhaps devout, or
penitent!"

"Nay, let us go softly," came the rejoinder from the shadows.
"Woman is man's monarch only part of the time.  We need some man
who is a nice judge of psychological moments and nicely suited
methods.  We stand, all of us, for the compromise of 1850.  That
compromise is not yet complete.  The question of this unwelcome
lady still remains to be adjusted.  Were Mr. Clay not quite so old,
I might suggest his name for this last and most crucial endeavor of
a long and troublous life!"

"By the Eternal Jove!" broke in the dark man at the right, shaking
off the half-moodiness which had seemed to possess him.  "When it
comes to wheedling, age is no such bar.  I call to mind one man who
could side with Old Hickory in the case of Mrs. Peggy Eaton.  I
mean him whom we call the Old Fox of the North."

"He was a widower, even then, and hence immune," smiled the man
across the table.  "Now he is many years older."

"Yet, none the less a widower, and all the more an adjuster of nice
matters.  He has proven himself a politician.  It was his accident
and not his fault not to remain with us in our party!  Yet I happen
to know that though once defeated for the presidency and twice for
the nomination, he remains true to his Free Soil beliefs.  It has
just occurred to me, since our friend from Kentucky mentions it,
that could we by some fair means, some legal means--some means of
adjustment and compromise, if you please, gentlemen,--place this
young lady under the personal care of this able exponent of the
_suaviter in modo_, and induce him to conduct her, preferably to
some unknown point beyond the Atlantic Ocean, there to lose her
permanently, we should perhaps be doing our country a service, and
would also be relieving this administration of one of its gravest
concerns.  Best of all, we should be using a fox for a cat's-paw,
something which has not often been done."

The matter-of-fact man who presided straightened his shoulders as
though with relief at some sign of action; yet he did not relax his
insistent gravity sufficiently to join the smile that followed this
sally.

"Let us be sure, gentlemen, of one thing at a time," he resumed.
"As we come to this final measure suggested by our friend from
Kentucky, I am at a loss how further to proceed.  What we do can
not be made public.  We can not sign a joint note asking this
distinguished gentleman to act as our intermediary."

"At the time of the ratification of the Constitution by the
convention of 1787," began the dark man who had earlier spoken,
"there arose a difficulty as to the unanimity of those signing.  At
the suggestion of Doctor Franklin and Mr. Gouverneur Morris, there
was a clause added which stated that the Constitution was signed
'_as by the states actually present_,' this leaving the individual
signers not personally responsible!  I suggest therefore, sir, that
we should evade the personal responsibility of this did you put it
to the vote of the _states_ represented here."

"I rely upon the loyalty and the unanimity of my family," replied
the leader, with more firmness than was wont.  "Gentlemen, are we
then agreed?  Does Massachusetts consent?  Is Virginia with us?  Is
New York agreeable?  Does Kentucky also agree?"

There was no murmur of dissent, and the leader, half rising,
concluded;

"Gentlemen, we agreed four days ago that the Countess St. Auban
should leave Washington not later than that night.  We are now
agreed that, in case of her return, she shall if possible be placed
under the charge, not of any responsible figure of _our_ party, but
of a gentleman distinguished in the councils of an _opposing_
party, whose abolitionist beliefs coincide somewhat with her own.
Let us hope they will both get them to Missouri, the debating
ground, the center of the political battle-field to-day.  But,
Missouri or Hungary, Kentucky or France, let us hope that one or
both of them shall pass from our horizon.

"There remains but one question, as earlier suggested by Kentucky:
if we agree upon New York as our agent, who shall be our emissary
to New York, and how shall he accomplish our purpose with that
gentleman?  Shall we decide it by the usual procedure of
parliamentary custom?  Do you allow the--the Chair--" he smiled as
he bowed before them--"to appoint this committee of one?  I suppose
you agree that the smaller the committee and the more secret the
committee's action, the better for us all?"

There was silence to this.  A moment's hesitation, and the speaker
announced his decision.  "The gentleman from Kentucky is appointed
to execute this task for the people of the United States.  Let us
hope he never will have need to serve."

It cost the self-control of some to remain silent at this, and the
courage of the remaining member also to preserve the silence which
meant his acceptance of a task so difficult and distasteful.

"Sir," hastily went on the original speaker, "our thanks are due to
you.  We shall limit you with no instructions.  All the money
required by you as agent, or required by your agent, shall of
course be forthcoming, and you shall quietly have also the
assistance of all the secret service, if so desired.  None of us
must know what has become of the Countess St. Auban, now or later.
You have heard me.  Gentlemen, we adjourn."

He stepped now to the door, and admitted the ancient colored man,
with his lights.  The curtains were drawn, shutting out even the
twilight gloom.  And now the lights blazed up, illuminating an
historic stage.

The chief of the deliberations now became the host, and motioned
his guests to the corner of the apartments where stood a long
sideboard of dark mahogany, bearing different crystal decanters.
Himself refraining, as did one or two others, he passed glasses,
motioned to the ancient colored man, and, raising his own hand,
proposed them a toast.

"Gentlemen,--the Union!"

They bowed to him ceremoniously, each in his way, with reverence,
touching lips to his glass.  As they parted, one for a moment stood
alone, the dark man who had sat at the speaker's right.  For a
moment he paused, as though absorbed, as finally he set down his
glass, gazing steadily forward as though striving to read what lay
in the future.

"The Union!" he whispered, almost to himself.

It might have been the voice, as it was the thought of all those
who, now passing, brought to a close this extraordinary meeting.

The Union!


CHAPTER IX

TALLWOODS

Meantime, events which might have held interest in certain circles
in Washington had they been known, passed on their course, and
toward that very region which had half in jest been named as the
storm center of the day--the state of Missouri, anomalous,
inchoate, discordant, half North, half South, itself the birth of
compromise and sired by political jealousy; whither, against her
will, voyaged a woman, herself engine of turbulence, doubt and
strife, and in company now of a savage captor who contemplated
nothing but establishing her for his own use in his own home.

Tallwoods, the home plantation of the Dunwody family in the West,
now the personal property of the surviving son, state senator
Warville Dunwody of Missouri, presented one of the contrasts which
now and again might have been seen in our early western
civilization.  It lay somewhat remote from the nearest city of
consequence, in a region where the wide acres of the owner blended,
unused and uncultivated, with those still more wild, as yet
unclaimed under any private title.  Yet in pretentiousness, indeed
in assuredness, it might have rivaled many of the old estates of
Kentucky, the Carolinas, or Virginia; so much did the customs and
ambitions of these older states follow their better bred sons out
into the newer regions.

These men of better rank, with more than competency at their
disposal, not infrequently had few neighbors other than the humble
but independent frontiersman who left for new fields when a dog
barked within fifty miles of his cabin.  There were neighbors
within half that distance of Tallwoods, settlers nestled here or
there in these enfolding hills and forests; but of neighbors in
importance equal to that of the owner of Tallwoods there were few
or none in that portion of the state.  The time was almost feudal,
but wilder and richer than any feudal day, in that fief tribute was
unknown.  The original landlord of these acres had availed himself
of the easy laws and easy ways of the time and place, and taken
over to himself from the loose public domain a small realm all his
own.  Here, almost in seclusion, certainly in privacy, a generation
had been spent in a life as baronial as any ever known in old
Virginia in earlier days.  A day's ride to a court house, two days
to a steamer, five hours to get a letter to or from the occasional
post--these things seem slight in a lifelong accustomedness; and
here few had had closer touch than this with civilization.

[Illustration: Tallwoods]

The plantation itself was a little kingdom, and largely supplied
its own wants.  Mills, looms, shops,--all these were part of the
careless system, easy and opulent, which found support and gained
arrogance from a rich and generous environment.  The old house
itself, if it might be called old, built as it had been scarce
thirty years before, lay in the center of a singular valley, at the
edge of the Ozark Hills.  The lands here were not so rich as the
wide acres thirty miles or more below, where on the fat bottom
soil, black and deep, the negroes raised in abundance the
wealth-making crop of the country.  On the contrary, this, although
it was the capital of the vast Dunwody holdings thereabout, was
chosen not for its agricultural richness so much as for its
healthfulness and natural beauty.

In regard to these matters, the site could not better have been
selected.  The valley, some three or four miles across, lay like a
deep saucer pressed down into the crest of the last rise of the
Ozarks.  The sides of the depression were as regular as though
created by the hands of man.  Into its upper extremity there ran a
little stream of clear and unfailing water, which made its entrance
at an angle, so that the rim of the hills seemed scarcely nicked by
its ingress.  This stream crossed the floor of the valley, serving
to water the farms, and, making its way out of the lower end by a
similar curious angle, broke off sharply and hid itself among the
rocks on its way out and down from the mountains--last trace of a
giant geology which once dealt in continental terms, rivers once
seas, valleys a thousand miles in length.  Thus, at first sight,
one set down in the valley might have felt that it had neither
inlet nor outlet, but had been created, panoplied and peopled by
some Titanic power, and owned by those who neither knew nor desired
any other world.  As a matter of fact, the road up through the
lower Ozarks from the great Mississippi, which entered along the
bed of the little stream, ended at Tallwoods farm.  Beyond it,
along the little river which led back into the remote hills, it was
no more than a horse path, and used rarely except by negroes or
whites in hunting expeditions back into the mountains, where the
deer, the wild turkey, the bear and the panther still roamed in
considerable numbers at no great distance from the home plantation.

Tallwoods itself needed no other fence than the vast wall of hills,
and had none save where here and there the native stone had been
heaped up roughly into walls, along some orchard side.  The fruits
of the apple, the pear and the peach grew here handsomely, and the
original owner had planted such trees in abundance.  The soil,
though at first it might have been, called inhospitable, showed
itself productive.  The corn stood tall and strong, and here and
there the brown stalks of the cotton plant itself might have been
seen; proof of the wish of the average Southerner to cultivate that
plant, even in an environment not wholly suitable.  All about, upon
the mountain sides, stood a heavy growth of deciduous trees, at
this time of the year lining the slopes in flaming reds and golds.
Beyond the valley's rim, tier on tier, stately and slow, the
mountains rose back for yet a way--mountains rich in their means of
frontier independence, later to be discovered rich also in
minerals, in woods, in all the things required by an advancing
civilization.

Corn, swine and cotton,--these made the wealth of the owner of
Tallwoods' plantation and of the richer lands in the river bottoms
below.  These products brought the owner all the wealth he needed.
Here, like a feudal lord, master of all about him, he had lived all
his life and had, as do all created beings, taken on the color and
the savor of the environment about him.  Rich, he was generous;
strong, he was merciful; independent, he was arrogant; used to his
own way, he was fierce and cruel when crossed in that way.  Not
much difference, then, lay between this master of Tallwoods and the
owner of yonder castle along the embattled Rhine, or the towered
stronghold of some old lord located along an easy, wandering,
English stream; with this to be said in favor of this solitary lord
of the wilderness, that his was a place removed and little known.
It had been passed by in some manner through its lack of appeal to
those seeking cotton lands or hunting grounds, so that it lay
wholly out of the ken and the understanding of most folk of the
older states.

If in Tallwoods the owner might do as he liked, certainly he had
elected first of all to live somewhat as a gentleman.  The mansion
house was modeled after the somewhat stereotyped pattern of the
great country places of the South.  Originally planned to consist
of the one large central edifice of brick, with a wing on each side
of somewhat lesser height, it had never been entirely completed,
one wing only having been fully erected.  The main portion of the
house was of two stories, its immediate front occupied by the
inevitable facade with its four white pillars, which rose from the
level of the ground to the edge of the roof, shading the front
entrance to the middle rooms.  Under this tall gallery roof, whose
front showed high, white and striking all across the valley, lay
four windows, and at each side of the great double doors lay yet
other two windows.  On either side of the pillars and in each
story, yet other two admitted light to the great rooms; and in the
completed wing which lay at one side of the main building, deep
embrasures came down almost to the level of the ground, well hidden
by the grouped shrubbery which grew close to the walls.  The
visitor approaching up the straight gravel walk might not have
noticed the heavy iron bars which covered these, giving the place
something the look of a jail or a fortress.  The shrubs,
carelessly, and for that reason more attractively planted, also
stood here and there over the wide and smooth bluegrass lawn.

The house was built in the edge of a growth of great oaks and elms,
which threw their arms out over even the lofty gables as though in
protection.  Tradition had it that the reason the building had
never been completed was that the old master would have been
obliged to cut down a favorite elm in order to make room for it;
and he had declared that since his wife had died and all his
children but one had followed her, the house was large enough as it
was.  So it stood as he had left it, with its two tall chimneys,
one at each end of the mid-body of the house, marking the two great
fireplaces, yet another chimney at the other end of the lesser wing.

Straight through the mid-body of the house ran a wide hall, usually
left open to all the airs of heaven; and through this one could see
far out over the approach, entirely through the house itself, and
note the framed picture beyond of woods glowing with foliage, and
masses of shrubbery, and lesser trees among which lay the white
huts of the negroes.  Still to the left, beyond the existing wing,
lay the fenced vegetable gardens where grew rankly all manner of
provender intended for the bounteous table, whose boast it was
that, save for sugar and coffee, nothing was used at Tallwoods
which was not grown upon its grounds.

So lived one, and thus indeed lived more than one, baron on
American soil not so long ago, when this country was more American
than it is to-day--more like the old world in many ways, more like
a young world in many others.  Here, for thirty years of his life,
had lived the present owner of Tallwoods, sole male of the family
surviving in these parts.

It might have been called matter of course that Warville Dunwody
should be chosen to the state legislature.  So chosen, he had,
through sheer force of his commanding nature, easily become a
leader among men not without strength and individuality.  Far up in
the northern comer, where the capital of the state lay, men spoke
of this place hid somewhere down among the hills of the lower
country.  Those who in the easier acres of the northwestern prairie
lands reared their own corn and swine and cotton, often wondered at
the half-wild man from St. Francois, who came riding into the
capital on a blooded horse, who was followed by negroes also on
blooded horses, a self-contained man who never lacked money, who
never lacked wit, whose hand was heavy, whose tongue was keen,
whose mind was strong and whose purse was ever open.

The state which had produced a Benton was now building up a rival
to Benton.  That giant, then rounding out a history of thirty years'
continuous service in the Senate of the United States, unlike the
men of this weaker day, reserved the right to his own honest and
personal political belief.  He steadily refused to countenance the
extending of slavery, although himself a holder of slaves; and,
although he admitted the legality and constitutionality of the
Fugitive Slave Act, he deplored that act as much as any.  To the
eventual day of his defeat he stood, careless of his fate, firm
in his own principles, going down in defeat at last because he
would not permit his own state legislature--headed then by men
such as Warville Dunwody and his friends--to dictate to him the
workings of his own conscience. Stronger than Daniel Webster, he
was one of those who would not obey the dictates of that leader,
and he _did_ set up his "conscience above the law." These two men,
Benton and Dunwody, therefore, were at the time of which we write
two gladiators upon the scenes of a wild western region, as yet
little known in the eastern states, though then swiftly coming
forward into more specific notice.

Perhaps thirty or forty slaves were employed about Tallwoods home
farm, as it was called.  They did their work much as they liked, in
a way not grudging for the main part.  Idle and shiftless, relying
on the frequent absence of the master and the ease of gaining a
living, they worked no more than was necessary to keep up a
semblance of routine.  In some way the acres got plowed and reaped,
in some way the meats were cured, in some way the animals were fed
and the table was served and the rooms kept in a semi-tidiness,
none too scrupulous.  Always in Tallwoods there was something at
hand ready to eat, and there was fuel whereby fires might be made.
Such as it was, the hospitality of the place was ready.  It was a
rich, loose way of life, and went on lazily and loosely, like the
fashion of some roomy old vehicle, not quite run down, but
advancing now and then with a groan or a creak at tasks imposed.

But now, another and most important matter for our note--there was
no woman's hand at Tallwoods.  The care was that of servants, of
slaves.  When things grew insupportable in their shiftlessness the
master lashed out an order and got what he demanded; then soon
matters sank back again to their old state.  None might tell when
the master would ride away, and when gone none could say when he
would return.  Since the death of his mother no woman's control had
ruled here, nor, in spite of the busy tongues at the larger cities
above, did there seem likelihood that any would soon share or alter
the fortunes of Tallwoods.  Rumors floated here and there, tongues
wagged; but Tallwoods lay apart; and Tallwoods, as commonly was
conceded, had ways of its own.

It was to these remote and somewhat singular surroundings that
there approached, on the evening of a bland autumn day, along the
winding road which followed the little stream, the great coach of
the master of Tallwoods, drawn by four blooded carriage horses,
weary, mud-stained and flecked with foam.  At the end of the
valley, where the road emerged from its, hidden course among the
cliffs, the carriage now halted.  Dunwody himself sprang down from
the driver's seat where he had been riding in order to give the
occupants of the coach the more room.  He approached the window,
hat in hand.

"My dear lady," said he, "this is the end of our journey.  Yonder
is my home.  Will you not look at it?"

It was a pale and languid face which greeted him, the face of a
woman weary and even now in tears.  Hastily she sought to conceal
these evidences of her distress.  It was the first time he had seen
her weeping.  Hitherto her courage had kept her cold and defiant,
else hot and full of reproofs.  This spectacle gave him concern.
His face took on a troubled frown.

"Come now, do not weep, my dear girl,--anything but that."

"What, then, is it you would say?" she demanded.  "It makes little
difference to me where you are taking me."

He threw open the coach door and extended a hand to aid her in
alighting.  "Suppose we walk up from here," he said.  "I know you
are tired by the ride.  Besides," he added, with pride, "I want to
show you Tallwoods."

Scarce touching his hand, she stepped down.  Dunwody motioned to
the driver to advance, and in spite of the protests of the maid
Jeanne, thus left alone within, the coach rolled on up the driveway
ahead of them.

It was in fact a beautiful prospect which lay before the travelers
thus arrived.  The sun was low in the west, approaching the rim of
the hills, and its level rays lighted the autumn foliage, crossed
the great trees, brightened the tall white pillars.  It even
illuminated the grounds beyond, so that quite through the body of
the house itself its golden light could be seen on the farther
slopes, framing the quaint and singular picture thus set apart.
All around rose the wide cup of the valley, its sides as yet
covered by unbroken decoration of vivid or parti-colored foliage.
Here and there the vivid reds of the wild sumac broke out in riot;
framed lower in the scale were patches of berry vines touched by
the frost; while now and again a maple lifted aloft a fan of clean
scarlet against the sky,--all backed by the more somber colors of
the oaks and elms, or the now almost naked branches of the lindens.

These enfolding forests gave a look of protectedness to this secret
place.  They left a feeling not of discomfort but of shelter.
Moreover, the grass underfoot was soft and still green.  Some sort
of comeliness, picturesque though rude, showed in the scant
attempts to modify nature in the arrangement of the grounds.  And
there, noble and strong, upon a little eminence swelling at the
bottom of the valley's cup, lay the great house, rude, unfinished,
yet dignified.  If it seemed just this side of elegance, yet the
look of it savored of comfort.  To a woman distracted and wearied
it should have offered some sort of rest.  To her who now gazed
upon it the sight afforded only horror.  This then was the place.
Here was to be her trial.  This was the battle-ground.

Dunwody lingered, hoping to hear some word of satisfaction.

"The hills are beautiful, the trees are beautiful, and the sky,"
she said, at length.  "What God has done here is beautiful.  But
God Himself is gone."

Rage filled him suddenly.  "At any rate, this is what I have and
all I have," he said.  "Like it, woman, or by that God! hate it!
Here you are, and here you stay, until--until I die or until God
returns.  You are the only woman in it for me when you step into
that house there.  You are its mistress.  I rule here.  But what
you want shall be yours at any time you want it.  You can think of
nothing in the world that shall not be brought to you when you ask
for it.  My servants are yours.  Choose from them as many as you
like."

"Slaves for your slave?  You are full of kindness indeed!  But I
shall never be what you delicately call the mistress of Tallwoods."

"By the Lord! girl, if I thought that would be true--if I thought
for one moment that it were true--" in a half-frenzy he threw out
his arm, rigid.  An instant later he had lapsed into one of the
moods new to him.  "There is no punishment I don't deserve," he
said.  "All the time I have hurt you, when I'd rather cut my tongue
out than hurt you.  I've seen you, these few days.  God knows, at
the hardest--me at the worst--you at the worst.  But your worst is
better than the best of any other woman I ever saw.  I'm going to
have you.  It's you or nothing for me, and I'm going to have you.
Choose your own title here, then, Madam.  This is your home or your
prison, as you like."

For a moment Josephine paused, looking around her at the
surrounding hills.  He seemed to catch her thought, and smiled at
her.

"Twenty miles to the nearest house that way, Madam.  None at all
that other way.  Every path known and guarded by my people.  No
paths at all in these hills out yonder.  Wild animals in them,
little food in them for man or woman not used to living wild.  You
would be helpless in one day, if you tried to get put.  We'd find
you before you'd gone five miles.  Don't attempt any foolishness
about trying to escape from here.  You're mine, I say.  I shall not
let you go."

Yet in spite of his savagery, his face softened in the next moment.
"If it could only be in the right way!  Look at me, look at you.
You're so very beautiful, I'm so strong.  There is only one right
way about it.  Oh, woman!

"But come," he resumed with a half sigh, seeking in a rough way to
brush back a wisp of hair from his forehead, to join the tangled
mane upon his crest; "I hate myself as much as you hate me, but
it's your fault--your fault that you are as you are--that you set
me mad.  Let's try to forget it for to-night, at least.  You're
tired, worn out.  I'm almost tired myself, with all this war
between us."

She was silent as they slowly advanced, silent as a prisoner facing
prison doors; but he still went on, arguing.

"Think of what you could do here, how happy we could be here.
Think of what we could do, together.  There isn't anything I
wouldn't try to do.  Why, I could do _anything_; and I'd bring
everything I got, everything, back to you,--and set it down at your
feet and say, 'I brought you this.' What would I care for it,
alone?  What does it mean to me?  What glory or success do I want?
Without you, what does all this world, all my life, all I can do,
mean to me after this?  I knew long ago I couldn't be happy, but I
didn't know why, I know now what I wanted, all along.  I can do
something in the world, I can succeed, I can be somebody now--and
now I want to, want to!  Oh, I've lacked so much, I've longed so
much.  Some way the world didn't seem made right.  I wondered, I
puzzled, I didn't know, I couldn't understand--I thought all the
world was made to be unhappy--but it isn't, it's made for
happiness, for joy, for exultation.  Why, I can see it plainly
enough now--all straight out, ahead of me,--all straight ahead of
us two!"

"How like a man you are!" she said slowly.  "You seek your own
success, although your path lies over a woman's disgrace and ruin."

"Haven't you ever thought of the other side of this at all?  Can't
a woman ever think of mercy to a man?  Can't she ever blame herself
just for being Eve, for being the incarnate temptation that she is
to any real man?  Can't she see what she is to him?  You talk about
ruin--I tell you it's ruin here, sure as we are born, for one or
both of us.  I reckon maybe it's for both."

"Yes, it is for both."

"No.  I'll not admit it!" he blazed out.  "If I've been strong
enough to pull you down, I'm strong enough to carry you up again.
Only, don't force the worst part of me to the front all the time."

"A gentle wooer, indeed!  And yet you blame me that I can not see a
man's side in a case like this."

"But in God's name, why should a man see any but a man's side of
it?  Things don't go by reason, after all.  The world goes, I
reckon, because there is a man's side to it.  Anyhow, I am as I am.
Whatever you do here, whatever you are, don't try to wheedle me,
nor ask me to see your side, when there is only one side to this.
If any man ever lifted hand or eye to you, I'd kill him.  I'll not
give up one jot of the right I've got in you, little as it is--I've
taken the right to hold you here and talk to you.  But when you say
you'll not listen to me, then you do run against my side of it, my
man's side of it; and I tell you once more, I'm the owner of this
place.  I live here.  It's mine.  I rule here, over free and
thrall."

With rude strength and pride he swept an arm widely around him,
covering half the circle of the valley.  "It's mine!" he said
slowly.  "Fit for a king, isn't it?  Yes, fit for a queen.  It is
almost fit for you."

His hat was in his hand.  The breeze of the evening, drawing down
the valley, now somewhat chilled, lifted the loose hair on his
forehead.  He stood, big, bulky and strong, like some war lord of
older days.  The argument on his lips was that of the day of skins
and stone.

She who stood at his side, this prisoner of his prowess, taken by
his ruthless disregard of wish or rights of others, stood even with
his shoulder, tall, deep-bosomed, comely, as fair and fit and
womanly a woman as man's need has asked in any age of the world.
In the evening light the tears which had wet her eyes were less
visible.  She might indeed have been fit queen for a spot like
this, mate for a man like this.

And now the chill of autumn lay in the twilight.  Night was
coming--the time when all creatures, save ravening night feeders,
feel apprehension, crave shelter, search out a haven for repose.
This woman was alone and weary, much in need of some place to rest
her head.  Every fiber in her heart craved shelter, comfort,
security, protection.

Dunwody turned, offered her a hand, and led her to the wide double
doors.


CHAPTER X

FREE AND THRALL

"Sally, come here," called Dunwody to one of the row of grinning
negro servants who were loosely lined up in the hall, as much in
curiosity as deference, to give their master his only welcome home.
"Take this lady up to the room in the east part.  See that she has
everything she wants.  She is not to be disturbed there until
morning, do you hear, Sally?  When you come down I want to see you
again.  You others there, make your duty to this lady.  Call her
Miss Josephine.  When she wants anything, you jump and get it.  Go
on, now."

They scattered grinning, all but the bent and grizzled old woman
Sally, who now came forward.  She looked with blank brown eyes at
the new-comer, herself inscrutable as the Sphinx.  If she commented
mentally on the droop of the young woman's mouth and eyes, at least
she said nothing.  It was not her place to ask what white folk did,
or why.  She took up the traveling-bags and led the way up the
narrow stairway which made out of the central hall.

"Sally," said Josephine, turning, when they reached the stairway,
"where's my own maid--the other--Jeanne?"

"I dunno, Ma'am," said Sally.  "I reckon she's all right, though.
Dis heah's yuah room, Ma'am, if you please."  She shuffled ahead,
into a tall and wide room, which overlooked the lawn and the
approaching road.

Once alone, Josephine flung herself face downward upon the bed and
burst into a storm of tears, her fine courage for once outworn.
She wept until utterly spent.  Sally, after leaving the room, had
returned unnoticed, and when at last Josephine turned about she saw
the old woman standing there.  A hard hand gently edged under her
heaving shoulder.  "Thah now, honey, doan' cry!  God A'mighty,
girl, doan' cry dat-a-way.  What is wrong, tell me."  Sympathy even
of this sort was balm to a woman wholly unnerved.  Josephine found
her head on the old negro woman's shoulder.

[Illustration: Her fine courage for once outworn.]

"Now you jus' lay right quiet, Ma'am," went on Sally.  "I'se gwine
to git you a little something warm to drink and something to eat
right soon, and den I'se gwine put you-all to bed nice and clean,
and in de mawnin' you'll feel like you was anotheh lady, you
suttinly will, Ma'am."

"Who are you?" demanded Josephine, turning to look into the old and
wrinkled face.

"I'se jus' Sally."

"I suppose you are keeper of the prison," commented Josephine
bitterly.

"Dis ain't no prisum, Ma'am, I'se bin heah a long time 'mong dese
triflin' niggahs.  Dis ain't no prisum--but God knows, Ma'am, we
needs a lady heah to run things.  Is you come foh dat?"

"No, no," said Josephine.  "I'm just--I'm just--I'm going away as
soon as I can."

"Sho, now!  Huc'cum you heah, Ma'am?"

"It was a mistake."

"I didn't know white folks evah done nothin' they didn't want to
do," commented Sally.  "But doan' you mind.  Ef you wants me, jes'
call for Sally."

"Tell me, Sally, isn't there any Mrs. Dunwody here?" demanded
Josephine suddenly.

The face of the old woman remained inscrutable, and Josephine could
see no sign except that a sort of film crossed her eyes, as though
veiling some inmost thought.

"Ef dey was, I doan' reckon you-all would have come heah, would
you?  Now you lay down and git comf'table.  Doan' you worry none,
Ma'am.  You gwine be fine, by mawnin'.  You suttinly is a right
handsome lady, Ma'am!"

The old woman shuffled from the room, to join her master at the
foot of the stairs.

"Where is she, Sally?" demanded Dunwody, "and how is she?"

"She's right tired, suh," said Sally non-committally.  And then,
"Mighty fine lookin' lady, suh.  An' she is a lady!  Huc'cum her
here, Marse Warv'l?  Whut you-all--"

"What did she say to you?"

"Nothin' 'cept she's gwine git away right soon.  White folkes'
business ain't none o' my business."

"Well, never you mind about all that, Sally.  Now listen.  It's
your business to keep her there, in that room.  When she wants
anything, get it.  But don't you talk to her, you understand.  I
reckon you do understand, don't you?"

"I reckon I does, suh."

"Well, all right then.  If she goes to walk, keep her in sight.
She doesn't send out letters to any one, and doesn't talk to
strangers, do you understand?"

"I reckon I does, suh."

Old Sally stood looking at him for a time with her small brown eyes
half-covered under her gray brows.  At last, with something of the
liberty of the old servant she said, "Marster, is you married to
that dere lady?  Ef you isn't, is you gwine marry her?"

"If I told you you'd know too much, Sally.  It's enough for you to
know that you're responsible for her.  If she turns up missing any
time, you'll be missing yourself not long after."

"I reckon I will," said Sally chuckling; and then shuffled off
about her own duties.


CHAPTER XI

THE GARMENTS OF ANOTHER

Left alone, Josephine St. Auban at last attempted to pull herself
together.  With the instinct of a newly caged animal, she made a
little tour of the room.  First she noted the depth of the windows,
their height above the ground.  No escape there, that was
sure--unless one, cat-like, could climb down this light ladder up
which the ivy ran between the cornice and the ground.  No, it was a
prison.

In the room itself were good yet simple furnishings.  The wall
paper was of a small and ancient figuring.  In places it hung torn.
The furniture was old mahogany, apparently made in an earlier
generation.  An engraving or so hung askew upon the wall, a broken
bust stood on a bracket.  The tall tester bed, decorated with a
patchwork silken covering, showed signs of comfort, but was neither
modern nor over neat.  The room was not furnished in poverty, but
its spirit, its atmosphere, its feeling, lacked something, a woman
could have told what.

She pushed back the heavy dresser, but the wall was without opening
behind it.  She looked for the key to the door, and was glad to
find the lock in order.  For the first time now she laid off her
bonnet, unfastened her wrap.  With a hand which trembled she made
some sort of attempt at toilet, staring into the mirror at a face
scarcely recognized as her own.  The corners of its mouth were
drooping plaintively.  A faint blue lay beneath the eyes.

She faced the fact that she must pass the night alone.  If it is at
night that the shadows fall upon the soul, then most of all does
woman, weak and timorous animal, long for some safe and accustomed
refuge place, for a home; and most of all does she shrink from
unfamiliar surroundings.  Yet she slept, wearied to exhaustion.
The night was cool, the air fresh from the mountains coming in
through the opened window, and bringing with it calm.

Dawn came.  A chirping cedar bird, busy in the near-by shrubbery,
wakened her with a care-free note.  She started up and gazed out
with that sudden wonder and terror which at times seize upon us
when we awake in strange environment.  Youth and vitality resumed
sway.  She was alive, then.  The night had passed, then.  She was
as she had been, herself, her own, still.  The surge of young blood
came back in her veins.  The morning was there, the hills were
there, the world was there.  Hope began once more with the throb of
her perfect pulse.  She stretched a round white arm and looked down
it to her hand.  She held up her fingers against the light, and the
blood in them, the soul in them, showed pink and clean between.
Slowly she pushed down the patchwork silk.  There lay her splendid
limbs and body.  Yes, it was she, it was herself, her own.  Yes,
she would live, she would succeed, she would win! All of which, of
course, meant to her but one thing--escape.

A knock came at the door, really for the third time, although for
the first time heard.  Old Sally entered, bearing her tray, with
coffee.

"Now you lay right still whah you is, Ma'am," she began.  "You-all
wants a li'l bit o' coffee.  Then I'll bring you up some real
breakfus'--how you like yuah aigs?  Ma'am, you suttinly is lookin'
fine dis mawnin'.  I'll fetch you yuah tub o' watah right soon now."

In spite of herself Josephine found herself unable to resist
interest in these proceedings.  After all, her prison was not to be
without its comforts.  She hoped the eggs would be more than two.

The old serving woman slowly moved about here and there in the
apartment, intent upon duties of her own.  While thus engaged,
Josephine, standing femininely engaged before her glass, chanced to
catch sight of her in the mirror.  She had swiftly slipped over and
opened the door of a wardrobe.  Over her arm now was some feminine
garment.

"What have you there?" demanded Josephine, turning as swiftly.

"Jus' some things I'se gwine take away to make room for you, tha'ss
all, Ma'am."

Josephine approached and took up in her own hands these evidences
of an earlier occupancy of the room.  They were garments of a day
gone by.  The silks were faded, dingy, worn in the creases from
sheer disuse.  Apparently they had hung untouched for some time.

[Illustration: They were garments of a day gone by.]

"Whose were these, Sally?" demanded Josephine.

"I dunno, Ma'am.  I'se been mos'ly in the kitchen, Ma'am."

Josephine regarded her closely.  No sign of emotion showed on that
brown mask.  The gray brows above the small eyes did not flicker.
"I suppose these may have belonged to Mr. Dunwody's mother," said
Josephine carelessly.

"Yassam!"

"His sister?"

"Yassam!"

"Or his wife, perhaps?"

"Yassam, ef they really wuz one."

"Was there ever?" demanded Josephine sharply.

"Might a-been none, er might a-been a dozen, fur's I know.  Us
folks don' study much 'bout whut white folks does."

"You must have known if there was any such person about--you've
been here for years.  Don't talk nonsense!"

Temptation showed on Sally's face.  The next instant the film came
again over the small brown eyes, the mask shut down again, as the
ancient negro racial secretiveness resumed sway.  Josephine did not
ask for what she knew would be a lie.

"Where is my own maid, Jeanne?" she demanded.  "I am anxious about
her."

"I dunno, Ma'am."

"Is she safe--has she been cared for?"

"I reckon she's all right."

"Can you bring her to me?"

"I'll try, Ma'am."

But breakfast passed and no Jeanne appeared.  From the great house
came no sounds of human occupancy.  Better struggle, conflict, than
this ominous waiting, this silence, here in this place of infamy,
this home of horror, this house of some other woman.  It was with a
sense of relief that at length she heard a human voice.

Outside, beneath the window, quavering sounds rose.  The words were
French, Canadian French, scarce distinguishable to an ear trained
only in the Old World.  It was an old man singing, the air perhaps
that of some old chanson of his own country, sung by villagers long
before:

  "Souvenirs du jeune age
  Sont gravis dans mon coeur,
  Quand je pense au village,
  Revenant du bonheur--"

The old voice halted, at length resuming, idly: "_Quand je
pense--quand je pense_."  Then after humming the air for a little
time it broke out as though in the chorus, bold and strong:

  "Rendes-moi ma patrie, ou laisses-moi mourir!"

The words came to her with a sudden thrill.  What did they not mean
to the alien, to the prisoner, to the outcast, anywhere in all the
world!  "Give me back my country, or let me die!"

She stepped to the window and looked down.  An old man, brown, bent
and wrinkled, was digging about the shrubbery, perhaps preparing
some of the plants for their winter sleep.  He was clad in leather
and linsey, and seemed ancient as the hills.  He resumed his song.
Josephine leaned out from the casement and softly joined in the
refrain:

  "Rendez-moi ma patrie, ou laissez-moi mourir!"

[Illustration: An old man, brown, bent and wrinkled]

The old man dropped his spade.  "_Mon Dieu_!" he exclaimed, and
looked all about, around, then at last up.

"Ah! _Bon jour_, Mademoiselle!" he said, smiling and taking off his
old fur cap.  "You spik also my language, Mademoiselle?"

"_Mais oui_, Monsieur," rejoined Josephine; and addressed him
further in a few sentences on trivial topics.  Then, suddenly
resolved, she stepped out of her own room, passed softly down the
stair, out through the wide central hall, and so, having
encountered no one, joined the ancient man on the lawn.  It chanced
he had been at labor directly in front of one of the barred lower
windows.  He now left his spade and stepped apart, essaying now a
little broken English.

"You seeng my song al_so_, Mademoiselle?  You like the old song
from Canadian village, aye?  I seeng heem many tam, me."

"Who are you?" demanded Josephine.

"Me, I am Eleazar, the ol' trap' man.  Summers, I work here for
Monsieur Dunwodee.  Verr' reech man, Monsieur Dunwodee.  He say,
'Eleazar, you live here, all right.'  When winter come I go back in
the heel, trap ze fur-r, Madame, ze cat, ze h'ottaire, ze meenk,
sometime ze coon, also ze skonk.  Pret' soon I'll go h'out for trap
now, Mademoiselle."

"How long have you been here, Eleazar?" she asked.

"Many year, Mademoiselle.  In these co'ntree perhaps twent'--thirt'
year, I'll don' know."

"Were you here when the lady lived here?" she demanded of him
directly.

He frowned at this suddenly.  "I'll not know what you mean,
Mademoiselle."

"I mean the other lady, the wife of Mr.  Dunwody."

"My faith!  Monsieur Dunwody he'll live h'alone here, h'all tam."

She affected not to understand him.  "How long since she was here,
Eleazar?" she demanded.

"What for you'll talk like those to me?  I'll not know nossing,
Mademoiselle.  I'll not even know who is Mademoiselle, or why
she'll been here, me.  I'll not know for say, whether 'Madame,'
whether 'Mademoiselle.'  _Mais_ 'Mademoiselle'--_que je pense_."

She looked about her hastily.  "I'm here against my wish, Eleazar.
I want to get away from here as soon as I can."

He drew away in sudden fright.  "I'll not know nossing at all, me,"
he reiterated.

"Eleazar, you like money perhaps?"

"Of course, yes.  _Tout le monde il aime l'argent_."

"Then listen, Eleazar.  Some day we will walk, perhaps.  How far is
it to Cape Girardeau, where the French people live?"

"My son Hector he'll live there wance, on Cap' Girardeau.  He'll
make the tub, make the cask, make the bar_rel_.  Cap' Girardeau,
oh, perhaps two--t'ree day.  Me, I walk heem once, maybe so feefty
mile, maybe so seexty mile, in wan day, two-t'ree a little more
tam, me.  I was more younger then.  But now my son he'll live on
St. Genevieve, French place there, perhaps thirtee mile.  Cap'
Girardeau, seventy-five mile.  You'll want for go there?" he added
cunningly.

"Sometime," she remarked calmly.  Eleazar was shrewd in his own
way.  He strolled off to find his spade.

Before she could resume the conversation Josephine heard behind her
in the hall a step, which already she recognized.  Dunwody greeted
her at the door, frowning as he saw her sudden shrinking back at
sight of him.

"Good morning," he said.  "You have, I hope, slept well.  Have you
and Eleazar here planned any way to escape as yet?"  He smiled at
her grimly.  Eleazar had shuffled away.

"Not yet."

"You had not come along so far as details then;" smilingly.

"You intruded too soon."

"At least you are frank, then!  You will never get away from here
excepting on one condition."

She made no answer, but looked about her slowly.  Her eyes rested
upon a little inclosed place where some gray stones stood upright
in the grass; the family burial place, not unusual in such
proximity to the abode of the living, in that part of the country
at the time.

"One might escape by going there!" she pointed.

"They are my own, who sleep there," he said simply but grimly.  "I
wish it might be your choice; but not now; not yet.  We've a lot of
living to do yet, both of us."

She caught no note of relenting in his voice.  He looked large and
strong, standing there at the entrance to his own home.  At length
he turned to her, sweeping out his arm once more in a gesture
including the prospect which lay before them.

"If you could only find it in your heart," he exclaimed, "how much
I could do for you, how much you could do for me.  Look at all
this.  It's a home, but it's just a desert--a desert--the way it is
now."

"Has it always been so?"

"As long as I can remember."

"So you desire to make all life a desert for me!  It is very noble
of you!"

Absorbed, he seemed not to hear her.  "Suppose you had met me the
way people usually meet--and you some time had allowed me to come
and address you--could you have done that, do you reckon?" He
turned to her, an intent frown on his face, unsmiling.

"That's a question which here at least is absurd," she replied.

"You spoke once of that other country, abroad,--" he broke off,
shaking his head.  "Who are you?  I don't feel sure that I even
know your name as yet."

"I am, as you have been told, Josephine, Countess St. Auban.  I am
French, Hungarian, American, what you like, but nothing to you.  I
came to this country in the interest of Louis Kossuth.  For that
reason I have been misunderstood.  They think me more dangerous
than I am, but it seems I am honored by the suspicions of Austria
and America as well.  I was a revolutionist yonder.  I am already
called an abolitionist here.  Very well.  The name makes little
difference.  The work itself--"

"Is that how you happened to be there on the boat?"

"I suppose so.  I was a prisoner there.  I was less than a chattel.
I was a piece of property, to be staked, to be won or lost at
cards, to be kidnapped, hand-cuffed, handled like a slave, it
seems.  And you've the hardihood to stand here and ask me who I am!"

"I've only that sort of hardihood, Madam, which makes me ride
straight.  If I had observed the laws, I wouldn't have you here
now, this morning."

"You'll not have me long.  If I despise you as a man without
chivalry, I still more do so because you've neither ambition nor
any sense of morals."

"You go on to improve me.  I thank you, Mademoiselle--Eleazar was
right.  I heard him.  I like you as 'Mademoiselle.'"

"What difference?" she flared out.  "We are opposed at all angles
of the human compass.  There is no common meeting ground between
us.  Let me go."

He looked at her full in the face, his own features softened,
relenting for a time, as though her appeal had touched either his
mental or his moral nature.  Then slowly, as he saw the excellence
of her, standing there, his face dropped back into its iron mold.
"You are a wonderful woman," he said, "wonderful.  You set me on
fire--and it's only eight o'clock in the morning.  I could crush
you--I could tear you to pieces.  I never saw your like, nor ever
shall.  Let you go?  Yes!  When I'm willing to let my blood and
soul go.  Not till then.  If I were out in that graveyard, with my
bones apart, and your foot crossed my grave, I'd get up and come,
and live again with you--live--again.  I say, I could live again,
do you hear me?"

She broke out into a torrent of hot speech.  He did not seem to
hear her.  "The wrong of it," said he, "is that we should fight
apart and not together.  Do as you like for to-day.  Be happy as
you can.  Let's live in the present, as we were, at least for
to-day.  But to-night--"

He turned swiftly, and left her, so that she found left unsaid
certain questions as well as certain accusations she had stored for
this first meeting.


CHAPTER XII

THE NIGHT

That night, Josephine St. Auban did not sleep.  For hours she
tossed about, listening.  Infrequently, sounds came to her ears.
Through the window came now and again faint notes of night-faring
birds, south bound on their autumnal migration.  Once in a while a
distant step resounded in the great building, or again there came
the distant voices of the negroes singing in their quarters beyond.
The house had ceased its daily activities.  The servants had left
it.  Who occupied it now?  Was she alone?  Was there one other?

In apprehension which comes to the senses in the dark watches of
the night--impressions, conclusions, based upon no actual or
recognized action of the physical senses--Josephine rose, passed to
the window and looked out.  The moonlight lay upon the lawn like a
broad silver blanket.  Faint stars were twinkling in the clear sky
overhead.  The night brooded her planets, hovering the world, so
that life might be.

The dark outlines of the shrubbery below showed black and strong.
Upon the side of a near-by clump of leafless lilacs shone a faint
light, as though from one of the barred windows below.  The house
was not quite asleep.  She stilled her breath as she might, stilled
her heart as she might, lest its beating should be heard.  What was
about to happen?  Where could she fly, and how?

Escape by the central stairway would be out of the question,
because by that way only could danger approach.  She leaned out of
the window.  Catching at the coarse ivy vine which climbed up the
old wall of the house, she saw that it ascended past her window to
the very cornice where the white pillars joined the roof.  The
pillars themselves, vast and smooth, would have been useless even
could she have reached them.  Below, a slender lattice or ladder
had been erected to the height of one story, to give the ivy its
support.  A strong and active person might by mere possibility
reach this frail support if the ivy itself proved strong enough to
hold under the strain.  She clutched at it desperately.  It seemed
to her that although the smaller tendrils loosened, the greater
arms held firm.

She stepped back into the room, listened, straining all her soul in
a demand for certitude.  As yet she had only dreaded to hear a
sound, had not indeed done so.  Now at last there came a
footfall--was it true?  It seemed not heavy enough for a man's
step, but a man on secret errand might tread light.  She flung
herself upon the bed, her hands clasped, her lips moving in
supplication.

But now it came again, that was it--it was a footfall.  It
approached along the hall, paused at the barricaded door.  It was
there outside, stopping.  She heard a breath drawn.  The knob was
tried, silently at first, then with greater force.  "Who is there?"
she quavered.  "Who is there?" she repeated.  No answer came.

"Jeanne!" she cried aloud.  "Oh, Jeanne!  Jeanne!  Sally!"

There was once a sound of a distant door opening.  No voice came.
Outside her own door now was silence.

She could endure no more.  Though it were into flames, she must
escape from this place, where came one to claim a property, not a
woman; where a woman faced use, not wooing.  God! And there was no
weapon, to assure God's vengeance now, here, at once.

Half-clad as she was, she ran to the window, and unhesitatingly let
herself out over the sill, clutching at the ivy as she did so.  She
feared not at all what now was before her.  It is doubtful whether
those who spring from a burning building dread the fall--they dread
only that which is behind them.

As she now half-slid from the window, she grasped wildly at the
screen of ivy, and as fate would have it caught one of its greater
branches.  It held fast, and she swung free from the sill, which
now she could never again regain.  She clung desperately, blindly,
swung out; then felt the roots of the ivy above her rip free, one
after another, far up, almost to the cornice.  Its whole thin
ladder broke free from the wall.  She was flung into space.  Almost
at that instant, her foot touched the light lattice of the lower
story.  The ivy had crawled up the wall face and followed the
cornice up and over somewhere, over the edge of the eaves, finding
some sort of holding ground.  It served to support her weight at
least until she felt the ladder underfoot.  At this in turn she
clutched as she dropped lower, but frail and rotten as it was, it
supported her but slightly.  The next instant she felt, herself
falling.

[Illustration: She grasped wildly at the screen of ivy.]

She dropped out and down, struck heavily, and had but consciousness
enough left to half-rise.  Before her eyes shone scores of little
pointed lights.  Then her senses passed away, and all went sweetly,
smoothly and soothingly black about her....After ages, there came
faint sounds of running feet.  There was a sort of struggle of some
sort, it seemed, in her first returning consciousness.  Her first
distinct feeling was one of wonder that Dunwody himself should be
the first to bend over her, and that on his face there should seem
surprise, regret, grief.  How could he feign such things?  She
pushed at his face, panting, silent.

Jeanne now was there--Jeanne, tearful, excited, wringing her hands,
offering aid; but in spite of Jeanne, Dunwody raised Josephine in
his arms.  As he did so he felt her wince.  Her arm dropped
loosely.  "Good God! It is broken!" he cried.  "Oh, why did you do
this?  Why did you?  You poor girl, you poor girl!  And it was all
my fault--my fault!" Then suddenly, "Sally!--Eleazar!" he cried.

They came running now from all sides.  Between them they carried
Josephine back to her room and placed her once more upon her couch.

"Saddle up, Eleazar," commanded Dunwody.  "Get a
doctor--Jamieson--from St. Genevieve as fast as you can.  The
lady's arm is broken."

"Pardon, Monsieur," he began, "but it is far for St. Genevieve.
Me, I have set h'arm before now.  Suppose I set heem now, then go
for the doc'?"

"Could you do that?" demanded Dunwody.

"Somehow, yes, me," answered Eleazar.  Dunwody nodded.  Without
further speech the old man rolled up his sleeves and addressed
himself to his task.  Not without skill, he approached the broken
ends of the ulna, which was fractured above the wrist.  Having done
this without much difficulty he called out for splints, and when
some pieces of thin wood were brought him he had them shaped to his
needs, adjusted about them his bandage and made all fast.  His
patient made no sound of suffering.  She only panted, like a
frightened bird held in the hand, although the sobbing of Jeanne
filled the room.  The forehead of Dunwody was beaded.  He said
nothing, not even when they had finished all they now could do to
make her comfortable.

"_Au revoir_, Mademoiselle," said Eleazar, at length.  "I go now
for those doc'."

A moment later the room was cleared, none but Dunwody remaining.
At last, then, they were alone together.

"Go away! Bring me Jeanne!" she cried at him.  His lips only
tightened.

"May I not have Jeanne?" she wailed again.

"Yes, you shall have Jeanne--you shall have anything you want," he
answered at length, quietly.  "Only get well.  Forgive me all this
if you can."

Josephine's lips trembled.  "May I go?" she demanded of him.

There was a strange gentleness in his voice.  "You're hurt.  It
would be impossible for you to go now.  Don't be afraid.  Don't!
Don't!"

She looked at him keenly, in spite of her suffering.  There seemed
some change about him.  At length, heavily, his head sunk, he left
the room.

Jeanne herself, sobbing, tearful, withal overjoyed, rejoined her
mistress.  The two embraced as was best possible.  As her senses
cleared, a sort of relief came over Josephine.  Now, she began to
reason, for the time she was shielded by this infirmity; comforted
also by the presence of one as weak and helpless as herself.

"It's an ill wind, Jeanne, which blows no one good," she smiled
bravely.  "See, now we are together again."

"Madame!" gulped Jeanne.  "Madame!"

"Fie, fie, Jeanne! In time we shall be away from here."

"Madame, I like it not--this house.  Something here is wrong.  We
must fly!"

"But, Jeanne, I am helpless.  We must wait, now."

All that night and till morning of the next day they waited, alone,
Dunwody not appearing, though continually old Sally brought up
proofs of his solicitousness.  At last there came the sound of
hoofs on the gravel road, and there alighted at the door,
dust-covered and weary, old Eleazar and Jamieson, the doctor of St.
Genevieve.  These were met by the master of Tallwoods himself.

"Listen now, Jamieson," said Dunwody, "You're here by my call.  You
understand me, and understand the rules of your own profession.
Ask no questions here.  Your patient has broken an arm--there has
been an accident.  That's all you need to know, I think.  Your job
is to get her well, as soon as you can.  You're a doctor, not a
lawyer; that's all."

He led the way to the door of Josephine's room, and the doctor,
stained with travel as he was, entered.  He was an old man, gray
and lean, consumed in his time by fevers and chills, in the
treatment of which he was perhaps more skilful than in surgery.  He
approached the couch not unkindly and stood in preliminary
professional scrutiny of his patient.  The face turned toward him,
framed in its dark roll of hair, caused him to start with surprise.
Even thus flushed in the fever of pain, it seemed to him no face
ever was more beautiful.  Who was she?  How came she here?  In
spite of Dunwody's command many questions sprang to his own mind,
almost to his lips.  Yet now he only gently took up the bandaged
arm.

"Pardon, my dear," he said quietly.  "I must unwrap these bandages,
to see how well Eleazar has done his work--you know, these doctors
are jealous of each other!  So now, easy, easy!"

He unrolled the rude bandages which, if not professionally applied,
at least had held their own.  He examined the splints, hummed to
himself meantime.

"Fine!" he exclaimed.  "Excellent!  Now indeed I shall be jealous.
The old man has done a job as good as I could have done myself!
There was no need of my coming at all.  But I'm glad I came, my
dear."

"But you aren't going away.  Doctor--you will not go back!"

He pursed a lip as he gazed down over his steel bowed glasses.  "I
ought to get back, my dear, because I have other patients, don't
you see, and it's a long ride.  Why can't you let me go?  You're
young and healthy as a wild deer.  You're a perfectly splendid
girl.  Why, you'll be out of this in a couple of weeks.  How did
you happen to fall that way?"

[Illustration: Why can't you let me go?]

She nodded toward the window.  "I fell out--there--I was
frightened."

"Yes, yes, of course--sleep walking, eh?"

Jamieson took snuff very vigorously.  "Don't do it again.  But
pshaw! If I were as young and strong as you are, I'd have my arm
broken twice a week, just for fun."

"Doctor, you're going!" she exclaimed.  "But you must do something
for me--you must be my friend."

"Certainly, my dear, why not?  But how can I help you?  Dunwody's
pledged me to professional secrecy, you know."  He grinned, "Not
that even Warv' Dunwody can run me very much."

He looked down at her, frowning, but at that moment turned to the
door as he heard Dunwody's step.

"How do you find the patient, Doctor?" asked Dunwody.  Jamieson
moved a hand in cheerful gesture to his patient.

"Good-by, my dear.  Just get well, now.  I'm coming back, and then
we'll have a talk.  Be good, now, and don't walk in your sleep any
more."  He took Dunwody by the shoulder and led him out.

"I don't like this, Dunwody," he said, when they were out of
earshot of the room.  "What's going on here? I'm your doctor, as we
both know; but I'm your friend, too.  And we both know that I'm a
gentleman, and you ought to be.  That's a lady there.  She's in
trouble--she's scared e'en a'most to death.  Why?  Now listen.  I
don't help in that sort of work, my boy.  What's up here?  I've
helped you before, and I've held your secrets; but I don't go into
the business of making any more secrets, d'ye see?"

"There aren't going to be any more, Jamieson," rejoined Dunwody
slowly.  "I've got to keep hers.  You needn't keep mine if you
don't feel like it.  Get her well, that's all.  This is no place
for her.  As for me, as you know very well, there isn't any place
anywhere for me."

The old doctor sighed.  "Brace up to it, my son.  But play the game
fair.  If it comes to a case of being kind to yourself or kind to a
woman, why, take a gamble, and try being kind to the woman.  They
need it.  I'm coming back: but now I must be getting on.  First,
I'm going to get something to eat.  Where's the whisky?"

Dunwody for the time left him, and began moodily to pace apart, up
and down the gallery.  Here presently he was approached by Jeanne,
the maid.

"Madame will speak to you!" announced that person loftily, and
turned away scornfully before he had time to reply.  Eager,
surprised, he hastened up the stair and once more was at her
bedside.  "Yes?" he said.  "Did you wish me for anything?"

Josephine pushed herself back against the head board of the bed,
half supported by pillows.  With her free hand she attempted to put
back a fallen lock of dark hair.  It was not care for her personal
appearance which animated her, however, although her costume,
arranged by her maid, now was that of the sick chamber.  "Jeanne,"
she said, "go to the armoire, yonder.  Bring me what you find
there.  Wait," she added to Dunwody.  "I've something to show you,
something to ask you, yes."

Jeanne turned, over her arm now the old and worn garments which
Sally earlier had attempted to remove.

"What are these?" exclaimed Josephine of the man who stood by.

He made no reply, but took the faded silks in his own hands,
looking at them curiously, as though he himself saw something
unexpected, inexplicable.

"What are they, sir?  Whose were they?  You told me once you were
alone here."

"I am," he answered.  "Look.  These are years old, years, years
old."

"What are they?  Whose were they?" she reiterated.

"They are grave clothes," he said simply, and looked her in the
face.  "Do you wish to know more?"

"Is she--was she--is she out there?"  He knew she meant to ask, in
the graveyard of the family.

"Why do you wish to know?" he inquired quietly.  "Is it because you
are a woman?"

"I am here because I am a woman.  Well, then."

He looked at her, still silently, for a time.  "She is dead," he
said slowly.  "Can't you let her lie dead?"

"No.  Is she out there?  Tell me."

"No."

"Is she dead?  Who was she?"

"I have told you, I am alone here.  I have told you, I've been
alone, all my life, until you came.  Isn't that enough?"

"Yes, you've said that; but that was not the truth."

"It depends upon what you mean by the truth."

"The man who could do what you have done with me would not stop at
anything.  How could I believe a word you said?"  Then, on the
instant, much as she had cause to hate him, she half regretted her
speech.  She saw a swift flush spring to his cheek under the thin
florid skin.  He moved his lips, but did not speak.  It was quite a
while before he made reply.

"That isn't just," he said quietly.  "I wouldn't lie to you, not
even to get you.  If that's the way you feel about me, I reckon
there couldn't, after all, be much between us.  I've got all the
sins and faults of the world, but not just that one.  I don't lie."

"Then tell me."

"No.  You've not earned it.  What would be the use, if you didn't
believe what I said?"

He held up the faded things before his eyes, turning them over
calmly, looking at them directly, unshrinkingly.  She could not
read what was in his mind.  Either he had courage or long
accustomedness, she thought.

"I asked Sally," she half smiled.

"Yes?"

"And I'll ask her again.  I don't want--I can't have, a--a room
which belongs to another woman, which has belonged to another.
I've not, all my life, been used to--that sort of place, myself,
you see."

"You are entitled to first place.  Madam, wherever you are.  I
don't know what you have been."  He pointed to her own garments,
which lay across a chair.  "You don't know what she has been;" he
indicated these that he held in his hand.  "Very well.  What could
a mere liar, a coward, do to arrange an understanding between two
women so mysterious?  You sprang from the earth, from the sea,
somewhere, I do not know how.  You are the first woman for me.  Is
it not enough?"

"I told Sally, it might have been a sister, your mother--"

"Dead long ago.  Out there." He nodded to the window.

"Which?" she demanded.

He turned to her full now, and put out a hand, touching the
coverlid timidly almost.  "You are ill," he said.  "Your eyes
shine.  I know.  It's the fever.  It isn't any time now for you to
talk.  Besides, until you believe me, I can not talk with you any
more.  I've been a little rough, maybe, I don't know; but as God
made this world, those trees, that sun yonder, I never said a word
to you yet that wasn't true.  I've never wanted of you what wasn't
right, in my own creed.  Sometimes we have to frame up a creed all
for ourselves, don't you know that?  The world isn't always run on
the same lines everywhere.  It's different, in places."

"Will you tell me all about it--about her, sometime?"

"If you are going away, why should you ask that?  If you are going
to be nothing to me, in all the world, what right have you to ask
that of me?  You would not have the right I've had in speaking to
you as I have.  That was right.  It was the right of love.  I love
you!  I don't care if all the world knows it.  Let that girl there
hear if she likes.  I've said, we belong together, and it seems
truth to me, the very truth; yes, and the very right itself.  But
some way, we hurt each other, don't we?  Look at you, there,
suffering.  My fault.  And I'd rather it had cost me a limb than to
see you hurt that way.  It cuts my heart.  I can't rest over it.
And you hurt me, too, I reckon, about as bad as anything can.
Maybe you hurt me more than you know.  But as to our rights to
anything back of the curtain that's before us, before your life and
mine, why, I can't begin until something else has begun.  It's not
right, unless that other is right, that I've told you.  We belong
together in the one big way, first.  That's the premise.  That's
the one great thing.  What difference about the rest, future or
past?"

"You've not been much among women," she said.

"Very little."

"You don't understand them."

"I don't reckon anybody does."

"Jeanne told me that she heard, last night, a child crying, here in
this house."

"Could it not have been a negro child?"  He smiled at her, even as
he stood under inquisition.

She noticed that his face now seemed pale.  The bones of the cheeks
stood out more now.  He showed more gravity.  Freed of his red
fighting flush, the, flame of passion gone out of his eyes, he
seemed more dignified, more of a man than had hitherto been
apparent to her.

"_Non_!  _Non_!" cried out Jeanne, who had benefited unnoticed to
an extent undreamed hitherto in her experience in matter delicate
between man and maid.  Her mistress raised a hand.  She herself had
almost forgotten that Jeanne was in the room.  "_Non_!  _Non_!"
reiterated that young person.  "Eet was no neegaire child, _pas de
tout, jamais de la vie_!  I know those neegaire voice.  It was a
voice white, Madame, Monsieur!  Apparently it wept.  Perhaps it had
hunger."

A sort of grim uncovering of his teeth was Dunwody's smile.  He
made no comment.  His face was whiter than before.

"Whose child was it?" demanded Josephine, motioning to the garments
he still held in his hands.  "Hers?"  He shook his head slowly.

"No."

"Yours?"

"No."

"Oh, well, I suppose it was some servant's--though the overseer,
Jeanne says, lives across the fields, there.  And there would not
be any negroes living here in the house, in any case?"

"No."

"Was it--was it--yours?"

"I have no child.  There will never be any for me in the
world--except--under--" But now the flush came back into his face.
Confused, he turned, and gently laid down the faded silks across a
chair back, pulling it even with the one where lay Josephine's
richer and more modern robes.  He looked at the two grimly, sadly,
shook his head and walked out of the room.

"Madame!" exclaimed Jeanne, "it was divine!  But, _quelle mystere_!"


CHAPTER XIII

THE INVASION

Dunwody joined Jamieson below, and the latter now called for his
horse, the two walking together toward the door.  They hardly had
reached the gallery when there became audible the sound of
hoof-beats rapidly approaching up the road across the lawn.  A
party of four horsemen appeared, all riding hard.

[Illustration: A party of four horsemen appeared.]

"Who're they?" inquired the doctor.  "Didn't see any of them on the
road as I came in."

"They look familiar," commented Dunwody.  "That's Jones, and that's
Judge Clayton, down below--why, I just left both of them on the
boat the other day!  It's Desha and Yates with them, from the other
side of the county.  There must be something up."

He advanced to meet the visitors.  "Good morning, gentlemen.  Light
down, and come in."

All four got down, shook hands with Dunwody, gave their reins to
servants, and joined him on his invitation to enter.  Jamieson was
known to all of them.

"Well, Colonel Dunwody," began the Honorable William Jones, "you
didn't expect to see us so soon, did you?  Reckon you'd ought to be
all the gladder.

"You live here, my dear Colonel," he continued, looking about him,
"in much the same state and seclusion remarked by Mr. Gibbon in his
immortal work on the _Decline and Fall of Rome_--where he described
the castles of them ancient days, located back in the mountainous
regions.  But it ain't no Roman road you've got, out thar."

"I was going to remark," interrupted Judge Clayton, "that Colonel
Dunwody has anticipated all the modern requirements of hospitality
as well as embodied all those of ancient sort.  Thank you, I shall
taste your bourbon, Colonel, with gladness.  It is a long ride in
from the river; but, following out our friend's thought, why do you
live away back in here, when all your best plantations are down
below?  We don't see you twice a year, any more."

-E.

358 Letter 128 To Sir Horace Mann.
Feb. 9, 1744.

I have scarce time to write, or to know what I write. I live in
the House of Commons.

We sat on Tuesday till ten at night, on a Welsh election; and shall
probably stay as long to-day on the same.

I have received all your letters by the couriers and the post:
I am persuaded the Duke of Newcastle is much pleased with your
despatch; but I dare not enquire, for fear he should dislike your
having written the same to me.

I believe we should have heard more of the Brest squadron, if their
appearance off the Land's End on Friday was se'nnight, steering
towards Ireland, had occasioned greater consternation. It is
incredible how little impression it made: the stocks hardly fell:
though it was then generally believed that the Pretender's son was
on board.

We expected some invasion; but as they were probably disappointed
on finding no rising in their favour, it is now believed that they
are gone to the Mediterranean.

They narrowly missed taking the Jamaica fleet, which was gone
out convoyed by two men-of-war. The French pursued them, outsailed
them, and missed them by their own inexpertness. Sir John
Norris is at Portsmouth, ready to sail with nineteen men-of-war, and
is to be joined by two more from Plymouth. We hope to hear that
Matthews has beat the Toulon squadron before they can be joined
by the Brest. This is the state of our situation. "le have stopped
the embarkation of the six thousand men for Flanders; and I hope
the King's journey thither, The Opposition fight every measure of
supply, but very unsuccessfully. When this Welsh election is
over, they will probably go out of town, and leave the rest of the
session at ease.

I think you have nothing to apprehend from the new mine that is
preparing against you. My lord is convinced it is an idle attempt
and it will always be in his power to prevent any such thing from
taking effect. I am very unhappy for Mr. Chute's gout, or for any
thing that disturbs the peace of people I love so much, and that I
have such vast reason to love.

You know my fears for you: pray Heaven they end well!

It is universally believed that the Pretender's son, who is at
Paris, will make the campaign in one of their armies. I suppose this
will soon produce a declaration of war; and then France, perhaps,
will not find her account in having brought him as near to England
as ever he is like to be.

Adieu! My Lord is hurrying me down to the House. I must go!

359 Letter 129 To Sir Horace Mann.
House of Commons, Feb. 16, 1744.

We are come nearer to a crisis than indeed I expected! After the
various reports about the Brest squadron, it has proved that they
are sixteen ships of the line off Torbay; in all probability to
draw our fleet from Dunkirk, where they have two men-of-war and
sixteen large Indiamen to transport eight thousand foot and two
thousand horse, which are there in the town.

There has been some difficulty to persuade people of the imminence
of our danger - but yesterday the King sent a message to both Houses
to acquaint us that he has certain information of the young Pretender
being in France, and of the designed invasion from thence, in
concert with the disaffected here.(900) Immediately the Duke of
Marlborough, who most handsomely and seasonably was come to town
on purpose, moved for an Address to assure the King of standing by
him with lives and fortunes.

Lord Hartington, seconded by Sir Charles Windham,(901) the convert
son of Sir William, moved the same in our House. To our amazement,
and little sure to their own honour, Waller and Doddington,
supported in the most indecent manner by Pitt, moved to add, that
we would immediately inquire into the state of the navy, the causes
of our danger by negligence, and the sailing of the Brest fleet.
They insisted on this amendment, and debated it till seven at night,
not one (professed) Jacobite speaking. The division was 287
against 123. In the Lords, Chesterfield moved the same amendment,
seconded by old dull Westmoreland; but they did not
divide.

All the troops have been sent for in the greatest haste to London
but we shall not have above eight thousand men together at most.
An express is gone to Holland, and General Wentworth followed
it last night, to demand six thousand men, who will probably be
here by the end of next week. Lord Stair (902) has offered the King
his service, and is to-day named commander-in-chief. This is very
generous, and will be of great use.

He is extremely beloved in the -army, and most firm to this family.

I cannot say our situation is the most agreeable; we know not whether
Norris is gone after the Brest fleet or not. We have three ships
in the Downs, but they cannot prevent a landing, which will probably
be in Essex or Suffolk. Don't be surprised if you hear that
this crown is fought for on land.
As yet there is no rising; but we must expect it on the first
descent.

Don't be uneasy for me, when the whole is at stake.

I don't feel as if my friends would have any reason to be concerned
for me: my warmth will carry me as far as any man; and I think I
can bear as I should the worst that can happen; though the delays
of the French, I don't know from what cause, have not made that
likely to happen.

The King keeps his bed with the rheumatism. He is not less obliged
to Lord Orford for the defence of his crown, now he is out of
place, than when he was in the administration. His zeal, his
courage, his attention, are indefatigable and inconceivable. He
regards his own life no more than when it was most his duty to
expose it, and fears for every thing but that.

I flatter myself that next post I shall write you a more comfortable
letter. I would not have written this, if it were a time to admit
deceit.

Hope the best, and fear as little as you would do if you were here
in the danger.

My best love to the Chutes; tell them -I never knew how little I was
a Jacobite till it was almost my interest to be one. Adieu!

(900) "February 13. Talking upon this subject with Horace Walpole,
he told me confidentially, that Admiral Matthews intercepted, last
summer, a felucca in her passage from Toulon to Genoa, on board of
which were found several papers of great consequence relating to a
French invasion in concert with the Jacobites; one of them particularly
was in the style of an invitation from several of the nobility and
gentry of England to the Pretender.

These papers, he thought had not been sufficiently looked into and
were not laid before the cabinet council until the night before the
message was sent to both Houses." Mr. P. York(,@'s Parliamentary
Journal.-E.

(901) Afterwards Earl of Egmont.

(902) The Duke of Marlborough and Lord Stair had quitted the army
in disgust, after last campaign, on the King's showing such
unmeasurible preference to the Hanoverians.
361 Letter 130 To Sir Horace Mann.

Thursday, Feb. 23, 1744.

I write to you, in the greatest hurry, at eight o'clock at night,
whilst they are all at dinner round me.

I am this moment come from the House, where we have carried a great
Welsh election against Sir Watkyn Williams by 26. I fear you have
not had my last, for the packet-boat has been stopped on the French
stopping our messenger at Calais.

There is no doubt of the invasion: the young Pretender is at
Calais, and the Count de Saxe is to command the embarkation. Hitherto
the spirit of the nation is with us. Sir John Norris was to sail
yesterday to Dunkirk, to try to burn their transports; we are in
the utmost expectation of the news.

The Brest squadron was yesterday on the coast of Sussex. We have
got two thousand men from Ireland, and have sent for two more.

The Dutch are coming: Lord Stair is general. Nobody is yet
taken up-God knows why not! We have repeated news of Matthews
having beaten and sunk eight of the Toulon ships; but the French
have so stopped all communication that we don't yet know it
certainly; I hope you do. Three hundred arms have been
seized in a French merchant's house at Plymouth. Attempts have been
made to raise the clans in Scotland, but unsuccessfully.

My dear child, I write short, but it is much: and I could not say
more in ten thousand words. All is at stake we have great hopes,
but they are but hopes! I have no more time: I wait with patience
for the event, though to me it must and shall be decisive.

361 Letter 131 To Sir Horace Mann.

March 1st, 1744.

I wish I could put you out of the pain my last letters must have
given you. I don't know whether your situation, to be at such a
distance on so great a crisis, is not more disagreeable than ours,
who are expecting every moment to hear the French are landed.

We had great ill-luck last week: Sir John Norris, with four-and-twenty
sail, came within a league of the Brest squadron, which had but
fourteen.

The coasts were covered with people to see the engagement;
but at seven in the evening the wind changed, and they escaped.
There have been terrible winds these four or five days . our fleet
has not suffered materially, but theirs less.

Ours lies in the Downs; five of theirs at Torbay-the rest at La
Hague. We hope to hear that these storms, which blew directly
on Dunkirk, have done great damage to their transports.

By the fortune of the winds, which have detained them in port, we
have had time to make preparations; if they had been ready three
weeks ago. when the Brest squadron sailed, it had all been
decided. We expect the Dutch in four or five days. Ten battalions,
which make seven thousand men, are sent for from our army in Flanders,
and four thousand from Ireland, two of which are arrived.

If they still attempt the invasion, it must be a bloody war!

The spirit of the nation has appeared extraordinarily in our
favour. I wish I could say as much for that of' the ministry.
Addresses are come from all parts, but you know how little they are to
be depended on-King James had them. The merchants of London are
most zealous: the French name will do more harm to their cause
than the Pretender's service.

One remarkable circumstance happened to Colonel Cholmondeley's
regiment on their march to London: the public-houses on all the
road would not let them pay any thing, but treated them, and said,
"You are going to defend us against the French."

There are no signs of any rising.

Lord Barrymore,(903) the Pretender's general, and Colonel Cecil, his
secretary of state, are at last taken up; the latter, who having
removed his papers, had sent for them back, thinking the danger
over, is committed to the Tower, on discoveries from them; but, alas!

these discoveries go on but lamely.(904) One may perceive who is not
minister, rather than who is. The Opposition tried to put off the
suspension of the Habeas Corpus -feebly. Vernon (905) and the
Grennvilles are the warmest: Pitt and Lyttelton went away without
voting.(906) My father has exerted himself most amazingly - the
other day, on the King's laying some information before the House,
when the ministry had determined to make no address on it, he rose
up in the greatest agitation, and made a long and fine speech On
the present situation.(907) The Prince was so pleased with it, that
he has given him leave to go to his court, which he never would
before.

He went yesterday, and was most graciously received.

Lord Stair is at last appointed general. General Oglethorpe (908)
is to have a commission for raising a regiment of Hussars, to defend
the coasts. The Swiss servants in London have offered to form
themselves into a regiment; six hundred are already clothed and
armed, but no colonel or officers appointed.

We flatter ourselves, that the divisions in the French ministry will
repair what the divisions in our own undo.

The answer from the court of France to Mr. Thomson on the subject
of the boy (909) is most arrogant: "that when we have given them
satisfaction for the many complaints which they have made on our
infraction of treaties, then they will think of giving us des
`eclaircissements."
We have no authentic news yet from Matthews: the most credited is
a letter from Marseilles to a Jew, which says it was the most
bloody battle ever fought; that it lasted three days; that the
two first we had the worst, and the third, by a lucky gale, totally
defeated them. Sir Charles Wager always said, "that if a sea-fight
lasted three days, he was sure the English suffered the most for the
two first, for no other nation would stand beating for two days
together."

Adieu! my dear child. I have told you every circumstance I know: I
hope you receive my letters; I hope their accounts will grow more
favourable. I never found my spirits so high, for they never
were so provoked. hope the best, and believe that, as long
as I am, I shall always be yours sincerely.

P. S. My dear Chutes, I hope you will still return to your own
England.

(903) James Barry, fourth Earl of Barrymore. He died in 1747.
See ant`e, p. 269. Letter 74.

(904) "Some treasonable papers of consequence were found in Cecil's
pockets, which gave occasion to the apprehending of Lord Barrymore.

They were both concerned in the affair of transmitting the Pretender's
letter to the late Duke of Argyle; which it was now lamented had not
then undergone a stricter examination.

I observed the Tories much struck with the news of this being
secured." Mr. P. Yorke's Parl.
Journal.

-E.

(905) Admiral Vernon.

(906) "Lord Barrington's motion for deferring the suspension was
thrown out by 181 against 83. Pitt and Lyttelton walked down the
House whilst Lord Barrington was speaking, and went away; so
did Mr. Crowne, though a Tory; but most of that party voted
with the Ayes. Lord Chesterfield told the chancellor there was
no opposition to this bill intended amongst the Lords; not even a
disposition to it in any body; and greatly approved the limiting it
to so short a time." Mr. P. Yorke's Parl. journal.-E.

(907) "Lord Orford, though he had never spoken in the House of Lords,
having remarked to his brother Horatio that he had left his tongue
in the House of Commons, yet on this occasion his eloquent voice
was once more raised, beseeching their lordships to forget their
cavils and divisions, and unite in affection round the throne.

It was solely owing to him, that the torrent of public opposition
was braved and overcome." Lord Mahon, Hist. vol. iii. p.
273.-E.

(908) General James Oglethorpe, born in 1698. His activity in
settling the colony of Georgia obtained for him the friendship and
panegyric of Pope-

"One, driven by strong benevolence of soul, Shall fly, like Oglethorpe,
from pole to pole."

He was one of the earliest patrons of Johnson's "London," on its
first appearance, and the Doctor, throughout life, acknowledged
the kind and effectual support given to that poem. The General
sat in five parliaments, and died in 1785, at the age of eighty-seven.
For a striking pen-and-ink whole.length sketch, taken a few
months before that event, while the General was attending the sale
of Dr. Johnson's library at Christie's auction-room, see
"Johnsoniana," 8vo.
edit. p. 378.-E.

(909) Charles Edward, the young Pretender. His person, at this time,
is thus described by Lord Mahon: "The Prince was tall and well-formed;
his limbs athletic and active.

He excelled in all manly exercises, and was inured to every kind
of toil, especially long marches on foot, having applied himself
to field-sports in Italy, and become an expert walker.

His face was strikingly handsome, of a perfect oval, and a fair
complexion; his eyes light blue; his features high and noble.

Contrary to the custom of the time, which prescribed perukes, his
own fair hair usually in long ringlets on his neck.

This goodly person was enhanced by his graceful manners;
frequently condescending to the most familiar kindness, yet always
shielded by a regal dignity: he had a peculiar talent to please
and to persuade, and never failed to adapt his conversation to the
taste or to the station of those whom he addressed." Hist. vol.
iii. p. 280.-E.

363 Letter 132 To Sir Horace Mann.

March 5th, 1744, eight o'clock at night.

I have but time to write you a minute-line, but it will be a
comfortable one.

There is just come advice, that the great storm on the 25th of last
month, the very day the embarkation was to have sailed from
Dunkirk, destroyed twelve of their transports, and obliged the
whole number of troops, which were fifteen thousand, to debark.
You may look upon the invasion is at an end, at least for
the present; though, as every thing is coming to a crisis,
one shall not be surprised to hear of the attempt renewed. We know
nothing yet certain from Matthews; his victory grows a great doubt.

As this must go away this instant, I cannot write more-but
what could be more? Adieu! I wish you all joy.

364 Letter 133 To Sir Horace Mann.
March 15th, 1744
I have nothing new to tell you: that great storm certainly saved
us from the invasion-then.(910) Whether it has put an end to the
design is uncertain. They say the embargo at Dunkirk and Calais
is taken off, but not a vessel of ours is come in from thence.
They have, indeed, opened again the communication with Ypres and
Nieuport, etc. but we don't yet hear whether they have renewed their
embarkation.

However, we take it for granted it is all over-from which, I suppose
it will not be over. We expect the Dutch troops every hour.
That reinforcement, and four thousand men from Ireland, will be
all the advantage we shall have made of gaining time.

At last we have got some light into our Mediterranean affair,
for there is no calling it a victory. Villettes has sent a
courier, by which it seems we sunk one great Spanish ship; the rest
escaped, and the French fled shamefully; that was, I suppose,
designedly, and artfully.

We can't account for Lestock's not coming up with his seventeen
ships, and we have no mind to like it, which will not amaze you.

We flatter ourselves that, as this was only the first day, we shall
get some more creditable history of some succeeding day.

The French are going to besiege Mons: I wish all the war may take
that turn; I don't desire to see England the theatre of it.

We talk no more of its becoming so, nor of the plot, than of the
gunpowder-treason.

Party is very silent; I believe, because the Jacobites have better
hopes than from parliamentary divisions,-those in the ministry run
very high, and, I think, near some crisis.

I have enclosed a proposal from my bookseller to the undertaker
of the Museum Florentinum, or the concerners of it, as the paper
called them; but it was expressed in such wonderfully-battered
English, that it was impossible for Dodsley or me to be sure of the
meaning of it. He is a fashionable author, and though that
is no sign of perspicuity, I hope, more intelligible. Adieu!

(910) "The pious motto," says Mr.

P. Yorke, "upon the medal struck by Queen Elizabeth after the
defeat of the Armada, may, with as much propriety, be applied to
this event-"Flavit ventO, et dissipati sunt;' for, as Bishop Burnet
somewhere observes, 'our preservation at this juncture was one of
those providential events, for which we have much to answer."'

MS.
Parl. Journal.-E.

365 Letter 134 To Sir Horace Mann.
London, March 22, 1744.

I am .sorry this letter must date the era of a new correspondence,
the topic of which must be blood!
Yesterday, came advice from Mr. Thompson,(911) that Monsieur Amelot
had sent for him and given him notice to be gone, for a declaration
of war with England was to be published in two days. Politically,
I don't think it so bad; for the very name of war, though in effect,
on foot before,, must make our governors take more precautions;
and the French declaring it will range the people more on our side
than on the Jacobite: besides, the latter will have their communication
with France cut off.

But, my dear child, what lives, what misfortunes, must and may
follow all this! As a man, I feel my humanity more touched than
my spirit-I feel myself more an universal man than an Englishman!
We have already lost seven millions of money and thirty thousand
men in the Spanish war-and all the fruit of all this blood and
treasure is the glory of having Admiral Vernon's head on
alehouse signs! for my part, I would not purchase another Duke of
Marlborough at the expense of one life. How I should be shocked,
were I a hero, when I looked on my own laurelled head on a medal,
the reverse of which would be widows and orphans.
How many such will our patriots have made!

The embarkation at Dunkirk does not seem to go on, though, to
be sure, not laid aside.

We received yesterday the particulars of the Mediterranean engagement
from Matthews. We conclude the French squadron retired designedly,
to come up to Brest, where we every day expect to hear of them.
If Matthews does not follow them, adieu our triumphs in the
Channel-and then!

Sir John Norris has desired leave to come back, as little
satisfied with the world as the world is with him. He is certainly
very unfortunate;(912) but I can't say I think he has tried to
correct his fortune.

If England is ever more to be England, this sure is the crisis
to exert all her vigour.
We have all the disadvantage of Queen Elizabeth's prospect, without
one of her ministers.

Four thousand Dutch are landed, and we hope to get eight or twelve
ships from them.

Can we now say, Quatuor maria vindico?"(913)

I will not talk any more politically, but turn to hymeneals, with
as much indifference as if I were a first minister. Who
do you think is going to marry Lady Sophia Fermor?

(914)-only Lord Carteret!-this very week!-a drawing-room conquest.
Do but imagine how many passions will be gratified in that family!
her own ambition, vanity, and resentment-love she never had any;
the politics, management, and pedantry of the mother, who will think
to govern her son-in-law out of Froissart.(915) Figure the instructions
she will give her daughter!

Lincoln is quite indifferent, and laughs. My Lord Chesterfield says,
"It is only another of Carteret's vigorous measures." I am really
glad of it; for her beauty and cleverness did deserve a better
fate, than she was on the point of having determined for her for
ever,.

How graceful, how charming, and how haughtily condescending she
will be!
how, if Lincoln should ever hint past history, she will
"Stare upon the strange man's face, As one she ne'er had known!"(916)

I wonder I forgot to tell you that Doddington had owned a match of
seventeen years' standing with Mrs. Behan, to whom the one you
mention is sister.

I have this moment received yours of March 10th, and thank you much
for the silver medal, which has already taken its place in my
museum.

I feel almost out of pain for your situation, as by the motion of
the fleets this way, I should think the expedition to Italy abandoned.

We and you have had great escapes, but we have still occasion for
all Providence!

I am very sorry for the young Sposa Panciatici, and wish all the other
parents joy of the increase of their families. Mr.
Whithed is en bon train; but the recruits he is raising will scarce
thrive fast enough to be of service this war.

My best loves to him and Mr. Chute. I except you three out of my
want of public spirit.

The other day, when the Jacobites and patriots were carrying every
thing to ruin, and had made me warmer than I love to be, one
of them said to me, "Why don't you love your country?"

I replied, "I should love my country exceedingly,'If it were not
for my countrymen." Adieu!

(911) Chaplain to the late Lord Waldegrave; after whose death
he acted as minister at Paris, till the war, when he returned, and
was made a dean in Ireland.

(912) He was called by the seamen "Foul-weather Jack

."
(913) Motto of a medal of Charles the Second

.

(914) Eldest daughter of Thomas, Earl of Pomfret.

(915) lady Pomfret had translated Froissart.

(916) Verses in Congreve's Doris.

366 Letter 135 To Sir Horace Mann.
April 2, 1744.

I am afraid our correspondence will be extremely disjointed, and
the length of time before you get my letters will make you very
impatient, when all the world will be full of events; but I flatter
myself that you will hear every thing sooner than by my letters; I
mean, that whatever happens will be on the Continent; for the danger
from Dunkirk seems blown over. We declared war on Saturday: that
is all I know, for every body has been out of town for the Easter
holidays. To-morrow the Houses meet again: the King goes, and is
to make a speech.
The Dutch seem extremely in earnest, and I think we seem to put all
our strength in their preparations.
The town is persuaded that Lord Clinton (916) is gone to Paris to
make peace - he is certainly gone thither, nobody knows why.You've got property of mine on board,
and we've the legal right to take it, and we're going to take it.
You've killed some of our posse."

"You're pirates!" reiterated the northern, leader.  "You're border
ruffians, and you want to take this boat.  You'll have to account
for this."

"We are ready to account for it," said Dunwody.  "Throw down your
arms, or we will kill every man of you.  At once!"

He swung heavily back on his support as he spoke.  Clayton caught
him by the arm.  "You're hit, Dunwody!" he said in a low voice.

"Yes, a little," answered the other.  "Don't say anything."  Slowly
he pushed on, directly up to Carlisle, who faced him fearless as
ever.  "Tell your men to throw down their guns!" demanded Dunwody
once more.

"Attention, company!" called out the young Northerner.  "Stack
arms!"

Silently, in the dark, even in the confusion, the beleaguered men
grouped together and leaned their rifles against this or that
support.  Silently they ranged themselves, some on the deck, some
still upon the shore.

"Get lights now, at once!" commanded Dunwody.  "We've got men hurt
here.  We'll have to do something at once.  Jamieson!" he cried
out.  "Are you hurt?"

"I'm all right," answered Doctor Jamieson out of the darkness.
"Not a scratch.  But there's a lot of our fellows down."

"Take care of them," said Dunwody.  "We'll attend to the rest of
this business after that."


CHAPTER XVI

THE ADJUDICATION

A dismal sight enough was presented when finally a few half-hearted
torches were pressed into use to produce a scant illumination.
What had been a commonplace scene now was become one of tragedy.
The bank of this willow-covered island had assumed the appearance
of a hostile shore.  Combat, collision, war had taken the place of
recent peace and silence.  The night seemed ominous, as though not
even these incidents were more than the beginning of others yet
more serious soon to come.

Out of the confusion at last there might have been heard the voice
of Dunwody, calling again for Jamieson.  There was work for the
surgeon when the dead and injured of both sides at last were
brought aboard the little steamer and ranged in a ghastly common
row along the narrow deck.  "Take care of them, Jamieson," said
Dunwody shortly.  He himself leaned against the rail.

"You're hurt yourself, Dunwody," exclaimed Jamieson, the blood
dripping from his fingers when he half rose.  "What's wrong?"

"Nothing--I got a nick in my leg, I think, but I'm all right.  See
to the others."

Jamieson bent over the body of young Desha, who had been first to
suffer here on the debated ground of Missouri.  He had been shot
through the upper body and had died with little suffering.  Of the
assailing party two others also were beyond aid, one a young
planter who had joined the party some miles back beyond St.
Genevieve, the other a sallow example of the "poor white trash" who
made a certain part of the population of the lower country.  Of
these both were shot through the head, and death did not at once
relieve them.  They both lay groaning dully.  Jamieson passed them
swiftly by.  The tally showed that of the Missourians three had
been killed, four badly wounded, besides the slight wound of
Dunwody and that of a planter by the name of Sanders, who had been
shot through the arm.

Of the boat party, smaller in the first place though well armed,
the loss had been slightly less.  Two men had been killed outright
and three others badly wounded, of these one, probably, fatally
hurt.  To all of these Jamieson ministered as best he might.  The
deck was wet with blood.  Silent and saddened spectators, the
attacking party stood ranged along the rail on the side next to the
shore.  On the opposite side were the sullen defenders.

Carlisle, the leader of the boat party, stood silent, with lips
tightly compressed, not far from where Dunwody leaned against the
rail.  He made no comment on the scene and was apparently not
unused to such spectacles.  Occasionally he bent over, the better
to observe the results of the surgeon's work, but he ventured no
comment and indulged in no recriminations.  His slight but erect
figure was military now in its formality.  His face was not
handsome, but the straight eyes showed fearless.  The brow was
strong, the nose straight and firm.  Once he removed his
"wideawake" hat and passed a hand through the heavy tangle of his
reddish hair.  The face was that of a fanatic.  It was later not
unknown in yet bloodier fighting.

The night faded after all, at last.  Along the level of the water's
surface came some glints from the eastern sky.  The horizon paled
slightly.  At last a haggard dawn came to light the scene.  The
shadows of the willow flat opened, and there lay exposed what now
was a coast possessed by embattled forces.

"Captain," began Dunwody at last, turning to the commander of the
boat forces.  "We will be leaving before long.  As to you, you will
have to turn back.  You will take your boat down-stream, if you
please."

"It's not as I please," rejoined the other.  "You order us back
from our journey at your own peril."

"Why argue the matter?" said Dunwody dully.  "It would do no good.
We're as much in earnest as you are about it, and we have beaten
you.  You belong to the army, but these are not enlisted men, and
you're not carrying out any orders."

"That part of the argument is plain," rejoined the young officer.
"But you are mistaken if you think you can order me.  I'm an
officer, and I'm on my own way, and I am, therefore, under orders.
I was following a prisoner late in my charge when I fell in with
this party bound up the river, to the Kansas front."

"The courts may take all that up.  This is Missouri soil."

"It's no case for courts," answered the other sternly.  "This will
come before the court of God Himself."

A bitter smile played over the face of the Missourian.  "You
preach.  Yet you yourself are lawless as the worst law-breakers.
Who made our laws--you, or the whole people of this country?  And
if God is your court, why did you have no better aid to-night.
It's the long arm wins.  You see, we will fight."

"That I agree.  It's force that wins, but not brute force.  You
will see."

"Argument!" exclaimed Dunwody.  "The answer is here at our
feet--it's in blood."

"So be it then!" said the other solemnly.  "If it means war, let it
be war.  I admit that we have a fugitive slave on board--a young
woman--I suppose that was the excuse for your attack."

"It was the cause of it; and we intend to take her," answered
Dunwody.  "We didn't intend to use violence unless it was
necessary.  But as to you, will you take your boat below and out of
this country?"

"I will not."

"Very well, then, we'll take you from your own boat, and we'll make
her pay the penalty."

"By what right?"

"By the right of the long arm, since you insist."

"You would make us prisoners--without any process of law whatever!"

"You can thresh that out in your own courts later, if you like,"
said Dunwody.  "Meantime, we'll see if I can't find a place that
will hold you."

"Jamieson," he called out an instant later; "Clayton; come here.
Take the roll of these men," he went on.  "If any of them want to
drop the thing at this point and go back, let them give parole.
They'll have to agree to leave and never come back here again."

"That's an outrage!" broke out the northern leader.  "You and your
band of ruffians--you talk as though you owned this state, as
though this river weren't made as a highway of this continent.
Don't you know that not even a river can be owned by an entire
state?"

"We own this part of it to-day," rejoined Dunwody simply.  "This is
our judiciary.  These are our legislators whom you see."  He
slapped his rifle stock, touched a revolver butt at his belt.  "You
left the highway when you tied up to our shores.  The temper of my
men is such that you are lucky to have a parole offered to you.
You deserve not the treatment of soldiers, but of spies.  You
disgrace your uniform.  These men are only fools.  But what do they
say, Clayton?" he demanded turning to the latter as he finally
returned.

"They consider the expedition at an end," returned the Judge.
"Three of them want to go on home to St.  Louis.  Yates yonder is
in favor of hanging them all.  The boys are bitter about losing
Desha."

Dunwody looked the young leader calmly in the face.  "You hear,"
said he.  "But you shall see that we are not such ruffians at
heart, in spite of all.  It's my intention to conclude this matter
as decently as possible."

"The others are willing to return," continued Judge Clayton.  "They
want to know what their captain intends."

"Their captain does not intend to surrender," rejoined the latter
fearlessly.  "Let those desert who like."

"I am with you, Captain," quietly said a tall young man, of German
accent, who had been foremost in the fighting.

[Illustration: "I am with you, Captain."]

"Good, Lieutenant Kammerer, I knew you'd stick," commented the
leader.

"As to the boat, Judge Clayton," resumed Dunwody, "what shall we do
with her?"

"Burned boats tell no tales," here called out young Yates
sententiously.

"You hear," said Dunwody.  "My men are not children."

"It's piracy, that's all," rejoined the young leader,

"Not in the least, sir," broke in Judge Clayton.  "We'll burn her
here, tied to this bank on Missouri soil.  The river fell during
the night--some inches in all--she's hard aground on the shore."

"Fall in, men!" commanded Dunwody suddenly.  "Jamieson, fix up my
leg, the best you can.  It'll have to take its chances, for we're
in a hurry.  About the paroled men, get them in the rowboats and
set them loose.  Get your crippled men off the boat at once,
Jamieson.  This couple of prisoners I am going to take home with
me.  The rest can go.

"But there's one thing we've forgotten--where's that girl?"  He
turned to the northern leader.

"She's below, in the cabin."

"Go get her, Clayton," commanded Dunwody.  "We'll have to be quick
now."

Clayton found his way down the narrow companionway and in the
darkness of the unlighted lower deck fumbled for the lock of the
cabin.  When he threw open the door he found the interior dimly
lighted by the low window.  At first he could make out nothing, but
at last got a glimpse of a figure at the farther side of the little
room.  "Who's there!" he demanded, weapon ready.

There was no answer, but slowly, wearily, with unspeakable sadness
in every gesture, there rose the figure of the girl Lily, around
whose fortunes had centered all these turbulent scenes.

In the confusion which followed, no one had a clear conception of
all the events which concluded this tragic encounter.  Dunwody,
Jamieson and Clayton cleared the men from the decks of the boat.
The wounded hobbled to a place of shelter.  The dead were laid out
in a long and ghastly row at the edge of the willow grove.
Meantime, busy hands brought dried brush and piled it up against
the side of the boat as she lay against the bank, the leader in
this being the Honorable William Jones, who now mysteriously
reappeared, after a temporary absence which had not been noted.
The faint light of a match showed in the dim dawn.  There came a
puff of smoke or so, a tiny crackling.  A denser burst of smoke
pierced through the light flames.  Soon the fire settled to its
work, eating in even against the damp planking of the boat.  The
drier railings caught, the deck floors, the sides of the cabin.  In
half an hour the _Helen Bell_, early border transport, was a mass
of flames.  In a quarter-hour more, her stacks had fallen overboard
and the hulk lay consumed half to the water-line.

[Illustration: Soon the fire settled to its work.]


CHAPTER XVII

THE LADY AT TALLWOODS

The arrival of the four visitors at Tallwoods, and their departure
so soon thereafter, were events of course not unknown to Josephine,
but only conjecture could exist in her mind as to the real nature
of the errand in either case.  Jeanne, her maid, speculated as to
this openly.

"That docteur also, he is now gone," said she, ruefully.  "But yet,
behold the better opportunity for us to escape, Madame.  Ah, were
it not for the injury of madame, I should say, let us at once set
out--we could follow the road."

"But they will return!" exclaimed her mistress.  "We can not tell
how long they will be gone.  And, Jeanne, I suffer."

"Ah, my poor angel!  You suffer!  It is criminal!  We dare not
start.  But believe me, Madame, even so, it is not all misfortune.
Suppose we remain; suppose Monsieur Dunwodee comes back?  You
suffer.  He has pity.  Pity is then your friend.  In that itself
are you most strong.  Content yourself to be weak and helpless for
a time.  Not even that brute, that assassin, that criminal, dare
offend you now, Madame.  But--of course he is impossible for one
like madame; yet I have delight to hear even a brute, an assassin,
make such love!  _Ah, mon Dieu_!"

Jeanne pursed a lip impartially.  "_Mon Dieu_!  And he was
_repressed_, by reason of my presence.  He was restrained, none the
less, by this raiment here of another, so mysterious.  Ah, if he--"

"_Tais-toi donc_, Jeanne!" exclaimed her mistress.  "No more!  We
shall stay until to-morrow, at least."

And so the day passed.  The sleepy life of the old plantation went
on about them in silence.  As a wild animal pursued, oppressed, but
for the time left alone in some hiding-place, gains greater courage
with each moment of freedom from pursuit, so Josephine St. Auban
gained a groundless hope with the passing of the hours.  Even the
long night at length rolled away.  Jeanne slept in her mistress'
room.  Nothing occurred to disturb their rest.

It was evening of the second day, and the shadows again were lying
long across the valley, when there came slowly filing into view
along the turn of the road the band of returning riders.  At their
head was the tall form of Dunwody, the others following,
straggling, drooping in their saddles as though from long hours of
exertion.  The cavalcade slowly approached and drew up at the front
door.  As they dismounted the faces of all showed haggard, worn and
stern.

"There has been combat, Madame!" whispered Jeanne.  "See, he has
been hurt.  Look--those others!"

Dunwody got out of his saddle with difficulty.  He limped as he
stood now.  A slender man near him got down unaided, a tall
German-looking man followed suit.  The group broke apart and showed
a girl, riding, bound.  Some one undid the bonds and helped her to
the ground.

All of these things were apparent from the vantage ground of the
upper story window, but Josephine, unwilling to play at spying, saw
none of it.  At last, however, an exclamation from Jeanne caused
her to hasten to the window.  "_Mon Dieu_, Madame!  Madame,
look--it is that officer--it is Monsieur le Capitaine Carlisle!
Look! why then--"

[Illustration: An exclamation from Jeanne caused her to hasten.]

With no more than a glance, her mistress turned, flung open the
door of the room, hurried down the stair, passed out of the hall
and so fronted these newcomers at the gallery.  They stood silent
as they saw her.  She herself was first to speak.

"What are you doing with that woman?" she demanded.

They all stood in silence, looking at her, at this apparition of a
woman--a young and beautiful woman--here at Tallwoods, where none
had known of any woman these many years.  Clayton himself made no
comment.  The Honorable William Jones smiled broadly.  Dunwody
removed his hat.  "Gentlemen," said he, "this is the Countess St.
Auban, who has come to see these parts of our country.  Madam," he
added, "this is Judge Clayton.  He was on the _Mount Vernon_ with
us.  Lieutenant Kammerer, I think, is the name of this gentleman
who came down here to teach us a few things.  There has been some
fighting.  Mr.  Yates--Mr.  Jones.  And this gentleman"--he stepped
back so that Carlisle might come into view--"I think you already
know."

"I knowed it!  I knowed it!" broke in the Honorable William Jones.
"I seen all along there was a woman in this house.  I said--"

Josephine turned to him a swift glance.  "There is a lady in this
house."

"Yes," broke out Carlisle, "and all of you remember it.  Don't I
know!  Madam, what are you doing here?"

"Kind words from my former jailer?  So!"  She rewarded him none too
much for his quick sympathy.  Then, relenting; "But at least you
were better than this new jailer.  Are you, too, a prisoner?  I
can't understand all this."

"But you're hurt.  Madam," began Carlisle.  "How is that?  Have you
also been attacked by these ruffians?  I did not dream Dunwody was
actually so much a ruffian."

"Madam," said Dunwody slowly turning to her, "I can't exchange
words now.  There has been an encounter, as I said.  There have
been men killed, and some of us have been hurt.  The northern
abolitionists have made their first attack on southern soil.  This
gentleman is an army officer.  I'm a United States marshal, and as
a prisoner he's safe in talking.  He has come here on his own moral
initiative, in the interest of what you call freedom.  You two
should be friends once more.  But would you mind helping me make
these people comfortable as we can?"

"You are hurt, yourself, then!" she said, turning toward him,
seeing him wince as he started up the step.

"No;" he said curtly, "it's nothing."

"That girl yonder--ah! she has been whipped!  My God in Heaven.
What is to be next, in this wilderness!  Is there indeed here no
law, no justice?"

The deep voice of the German, Kammerer, broke in.  "Thank God in
Heaven, at least you are a woman!" he said, turning to her.

"A woman!  Why thank God for that?  Here, at least, a woman's sole
privilege is insult and abuse."

The others heard but did not all understand her taunt.  Tears
sprang to the eyes of young Carlisle.  "Don't talk so!" was all he
could exclaim, feeling himself not wholly innocent of reproach.
Dunwody's face flushed a deep red.  He made no answer except to
call aloud for the old house servant, Sally, who presently appeared.

"Madam," said Dunwody, in a low voice, limping forward toward
Josephine, "you and I must declare some sort of truce.  The world
has all gone helter-skelter.  What'll become of us I don't know;
but we need a woman here now."

She gazed at him steadily, but made no reply.  Growling, he turned
away and limped up the steps, beckoning the others to follow into
the hall.

They entered, awkward, silent, and stood about, none knowing what
was best to do.  Dunwody, luckless and unhappy as he was, still
remembered something of his place as host, and would have led them,
friends and enemies, into the dining-room beyond in search of some
refreshment.  He limped forward, without any support.  In the door
between the hall and the farther room there lay a mounted rug, of a
bear skin.  He tripped at its edge and fell, catching vainly at the
door.  A sharp exclamation escaped him.  He did not at once rise.
It was the arm of his prisoner, Carlisle, who aided him.  "You are
hurt, sir."

"No, no, go away!" exclaimed Dunwody, as he struggled to his feet.

"One bone's gone," he said presently in a low tone to Clayton.  "I
broke it when I fell that time."

A curious moment of doubt and indecision was at hand.  The men,
captors and captives, looked blankly at one another.  It was the
mind of a woman which first rose to this occasion.  In an instant
Josephine, with a sudden exclamation, flung aside indecision.

"Jeanne' Sally!" she called.  "Show these gentlemen to their
rooms," naming Clayton and Jones.  "Sir," she said to Dunwody,
whose injury she did not guess to be so severe, "you must lie down.
Gentlemen, pass into the other room, there, if you please." She
motioned to the two prisoners, and stepped to Dunwody's side.

"I can't have this," he broke out suddenly.  "You're hurt,
yourself.  Go to your room.  I tell you, it's nothing."

"Be quiet," she said, close at his ear.  "I'm not afraid of you
now."


CHAPTER XVIII

ON PAROLE

In this strange house party, a truce was tacitly agreed.  It seemed
sufficient that the future for the time should take care of itself.
Dunwody's injury left Clayton practically leader of the
Missourians.  His party gravitated toward him, while opposite sat
the two prisoners, Carlisle and Kammerer, composed and silent, now
and then exchanging a glance with each other, but making no spoken
comment.

Dunwody, in his own room, was looking into the seriousness of his
injury, with the old trapper Eleazar, once more summoned as
readiest physician.  Eleazar shook his head when he had stripped
off the first bloody bandages from the limb.  "She'll been broke,"
was his dictum.  "She'll been bad broke.  We mus' have docteur
soon."  For half an hour the old man did the best he could,
cleansing and rebandaging.

"We _mus_' have _docteur_!" complained he, mindful of Jamieson, far
away, busy with cases as bad as this.

For half an hour or so Josephine remained in her own room above,
having done all she could to establish some sort of order.  All at
once to her strained senses there seemed to flash some apprehension
of a coming danger.  She rose, tiptoed to her door, looked down.  A
moment later she turned, and caught up an old pistol which hung on
the wall near the door in the narrow hallway.  Silently and swiftly
she stepped forward to the head of the stair.

What she saw now was this: Carlisle and Kammerer, themselves now
armed with weapons carelessly left in the lower hall, had passed
unnoticed from the dining-room, and now were tiptoeing down the
hall toward the door of Dunwody's apartment.  Clayton and his men,
dulled with loss of sleep, had allowed them to leave the main room,
and these two, soldiers by training, had resolved to turn the
tables and take possession of the place.  Their plans were at the
point of success.  They had almost reached the door of Dunwody's
room, weapons in hand, when from above they heard a sharp command.

"Halt, there!" a woman cried to them.

They turned and looked up, arrested by the unmistakable quality in
the tones.  They saw her leaning against the baluster of the stair,
one arm bound tightly to her side, the other resting a revolver
barrel along the baluster and glancing down it with a fearless eye.
She took a step or two lower down the stair, sliding the weapon
with her.  "What are you doing there?" she demanded.

A half-humorous twist came to the mouth of Carlisle.  He answered
quietly, as he raised a hand for silence:

"Just about what you might expect us to do.  We're trying to take
care of ourselves.  But how about yourself?  I thought you were
with us, Madam.  I had heard that you--"

"Come," she answered, lowering the weapon and stepping swiftly down
the stairs.  "Come outside, where we can talk."

The three now passed out the open front door to the wide gallery,
which lay in the dim twilight untenanted.  Kammerer kept his eyes
still on the muzzle of the revolver.  Carlisle laughed.  "That's
right, Kammerer," said he.  "Be careful when a woman gets the drop
on you.  She'll shoot quicker than a man, because she doesn't know
any better.  I don't doubt you had a reason for stopping us,
Madam," said he; "but what?--that puzzles me."

"How came you here?" she demanded.  "You left me.  I don't know
anything about what's going on.  I'm all at sea."

"So are we all, Madam.  But I'll tell you all I know.  I left you
for several reasons.  I knew my main errand with you was done.  My
post is out beyond, up the Missouri.  I was on my way there when I
got orders to take you with me, as you know.  I concluded to drop
off and send a telegraphic report to Washington, and to ask consent
to go on out to my post.  I saw your note to Dunwody.  You had then
chosen a new jailer.  I thought, since he was better known in this
country than myself, your reputation would be safer in his hands
than mine.  But as soon as I left, I began to think it over, and I
resolved to follow after you, not as a jailer but as a friend.  I
met a little party of northern men, going out to the Kansas
country; and I knew Lieutenant Kammerer, here, at St. Louis.  We
all thought alike.  That girl yonder pleaded so hard that we took
her on with us, at Cairo.  She was bound to get away.  When we tied
up for the night, above St.  Genevieve, we were attacked by these
Missourians here.  I had intended to leave the boat, for now I knew
where you were.  Lily told me you were taken--handled rudely--like
a slave--that you--Well then, I knew it was Dunwody.

"Of course, I was going to kill him.  In the night none of us knew
who made up the party that fired on us.  There were half a dozen
men killed, more than that many wounded, and we are prisoners here,
as you see.  I suppose that's about all.  But then, good God!
Madam, why break up our attempt to escape?  Aren't you with us?
And how did you get hurt?"

She told him, simply, there had been accident.

"Are you of the revolutionists, Madam?" demanded the big German
suddenly.

"Yes!" she wheeled upon him.  "I am from Europe.  I am for liberty."

"Come, then," said Kammerer, quietly reaching out and taking away
the revolver from her hand.  "We're friends.  How came you to be in
this country, here?"

She smiled at him bitterly.  "Because of my zeal.  There were
powers who wanted me out of Washington.  Ask Captain Carlisle as to
that.  But this man I met later on the boat, as you know.
He--brought me here--as you have heard!"

"It iss outrage!" broke in Kammerer.  "It iss crime!"

"We'll call him to account," interrupted Carlisle.  "Why did you
stop us?  We'd have killed him the next minute.  I'll kill him yet."

"I was afraid you _would_ kill him," she said simply.

"Well, why not?  What has he done to us,--our men,--to you?"

"I could not see it done."

"You'll see worse done.  We'll do it yet.  You must not stand in
our way."  His hand closed over his own revolver butt, and he made
a half motion forward.

"No!" she said, and stepped before him.

Carlisle would have put her aside.  "What do you mean?  They'll be
out here in a minute,--we'll have to fight if they catch us here.
Do you want to see us killed?  Quick!  Out of the way!"  His voice,
raucous in anger, rasped at her ears, low as it was pitched.

"No," she still replied.  "Let me do the thinking.  Keep quiet!
I'll get you out.  There's been blood enough shed now."

"You are magnificent, Madam!" said Carlisle.  "But you are
visionary.  Get out of our way.  I claim him.  Leave him to me."

"No, I claim him myself.  Leave him to me!"

"In God's name, what next!" exclaimed the young Northerner
bitterly.  "Are we all mad?  Haven't you had trouble enough already
with this man?  You don't make yourself clear.  What do you want of
him?"

"I'm entirely clear about it myself.  I can't get away from here
now, but I'm safe here now.  For all of you to stay would mean
trouble, certainly.  If those men knew you were planning escape
there would be more men killed.  But you don't belong here.  Very
well.  I'm obliged to stay for a time.  So, I'm just going to take
the position of commander.  I'm just going to parole you two.
You're free to go if you like!"

Carlisle turned toward the big German, Kammerer, and broke into a
laugh.  "Did you ever see anything like this?" he demanded.  But
the assent of the other shone in his eyes.

"The lady hass right," he said.  "What she said iss wise, if it can
be done."

"But, Madam, what will become of _you_?" said Carlisle at last.
Her answer was instant.  She turned back to the door.

"Judge Clayton!" she called out, loud and clear.  "Mr. Yates!  All
of you, come here!"

The inner doors opened, and they ran out at her call.  Some of them
had been asleep, leaning back in their chairs against the wall.
The confusion of their approach now aroused all the house.  There
appeared also the tall form of Dunwody himself, leaning on a rifle
barrel for a crutch.  All these paused in the hall or on the
gallery, close to the great door.  Dunwody's frown was unmistakable
enough, when he saw the three grouped outside, the two prisoners
armed.

"There's been plotting here!" he cried.  "What's up?  Get your
arms, men!  Cover them, quick!"

"Wait!" said Carlisle quietly.  "We're armed, and we've got you
covered."  His weapon and that of Kammerer shone gray in the half
light.  Dunwody threw himself against the doorpost with a growl of
anger.

"You've been plotting against us!" he said to Josephine grimly.
"Well!"

"You are unjust, as usual, Sir," said Carlisle hotly.  "On the
contrary, she just kept us from killing you--which by all the
rights of God and man we ought to have done,--and will do, some
day."

"What do you mean?" demanded Dunwody dully.  "You--she saved--"

"It iss the truth," assented Kammerer, in his turn.  "It wass the
lady who hass saved you.  She hass spoken for peace and not for
bloodshed.  You owe to her your life."

"My life!" he said, turning toward her.  "You--"

"I've assumed command here," interrupted Josephine calmly.  "I've
paroled these gentlemen."

"Indeed!" said Dunwody sarcastically.  "That's very nice, for
them!".

She went on unperturbed.  "I'm going to set them free.  Judge
Clayton and Mr. Jones and you others, too, must go on home.  You
will have to surrender to the courts.  These men are going to leave
the state.  All of you must disperse--at once."

"And you yourself,--" began Dunwody grimly; "what do you plan?"

"I remain.  I am a hostage.  It will now be known where I am.  You
will be responsible for me, now.  I fancy that will suit Washington
as well as to detain Captain Carlisle as my jailer any longer.  If
I thought I needed him, I would not let him go.  We are all of us
going to be under parole, don't you see?"

"Is it your wish that we should give parole in these circumstances,
Dunwody?"  Judge Clayton himself smiled rather sardonically.

"I don't see why not, after all," said Dunwody, at length, slowly.
"I don't see why that isn't about as wise as anything we can do.
The law will do the rest of this work, and we must all be ready for
it, as she says.  Only one thing, gentlemen, before we part.  As to
this young lady here, I'll kill the first man, friend or foe, who
raises a breath against her.  Do I make myself plain?  Put down
your guns, then.  I won't turn any man away, not even an enemy.
Have you eaten, gentlemen?  Are you rested enough to go to-night?"

An hour later clattering hoofs once more resounded along the
Tallwoods road.


CHAPTER XIX

THE ENEMY

Leaning against the pillar of the gallery, Dunwody watched them
all, old friends, late foes, depart.  Josephine St. Auban stood not
far away.  He turned to her, and her gaze fell upon his face, now
haggard and gaunt.  He had ridden sixty miles since the previous
sun, half the distance wounded as he was; had been without sleep
for thirty-six hours, without food for almost as long, and now was
suffering with an aggravated wound.

"You are ill," she said to him impulsively.  "You're badly hurt."

"Aren't you glad to see me suffer?" he asked grimly.

"I am not glad to see any one suffer."

"Well, never mind about me.  But now, you, yourself.  Didn't I tell
you to go to your room and rest?"

She was pale, the corners of her mouth were drawn, her eyes were
duller.  Neither had she slept.  She also suffered, even now.  Yet
her courage matched his own.  She smiled.

"It makes me crawl, all the way through, to see a woman hurt that
way.  Why did you try to climb out of that window?  You weren't
walking in your sleep."

"I was trying to get away from you.  I thought you were coming.  I
thought I heard you--at the door." She looked him full in the face,
searching it for sign of guilt, of confusion.  "Was it not enough?"
she added.

The frown on his face only deepened.  "That was not true," said he.
"I never came to your door.  It was Sally you heard.  I'll
confess--I sent her, to get away those--those clothes you saw.  I
didn't want--you to see them."

"I believe you!" she said, low, as if she spoke to herself.  "Yes,
I understand now."

"Why don't you say I'm lying to you?"

"Because you are not lying.  Because you tell me the truth, and I
know it.  I was mistaken."

"How do you know?  Why forgive me?  I don't want you to forgive me.
You don't understand the madness--"

"What hope could there be in a particular madness such as that?"
He could see her eyes turned on him steadily.  He turned away,
sighing.

"I am degraded for ever."

"Tell me," she flashed out upon him suddenly; "what did you think
then of _me_, there on the boat? How did you dare--"

"I don't think I had any conclusion--I only wanted you.  I just
couldn't think of your going away, that was all.  I'd never seen a
woman like you, I'll never hope to see another your equal in all my
life.  And you sent for me, told me to come, said you needed help.
I didn't know what you were.  But I didn't care what you were,
either.  I don't care now.  Your past might be what you liked, you
might be what you are not, and it would make no difference to me.
I wanted you.  I'll never in all my life cease to want you.  Who
you are or what you are is nothing to me."

[Illustration: "I'll never in all my life cease to want you."]

"But what is the right thing to do now?" he resumed, after a time.
"Parole?  Hostage?  I don't need to tell you I'm the prisoner now.
My future, my character, are absolutely in your hands.  The fact
that I have insulted a woman can be proved.  It is with you, what
revenge you will take.  As a lawyer, I point out to you that the
courts are open.  You easily can obtain redress there against
Warville Dunwody.  And your relatives or friends will of course
hold me accountable."

"Then you fear me?"

"No.  What comes, comes.  I am afraid of no one in the world but my
own self.  I fear only the dread of facing life--of looking about
me here, in my own home, and not seeing, not hearing you.

"But you haven't told me what you wish," he added; raising his eyes
at last; "nor what you intend to do.  Tell me, when will your
lawyers call on me?"

"Never at all," she answered at last.

"What do you mean?" he demanded.  "To set me quit so easily?  Oh,
no."

"Never fear.  You shall pay me ransom, and heavily."

"Ransom?  Parole?  Hostages?  How do you mean?"

"What ransom you pay me must be out of yourself, out of your own
character.  I shall exact it a hundredfold, in shame, in regret, of
you.  Do you hold any of that ready to pay your debtor?"

He shook his head.  "No, I'll never regret.  But you don't know me,
do you?  My fortune is adequate."

"So is mine," she rejoined.  "I could perhaps buy some of your
property, if it were for sale.  But I want more than money of you."

"Who are you?" demanded he suddenly, reverting to the old puzzle
regarding her.

A sadness came upon her averted face.  "Only a bit of flotsam on
the human wave.  How small we all are, any of us!  And there's so
much to be done!"

Half stumbling, he shifted his position, leaning his weight against
the tall pillar of the gallery.  He could see her plainly.  In the
light from the hall half her features were now thrown into
Rembrandt lighting.  The roll of dark hair framed her face,
highbred, aristocratic, yet wholly human and sweet.  Gravity sat on
all her features; a woman for thought, said they.  A woman for
dreams; so declared the fineness of brow and temple and cheek and
chin, the hand--which, lifted now for an instant, lingered at her
throat.  But a woman for love! so said every throb of the pulse of
the man regarding her.  And now, most of all, pity of her just
because she was woman was the thought first in his soul.  Already
he was beginning to pay, and as she had said!

"You don't answer me," said he, at length, gently.  "I can imagine
your ambitions; but I don't learn enough of _you_."

"No," said she, with a deep breath.  "As you said, we part, each
with secrets untold.  To you, I am of no consequence.  Very well.
I was born, no matter where, but free and equal to yourself, I
fancy.  I came here in the pursuit of life and liberty, and of the
days of my remaining unhappiness.  I suppose this must be your
answer."

"You speak, at least, as though you had studied life--and history."

"I have lived.  And I have seen some history made--for a cause.
Sir, a great cause.  Men will fight for that again, here, on this
soil, not under man-made laws, but under a higher and greater law.
You love my body.  You do not love my mind.  I love them, both.
Yes, I am student of the law.  Humanity!  Is it not larger than we?
Is this narrow, selfish life of yours all you can see--of life--of
this law?"

"Yes," said Dunwody, grinning painfully.  "I reckon maybe it was
one of those 'higher law' abolitionists that shot me!"

"Shot?  What do you mean?"  Forgetting philosophy, she turned
swiftly.  Yet even as she spoke she now for the first time caught
sight of the dark rimmed rent in his trousers leg, noted the uneasy
fashion in which he held his weight.

"No one told me you were hurt--I thought you only tired, or perhaps
bruised by some accident--when you fell, in there."

"No; shot," he replied.  "Shot right in here, through the edge of
the bone.  When I tripped and fell, there in the hall, I broke the
bone short off--it was only nicked at first."

"And you have been standing here, talking to me, with _that_?" She
stepped to him swiftly and placed a hand under his arm.  "You must
go in.  Come.  Can you walk?"

Through his nerves, racked as they were, there swept a flood of
joy, more sweet than that of any drug.  He could see the blown hair
about her ears, see the round of her neck, the curve of her body as
she bent to aid him, putting her free arm under his, forgetful of
everything in her woman's wish to allay suffering, to brood, to
protect, to increase life.  They passed through the door toward the
foot of the stairs.  Here she turned to him.

"The pain is very great?" she inquired.

"The pain at thinking of your going away is very great," he
answered.  One hand on the newel post, he bent down, his head on
his arm for an instant.  "Oh, you're making me _pay_!" he groaned.
But the next moment he turned on her defiantly.  "I'll not learn!
If this was the only way for me to meet you, then I'll not regret a
single thing I've done.  I'll not!  I'll not!  I'll not pay!  It
all comes back to me, just what I said before.  What couldn't we
do, _together_?--I need you--I need you!"

"You must go to your room.  You've been standing for an hour."

"But I've been with you.  I can't hope for another hour like this.
You'll be leaving me.  But I'd live the hour over again--in hell
with you!"

"I told you, when we all gave parole, that I would exact my price
of you, in regret, in remorse."

"You shall not have it in regret, I'll not regret.  But I'm paying!
See, I'm telling you you may go, that you must go--away from me."


CHAPTER XX

THE ART OF DOCTOR JAMIESON

Eleazar proved a faithful messenger once more.  Before the evening
shadows  had greatly lengthened, three figures appeared at the
lower end of the approach to Tallwoods mansion house.  Jeanne, as
usual looking out from their window, saw these.

"It is the old man, Madame," she commented.  "And yes, _Monsieur le
Docteur_ at last--thank the _Bon Dieu_!  But one other--who is
that?"

[Illustration: "It is the old man, Madame," commented Jeanne.]

It was a very worn and weary doctor who presently swung out of his
saddle at the gallery step.  His clothing was stained with mud, his
very shoulders drooping with fatigue.  In the past few days he
scarcely had slept, but had been here and there attending to the
wants of surviving sufferers of the boat encounter.  None the less
he smiled as he held out his hand to Josephine.

"How is my patient?" he inquired.  "Plumb well, of course.  And how
about this new one--I thought I fixed him up before he came home.
I've been grunting at Eleazar all the way, telling him it's all
foolishness, my coming away out here--he could have fixed Dunwody's
leg up, somehow.  I suppose you know the old man's son, Hector.  He
came along for good measure, I reckon."

The young man referred to now advanced, made a leg and pulled a
black forelock.  He was a strapping youth, attired in the latest
fashion of French St. Genevieve.  He bowed to this lady; but at the
same time, the glance he cast at her French waiting-maid was
evidence enough of the actuating cause of his journey.  He had
heard somewhat of these strangers at Tallwoods house.

"I'll been forget to tell the _docteur_ h'all about Mr. Dunwodee,"
began Eleazar.

"What business have you to forget!" demanded Jamieson sternly.
"Has anything gone wrong?"

"_Mon pere_," began Hector, "I'll tol' him, if he didn't tell the
_docteur_ about how Monsieur Dunwodee he'll broke it his leg some
more--"

"What's that?" The doctor whirled upon him.

"It's quite true," said Josephine.  "He had a fall, here in the
house.  He thinks he has broken the injured bone.  I didn't know
for a long time that he had been shot.  He stood out here last
night talking to me."

"_Stood_ out here--_talking_ to you--with his leg broken
through--the front bone?  Couldn't you have any mercy?  You didn't
have to _use_ that broken wrist, but he--standing around--"

"He did not tell me, until the last moment.  He said he thought he
had a little fever and believed he would take a little quinine."

"Oh, quinine--a Missourian would take that to save his immortal
soul--and quite as well as to take it for a broken bone like that.
I did the best I could with it--out there in the dark, but it
wasn't half dressed.  Come--" He motioned Josephine to follow him
to Dunwody's room.

Eleazar had slunk away about the house, but Hector, left alone with
Jeanne, improved the shining hour.  In a few moments he had
informed her that he was most happy to see one so beautiful, one,
moreover, who spoke his own tongue--although perhaps, it was true,
not quite as that tongue was spoken in Canada.  As for himself, he
was a cooper, and had a most excellent business, yonder at St.
Genevieve.  But the society of St. Genevieve--ah, well!  And so on,
very swimmingly.

In the sick chamber Jamieson advanced with one glance at Dunwody's
fevered face.  "What's up, Dunwody?" said he.  "What has gone
wrong?  Easy now, never mind."

He shook his head over the results of his first scrutiny.  He
turned to Josephine, "Have you ever seen anybody hurt?"

"I've been on two battlefields," said she.  "I've nursed a little."

Dunwody turned to her a face whose eyes now were glazed with
suffering.  He nodded to Jamieson without any word.

"Sally, get some hot water, quick!" called out Jamieson in the
hall.  "So, now, old man, let's see."

He stripped the covering quite down and bared the lower limb,
removing the bandage which he had originally applied.  For a moment
he looked at the angry wound.  Then he pulled back the covering,
and turned away.

"Well, well, what is it?" croaked Dunwody hoarsely, half-rising on
his crumpled pillow.  Jamieson did not reply.  "I fell, out there
in the hall.  Weight must have come on the bad place in the leg.  I
think the bone snapped."

"I think so too!  That mightn't have been so bad--but then you
stood a while on that bad leg, eh?  Now look here, Dunwody; do you
know what shape you are in now?"

"No, I only know it hurts."

"If that leg were mine, do you know what I'd do with it?"

"No; but it isn't yours."

"Well, I'd have it off--as quick as it could come, that's all.  If
you don't, you'll lose your life."

"You don't mean that?" whispered Dunwody tensely, after a time.
"You don't mean that, Doctor?"

"I mean every word I say.  It's blood poisoning."

The only answer his patient made was to reach a slow hand under his
pillow and draw out a long-barreled revolver, which he laid upon
the bed beside him.

"I didn't think you such a coward," ruminated Jamieson, rubbing his
chin.

"If you think I'm afraid of the hurt of it, I'll let you do your
work first, and I'll do mine afterward," gasped Dunwody slowly.
"But I'm not going to live a cripple.  I'll not be maimed."

They looked each other firmly in the face.

"Is it so bad as all that, Doctor?" demanded Josephine.  Her answer
was a sad look from the gray old eyes.  "Blood poison.  Some kind
of an aggravation.  It's traveling fast."

Josephine gazed down at the bulky figure lying there prone, so
lately full of rugged ferocity, now so weak and helpless.  Her eye
fell on the weapon lying on the bed.  She gently removed it.

"That was what he preferred to my skill," commented Jamieson.

Dunwody turned, his gaze on Josephine now.  "You don't belong here,
now," said he at length.  "You'd better go away."

"This is just where she _does_ belong!" contradicted Jamieson.  "If
she has courage to stay here, I want her.  I've got to have help.
She'll do her duty, and with one hand tied!  Can't you do as much?
Haven't you any idea of duty in the world?"

"Duty!"  Dunwody's lips met in a bitter smile.

"Listen here, Mr. Dunwody," began Josephine, "I've seen worse
wounds than that, seen weaker men survive worse than that.  There's
a chance perhaps--why don't you take it like a man?  I exact it of
you.  I demand it!  Your duty to me is unpaid.  Come.  We must
live, all of us, _till all our debts are paid_."

He made no answer at first save to look her straight in the face
for a moment.  "Maybe there is such a thing as duty," said he.
"Maybe I do owe it--to you.  I've--not yet--paid enough.  Very
well, then."

"Come," cried out Jamieson suddenly, "out you go on the table.  Get
a hand under there, girl."

There was no word further spoken.  Gently they aided the injured
man to his feet and helped him hobble through the hall and into the
great dining-room beyond, where stood the long table of polished
mahogany.  Dunwody, swaying, leaned against it, while Jamieson
hurried to the window and threw up the curtains to admit as much as
possible of the light of late afternoon.  Returning, he motioned
Dunwody to remove his coat, which he folded up for a pillow.  The
remainder of his preparations necessarily were scant.  Hot water,
clean instruments--that was almost all.  An anaesthetic was of
course out of the question.

"Dunwody, we're going to hurt you a little," said Jamieson, at
last.  "You've got to stand it, that's all.  Lie down there on the
table and get ready."

He himself turned his back and was busy near by at a smaller table,
arranging his instruments.  "What then represented surgical care
would to-day be called criminal carelessness.  Next he went out to
the front door and called aloud for Eleazar.

"Come here, man," commanded Jamieson, after he had the old trapper
in the room.  "Take hold of this good leg and hold it still.
Madam, I want you at the foot on the other side.  You may get hold
of the edge of the table with your hands, Dunwody, and hold still,
if you can.  I won't be very long."

Swiftly the doctor cut away the garments from the wounded limb,
which lay now exposed in all the horrors of its inflammation. . . .
The next instant there was a tense tightening of the muscles of the
man on the table.  There was a sigh of deep, intaken breath,
followed, however, by no more than a faint moan as the knife went
at its work. . . .

"I'm not going to do it!" came back from under the surgeon's arm.
"There's half a chance--I'm going to try to save it!  Hold on, old
man,--here's the thing to do--we're going to try--"

He went down now into the quivering tissues and laid bare the edge
of the broken bone, deep to the inner lines.  Thus the front of the
shattered bone lay exposed.  The doctor sighed, as he pushed at
this with a steady finger, his eyes frowning, absorbed.  The bullet
wound in the anterior edge was not clean cut.  Near it was a long,
heavy splinter of bone, the cause of the inflammation--something
not suspected in the hurried dressing of the wound in the half
darkness at the river edge.  This bone end, but loosely attached,
was broken free, thrust down into the angry and irritated flesh.

For an instant Jamieson studied the injury.  The silence of death
was in the room.  The tense muscles of the patient might have been
those of a lifeless man.  Only the horrid sound of the dripping
blood, falling from the table upon the carpet, broke the silence.

"I had a coon dog once," began Doctor Jamieson cheerfully--"I don't
know whether you remember him or not, Dunwody.  Sort of a yellow
dog, with long ears and white eye.  Just wait a minute."  He
hastened over to the side of the table and bent again over his case
of instruments.

"There's been all kinds of coon dogs in these bottoms and hills, I
suppose, ever since white folks came here, but Dunwody, I'm telling
you the truth, that dog of mine--"

By this time he had fished out from his case a slender probe, which
he bent back and forth as he once more approached the table.

"There's wasn't anything he wouldn't run, from deer to catamount;
and, one day, when we were out back here in the hills--I don't know
but Eleazar here might remember something about that himself. . . .
_Hold on, now, old man_!"

The old doctor's forehead for the first time was beaded.  He wanted
silver wire.  He would have accepted catgut.  He had neither.  For
one moment, in agony himself, he looked about; then a look of joy
came to his face.  An old fiddle was lying in the window.  A
moment, and he had ripped off a string.  In two strides he was back
at the dripping table, where lay one marble figure, stood a second
figure also of marble.

"We were just trailing along, not paying much attention to
anything, when all at once that _dog_. . ."

Doctor Jamieson's story of his famous coon dog was never entirely
completed.  His voice droned away and ceased now, as he bent once
more over his work.

What he did, so far as he in his taciturn way ever would admit, was
in some way to poke the catgut violin string under the bone, with
the end of the probe, and so to pass a ligature around the broken
bone itself.  After that, it was easier to fasten the splinter back
in place where it belonged.

Doctor Jamieson used all his violin string.  Then he cleaned the
wound thoroughly, and with a frank brutality drenched it with
turpentine, as he would have done with a horse or a dog; for this
burning liquid was the only thing at hand to aid him.  His own eyes
grew moist as he saw the twitching of the burned tissues under this
infliction, but his hand was none the less steady.  The edge of the
great table was splintered where Dunwody's hands had grasped it.
The flesh on the inside of his fingers was broken loose under his
grip.  Blood dripped also from his hands.

"I'm only a backwoods doctor, Dunwody," said Jamieson at length, as
he began rebandaging the limb.  "I reckon there's a heap of good
surgeons up North that could make a finer job of this.  God knows,
I wish they'd had it, and not me.  But with what's at hand, I've
done the best I could.  My experience is, it's pretty hard to kill
a man.

"Wait now until I get some splints--hold still, can't you!  If we
have to cut your leg off after a while, I can do a better job than
this, maybe.  But now we have all done the best we could.  Young
lady, your arm again, if you please.  God bless you!"

The face of Josephine St. Auban was wholly colorless as once more
she assisted the doctor with his patient.  They got him upon his
own bed at last.  To Dunwody's imagination, although he could never
settle it clearly in his mind, it seemed that a hand had pushed the
hair back from his brow; that some one perhaps had arranged a
pillow for him.

Jamieson left the room and dropped into a chair in the hall, his
face between his hands.  "Sally," he whispered after a time,
"whisky--quick!"  And when she got the decanter he drank half a
tumblerful without a gasp.

"Fiddle string in his leg!" he grinned to himself at last.  "Maybe
it won't make him dance, but I'll bet a thousand dollars he'd never
have danced again without it!"

When at last Josephine found her own room she discovered her maid
Jeanne, waiting for her, fright still in her face.

"Madame!" exclaimed Jeanne, "it is terrible!  What horrors there
are in this place.  What has been done--is it true that Monsieur
has lost both his legs?  But one, perhaps?  For the man with one
leg, it is to be said that he is more docile, which is to be
desired.  But both legs--"

"It is not true, Jeanne.  There has been surgery, but perhaps Mr.
Dunwody will not even be a cripple.  He may get well--it is still
doubtful."

"How then was it possible, Madame, for you to endure such sights?
But is it not true, how the _Bon Dieu_ punishes the wicked?  For
myself, I was in terror--even though I was some distance away; and
although that young gentleman, Monsieur Hector, was so good as to
hold my hand."


CHAPTER XXI

THE PAYMENT

Doctor Jamieson did not at once return to his other duties.  He
knew that in this case care and skill would for a time continue in
demand.  Little sleep was accorded him during his first night.
Ammonia--whisky--what he had, he used to keep his patient alive;
but morning came, and Dunwody still was living.  Morphine now
seemed proper to the backwoods physician; after this had done its
work, so that his patient slept, he left the room and wandered
discontentedly about in the great house, too tired to wake, too
strained to sleep.

"Old--old--it's an old, tumble-down ruin, that's what it is," he
grumbled.  "Everything in sixes and sevens--a man like that--and an
ending like this to it all."

He had called several times before he could get any attendance from
the shiftless blacks.  These, quick to catch any slackening in the
reins of the governing power which controlled their lives, dropped
back into unreadiness and pretense more and more each hour.

"What it needs here is a woman," grumbled Jamieson to himself.
"All the time, for that matter.  But this one's got to stay now, I
don't care who she is.  There must be some one here to run things
for a month or two.  Besides, she's got his life in her two hands,
some way.  If she left now, might as well shoot him at once.  Oh,
hell! when I die, I want to go to a womanless world.  No I don't,
either!"

His decision he at last announced to Josephine herself when finally
the latter appeared to make inquiry regarding the sick master of
Tallwoods.

"My dear girl," said he, "I am a blunt man, not a very good doctor
maybe, and perhaps not much of a gentleman, I don't know--never
stopped to ask myself about it.  But now, anyhow, I don't know how
you happened to be here, or who you are, or when you are going
away, and I'm not going to ask you about any of those things.  What
I want to say is this: Mr. Dunwody is going to be a very sick man.
He hasn't got any sort of proper care here, there's no one to run
this place, and I can't stay here all the time myself.  Even if I
did stay, all I could do would be to give him a dose of quinine or
calomel once in a while, and that isn't what he needs.  He needs
some one to be around and watch after things--this whole place is
sick, as much as the owner of it.  I reckon you've got to help me,
my dear."

She looked at him, her large, dark eyes slightly contracting,
making neither protest nor assent.  He drew a long breath of
satisfaction.

"Of course you'll stay," he said; "it's the right thing to do, and
we both know it.  You don't want to kill a man, no matter how much
he desires or deserves it.  Doctors and women--they sometimes are
fatal, but they don't consciously mean to be, now do they?  We
don't ask many questions out here in these hills, and I will never
bother you, I feel entirely free to ask you to remain at least for
a few days--or maybe weeks."

[Illustration: Doctors and women--they sometimes are fatal.]

Her eyes still were on his face.  It was a face fit for trust.
"Very well," said she at length, quietly.  "If you think it is
necessary."

It was thus that Josephine St. Auban became the head of Tallwoods
household.  Not that week did she leave, nor the next, nor the one
thereafter.  The winter advanced, it was about to wane, and still
she remained.  Slowly, the master advanced toward recovery.
Meantime, under charge of the mistress, the household machine fell
once more into proper ways.  The servants learned obedience.  The
plans for the work of the spring somehow went on much as formerly.
Everywhere there became manifest the presence of a quiet, strong,
restraining and self-restrained influence.

In time the doctor became lighter in his speech, less frequent in
his visits.  "You're not going to lose that musical leg, Dunwody,"
said he.  "Old Ma Nature beats all us surgeons.  In time she'll
fill you in a nice new bone along there maybe, and if you're
careful you'll have two feet for quite a while yet to come.  You've
ruined old Eleazar's fiddle, though, taking that E string!  Did I
ever tell you all about that coon dog of mine I had, once?"

Dunwody at last reached the point of his recovery where he could
grin at these remarks; but if anything, he had grown more grim and
silent than before.  Once in a while his eyes would linger on the
face of Josephine.  Little speech of any kind passed between them.
There were no callers at Tallwoods, no news came, and apparently
none went out from that place.  It might have been a fortress, an
island, a hospital, a prison, all in one.

At length Dunwody was able safely to leave his room and to take up
a resting place occasionally in the large library across the hall.
Here one day by accident she met him.  He did not at first note her
coming, and she had opportunity now carefully to regard him, as he
stood moodily looking out over the lawn.  Always a tall man, and
large, his figure had fined down in the confinement of the last few
weeks.  It seemed to her that she saw the tinge of gray crawling a
little higher on his temples.  His face was not yet thin, yet in
some way the lines of the mouth and jaw seemed stronger, more
deeply out.  It was a face not sullen, yet absorbed, and above all
full, now, of a settled melancholy.

"Good morning," said he, smiling, as he saw her.  "Come in.  I want
to talk to you.  But please don't resume our old argument about the
compromise, and about slavery and the rights of man.  You've been
trying--all these weeks when I've been down and helpless and
couldn't either fight or run away--to make me be a Bentonite, or
worse, an abolitionist--trying, haven't you? to make me an
apostate, faithless to my state, my beliefs, my traditions--and I
suppose you'd be shrewd enough to add, faithless to my material
interests.  Please don't, this morning.  I don't want subjective
thought.  I don't want algebra.  I don't want history or law, or
medicine.  I want--"

She stood near the window, at some distance removed from him, even
as she passed stopping to tidy Up a disarranged article on the
tables here or there.  He smiled again at this.  "Where is Sally?"
he asked.  "And how about your maid?"

"Some one must do these things," she answered.  "Your servants need
watching.  Sally is never where I can find her.  Jeanne I can
always find--but it is with her young man, Hector!"

He shook his head impatiently.  "It all comes on you--work like
this.  What could I have done without you?  But yourself, how are
you coming on?  That arm of yours has pained me--"

"It ceased to trouble me some time since.  The doctor says, too,
that you'll be quite well, soon.  That's fine."

He nodded.  "It's wonderful, isn't it?" said he.  "You did it.
Without you I'd be out there."  He nodded toward the window, beyond
which the grass-grown stones of the little family graveyard might
be seen.  "You're wonderful."

He wheeled painfully toward her presently, "Listen.  We two are
alone here, in spite of ourselves.  Face to face again, in spite of
all, and well enough, now, both of us, to go back to our firing
lines before long.  We have come closer together than many men and
women get to be in a good many years; but we're enemies, and apart,
now.  At least you have seen me pretty much as I am--a savage--not
much more.  I've seen you for what you are--one woman out of
hundreds, of thousands.  There isn't going to be any woman in my
life, after you.--Would you mind handing me that paper, please?"

He passed the document to her opened.  "Here's what I meant to do
if I didn't come through.  It wasn't much.  But I am to pay; and if
I had died, that was all I could pay.  That's my last will and
testament, my dear girl.  I have left you all I have.  It is a
legal will.  There'll never be any codicil."

She looked at him straight.  "It is not valid," she said.  "Surely
you are not of sound mind!"

He looked about him at the room, for the first time in his memory
immaculately neat.  From a distance there came the sound of a
contented servant's voice.  An air of rest and peace seemed in some
way to be all about him.  He sighed.  "I never will be of sound
mind again, I fear.

"Make this paper valid!" he suddenly demanded.  "Give me my sound
mind too.  You've given me back my body sound."

Her lips parted in a smile sufficient to show the row of her white
and even teeth, "You are getting well.  It is time for me to go.
As to this--" She handed him back the paper folded.

"You think it's only an attempt to heal the soreness of my
conscience, don't you?" he said after a time, shaking his head.
"It was; but it was more.  Well, you can't put your image out of my
heart, anyhow.  I've got that.  So you're going to leave me now?
Soon?  Let it be soon.  I suppose it has to come."

"My own affairs require me.  There is no possible tenure on which I
could stay here much longer.  Not even Jeanne--"

"No," said he, at length, again in conviction, shaking his head.
"There isn't any way."

"You make it so hard," said she.  "Why are you so stubborn?"

"Listen!"  He turned, and again there came back to his face the old
fighting flush.  "I faced the loss of a limb and said I couldn't
stand that and live.  Now you are going to cut the heart out of me.
You ask me to live in spite of that.  How can I?  Were you ever
married, Madam?"  This last suddenly.

"You may regard it as true," said she slowly, after long
hesitation.  "Were you?"

"You may regard that also as true!"  He set his jaw, and looked at
her straight.  Their eyes met, steadily, seeking, searching.  They
now again, opposed, stood on the firing lines as he had said.

"But you told me,--" she began.

"I told you nothing, if you will remember.  I only said that, if
you could feel as I did, I'd let the heavens fold as a scroll
before I'd ask a word about your past.  I'd begin all the world all
over again, right here.  So far as I am concerned, I wouldn't even
care about the law.  But you're not so lawless as I am.  And
somehow, I've got to thinking--a little--of your side of things."

"The law does not prevent me from doing as I like," she replied.
It was agony that showed on his face at this.

"That demands as much from me, if I play fair with you," he said
slowly.  "Suppose there was some sort of law that held me back?"

"I have not observed any vast restraint in you!"

"Not at first.  Haven't you gained any better opinion?"

She was one of those able to meet a question with silence.  He was
obliged to continue.

"Suppose I should tell you that, all the time I was talking to you
about what I felt, there was a wall, a great wall, for ever between
us?"

"In that case, I should regret God had made a man so forgetful of
honor.  I should be glad Heaven had left me untouched by anything
such a man could say.  Suppose that?--Why, suppose I had cared, and
that I had found after all that there was no hope?  There comes in
conscience, Sir, there comes in honor."

"Then, in such case--"

"In such case any woman would hate a man.  Stress may win some
women, but deceit never did."

"I have not deceived you."

"Do you wish to do so now?"

"No.  It's just the contrary.  Haven't I said you must go?  But
since you must go, and since I must pay, I'm willing, if you wish,
to bare my life to the very bone, to the heart before you,
now--right now."

She pondered for a moment.  "Of course, I knew there was something.
There, in that room--in that wardrobe--those were her garments--of
another--another woman.  Who?"

"Wait, now.  Go slow, because I'm suffering.  Listen.  I'll not
hear a word about your own life--I want no secret of you.  I'm
content.  But I'm willing now, I say, to tell you all about
that--about those things.

"I didn't do that at first, but how could I?  There wasn't any
chance.  Besides, when I saw you, the rest of the world, the rest
of my life, it was all, all wiped out of my mind, as though some
drug had done it.  You came, you were so sweet, my lack was so
horrible, that I took you into my soul, a drug, a balm, an
influence, a wonderful thing.

"Oh, I'm awake now! But I reckon maybe that doesn't mean that I'm
getting out of my dream, but only into it, deeper yet.  I was mad
for you then.  I could feel the blood sting in my veins, for you.
Life is life after all, and we're made as we are.  But later, now,
beside that, on top of that, something else--do you think it's--do
you suppose I'm capable of it, selfish as I am?  Do you reckon it's
love, just big, worthy, _decent_ love, better than anything in the
world?  Is that--do you reckon, dear girl, that that's why I'm able
now to say good-by?  I loved you once so much I could not let you
go.  Now I love so much I can not let you stay!  I reckon this is
love.  I'm not ashamed to tell it.  I'm not afraid to justify it.
And I can't help it."

It was any sort of time, a moment, an hour, before there was spoken
speech between them after that.  At last they both heard her voice.

"Now, you begin to pay.  I am glad.  I am glad."

"Then it is your revenge?  Very well.  You have it."

"No, no!  You must not say that.  Believe me, I want you to feel
how--how much I admire--no, wait,--how much I admire any man who
could show your courage.  It's not revenge, it's not vanity--"

He waited, his soul in his eyes, hoping for more than this; but she
fell silent again.

"Then it is the end," he said.

He held up his fingers, scarred to the bone.

"That's where I bruised my hands when I clenched on the table,
yonder.  You wouldn't think it, maybe, but I love pictures.  I've
spent a lot of time looking for them and at them.  I remember one
collection--many pictures of the martyrs, horrors in art,
nightmares.  Here was a man disemboweled--they wound his very
bowels about a windlass, before his eyes, and at each turn--I could
see it written in the picture--they asked him, did he yield at
last, did he agree, did he consent. . . .  Then they wound again.
Here another man was on an iron chair, flames under him.  Now and
then they asked him.  Should they put out the flames and hear him
say he had foresworn his cause?  Again, there was a man whom they
had shot full of arrows, one by one, little by little, and they
asked him, now and then, if he foreswore his faith. . . .  But I
knew he would not--I knew these had not. . . .

"That's the way it is," he said slowly.  "That's what you're seeing
now.  These scars on my fingers came cheap.  I reckon they've got
to run deeper, clean down into my heart.  Yet you're saying that
now I begin to pay.  Yes.  When I pay, I'm going to _pay_.  And I'm
not going to take my martyrdom for immediate sake of any crown,
either.  There is none for me.  I reckon I sinned too far against
one of God's angels.  I reckon it's maybe just lasting hell for me,
and not a martyrdom with an end to it some time.  That's how _I've_
got to pay.

"Now, do you want me to tell you all the rest?"

She would not answer, and he resumed.

"Do you want me to tell what you've maybe heard, about this house?
Do you want me to tell whose garments those were that you saw?  Do
you want my past?  Do you want to see my bowels dragged out before
your eyes?  Do you want to turn the wheel with your own hands?  Do
you want me to pay, that way?"

She went to him swiftly, put a hand on his arm.

"No!" said she.  "What I want you to believe is that it's _life_
makes us pay, that it's _God_ makes us pay.

"I want you to believe, too," she went on after a time, "that we
need neither of us be cheap.  I'm not going to ask you one thing,
I'm not going to listen to one word.  You must not speak.  I must
go.  It's just because I must go that I shall not allow you to
speak."

"Is my debt to you paid, then?"  His voice trembled.

"So far as it runs to me, it is paid."

"What remains?"

"Nothing but the debt of yourself to yourself.  I'm going to look
back to a strange chapter in my life--a life which has had some
strange ones.  I'm not going to be able to forget, of course, what
you've said to me.  A woman loves to be loved.  When I go, I go;
but I want to look back, now and then, and see you still paying,
and getting richer with each act of courage, when you pay, to
yourself, not me."

"Ah! fanatic.  Ah! visionary.  Ah! dreamer, dreamer.  And you!"

"That is the rest of the debt.  Let the wheel turn if need be.
Each of us has suffering.  Mine own is for the faith, for the
cause."

"For what faith?  What cause do you mean?"

"The cause of the world," she answered vaguely.  "The cause of
humanity.  Oh, the world's so big, and we're so very little.  Life
runs away so fast.  So many suffer, in the world, so many want!  Is
it right for us, more fortunate, to take all, to eat in greed, to
sleep in sloth, to be free from care, when there are thousands, all
over the world, needing food, aid, sympathy, opportunity, the
chance to grow?

"Why," she went on, "I put out little plants, and I love them,
always, because they're going to grow, they're going to live.  I
love it--that thought of life, of growth.  Well, can I make you
understand, that was what I felt over yonder, in that revolution,
in mid-Europe.  I felt it was just like seeing little plants set
out, to grow.  Those poor people!  Those poor people!  They're
coming over here, to grow, here in America, in this great country
out here, in this West.  They'll grow, like plants extending, like
grass multiplying, going out, edging westward, all the time.  Ah,
thousands of them, millions yet to come, plants, little human
plants, with the right to live born with them.  I don't so much
mind about their creed.  I don't so much mind about race--their
color, even.  But to see them grow--why, I suppose God up in His
Heaven looks down and smiles when He sees that.  And we--we who are
here for a little time--we who sometimes are given minds and means
to fall in tune with God's smile--why, when we grow little and
selfish, instead of getting in tune with the wish of God--why, we
fail.  Then, indeed, we do not pay--we repudiate our debt to
ourselves."

"You are shaming me," he said slowly.  "But I see why they put you
out of Washington."

"But they can not put God out of Heaven!  They can not turn back
the stars!  They can not stop the rush of those westbound feet, the
spread of the millions, millions of blades of grass edging out, on.
That is what will make you see this 'higher law,' some time.  That
is big politics, higher than what you call your traditions.  That
will shame little men.  Many traditions are only egotism and
selfishness.  There is a compromise which will be final--not one
done in a mutual cowardice.  It's one done in a mutual largeness
and courage.

"Oh,"--she beat her hands together, as was sometimes her
way--"America, this great West, this splendid country where the
feet are hurrying on so fast, fast--and the steam now carries men
faster, faster, so that it may be done--it may be done--without
delay--why, all this America must one day give over war and
selfishness--just as we two have tried to give over war and
selfishness, right here, right now.  Do you suppose this world was
made just to hold selfishness and unhappiness?   Do you think
that's all there ever was to the plan of life?  Ah, no!  There's
something in living beyond eating and drinking and sleeping and
begetting.  Faith--a great faith in something, some plan ahead,
some _purpose_ under you--ah, _that's_ living!"

"But they banished you for that?"

"Yes, that's why they put me out of Washington, I suppose.  I've
been twice banished.  That is why I came here to this country.
Maybe, Sir, that is why I came to you, here!  Who shall say as to
these things?  If only I could feel your faith, your beliefs to be
the same as mine, I'd go away happy, for then I'd know it had been
a plan, somehow, somewhere--for us, maybe."

His throat worked strongly.  There was some struggle in the man.
At last he spoke, and quietly.  "I see what separates us now.  It
is the wall of our convictions.  You are specifically an
abolitionist, just as you are in general a revolutionist.  I'm on
the other side.  That's between us, then?  An abstraction!"

"I don't think so.  There are _three_ walls between us.  The first
you put up when you first met me.  The second is what you call your
traditions, your belief in wasting human life.  The third--it's
this thing of which you must not speak.  Why should I ponder as to
that last wall, when two others, insurmountable, lie between?"

"Visionary, subjective!"

"Then let us be concrete if you like.  Take the case of the girl
Lily.  She was the actual cause of your getting hurt, of many men
being killed.  Why?"

"Because she was a runaway slave.  The law has to be enforced,
property must be protected, even if it costs life sometimes.
There'd be no government otherwise.  We men have to take our
chances in a time like that.  The duty is plain."

"How utterly you fail of the truth!  That's not why there was blood
spilled over her.  Do you know who she is?"

"No," he said.

"She is the daughter of your _friend_, Judge Clayton, of the bench
of justice in your commonwealth.  _That_ is why she wants to run
away!  Her father does not know he is her father.  God has His own
way of righting such things."

"There are things we must not talk about in this slavery question.
Stop!  I did not, of course, know this.  And Clayton did not know!"

"There are things which ought not to be; but if you vote for
oppression, if you vote yonder in your legislature for the
protection of this institution, if you must some day vote yonder in
Congress for its extension, for the right to carry it into other
lands--the same lands where now the feet of freedom-seekers are
hurrying from all over the world, so strangely, so wonderfully--then
you vote for a compromise that God never intended to go through or
to endure.  Is that your vote? Come now, I will tell you something."

"You are telling me much."

"I will tell you--that night, when Carlisle would have killed you
in your room there, when I afterward put you all on parole--"

"Yes, yes."

"I saved you then; and sent them away.  Do you know why?"

"I suppose it was horror of more blood."

"I don't think so.  I believe it was just for this--for this very
talk I'm having now with you.  I saved you then so that some day I
might demand you as hostage.

"I want you to vote with me," she continued, "for the 'higher law.'
I want you to vote with the west-bound wheels, with God's blades of
grass!"

"God! woman!  You have gift of tongues!  Now listen to me.  Which
shall we train with, among your northern men, John Quincy Adams or
William Lloyd Garrison, with that sane man or the hysterical one?
Is Mr. Beecher a bigger man than Mr. Jefferson was?"

"I know you're honest," she said, frowning, "but let us try to see.
There's Mr. Birney, of Alabama, a Southerner who has gone over,
through all, to the abolitionists as you call them.  And would you
call Mr. Clay a fool?  Or Mr. Benton, here in your own state, who--"

"Oh, don't mention Benton to me here!  He's anathema in this state."

"Yet you might well study Mr. Benton's views.  He sees the case of
Lily first, the case of the Constitution afterward.  Ah, why can't
_you_?  Why, Sir, if I could only get you to think as he does--a
man with your power and influence and faculty for leadership--I'd
call this winter well spent--better spent than if I'd been left in
Washington."

"Suppose I wanted to change my beliefs, how would I go about it?"
He frowned in his intent effort to follow her, even in her
enthusiasm.  "Once I asked a preacher how I could find religion,
and he told me by coming to the Saviour.  I told him that was
begging the question, and asked him how I could find the Saviour.
All he could say was to answer once more, 'Come to the Saviour!'
That's reasoning in a circle.  Now, if a man hasn't _got_ faith,
how's he going to get it--by what process can he reach out into the
dark and find it?  What's the use of his saying he has found faith
when he knows he hasn't?  There's a resemblance between clean
religion and honest politics.  The abolitionists have never given
us Southerners any answer to this."

"No," said she.  "I can not give you any answer.  For myself, I
have found that faith."

"You would endure much for your convictions?" he demanded suddenly.

"Very much, Sir."

"Suffer martyrdom?"

"Perhaps I have done so."

"Would you suffer more?  You undertake the conversion of a sinner
like myself?"

The flame of his eye caught hers in spite of herself.  A little
flush came into her cheek.

"Tell me," he demanded imperiously, "on what terms?"

"You do not play the game.  You would ask me to preach to you--but
you would come to see the revival, not to listen to grace.  It
isn't playing the game."

"But you're seeking converts?"

"I would despise no man in the world so much as a hypocrite, a
turn-coat!  You can't purchase faith in the market place, not any
more than--"

"Any more than you can purchase love?  But I've been wanting not
the sermon, but the preacher.  You!  You!  Yes, it is the truth.  I
want nothing else in the world so much as you."

"I'd never care for a man who would admit that."

"There never was a woman in the world loved a man who did not."

"Oh, always I try to analyze these things," she went on
desperately, facing him, her eyes somber, her face aglow, her
attitude tense.  "I try to look in my mirror and I demand of what I
see there.  'What are you?" I say.  'What is this that I see?'
Why, I can see that a woman might love her own beauty for itself.
Yes, I love my beauty.  But I don't see how a woman could care for
a man who only cared for that,--what she saw in her mirror, don't
you know?"

"Any price, for just that!" he said grimly.

"No, no!  You would not.  Don't say that!  I so much want you to be
bigger than that."

"The woman you see in your mirror would be cheap at any cost."

"But a man even like yourself.  Sir, would be very cheap, if his
price was such as you say.  No turncoat could win me--I'd love him
more on his own side yonder threefold wall, _with_ his convictions,
than on my side without them.  I couldn't be bought cheap as that,
nor by a cheap man.  I'd never love a man who held himself cheap.

"But then," she added, casting back at him one of his own earlier
speeches, "if you only thought as I did, what could not we two do
together--for the cause of those human blades of grass--so soon cut
down?  Ah, life is so little, so short!"

"No!  No!  Stop!" he cried out.  "Ah, now is the torture--now you
turn the wheel.  I can not recant!  I can not give up my
convictions, or my love, either one; and yet--I'm not sure I'm
going to have left either one.  It's hell, that's what's left for
me.  But listen! What for those that grow as flowers, tall,
beautiful, there among the grass that is cut down--should they
perish from the earth?  For what were such as they made, tall and
beautiful?--poppies, mystic, drug-like, delirium producing?  Is
that it--is that your purpose in life, then, after all?  You--what
you see in your mirror there--is it the purpose of _that_ being--so
beautiful, so beautiful--to waste itself, all through life, over
some vague and abstract thing out of which no good can come?  Is
that all?  My God!  Much as I love you, I'd rather see you marry
some other man than think of you never married at all.  God never
meant a flower such as you to wither, to die, to be _wasted_.  Why,
look at you!  Look . . . at . . . you!  And you say you are to be
wasted!  God never meant it so, you beauty, you wonderful woman!"

Even as she was about to speak, drawn by the passion of him, the
agony of his cry, there came to the ears of both an arresting
sound--one which it seemed to Josephine was not wholly strange to
her ears.  It was like the cry of a babe, a child's wail, difficult
to locate, indefinite in distance.

"What was it?" she whispered.  "Did you hear?"

He made no answer, except to walk to her straight and take her by
the arms, looking sadly, mournfully into her face.

"Ah, my God!  My God!  Have I not heard?  What else have I heard,
these years?  And you're big enough not to ask--

"It can't endure this way," said he, after a time at last.  "You
must go.  Once in a while I forget.  It's got to be good-by between
you and me.  We'll set to-morrow morning as the time for you to go.

"As I have a witness," he said at last, "I've paid.  Good-by!"

He crushed her to him once, as though she were no more than a
flower, as though he would take the heart of her fragrance.  Then,
even as she felt the heave of his great body, panting at the touch
of her, mad at the scent of her hair, he put her back from him with
a sob, a groan.  As when the knife had begun its work, his scarred
fingers caught her white arms.  He bent over, afraid to look into
her eyes, afraid to ask if her throat panted too, afraid to risk
the red curve of her lips, so close now to his, so sure to ruin
him.  He bent and kissed her hands, his lips hot on them; and so
left her trembling.

[Illustration: He bent and kissed her hands.]


CHAPTER XXII

THE WAY OF A MAID

It is the blessing of the humble that they have simplicity of
mental processes.  Not that Hector himself perhaps would thus have
described himself.  The curve of the black crow's wing on his
somewhat retreating forehead, the tilt of his little hat, the swing
of his body above the hips as he walked, all bespoke Hector's
opinion of himself to be a good one.  Valiant among men,
irresistible among the women of St. Genevieve, he was not the one
to mitigate his confidence in himself now that he found himself
free from competition and in the presence of a fair one whom in
sudden resolve he established in his affections as quite without
compare.  In short, Hector had not tarried a second week at
Tallwoods before offering his hand and his cooper shop to Jeanne.

To the eyes of Jeanne herself, confined as they had been to the
offerings of a somewhat hopeless class of serving persons here or
there, this swaggering young man, with his broad shoulders, his
bulky body, his air of bravado, his easy speech, his ready arm,
offered a personality with which she was not too familiar, and
which did not lack its appeal.  With Gallic caution she made
delicate inquiry of Hector's father as to the yearly returns and
probable future of the cooperage business at St. Genevieve, as to
the desirability of the surrounding country upon which the
cooperage business must base its own fortunes.  All these matters
met her approval.  Wherefore, the air of Jeanne became tinged with
a certain lofty condescension.  In her own heart she trembled now,
not so much as to her own wisdom or her own future, but as to the
meeting which must be had between herself and her mistress.

This meeting at last did take place, not by the original motion of
Jeanne herself.  The eye of her mistress had not been wholly blind
all these days.

"Jeanne," she demanded one day, "why are you away so much when I
desire you?  I have often seen you and that young man yonder in
very close conversation.  Since I stand with you as your guardian
and protector, I feel it my duty to inquire, although it is not in
the least my pleasure.  You must have a care."

"Madame," expostulated Jeanne, "it is nothing, I assure you.  _Rien
du tout--jamais de la vie_, Madame."

"Perhaps, but it is of such nothings that troubles sometimes come.
Tell, me, what has this young man said to you?"

"But, Madame!--"

"Tell me.  It is quite my right to demand it."

"But he has said many things, Madame."

"As, for instance, that you please him, that you are beautiful,
that you have a voice and hand, a turn of the arm--that you have
the manner Parisienne--Jeanne, is it not so?"

"But, yes, Madame, and indeed more.  I find that young man of
excellent judgment, of most discriminating taste."

"And also of sufficient boldness to express the same to you, is it
not so, Jeanne?"

"Madame, the strong are brave.  I do not deny.  Also he is of an
excellent cooperage business in St. Genevieve yonder.  Moreover, I
find the produce of the grape in this country to increase yearly,
so that the business seems to be of a certain future, Madame.  His
community is well founded, the oldest in this portion of the
valley.  He is young, he has no entanglements--at least, so far as
I discover.  He has an excellent home with his old mother.  Ah,
well!  Madame, one might do worse."

"So, then, a cooperage business so promising as that, Jeanne, seems
more desirable than my own poor employment?  You have no regard for
your duty to one who has cared for you, I suppose?  You desert me
precisely at the time my own affairs require my presence in
Washington."

"But, Madame, why Washington?  Is that our home?  What actual home
has madame on the face of the earth?  Ah, Heaven!--were only it
possible that this man were to be considered.  This place so large,
so beautiful, so in need of a mistress to control it.  Madame says
she was carried away against her will.  _Mon Dieu_!  All my life
have I dreamed--have I hoped--that some time a man should steal me,
to carry me away to some place such as this!  And to make love of
such a warmness!  Ah, _Mon Dieu_!

"Behold, Madame," she went on, "France itself is not more beautiful
than this country.  There is richness here, large lands.  That
young man Hector, he says that none in the country is so rich as
Mr. Dunwodee--he does not know how rich he is himself.  And such
romance!"

"Jeanne, I forbid you to continue!"  The eyes of her mistress had a
dangerous sparkle.

"I obey, Madame, I am silent.  But listen!  I have followed the
fortunes of madame quite across the sea.  As madame knows, I do not
lack intelligence.  I have read--many romances, my heart not
lacking interest.  Always I have read, I have dreamed, of some man
who should carry me away, who should oblige me--Ah, Madame! what
girl has not in her soul some hero?  Almost I was about to say it
was the sight, the words, of the boldness, the audacity of this
assassin, this brute, who has brought us here by force--the words
of his love so passionate to madame, which stirred in my own heart
the passion!  That I might be stolen!  It was the dream of my
youth!  And now comes this Hector, far more bold and determined
than this Mr. Dunwodee.  That assassin, that brute _began_, but
hesitated.  Ah, Hector has not hesitated!  Seeing that he would in
any case possess myself, would carry me away, I yielded, but with
honor and grace, Madame.  As between Monsieur Dunwodee and
Hector--_il y a une difference_, Madame!"

"_Je crois qu' oui_, Jeanne--_Je le crois_!  But it comes to the
same thing, eh?  You forsake me?"

"Madame, I confess sometimes in my heart there comes a desire for a
home, for a place where one may abide, where one may cease to
wander."

Josephine sat silent for a moment.  In what direction might she
herself now turn for even the humblest friendship?  And where was
any home now for her?  The recreant maid saw something of this upon
her face.

"Madame," she exclaimed, falling upon her knees in consternation.
"To think I would desert you!  In my heart resides nothing but
loyalty for you.  How could you doubt?"

But Josephine was wise in her own way.  That night Jeanne kissed
her hand dutifully, yet the very next morning she had changed her
mind.  With sobs, tears, she admitted that she had decided to leave
service, no longer to be Jeanne, but Madame Hector Fournier.  Thus,
at the very time when she most would have needed aid and
attendance, Josephine saw herself about to be left alone.

"But, Madame," said Jeanne, still tearful, returning after brief
absence from the room, "although I leave now for St. Genevieve to
stand before the priest, I shall not see madame left without
attendance.  See, I have asked of this Lily person,--_la voici_,
Madame--if she could take service with madame.  Madame plans soon
to return to the East.  Perhaps this Lily, then--"

"Ma'am, I want to work for you!" broke out Lily suddenly,
stretching out her hands.  "I don't want to go back home.  I want
to go with you.  I cain't go back home--I'd only run away--again.
They'd have to kill me."

Some swift arithmetic was passing through Josephine's mind at the
time.  Here, then, was concrete opportunity to set in practice some
of her theories.

"Lily, would you like to come with me as my maid?" she demanded.
"Could you learn, do you think, in case I should need you?"

"Of co'se I could learn, Ma'am.  I'd do my very best."

It was thus that it was agreed, with small preliminary, that on the
next morning Tallwoods should lose three of its late tenants.
Josephine ventured to inquire of Dunwody regarding Lily.  "Take her
if you like," said he bruskly.  "I will arrange the papers for it
with Clayton himself.  There will be no expense to you.  If he
wants to sell the girl I'll pay him.  No, not a cent from you.  Go
on, Lily, if you want to.  This time you'll get shut of us, I
reckon, and we'll get shut of you.  I hope you'll never come back,
this time.  You've made trouble enough already."

Thus, then, on the day of departure, Josephine St. Auban found
herself standing before her mirror.  It was not an unlovely image
which she saw there.  In some woman's fashion, assisted by Jeanne's
last tearful services and the clumsy art of Lily, she had managed a
garbing different from that of her first arrival at this place.
The lines of her excellent figure now were wholly shown in this
costume of golden brown which she had reserved to the last.  Her
hair was even glossier than when she first came here to Tallwoods,
her cheek of better color.  She was almost disconcerted that the
trials of the winter had wrought no greater ravages; but after all,
a smile was not absent from her lips.  Not abolitionist here in the
mirror, but a beautiful young woman.  Certainly, whichever or
whoever she was, she made a picture fit wholly to fill the eyes of
the master of Tallwoods when he came to tell her the coach was
ready for the journey to St. Genevieve.  But he made no comment,
not daring.

"See," she said, almost gaily, "I can put on both my gloves."  She
held out to him her hands.

"They are very small," he replied studiously.  He was calm now.
She saw he had himself well in hand.  His face was pale and grave.

"Well," said she finally, as the great coach drove around to the
door, "I suppose I am to say good-by."

"I'll just walk with you down the road," he answered.  "We walked
up it, once, together."

They followed on, after the coach had passed down the driveway,
Dunwody now moody and silent, his head dropped, his hands behind
him, until the carriage pulled up and waited at the end of the
shut-in at the lower end of the valley.  Josephine herself remained
silent as well, but as the turn of the road approached which would
cut off the view of Tallwoods, she turned impulsively and waved a
hand in farewell at the great mansion house which lay back, silent
and strong, among the hills.

[Illustration: She waved a hand in farewell.]

He caught the gesture and looked at her quickly.  "That's nice of
you," said he, "mighty nice."

In some new sort of half-abashment she found no immediate reply.
He left her then, and walked steadily back up the driveway, saying
nothing in farewell, and not once looking back.  For a time she
followed him with her gaze, a strange sinking at her heart of which
she was ashamed, which gave her alike surprise and sudden fear.

It was a much abashed and still tearful though not a repentant
Jeanne who embraced her mistress, after the simple little wedding
of Jeanne and Hector, when they had repaired to the wedding feast
at the _maison_ Fournier.

"But come, Madame," said Jeanne.  "Behold my new home.  Is it not
delightful?  This is the mother of Hector, Madame, and this--ah,
this is the home of Hector and myself.  To-night also it is yours.
I am rejoiced.  Madame," she added, in an aside, while Lily, stupid
and awkward, was for the time out of the way, "I can not bear to
think of your going away with but that impossible niggaire there to
care for you.  Almost--were it not for Hector and for this
home--could you take Hector also--I should forget all and go with
you even yet.  To-morrow I shall go with you to the boat."

But alas! in the morning Jeanne had again forgotten.

When at last the busy little steamer swung inshore, presently to
churn her way out again into the current, Josephine went aboard
with only the colored girl for her company.  Her heart sank
strangely, and she felt more lonely than ever in her life before.
She leaned against the rail for a time, looking at the banks slip
back across the turbid stream.  The truth was coming into her heart
that it was not with exultation she now was turning back to the
East to take up her life again.  Something was different now--was
it the loss of Jeanne?  Again surprise, terror, shame, withal
wonder.


CHAPTER XXIII

IM WASHINGTON

Meantime, the storm dreaded as so immediate by the administration
at Washington--the organization of a new political party, born of
the unrest over the slavery question--had spent its force, and,
temporarily, long since had muttered away in the distance, leaving
scarce a trace behind it on the political sky.  Austria, England,
the Old World creeds of monarchies arrayed against popular
governments, had their way at our capital, where the birth of an
actual democracy impended.  Active leadership by revolutionists
trained in Europe was suppressed, removed; as in one instance we
have seen.  One abolitionist mass-meeting followed another in those
days, but the results of all were much the same.  Protests and
declamation abounded, plan and leadership lacked.  The strained
compromise held.  Neither war nor a new party came as yet, disunion
was not yet openly attempted.  Moreover, there was a deliberate
intent upon an era of good feeling.  Whig and Democrat alike forced
themselves to settle down into the belief that peace had come.  If
men were slaves, why, let them be slaves.  At that time the
national reflex was less sensitive than it later became with
increased telegraphic and news facilities.  Washington was not
always promptly and exactly advised of the political situation in
this or that more remote portion of the country.  This very fact,
however, meant a greater stability in the political equilibrium.
Upon the western borders the feeling of unrest now became most
marked; and, more swiftly than was generally recognized, important
matters there were going forward; but even in that direction,
declared the prophets of peace, all now was more calm than it had
been for years.

Six years before this time Mr. Wilkins, secretary of war, had
proposed to organize Nebraska Territory and to extend thither the
army posts; and in that same year Stephen A. Douglas, then of the
House, had introduced a bill for the organization of Nebraska; but
neither effort had had result.  Two years later, Douglas, then in
the Senate, once more sought to test the Squatter Sovereignty idea
regarding the new western lands, but once more a cold silence met
his attempts.  Six months after that time the same bill, with the
intent of attaching Nebraska to the state of Arkansas, was killed
by Congress, because held to be dangerous.  A third bill by
Douglas, later in the same year, was also recommitted.  The
"Territory of the Platte" was the next attempt to be dropped.  All
these crude attempts were merged in the great Compromise of 1850.
The might of party was brought to bear upon all questions of
principle, and the country was commanded to be calm; indeed for a
time was calm.  It was the time of manacled hands and of manacled
minds.  Our government was not a real democracy.  The great West
had not yet raised its voice, augmented by new millions of voices
pealing the paean of liberty and opportunity for man.

In this era of arrested activities, the energies of a restless
people turned otherwhere for interest.  To relieve the monotony of
political stagnation, popular attention was now turned toward the
affairs of Hungary.  We could not solve our own problems, but we
were as ready to solve those of Europe as Europe was to offer us
aid in ours.  Therefore, instant interest attached to the news that
a Hungarian committee of inquiry had landed upon our shores, with
the purpose of investigating a possible invitation from our
republic to the Hungarian patriot, Kossuth, then in exile in Turkey.

The leader of this mission was General Zewlinski, an officer of the
patriot army of Hungary, who brought with him a suite of some dozen
persons.  These, late in the winter of 1850-51, arrived at
Washington and found quarters of somewhat magnificent sort in one
of the more prominent hotels of the national capital.  At once
political and journalistic Washington was on the _qui vive_.  The
Hungarians became the object of a solicitude, not to say a
curiosity, which must at times have tried their souls.

The first formal action of the Hungarian committee took the shape
of a return reception, to be held in the hotel parlors.  The
invitations, liberal as they were, were sought for quite in excess
of the supply, and long before the doors were open, it was quite
assured that the affair would be a crush.  The administration, for
which Mr. Webster, our secretary of state, had not hesitated to
write in most determined fashion to the attache Hulsemann regarding
the presumptuous Austrian demands upon our government, none the less
was much in a funk regarding "European obligations."  Not wishing to
offend the popular fancy, and not daring to take decisive stand, the
usual compromise was made.  Although no member of the administration
was sent officially to recognize these unofficial ambassadors, a
long suffering officer of the navy, with his wife and one or two
other ladies, were despatched quasi-officially to lend color to the
occasion.

Such splendor as could be arranged had been provided for the
setting of this event.  A Hungarian orchestra, brought with these
commissioners, discoursed its peculiar music beyond a screen of
palms and flowers.  One of the great parlors had been prepared for
those of the young who could not resist the temptation to dance.
At the head of the little line of these visitors, now themselves in
effect hosts, stood the old Hungarian general, Zewlinski, an
officer over six feet in height, with white hair and wide white
mustaches, a distinguished figure in the brilliant Hungarian
uniform.  Those of his staff near by added additional vividness to
the picture.  The ladies of the party, half of whom spoke English,
were costumed quite in keeping, and endeavored by the graciousness
of their manner to add to the good impression already formed by
their more brilliant companions.  Here and there the more sober
uniform of an American army or navy officer might have been seen,
brought thither on demand of his lady.  The ladies themselves were
out in force, and in their most brilliant array.  The doors had not
been opened for a half hour before all prophecies were more than
fulfilled.  The rooms were packed with a struggling mass of
humanity, all eager to grasp the hand of the representative of
Hungary and of the members of his company.  Patriotism, liberty,
brotherly love were in the speech of all.  Never has our country
been more full of zeal for liberty than then, never more
inconsistent, never more swiftly forgetful.

In these circumstances, the somewhat bewildered commissioners did
what they could graciously to discover to all their friendly
feeling toward this country.  For more than an hour they stood in
line, bowing, smiling, accepting hands, offering greetings, a
little wondering perhaps, yet none the less well assured of the
attitude of this people toward their own country, and hoping there
might later be substantial financial proof of its sincerity.

It was at about this time that there entered at the door near the
head of the receiving line a young woman, for the time apparently
quite unattended.  She was brilliantly robed, with jewels flashing
at neck and wrists, clad like a queen and looking one.  Of good
height and splendid carriage, her dark hair and singularly striking
features might at first have caused the belief that she was one of
this party of foreigners, toward whom she now advanced.  A second
glance would have shown her beauty to be of that universal
world-quality which makes its owner difficult to classify, although
assured of approval in any quarter of the world.

[Illustration: Clad like a queen and looking one.]

That this lady was acquainted with social pageants might have been
in the first instant quite evidenced by her comportment here.  Many
eyes turned toward her as she approached the head of the line.  She
was unconscious of all, lazily, half-insolently observant, yet
wholly unconcerned.  Some observers choked back a sudden
exclamation.  A hush fell in the great room, then followed a low
buzzing of curious or interested, wise or ignorant human bees.

There were many in Washington social circles who knew by sight or
by reputation Josephine, Countess St. Auban, no longer than six
months ago pronounced by one journal of the capital to be the most
beautiful and the most dangerous woman in Washington.  Yet even the
most hostile of these suddenly suspended judgment as they saw her
advance met now by that of the old Hungarian general himself.  With
the enthusiasm of a boy he fell upon her, both his hands extended.

"Countess--my dear child--at last you are here!" he exclaimed.
Taking her by the hand he led her back to the line of his official
company, volleying rapid exclamations in his native tongue.  Eager
groups fell into line near at hand, seeking to know what was toward.

"You left us!" at length exclaimed the old general, politely
speaking in his best English, since these others were thus bound to
hear.  "Where you had gone we did not know.  It was as though the
heavens had opened.  See then, Sir,"--he addressed the naval
officer who stood near at hand--"the Countess St. Auban was one of
the most important members of our little company--she was to come
in advance of us, who also are in advance of a greater number.  For
a time we heard from her, then all was silent!  She had
disappeared!--But now, at last, my dear Countess, you are here!  We
shall succeed, it is certain; henceforth you will be of our party.
Is it not true?"

Political, social and journalistic Washington then and there begged
a sudden though silent pardon of the Countess St. Auban.  A few
journalists left the room quickly.  An attache of the Austrian
legation also hurriedly took his leave.

"But where have you been, my dear?" again demanded General
Zewlinski, his hand again affectionately grasping that of Josephine
St. Auban.  "We have so missed you."

"I have been visiting some of the more remote parts of this
country," replied she in even tones.

"So, then, you have not forgotten our mission from Hungary!  Well,
now we shall surely have the invitation for our Kossuth to come?
Is it not true?"

"Assuredly, my dear General.  You will find this country eager to
meet him.  But alas! I fear that Kossuth himself will find problems
also in this country."

"Our own problem--our cause, dear Countess?"

"Pardon, General, really it is also the cause of this country.  We
think that in Hungary democracy is in peril.  It is not less so
here."

"But, my dear child, you would not cast doubt upon our plans,--you
have not become lukewarm to our cause so soon, my dear?"

"No, no, General.  But Europe does not understand America.  America
does not understand herself.  I ask only that the great men of that
country shall see the great problems of this.  There we could win
freedom by sword and gun.  Here also that must yet be done.  The
time for such means has not yet arrived.  Yet here also evil cries
aloud.  Soon war must come, here also--bloody war.  We ask funds
for Hungary.  America soon will need funds for herself."

"Ah, you mean this problem of the North and South--of slavery."
The face of the old general became grave.  "I have talked with
many," said he.  "It seems incapable of solution.  But have not
your brilliant faculties, my dear Countess, suggested any solution?
We learned to value your counsel over yonder."

"What could a mere woman do in a matter vast as this?  My General,
not all the wisdom of this country has suggested a remedy.  I am
but a woman and not wise.  He who attempts to solve this slavery
question must do what no statesman in all history has been able to
do, what human wisdom here has failed to do for fifty years or
more.  America has spent thirty years of statesmanship on this one
question, and is just where it started.  This country, as Thomas
Jefferson said so long ago, still has the wolf by the ear, but has
not killed it and dare not let it go.  Out there--where I have
been--in the West--there the new battle must be fought.  Now, my
General, what difference, whether America shall help Europe.  or
Europe shall help America?  The battle for democracy must be
fought, in this generation, perhaps again in the next.  What would
be the result of that war, if either section won to the destruction
of this Union?  Ah! _there_, my General, is the danger to Hungary,
the danger to Europe, to the cause of freedom and humanity.  As I
said, Kossuth will find things here to engage his best attention."

"I know your generosity," said Zewlinski, swiftly leading her apart
and gazing her straight in the face as he spoke, in low tones none
else might hear.  "I know how you got your estates yonder--how wide
handed you have been with your revenues.  I know your strange,
unhappy life, my dear.  But have a care.  Do not make that life
more unhappy.  Do not let your penitence, your devotion, your
self-abnegation, carry you too far.  Listen; times are very
troublous abroad.  The nations are banding against us--even France.
He who gives may take.  Let me tell you, be careful.  Do not
involve yourself.  Do not jeopardize the good will of Louis
Napoleon.  Do not let your warm heart endanger your own good
fortune."

She laughed almost gaily.  "You suggest an idea, my General!" she
said.  "I still am rich.  Since I advocate a measure, why should I
not enforce it to the best of my ability?  Let Louis Napoleon do as
he likes with the widow of a man he murdered!  Bring over our
friend Louis Kossuth, General, as soon as you like!  Meantime, I
shall be busy here, seeking to set on foot certain little plans of
my own."

"My child, you will be lost!  Forget these matters.  Come back with
us to our own country.  You are young, you are beautiful.  You are
a woman.  As a patriot we love you, but you are a woman, and we
would not rob you of your life.  You are young.  You did not love
old St. Auban, who took you from your American mother.  You did not
love him--but you will love some other--some young, strong man.
Many have sought your hand, my dear."

"You call me a lost child, General?  Ah, you remember the term!  At
many battles there is what is known as the forlorn hope--those whom
the French call _Les enfants perdus_--The Lost Children.  Perhaps
they perish.  But at the next battle, at the crucial time, they
rise again from the dead.  Always there is the band of the Lost
Children, ready to do what must be done.  And always, at the last
moment, are battles won by those who remain devoted, whatever be
the cause."

Zewlinski nodded his gray head gravely.  "It was thus my own sons
died in battle," said he.  "It was as I would have had it.  But
you--you are a woman!  These things are not for you."

"See," she interrupted, gently tapping his arm with her fan.  "We
must not be too much apart.  Let us return."

As they turned back toward the head of the line, Josephine gave a
half-exclamation.  Two figures were approaching, each of which
seemed to her familiar.  An instant later she had recognized the
young northern officer, Carlisle, whom she had met under such
singular conditions.  With him stalked the tall young German,
Kammerer.  Their eyes lighted suddenly, as they fell upon her, and
both advanced eagerly.  There was new dignity in her carriage now,
but she greeted them warmly.

[Illustration: Two figures were approaching.]

"When we may, I shall hope to compare notes with you," she smiled.
"You are still on parole to me."

"But you, Madam--you seem differently situated here.  I am very
glad to find it so."  Carlisle was eager, flushed, frankly admiring.

"Yes, I scarce know which side the sea I belong.  You know, I am
half American, though my people lived abroad, in diplomatic work.
By President Taylor I was chosen as one of the members of the
Hungarian commission sent over by America to look into the cause of
Hungary.  In return, last year I had the honor of being asked to
come to this country as one of the commission despatched to America
in the interest of Hungary.  I came over a certain time in advance,
for reasons of my own.  Meantime, I have had, it seems--well, call
them adventures!  I am not eager they should be known here.  But if
you like, you may call on me at my hotel--to-morrow?"

Both recognized a slight additional trace of hauteur in the
deportment of the woman whom they now accosted.  She herself saw a
sort of hesitation on the part of Carlisle.

"I can't let you make any mistake about me," he began presently.

"How do you mean?"

"You are probably not advised about me.  I'm a person of no
consequence."

"An officer of his country's army can not say that of himself."

"But, I am no longer an officer of any army.  I have been
court-martialed--for my conduct there--you know--that fight at St.
Genevieve.  My abolitionist tendencies have always made me _persona
non grata_ in my own mess.  There's been all sort of pressure
brought on me to drop it.  Now the government itself, not wishing
these things to come to a focus, has ordered me to a court-martial.
Very well, I've been sentenced.  My parole is ended, for the law
has acted on my conduct.  Rather than go back many steps in rank, I
have thrown up my commission.  This morning I resigned.  I am
wearing my uniform, I don't doubt, for the last time."

"And that, although you fought in the cause of freedom!  Although
you have fought honorably in an earlier war!  Is it not horrible!"

"I could not do otherwise," said he simply.  "I have no regrets."

"But don't you see,"--she turned upon him suddenly--"it only leaves
you all the more free!"

"I can not understand you."

"Will it not give you and your friend, Lieutenant Kammerer here,
precisely the opportunity you've wished?"

"Still I do not follow you."

"My dear Countess," ventured the German, "I'll go anywhere under
your orders.  You may be sure of that."

She turned from them.  "Come to my hotel, will you not, to-morrow?
I may have something to say to you."  Thus she passed back into the
throng, and into the arms of fickle and repentant Washington, which
marveled when she danced, flushed, excited, yet absorbed, with the
gallant old general, himself intoxicated by the music and by all
this warm talk of freedom, of equality, of democracy,--in
Washington!


CHAPTER XXIV

IN THE NAME OF ALTRUISM

In her apartments at the hotel the following morning Josephine St.
Auban looked over the journals of the day.  There were many columns
of description of the only social event of the previous day thought
worth extended mention.  The visitors from Hungary were lauded to
the skies.  There did not lack many references to the similarity
between the present struggles of the Hungarian people and those of
our own earlier days.  A vast amount of rampant Americanism was
crowded into all these matters.

[Illustration: She looked over the journals of the day.]

Joined to this, there was considerable mention of the reappearance
in Washington society of the beautiful Countess, Josephine St.
Auban, now discovered to have been originally a member of this
Hungarian commission, and recently journeying in the western states
of the republic.  This beautiful countess was now invested with a
romantic history.  She was a friend and protegee of the old General
Zewlinski, a foreign noblewoman half American by birth, of rank,
wealth and distinction, who had taken a leading part in the cause
of Hungary in her struggle with the oppressing monarchies.  Without
any reference to earlier stories not unknown to them, and bolder as
to Austria than those who then dwelt in the White House, the
newspapers now openly and unanswerably welcomed this distinguished
stranger to the heart of Washington.  Unknowingly, when they gave
her this publicity, they threw around her also protection, secrecy.
As she read, the Countess St. Auban smiled.  She knew that now
there would be no second vehmgerichte.  The government now would
not dare!

What interested her more was the story at that time made current,
of an unsuccessful attempt which had been made by a southern slave
owner to reclaim his property in a northern state.  The facts
recounted that a planter of Maryland, with two relatives, had
followed an escaped slave to the settlement of Christianville,
Pennsylvania, where a little colony of fugitives had made common
cause together.  In this case, as was prescribed under the law, the
slave owner had called to his aid a United States marshal, who in
turn had summoned a large posse of his own.  These had visited the
home of the fugitive and called upon him to surrender himself to
his owner.  This the fugitive had refused to do, and he was backed
in this refusal by a considerable party of men of his own race,
some of them free men, and some fugitive slaves, who had assembled
at his house.

"I'll have my property," asserted the slave owner, according to the
report, "or I'll eat my breakfast in hell."  One of the Marylanders
had then fired upon the slave, and the fire was returned in general
by the negroes.  The old planter, a man of courage, was struck to
the ground, killed by the blacks, his two relatives disabled, and
several other men on both sides were wounded.  The fugitive himself
was not taken, and the arresting party was obliged to retire.
Naturally, great exultation prevailed among the triumphant blacks;
and this, so said numerous despatches, was fostered and encouraged
by comment of all the northern abolitionist press.

Josephine St. Auban pondered over this barbarous recountal of an
event which would seem to have been impossible in a civilized
community.  "It comes," said she, musing, "it comes! _Ca ira_!
There will be war!  Ah, I must hasten."

She turned to other papers, of private nature, in her desk.  In a
half hour more, she had gone over the last remittance reports of
the agents of her estates in Europe.  She smiled, nodded, as she
tapped a pencil over the very handsome totals.  In ten minutes
more, she was ready and awaiting the call of Carlisle and Kammerer
in her reception-room.  In her mind was a plan already formulated.

At heart frank and impulsive, and now full of a definite zeal, she
did not long keep them waiting to learn her mind.

"Are you still for the cause of freedom, and can you keep a secret,
or aid in one?" she broke in suddenly, turning toward Carlisle.
Looking at him at first for a time, inscrutably, as though half in
amusement or in recollection, she now regarded him carefully for an
instant, apparently weighing his make-up, estimating his sincerity,
mentally investigating his character, looking at the flame of his
hair, the fanatic fire of his deep set eye.

"I have sometimes done so," he smiled.  "Is there anything in which
I can be of service?"

"Time is short," was her answer.  "Let us get at once to the point.
I am planning to go into the work long carried on by that
weak-minded Colonization Society; but on certain lines of my own."

"Explain, Countess!"

"It is my belief that we should deport the blacks from this
country.  Very well, I am willing to devote certain moneys and
certain energies to that purpose.  Granted I found it advisable and
could obtain proper support, I might perhaps not return to Hungary
for a time."

"Kammerer!" broke in Carlisle suddenly, "Listen!  Do you hear?
It's what we've said!  It is precisely what you yourself have
always said."

"That iss it!--that iss it!" exclaimed the young German.  "The
colonization--remoof them from this country to another, where they
shall be by themselves.  That only iss wise, yess.  Elsewise must
great war come--else must this Union be lost!  Ah, Madam; ah,
Madam!  How great your heart, your mind.  I kiss your hand."

"Listen!" she interrupted.  "There are about three and one-third
millions of them now.  Say they are worth, old and young, large and
little, one thousand dollars a head--monstrous thing, to put a
price upon a human head, but suppose it.  It would amount to but a
few billions of dollars.  What would a war cost between these two
sections? Perhaps a million dollars a day!  How much cheaper could
these slaves be purchased and deported from these shores!  Their
owners regard them as property.  The laws protect that belief.  The
Constitution establishes the laws.  There is no peaceful way to end
the turmoil, save by the purchase of these people.  That is a
solution.  It will prevent a war.  Let them be sent away to a place
where they belong, rather than here."

"My dear Countess," said Carlisle, "you are, as usual, brilliant.
Your imagination vaults--your daring is splendid.  But as usual you
are visionary and impractical.  Buy them?  To do this would require
the credit of a nation!  It would be subversive of all peace and
all industry.  You do not realize the sums required.  You do not
realize how vast are the complications."

She stepped closer to him in her eagerness.

"All it needs is money, and management.  A start, and the country
will follow.  Mr. Fillmore himself was about to recommend it, in
his last message.  Let me furnish the money, and do you attend to
the complications."

Carlisle rubbed his chin thoughtfully.  "It's beautiful; it may be
wise, but it's impossible.  It would take a king's credit."

"At least we might begin with such funds as are already at hand,"
smiled the Countess St. Auban.  "It might be difficult?  I suppose
the building of the pyramids was difficult.  Yet they were begun.
Yet they are finished.  Yet they stand, complete, to-day."

"It is hardly for me to advise in a case so grave as that," said
Carlisle.   "I should not undertake it.  Have you really
considered?"

"I have often followed over the same old course of reasoning, South
against North," she said, smiling at him.  "Come now, a
revolutionist and two abolitionists should do much.  You still can
fight, though they have taken away your sword."

"Some say that the courts will settle these mooted points,"
Carlisle went on; "others, that Congress must do so.  Yet others
are unwilling that even the courts should take it up, and insist
that the Constitution is clear and explicit already.  These
Southerners say that Congress should make an end to it, by
specifically declaring that men have a right to take into any new
country what they lawfully own--that is to say, these slaves;
because that territory was bought in common by North and South.
The South is just as honest and sincere as the North is, and to be
fair about it, I don't believe it's right to claim that the South
wants the Union destroyed.  A few hotheads talk of that in South
Carolina, in Mississippi, but that is precisely what the sober
judgment of the South doesn't desire.  Let us match those
secessionists against the abolitionists," he grinned.  "The first
think they have law back of them.  The latter know they have none!"

"No," she said, "only the higher law, that of human democracy.
No,--we've nothing concrete--except Lily!"

"Yes, but let me argue you out of this, Countess.  Really, I can
see no just reason why the proud and prosperous North should wish
to destroy the proud and prosperous South.  If the South remains in
the Union it must be considered a part of the Union.  New England
did not believe in taxation without representation.  Ought it to
enforce that doctrine on the South?"

"You argue it very well, Sir, as well as any one can.  The only
trouble is that you are not convinced, and you do not convince.
You are trying to protect me, that's all.  I have no answer--except
Lily!  There are some things in the analysis from which you shrink.
Isn't it true?"

"Yes, altogether true.  We always come back to the bitter and
brutal part of slavery.  But what are we going to do for remedy?
Anarchy doesn't suggest remedy.  For my own part, sometimes I think
that Millard Fillmore's idea was right--that the government should
buy these slaves and deport them.  That would be, as you say, far
cheaper than a war.  It was the North that originally sold most of
the slaves.  If they, the South, as half the country, are willing
to pay back their half of the purchase price, ought not the North
to be satisfied with that?  That's putting principles to the
hardest test--that of the pocket."

In his excitement he rose and strode about the room, his face
frowning, his slender figure erect, martial even in its civilian
dress.  Presently he turned; "But it is noble of you, magnificent,
to think of doing what a government hesitates to do!  And a woman!"

"Could it be done?" she demanded.  "It would require much money.
But what a noble solution it would be!"

"Precisely.  I rejoice to see that your mind is so singularly clear
although your heart is so kind."

"You speak in the voice of New England."

"Yes, yes, I'm a New Englander.  She's glorious in her principles,
New England, but she carries her principles in her pocket!  I
admire your proposed solution, but that solution I fear you will
never see.  It is the fatal test, that of the pocket."  But the
idea had hold of him, and would not let him go.  He walked up and
down, excited, still arguing against it.

"The South, frankly, has always been juggled out of its rights, all
along the line--through pocket politics--and I'm not sure how much
more it can endure of the same sort of juggling.  Why, John Quincy
Adams himself, Northerner that he was, admitted that Missouri had
the right to come in as a slave state, just as much as had Arkansas
and Louisiana.  Pocket-politics allowed Congress to trade all of
the Louisiana Purchase south of thirty-six degrees, thirty minutes,
excepting Arkansas, in exchange for the Floridas--and how much
chance, how much lot and part had the Missourians in a country so
far away as Florida?  The South led us to war with Mexico in order
to extend our territory, but what did the South get?  The North
gets all the great commercial and industrial rights.  Just to be
frank and fair about it, although I am a New Englander and don't
believe in slavery, the truth is, the South has paid its share in
blood and risk and money, but it didn't get its share when it came
to the divide; and it never has."

"Precisely, my dear Captain.  I delight to see you so broad-minded
and fair.  This plan of mine, to have any success, must be carried
out on lines broad-minded and fair."

"But how adjust pocket interests on both sides?  You'll see.
You'll be left alone.  It is easier to make a speech for liberty
than it is to put the price of one slave in the hat passed for
liberty.  New England, all the North, will talk, will hold mass
meetings, will pass resolutions commending resistance to the
law--like this Christianville incident of which there's news this
morning.  You'll see the blacks commended for that.  But you won't
see much money raised to keep other blacks from being followed by
their owners."

"Then leave it for those who see duty in more concrete form.  Leave
the cost to me.  My only answer is--Lily."

And again and again her only answer to them both was--Lily.  She
told them her story, produced the girl herself and made her confirm
it, offered her as concrete example to be presented in a platform
campaign which might not end in talk alone--pleaded, argued, and
won.

"Madam, I, too, kiss your hands," said Carlisle at last; and did so.

An hour after that, she had laid out a campaign for her two agents,
and had arranged for the expenditure of an initial hundred thousand
dollars.


CHAPTER XXV

THE ARTFUL GENTLEMAN PROM KENTUCKY

It was dusk.  Heavy shadows lay over the trees which lined the
curving walks leading across a little park to the stately white
house beyond.  From that direction now appeared several gentlemen,
advancing in scattering groups.  They might almost have been made
up of conspirators, so intent they seemed, so apprehensive lest
even their thoughts might be read.  Two of them drew apart,--one of
these a slender bony man, the other a tall and dark man.  The
latter spoke almost moodily.

"I doubt your ability, my dear sir, to influence so shrewd a man in
any such way as you suggest.  Besides, he is not of our party."

"That's all the better.  A man of our party might, could, would and
should keep his mouth shut about such a ticklish matter; but
outside our party, any who begins it has got to keep his mouth
shut!"

"There is no other way," he added, smiling.  "It must be done.  The
Countess St. Auban is here again!  This band of Gipsy heathens from
Hungary is also here.  The country is wild over Kossuth.  We'll
have to accept this invitation to invite him!  But Austria remains
bitter against the countess.  What we must do is to have her go
back home with these commissioners from Hungary.  There's ugly talk
about the way she's been used.  That fellow Carlisle--good riddance
of him from the army--even confessed he engaged in a game of
cards--" their heads bent together--"in short, the devil is to pay
with the administration if this gets out.  We can't banish her
again.  But how can we with dignity even it with her, so she will
make no talk?  If she likes, she can ruin us, because Carlisle
can't be kept silent, now he's out of the army.  And he's crazy
over her, anyhow."

"So?  I do not blame him."

"Yes.  Therefore, since all of us have lacked wisdom in our own
camp, we'd e'en do well to take wisdom where we can find it."

They parted, the last speaker presently to hail the nearest
carriage.  The driver a few moments later drew up at the front of a
spacious and dignified brick building, whose reserved look might
have pronounced it a private hotel or a club for gentlemen.  The
visitor seemed known, the door swinging open for him.

[Illustration: They parted, the last speaker hailing a carriage.]

"Louis," said he to the attendant, "is Mr. ---- in?" He mentioned a
name which even then was well known in Washington.

"I think you will find him in the reading-room, Sir," was the
answer.

The inquirer passed to the right, entering a wide room with tables,
books, heavy chairs, discreetly shaded lamps.  At one table, drawn
close to the light and poring over a printed page, sat a gentleman
whose personality was not without distinction.  The gray hair
brushed back from a heightening forehead might have proclaimed him
even beyond middle age, and his stature, of about medium height,
acknowledged easy living in its generous habit.  The stock and
cravat of an earlier day gave a certain austerity to the shrewd
face, lighted by a pair of keen gray eyes, which now turned to
greet the new-comer.  He rose, and both bowed formally before they
advanced to take each other by the hand.  They were acquaintances,
if not intimate friends.  Evidently this particular club no more
enlisted its members from this or that political party than did
either of the leading parties call upon any certain section for
their membership.

"I am fortunate to find you here in Washington, my dear Sir," began
the gentleman from Kentucky.  "It is something of a surprise."

The wrinkles about the other's eyes deepened in an affable smile.
"True," said he, "in the last twelve years I have three times
sought to get back into Washington!  Perhaps it would have been
more seemly for me to remain in the decreed dignified retirement."

They joined in a laugh at this, as they both drew up chairs at the
table side.

"You see," resumed the last speaker, "I am not indeed intruding
here in national affairs, but only choose Washington for to-night.
I have been thinking of a pleasure journey into the West, down the
Ohio River--"

"Will you have snuff?" began his companion.  "This is no import, I
assure you, but is made by one of my old darkeys, on my plantation
in Kentucky.  He declares he puts nothing into it but straight
leaf."

"My soul!" exclaimed the other, sneezing violently.  "I suspect the
veracity of your darkey.  It is red pepper that he uses!"

"All the better, then, to clear our minds, my dear Sir.  But let me
first send for another product of my state, to assuage these
pains."  He beckoned to a servant, who presently, returned with
tray and glasses.

"And now," he resumed, "what you say of your journey interests me
immensely.  No doubt you propose going down the river as far as
Missouri?  The interest of the entire country is focused there
to-day.  Ah, yonder is the crux of all our compromise!  Safe within
the fold herself, that is to say above the fatal line of thirty-six
degrees, thirty minutes, her case is simply irresistible in
interest to-day, both for those who argue for and those who talk
against the extension of slavery into our other territories."

"Yet your administration, to-day, my dear Sir, calls this
'finality.'  Believe me, it is no more than a compromise with truth
and justice!  The entire North demands that slavery shall halt."

"The entire South refuses it!"

"Then let the South beware!"

"The North also may beware, my dear Sir!"

"We are aware, and we are prepared.  Not another inch for slavery!"

"Hush!" said the other, raising a hand.  "Not even you and I dare
go into this.  The old quarrel is lulled for a time.  At last we
have worked these measures through both the House and Senate.  In
the House the administration can put through at any time the Wilmot
proviso prohibiting slavery, and although the Senate always has and
always can defeat such a measure, both branches, and the executive
as well, have agreed to put this dog to sleep when possible, and
when found sleeping, to let him lie.  My dear friend, it is not a
question of principle, but of policy, to-day."

"Principles should rule policies!" exclaimed the other virtuously.

"Agreed!  Agreed! We are perfectly at one as to that.  But you know
that Webster himself reiterates again and again that no man should
set up his conscience above the law of his country.  Your Free Soil
party means not law, but anarchy,--and worse than that--it means
disunion!  Clay, Cass, Webster, Benton, even the hottest of the men
from Mississippi and South Carolina, are agreed on that.  My dear
Sir, I say it with solemn conviction, the formation of a new party
of discontent to-day, when everything is already strained to
breaking, will split this country and plunge the divided sections
into a bloody war!"

The other sat gravely for a time before he made reply.  "Our people
feel too sternly to be reconciled.  We need some new party--"

Again the other raised a warning hand.  "_Do not say that word_!
Others have principles as much as you and I.  Let us not speak with
recklessness of consequences.  But, privately, and without hot
argument, my dear friend, the singular thing to me is that you, an
old leader of the people, with a wide following in the North and
South, should now be entertaining precisely the same principles--
though not expressing them with the same reckless fervor--which are
advanced by the latest and most dangerous abolitionist of the time."

"You do not mean Mr. Garrison?  Any of my New York or Boston
friends?"

"No, I mean a _woman_, here in Washington.  You could perhaps guess
her name."

The other drew his chair closer.  "I presume you mean the lady
reputed to have been connected with President Taylor's commission,
of inquiry into affairs in Hungary--"

"Yes,--the 'most beautiful woman in Washington to-day.'  So she is
called by some--'the most dangerous,' by others."

"Has Kentucky forgotten its gallantry so fully as that?  Rumor has
reported the young woman to me as a charming young widow, of
beauty, wealth and breeding."

"Yes, manners, and convictions, and courage--abolitionist
tendencies and fighting proclivities.  She is a firebrand--a
revolutionist, fresh back from the Old World, and armed with
weapons of whose use we old fogies are utterly ignorant.  Having
apparently nothing to lose whose loss she dreads, she is careless
of all consequences.  You, my dear Sir, speak of your moral
adherence to some new party.  You consider yourself one of the
lamented Free Soil party, and hope a resurrection.  This woman does
not pause there--no.  She comes here to Washington, at precisely
the time of our final compromise, when all is peaceful, even
slumberous,--and she preaches the crusade of fire and sword.  My
dear friend, if you seek a prophet, here is one; and if you want
leadership in your dogma of no slavery north of thirty-six degrees,
thirty minutes, here is prophet and leader in one!--And, believe
me, one with arguments which make her dangerous to one man, two
men, or any collection of men."

The other pondered.  "I have never seen the lady," he remarked, at
length.  "Is she acquainted among the abolitionists of the North?"

"No.  She trains in no one's camp.  Indeed, socially she has been
neglected in the North, for reasons said to have been urged in
diplomatic circles."

"Something of an intrigante, eh?"

"At least enough to excite the anger and suspicion of Austria, the
interest of England, the concern of France;--that's all!"

"Of what age is she?"

"Of about that age, my dear Sir, which our children or
grandchildren might claim.  I should say, twenty-three,
twenty-four,--not over twenty-six, perhaps.  It is difficult to
say.  I have met her but rarely."

"You have me at disadvantage, even so," smiled the other.  "It is,
however, unnecessary for you to settle your cravat.  It is quite
straight; and besides, I think we are quite safe from intrusion of
women here."

"You have never met this fair enthusiast?  You are behind the
times!" retorted the wily Kentuckian.  "Perhaps you would like that
honor?  I think it could be arranged.  Indeed," he added, after a
moment spent in careful study of his companion's face, "I would
even undertake to arrange it.  My dear Sir, with your well known
charm of manner with men, and women as well, you could in that case
win the lasting plaudits of your country, if you but possessed the
resolution!"

"In a cause so noble, I would do what I might!  But what is the
cause?  And is it proper for one of my place to engage in it?"

"You could, I say, be hailed by the administration in power, not as
the Father of your Country, perhaps, but as its savior.  Take this
woman out of our camp, and into your own.  Flock your own fowl
together, you Free Soilers!  Take her out of Washington, get her
back to Europe--where she belongs,--and, without jesting, my dear
Sir, you shall have the backing next year, two years hence--in
1853,--any time you like--of the men who make this administration,
and of the men behind this compromise.  A majority of the House, an
even division of the Senate--Listen, my dear friend, this is not
idle talk, and these are no idle promises!  I am serious.  I speak
to you in no wise ill-advised.  To tell you the truth, we are
frightened.  She has stolen all our peace of mind, and stolen also
some of our thunder--some of our cast-off and unthundered thunder."

"In what way?"

"Oh, nothing.  It is of very little consequence.  It is a
bagatelle.  All she proposes to do is to purchase all the slaves in
the United States--out of her own funds--and ship them out of
America."

"Great God!"

"Yes.  We didn't dare it.  She does.  We didn't begin.  She has
begun.  And since it has begun, who knows what army of the
people--what _new party_--may fall in behind her?  We want you to
forestall all that.  We don't want you to head that new party.  We
think you will do better to fall in with us, to accept the
compliment of a European mission--and to take this fair firebrand
with you.  We are afraid to have her in Washington."

The other listened with a flicker of the eyelid, which showed his
interest, but feigned lightness in his speech.

"In matters of gallantry, my dear friend, why does Kentucky need a
substitute, or even an ally?"

"Kentucky, in the deference due to so great a man as yourself,
yields to New York!  Will you have snuff, Sir?"

"I thank you, I think not.  But tell me, what is it that New York
must do?"

"New York, my dear Sir, must transport, man-handle, murder,
wheedle, bowstring, drown, and permanently lose Josephine, Countess
St. Auban,--herself late back from Missouri, formerly of God knows
where.  I promise you, this country is only a tinder box, waiting
for that sort of spark.  To-morrow--but you remember, my dear
Horatio!"

"But between now and to-morrow is rather a brief period.  We have
not yet invented means of traveling through the air.  I could not
well carry off this fair lady by main strength.  My own plans
unfortunately require some attention.  And I think that, even were
the trifling difficulty of the lady's consent overcome, I could not
easily assume the role of savior of my country before the time of
the departure of the next ship for Europe--even granted my enemies,
the Whigs, will give a mission to an ex-Democrat and a Free Soiler
like myself!"

"Not that I should not experience the most pleasureable emotions
both in saving the country, my dear Sir," he saluted with his
glass, "and of saving it in the company of so charming a person as
this young lady is reported to be.  The years have laid us under a
certain handicap, my friend.  Yet were this lady quite unattached,
or her duena not wholly impossible, one might consider the
distinguished role of disinterestedly saving one's country in the
capacity at least of chaperon."

They looked at each other, and broke into laughter.  Yet minds so
keen as theirs long before them had read between lines on the
printed page, under the outward mask of human countenances.

"Stranger things have happened!" said the gentleman from Kentucky.

"My soul and body'  My dear Sir, you do not speak seriously?"  His
surprise was feigned, and the other knew it.

"I was never so serious in my life.  My friend, it seems almost as
though fate had guided me to your side to-night.  At this time,
when our diplomacy abroad is none too fortunate, and when our
diplomacy at home is far more delicate and dangerous, you yourself,
known the country over as a man of tact and delicacy, are the one
man in the world to handle this very mission.  It is the Old Fox of
the North, after all, Free Soiler or not, who alone can smooth down
matters for us.  Our country had supreme confidence in you.  This
administration has such confidence still.  It will give all that is
seemly for one of your station to accept.  It will not ask aught of
party lines, this or that."

"Do you speak with authority other than your own?"

"It is not yet time for me to answer that."

"Yet you dare approach one who is in the opposing camp."

"But one whose camp we either hope to join, or whom we hope later
to have in our own.  Who can tell where party lines will fall in
the next three years?  All the bars may be down by then, and many a
fence past mending."

"For the sake of harmony, much should be ventured."

"Excellent words, Sir."

"One owes a certain duty to one's country at any time."

LONGFELLOW.

"Now," said Tom, "I am ready be off, if it's to the world's end."

"Ah!" said the fairy, "that is a brave, good boy. But you must
go farther than the world's end, if you want to find Mr. Grimes; for
he is at the Other-end-of-Nowhere.

You must go to Shiny Wall, and through the white gate that never
was opened; and then you will come to Peacepool, and Mother Carey's
Haven, where the good whales go when they die.

And there Mother Carey will tell you the way to the Other-end-of-Nowhere,
and there you will find Mr. Grimes."

"Oh, dear!" said Tom. "But I do not know my way to Shiny Wall, or
where it is at all."
"Little boys must take the trouble to find out things for themselves,
or they will never grow to be men; so that you must ask all the
beasts in the sea and the birds in the air, and if you have been
good to them, some of them will tell you the way to Shiny Wall."

"Well," said Tom, "it will be a long journey, so I had better start
at once.

Good-bye, Miss Ellie; you know I am getting a big boy, and I must
go out and see the world."

"I know you must," said Ellie; "but you will not forget me, Tom.

I shall wait here till you come."

And she shook hands with him, and bade him good-bye.

Tom longed very much again to kiss her; but he thought it would not
be respectful, considering she was a lady born; so he promised not
to forget her: but his little whirl-about of a head was so full of
the notion of going out to see the world, that it forgot her in
five minutes: however, though his head forgot her, I am glad to say
his heart did not.

So he asked all the beasts in the sea, and all the birds in the air,
but none of them knew the way to Shiny Wall. For why? He was still
too far down south.

Then he met a ship, far larger than he had ever seen--a gallant
ocean-steamer, with a long cloud of smoke trailing behind;
and he wondered how she went on without sails, and swam up to her
to see.
A school of dolphins were running races round and round her, going
three feet for her one, and Tom asked them the way to Shiny Wall:

but they did not know.

Then he tried to find out how she moved, and at last he saw
her screw, and was so delighted with it that he played under her
quarter all day, till he nearly had his nose knocked off by the fans,
and thought it time to move. Then he watched the sailors upon deck,
and the ladies, with their bonnets and parasols: but none of them
could see him, because their eyes were not opened,--as, indeed,
most people's eyes are not.

At last there came out into the quarter-gallery a very pretty
lady, in deep black widow's weeds, and in her arms a baby. She
leaned over the quarter-gallery, and looked back and back toward
England far away; and as she looked she sang:

I.

"Soft soft wind, from out the sweet south sliding, Waft thy silver
cloud-webs athwart the summer sea; Thin thin threads of mist on
dewy fingers twining Weave a veil of dappled gauze to shade my babe
and me.

II.

"Deep deep Love, within thine own abyss abiding, Pour Thyself
abroad, O Lord, on earth and air and sea; Worn weary hearts within
Thy holy temple hiding, Shield from sorrow, sin, and shame my
helpless babe and me."

Her voice was so soft and low, and the music of the air so sweet,
that Tom could have listened to it all day. But as she held the baby
over the gallery rail, to show it the dolphins leaping and the water
gurgling in the ship's wake, lo! and behold, the baby saw
Tom.

He was quite sure of that for when their eyes met, the baby smiled
and held out his hands; and Tom smiled and held out his hands too;
and the baby kicked and leaped, as if it wanted to jump overboard
to him.

"What do you see, my darling?" said the lady; and her eyes followed
the baby's till she too caught sight of Tom, swimming about
among the foam-beads below.

She gave a little shriek and start; and then she said, quite quietly,
"Babies in the sea?

Well, perhaps it is the happiest place for them;" and waved her hand
to Tom, and cried, "Wait a little, darling, only a little: and
perhaps we shall go with you and be at rest."
And at that an old nurse, all in black, came out and talked to her,
and drew her in. And Tom turned away northward, sad and wondering;
and watched the great steamer slide away into the dusk, and the
lights on board peep out one by one, and die out again, and the long
bar of smoke fade away into the evening mist, till all was out of
sight.

And he swam northward again, day after day, till at last he met the
King of the Herrings, with a curry-comb growing out of his
nose, and a sprat in his mouth for a cigar, and asked him the way
to Shiny Wall; so he bolted his sprat head foremost, and said:
"If I were you, young Gentleman, I should go to the Allalonestone,
and ask the last of the Gairfowl.

She is of a very ancient clan, very nearly as ancient as my
own; and knows a good deal which these modern upstarts don't, as
ladies of old houses are likely to do."

Tom asked his way to her, and the King of the Herrings told him
very kindly, for he was a courteous old gentleman of the old school,
though he was horribly ugly, and strangely bedizened too, like the
old dandies who lounge in the club-house windows.

But just as Tom had thanked him and set off, he called after him:
"Hi!

I say, can you fly?"
"I never tried," says Tom. "Why?"
"Because, if you can, I should advise you to say nothing
to the old lady about it. There; take a hint. Good-bye."
And away Tom went for seven days and seven nights due north-west,
till he came to a great codbank, the like of which he never saw
before.

The great cod lay below in tens of thousands, and gobbled shell-fish
all day long; and the blue sharks roved above in hundreds, and
gobbled them when they came up. So they ate, and ate, and ate each
other, as they had done since the making of the world; for no man
had come here yet to catch them, and find out how rich old Mother
Carey is.

And there he saw the last of the Gairfowl, standing up on the
Allalonestones all alone. And a very grand old lady she was, full
three feet high, and bolt upright, like some old Highland chieftainess.
She had on a black velvet gown, and a white pinner and apron, and
a very high bridge to her nose (which is a sure mark of high
breeding), and a large pair of white spectacles on it, which made
her look rather odd: but it was the ancient fashion of her
house.

And instead of wings, she had two little feathery arms, with which
she fanned herself, and complained of the dreadful heat; and she
kept on crooning an old song to herself, which she learnt when she
was a little baby-bird, long ago -

"Two little birds they sat on a stone, One swam away, and then there
was one, With a fal-lal-la-lady.

"The other swam after, and then there was none, And so the poor
stone was left all alone; With a fal-lal-la-lady."

It was "flew" away, properly, and not "swam" away: but, as she could
not fly, she had a right to alter it. However, it was a very fit
song for her to sing, because she was a lady herself.

Tom came up to her very humbly, and made his bow; and the first
thing she said was - 
"Have you wings?

Can you fly?"
"Oh dear, no, ma'am; I should not think of such thing," said cunning
little Tom.

"Then I shall have great pleasure in talking to you, my dear.

It is quite refreshing nowadays to see anything without wings. They
must all have wings, forsooth, now, every new upstart sort of
bird, and fly. What can they want with flying, and raising
themselves above their proper station in life? In the days of
my ancestors no birds ever thought of having wings, and did very
well without; and now they all laugh at me because I keep to the
good old fashion.

Why, the very marrocks and dovekies have got wings, the vulgar
creatures, and poor little ones enough they are; and my own cousins
too, the razor-bills, who are gentlefolk born, and ought to know
better than to ape their inferiors."

And so she was running on, while Tom tried to get in a word
edgeways; and at last he did, when the old lady got out of breath,
and began fanning herself again; and then he asked if she knew the
way to Shiny Wall.

"Shiny Wall? Who should know better than I? We all came from
Shiny Wall, thousands of years ago, when it was decently cold, and
the climate was fit for gentlefolk; but now, what with the heat,
and what with these vulgar-winged things who fly up and down and
eat everything, so that gentlepeople's hunting is all spoilt, and
one really cannot get one's living, or hardly venture off the rock
for fear of being flown against by some creature that would not
have dared to come within a mile of one a thousand years ago--what
was I saying?

Why, we have quite gone down in the world, my dear, and have nothing
left but our honour.

And I am the last of my family. A friend of mine and I came and settled
on this rock when we were young, to be out of the way of low people.
Once we were a great nation, and spread over all the Northern
Isles. But men shot us so, and knocked us on the head, and took our
eggs--why, if you will believe it, they say that on the coast of
Labrador the sailors used to lay a plank from the rock on board the
thing called their ship, and drive us along the plank by hundreds,
till we tumbled down into the ship's waist in heaps; and then, I
suppose, they ate us, the nasty fellows!

Well--but--what was I saying? At last, there were none of us left,
except on the old Gairfowlskerry, just off the Iceland coast, up
which no man could climb. Even there we had no peace; for one day,
when I was quite a young girl, the land rocked, and the sea
boiled, and the sky grew dark, and all the air was filled with
smoke and dust, and down tumbled the old Gairfowlskerry into the sea.

The dovekies and marrocks, of course, all flew away; but we were
too proud to do that. Some of us were dashed to pieces, and
some drowned; and those who were left got away to Eldey, and
the dovekies tell me they are all dead now, and that another
Gairfowlskerry has risen out of the sea close to the old one, but
that it is such a poor flat place that it is not safe to live on:
and so here I am left alone."

This was the Gairfowl's story, and, strange as it may seem, it is
every word of it true.

"If you only had had wings!" said Tom; "then you might all have
flown away too."
"Yes, young gentleman: and if people are not gentleman and ladies,
and forget that noblesse oblige, they will find it as easy to get
on in the world as other people who don't care what they do.

Why, if I had not recollected that noblesse oblige, I should not
have been all alone now." And the poor old lady sighed.

"How was that, ma'am?"
"Why, my dear, a gentleman came hither with me, and after we had
been here some time, he wanted to marry--in fact, he actually proposed
to me. Well, I can't blame him; I was young, and very handsome
then, I don't deny: but you see, I could not hear of such a thing,
because he was my deceased sister's husband, you see?"

"Of course not, ma'am," said Tom; though, of course, he knew nothing
about it. "She was very much diseased, I suppose?"
"You do not understand me, my dear. I mean, that being a lady, and
with right and honourable feelings, as our house always has
had, I felt it my duty to snub him, and howk him, and peck him
continually, to keep him at his proper distance; and, to tell the
truth, I once pecked him a little too hard, poor fellow, and he
tumbled backwards off the rock, and--really, it was very unfortunate,
but it was not my fault--a shark coming by saw him flapping, and
snapped him up.

And since then I have lived all alone -

'With a fal-lal-la-lady.'

And soon I shall be gone, my little dear, and nobody will miss me;
and then the poor stone will be left all alone."

"But, please, which is the way to Shiny Wall?" said Tom.

"Oh, you must go, my little dear--you must go. Let me see--I am
sure--that is--really, my poor old brains are getting quite puzzled.
Do you know, my little dear, I am afraid, if you want to know,
you must ask some of these vulgar birds about, for I have quite
forgotten."

And the poor old Gairfowl began to cry tears of pure oil; and Tom
was quite sorry for her; and for himself too, for he was at his
wit's end whom to ask.

But by there came a flock of petrels, who are Mother Carey's own
chickens; and Tom thought them much prettier than Lady Gairfowl,
and so perhaps they were; for Mother Carey had had a great deal
of fresh experience between the time that she invented the Gairfowl
and the time that she invented them.

They flitted along like a flock of black swallows, and hopped and
skipped from wave to wave, lifting up their little feet behind
them so daintily, and whistling to each other so tenderly, that
Tom fell in love with them at once, and called them to know the way
to Shiny Wall.

"Shiny Wall? Do you want Shiny Wall? Then come with us, and
we will show you. We are Mother Carey's own chickens, and she sends
us out over all the seas, to show the good birds the way
home."
Tom was delighted, and swam off to them, after he had made his bow
to the Gairfowl. But she would not return his bow: but held herself
bolt upright, and wept tears of oil as she sang:

"And so the poor stone was left all alone; With a fal-lal-la-lady."

But she was wrong there; for the stone was not left all alone: and
the next time that Tom goes by it, he will see a sight worth seeing.

The old Gairfowl is gone already: but there are better things come
in her place; and when Tom comes he will see the fishing-smacks
anchored there in hundreds, from Scotland, and from Ireland, and
from the Orkneys, and the Shetlands, and from all the Northern
ports, full of the children of the old Norse Vikings, the
masters of the sea.

And the men will be hauling in the great cod by thousands, till
their hands are sore from the lines; and they will be making cod-liver
oil and guano, and salting down the fish; and there will be a
man-of-war steamer there to protect them, and a lighthouse to show
them the way; and you and I, perhaps, shall go some day to the
Allalonestone to the great summer sea-fair, and dredge strange
creatures such as man never saw before; and we shall hear the sailors
boast that it is not the worst jewel in Queen Victoria's crown, for
there are eighty miles of codbank, and food for all the poor folk
in the land.

That is what Tom will see, and perhaps you and I shall see it too.
And then we shall not be sorry because we cannot get a Gairfowl
to stuff, much less find gairfowl enough to drive them into stone
pens and slaughter them, as the old Norsemen did, or drive them on
board along a plank till the ship was victualled with them, as the
old English and French rovers used to do, of whom dear old
Hakluyt tells: but we shall remember what Mr. Tennyson says: how

"The old order changeth, giving place to the new, And God fulfils
himself in many ways."

And now Tom was all agog to start for Shiny Wall; but the petrels
said no.

They must go first to Allfowlsness, and wait there for the great
gathering of all the sea-birds, before they start for their
summer breeding-places far away in the Northern Isles; and there
they would be sure to find some birds which were going to Shiny
Wall: but where Allfowlsness was, he must promise never to tell,
lest men should go there and shoot the birds, and stuff them, and
put them into stupid museums, instead of leaving them to play and
breed and work in Mother Carey's water-garden, where they ought to
be.

So where Allfowlsness is nobody must know; and all that is to
be said about it is, that Tom waited there many days; and as he
waited, he saw a very curious sight.

On the rabbit burrows on the shore there gathered hundreds and
hundreds of hoodie-crows, such as you see in Cambridgeshire.

And they made such a noise, that Tom came on shore and went up to
see what was the matter.

And there he found them holding their great caucus, which they hold
every year in the North; and all their stump-orators were
speechifying; and for a tribune, the speaker stood on an old sheep's
skull.

And they cawed and cawed, and boasted of all the clever things
they had done; how many lambs' eyes they had picked out, and how
many dead bullocks they had eaten, and how many young grouse they
had swallowed whole, and how many grouse-eggs they had flown away
with, stuck on the point of their bills, which is the hoodie-crow's
particularly clever feat, of which he is as proud as a gipsy is of
doing the hokany-baro; and what that is, I won't tell you.

Now there is but one word
I can say; that you have courage and decision, I know."

He had risen, and unconsciously the young woman also had
risen,--balancing, measuring, watching, warding, in this contest,
all too unequal.  Suddenly, with a swift and most charming smile
she approached him a half step and held out her hand.

"You are a great man, Sir.  Your country has found you great.  I
have always found the greatest men the simplest and most frank.
Therefore I know you will tell me--you will satisfy any doubt I may
feel--If I should ask a question, you would not condemn me as
presuming?"

"Certainly not.  Upon the contrary, my dear Countess, I should feel
flattered."

She looked at him for an instant, then came up to the side of the
table beyond which he had taken his seat.  Leaning her chin upon
her hand, her elbow upon the table, in a sudden posture of
encounter, she asked him a question whose answer took him swiftly
far back into his own past, into another and forgotten day.

"Did you ever hear of Mr. John Parish, Sir?" she demanded.

The suave countenance before her was at first blank, then curious,
then intent.  His mind was striving to summon up, from all its many
images, this one which was required.  It was a brain which rarely
forgot, even though years had passed; and had it been able to
forget, so much had been the better for the plans of the gentleman
from Kentucky, and for the success of his proposed European mission.

At last, slowly, a faint flush passed over the face she was
regarding so intently.  "Yes, I remember him very well," he
replied.  "He has not for very many years, been in this country.
He died abroad, some years since.  I presume you mean Mr. Parish of
New York--he is the only one I recall of that name at least.  Yes;
I knew such a man."

"That was very long ago?"

"It was when I was much younger, my dear Countess."

"You knew him very well, then?"

"I may say that I did, Madam."

"And you'll tell me; then--tell me, was it true that once, as a
wild rumor had it, a rumor that I have heard--that once you two
played at cards--"

"Was that a crime?" he smiled.

"But with him, at cards with him, Mr. John Parish, a certain game
of cards with him--one day,--a certain winter day years ago, when
you both were younger--when the train was snowbound in the North?
And you played then, for what?  What were the stakes then, in that
particular game with Mr. John Parish?  Do you chance to recall?"

"Madam, you credit me with frankness.  I will not claim even so
much.  But since you have heard a rumor that died out long years
ago--which was denied--which even now I might better deny--since,
in fact you know the truth--why should I deny the truth?"

"Then you two played a game, at cards,--for a woman?  And Mr.
Parish won?  Was it not true?"

A new and different expression passed over the face of the
gentleman before her.  Her chin still rested in her hand, her other
arm, long, round, white, lay out upon the table before him.  He
could see straight into her wide eyes, see the heave of her throat
now under its shining circlet, see the color of her cheek, feel the
tenseness of all her mind and body as she questioned him about his
long forgotten past.

"Why do you ask me this?" he demanded at last.  "What has that to
do with us? That was long ago.  It is dead, it is forgotten.  Why
rake up the folly of a deed of youth and recklessness, long years
dead and gone?  Why, the other man, and the woman herself, are dead
and gone now, both of them.  Then, why?"

"I will tell you why.  That happened once in my own experience."

"Impossible!"

"Yes, impossible.  It should have been impossible among men at this
day of the world.  But it happened.  I also had the distinguished
honor to be the stake in some such game, and that because--indirectly
because--I had won the enmity, the suspicions at least--well, we will
say, of persons high in authority in this land."

"But, my dear young lady, the conditions can not have been the
same.  Assuredly the result was not the same!"

"By whose credit, then?  Who thinks of a woman?  Who is there whose
hand is not raised against her?  Each member of her own sex is her
enemy.  Each member of the opposite sex is her foe.  One breath,
one suspicion, and she becomes fair game, even under the strictest
code among men; and then, the man who did not dare would be
despised because he would not dare.  Her life is one long war
against suspicion.  It is one long war against selfishness, a
continued defense against desire, gratification.  She is, even
to-day, valued as chattel--under all the laws and conventions built
about her runs the chattel idea.  She is a convenience.  Is that
all?"

"My dear lady, it is not for me to enter into discussion of
subjects so abstruse, so far removed at least from my proper trend
of thought--our proper trend of thought, if you please.  I must
admit that act of folly, yes.  But I must also end the matter
there."

"Then why should not I end our matter there, Sir?  It seems to me
that if in any usual way of life, going about her business
honestly, paying her obligations of all sort--even that to her
crucifix at night--a woman who is clean wishes to remain clean, to
be herself,--why, I say, if that may not be, among men great or
small, distinguished or unknown, then most fortunate is she who
remains aloof from all chance of that sort of thing.  Sir, I should
not like to think that, while I was in my room, for the time
removed from the society of the gentlemen who should be my
protectors, there was going on, let us say, somewhere in the
gentlemen's saloon, a little enterprise at chance in which--"

"But, my dear lady, you are mad to speak in this way!  Lightning,
even lightning of folly, does not strike twice in the same place."

"Ah, does it not?  But it has!"

"What can you mean?  Surely you do not mean actually to say that
you yourself ever have figured in such an incident?"

She made no answer to him, save to look straight into his eyes,
chin in hand still, her long white arm lying out, motionless, her
posture free of nervous strain or unrest.  Slowly her lips parted,
showing her fine white teeth in a half smile.  Her eyes smiled
also, with wisdom in their look.

The venerable statesman opposed to her all at once felt his
resources going.  He knew that his quest was over, that this young
woman was after all able to fend for herself.

"What would you do?" she demanded of him.  "If you were a woman and
knew you were merely coveted in general, as a woman, and that you
had been just cheaply played for in a game of cards, in a public
place--what would you do, if you could, to the man who lost--or the
man who won?  Would you be delivered over?  That woman, was
she--but she could not help herself; she had no place to turn, poor
girl?  And she paid all her life, then, for some act earlier, which
left her fair game?  Was that it?"

"But you, my dear girl!  It is impossible!"

"I was more fortunate, that is all.  Would you blame me if I
dreaded the memory of such an incident; if I felt a certain
shrinking from one who ever figured in such an incident?  If I
could trust--but then, but then--Are you very sure that Mr. Parish
loved that woman?"

"I am sure of it," answered the old man soberly.  "Did he use her
well?"

"All her life.  He gave her everything--"

"Oh, that is nothing!  Did he give her--after he had learned,
maybe, that she was not what he had thought--did he give her
then--love--belief, trust?  Did he--are you very sure that any man
in such case, after such an incident, _could_ have loved, really
loved, the woman whom he held in that way--"

"I not only believe he might, my dear girl, but I know that in this
one case--the only one of my experience"--he smiled--"such was the
truth.  There was some untold reason why they two did not, or could
not, marry.  I do not go into that.

"Consider, my dear girl," he resumed; "you are young, and I am so
old that it is as though I too were young now and had no
experience--so we may talk.  Our life is a contest among men for
money and for love; that is all success can bring us.  In older
days men fought for that.  To-day we have modified life a little,
and have other ways; but I fancy the game in which that certain
lady figured was only one form of contest--it was a fight, the
spoils to go to the victor."

"Horrible!  But you might have been the victor?  In that case,
would you have loved her, would you have used her well, all your
life, and hers?"

He drew back now with dignity.  "Madam, my position in later years
defends me from necessity of answering you.  You are young,
impulsive, but you should not forget the proprieties even now--"
His face was now hotly flushed.

"I ask your pardon!  But _would_ you?"

He smiled in spite of himself, something of the old fire of
gallantry still burning in his withered veins.  "My dear girl, if
it were yourself, I would!  And by the Lord!  I'd play again with
Parish, or any other man, if my chance otherwise, merely by cruel
circumstances, had been left hopeless.  Some one must win."

"But how could the winner be sure?  How could the--how did she--I
would say--"

"Dear girl, let us not be too cold in our philosophy, nor too wise.
I can not say how or why these things go as they do.  All I know is
that the right man won in that case, and that he proved it later,
by each act of kindness he gave her, all her life.  This, my dear,
is an odd world, when it comes to all that."

"Was he--did he have anybody else in the world who--"

"Oh, only a wife, I believe, that was all!"

"Did she die, soon?  Was there ever--"

"How you question!  What do you plan for _yourself_?  My word!  You
are putting me through a strange initiation on our first
acquaintance, my dear Countess!  Let us not pursue such matters
further, or I shall begin to think your own interest in these
questions is that of the original Eve!"

"To the victor does not always belong the spoils," she said slowly.
"Not till he has won--earned them--in war, in conquest!  Perhaps
conquest of himself."

[Illustration: "To the victor does not always belong the spoils."]

"You speak in enigmas for me, my dear Countess."

She shook her head slowly, from side to side.  "That poor girl!
Did she ever feel she had been won in the real game, I wonder?  To
whom would belong herself--if she felt that she had something in
her own life to forget, some great thing to be done, in penance
perhaps, in eagerness perhaps, some step to take, up--something to
put her into a higher plane in the scheme of life?  To do
something, for some one else--not just to be selfish--suppose that
was in her heart; after that game?"

"Why, you read her story as though you saw it!  That was her life,
absolutely.  Never lived a woman more respected there, more loved.
She disarmed even the women, old and young--yes, even the single
ones!"

"It is an odd world," she said slowly.  "But"--drawing back--"I do
not think I will go back to Europe.  It would delight me to meet
again my friend, the patriot Kossuth.  But here I have many ideas
which I must work out."

"My dear Countess, you oppress me with a sense of failure!  I had
so much hoped that you would lend your aid in this mission of my
own abroad.  You would be valuable.  You are so much prized in the
opinions of the administration, I am sure, that--"

"What do you mean?  Does the administration know of me?  _Why_
should it know?  What have I done?"

But the old statesman before her was no such fool as to waste time
in a lost cause.  This one was lost, he knew, and it booted little
for him to become involved where, even at the best issue, there was
risk enough for him.  He reflected that risk must have existed even
had this young lady been a shade more dull of mind, of less
brilliant faculty in leaping to conclusions and resolutions.  She
_was_ a firebrand, that was sure.  Let others handle such, but not
that task for him!

"Now you ask questions whose answers lie entirely beyond my power,"
he replied easily.  "You must remember that I am not of this party,
let alone this administration.  My own day in politics has past,
and I must seek seclusion, modestly.  I own that the mission to
Europe, to examine in a wholly non-partisan way, the working out
there of this revolutionary idea--the testing on the soil of
monarchies of the principle of democratic government--has a great
appeal to me; and I fancied it would offer appeal also to yourself.
But if--"

"All life is chance, is it not?  But in your belief, does the right
man always win?"

He rose, smiling, inscrutable once more, astute and suave
politician again, and passing about the table he bowed over her
hand to kiss it.

"My dear Countess," he said, "my dear girl, all I can say is that
in the very limited experience I can claim in such matters, the
victor usually is the right man.  But I find you here, alone,
intent on visionary plans which never can be carried out,
undertaking a labor naturally foreign to a woman's methods of life,
alien to her usual ideas of happiness.  So, my dear, my dear, I
fear you yourself have not played out the game--you have not
fulfilled its issue!  The stakes are not yet given over!  I can not
say as to the right man, but I can say with all my heart that he
who wins such prize is fortunate indeed, and should cherish it for
ever.  See, I am not after all devoid of wit or courage, my dear
young girl!  Because, I know, though you do not tell me, that there
is some game at which you play, yourself, and that you will not
stop that game to participate in my smaller enterprise of visiting
Kossuth and the lands of Europe!  I accept defeat myself, once
more, in a game where a woman is at stake.  Again, I lose!"

There was more truth than she knew in his words, for what was in
his mind and in the minds of others there in Washington, regarding
her, were matters not then within her knowledge.  But she was
guided once more, as many a woman has been, by her unerring
instinct, her sixth sense of womanhood, her scent for things of
danger.  Now, though she stood with face grave, pensive, almost
melancholy, to give him curtsy as he passed, there was not weakness
nor faltering in her mien or speech.

"But he would have to _win_!" she said, as though following out
some train of thought.  "He would first need to win in the larger
game.  Ah! What woman would be taken, except by the man who really
had won in the real game of life."

"You would demand that, my dear?" smiled the pleasant gentleman who
now was bowing himself toward the door.

"I would demand it!"

By the time he had opportunity to rally his senses, assailed as
they were by the sight of her, by the splendor of her apparel, by
the music of her voice, the fragrance which clung about her, the
charm of her smiles,--by the time, in short, which he required to
turn half about, she was gone.  He heard her light step at the
stair.

"My soul!" he exclaimed, wiping his brow with a silken kerchief.
"So much for attempting to sacrifice principle--for expecting to
mix Free Soil and Whig!  Damn that Kentuckian!"


CHAPTER XXVII

A SPLENDID FAILURE

If it is easy to discover why there was no special embassy sent by
this government to Turkey for the purpose of inviting the
distinguished patriot Kossuth to visit America, (that matter being
concluded in rather less formal fashion after the return home of
the Hungarian committee of inquiry--a ship of our navy being
despatched to carry him to our shores) it with equal ease may be
understood why the Countess St. Auban after this remained
unmolested.  A quaking administration, bent only on keeping
political matters in perfect balance, and on quenching promptly, as
best it might, any incipient blaze of anti-slavery zeal which might
break out from its smoldering, dared make no further move against
her.  She was now too much in the public eye to be safe even in
suppression, and so was left to pursue her own way for a time; this
the more readily, of course, because she was doing nothing either
illegal or reprehensible.  Indeed, as has been said, she was only
carrying out in private way a pet measure of Mr. Fillmore himself,
one which he had only with difficulty been persuaded to eliminate
from his first presidential message--that of purchasing the slaves
and deporting them from our shores.  The government at Washington
perforce looked on, shivering, dreading lest this thing might fail,
dreading also lest it might not fail.  It was a day of compromise,
of cowardice, of politics played as politics; a day of that
political unwisdom which always is dangerous--the fear of riding
straight, the ignorance of the saving quality of honest courage.
Wherefore, matters went on thus, fit foundation now building for
that divided and ill-ordered house of this republic, whose
purification could only be found in the cleansing catastrophe of
fire so soon to come.

As to the unfortunate work in which this warm-hearted enthusiast
thus impulsively engaged, small comment need be made, since its
failure so soon was to become apparent to the popular mind.  The
Countess St. Auban was not the first to look to colonization and
deportation as the solution of the negro problem in America.  But
as the Colonization Society for more than a decade had failed to
accomplish results, so did she in her turn fail.  In a work which
continued through all that spring and summer, she drew again and
again upon her own private fortune.  Carlisle and Kammerer had
charge of the details, but she herself was the driving force of the
enterprise.  While they were abroad lecturing and asking
contributions to their cause--taking with them the slave girl Lily
as an example of what slavery had done--she remained at Washington.
They actually did arrange for the deportation of a ship-load of
blacks to Hayti, another ship-load to Liberia.  A colony of blacks
whose freedom had been purchased was established in Tennessee,
others were planned for yet other localities.  It was part of her
intent to establish nuclei of freed blacks in different portions of
the southern section.

In all this work Lily, late servant of Josephine St. Auban, assumed
a certain prominence, this being given to her not wholly with
wisdom.  Although but little negro blood remained in her veins,
this former slave had not risen above the life that had surrounded
her.  Ignorant, emotional, at times working herself into a frenzy
of religious zeal, she was farthest of all from being a sober judge
or a fair-minded agent for the views of others.  Yet in time her
two guardians, Carlisle and Kammerer, unwisely allowed her more and
more liberty.  She was even, in times of great hurry, furnished
funds to go upon trips of investigation for herself, as one best
fitted to judge of the conditions of her people.  As to these
details, Josephine St. Auban knew little.  There was enough to
occupy her mind at the center of these affairs, where labors grew
rapidly and quite beyond her original plan.

As is always the case in such hopeless enterprises, the expenses
multiplied beyond belief.  True, contributions came meagerly from
the North, here and there some abolitionist appearing who would do
something besides write and preach.  In all, more than a half
million dollars was spent before the end of the year 1851.  Then,
swiftly and without warning, there came the end.

One morning, almost a year after her return to Washington,
Josephine St. Auban sat in her apartments, looking at a long
document inscribed in a fine, foreign hand.  It was the report of
the agent of her estates in Prance and Hungary.  As she read it the
lines blurred before her eyes.  It demanded an effort even of her
superb courage fairly to face and meet the meaning.  In fact, it
was this: The revolution of Louis Napoleon of 1851 had resulted in
the confiscation of many estates in France, all her own included.
As though by concert among the monarchies of Europe, the heavy hand
of confiscation fell, in this nation and in that.  The thrones of
the Old World are not supported by revolutionists; nor are
revolutionists supported by the occupants of thrones.  Her
Hungarian lands had followed those which she had owned in France.
The rents of her estates no longer could be collected.  Her
revenues were absolutely gone.  Moreover, she herself was an exile.

[Illustration: She herself was an exile.]

Thus, then, had her high-blown hopes come to an end.  It was proof
of the splendid courage of the woman that she shed not a tear.  Not
a lash trembled as presently she turned to despatch a message for
her lieutenant, Carlisle, to come to her.  The latter was absent at
some western point, but within two days he appeared in Washington
and presently made his call, as yet ignorant of what were his
employer's wishes.

He himself began eagerly, the fanatic fire still in his eye, on
details of the work so near to his soul.  "My dear Countess," he
exclaimed, even as he grasped her hands, "we're doing splendidly.
We'll have the whole Mississippi Valley in an uproar before long.
All the lower Ohio is unsettled.  Missouri, Illinois, Indiana are
muttering as loudly as New England.  I hear that Lily has led away
a whole neighborhood over in Missouri.  A few months more like
this, and we'll have this whole country in a turmoil.  It's bound
to win--the country's bound to come to its senses--if we keep on."

"But we can not keep on, my dear Sir," she said to him slowly.
"That is why I have sent for you."

"How do you mean?  What's wrong?  Can not keep on--end our work?
You're jesting!"

"No, it is the truth.  Kossuth is in Turkey.  Shall I join him
there?  Where shall I go?  I'm an exile from France.  I dare not
return to Hungary."

"You--I'll--I'll not believe it!  What do you mean?"

"I am ruined financially, that's all.  My funds are at an end.  My
estates are gone!  My agent tells me he can send me no more money.
How much do you think," she said, with a little _moue_, "we can do
in the way of deporting blacks out of my earnings--well, say as
teacher of music, or of French?"

"I'll not believe it--you--why, you've been used to riches,
luxuries, all your life!  And I--why, I've helped impoverish you!
I've been spending your money.  A ship-load of blacks, against you?
My God!  I'd have cut my hand off rather."

She showed him the correspondence, proof of all that she had said,
and he read with a face haggard in unhappiness.'

"There' There!" she said.  "You've not heard me make any outcry
yet, have you?  Why should you, then?  I have seen men lay down
their lives for a principle, a belief.  You will see that again.
Should not a woman lay down her money?

"But as to that," she went on lightly, "why, there are many things
one might do.  I might make a rich alliance, don't you think?"

He suddenly stiffened and straightened, and looked her full in the
eye, a slow flush coming across his face.

"I couldn't have said it any time before this," said he.  "It has
been in my heart all along, but I didn't dare--not then.  Yes, a
rich alliance if you liked, I do not doubt.  There's a poor one
waiting for you, any time you like.  You know that.  You must have
seen it, a thousand times--"

She advanced to him easily and held out both her hands.  "Now,
now!" she said.  "Don't begin that.  You'll only hurt us both.  My
lieutenant, visionary as myself!  Ah, we've failed."

"But everybody will blame you--you will have no place to go--it
will be horrible--you don't begin to know what it means.  Of
course, we have made mistakes."

"Then let's not make the worst mistake of all," she said.

"But we could do so much--"

She turned upon him suddenly, pale, excited.  "Do not!" she cried.
"Do not use those words!  It seems to me that that is what all men
think and say.  'How much we could do--together!'  Do not say that
to me."

At this he sobered.  "Then there is some one else?" he said slowly.
"You've heard some one else use those words?  I couldn't blame him.
Well, I wish him happiness.  And I wish you happiness, too.  I had
no right to presume."

"Happiness!--what is that?" she said slowly.  "I've been trying to
find it all my life.  My God!  How crooked were all the mismated
planets at my birth!  I haven't been happy myself.  I do not think
that I've added one iota to the happiness of any one else, I've
just failed, that's all.  And I've tried so hard--to do something,
something for the world!  Oh, can a woman--can she, ever?"  For
once shaken, she dropped her face an instant in her hands, he
standing by, mute, and suffering much as herself at seeing her thus
suffer.

"But now," she continued after a time, "--I want to ask you whether
I've been ungenerous or vindictive with you--"

"Vindictive?  You?  Never! But why should you be?"

"Captain," she said easily, "my lieutenant, my friend, let me
say--I will not be specific--I will not mention names or dates; but
do you think, if you were a woman, you could ever marry a man who
once, behind your back, with not even eagerness to incite him, but
coolly, deliberately--had played a game of cards for--you?"

He stiffened as though shot.  "I know.  But you misunderstand.  I
did not play for you.  I played to relieve a situation--because I
thought you wished--because it seemed the solution of a situation
hard for both of us.  I thought--"

"Solution!"  She blazed up now, tigerlike, and her words came
through set lips.  "I'd never have told you I knew, if you hadn't
said what you have.  But--a solution--a plan--a compromise!  You
ought to have played for me!  You ought to have played for me; and
you ought to have won--have won!"

[Illustration: You ought to have played for me!]

He stood before a woman new to him, one so different from the
grateful and gracious enthusiast he had met all these months that
he could not comprehend the change, could not at once adjust his
confused senses.  So miserable was he that suddenly, with one of
her swift changes, she smiled at him, even through her sudden
tears.  "No! No!" she exclaimed.  "See!  Look here!"

She handed him a little sheet of crumpled note paper, inscribed in
a cramped hand, showed him the inscription--"Jeanne Fournier."

"You don't know who that is?" she asked him.

"No, I don't know."

"Why, yes, you do.  My maid--my French maid--don't you remember?
She married Hector, the cooper, at St. Genevieve.  Now, see, Jeanne
is writing to me again.  Don't you see, there's a baby, and it is
named for me--who has none.  Good-by, that money!"--she kissed hand
to the air--"Good-by, that idea, that dream of mine!  That's of no
consequence.  In fact, nothing is of consequence.  See, this is the
baby of Jeanne!  She has asked me to come.  Why, then, should I
delay?"

Whether it were tears or smiles which he saw upon her face Carlisle
never could determine.  Whether it were physical unrest or mental
emotion, he did not know, but certainly it was that the letter of
the agent remained upon the table untouched between them while
Josephine St. Auban pressed to her lips the letter from Jeanne, her
maid.

"Why, I have not failed at all!" said she.  "Have I not cared for
and brought up this Jeanne, and is there not a baby of Jeanne, a
baby whom she has named for me?"

Carlisle, mute and unnoticed, indeed, as he felt almost forgotten,
was relieved when there came a knock at the door.  A messenger
bearing a card entered.  She turned toward him gravely, and he
could only read dismissal now.  Mute and unhappy, he hurried from
the room.  He did not, however, pass from the stage of activity he
had chosen.  He later fought for his convictions, and saw
accomplished, before, with so many other brave men, he fell upon
the field of battle--accomplished at vast cost of blood and
tears--that work which he had been inspired to undertake in a more
futile form.

"You may say to this gentleman that I shall join him presently, in
the parlor at the right of the stair," said Josephine St. Auban
after a moment to the messenger.


CHAPTER XXVIII

IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT

As she entered the room, there rose to meet her a tall gentleman,
who stood gravely regarding her.  At sight of him she paused,
embarrassed.  No figure was more familiar in Washington, yet none
was less to be expected here.  There was no mistaking the large
frame, the high brow, the dark and piercing eye, the costume--that
of another day.  Involuntarily, although her first impression
(based upon other meetings with distinguished men) was one more of
apprehension than of pleasure, she swept him a deep curtsy.  With
the grace of a courtier he extended a hand and led her to a chair.

"You know me, Madam?" he demanded, in a deep and bell-like voice.
"I know you, as well.  I am delighted, I am honored, to announce
that I come to you as a messenger."

"It is an honor that you come in any capacity, Sir.  To what may I
attribute so kind a visit, to one so unimportant?"

"No, no, my dear Countess.  We rate you very high.  It is the wish
of a certain gentleman to have you attend a little meeting which
will not welcome many out of all this city.  It is informal and
unofficial, my dear lady, but all those who will be there will be
glad to have your attendance.  It was thought well for me to drop
in to interrogate your pleasure in the matter."

"It is a command, Sir!  Very well, at what time, then?"

"If it should please you, it would delight me to accompany you at
once, my dear lady!  My carriage is waiting now."

Josephine St. Auban did not lack decision upon her own part.
Something told her that no danger this time lurked for her.

"Pardon me for just one moment then, Sir," she answered.  A few
moments later she returned, better prepared for the occasion with
just a touch to her toilet; and with a paper or two which with some
instinct she hastily snatched up from her desk.  These latter she
hurriedly crowded into her little reticule.  They took the carriage
and soon were passing through the streets toward the most public
portion of the city of Washington.

They entered wide grounds, and drew up before a stately building
which lay well back from the street.  Entering, they passed through
a narrow hall, thence into a greater room, fitted with wide panels
decorated with many portraits of men great in the history of this
country.  There was a long table in this room, and about it--some
of them not wholly visible in the rather dim light--there were
several gentlemen.  As her tall escort entered with a word of
announcement, all of these rose, grave and silent, and courteously
bowed to her.  There approached from the head of the room a tall,
handsome and urbane gentleman, who came and took her hand.  He,
some of these others, she could not fail to know.  She had come
hither without query or comment, and she stood silent and waiting
now, but her heart was racing, her color faintly rising in spite of
all her efforts to be calm.

[Illustration: They entered wide grounds.]

"My dear lady," he began, in a voice whose low, modulated tones
scarce could fail to please any ear, "I thank you for your presence
here.  Will you not be seated?  It is a very great honor that you
give us, and all of these gentlemen appreciate it."

Josephine St. Auban curtsied and, remaining silent and wondering,
assumed the seat assigned her, at the right hand of the tall and
grave gentleman who had escorted her hither, and who now
courteously handed her to her place.

"We meet absolutely without formality, my dear Madam," went on the
tall and kindly man who had greeted her.  "What goes on here is
entirely unofficial and, as I need not say, it is altogether
private; as you will remember."

"You will perhaps pardon my diffidence at such a time and place,
Sir," she began, at last.  "It is difficult for me to understand
what small merit, or large error, of mine should bring me here."

"Madam, we wish that your abilities were smaller," smiled the tall
gentleman.  "That is the very thing of which we wish to speak.  It is
your activities which have seemed to us matters of concern--indeed,
of kindly inquiry, if you do not mind.  These gentlemen, I think, I
do not need to introduce.  We are all of us interested in the peace
and dignity of this country."

"Have I done anything against either?" asked she.

"Ah, you have courage to be direct!  In answer, I must say that we
would like to ask regarding a few things which seem to be within
your own knowledge.  You, of course, are not unaware of the popular
discontent which exists on this or the other side of the great
political question in America to-day.  We are advised that you
yourself have been a traveler in our western districts; and it
seemed to us likely that you might be possessed of information
regarding matters there of which we get only more interested, more
purely partisan, reports."

"That is not impossible," was her guarded reply.  "It is true, I
have talked with some in that part of the country."

"You were witness of the anxiety of our attempt to keep war and the
talk of it far in the background,--our desire to preserve the
present state of peace."

"Assuredly.  But, Sirs, you will forgive me,--I do not believe
peace will last.  I thought so, until this very day.  In my belief,
now, there will be war.  It can not be averted."

"We are glad to hear the belief of all, on all sides," was the
courteous rejoinder.  "We ourselves hope the compromise to be more
nearly final.  Perhaps you as well as others hold to the so-called
doctrine of the 'higher law'?  Perhaps you found your politics in
Rousseau's _Nouvelle Heloise_, rather than in the more sober words
of our own Constitution?"  His eyes were quizzical, yet not unkind.

"Certain doctrines seem to endure," was her stout answer, kindling.
"I am but a woman, yet I take it that anything that I can say will
have no value unless it shall be sincere.  To me, this calm is
something which can not endure."

"There at least do not lack others who are of that belief.  But
why?"

"They told me in the West that the South has over three million
slaves.  They told me that the labor of more than seven million
persons, black and white, is controlled by less than a third of a
million men; and of all that third of a million, less than eight
thousand practically represent the owners of these blacks, who do
not vote.  Gentlemen, I have been interested in the cause of
democracy in Europe--I do not deny it--yet it seems to me an
oligarchy and not a democracy which exists in the American South.
The conflict between an oligarchy and a natural democracy is ages
old.  It does not die.  It seems to me that there is the end of all
compromise--in the renewed struggle of men, all over the world, to
set up an actual government of their own,--not an oligarchy, not a
monarchy, not of property and wealth, but of actual democracy.  It
must come, here, some day."

"It is unusual, my dear lady, to find one of your sex disposed to
philosophy so deep and clear as your own.  You please us.  Will you
go on?"

"Sir, your courtesy gives me additional courage,".  was her answer.
"You have asked me for my beliefs--and I do not deny that I have
some of my own, some I have sought to put in practice.  To me,
another phase of this question lies in something which the South
itself seems not to have remembered.  The South figures that the
cost of a laboring man, a slave, is perhaps a thousand or fifteen
hundred dollars.  The South pays the cost of rearing that man.  Any
nation pays the cost of bringing up a human being.  Yet, within
this very year, Europe has sent into the North and into the West a
third of a million of men _already_ reared, already _paid_ for.
Sir, you ask me what will be the result of this discontent, the
result of this compromise.  It seems to me plainly written in those
two facts--industrial, not political facts.  The 'finality' of this
compromise, its final issue, will be established by conditions with
which laws or their enforcement have little to do.  Yet statesmen
try to solve such a question by politics.  I myself at one time
thought it could endure--but only if all the blacks were bought,
paid for and deported, to make room for those who come at no cost
to us.  I thought for a time it could be done.  I have tried to do
it.  I have failed.  I do not think others will follow in my
attempt."

"We have not undervalued, Madam, either the brilliance or the
profundity of your own active intellect!  What you say is of
interest.  We already have followed with profound interest your
efforts.  Your words here justify our concern in meeting you.  This
is perhaps the first time in our history when a woman has been
asked to meet those most concerned in even so informal an
assemblage as this, at precisely this place."

There were gravity and dignity in his words.  The majesty of a
government, the dignity of even the simplest and most democratic
form of government, the unified needs, the concentrated wish of
many millions expressed in the persons of a few,--these are the
things which can not fail to impress even the most ignorant and
insensitive as deeply as the most extravagant pageantry of the
proudest monarchy.  They did not fail to impress Josephine St.
Auban, brilliant and audacious thinker though she was, and used to
the pomp of Old World courts.  At once she felt almost a sense of
fright, of terror.  The silence of these other gentlemen, so able
to hold their peace, came to her mind with the impress of some
mighty power.  She half shrank back into her chair.

"Madam, you have no need of fear," broke in the deep voice of the
gentleman who had escorted her thither, and who now observed her
perturbation.  "We shall not harm you--I think not even criticize
you seriously.  Our wish is wholly for your own good."

"Assuredly," resumed the first speaker.  "That is the wish of all
my friends here.  But let us come now to the point.  Madam, to be
frank with you, you have, as we just have said, been much concerned
of late with attempts at the colonization and deportation of
negroes from this country.  You at least have not hesitated to
undertake a work which has daunted the imagination of our ablest
minds.  Precisely such was once my own plan.  My counselors
dissuaded me.  I lacked your courage."

"There seemed no other way," she broke in hurriedly, her
convictions conquering her timidity.  "I wanted so much to do
something--not alone for these blacks--but something for the good
of America, the good of the world.  And I failed, to-day."

"The work of the Colonization Society has gone on for many years,"
gently insisted the first speaker, raising a hand, "and made it no
serious complications.  Your own work has been much bolder, and, to
be frank, there _have_ been complications.  Oh, we do not criticize
you.  On the contrary, we have asked your presence here that we
might understandingly converse on these things to which you have
given so much attention."

"If I have erred," she ventured, "it has been done within the
limitations of human wisdom; yet my convictions were absolutely
sincere--at least I may assure you of so much.  I have not wished
to break any law, to violate convictions on either side.  I only
wanted to do some good in the world."

"We are quite sure, my dear lady, that the sentiments of your mind
are precisely those of our own.  But perhaps you may be less aware
than ourselves of complications which may rise.  Our friend who
sits by you has found occasion to write again in unmeasured terms
to the representatives of Austria.  We are advised of your
affiliations with the Hungarian movement--in short, we are perhaps
better advised of your movements than you yourself are aware.  We
know of these blacks which have been purchased and deported by your
agents, but we also know that large numbers of slaves have been
enticed away from their owners, that whole plantations have been
robbed of their labor, and this under the protection--indeed, under
the very _name_--of this attempt which you have set on foot.  Has
this been done by your knowledge, Madam?  I anticipate your answer.
I am sure that it has not."

"No! No!" she rejoined.  "Assuredly, no!  That is a matter entirely
without my knowledge.  You shock me unspeakably by this news.  I
have not heard of it.  I should be loath to believe it!  I have
spent my own funds in this matter, and I have told my own agents to
do nothing in the slightest contravention of the laws."

"None the less, these things have been done, my dear lady.  They
have awakened the greatest feeling in the South--a feeling of
animosity which extends even to the free colonies of blacks which
have been established.  The relations between the two great
sections of this country are already strained sufficiently.  We
deprecate, indeed we fear, anything which may cause a conflict, an
outbreak of sectional feeling."

"Gentlemen, you must believe me," she replied, firmly and with
dignity, "I have been as ignorant as I am innocent of any such
deeds on the part of my agents.  While I do not agree that any
human being can be the property of another, I will waive that
point; and I have given no aid to any undertaking which
contemplated taking from any man what he _himself_ considered to be
his property, and what the laws of the land accorded him as his
property.  My undertaking was simply intended as a solution of
_all_ those difficulties--for both sides, and justly--"

"Madam, I rejoice to hear those words,--rejoice beyond measure!
They accord entirely with the opinion we have formed of you."

"Then you have watched me!--I have been--"

"This is a simple and democratic country, Madam," was the quiet
answer, although perhaps there might have been the trace of a smile
on the close-set mouth of the speaker.  "We do not spy on any one.
Your acts have been quite within public knowledge.  You yourself
have not sought to leave them secret.  Should these facts surprise
you?"

"They almost terrify me.  What have I done!"

"There is no need of apprehension on your part.  Let us assure you
of that at once.  We are glad that you, whom we recognize as the
moving spirit in this deportation enterprise, have not sanctioned
certain of the acts of your agents.  There was one--a former army
officer--with whom there labored a revolutionist, a German,
recently from Europe.  Is it not so?"

"It is true," she assented.  "They were my chief agents.  But as
for that officer, this country has none more eager to offer his
sword to the flag when the time shall come.  I am sure it is but
his zeal which has caused offense.  I would plead for his
reinstatement.  He may have been indiscreet."

"We shall listen to what you say.  But in addition to these, there
was a former slave girl, who has been somewhat prominent in
meetings which these two have carried on in different parts of the
country.  In the words of the southern press, this girl has been
used as a decoy."

"Lily!" exclaimed Josephine.  "It must have been she!  Yes, I had
such a person in my employ--in very humble capacity.  But, Sir, I
assure you I have not seen her for more than two months.  I had
supposed her busy with these others on the lecture platform."

"She is not now so engaged," interrupted a voice from the shadows
on the other side of the table.

"Then she has been arrested?" demanded Josephine.

"That is not the term; yet it is true that she sailed on one of
your own colonization ships last week.  Her fortune will lie
elsewhere hereafter.  It was her own wish."

Not long after he received that order he went into Opposition,
and left off his riband and star for one day, but thought better
of it, and put them on the next. He was created Lord Fortescue and
Earl of Clinton in 1746, and died in 1751.)
(917) Mr.

Bulkeley, an Irish Roman Catholic, married the widow Cantillon, mother
of the Countess of Stafford. He rose high in the French army, and
had the cordon bleu: his sister was second wife of the first Duke
of Berwick.

(918)Afterwards Duke of Rohan Chabot.My own work is at an end,
already!  This very morning it came to an end, and for ever.  Will
you not look at these?"

[Illustration: "My own work is at an end."]

"How do you mean, Madam?"  The tall grave man near by turned upon
her his beetling brows, his piercing dark eyes.  "Your work was
worthy of approval in many ways.  What has happened that it should
cease?"

"This!" she said, handing to him the papers which she held.  "I
have a report to-day from my agents in Europe.  Gentlemen, since I
must mention these things,--I have been possessor of a fortune in
my own name which might have been called considerable.  I had
estates in France and in Austria.  This advises me that my estates
have been confiscated by the governments in both countries--they
got word there, in some way--"

"It was Hulsemann!" ejaculated the dark man, as to himself.
"Austria's man here!"

She went on: "If I am not welcome in this country, whither shall I
go?  I am an exile as I stand before you.  I am a widow.  I have no
living kin.  Moreover, I am an exile, impoverished, as I stand.  My
fortune has been dissipated--honestly so, gentlemen; but since it
is gone, my powers are at an end.  If I have displeased you, I
shall do so no longer.  Here are my proofs."

She placed her papers in the hand of her escort, the nearest of
these grave and silent men.  A nod from the leader at the head of
the table caused this tall and dark gentleman to rise and seek a
place closer to the window in order that he might find better light
for reading.  His glasses upon his nose, he scanned the papers
gravely.  A sudden smile broke out upon his face, so that he passed
a hand across his face to force it back into its usual lines of
gravity.

"Gentlemen," said he, at length, solemnly, "this lady has been kind
to come to meet us, and you all are witness that her dealings have
been perfectly frank and sincere.  I confess, however, I am
somewhat puzzled over this document which she has given me.  I
presume we may well mark it 'Exhibit A.'  If you do not mind, I
will read it to you."

Slowly, deliberately, employing all the tones of his deep and
sonorous voice, which before then had thrilled audiences of
thousands in every portion of his country, he read; his face
studiously turned away that he might not see the dismayed gestures
of the woman who had handed him these papers:

  "MY DEAR MADAME:

  "I take in hand my pen to tell you how life goes
  with us in this locality.  The business of Hector is
  improved one half this year.  We have green blinds
  on all sides of the house, and a vine that grows also.
  The mother of Hector is kind to me.  We have
  abundance and peace at this place.  But, Madame,
  that which it is which I write you, there is come but
  now the baby of Hector and myself Jeanne.  In all
  this locality there is no baby like this.  Madame, we
  have said to name it for yourself, Josephine St. Auban
  Jeanne Marie Fournier.  Moreover, Madame, it is
  advise that for a baby so remarkable a godmother is
  necessary.  I take my pen in hand to inquire of
  madame whether in the kindness of her heart madame
  could come to see us and be present at this christening
  of this child most extraordinary.  I have the assurance
  also of Hector that the remarkable qualities of this
  baby will warrant the presence of madame.  A reply
  _poste restante_, address on St. Genevieve in Missouri,
  will arrive to your faithful and obedient servant,

    "JEANNE."

Before this singular document had been half concluded there were
sounds of shifting chairs, bursts of stifled laughter.  The tall
grave man nevertheless went on, solemnly finishing this
communication.  As for Josephine, she had shrunk back in her chair,
knowing not which way to turn.

"Sirs," concluded the gentleman who now occupied the floor, "while
I do not find full confirmation herein of all the statements this
lady has made to us, I do discover this document to be not without
interest.  At its close, I find in a different handwriting--Madam,
may I guess it to be your own?--the addendum--let me see,--Ah, yes,
it says merely two words: '_The darling_!'"

He approached, and laid just the lightest, gentlest hand upon the
shoulder of the disturbed woman, who sat speechless, her face
suffused.  "Your documents are regular, Madam," he said kindly.
"As for this other, which perhaps was the one you intended me to
read, that is private matter.  It is not necessary even for myself
to read it.  There will be no further exhibits in this case.  I am
sure that I voice the feeling of every gentleman present here
however, Madam, if I say that although we have not curiosity as to
the terms of this communication, we have deep regret over its
advices to you.  If your fortunes have been ruined, they have been
ruined in a cause in which a kind heart and an active brain were
deeply enlisted.  You have our regrets."

"Sir!"  He turned now toward the tall gentleman who sat silent at
the head of the table.  "I am sure there is no further need for
this lady's attendance here.  For my own part, I thank her.  She
has offered us no remedy, I fear.  In turn, there seems none we can
extend to her."

"Wait a moment!" interrupted a voice from the opposite side of the
table.

The leader shifted in his seat as he turned toward Josephine St.
Auban.  "This is the gentleman from Kentucky," he said.  "We
usually find his words of interest.  Tarry, then, for just a moment
longer."

A tall figure was visible in the half light, as the clear voice of
the gentleman so described went on.

"Sir, and gentlemen, there is no Kentuckian,--no, nor any man from
any other state here present--who could suffer this matter to
conclude just as it is now.  This is not all.  This matter but
begins.  We have invited to attend us a lady whose activities we
considered dangerous,--that is the plain truth of it, and we all
know it, and she may know it.  Instead of that, we find here with
us now a woman in distress.  Which of us would have the courage to
endure with equal equanimity that which she faces now?  It has
already been said here that we have been not unmindful of the plans
of this lady, not wholly unacquainted with her history.  We know
that although a revolutionist at heart, an alien on our shores, her
purposes have been clean, have been noble.  Would to God we had
more such in our own country!  But now, in a plan which has proved
wholly futile before her time, which would prove futile after it,
even though backed by the wealth of a nation,--she has failed, not
to our ruin, but to her own.

"It is not without my knowledge that this lady at one time,
according to popular report, was asked to undertake a journey which
later resulted, in considerable personal inconvenience, not to say
indignity, to herself.  Is there no way, gentlemen, in which,
especially in consideration of her present material circumstances,
this government--I mean to say this country--can make some amends
for that?"

"Madam," began the leader at the head of the table, "I did not
predict wrongly regarding our friend from Kentucky; but in reply to
him, I myself must say, as I have already said, we are but a simple
republic,--all our acts must be open and known.  What special fund,
my dear sir,"--this to the speaker, who still retained his
position,--"in what manner, indeed, could this be arranged?"

"In the easiest way in the world," rejoined the Kentuckian.  "This
lady, whatever be her nationality, is at heart much identified with
the cause of Hungary, which she has been so good as to confuse with
our own cause here in America.  Her idea is to advance democracy--and
to advance pure nationalism.  Very well.  We have already invited
Louis Kossuth to come to America as the guest of this country.  Even
now one of the vessels of our navy is approaching his port of exile
in Turkey to carry him hither.  In the entertainment of Louis Kossuth
large sums of money will be--and it is proper that they should
be--expended.  The people demand it. The dignity of this nation must
be maintained.  Popular approval will meet the proper expenditures
for any such entertainment.

"Now then, gentlemen,"--and he raised an argumentative
forefinger,--"there must be committees of entertainment; there must
be those able to interpret, those competent to arrange large plans,
and to do so courteously, with dignity."  He bowed toward the
somewhat dejected figure of the only woman present, who scarce
ventured to raise her eyes to his, startled as she was by the
sudden turn of events,

"Now, Sir, we all understand this is wholly unofficial and
informal; we understand that there is no special fund which could
be devoted to any such purpose as I have suggested--unless it were
precisely this fund for the Kossuth entertainment!  Gentlemen, it
is not the part of a host to set a limit upon the visit of a guest.
It is my belief that Kossuth will remain on these shores for at
least _ten years_, and that he will need entertainment for each of
those ten years at least!"  A gentle applause met this speech.  The
speaker himself smiled as he went on.

"For a competent committee head, charged with the duty of making
that entertainment gracious and dignified and worthy alike of the
Old World and the New, I should think that an annual expenditure
of, say, eight thousand or ten thousand dollars, would not be
inadequate!  If this lady, whose kind heart and brilliant mind, as
our honored friend has said, both have been shown before us
to-day,--if she would agree,--if she would _accept_,--some such
provision as this from this fund, I am entirely clear in my own
mind as to both the wisdom and the absolute propriety of extending
this offer to her!"

He sat down.  Laughter and applause met his remarks.  Thus, and
gallantly, did Kentucky make amends.

"Madam," at length interrogated the tall man at the head of the
table, bending upon her his gaze, as did all these other grave
figures present,--"provided this matter might be arranged, would it
be within your pleasure to accept some such remuneration as that,
for services which should be given quite within your wishes?  I
need not say," he added, turning his gaze along each side of the
long table, "that this is something which, _in view of all
circumstances_, to me also seems quite within dignity, decency and
absolute public propriety."

But Josephine St. Auban could make no reply.  Her face was hidden
in her hands, and only her heaving shoulders showed the sudden
emotion which had swept upon her overstrained soul.  At last she
felt a gentle hand touch hers.  She raised her head as, one after
another, these men approached, each extending his hand to her and
bowing in salutation.  Presently the room was deserted.

In the hall the gentleman from Kentucky passed his arm within that
of a tall man, obviously from the North.

"I have just got word within the week of the arrival of a daughter
at my own home out in Kentucky," said he.  "I am in a position to
understand all and several the statements in Exhibit A, my dear
Sir!  'The darling!'

"But what a woman,--what a woman!" he went on meditatively.  "Sir,
if I were a single man, as I am a married man, I should offer to
her, upon the spot, a union, now and for ever, one and inseparable!"


CHAPTER XXIX

IN OLD ST. GENEVIEVE

It was the daily custom of Hector to be upon hand at the dock for
the landing of each and every steamer which touched at St.
Genevieve, bound either up or down the Mississippi, and his
business of cooperage never was allowed to infringe upon these more
important duties.  Accordingly, on a certain day late in the
winter, although he had no special reason to be present, Hector was
among those who waited for the boat to land, with no purpose more
definite than that of giving a hand with her line at a snubbing
post.  He was much surprised when he saw coming from the
gang-plank, and beckoning to him, a distinguished and handsomely
clad lady.  For an instant, abashed, he could find no speech; then
suddenly he jerked off his cap, and stood smiling.

"It is Madame!" he exclaimed.  "_Ah, bon jour!  Bon jour!  Ah,
c'est Madame_!"

"Yes," rejoined Josephine St. Auban, "it is I.  And I am glad to
see St. Genevieve again, and you, Monsieur Hector.  Tell me,--ah,
about that infant, that baby of ours!!

"Madame, believe me, there is none such in all the valley!  Come!"

It was a proud and happy Jeanne who greeted her former mistress at
the little cottage with the green blinds, and the ivy, which lay
close upon the street of St. Genevieve,--Jeanne, perhaps a trifle
more fleshy, a shade more French and a touch less Parisian in look,
more mature and maternal, yet after all, Jeanne, her former maid.
Woman fashion, these two now met, not without feminine tears, and
forgetful of late difference in station, although Jeanne dutifully
kissed the hand held out to her.  The first coherent speech, as in
the case of Hector, was regarding this most extraordinary infant,
whose arrival seemed to be thus far regarded as a matter of
national importance.  He looked like an alligator," said the Admiral,
who did not mince his words. It is strange that men should prefer
to put their kin in what, in the naval records after Trafalgar,
is called "a pickle" rather than give them a burial at sea or in
"some corner of a foreign field"!

But on such matters there can be no argument.

It is a matter of feeling, not of reasoning.

So much for unwritten chapters and unwritten books, though,
perhaps, I ought to add a postscript upon the writing of memoirs,
describing how pleasant, though arduous a task it is. At any rate,
it has proved so in my case. I began these memoirs with the feeling
that, though it was quite worth while to record my part in the general
adventure of living, I must expect that, even if I were to
contrive to give pleasure to my readers, the part of the
writer must be hard, laborious, and ungrateful.
"Why," I asked myself, "should I munch for others the remainder
biscuit of life?" Yet, strange to say, what I had looked forward
to almost with dread, turned out to be by far the pleasantest
literary experience of my life.

I have never been one of those people who dislike writing, or find
it, as some people do, agonising; but I was not in the least
prepared to find how pleasant it could be to dive into the depths
of memory and let, what the author of the anonymous Elizabethan
play, _Nero_, calls "the grim churl" of memory lead you through the
labyrinth of the past.

But, though the path was pleasant, nay, exhilarating and stimulating,
I must confess to the fact that I have had no psychological experiences,
regrets, or disillusionments. I have had no temptation to write as
to the shortness and precariousness of human existence, or to
reflect how base I had found mankind, or, again, to deplore the past,
curse the present, and dread the future. Life to me, in looking
back, seems on the whole a very natural and simple show. No one,
in one sense, feels more strongly than I do that we are being
swept along by the mighty current of a vast river, without any
clearer indication of what is the outlet of the river than of what
is its source.

But though these things may be an excuse for a great deal of
rhetoric, they somehow seem to me, if I may use the word again,
natural and non-inflammatory. It is far easier to trust what those
who, liking the vagueness of theology, call "the larger hope,"
but which I should be content to call plainly the mercy of God--a
mercy which I, for one, make bold to say I would rather have
uncovenanted than covenanted.

Covenanted mercies are a kind of thing which may do very well at
an insurance office or for business purposes, but they are not the
mercies one would ever dream of asking for or accepting from an
earthly father. Then how can one dare to speak of them in the same
breath with God?

"But this," I hear some readers say, "is the illusion of faith and
has nothing of the permanence of fact." Well, I, for one, am content
to rest on faith, honest and instinctive. Faith, to my mind, is a
fact and a very palpable fact,--a fact as vital as any of the
other great incommensurables and insolubles of our existence.

If I am asked to treat of the river, or rather, the ocean of
life and the adventure of its voyage in terms that will satisfy
those not fortunate enough to have faith, let me commend to them
that memorable dream set forth by that most honest and exact of
agnostics as of jurists, Mr. Justice Stephen. The dream, published
some fifty years ago, is as noble a piece of literature as it is
a monument of intellectual insight.

I dreamt [he says, after Bunyan's fashion] that I was in the cabin
of a ship, handsomely furnished and lighted. A number of people
were expounding the objects of the voyage and the principles of
navigation.
They were contradicting each other eagerly, but each maintained that
the success of the voyage depended absolutely upon the adoption of
his own plan.

The charts to which they appealed were in many places confused
and contradictory. They said that they were proclaiming the best of
news, but the substance of it was that when we reached port
most of us would be thrown into a dungeon and put to death
by lingering torments.

Some, indeed, would receive different treatment; but they could
not say why, though all agreed in extolling the wisdom and
mercy of the Sovereign of the country.

Saddened and confused I escaped to the deck, and found myself
somehow enrolled in the crew.

The prospect was unlike the accounts given in the cabin."Of the Congress of this state, where he is so long a member, he is
now not a member.  He has fail', he has been defeat'."

"I thought he was sure of reelection so long as he chose,"
commented Josephine, with feigned indifference.

"There is talk--I do not understand these matters--that he has
change' his coat, as one says, and gone over to the side of that
man Benton.  Yet one says that Benton was always his enemy!  Me, I
do not understand.  I have the baby."

"What is that you tell me?" suddenly demanded Josephine.  "That Mr.
Dunwody has _changed_ his political beliefs--that he has become
Free Soiler?"

Jeanne nodded.  "I think it is so name'.  I know little of such
matters, naturally.  To me, my infant here is of much more
importance than any question of free soil.  It is possible in this
country that one day this infant--were it of opposite sex--might
arrive to be governor of this state--who knows?  It is possible, in
the belief of Hector, that this infant, were it a boy, might even
become president of this great republic.  Ah, well, there are
hopes.  Who shall set bounds to the achievement of a child well
born in this country of America?  Is it established that Hector and
I may not, at a later time, be blessed with a son?  Is it
established that that son shall not be president?  Is it not
necessary that _some_ boy shall grow up to be a president?  Very
well!  Then who shall say that a child of ours, if of a proper sex,
Madame, should not one day be president of this republic?"

"Yes, yes, Jeanne!  I do not doubt that.  But now you were speaking
of Mr. Dunwody--"

"Yes, that is true.  I was rejoicing that at last he has been
defeat', that he has fail', that he has met with that fate which
should be his.  Now he has few friends.  It is charge' against
him--well, Madame, perhaps it were as well not to repeat all of
that."

"I can understand," said Josephine slowly.  "I can guess.  Yes, I
know."

Jeanne nodded.  "Yes, they bring up stories that at one time you
and I--well, that we were there at Tallwoods.  But these wild
people here, who shoot, and fight with knives, they are of all
peoples in the world the most strict and the most moral, the most
abhorrent of what is not their own custom of life.  Behold, that
droll Mr. Bill Jones, in jest perhaps, expressed to others his
belief that at one time there was a woman conceal' about this place
of Tallwoods!  Yes!  Madame knows with what ground of justice this
was said.  Very well!  The people took it up.  There was comment.
There was criticism.  These charges became public.  It was rumored
thus and so in all the district of Mr. Dunwodee.  He has fought the
duel--oh, la, la!

"Ah, well, as for madame, by this time she was far away.  None knew
her name.  None doubted regarding her.  But as for Mr. Dunwodee, he
was here,--he was discover'!  Behold it all!  At the election he
was defeat'.  Most easily did this happen, because, as I have said,
he no longer was of the same political party which formerly had
chosen him.  There you have him.  That has come to him which he has
deserve'!"

The eyes of Josephine St. Auban flashed with interest over this
intelligence.  "He has changed his belief, his party!  But no, it
is not possible that he should come out for _our_ party, _our_
cause, Jeanne,--_our_ cause, for the people of the world--for
liberty!  I wish I might believe it.  No.  It can not be true."

"Yet it is true, Madame.  A turncoat!  Bah!"

"No, Jeanne!  Not in the least should you feel contempt tempt for a
man who honestly changes a belief.  To turn from error, is not that
always wisdom?"

But Jeanne only shrugged her shoulders, and held out her hands for
the baby.  "It is naught to me," said she.  "We are happy here
under this roof, are we not?"

"Precisely.  We are safe here.  That child yonder is safe here.
But how long shall we be safe if there are not those to keep this
roof protected?  The law, Jeanne,--the Justice, back of the
law,--are these things of no interest to you?"

"At least, when it comes to roofs," reiterated Jeanne.  "Monsieur
Dunwodee has pulled down his roof about his ear."

"Yes!  Yes!  Thank God!  And so did Samson pull down the pillars
about him when he had back his strength!"

"Madame has given me occasion to disappear," rejoined Jeanne, with
a resigned shrug.  "I do not always find myself able to follow the
lofty thought of madame.  But, at least, for these people of St.
Genevieve there is no doubt.  They have argue' among theirself.
The vote here is against Monsieur Dunwodee.  He is what one calls
depose'.

"But then, Madame," she added presently, as she turned at the door,
with the baby on her arm, "if madame should wish to explore the
matter for herself, that is quite possible.  This night, perhaps
to-morrow, Monsieur Dunwodee himself comes to St. Genevieve.  He is
to meet the voters of this place.  He wishes to speak, to explain.
I may say that, even, he will have the audacity to come here to
advocate the cause of freedom, and the restriction of those slavery
for which hitherto he has labor' so valiant.  Perhaps there will be
those who care to listen to the address of a man of no more
principle.  For me and for my husband Hector--we do not argue.
Hector, he is for Monsieur Dunwodee.  Save as a maker of love,
Madame, I am not!"

Josephine made no immediate reply.  A tall mirror with pretentious
golden frame hung opposite to her across the room.  A few moments
later, with a start, she suddenly pulled herself together,
discovering that she had been gazing steadfastly into the glass.

[Illustration: Gazing steadfastly into the glass.]


CHAPTER XXX

THE TURNCOAT

It was late in the sunlit afternoon when there rode into the head
of the street of old St. Genevieve a weary and mud-stained
horseman, who presently dismounted at the hitching rail in front of
the little inn which he favored with his company.  He was a tall
man who, as he turned down the street, walked with just the
slightest trace of a limp.

This traveler did not turn into the inn, did not pause, indeed, at
any of the points of greater interest, but sought out the little
cooper shop of Hector Fournier.  That worthy greeted him, wiping
his hands upon his leathern apron.

"Eh, bien, then, it is Monsieur Dunwodee!  Come in!  Come in!  I'll
been glad for see you.  There was those talk you'll would not came."

"Yes, I have come, Hector," said Dunwody, "and naturally, I have
come to see you first.  You are one of the few political allies
that I have left.  At least, if you don't believe the way I do, you
are generous enough to listen!"

"But, Monsieur, believe me, the situation here is difficult.  I had
a list here of twelve citizen of St.  Genevieve who were willing
for listen to Monsieur Dunwodee to-night in a grand mass meeting;
but now talk has gone out.  There is much indignation.  In fact, it
is plan'--"

"What do you mean?  What is going on?" demanded Dunwody.

"Alas!  Monsieur, it is with regret I announce that the majority of
our citizen, who so dislike Monsieur Benton and his views, are much
in favor of riding upon a rail, after due treatment of the tar and
the feather, him who lately was their idol; that is to say,
yourself, Monsieur!"

Dunwody, his face grim, leaned against the door of the little shop.
"So that is the news?" said he.  "It seems hardly generous, this
reception of St. Genevieve to myself!  It is too bad that my
friend, Mr. Benton, is not here to share this hospitality of yours!"

"As I have said, alas! Monsieur!"

"But, now, as to that, Hector, listen!" said Dunwody sharply.  "We
will hold the meeting here just the same.  We do not run away!
To-night, in front of the hall there.

"But why trouble about that?" he added, almost lightly.  "What
comes, comes.  Now, as to yourself and your mother--and your wife?"

"And those baby!" exclaimed Hector.  "Assuredly monsieur does not
forget the finest baby of St. Genevieve?  Come, you shall see
Josephine St. Auban Jeanne Marie Fournier--at once, _tout de
suite_.  _Voila_!"  Hector was rolling down his sleeves and
loosening the string of his leathern apron.  Suddenly he turned.

"But, Monsieur," he said, "come, I have news!  It is a situation
_un peu difficile_; but it can not be concealed, and what can not
be concealed may best be revealed."

"What news?" asked Dunwody.  "More bad news?"

"Not in the least, as we of my household regard it.  With monsieur,
I am not so certain.  It is _quelque chose un peu difficile, mais
oui_.  But then--Monsieur remembers that lady, the Countess--?"

"Countess?  Whom do you mean?"

"Who but our madame, the Countess St. Auban in her own right?  She
who gave me my Jeanne--_at Tallwoods_, Monsieur!  Have you not
known?  She is, here.  She is _chez nous_.  Of wealth and
distinction, yes, she has traveled in this country merely for
divertisement--but the Countess St.  Auban, yes, she pauses now
with the cooper, Hector Fournier!  Does one find such beauty, such
distinction, such gentleness, such kindness, such courteousness
elsewhere than among the nobility?"

"When did she come?" demanded Dunwody quietly.

"But yesterday, upon the boat; without announcement.  She is at
this very moment at my house yonder, busy with that baby, Josephine
St. Auban Jeanne Marie Fournier, named for a countess!  But do not
turn back!  Monsieur himself has not yet seen the baby.  Come!"
For one moment Dunwody paused; then, quietly, he accompanied
Hector, making no comment.  He limped just slightly.  He was
older--yes, and graver.

The mother of Hector met them even before the gate was opened.  Her
voice called to the door her daughter Jeanne, who was shaking hands
with Dunwody before he was half way up the walk.  The ejaculations
of Jeanne attracted yet another ear farther within the house.  A
moment later Dunwody saw pass before the door a figure which he
recognized, a face which called the blood to his own face.  An
instant later, forgetting everything, he was at the door, had her
hands in his own.

"It is you!" he exclaimed.  "How does it happen?  It is impossible!"

Her face had more color than for days.  "Yes, it is unexpected,"
she said simply, at last.  "Everything is unexpected.  But of all
things possible, this it seems to me is best--to come here--to rest
for a time."

"You are passing through to St. Louis?"

"Perhaps," she said.  "My plans for the moment are somewhat
unsettled.  I stopped off here, as no doubt you know, to serve as
godmother to this baby of Jeanne's!  It is an important errand."

"But monsieur has not perfectly examined this infant as yet,"
interrupted Hector.  "See, it has the eyes of Jeanne,--it has--"

"It is a darling!" said Josephine gently, and stroked the somewhat
scanty hair of the heiress of the Fournier estates.

In some way, a moment later, they were apart from the protestations
of the fond parents.  They found themselves alone, in the special
apartment reserved for guests of distinction.  An awkward moment
ensued.  Josephine was first to break the silence.  Dunwody could
only sit and look at her, devouring each line, each little
remembered gesture of her.  Yes, it was she--a little older and
graver and thinner, yes.  But it was she.

"I was talking with Jeanne this very morning," she said.  "She was
telling me some story that you have been unfortunate--that there
have been--that is to say--political changes--"

He nodded, "Yes.  Perhaps you know I have lost my place with my
people here?  I am done for, politically."

He continued, smiling; "Just to show you the extent of my downfall,
I have heard that they are intending to tar and feather me
to-night,--perhaps to give me a ride upon a rail!  That is the form
of entertainment which in the West hitherto has generally been
reserved for horse-thieves, unwelcome revivalists, and that sort of
thing.  Not that it terrifies me.  The meeting is going to be held!"

"Then it is true that you are to speak here to-night--and to uphold
doctrines precisely the reverse of what--"

"Yes, that is true."  He spoke very quietly.

"I had not thought that possible," she said gently.

"Of course," she added, "I have been in entire ignorance of alt
matters out here for a year past.  I have been busy."

"Why should you follow the political fortunes of an obscure
Missourian?" he asked.  "On the contrary, there is at least one
obscure Missourian who has followed yours.  I have known pretty
much all you have been doing of late.  Yes, you at least have been
busy!"

As usual, she hung on the main point.  "But tell me!" she demanded
of him presently, a little added color coming into her cheeks.  "Do
you mean to say to me that you really remember what we talked
about--that you really--"

He nodded, smiling.  "Don't you remember we talked about faith, and
how to get hold of it?  And I said I couldn't find it?  Well, I
have no apologies and no explanations.  All I have to say is that I
fought it out, threshed it all over, and then somehow, I don't know
how,--well, faith _came_ to me,--that is all.  I waked up one
night, and I--well, I just knew.  That is all.  Then I knew I had
been wrong."

"And it cost you everything."

"Just about everything in the world, I reckon, so far as worldly
goods go.  I suppose you know what you and your little colonization
scheme have done to me?"

"But you--what do you mean?"

"Why, didn't you know that?  Weren't Carlisle and Kammerer your
agents; and didn't Lily, our late disappearing slave and also late
lecturing fugitive yonder, represent them?  Don't you really know
about that?"

"No, I had nothing to do with their operations."

"Do you mean to tell me that it was--Oh, I am glad you do not know
about it," he said soberly, "although I don't understand that part
of it."

"Won't you explain?" she besought him.

"Now, the truth is--and that is the main reason of all this popular
feeling against me here--that Lily, or these men, or people like
them, took away every solitary negro from my plantation, as well as
from two or three others neighboring me! They didn't stop to _buy_
my property--they just _took_ it!  You see, Madam,"--he smiled
rather grimly,--"these northern abolitionists remain in the belief
that they have all the virtue and all the fair dealing in the
world.  It has been a little hard on my cotton crop.  I will not
have any crop this fall.  I had no labor.  I will not have any crop
next summer.  With money at twelve per cent. and no munificent
state salary coming in,--that means rather more than I care to talk
about."

"And it was I--_I_ who did that for you!  Believe, believe me, I
was wholly innocent of it!  I did not know!--I did not!  I did not!
I would not have done that to my worst enemy!"

"No, I suppose not; but here is where we come again to the real
heart of all of these questions which so many of us feel able to
solve offhand.  What difference should you make between me and
another?  If it is right for the North to free all these slaves
without paying for them, why should there be anything in my favor,
over any one of my neighbors?  And, most of all, why should you not
be overjoyed at punishing me?  Why am I not your worst enemy?  I
differed from you,--I wronged you,--I harmed you,--I did everything
in the world I could to injure you.  At least you have played even
with me.  I got you Lily to take along.  And I even once went so
far as to tell you my own notion, that the blacks ought to be
deported.  Well, you got mine!"

"I never meant it!  I never intended it!  It was done wholly
without my knowledge!  I am sorry! I am sorry!"

"You need not be sorry.  It is only one of the consequences of
following one's faith.  Anyhow, I'm just a little less inconsistent
than Mr. Benton, who had always been opposed to slavery, although
he still owns slaves.  The same is true of Mr. Clay.  They both
have been prominent politically.  Well, set them free of their
slaves, and they and I would be about even, wouldn't we?  It comes
to being pretty much on foot, I must confess."

"I can understand that," said she.  "For that matter, we are both
ruined; and for the same reason."

"What do you mean?  And, tell me, once more, who are you?  You
certainly have stirred things up!"

"As to the latter, it makes little difference," said she.  "I will
confess to being a revolutionist and a visionary reformer; and an
absolute failure.  I will confess that I have undertaken things
which I thought were within my power, but which were entirely
beyond me.  Well, it has ruined me also in a material way."

"How, do you mean?"

"This colonization work was carried on by my own funds.  It is not long
ago that I got a letter, saying that my funds were at an end. I had
some small estates in the old country.  They are gone,--confiscated.
My last rents were not collected."

She, in turn, smiled, spreading out her hands.  "You see me here in
St. Genevieve, perhaps on my way to St. Louis.  Tell me, is there
demand for persons of foreign experience, who understand a little
French, a little English, perhaps a little music?  But if this
smaller spiral be placed at a different angle to the larger
one, it is, as you observe by the deflection of the galvanometer,
again affected.

This experiment is analogous to the one illustrated by diagram 6,
which represents the result of an experiment made to ascertain the
relative strength of capability or producing inductive effects of
different parts of a straight electro-magnet.

A, Fig. 1, represents the iron core, PP the primary coil, connected
at pleasure to one Grove cell, B, by means of the key, K;
S, a small secondary coil free to move along the primary coil while
in circuit with the galvanometer, G. The relative strength of
any particular spot can be obtained by moving the coil, S, exactly
over the required position.

The small secondary coil is only cut at right angles when it is
placed in the center of the magnet, and as it is moved toward either
pole so the lines of force cut it more and more obliquely.

From this it would appear that the results obtained are not purely
dependent upon the strength of the portion of the magnet over
which the secondary coil is placed, but principally upon the angle
at which the lines of force cut the coil so placed.

It does not follow, therefore, that the center of the magnet is
its strongest part, as the results of the experiments at first
sight appear to show.

It was while engaged on those experiments that I discovered that a
telephone was affected when not in any way connected with the spiral,
but simply placed so that the lines of force proceeding from the
spiral impinged upon the iron diaphragm of the telephone.

Please to bear in mind that the direction of the lines of force
emitted from the spiral is such that, starting from any point on
one of its faces, a circle is described extending to a similar point
on the opposite side.

It is this very night, and I--there being no
other to come--have come to advise.  Believing that monsieur might
desire to carry with him certain friends, I have brought the large
carriage.  It is here!"

"Thank God!" said Dunwody, "they don't vote with me, but they ride
with me still--they're my neighbors, my friends, even yet!

"Hector," he exclaimed suddenly,--"come here!" Then, as they both
listened, he went on: "Tell the people there can not be a meeting,
after all.  I am going back to my house, to see what is on up
yonder.  Hector, can you get a fresh horse?  And are there any
friends who would go with you?"

The sturdy young cooper did not lack in courage, and his response
was instant.  "Assuredly I have a horse, Monsieur," was his reply.
"Assuredly we have friends.  Six, ten, seven, h'eight person shall
go with us within the hour!  But I must tell--"

Jeanne was at his elbow, catching scent of something of this,
guessing at possible danger.  She broke out now into loud
expostulations at this rashness of her spouse, parent of this
progeny of theirs, thus undertaking to expose himself to midnight
dangers.  Hector, none the less, shook his head.

"It is necessary that one go armed," commented Eleazar calmly.  He
patted with affection the long barreled piece which lay over his
own arm.

Much of this conversation, loud and excited as it was, could not
fail to reach the ears of Josephine, who presently had joined them,
and who now heard the story of the old man, so fully confirming all
Dunwody said.

"There is trouble!  There is trouble!" she said, with her usual
prompt decision.  "There is room for me in the coach.  I am going
along."

"You--what in the world do you mean?  You'll do nothing of the
sort!" rejoined Dunwody.  "It's going to be no place for women, up
there.  It's a _fight_, this time!"

"Perhaps not for Jeanne or Hector's mother, or for many women; but
for me it is the very place where I belong!  _I_ made that trouble
yonder.  It was I, not you, who caused that disaffection among the
blacks.  Your neighbors ought to blame me, not you--I will explain
it all to them in a moment, in an instant.  Surely, they will
listen to me.  Yes, I am going."

Dunwody looked at her in grave contemplation for an instant.

"In God's name, my dear girl, how can you find it in your heart to
see that place again?  But do you find it?  Will you go? If you
insist, we'll take care of you."

"Of course!  Of course!" she replied, and even then was busy
hunting for her wraps.  "Get ready!  Let us start."

"Have cushions and blankets for the carriage, Eleazar," said
Dunwody quietly.  "Better get a little lunch of some sort to take
along.  Go down to the barn yonder and get fresh horses.  I don't
think this team could stand it all the way back."


CHAPTER XXXI

THE SPECTER IN THE HOUSE

The travel-stained figures of Doctor Jamieson, Judge Clayton and
the Honorable William Jones met the Dunwody coach just as it was
leaving at the upper end of St. Genevieve's main street.  They also
had found fresh horses, and in the belief of Dunwody it was quite
as well that they rode horseback, in common with the followers of
Hector, who presently came trooping after him.  The interior of the
coach seemed to him more fittingly reserved for this lady and
himself.  None the less, the Honorable William had abated none of
his native curiosity.  It was his head which presently intruded at
the coach window.

"Ah, ha!" exclaimed he.  "What?  Again?  This time there is no
concealment, Dunwody!  Come, confess!"

"I will confess now as much as I ever had to confess," retorted
Dunwody angrily.  "If you do not know yet of this lady, I will
introduce you once more.  She is the Countess St. Auban, formerly
of Europe, and now of any place that suits her.  It is no business
of yours or of mine why she was once there, or cares to go there
again; but she is going along with us out to Tallwoods."

Judge Clayton made salutation .more in keeping with good courtesy
than had his inquisitive friend.  "I have been following the
fortunes of this lady somewhat attentively of late," he said, at
length.  "At least, she has not been idle!"

"Precisely!" ventured Josephine, leaning out the window.  "That is
why I am coming to-night.  I understand there has been trouble down
here,--that it came out of the work of our Colonization Society--"

"Rather!" said Clayton grimly.

"I was back of that.  But, believe me, as I told Mr. Dunwody, I was
not in the least responsible for the running off of negroes in this
neighborhood.  I thought, if I should go out there and tell these
other gentlemen, that they would understand."

"That's mighty nice of you," ventured the Honorable William Jones.
"But if we don't git there before midnight, they'll be so full of
whisky and devilment that _I_ don't think they'll listen even to
you, Ma'am."

"It is pretty bad, I'm afraid," said Judge Clayton.  "What with one
thing and another, this country of ours has been in a literal state
of anarchy for the last year or two.  What the end is going to be,
I'm sure I don't see.

"And the immediate cause of all this sort of thing, my dear Madam,"
he continued, as he rode alongside, "why, it seems to be just that
girl Lily, that we had all the trouble about last year.  By the
way, what's become of that girl?  Too bad--she was more than half
white!"

[Illustration: By the way, what's become of that girl?]

"Yes, it is all about that girl Lily," said Josephine slowly,
restraining in her own soul the impulse to cry out the truth to
him, to tell him why this girl was almost white, why she had
features like his own.  "That is the trouble, I am afraid,--that
girl Lily, and her problem!  If we could understand all of that,
perhaps we could see the reason for this anarchy!"

The group broke apart, as the exigencies of the road traveled
required.  Now and again some conversation passed between the
occupants of the carriage and the horsemen who loosely grouped
about it as they advanced.  The great coach swayed its way on up
through the woods into the hills, over a road never too good and
now worse than usual.  They had thirty miles or more to drive, most
of it after dark.  Could they make that distance in time?

Dunwody, moody, silent, yet tense, keyed to the highest point, now
made little comment.  Even when left alone, he ventured upon no
intimate theme with his companion in the coach; nor did she in turn
speak upon any subject which admitted argument.  Once she
congratulated him upon his recovery from what had seemed so
dangerous a hurt.

"But that is nothing now," he said.  "I got off better than I had
any right,--limp a little, maybe, but they say that even that is
mostly a matter of habit now.  Jamieson says his fiddle string may
have slipped a little!  And you?"

"Oh, perfectly well," she answered.  "I even think I may be
happy--you know, I must start my French and English classes before
long."

Silent now in part as to matters present, wholly silent as to
matters past, these two went on into the night, neither loosing the
tight rein on self.  Swaying and jolting its way upward and outward
into the wilder country, the coach at last had so far plunged into
the night that they were almost within touch of the valley in which
lay the Dunwody lands.  Eleazar, the trapper, rode on the box with
the negro driver who had been impressed into service.  It was the
old trapper who at length called for a halt.

"Listen!" said he.  "What is that?"

Dunwody heard him, and as the coach pulled up, thrust his head out
of the window.  The sound was repeated.

"I hear it!" cried he.  "Rifle firing!  I'm afraid we're going to
be too late.  Drive on, there, fast!"

Finally they reached the point in the road just below the shut-in,
where the hills fell back in the approach to the little circular
valley.  Dunwody's gaze was bent eagerly out and ahead.  "My God!"
he exclaimed, at length.  "We are too late! Look!"

At the same moment there came excited cries from the horsemen who
followed.  Easily visible now against the black background of the
night, there showed a flower of light, rising and falling,
strengthening.

"Drive!" cried Dunwody; and now the sting of the lash urged on the
weary team.  They swung around the turn of the shut-in, and came at
full speed into the approach across the valley.  Before them lay
the great Tallwoods mansion house.  It stood before them a pillar
of fire, prophetic, it might be repeated, of a vast and cleansing
catastrophe soon to come to that state and this nation; a
catastrophe which alone could lay the specter in our nation's house.

They were in time to see the last of the disaster, but too late to
offer remedy.  By the time the coach had pulled up at the head of
the gravel way, before the yet more rapid horsemen had flung
themselves from their saddles, the end easily was to be guessed.
The house had been fired in a half score places.  At the rear, even
now, the long streaks of flame were reaching up to the cornice,
casting all the front portion of the house, and the lawn which lay
before it, into deep shadow.  The shrubbery and trees thus outlined
showed black and grim.

The men of the Tallwoods party dashed here and there among the
covering of trees back of the house.  There were shots, hastily
exchanged, glimpses of forms slinking away across the fields.  But
the attacking party had done their work; and now, alarmed by the
sudden appearance of a resistance stronger than they had expected,
were making their escape.  Once in a while there was heard a loud
derisive shout, now and again the crack of a spiteful rifle,
resounding in echoes against the hillsides.

Dunwody was among the first to disappear, in search of these
besiegers.  For an instant Josephine was left alone, undecided,
alarmed, in front of the great doors.  Eleazar, to save the
plunging team, had now wheeled the vehicle back, and was seeking a
place for it lower down the lawn.  It was as she stood thus
hesitant that there approached her from some point in the bushes a
disheveled figure.  Turning, she recognized none other than old
Sally, her former jailer and sometime friend.

"Sally," she cried; "Sally!  What is it?  Who has done this?  Where
are they?  What is it all about?  Can't anything be done?"

But Sally, terrified beyond reason, could exclaim only one word:
"Whah is he?  Whah's Mr. Dunwody?  Quick!"  An instant later, she
too was gone.

At the same moment, Dunwody, weapon in hand, dashed around the
corner of the house and up on the front gallery.  Apparently he was
searching for some one whom he did not find.  Here he was soon
discovered by the old negro woman, who began an excited harangue,
with wild gesticulations.  To Josephine it seemed that Sally
pointed toward the interior of the house, as though she beckoned,
explained.  She heard his deep-voiced cry.

By this time the names had taken firm hold upon the entire
structure.  Smoke tinged with red lines poured through the great
double doors of the mansion house.  Yet even as she met the act
with an exclamation of horror, Josephine saw Dunwody fling away his
weapons, run to the great doors and crash through them, apparently
bent upon reaching some point deep in the interior.

Others saw this, and joined in her cry of terror.  The interior of
the hall, thus disclosed by the opening of the doors, seemed but a
mass of flames.  An instant later, Dunwody staggered back, his arm
across his face.  His hair was smoking, the mustaches half burned
from his lips.  He gasped for breath, but, revived by air, drew his
coat across his mouth and once again dashed back.  Josephine,
standing with hands clasped, her eyes filled with terror, expected
never to see him emerge alive.

He was scarcely more than alive when once more he came back,
blinded and staggering.  This time arms reached out to him,
steadied him, dragged him from the gallery, through the enshrouding
smoke, to a place of safety.

He bore something shielded, concealed in his arms--something, which
now he carried tenderly and placed down away from the sight of
others, behind the shade of a protecting clump of shrubbery.  His
breath, labored, sobbing, showed his distress.  They caught him
again when he staggered back, dragged him to a point somewhat
removed, upon the lawn.  All the time he struggled, as though once
more to dash back into the flames, or as though to find his
weapons.  He was sobbing, half crazed, horribly burned, but
seemingly unmindful of his hurts.

The fire went on steadily with its work, the more rapidly now that
the opening of the front doors had admitted air to the interior.
The construction of the house, with a wide central hall, and
stairways leading up almost to the roof, made an admirable
arrangement for a conflagration.  No living being, even though
armed with the best of fire fighting apparatus, could have survived
in that blazing interior.  All they could do, since even a bucket
brigade was out of the question here, was to stand and watch for
the end.  Some called for ladders, but by accident or design, no
ladders were found where they should have been.  Men ran about like
ants.  None knew anything of time's passing.  No impression
remained on their minds save the fascinating picture of this tall
pillar of the fire.

Dunwody ceased to struggle with those who restrained him.  He
walked apart, near to the little clump of shrubs.  He dropped to
the ground, his face in his hands.

"What do you reckon that thah was he brung out in his arms, that
time?" demanded Mr. William Jones, after a time, of a neighbor who
met him a little apart.  "Say, you reckon that was _folks_?
Anybody _in_ there?  Anybody over--thah?  Was that a bed--folded up
like--'bout like a crib, say?  I'm skeered to go look, somehow."

"God knows!" was the reply.  "This here house has had mighty
strange goings on of late times.  There was always something
strange about it,--something strange about Dunwody too!  There
ain't no doubt about that.  But I'm skeered, too--him a-settin'
thah--"

"But _who_ was she, or it, whatever it was?  How come--in--in
there?  How long has it been there?  What kind of goings on do you
think there has been; in this here place, after all?"  Mr. Jones
was not satisfied.  They passed apart, muttering, exclaiming,
wondering.

An hour later, Tallwoods mansion house was no more.  The last of
cornice and pillar and corner post and beam had fallen into a
smoldering mass.  In front of one long window a part of the heavy
brick foundation remained.  Some bent and warped iron bars appeared
across a window.

Unable to do anything, these who had witnessed such scenes, scarce
found it possible to depart.  They stood about, whispering, or
remaining silent, some regarding the smouldering ruin.  Once in a
while a head was turned over shoulder toward a bowed form which sat
close under a sheltering tree upon the lawn.

"He is taking it mighty hard," said this or that neighbor.  "Lost
nigh about everything he had in the world."  But still his bowed
form, stern in its sentinelship, guarded the something concealed
behind the shadows.  And still they dared not go closer.

So, while Dunwody was taking that which had come to him, as human
beings must, the gray of the dawn crawled up, up over the eastern
edge of this little Ozark Valley.  After a time the day would come
again, would look with franker eyes upon this scene of horror.  As
the light grew stronger, though yet cold and gray, Dunwody,
sighing, raised his head from his hands and turned.  There was a
figure seated close to him--a woman, who reached out a hand to take
his scarred and burned ones in her own,--a woman, moreover, who
asked him no questions.

"Oh! Oh God!" he began, for the first time breaking silence, his
burned lips twitching.  "And you,--why don't you go away?  What
made you come?"

She was silent for a time.  "Am I not your friend?" she asked, at
length.

Now he could look at her.  "My friend!" said he bitterly.  "As if
all the world had a friend for me!  How could there be? But you saw
that,--this--?"

She made no answer, but only drew a trifle nearer, seeing him for
the first time unnerved and unstrung.  "I saw something, I could
not tell what--when you came out.  I supposed--"

"Well, then," said he, with a supreme effort which demanded all his
courage, as he turned toward her; "it all had to come out, somehow.
It is the end, now."

She had brought with her a cup of water.  Now she handed it to him
without comment.  His hand trembled as he took it.

"You saw that--?"  He nodded toward the ruins.  All she did was to
nod, in silence.  "Yes, I saw you come out--with--that--in your
arms."

"Who--what--do you suppose it was?"

"I don't know."  Then, suddenly,--"Tell me.  Tell me!  _Was it
she_?"

"Send them away!" he said to her after a time.  She turned, and
those who stood about seemed to catch the wish upon her face.  They
fell back for a space, silent, or talking in low tones.

"Come," he said.

He led her a pace or so, about the scanty wall of shrubbery.  He
pulled back a bit of old and faded silk, a woman's garment of years
ago, from the face of that something which lay there, on a tiny
cot, scarce larger than a child's bed.

It was the face of a woman grown, yet of a strangely vague and
childlike look.  The figure, never very large, was thin and
shrunken unbelievably.  The features, waxy-white, were mercifully
spared by the flames which had licked at the shielding hands and
arms that had borne her hither.  Yet they seemed even more thin,
more wax-like, more unreal, than had their pallor come by merciful
death.  Death?  Ah, here was written death through years.  Life,
full, red-blooded, abounding, luxuriant, riotous, never had
animated this pallid form, or else had long years since abandoned
it.  This was but the husk of a human being, clinging beyond its
appointed time to this world, so cruel and so kind.

They stood and gazed, solemnly, for a time.  The hands of Josephine
St. Auban were raised in the sign of her religion.  Her lips moved
in some swift prayer.  She could hear the short, hard breathing of
the man who stood near her, grimed, blistered, disfigured, in his
effort to bring away into the light for a time at least this
specter, so long set apart from all the usual ways of life.

"She has been there for years," he said, at last, thickly.  "We
kept her, I kept her, here for her sake.  In this country it would
be a sort of disgrace for any--any--feeble--person, you know, to go
to an institution.  Those are our graves over yonder in the yard.
You see them?  Well, here was our asylum.  We kept our secrets.

"She was this way for more than ten years.  She was hurt in an
accident--her spine.  She withered away.  Her mind was gone--she
was like a child.  She had toys, like a child.  She wept, she cried
out like a child.  Very often I was obliged to play--Ah! my God!
My God!"

"This was one of your family.  It was that which we heard--which we
_felt_--about the place--?" Her voice was very clear, though low.

"My wife!  Now you know."  He dropped back, his face once more
between his hands, and again she fell into silence.

"How long--was this?" at length she asked quietly.

He turned a scorched and half-blinded face toward her.  "Ever since
I was a boy, you might say," said he.  "Even before my father and
mother died.  We kept our own counsel.  We ran away, we two
children.  A and B will now be placed a definite distance apart, and
comparatively slow reversals from ten Leclanché cells sent through
spiral A; you will observe the amount of the induced current in B,
as shown on the scale of the galvanometer in circuit with that
spiral. Now midway between the two spirals will be placed a plate
of iron, as shown in Plate 2, and at once you observe the
deflection of the galvanometer is reduced by less than one half,
showing clearly that the presence of the iron plate is in some
way influencing the previous effects. The iron will now be removed,
but the spirals left in the same position as before, and by
increasing the speed of the reversals you see a higher deflection
is given on the galvanometer. Now, on again interposing the iron
plate the deflection falls to a little less than one-half, as
before.

I wish this fact to be carefully noted.

The experiment will be repeated with a plate of copper of precisely
the same dimensions as the iron plate, and you observe that,
although the conditions are exactly alike in both cases, the
interposition of the copper plate has apparently no effect at the
present speed of the reversals, although the interposition of the
iron plate under the same conditions reduced the deflection about
fifty per cent.

We will now remove the copper plate, as we did the iron one, and
increase the speed of the reversals to the same as in the experiment
with the iron, and you observe the deflection on the galvanometer
is about the same as it was on that occasion. Now, by replacing the
copper plate to its former position you will note how rapidly the
deflection falls. We will now repeat the experiment with a plate
of lead; you will see that, like the copper, it is unaffected at
the low speed, but there the resemblance ceases; for at the high
speed it has but very slight effect.

Thus these metals, iron, copper, and lead, appear to differ as
widely in their electrical as they do in their mechanical properties.
Of course it would be impossible to obtain accurate measurements
on an occasion like the present, but careful and reliable measurements
have been made, the results of which are shown on the sheet before
you, marked 3.

It will be seen by reference to these results that the percentage
of inductive energy intercepted does not increase for different
speeds of the reverser in the same rate with different metals,
the increase with iron being very slight, while with tin it is
comparatively enormous.

It was observed that time was an important element to be taken into
account while testing the above metals, that is to say, the lines
of force took an appreciable time to polarize the particles of the
metal placed in their path, but having accomplished this, they
passed more freely through it.

If I ever loved her, it was so faint and far away--but it
isn't right to say that, now."

"No.  Do not.  Do not."

"I don't know.  There are a heap of things I don't know.  But I
knew I loved you.  It was for ever.  That was what was meant to be.
It seemed to me I owed debts on every hand--to the world--to you: I
tried--tried to pay--to pay you fair, ache for ache, if I could,
for the hurts I'd given you.  And you wouldn't let me.  You were
wonderful.  Before the throne of God--here--now, I'll say it: I
love you!  But now it's over."

"It is easier now," she said again.  "You must not give way.  You
are strong.  You must not be beaten.  You must keep your courage."

"Give me a moment," he said.  "Give me a chance to get on my feet
again.  I want to be game as I can."

"You have courage--the large courage," she answered quietly.
"Haven't you been showing it, by your very silence?  You will be
brave.  You are just beginning.  You have changed many things in
your life of late.  You were silent.  You did not boast to me.
Sometimes things seem to be changed for us, without our
arrangement."

"Isn't it true?" he exclaimed, turning to her quickly; "isn't it
the truth?  Why, look at me.  I met you a year ago.  Here I sit
now.  Two different men, eh?  No chance, either time.  No chance."

"Maybe two different women," said she.

"No, we are not different," he went on suddenly.  "We are something
just the same,--for my part, at least, I have never changed very
much in some ways."

"You have suffered a great deal," she said simply "You have lost
very much.  You are no longer a boy.  You are a man, now.  You've
changed because you are a man.  And it wasn't--well, it wasn't done
for--for any reward."

"No, maybe not.  In some ways I don't think just the way I used to.
But the savage--the brute--in me is there just the same.  I don't
want to do what is right.  I don't want to know what is right.  I
only want to do what I want to do.  What I covet, I covet.  What I
love, I love.  What I want, I want.  That is all.  And yet, just a
minute ago you were telling me you would be a friend!  Not to a man
like that!  It wouldn't be right."

She made no answer.  The faces of both were now turned toward the
gray dawn beyond the hills.  It was some moments before once more
he turned to her.

"But you and I--just you and I, together, thinking the way we both
do, seeing what we both see--the splendid sadness and the glory of
living and loving--and being what we both are!  Oh, it all comes
back to me, I tell you; and I say I have not changed.  I shall
always call your hair 'dark as the night of disunion and
separation'--isn't that what the oriental poet called it?--and your
face, to me, always, always, always, will be 'fair as the days of
union and delight.' No you've not changed.  You're still just a
tall flower, in the blades of grass--that are cut down.  But
wasted!  What is in my mind now, when maybe it ought not to be
here, is just this: What couldn't you and I have done together?
Ah! Nothing could have stopped us!"

"What could we not have done?" she repeated slowly.  "I've done so
little--in the world--alone."

Something in her tone caught his ear, his senses, overstrung,
vibrating in exquisite susceptibility, capable almost of hearing
thought that dared not be thought.  He turned his blackened face,
bent toward her, looking into her face with an intensity which
almost annihilated the human limitations of flesh and blood.  It
was as though his soul heard something in hers, and turned to
answer it, to demand its repetition.

"Did you say, _could_ have done?" he demanded.  "Tell me, did you
say that?"

She did not answer, and he went on.  "Listen!" To his surprise he
found that it made not the least difference whether the intervening
space was occupied by such insulating bodies as air, sulphur, and
shellac, or such conducting bodies as copper and the other non-magnetic
metals.

he heard a gentle voice reply.