Again did silence fall. Claude had resumed his drawing. But she became
restless, her arm was getting stiff.

'Just put your elbow a little lower, please,' said Claude. Then, with
an air of concern, as if to excuse his curtness: 'Your parents will be
very uneasy, if they have heard of the accident.'

'I have no parents.'

'What! neither father nor mother? You are all alone in the world?'

'Yes; all alone.'

She was eighteen years old, and had been born in Strasburg, quite by
chance, though, between two changes of garrison, for her father was a
soldier, Captain Hallegrain. Just as she entered upon her twelfth
year, the captain, a Gascon, hailing from Montauban, had died at
Clermont, where he had settled when paralysis of the legs had obliged
him to retire from active service. For nearly five years afterwards,
her mother, a Parisian by birth, had remained in that dull provincial
town, managing as well as she could with her scanty pension, but eking
it out by fan-painting, in order that she might bring up her daughter
as a lady. She had, however, now been dead for fifteen months, and had
left her child penniless and unprotected, without a friend, save the
Superior of the Sisters of the Visitation, who had kept her with them.
Christine had come straight to Paris from the convent, the Superior
having succeeded in procuring her a situation as reader and companion
to her old friend, Madame Vanzade, who was almost blind.

At these additional particulars, Claude sat absolutely speechless.
That convent, that well-bred orphan, that adventure, all taking so
romantic a turn, made him relapse into embarrassment again, into all
his former awkwardness of gesture and speech. He had left off drawing,
and sat looking, with downcast eyes, at his sketch.

'Is Clermont pretty?' he asked, at last.

'Not very; it's a gloomy town. Besides, I don't know; I scarcely ever
went out.'

She was resting on her elbow, and continued, as if talking to herself
in a very low voice, still tremulous from the thought of her
bereavement.

'Mamma, who wasn't strong, killed herself with work. She spoilt me;
nothing was too good for me. I had all sorts of masters, but I did not
get on very well; first, because I fell ill, then because I paid no
attention. I was always laughing and skipping about like a
featherbrain. I didn't care for music, piano playing gave me a cramp
in my arms. The only thing I cared about at all was painting.'

He raised his head and interrupted her. 'You can paint?'

'Oh, no; I know nothing, nothing at all. Mamma, who was very talented,
made me do a little water-colour, and I sometimes helped her with the
backgrounds of her fans. She painted some lovely ones.'

In spite of herself, she then glanced at the startling sketches with
which the walls seemed ablaze, and her limpid eyes assumed an uneasy
expression at the sight of that rough, brutal style of painting. From
where she lay she obtained a topsy-turvy view of the study of herself
which the painter had begun, and her consternation at the violent
tones she noticed, the rough crayon strokes, with which the shadows
were dashed off, prevented her from asking to look at it more closely.
Besides, she was growing very uncomfortable in that bed, where she lay
broiling; she fidgetted with the idea of going off and putting an end
to all these things which, ever since the night before, had seemed to
her so much of a dream.

Claude, no doubt, became aware of her discomfort. A sudden feeling of
shame brought with it one of compunction.

He put his unfinished sketch aside, and hastily exclaimed: 'Much
obliged for your kindness, mademoiselle. Forgive me, I have really
abused it. Yes, indeed, pray get up; it's time for you to look for
your friends.'

And without appearing to understand why she did not follow his advice,
but hid more and more of her bare arm in proportion as he drew nearer,
he still insisted upon advising her to rise. All at once, as the real
state of things struck him, he swung his arms about like a madman, set
the screen in position, and went to the far end of the studio, where
he began noisily setting his crockery in order, so that she might jump
out and dress herself, without fear of being overheard.

Amidst the din he had thus raised, he failed to hear her hesitating
voice, 'Monsieur, monsieur--'

At last he caught her words.

'Monsieur, would you be so kind--I can't find my stockings.'

Claude hurried forward. What had he been thinking of? What was she to
do behind that screen, without her stockings and petticoats, which he
had spread out in the sunlight? The stockings were dry, he assured
himself of that by gently rubbing them together, and he handed them to
her over the partition; again noticing her arm, bare, plump and rosy
like that of a child. Then he tossed the skirts on to the foot of the
bed and pushed her boots forward, leaving nothing but her bonnet
suspended from the easel. She had thanked him and that was all; he
scarcely distinguished the rustling of her clothes and the discreet
splashing of water. Still he continued to concern himself about her.

'You will find the soap in a saucer on the table. Open the drawer and
take a clean towel. Do you want more water? I'll give you the
pitcher.'

Suddenly the idea that he was blundering again exasperated him.

'There, there, I am only worrying you. I will leave you to your own
devices. Do as if you were at home.'

And he continued to potter about among the crockery. He was debating
with himself whether he should ask her to stay to breakfast. He ought
not to let her go like that. On the other hand, if she did stay, he
would never get done; it would mean a loss of his whole morning.
Without deciding anything, as soon as he had lighted his spirit lamp,
he washed his saucepan and began to make some chocolate. He thought it
more _distingue_, feeling rather ashamed of his vermicelli, which he
mixed with bread and soused with oil as people do in the South of
France. However, he was still breaking the chocolate into bits, when
he uttered a cry of surprise, 'What, already?'

It was Christine, who had pushed back the screen, and who appeared
looking neat and correct in her black dress, duly laced and buttoned
up, equipped, as it were, in a twinkle. Her rosy face did not even
show traces of the water, her thick hair was twisted in a knot at the
back of her head, not a single lock out of place. And Claude remained
open-mouthed before that miracle of quickness, that proof of feminine
skill in dressing well and promptly.

'The deuce, if you go about everything in that way!' said he.

He found her taller and handsomer than he had fancied. But what struck
him most was her look of quiet decision. She was evidently no longer
afraid of him. It seemed as though she had re-donned her armour and
become an amazon again. She smiled and looked him straight in the
face. Whereupon he said what he was still reluctant to say:

'You'll breakfast with me, won't you?'

But she refused the offer. 'No, thank you. I am going to the station,
where my trunk must have arrived by now, and then I shall drive to
Passy.'

It was in vain that he told her that she must be hungry, that it was
unreasonable for her to go out without eating something.

'Well, if you won't, I'll go down and fetch you a cab,' he ended by
exclaiming.

'Pray don't take such trouble.'

'But you can't go such a distance on foot. Let me at least take you to
the cabstand, as you don't know Paris.'

'No, really I do not need you. If you wish to oblige me, let me go
away by myself.'

She had evidently made up her mind. She no doubt shrank from the idea
of being seen with a man, even by strangers. She meant to remain
silent about that strange night, she meant to tell some falsehood, and
keep the recollection of her adventure entirely to herself. He made a
furious gesture, which was tantamount to sending her to the devil.
Good riddance; it suited him better not to have to go down. But, all
the same, he felt hurt at heart, and considered that she was
ungrateful.

'As you please, then. I sha'n't resort to force,' he said.

At these words, Christine's vague smile became more accentuated. She
did not reply, but took her bonnet and looked round in search of a
glass. Failing to find one, she tied the strings as best she could.
With her arms uplifted, she leisurely arranged and smoothed the
ribbons, her face turned towards the golden rays of the sun. Somewhat
surprised, Claude looked in vain for the traits of childish softness
that he had just portrayed; the upper part of her face, her clear
forehead, her gentle eyes had become less conspicuous; and now the
lower part stood out, with its somewhat sensual jaw, ruddy mouth, and
superb teeth. And still she smiled with that enigmatical, girlish
smile, which was, perhaps, an ironical one.

'At any rate,' he said, in a vexed tone, 'I do not think you have
anything to reproach me with.'

At which she could not help laughing, with a slight, nervous laugh.

'No, no, monsieur, not in the least.'

He continued staring at her, fighting the battle of inexperience and
bashfulness over again, and fearing that he had been ridiculous. Now
that she no longer trembled before him, had she become contemptuously
surprised at having trembled at all? What! he had not made the
slightest attempt at courtship, not even pressed a kiss on her
finger-tips. The young fellow's bearish indifference, of which she had
assuredly been conscious, must have hurt her budding womanly feelings.

'You were saying,' she resumed, becoming sedate once more, 'that the
cabstand is at the end of the bridge on the opposite quay?'

'Yes; at the spot where there is a clump of trees.'

She had finished tying her bonnet strings, and stood ready gloved,
with her hands hanging by her side, and yet she did not go, but stared
straight in front of her. As her eyes met the big canvas turned to the
wall she felt a wish to see it, but did not dare to ask. Nothing
detained her; still she seemed to be looking around as if she had
forgotten something there, something which she could not name. At last
she stepped towards the door.

Claude was already opening it, and a small loaf placed erect against
the post tumbled into the studio.

'You see,' he said, 'you ought to have stopped to breakfast with me.
My doorkeeper brings the bread up every morning.'

She again refused with a shake of the head. When she was on the
landing she turned round, and for a moment remained quite still. Her
gay smile had come back; she was the first to hold out her hand.

'Thank you, thank you very much.'

He had taken her small gloved hand within his large one, all
pastel-stained as it was. Both hands remained like that for a few
moments, closely and cordially pressed. The young girl was still
smiling at him, and he had a question on the tip of his tongue: 'When
shall I see you again?' But he felt ashamed to ask it, and after
waiting a while she withdrew her hand.

'Good-bye, monsieur.'

'Good-bye, mademoiselle.'

Christine, without another glance, was already descending the steep
ladder-like stairway whose steps creaked, when Claude turned abruptly
into his studio, closing the door with a bang, and shouting to
himself: 'Ah, those confounded women!'

He was furious--furious with himself, furious with everyone. Kicking
about the furniture, he continued to ease his feelings in a loud
voice. Was not he right in never allowing them to cross his threshold?
They only turned a fellow's head. What proof had he after all that
yonder chit with the innocent look, who had just gone, had not fooled
him most abominably? And he had been silly enough to believe in her
cock-and-bull stories! All his suspicions revived. No one would ever
make him swallow that fairy tale of the general's widow, the railway
accident, and especially the cabman. Did such things ever happen in
real life? Besides, that mouth of hers told a strange tale, and her
looks had been very singular just as she was going. Ah! if he could
only have understood why she had told him all those lies; but no, they
were profitless, inexplicable. It was art for art's sake. How she must
be laughing at him by this time.

He roughly folded up the screen and sent it flying into a corner. She
had no doubt left all in disorder. And when he found that everything
was in its proper place--basin, towel, and soap--he flew into a rage
because she had not made the bed. With a great deal of fuss he began
to make it himself, lifting the mattress in his arms, banging the
pillow about with his fists, and feeling oppressed by the pure scent
of youth that rose from everything. Then he had a good wash to cool
himself, and in the damp towel he found the same virgin fragrance,
which seemed to spread through the studio. Swearing the while, he
drank his chocolate from the saucepan, so excited, so eager to set to
work, as to swallow large mouthfuls of bread without taking breath.

'Why, it's enough to kill one here,' he suddenly exclaimed. 'It must
be this confounded heat that's making me ill.'

After all, the sun had shifted, and it was far less hot. But he opened
a small window on a level with the roof, and inhaled, with an air of
profound relief, the whiff of warm air that entered. Then he took up
his sketch of Christine's head and for a long while he lingered
looking at it.


                                 II

IT had struck twelve, and Claude was working at his picture when there
was a loud, familiar knock at the door. With an instinctive yet
involuntary impulse, the artist slipped the sketch of Christine's
head, by the aid of which he was remodelling the principal figure of
his picture, into a portfolio. After which he decided to open the
door.

'You, Pierre!' he exclaimed, 'already!'

Pierre Sandoz, a friend of his boyhood, was about twenty-two, very
dark, with a round and determined head, a square nose, and gentle
eyes, set in energetic features, girt round with a sprouting beard.

'I breakfasted earlier than usual,' he answered, 'in order to give you
a long sitting. The devil! you are getting on with it.'

He had stationed himself in front of the picture, and he added almost
immediately: 'Hallo! you have altered the character of your woman's
features!'

Then came a long pause; they both kept staring at the canvas. It
measured about sixteen feet by ten, and was entirely painted over,
though little of the work had gone beyond the roughing-out. This
roughing-out, hastily dashed off, was superb in its violence and
ardent vitality of colour. A flood of sunlight streamed into a forest
clearing, with thick walls of verdure; to the left, stretched a dark
glade with a small luminous speck in the far distance. On the grass,
amidst all the summer vegetation, lay a nude woman with one arm
supporting her head, and though her eyes were closed she smiled amidst
the golden shower that fell around her. In the background, two other
women, one fair, and the other dark, wrestled playfully, setting light
flesh tints amidst all the green leaves. And, as the painter had
wanted something dark by way of contrast in the foreground, he had
contented himself with seating there a gentleman, dressed in a black
velveteen jacket. This gentleman had his back turned and the only part
of his flesh that one saw was his left hand, with which he was
supporting himself on the grass.

'The woman promises well,' said Sandoz, at last; 'but, dash it, there
will be a lot of work in all this.'

Claude, with his eyes blazing in front of his picture, made a gesture
of confidence. 'I've lots of time from now till the Salon. One can get
through a deal of work in six months. And perhaps this time I'll be
able to prove that I am not a brute.'

Thereupon he set up a whistle, inwardly pleased at the sketch he had
made of Christine's head, and buoyed up by one of those flashes of
hope whence he so often dropped into torturing anguish, like an artist
whom passion for nature consumed.

'Come, no more idling,' he shouted. 'As you're here, let us set to.'

Sandoz, out of pure friendship, and to save Claude the cost of a
model, had offered to pose for the gentleman in the foreground. In
four or five Sundays, the only day of the week on which he was free,
the figure would be finished. He was already donning the velveteen
jacket, when a sudden reflection made him stop.

'But, I say, you haven't really lunched, since you were working when I
came in. Just go down and have a cutlet while I wait here.'

The idea of losing time revolted Claude. 'I tell you I have
breakfasted. Look at the saucepan. Besides, you can see there's a
crust of bread left. I'll eat it. Come, to work, to work, lazy-bones.'

And he snatched up his palette and caught his brushes, saying, as he
did so, 'Dubuche is coming to fetch us this evening, isn't he?'

'Yes, about five o'clock.'

'Well, that's all right then. We'll go down to dinner directly he
comes. Are you ready? The hand more to the left, and your head a
little more forward.'

Having arranged some cushions, Sandoz settled himself on the couch in
the required attitude. His back was turned, but all the same the
conversation continued for another moment, for he had that very
morning received a letter from Plassans, the little Provencal town
where he and the artist had known each other when they were wearing
out their first pairs of trousers on the eighth form of the local
college. However, they left off talking. The one was working with his
mind far away from the world, while the other grew stiff and cramped
with the sleepy weariness of protracted immobility.

It was only when Claude was nine years old that a lucky chance had
enabled him to leave Paris and return to the little place in Provence,
where he had been born. His mother, a hardworking laundress,* whom his
ne'er-do-well father had scandalously deserted, had afterwards married
an honest artisan who was madly in love with her. But in spite of
their endeavours, they failed to make both ends meet. Hence they
gladly accepted the offer of an elderly and well-to-do townsman to
send the lad to school and keep him with him. It was the generous
freak of an eccentric amateur of painting, who had been struck by the
little figures that the urchin had often daubed. And thus for seven
years Claude had remained in the South, at first boarding at the
college, and afterwards living with his protector. The latter,
however, was found dead in his bed one morning. He left the lad a
thousand francs a year, with the faculty of disposing of the principal
when he reached the age of twenty-five. Claude, already seized with a
passion for painting, immediately left school without even attempting
to secure a bachelor's degree, and rushed to Paris whither his friend
Sandoz had preceded him.

  * Gervaise of 'The Dram Shop'(L'Assommoir).--ED.

At the College of Plassans, while still in the lowest form, Claude
Lantier, Pierre Sandoz, and another lad named Louis Dubuche, had been
three inseparables. Sprung from three different classes of society, by
no means similar in character, but simply born in the same year at a
few months' interval, they had become friends at once and for aye,
impelled thereto by certain secret affinities, the still vague
promptings of a common ambition, the dawning consciousness of
possessing greater intelligence than the set of dunces who maltreated
them. Sandoz's father, a Spaniard, who had taken refuge in France in
consequence of some political disturbances in which he had been mixed
up, had started, near Plassans, a paper mill with new machinery of his
own invention. When he had died, heart-broken by the petty local
jealousy that had sought to hamper him in every way, his widow had
found herself in so involved a position, and burdened with so many
tangled law suits, that the whole of her remaining means were
swallowed up. She was a native of Burgundy. Yielding to her hatred of
the Provencals, and laying at their door even the slow paralysis from
which she was suffering, she removed to Paris with her son, who then
supported her out of a meagre clerk's salary, he himself haunted by
the vision of literary glory. As for Dubuche, he was the son of a
baker of Plassans. Pushed by his mother, a covetous and ambitious
woman, he had joined his friends in Paris later on. He was attending
the courses at the School of Arts as a pupil architect, living as best
he might upon the last five-franc pieces that his parents staked on
his chances, with the obstinacy of usurers discounting the future at
the rate of a hundred per cent.

'Dash it!' at last exclaimed Sandoz, breaking the intense silence that
hung upon the room. 'This position isn't at all easy; my wrist feels
broken. Can I move for a moment?'

Claude let him stretch himself without answering. He was now working
at the velveteen jacket, laying on the colour with thick strokes,
However, stepping backward and blinking, he suddenly burst into loud
laughter at some reminiscence.

'I say, do you recollect, when we were in the sixth form, how, one
day, Pouillaud lighted the candles in that idiot Lalubie's cupboard?
And how frightened Lalubie was when, before going to his desk, he
opened the cupboard to take his books, and found it transformed into a
mortuary chapel? Five hundred lines to every one in the form.'

Sandoz, unable to withstand the contagion of the other's gaiety, flung
himself back on the couch. As he resumed his pose, he remarked, 'Ah,
that brute of a Pouillaud. You know that in his letter this morning he
tells me of Lalubie's forthcoming marriage. The old hack is marrying a
pretty girl. But you know her, she's the daughter of Gallissard, the
haberdasher--the little fair-haired girl whom we used to serenade!'

Once on the subject of their recollections there was no stopping them,
though Claude went on painting with growing feverishness, while
Pierre, still turned towards the wall, spoke over his shoulders,
shaking every now and then with excitement.

First of all came recollections of the college, the old, dank convent,
that extended as far as the town ramparts; the two courtyards with
their huge plane trees; the slimy sedge-covered pond, where they had
learned to swim, and the class-rooms with dripping plaster walls on
the ground floor; then the refectory, with its atmosphere constantly
poisoned by the fumes of dish-water; the dormitory of the little ones,
famous for its horrors, the linen room, and the infirmary, full of
gentle sisters, nuns in black gowns who looked so sweet beneath their
white coifs. What a to-do there had been when Sister Angela, she whose
Madonna-like face had turned the heads of all the big fellows,
disappeared one morning with Hermeline, a stalwart first-form lad,
who, from sheer love, purposely cut his hands with his penknife so as
to get an opportunity of seeing and speaking to her while she dressed
his self-inflicted injuries with gold-beater's skin.

Then they passed the whole college staff in review; a pitiful,
grotesque, and terrible procession it was, with such heads as
are seen on meerschaum pipes, and profiles instinct with hatred
and suffering. There was the head master, who ruined himself in
giving parties, in order to marry his daughters--two tall, elegant
girls, the butt of constant and abominable insults, written and
sketched on every wall; there was the comptroller Pifard, whose
wonderful nose betrayed his presence behind every door, when he went
eavesdropping; and there were all the teachers, each befouled with
some insulting nickname: the severe 'Rhadamantus,' who had never been
seen to smile; 'Filth,' who by the constant rubbing of his head had
left his mark on the wall behind every professional seat he occupied;
'Thou-hast-deceived-me-Adele,' the professor of physics, at whom ten
generations of schoolboys had tauntingly flung the name of his
unfaithful wife. There were others still: Spontini, the ferocious
usher, with his Corsican knife, rusty with the blood of three cousins;
little Chantecaille, who was so good-natured that he allowed the
pupils to smoke when out walking; and also a scullion and a scullery
maid, two ugly creatures who had been nicknamed Paraboulomenos and
Paralleluca, and who were accused of kissing one another over the
vegetable parings.

Then came comical reminiscences; the sudden recollection of practical
jokes, at which they shook with laughter after all those years. Oh!
the morning when they had burned the shoes of Mimi-la-Mort, _alias_
the Skeleton Day Boarder, a lank lad, who smuggled snuff into the
school for the whole of the form. And then that winter evening when
they had bagged some matches lying near the lamp in the chapel, in
order to smoke dry chestnut leaves in reed pipes. Sandoz, who had been
the ringleader on that occasion, now frankly avowed his terror; the
cold perspiration that had come upon him when he had scrambled out of
the choir, wrapt in darkness. And again there was the day when Claude
had hit upon the sublime idea of roasting some cockchafers in his desk
to see whether they were good to eat, as people said they were. So
terrible had been the stench, so dense the smoke that poured from the
desk, that the usher had rushed to the water pitcher, under the
impression that the place was on fire. And then their marauding
expeditions; the pillaging of onion beds while they were out walking;
the stones thrown at windows, the correct thing being to make the
breakage resemble a well-known geographical map. Also the Greek
exercises, written beforehand in large characters on the blackboard,
so that every dunce might easily read them though the master remained
unaware of it; the wooden seats of the courtyard sawn off and carried
round the basin like so many corpses, the boys marching in procession
and singing funeral dirges. Yes! that had been a capital prank.
Dubuche, who played the priest, had tumbled into the basin while
trying to scoop some water into his cap, which was to serve as a holy
water pot. But the most comical and amusing of all the pranks had
perhaps been that devised by Pouillaud, who one night had fastened all
the unmentionable crockery of the dormitory to one long string passed
under the beds. At dawn--it was the very morning when the long
vacation began--he had pulled the string and skedaddled down the three
flights of stairs with this frightful tail of crockery bounding and
smashing to pieces behind him.

At the recollection of this last incident, Claude remained grinning
from ear to ear, his brush suspended in mid-air. 'That brute of a
Pouillaud!' he laughed. 'And so he has written to you. What is he
doing now?'

'Why, nothing at all, old man,' answered Sandoz, seating himself more
comfortably on the cushions. 'His letter is idiotic. He is just
finishing his law studies, and he will inherit his father's practice
as a solicitor. You ought to see the style he has already assumed--all
the idiotic austerity of a philistine, who has turned over a new
leaf.'

They were silent once more until Sandoz added, 'You see, old boy, we
have been protected against that sort of thing.'

Then they relapsed again into reminiscences, but such as made their
hearts thump; the remembrance of the many happy days they had spent
far away from the college, in the open air and the full sunlight. When
still very young, and only in the sixth form, the three inseparables
had become passionately fond of taking long walks. The shortest
holidays were eagerly seized upon to tramp for miles and miles; and,
getting bolder as they grew up, they finished by scouring the whole of
the country-side, by making journeys that sometimes lasted for days.
They slept where they could, in the cleft of a rock, on some
threshing-floor, still burning hot, where the straw of the beaten corn
made them a soft couch, or in some deserted hut, the ground of which
they covered with wild thyme and lavender. Those were flights far from
the everyday world, when they became absorbed in healthy mother Nature
herself, adoring trees and streams and mountains; revelling in the
supreme joy of being alone and free.

Dubuche, who was a boarder, had only joined them on half-holidays and
during the long vacation. Besides, his legs were heavy, and he had the
quiet nature of a studious lad. But Claude and Sandoz never wearied;
they awakened each other every Sunday morning by throwing stones at
their respective shutters. In summer, above all, they were haunted by
the thought of the Viorne, the torrent, whose tiny stream waters the
low-lying pastures of Plassans. When scarcely twelve they already knew
how to swim, and it became a passion with them to potter about in the
holes where the water accumulated; to spend whole days there, stark
naked, drying themselves on the burning sand, and then replunging into
the river, living there as it were, on their backs, on their stomachs,
searching among the reeds on the banks, immersed up to their ears, and
watching the hiding-places of the eels for hours at a stretch. That
constant contact of water beneath a burning sun prolonged their
childhood, as it were, and lent them the joyous laughter of truant
urchins, though they were almost young men, when of an evening they
returned to the town amidst the still oppressive heat of a summer
sunset. Later on they became very fond of shooting, but shooting such
as is carried on in a region devoid of game, where they had to trudge
a score of miles to pick off half a dozen pettychaps, or fig-peckers;
wonderful expeditions, whence they returned with their bags empty, or
with a mere bat, which they had managed to bring down while
discharging their guns at the outskirts of the town. Their eyes
moistened at the recollection of those happy days; they once more
beheld the white endless roads, covered with layers of dust, as if
there had been a fall of snow. They paced them again and again in
their imagination, happy to hear the fancied creaking of their heavy
shoes. Then they cut across the fields, over the reddish-brown
ferruginous soil, careering madly on and on; and there was a sky of
molten lead above them, not a shadow anywhere, nothing but dwarf olive
trees and almond trees with scanty foliage. And then the delicious
drowsiness of fatigue on their return, their triumphant bravado at
having covered yet more ground than on the precious journey, the
delight of being no longer conscious of effort, of advancing solely by
dint of strength acquired, spurring themselves on with some terrible
martial strain which helped to make everything like a dream.

Already at that time Claude, in addition to his powder-flask and
cartridge-belt, took with him an album, in which he sketched little
bits of country, while Sandoz, on his side, always had some favourite
poet in his pocket. They lived in a perfect frenzy of romanticism,
winged strophes alternated with coarse garrison stories, odes were
flung upon the burning, flashing, luminous atmosphere that enwrapt
them. And when perchance they came upon a small rivulet, bordered by
half a dozen willows, casting grey shadows on the soil all ablaze with
colour, they at once went into the seventh heaven. They there by
themselves performed the dramas they knew by heart, inflating their
voices when repeating the speeches of the heroes, and reducing them to
the merest whisper when they replied as queens and love-sick maidens.
On such days the sparrows were left in peace. In that remote province,
amidst the sleepy stupidity of that small town, they had thus lived on
from the age of fourteen, full of enthusiasm, devoured by a passion
for literature and art. The magnificent scenarios devised by Victor
Hugo, the gigantic phantasies which fought therein amidst a ceaseless
cross-fire of antithesis, had at first transported them into the
fulness of epic glory; gesticulating, watching the sun decline behind
some ruins, seeing life pass by amidst all the superb but false
glitter of a fifth act. Then Musset had come to unman them with his
passion and his tears; they heard their own hearts throb in response
to his, a new world opened to them--a world more human--that conquered
them by its cries for pity, and of eternal misery, which henceforth
they were to hear rising from all things. Besides, they were not
difficult to please; they showed the voracity of youth, a furious
appetite for all kinds of literature, good and bad alike. So eager
were they to admire something, that often the most execrable works
threw them into a state of exaltation similar to that which the purest
masterpieces produce.

And as Sandoz now remarked, it was their great love of bodily
exercise, their very revels of literature that had protected them
against the numbing influence of their ordinary surroundings. They
never entered a cafe, they had a horror of the streets, even
pretending to moult in them like caged eagles, whereas their
schoolfellows were already rubbing their elbows over the small marble
tables and playing at cards for drinks. Provincial life, which dragged
other lads, when still young, within its cogged mechanism, that habit
of going to one's club, of spelling out the local paper from its
heading to the last advertisement, the everlasting game of dominoes no
sooner finished than renewed, the same walk at the self-same hour and
ever along the same roads--all that brutifies the mind, like a
grindstone crushing the brain, filled them with indignation, called
forth their protestations. They preferred to scale the neighbouring
hills in search of some unknown solitary spot, where they declaimed
verses even amidst drenching showers, without dreaming of shelter in
their very hatred of town-life. They had even planned an encampment on
the banks of the Viorne, where they were to live like savages, happy
with constant bathing, and the company of five or six books, which
would amply suffice for their wants. Even womankind was to be strictly
banished from that camp. Being very timid and awkward in the presence
of the gentler sex, they pretended to the asceticism of superior
intellects. For two years Claude had been in love with a 'prentice
hat-trimmer, whom every evening he had followed at a distance, but to
whom he had never dared to address a word. Sandoz nursed dreams of
ladies met while travelling, beautiful girls who would suddenly spring
up in some unknown wood, charm him for a whole day, and melt into air
at dusk. The only love adventure which they had ever met with still
evoked their laughter, so silly did it seem to them now. It consisted
of a series of serenades which they had given to two young ladies
during the time when they, the serenaders, had formed part of the
college band. They passed their nights beneath a window playing the
clarinet and the cornet-a-piston, and thus raising a discordant din
which frightened all the folk of the neighbourhood, until one
memorable evening the indignant parents had emptied all the water
pitchers of the family over them.

Ah! those were happy days, and how loving was the laughter with which
they recalled them. On the walls of the studio hung a series of
sketches, which Claude, it so happened, had made during a recent trip
southward. Thus it seemed as if they were surrounded by the familiar
vistas of bright blue sky overhanging a tawny country-side. Here
stretched a plain dotted with little greyish olive trees as far as a
rosy network of distant hills. There, between sunburnt russet slopes,
the exhausted Viorne was almost running dry beneath the span of an old
dust-bepowdered bridge, without a bit of green, nothing save a few
bushes, dying for want of moisture. Farther on, the mountain gorge of
the Infernets showed its yawning chasm amidst tumbled rocks, struck
down by lightning, a huge chaos, a wild desert, rolling stony billows
as far as the eye could reach. Then came all sorts of well remembered
nooks: the valley of Repentance, narrow and shady, a refreshing oasis
amid calcined fields; the wood of Les Trois Bons-Dieux, with hard,
green, varnished pines shedding pitchy tears beneath the burning sun;
the sheep walk of Bouffan, showing white, like a mosque, amidst a
far-stretching blood-red plain. And there were yet bits of blinding,
sinuous roads; ravines, where the heat seemed even to wring bubbling
perspiration from the pebbles; stretches of arid, thirsty sand,
drinking up rivers drop by drop; mole hills, goat paths, and hill
crests, half lost in the azure sky.

'Hallo!' exclaimed Sandoz, turning towards one sketch, 'what's that?'

Claude, indignant, waved his palette. 'What! don't you remember? We
were very nigh breaking our necks there. Surely you recollect the day
we clambered from the very bottom of Jaumegarde with Dubuche? The rock
was as smooth as your hand, and we had to cling to it with our nails,
so that at one moment we could neither get up nor go down again. When
we were once atop and about to cook our cutlets, we, you and I, nearly
came to blows.'

Sandoz now remembered. 'Yes, yes; each had to roast his own cutlet on
rosemary sticks, and, as mine took fire, you exasperated me by
chaffing my cutlet, which was being reduced to cinders.'

They both shook with laughter, until the painter resumed his work,
gravely concluding, 'That's all over, old man. There is to be no more
idling at present.'

He spoke the truth. Since the three inseparables had realised their
dream of meeting together in Paris, which they were bent upon
conquering, their life had been terribly hard. They had tried to renew
the long walks of old. On certain Sunday mornings they had started on
foot from the Fontainebleau gate, had scoured the copses of Verrieres,
gone as far as the Bievre, crossed the woods of Meudon and Bellevue,
and returned home by way of Grenelle. But they taxed Paris with
spoiling their legs; they scarcely ever left the pavement now,
entirely taken up as they were with their struggle for fortune and
fame.

From Monday morning till Saturday night Sandoz sat fuming and fretting
at the municipal building of the fifth Arrondissement in a dark corner
of the registry office for births, rooted to his stool by the thought
of his mother, whom his salary of a hundred and fifty francs a month
helped in some fashion to keep. Dubuche, anxious to pay his parents
the interest of the money placed on his head, was ever on the look-out
for some petty jobs among architects, outside his studies at the
School of Arts. As for Claude, thanks to his thousand francs a year,
he had his full liberty; but the latter days of each month were
terrible enough, especially if he had to share the fag-end of his
allowance. Luckily he was beginning to sell a little; disposing of
tiny canvases, at the rate of ten and twelve francs a-piece, to Papa
Malgras, a wary picture dealer. After all, he preferred starvation to
turning his art into mere commerce by manufacturing portraits of
tradesmen and their wives; concocting conventional religious pictures
or daubing blinds for restaurants or sign-boards for accoucheuses.
When first he had returned to Paris, he had rented a very large studio
in the Impasse des Bourdonnais; but he had moved to the Quai de
Bourbon from motives of economy. He lived there like a savage, with an
absolute contempt for everything that was not painting. He had fallen
out with his relatives, who disgusted him; he had even ceased visiting
his aunt, who kept a pork-butcher's shop near the Central Markets,
because she looked too flourishing and plump.* Respecting the downfall
of his mother, who was being eaten out of doors and driven into the
streets, he nursed a secret grief.

  * This aunt is Lisa of 'The Fat and the Thin' (Le Ventre de Paris)
    in a few chapters of which Claude figures.--ED.

Suddenly he shouted to Sandoz, 'Will you be kind enough not to tumble
to pieces?' But Sandoz declared that he was getting stiff, and jumped
from the couch to stretch his legs a bit. They took ten minutes' rest,
talking meanwhile about many things. Claude felt condescendingly
good-tempered. When his work went smoothly he brightened up and became
talkative; he, who painted with his teeth set, and raged inwardly
directly he felt that nature was escaping him. Hence his friend had
scarcely resumed his attitude before he went on chattering, without,
however, missing a stroke of his brush.

'It's going on all right, old boy, isn't it? You look all there in it.
Oh, the brutes, I'll just see whether they'll refuse me this time. I
am more severe for myself than they are for themselves, I'm sure of
it; and whenever I pass one of my own pictures, it's more serious than
if it had passed before all the hanging committees on earth. You know
my picture of the markets, with the two urchins tumbling about on a
heap of vegetables? Well, I've scratched it all out, it didn't come
right. I found that I had got hold of a beastly machine,* a deal too
heavy for my strength. But, never you fear, I'll take the subject up
again some day, when I know better, and I'll take up others, machines
which will knock them all cock-a-hoop with surprise.'

  * In familiar conversation, French artists, playwrights, and
    novelists invariably call their productions by the slang
    term 'machines.'--ED.

He made a magnificent gesture, as if to sweep a whole crowd away;
emptied a tube of cobalt on his palette; and then began to jeer,
asking what his first master would say to a picture like this? His
first master indeed, Papa Belloque, a retired infantry captain, with
one arm, who for a quarter of a century had taught drawing to the
youth of Plassans in one of the galleries of the Museum! Then, in
Paris, hadn't the celebrated Berthou, the painter of 'Nero in the
Circus'--Berthou, whose lessons he had attended for six long months
--told him a score of times that he would never be able to do
anything? How he now regretted those six months wasted in idiotic
efforts, absurd 'studies,' under the iron rule of a man whose ideas
differed so much from his own. He at last began to hold forth against
working at the Louvre. He would, he said, sooner chop his hand off
than return there to spoil his perception of nature by undertaking one
of those copies which for ever dim the vision of the world in which
one lives.

Was there aught else in art than the rendering of what one felt within
oneself? Was not the whole of art reduced to placing a woman in front
of one--and then portraying her according to the feelings that she
inspired? Was not a bunch of carrots--yes, a bunch of carrots--studied
from nature, and painted unaffectedly, in a personal style, worth all
the ever-lasting smudges of the School of Arts, all that tobacco-juice
painting, cooked up according to certain given recipes? The day would
come when one carrot, originally rendered, would lead to a revolution.
It was because of this that he now contented himself with going to the
Boutin studio, a free studio, kept by a former model, in the Rue de la
Huchette. When he had paid his twenty francs he was put in front of as
many men and women as he cared for, and set about his work with a
will, never thinking of eating or drinking, but struggling unrestingly
with nature, mad almost with the excitement of work, by the side of a
pack of dandies who accused him of ignorant laziness, and arrogantly
prated about their 'studies,' because they copied noses and mouths,
under the eye of a master.

'Listen to this, old man: when one of those whipper-snappers can build
up a torso like that one over yonder, he may come up and tell me, and
we'll have a talk together.'

With the end of his brush he pointed to a study of the nude, suspended
from the wall near the door. It was really magnificent, full of
masterly breadth of colouring. By its side were some other admirable
bits, a girl's feet exquisite in their delicate truthfulness, and a
woman's trunk with quivering satin-like skin. In his rare moments of
content he felt proud of those few studies, the only ones which
satisfied him, which, as it were, foretold a great painter, admirably
gifted, but hampered by sudden and inexplicable fits of impotency.

Dealing sabre-like strokes at the velveteen jacket, he continued
lashing himself into excitement with his uncompromising theories which
respected nobody:

'They are all so many daubers of penny prints, who have stolen their
reputations; a set of idiots or knaves on their knees before public
imbecility! Not one among them dares to give the philistines a slap in
the face. And, while we are about it, you know that old Ingres turns
me sick with his glairy painting. Nevertheless, he's a brick, and a
plucky fellow, and I take off my hat to him, for he did not care a
curse for anybody, and he used to draw like the very devil. He ended
by making the idiots, who nowadays believe they understand him,
swallow that drawing of his. After him there are only two worth
speaking of, Delacroix and Courbet. The others are only numskulls. Oh,
that old romantic lion, the carriage of him! He was a decorator who
knew how to make the colours blaze. And what a grasp he had! He would
have covered every wall in Paris if they had let him; his palette
boiled, and boiled over. I know very well that it was only so much
phantasmagoria. Never mind, I like it for all that, as it was needed
to set the School on fire. Then came the other, a stout workman--that
one, the truest painter of the century, and altogether classical
besides, a fact which not one of the dullards understood. They yelled,
of course; they shouted about profanation and realism, when, after
all, the realism was only in the subject. The perception remained that
of the old masters, and the execution resumed and continued the best
bits of work one can find in our public galleries. Both Delacroix and
Courbet came at the proper time. Each made a stride forward. And now
--ah, now!'

He ceased speaking and drew back a few steps to judge of the effect of
his picture, becoming absorbed in contemplation for a moment, and then
resuming:

'Yes, nowadays we want something different--what, I don't exactly
know. If I did, and could do it, I should be clever indeed. No one
else would be in the race with me. All I do know and feel is that
Delacroix's grand romantic scenes are foundering and splitting, that
Courbet's black painting already reeks of the mustiness of a studio
which the sun never penetrates. You understand me, don't you? We,
perhaps, want the sun, the open air, a clear, youthful style of
painting, men and things such as they appear in the real light. In
short, I myself am unable to say what our painting should be; the
painting that our eyes of to-day should execute and behold.'

His voice again fell; he stammered and found himself unable to explain
the formulas of the future that were rising within him. Deep silence
came while he continued working at the velveteen jacket, quivering all
the time.

Sandoz had been listening to him without stirring from his position.
His back was still turned, and he said slowly, as if speaking to the
wall in a kind of dream:

'No; one does not know, and still we ought to know. But each time a
professor has wanted to impress a truth upon me, I have mistrustfully
revolted, thinking: "He is either deceiving himself or deceiving me."
Their ideas exasperate me. It seems to me that truth is larger, more
general. How beautiful would it be if one could devote the whole of
one's existence to one single work, into which one would endeavour to
put everything, the beasts of the field as well as mankind; in short,
a kind of immense ark. And not in the order indicated by manuals of
philosophy, or according to the idiotic hierarchy on which we pride
ourselves, but according to the full current of life; a world in which
we should be nothing more than an accident, in which the passing cur,
even the stones of the roads, would complete and explain us. In sum,
the grand whole, without low or high, or clean or unclean, such as it
indeed is in reality. It is certainly to science that poets and
novelists ought to address themselves, for it is the only possible
source of inspiration to-day. But what are we to borrow from it? How
are we to march in its company? The moment I begin to think about that
sort of thing I feel that I am floundering. Ah, if I only knew, what a
series of books I would hurl at the heads of the crowd!'

He also became silent. The previous winter he had published his first
book: a series of little sketches, brought from Plassans, among which
only a few rougher notes indicated that the author was a mutineer, a
passionate lover of truth and power. And lately he had been feeling
his way, questioning himself while all sorts of confused ideas
throbbed in his brain. At first, smitten with the thought of
undertaking something herculean, he had planned a genesis of the
universe, in three phases or parts; the creation narrated according to
science; mankind supervening at the appointed hour and playing its
part in the chain of beings and events; then the future--beings
constantly following one another, and finishing the creation of the
world by the endless labour of life. But he had calmed down in
presence of the venturesome hypotheses of this third phase; and he was
now looking out for a more restricted, more human framework, in which,
however, his vast ambition might find room.

'Ah, to be able to see and paint everything,' exclaimed Claude, after
a long interval. 'To have miles upon miles of walls to cover, to
decorate the railway stations, the markets, the municipal offices,
everything that will be built, when architects are no longer idiots.
Only strong heads and strong muscles will be wanted, for there will be
no lack of subjects. Life such as it runs about the streets, the life
of the rich and the poor, in the market places, on the race-courses,
on the boulevards, in the populous alleys; and every trade being
plied, and every passion portrayed in full daylight, and the peasants,
too, and the beasts of the fields and the landscapes--ah! you'll see
it all, unless I am a downright brute. My very hands are itching to do
it. Yes! the whole of modern life! Frescoes as high as the Pantheon! A
series of canvases big enough to burst the Louvre!'

Whenever they were thrown together the painter and the author
generally reached this state of excitement. They spurred each other
mutually, they went mad with dreams of glory; and there was such a
burst of youth, such a passion for work about their plans, that they
themselves often smiled afterwards at those great, proud dreams which
seemed to endow them with suppleness, strength, and spirit.

Claude, who had stepped back as far as the wall, remained leaning
against it, and gazing at his work. Seeing which, Sandoz, overcome by
fatigue, left the couch and joined him. Then both looked at the
picture without saying a word. The gentleman in the velveteen jacket
was entirely roughed in. His hand, more advanced than the rest,
furnished a pretty fresh patch of flesh colour amid the grass, and the
dark coat stood out so vigorously that the little silhouettes in the
background, the two little women wrestling in the sunlight, seemed to
have retreated further into the luminous quivering of the glade. The
principal figure, the recumbent woman, as yet scarcely more than
outlined, floated about like some aerial creature seen in dreams, some
eagerly desired Eve springing from the earth, with her features
vaguely smiling and her eyelids closed.

'Well, now, what are you going to call it?' asked Sandoz.

'_The Open Air_,' replied Claude, somewhat curtly.

The title sounded rather technical to the writer, who, in spite of
himself, was sometimes tempted to introduce literature into pictorial
art.

'_The Open Air_! that doesn't suggest anything.'

'There is no occasion for it to suggest anything. Some women and a man
are reposing in a forest in the sunlight. Does not that suffice? Don't
fret, there's enough in it to make a masterpiece.'

He threw back his head and muttered between his teeth: 'Dash it all!
it's very black still. I can't get Delacroix out of my eye, do what I
will. And then the hand, that's Courbet's manner. Everyone of us dabs
his brush into the romantic sauce now and then. We had too much of it
in our youth, we floundered in it up to our very chins. We need a
jolly good wash to get clear of it.'

Sandoz shrugged his shoulders with a gesture of despair. He also
bewailed the fact that he had been born at what he called the
confluence of Hugo and Balzac. Nevertheless, Claude remained
satisfied, full of the happy excitement of a successful sitting. If
his friend could give him two or three more Sundays the man in the
jacket would be all there. He had enough of him for the present. Both
began to joke, for, as a rule, Claude almost killed his models, only
letting them go when they were fainting, half dead with fatigue. He
himself now very nigh dropped, his legs bending under him, and his
stomach empty. And as the cuckoo clock struck five, he snatched at his
crust of bread and devoured it. Thoroughly worn out, he broke it with
trembling fingers, and scarcely chewed it, again standing before his
picture, pursued by his passion to such a degree as to be unconscious
even that he was eating.

'Five o'clock,' said Sandoz, as he stretched himself, with his arms
upraised. 'Let's go and have dinner. Ah! here comes Dubuche, just in
time.'

There was a knock at the door, and Dubuche came in. He was a stout
young fellow, dark, with regular but heavy features, close-cropped
hair, and moustaches already full-blown. He shook hands with both his
friends, and stopped before the picture, looking nonplussed. In
reality that harum-scarum style of painting upset him, such was the
even balance of his nature, such his reverence as a steady student for
the established formulas of art; and it was only his feeling of
friendship which, as a rule, prevented him from criticising. But this
time his whole being revolted visibly.

'Well, what's the matter? Doesn't it suit you?' asked Sandoz, who was
watching him.

'Yes, oh yes, it's very well painted--but--'

'Well, spit it out. What is it that ruffles you?'

'Not much, only the gentleman is fully dressed, and the women are not.
People have never seen anything like that before.'

This sufficed to make both the others wild. Why, were there not a
hundred pictures in the Louvre composed in precisely the same way?
Hadn't all Paris and all the painters and tourists of the world seen
them? And besides, if people had never seen anything like it, they
would see it now. After all, they didn't care a fig for the public!

Not in the least disconcerted by these violent replies, Dubuche
repeated quietly: 'The public won't understand--the public will think
it indecorous--and so it is!'

'You wretched bourgeois philistine!' exclaimed Claude, exasperated.
'They are making a famous idiot of you at the School of Arts. You
weren't such a fool formerly.'

These were the current amenities of his two friends since Dubuche had
attended the School of Arts. He thereupon beat a retreat, rather
afraid of the turn the dispute was taking, and saved himself by
belabouring the painters of the School. Certainly his friends were
right in one respect, the School painters were real idiots. But as for
the architects, that was a different matter. Where was he to get his
tuition, if not there? Besides his tuition would not prevent him from
having ideas of his own, later on. Wherewith he assumed a very
revolutionary air.

'All right,' said Sandoz, 'the moment you apologise, let's go and
dine.'

But Claude had mechanically taken up a brush and set to work again.
Beside the gentleman in the velveteen jacket the figure of the
recumbent woman seemed to be fading away. Feverish and impatient, he
traced a bold outline round her so as to bring her forward.

'Are you coming?'

'In a minute; hang it, what's the hurry? Just let me set this right,
and I'll be with you.'

Sandoz shook his head and then remarked very quietly, lest he should
still further annoy him: 'You do wrong to worry yourself like that,
old man. Yes, you are knocked up, and have had nothing to eat, and
you'll only spoil your work, as you did the other day.'

But the painter waved him off with a peevish gesture. It was the old
story--he did not know when to leave off; he intoxicated himself with
work in his craving for an immediate result, in order to prove to
himself that he held his masterpiece at last. Doubts had just driven
him to despair in the midst of his delight at having terminated a
successful sitting. Had he done right, after all, in making the
velveteen jacket so prominent, and would he not afterwards fail to
secure the brilliancy which he wished the female figure to show?
Rather than remain in suspense he would have dropped down dead on the
spot. Feverishly drawing the sketch of Christine's head from the
portfolio where he had hidden it, he compared it with the painting on
the canvas, assisting himself, as it were, by means of this document
derived from life.

'Hallo!' exclaimed Dubuche, 'where did you get that from? Who is it?'

Claude, startled by the questions, did not answer; then, without
reflecting, he who usually told them everything, brusquely lied,
prompted by a delicate impulse to keep silent respecting the adventure
of the night.

'Tell us who it is?' repeated the architect.

'Nobody at all--a model.'

'A model! a very young one, isn't she? She looks very nice. I wish you
would give me her address. Not for myself, but for a sculptor I know
who's on the look-out for a Psyche. Have you got the address there?'

Thereupon Dubuche turned to a corner of the greyish wall on which the
addresses of several models were written in chalk, haphazard. The
women particularly left their cards in that way, in awkward, childish
handwriting. Zoe Piedefer, 7 Rue Campagne-Premiere, a big brunette,
who was getting rather too stout, had scrawled her sign manual right
across the names of little Flore Beauchamp, 32 Rue de Laval, and
Judith Vaquez, 69 Rue du Rocher, a Jewess, both of whom were too thin.

'I say, have you got the address?' resumed Dubuche.

Then Claude flew into a passion. 'Don't pester me! I don't know and
don't care. You're a nuisance, worrying like that just when a fellow
wants to work.'

Sandoz had not said a word. Surprised at first, he had soon smiled. He
was gifted with more penetration than Dubuche, so he gave him a
knowing nod, and they then began to chaff. They begged Claude's
pardon; the moment he wanted to keep the young person for his personal
use, they would not ask him to lend her. Ha! ha! the scamp went
hunting about for pretty models. And where had he picked up that one?

More and more embarrassed by these remarks, Claude went on fidgetting.
'What a couple of idiots you are!' he exclaimed, 'If you only knew
what fools you are making of yourselves. That'll do. You really make
me sorry for both of you.'

His voice sounded so stern that they both became silent immediately,
while he, after once more scratching out the woman's head, drew it
anew and began to paint it in, following his sketch of Christine, but
with a feverish, unsteady touch which went at random.

'Just give me another ten minutes, will you?' he repeated. 'I will
rough in the shoulders to be ready for to-morrow, and then we'll go
down.'

Sandoz and Dubuche, knowing that it was of no use to prevent him from
killing himself in this fashion, resigned themselves to the
inevitable. The latter lighted his pipe, and flung himself on the
couch. He was the only one of the three who smoked; the others had
never taken kindly to tobacco, always feeling qualmish after a cigar.
And when Dubuche was stretched on his back, his eyes turned towards
the clouds of smoke he raised, he began to talk about himself in an
interminable monotonous fashion. Ah! that confounded Paris, how one
had to work one's fingers to the bone in order to get on. He recalled
the fifteen months of apprenticeship he had spent with his master, the
celebrated Dequersonniere, a former grand-prize man, now architect of
the Civil Branch of Public Works, an officer of the Legion of Honour
and a member of the Institute, whose chief architectural performance,
the church of St. Mathieu, was a cross between a pastry-cook's mould
and a clock in the so-called First Empire style. A good sort of
fellow, after all, was this Dequersonniere whom Dubuche chaffed, while
inwardly sharing his reverence for the old classical formulas.
However, but for his fellow-pupils, the young man would not have
learnt much at the studio in the Rue du Four, for the master only paid
a running visit to the place some three times a week. A set of
ferocious brutes, were those comrades of his, who had made his life
jolly hard in the beginning, but who, at least, had taught him how to
prepare a surface, outline, and wash in a plan. And how often had he
had to content himself with a cup of chocolate and a roll for dejeuner
in order to pay the necessary five-and-twenty francs to the
superintendent! And the sheets of paper he had laboriously smudged,
and the hours he had spent in poring over books before he had dared to
present himself at the School! And he had narrowly escaped being
plucked in spite of all his assiduous endeavours. He lacked
imagination, and the drawings he submitted, a caryatide and a summer
dining-room, both extremely mediocre performances, had classed him at
the bottom of the list. Fortunately, he had made up for this in his
oral examination with his logarithms, geometry, and history of
architecture, for he was very strong in the scientific parts. Now that
he was attending the School as a second-class student, he had to toil
and moil in order to secure a first-class diploma. It was a dog's
life, there was no end to it, said he.

He stretched his legs apart, high upon the cushions, and smoked
vigorously and regularly.

'What with their courses of perspective, of descriptive geometry, of
stereotomy, of building, and of the history of art--ah! upon my word,
they do make one blacken paper with notes. And every month there is a
competitive examination in architecture, sometimes a simple sketch, at
others a complete design. There's no time for pleasure if a fellow
wishes to pass his examinations and secure the necessary honourable
mentions, especially if, besides all that, he has to find time to earn
his bread. As for myself, it's almost killing me.'

One of the cushions having slipped upon the floor, he fished it up
with his feet. 'All the same, I'm lucky. There are so many of us
scouring the town every day without getting the smallest job. The day
before yesterday I discovered an architect who works for a large
contractor. You can have no idea of such an ignoramus of an architect
--a downright numskull, incapable even of tracing a plan. He gives me
twenty-five sous an hour, and I set his houses straight for him. It
came just in time, too, for my mother sent me word that she was quite
cleared out. Poor mother, what a lot of money I have to refund her!'

As Dubuche was evidently talking to himself, chewing the cud of his
everyday thoughts--his constant thoughts of making a rapid fortune
--Sandoz did not even trouble to listen to him. He had opened the
little window, and seated himself on a level with the roof, for he
felt oppressed by the heat in the studio. But all at once he
interrupted the architect.

'I say, are you coming to dinner on Thursday? All the other fellows
will be there--Fagerolles, Mahoudeau, Jory, Gagniere.'

Every Thursday, quite a band met at Sandoz's: friends from Plassans
and others met in Paris--revolutionaries to a man, and all animated by
the same passionate love of art.

'Next Thursday? No, I think not,' answered Dubuche.

'I am obliged to go to a dance at a family's I know.'

'Where you expect to get hold of a dowry, I suppose?'

'Well, it wouldn't be such a bad spec.'

He shook the ashes from his pipe on to his left palm, and then,
suddenly raising his voice--'I almost forgot. I have had a letter from
Pouillaud.'

'You, too!--well, I think he's pretty well done for, Pouillaud.
Another good fellow gone wrong.'

'Why gone wrong? He'll succeed his father; he'll spend his money
quietly down there. He writes rationally enough. I always said he'd
show us a thing or two, in spite of all his practical jokes. Ah! that
beast of a Pouillaud.'

Sandoz, furious, was about to reply, when a despairing oath from
Claude stopped him. The latter had not opened his lips since he had so
obstinately resumed his work. To all appearance he had not even
listened.

'Curse it--I have failed again. Decidedly, I'm a brute, I shall never
do anything.' And in a fit of mad rage he wanted to rush at his
picture and dash his fist through it. His friends had to hold him
back. Why, it was simply childish to get into such a passion. Would
matters be improved when, to his mortal regret, he had destroyed his
work? Still shaking, he relapsed into silence, and stared at the
canvas with an ardent fixed gaze that blazed with all the horrible
agony born of his powerlessness. He could no longer produce anything
clear or life-like; the woman's breast was growing pasty with heavy
colouring; that flesh which, in his fancy, ought to have glowed, was
simply becoming grimy; he could not even succeed in getting a correct
focus. What on earth was the matter with his brain that he heard it
bursting asunder, as it were, amidst his vain efforts? Was he losing
his sight that he was no longer able to see correctly? Were his hands
no longer his own that they refused to obey him? And thus he went on
winding himself up, irritated by the strange hereditary lesion which
sometimes so greatly assisted his creative powers, but at others
reduced him to a state of sterile despair, such as to make him forget
the first elements of drawing. Ah, to feel giddy with vertiginous
nausea, and yet to remain there full of a furious passion to create,
when the power to do so fled with everything else, when everything
seemed to founder around him--the pride of work, the dreamt-of glory,
the whole of his existence!

'Look here, old boy,' said Sandoz at last, 'we don't want to worry
you, but it's half-past six, and we are starving. Be reasonable, and
come down with us.'

Claude was cleaning a corner of his palette. Then he emptied some more
tubes on it, and, in a voice like thunder, replied with one single
word, 'No.'

For the next ten minutes nobody spoke; the painter, beside himself,
wrestled with his picture, whilst his friends remained anxious at this
attack, which they did not know how to allay. Then, as there came a
knock at the door, the architect went to open it.

'Hallo, it's Papa Malgras.'

Malgras, the picture-dealer, was a thick-set individual, with
close-cropped, brush-like, white hair, and a red splotchy face. He was
wrapped in a very dirty old green coat, that made him look like an
untidy cabman. In a husky voice, he exclaimed: 'I happened to pass
along the quay, on the other side of the way, and I saw that gentleman
at the window. So I came up.'

Claude's continued silence made him pause. The painter had turned to
his picture again with an impatient gesture. Not that this silence in
any way embarrassed the new comer, who, standing erect on his sturdy
legs and feeling quite at home, carefully examined the new picture
with his bloodshot eyes. Without any ceremony, he passed judgment upon
it in one phrase--half ironic, half affectionate: 'Well, well, there's
a machine.'

Then, seeing that nobody said anything, he began to stroll round the
studio, looking at the paintings on the walls.

Papa Malgras, beneath his thick layer of grease and grime, was really
a very cute customer, with taste and scent for good painting. He never
wasted his time or lost his way among mere daubers; he went straight,
as if from instinct, to individualists, whose talent was contested
still, but whose future fame his flaming, drunkard's nose sniffed from
afar. Added to this he was a ferocious hand at bargaining, and
displayed all the cunning of a savage in his efforts to secure, for a
song, the pictures that he coveted. True, he himself was satisfied
with very honest profits, twenty per cent., thirty at the most. He
based his calculations on quickly turning over his small capital,
never purchasing in the morning without knowing where to dispose of
his purchase at night. As a superb liar, moreover, he had no equal.

Pausing near the door, before the studies from the nude, painted at
the Boutin studio, he contemplated them in silence for a few moments,
his eyes glistening the while with the enjoyment of a connoisseur,
which his heavy eyelids tried to hide. Assuredly, he thought, there
was a great deal of talent and sentiment of life about that big crazy
fellow Claude, who wasted his time in painting huge stretches of
canvas which no one would buy. The girl's pretty legs, the admirably
painted woman's trunk, filled the dealer with delight. But there was
no sale for that kind of stuff, and he had already made his choice--a
tiny sketch, a nook of the country round Plassans, at once delicate
and violent--which he pretended not to notice. At last he drew near,
and said, in an off-hand way:

'What's this? Ah! yes, I know, one of the things you brought back with
you from the South. It's too crude. I still have the two I bought of
you.'

And he went on in mellow, long-winded phrases. 'You'll perhaps not
believe me, Monsieur Lantier, but that sort of thing doesn't sell at
all--not at all. I've a set of rooms full of them. I'm always afraid
of smashing something when I turn round. I can't go on like that,
honour bright; I shall have to go into liquidation, and I shall end my
days in the hospital. You know me, eh? my heart is bigger than my
pocket, and there's nothing I like better than to oblige young men of
talent like yourself. Oh, for the matter of that, you've got talent,
and I keep on telling them so--nay, shouting it to them--but what's
the good? They won't nibble, they won't nibble!'

He was trying the emotional dodge; then, with the spirit of a man
about to do something rash: 'Well, it sha'n't be said that I came in
to waste your time. What do you want for that rough sketch?'

Claude, still irritated, was painting nervously. He dryly answered,
without even turning his head: 'Twenty francs.'

'Nonsense; twenty francs! you must be mad. You sold me the others ten
francs a-piece--and to-day I won't give a copper more than eight
francs.'

As a rule the painter closed with him at once, ashamed and humbled at
this miserable chaffering, glad also to get a little money now and
then. But this time he was obstinate, and took to insulting the
picture-dealer, who, giving tit for tat, all at once dropped the
formal 'you' to assume the glib 'thou,' denied his talent, overwhelmed
him with invective, and taxed him with ingratitude. Meanwhile,
however, he had taken from his pocket three successive five-franc
pieces, which, as if playing at chuck-farthing, he flung from a
distance upon the table, where they rattled among the crockery.

'One, two, three--not one more, dost hear? for there is already one
too many, and I'll take care to get it back; I'll deduct it from
something else of thine, as I live. Fifteen francs for that! Thou art
wrong, my lad, and thou'lt be sorry for this dirty trick.'

Quite exhausted, Claude let him take down the little canvas, which
disappeared as if by magic in his capacious green coat. Had it dropped
into a special pocket, or was it reposing on Papa Malgras' ample
chest? Not the slightest protuberance indicated its whereabouts.

Having accomplished his stroke of business, Papa Malgras abruptly
calmed down and went towards the door. But he suddenly changed his
mind and came back. 'Just listen, Lantier,' he said, in the honeyest
of tones; 'I want a lobster painted. You really owe me that much after
fleecing me. I'll bring you the lobster, you'll paint me a bit of
still life from it, and keep it for your pains. You can eat it with
your friends. It's settled, isn't it?'

At this proposal Sandoz and Dubuche, who had hitherto listened
inquisitively, burst into such loud laughter that the picture-dealer
himself became gay. Those confounded painters, they did themselves no
good, they simply starved. What would have become of the lazy beggars
if he, Papa Malgras, hadn't brought a leg of mutton now and then, or a
nice fresh plaice, or a lobster, with its garnish of parsley?

'You'll paint me my lobster, eh, Lantier? Much obliged.' And he
stationed himself anew before the large canvas, with his wonted smile
of mingled derision and admiration. And at last he went off,
repeating, 'Well, well, there's a machine.'

Claude wanted to take up his palette and brushes once more. But his
legs refused their service; his arms fell to his side, stiff, as if
pinioned there by some occult force. In the intense melancholy silence
that had followed the din of the dispute he staggered, distracted,
bereft of sight before his shapeless work.

'I'm done for, I'm done for,' he gasped. 'That brute has finished me
off!'

The clock had just struck seven; he had been at work for eight mortal
hours without tasting anything but a crust of bread, without taking a
moment's rest, ever on his legs, shaken by feverish excitement. And
now the sun was setting, shadows began to darken the studio, which in
the gloaming assumed a most melancholy aspect. When the light went
down like this on the crisis of a bad day's work, it seemed to Claude
as if the sun would never rise again, but had for ever carried life
and all the jubilant gaiety of colour away.

'Come,' implored Sandoz, with all the gentleness of brotherly
compassion. 'Come, there's a good fellow.'

Even Dubuche added, 'You'll see more clearly into it to-morrow. Come
and dine.'

For a moment Claude refused to surrender. He stood rooted to the spot,
deaf to their friendly voices, and fiercely obstinate.

What did he want to do then, since his tired fingers were no longer
able to grasp the brush? He did not know, but, however powerless he
might be, he was gnawed by a mad craving to go on working still and to
create in spite of everything. Even if he did nothing, he would at
least stay there, he would not vacate the spot. All at once, however,
he made up his mind, shaken the while as by a big sob. He clutched
firmly hold of his broadest palette-knife, and, with one deep, slow
sweep, he obliterated the woman's head and bosom. It was veritable
murder, a pounding away of human flesh; the whole disappeared in a
murky, muddy mash. By the side of the gentleman in the dark jacket,
amidst the bright verdure, where the two little wrestlers so lightly
tinted were disporting themselves, there remained naught of the nude,
headless, breastless woman but a mutilated trunk, a vague cadaverous
stump, an indistinct, lifeless patch of visionary flesh.

Sandoz and Dubuche were already descending the stairs with a great
clatter, and Claude followed them, fleeing his work, in agony at
having to leave it thus scarred with a gaping gash.


                                III

THE beginning of the week proved disastrous to Claude. He had relapsed
into one of those periods of self-doubt that made him hate painting,
with the hatred of a lover betrayed, who overwhelms the faithless one
with insults although tortured by an uncontrollable desire to worship
her yet again. So on the Thursday, after three frightful days of
fruitless and solitary battling, he left home as early as eight in the
morning, banging his door violently, and feeling so disgusted with
himself that he swore he would never take up a brush again. When he
was unhinged by one of these attacks there was but one remedy, he had
to forget himself, and, to do so, it was needful that he should look
up some comrades with whom to quarrel, and, above all, walk about and
trudge across Paris, until the heat and odour of battle rising from
her paving-stones put heart into him again.

That day, like every other Thursday, he was to dine at Sandoz's, in
company with their friends. But what was he to do until the evening?
The idea of remaining by himself, of eating his heart out, disgusted
him. He would have gone straight to his friend, only he knew that the
latter must be at his office. Then the thought of Dubuche occurred to
him, but he hesitated, for their old friendship had lately been
cooling down. He felt that the fraternity of the earlier times of
effort no longer existed between them. He guessed that Dubuche lacked
intelligence, had become covertly hostile, and was occupied with
ambitions different from his own. However, he, Claude, must go
somewhere. So he made up his mind, and repaired to the Rue Jacob,
where the architect rented a small room on the sixth floor of a big
frigid-looking house.

Claude was already on the landing of the second floor, when the
doorkeeper, calling him back, snappishly told him that M. Dubuche was
not at home, and had, in fact, stayed out all night. The young man
slowly descended the stairs and found himself in the street,
stupefied, as it were, by so prodigious an event as an escapade on the
part of Dubuche. It was a piece of inconceivable bad luck. For a
moment he strolled along aimlessly; but, as he paused at the corner of
the Rue de Seine, not knowing which way to go, he suddenly recollected
what his friend had told him about a certain night spent at the
Dequersonniere studio--a night of terrible hard work, the eve of the
day on which the pupils' designs had to be deposited at the School of
Arts. At once he walked towards the Rue du Four, where the studio was
situated. Hitherto he had carefully abstained from calling there for
Dubuche, from fear of the yells with which outsiders were greeted. But
now he made straight for the place without flinching, his timidity
disappearing so thoroughly before the anguish of loneliness that he
felt ready to undergo any amount of insult could he but secure a
companion in misfortune.

The studio was situated in the narrowest part of the Rue du Four, at
the far end of a decrepit, tumble-down building. Claude had to cross
two evil-smelling courtyards to reach a third, across which ran a sort
of big closed shed, a huge out-house of board and plaster work, which
had once served as a packing-case maker's workshop. From outside,
through the four large windows, whose panes were daubed with a coating
of white lead, nothing could be seen but the bare whitewashed ceiling.

Having pushed the door open, Claude remained motionless on the
threshold. The place stretched out before him, with its four long
tables ranged lengthwise to the windows--broad double tables they
were, which had swarms of students on either side, and were littered
with moist sponges, paint saucers, iron candlesticks, water bowls, and
wooden boxes, in which each pupil kept his white linen blouse, his
compasses, and colours. In one corner, the stove, neglected since the
previous winter, stood rusting by the side of a pile of coke that had
not been swept away; while at the other end a large iron cistern with
a tap was suspended between two towels. And amidst the bare untidiness
of this shed, the eye was especially attracted by the walls which,
above, displayed a litter of plaster casts ranged in haphazard fashion
on shelves, and disappeared lower down behind forests of T-squares and
bevels, and piles of drawing boards, tied together with webbing
straps. Bit by bit, such parts of the partitions as had remained
unoccupied had become covered with inscriptions and drawings, a
constantly rising flotsam and jetsam of scrawls traced there as on the
margin of an ever-open book. There were caricatures of the students
themselves, coarse witticisms fit to make a gendarme turn pale,
epigrammatic sentences, addition sums, addresses, and so forth; while,
above all else, written in big letters, and occupying the most
prominent place, appeared this inscription: 'On the 7th of June, Gorfu
declared that he didn't care a hang for Rome.--Signed, Godemard.'*

  * The allusion is to the French Art School at Rome, and the
    competitions into which students enter to obtain admission
    to it, or to secure the prizes offered for the best exhibits
    which, during their term of residence, they send to Paris.--ED.

Claude was greeted with a growl like that of wild beasts disturbed in
their lair. What kept him motionless was the strange aspect of this
place on the morning of the 'truck night,' as the embryo architects
termed the crucial night of labour. Since the previous evening, the
whole studio, some sixty pupils, had been shut up there; those who had
no designs to exhibit--'the niggers,' as they were called remaining to
help the others, the competitors who, being behind time, had to knock
off the work of a week in a dozen hours. Already, at midnight, they
had stuffed themselves with brawn, saveloys, and similar viands,
washed down with cheap wine. Towards one o'clock they had secured the
company of some 'ladies'; and, without the work abating, the feast had
turned into a Roman orgy, blended with a smoking competition. On the
damp, stained floor there remained a great litter of greasy paper and
broken bottles; while the atmosphere reeked of burnt tallow, musk,
highly seasoned sausages, and cheap bluish wine.

And now many voices savagely yelled: 'Turn him out. Oh, that mug! What
does he want, that guy? Turn him out, turn him out.'

For a moment Claude, quite dazed, staggered beneath the violence of
the onslaught. But the epithets became viler, for the acme of
elegance, even for the more refined among these young fellows, was to
rival one's friends in beastly language. He was, nevertheless,
recovering and beginning to answer, when Dubuche recognised him. The
latter turned crimson, for he detested that kind of adventure. He felt
ashamed of his friend, and rushed towards him, amidst the jeers, which
were now levelled at himself:

'What, is it you?' he gasped. 'I told you never to come in. Just wait
for me a minute in the yard.'

At that moment, Claude, who was stepping back, narrowly escaped being
knocked down by a little hand-truck which two big full-bearded fellows
brought up at a gallop. It was from this truck that the night of heavy
toil derived its name: and for the last week the students who had got
behindhand with their work, through taking up petty paid jobs outside,
had been repeating the cry, 'Oh! I'm in the truck and no mistake.' The
moment the vehicle appeared, a clamour arose. It was a quarter to nine
o'clock, there was barely time to reach the School of Arts. However, a
helter-skelter rush emptied the studio; each brought out his chases,
amidst a general jostling; those who obstinately wished to give their
designs a last finishing touch were knocked about and carried away
with their comrades. In less than five minutes every frame was piled
upon the truck, and the two bearded fellows, the most recent additions
to the studio, harnessed themselves to it like cattle and drew it
along with all their strength, the others vociferating, and pushing
from behind. It was like the rush of a sluice; the three courtyards
were crossed amidst a torrential crash, and the street was invaded,
flooded by the howling throng.

Claude, nevertheless, had set up running by the side of Dubuche, who
came at the fag-end, very vexed at not having had another quarter of
an hour to finish a tinted drawing more carefully.

'What are you going to do afterwards?' asked Claude.

'Oh! I've errands which will take up my whole day.'

The painter was grieved to see that even this friend escaped him. 'All
right, then,' said he; 'in that case I leave you. Shall we see you at
Sandoz's to-night?'

'Yes, I think so; unless I'm kept to dinner elsewhere.'

Both were getting out of breath. The band of embryo architects,
without slackening their pace, had purposely taken the longest way
round for the pleasure of prolonging their uproar. After rushing down
the Rue du Four, they dashed across the Place Gozlin and swept into
the Rue de l'Echaude. Heading the procession was the truck, drawn and
pushed along more and more vigorously, and constantly rebounding over
the rough paving-stones, amid the jolting of the frames with which it
was laden. Its escort galloped along madly, compelling the passers-by
to draw back close to the houses in order to save themselves from
being knocked down; while the shop-keepers, standing open-mouthed on
their doorsteps, believed in a revolution. The whole neighbourhood
seemed topsy-turvy. In the Rue Jacob, such was the rush, so frightful
were the yells, that several house shutters were hastily closed. As
the Rue Bonaparte was, at last, being reached, one tall, fair fellow
thought it a good joke to catch hold of a little servant girl who
stood bewildered on the pavement, and drag her along with them, like a
wisp of straw caught in a torrent.

'Well,' said Claude, 'good-bye, then; I'll see you to-night.'

'Yes, to-night.'

The painter, out of breath, had stopped at the corner of the Rue des
Beaux Arts. The court gates of the Art School stood wide open in front
of him, and the procession plunged into the yard.

After drawing breath, Claude retraced his steps to the Rue de Seine.
His bad luck was increasing; it seemed ordained that he should not be
able to beguile a chum from work that morning. So he went up the
street, and slowly walked on as far as the Place du Pantheon, without
any definite aim. Then it occurred to him that he might just look into
the Municipal Offices, if only to shake hands with Sandoz. That would,
at any rate, mean ten minutes well spent. But he positively gasped
when he was told by an attendant that M. Sandoz had asked for a day
off to attend a funeral. However, he knew the trick of old. His friend
always found the same pretext whenever he wanted to do a good day's
work at home. He had already made up his mind to join him there, when
a feeling of artistic brotherliness, the scruple of an honest worker,
made him pause; yes, it would be a crime to go and disturb that good
fellow, and infect him with the discouragement born of a difficult
task, at the very moment when he was, no doubt, manfully accomplishing
his own work.

So Claude had to resign himself to his fate. He dragged his black
melancholy along the quays until mid-day, his head so heavy, so full
of thoughts of his lack of power, that he only espied the well-loved
horizons of the Seine through a mist. Then he found himself once more
in the Rue de la Femme-sans-Tete, where he breakfasted at Gomard's
wine shop, whose sign 'The Dog of Montargis,' inspired him with
interest. Some stonemasons, in their working blouses, bespattered with
mortar, were there at table, and, like them, and with them, he ate his
eight sous' 'ordinary'--some beef broth in a bowl, in which he soaked
some bread, followed by a slice of boiled soup-beef, garnished with
haricot beans, and served up on a plate damp with dish-water. However,
it was still too good, he thought, for a brute unable to earn his
bread. Whenever his work miscarried, he undervalued himself, ranked
himself lower than a common labourer, whose sinewy arms could at least
perform their appointed task. For an hour he lingered in the tavern
brutifying himself by listening to the conversation at the tables
around him. Once outside he slowly resumed his walk in haphazard
fashion.

When he got to the Place de l'Hotel de Ville, however, a fresh idea
made him quicken his pace. Why had he not thought of Fagerolles?
Fagerolles was a nice fellow, gay, and by no means a fool, although he
studied at the School of Arts. One could talk with him, even when he
defended bad painting. If he had lunched at his father's, in the Rue
Vieille-du-Temple, he must certainly still be there.

On entering the narrow street, Claude felt a sensation of refreshing
coolness come over him. In the sun it had grown very warm, and
moisture rose from the pavement, which, however bright the sky,
remained damp and greasy beneath the constant tramping of the
pedestrians. Every minute, when a push obliged Claude to leave the
footwalk, he found himself in danger of being knocked down by trucks
or vans. Still the street amused him, with its straggling houses out
of line, their flat frontages chequered with signboards up to the very
eaves, and pierced with small windows, whence came the hum of every
kind of handiwork that can be carried on at home. In one of the
narrowest parts of the street a small newspaper shop made him stop. It
was betwixt a hairdresser's and a tripeseller's, and had an outdoor
display of idiotic prints, romantic balderdash mixed with filthy
caricatures fit for a barrack-room. In front of these 'pictures,' a
lank hobbledehoy stood lost in reverie, while two young girls nudged
each other and jeered. He felt inclined to slap their faces, but he
hurried across the road, for Fagerolles' house happened to be
opposite. It was a dark old tenement, standing forward from the
others, and was bespattered like them with the mud from the gutters.
As an omnibus came up, Claude barely had time to jump upon the foot
pavement, there reduced to the proportions of a simple ledge; the
wheels brushed against his chest, and he was drenched to his knees.

M. Fagerolles, senior, a manufacturer of artistic zinc-work, had his
workshops on the ground floor of the building, and having converted
two large front rooms on the first floor into a warehouse, he
personally occupied a small, dark, cellar-like apartment overlooking
the courtyard. It was there that his son Henri had grown up, like a
true specimen of the flora of the Paris streets, at the edge of that
narrow pavement constantly struck by the omnibus wheels, always
soddened by the gutter water, and opposite the print and newspaper
shop, flanked by the barber's and tripeseller's. At first his father
had made an ornamental draughtsman of him for personal use. But when
the lad had developed higher ambition, taking to painting proper, and
talking about the School of Arts, there had been quarrels, blows, a
series of separations and reconciliations. Even now, although Henri
had already achieved some successes, the manufacturer of artistic
zinc-work, while letting him have his will, treated him harshly, like
a lad who was spoiling his career.

After shaking off the water, Claude went up the deep archway entrance,
to a courtyard, where the light was quite greenish, and where there
was a dank, musty smell, like that at the bottom of a tank. There was
an overhanging roofing of glass and iron at the foot of the staircase,
which was a wide one, with a wrought-iron railing, eaten with rust. As
the painter passed the warehouse on the first floor, he glanced
through a glass door and noticed M. Fagerolles examining some
patterns. Wishing to be polite, he entered, in spite of the artistic
disgust he felt for all that zinc, coloured to imitate bronze, and
having all the repulsive mendacious prettiness of spurious art.

'Good morning, monsieur. Is Henri still at home?'

The manufacturer, a stout, sallow-looking man, drew himself straight
amidst all his nosegay vases and cruets and statuettes. He had in his
hand a new model of a thermometer, formed of a juggling girl who
crouched and balanced the glass tube on her nose.

'Henri did not come in to lunch,' he answered drily.

This cool reception upset Claude. 'Ah! he did not come back; I beg
pardon for having disturbed you, then. Good-day, monsieur.'

'Good-day.'

Once more outside, Claude began to swear to himself. His ill-luck was
complete, Fagerolles escaped him also. He even felt vexed with himself
for having gone there, and having taken an interest in that
picturesque old street; he was infuriated by the romantic gangrene
that ever sprouted afresh within him, do what he might. It was his
malady, perhaps, the false principle which he sometimes felt like a
bar across his skull. And when he had reached the quays again, he
thought of going home to see whether his picture was really so very
bad. But the mere idea made him tremble all over. His studio seemed a
chamber of horrors, where he could no more continue to live, as if,
indeed, he had left the corpse of some beloved being there. No, no; to
climb the three flights of stairs, to open the door, to shut himself
up face to face with 'that,' would have needed strength beyond his
courage. So he crossed the Seine and went along the Rue St. Jacques.
He felt too wretched and lonely; and, come what might, he would go to
the Rue d'Enfer to turn Sandoz from his work.

Sandoz's little fourth-floor flat consisted of a dining-room, a
bedroom, and a strip of kitchen. It was tenanted by himself alone; his
mother, disabled by paralysis, occupied on the other side of the
landing a single room, where she lived in morose and voluntary
solitude. The street was a deserted one; the windows of the rooms
overlooked the gardens of the Deaf and Dumb Asylum, above which rose
the rounded crest of a lofty tree, and the square tower of St.
Jacques-du-Haut-Pas.

Claude found Sandoz in his room, bending over his table, busy with a
page of 'copy.'

'I am disturbing you?' said Claude.

'Not at all. I have been working ever since morning, and I've had
enough of it. I've been killing myself for the last hour over a
sentence that reads anyhow, and which has worried me all through my
lunch.'

The painter made a gesture of despair, and the other, seeing him so
gloomy, at once understood matters.

'You don't get on either, eh? Well, let's go out. A sharp walk will
take a little of the rust off us. Shall we go?'

As he was passing the kitchen, however, an old woman stopped him. It
was his charwoman, who, as a rule, came only for two hours in the
morning and two hours in the evening. On Thursdays, however, she
remained the whole afternoon in order to look after the dinner.

'Then it's decided, monsieur?' she asked. 'It's to be a piece of skate
and a leg of mutton, with potatoes.'

'Yes, if you like.'

'For how many am I to lay the cloth?'

'Oh! as for that, one never knows. Lay for five, at any rate; we'll
see afterwards. Dinner at seven, eh? we'll try to be home by then.'

When they were on the landing, Sandoz, leaving Claude to wait for him,
stole into his mother's room. When he came out again, in the same
discreet affectionate manner, they both went downstairs in silence.
Outside, having sniffed to right and left, as if to see which way the
wind blew, they ended by going up the street, reached the Place de
l'Observatoire, and turned down the Boulevard du Montparnasse. This
was their ordinary promenade; they reached the spot instinctively,
being fond of the wide expanse of the outer boulevards, where they
could roam and lounge at ease. They continued silent, for their heads
were heavy still, but the comfort of being together gradually made
them more serene. Still it was only when they were opposite the
Western Railway Station that Sandoz spoke.

'I say, suppose we go to Mahoudeau's, to see how he's getting on with
his big machine. I know that he has given "his gods and saints" the
slip to-day.'

'All right,' answered Claude. 'Let's go to Mahoudeau's.'

They at once turned into the Rue du Cherche-Midi. There, at a few
steps from the boulevard, Mahoudeau, a sculptor, had rented the shop
of a fruiterer who had failed in business, and he had installed his
studio therein, contenting himself with covering the windows with a
layer of whitening. At this point, the street, wide and deserted, has
a quiet, provincial aspect, with a somewhat ecclesiastical touch.
Large gateways stand wide open showing a succession of deep roomy
yards; from a cowkeeper's establishment comes a tepid, pungent smell
of litter; and the dead wall of a convent stretches away for a goodly
length. It was between this convent and a herbalist's that the shop
transformed into a studio was situated. It still bore on its
sign-board the inscription, 'Fruit and Vegetables,' in large yellow
letters.

Claude and Sandoz narrowly missed being blinded by some little girls
who were skipping in the street. On the foot pavement sat several
families whose barricades of chairs compelled the friends to step down
on to the roadway. However, they were drawing nigh, when the sight of
the herbalist's shop delayed them for a moment. Between its windows,
decked with enemas, bandages, and similar things, beneath the dried
herbs hanging above the doorway, whence came a constant aromatic
smell, a thin, dark woman stood taking stock of them, while, behind
her, in the gloom of the shop, one saw the vague silhouette of a
little sickly-looking man, who was coughing and expectorating. The
friends nudged each other, their eyes lighted up with bantering mirth;
and then they turned the handle of Mahoudeau's door.

The shop, though tolerably roomy, was almost filled by a mass of clay:
a colossal Bacchante, falling back upon a rock. The wooden stays bent
beneath the weight of that almost shapeless pile, of which nothing but
some huge limbs could as yet be distinguished. Some water had been
spilt on the floor, several muddy buckets straggled here and there,
while a heap of moistened plaster was lying in a corner. On the
shelves, formerly occupied by fruit and vegetables, were scattered
some casts from the antique, covered with a tracery of cinder-like
dust which had gradually collected there. A wash-house kind of
dampness, a stale smell of moist clay, rose from the floor. And the
wretchedness of this sculptor's studio and the dirt attendant upon the
profession were made still more conspicuous by the wan light that
filtered through the shop windows besmeared with whitening.

'What! is it you?' shouted Mahoudeau, who sat before his female
figure, smoking a pipe.

He was small and thin, with a bony face, already wrinkled at
twenty-seven. His black mane-like hair lay entangled over his very low
forehead, and his sallow mask, ugly almost to ferociousness, was
lighted up by a pair of childish eyes, bright and empty, which smiled
with winning simplicity. The son of a stonemason of Plassans, he had
achieved great success at the local art competitions, and had
afterwards come to Paris as the town laureate, with an allowance of
eight hundred francs per annum, for a period of four years. In the
capital, however, he had found himself at sea, defenceless, failing in
his competitions at the School of Arts, and spending his allowance to
no purpose; so that, at the end of his term, he had been obliged for a
livelihood to enter the employment of a dealer in church statues, at
whose establishment, for ten hours a day, he scraped away at St.
Josephs, St. Rochs, Mary Magdalens, and, in fact, all the saints of
the calendar. For the last six months, however, he had experienced a
revival of ambition, on finding himself once more among his comrades
of Provence, the eldest of whom he was--fellows whom he had known at
Geraud's boarding-school for little boys, and who had since grown into
savage revolutionaries. At present, through his constant intercourse
with impassioned artists, who troubled his brain with all sorts of
wild theories, his ambition aimed at the gigantic.

'The devil!' said Claude, 'there's a lump.'

The sculptor, delighted, gave a long pull at his pipe, and blew a
cloud of smoke.

'Eh, isn't it? I am going to give them some flesh, and living flesh,
too; not the bladders of lard that they turn out.'

'It's a woman bathing, isn't it?' asked Sandoz.

'No; I shall put some vine leaves around her head. A Bacchante, you
understand.'

At this Claude flew into a violent passion.

'A Bacchante? Do you want to make fools of people? Does such a thing
as a Bacchante exist? A vintaging girl, eh? And quite modern, dash it
all. I know she's nude, so let her be a peasant woman who has
undressed. And that must be properly conveyed, mind; people must
realise that she lives.'

Mahoudeau, taken aback, listened, trembling. He was afraid of Claude,
and bowed to his ideal of strength and truth. So he even improved upon
the painter's idea.

'Yes, yes, that's what I meant to say--a vintaging girl. And you'll
see whether there isn't a real touch of woman about her.'

At that moment Sandoz, who had been making the tour of the huge block
of clay, exclaimed: 'Why, here's that sneak of a Chaine.'

Behind the pile, indeed, sat Chaine, a burly fellow who was quietly
painting away, copying the fireless rusty stove on a small canvas. It
could be told that he was a peasant by his heavy, deliberate manner
and his bull-neck, tanned and hardened like leather. His only
noticeable feature was his forehead, displaying all the bumps of
obstinacy; for his nose was so small as to be lost between his red
cheeks, while a stiff beard hid his powerful jaws. He came from Saint
Firmin, a village about six miles from Plassans, where he had been a
cow-boy, until he drew for the conscription; and his misfortunes dated
from the enthusiasm that a gentleman of the neighbourhood had shown
for the walking-stick handles which he carved out of roots with his
knife. From that moment, having become a rustic genius, an embryo
great man for this local connoisseur, who happened to be a member of
the museum committee, he had been helped by him, adulated and driven
crazy with hopes; but he had successively failed in everything--his
studies and competitions--thus missing the town's purse. Nevertheless,
he had started for Paris, after worrying his father, a wretched
peasant, into premature payment of his heritage, a thousand francs, on
which he reckoned to live for a twelvemonth while awaiting the
promised victory. The thousand francs had lasted eighteen months.
Then, as he had only twenty francs left, he had taken up his quarters
with his friend, Mahoudeau. They both slept in the same bed, in the
dark back shop; they both in turn cut slices from the same loaves of
bread--of which they bought sufficient for a fortnight at a time, so
that it might get very hard, and that they might thus be able to eat
but little of it.

'I say, Chaine,' continued Sandoz, 'your stove is really very exact.'

Chaine, without answering, gave a chuckle of triumph which lighted up
his face like a sunbeam. By a crowning stroke of imbecility, and to
make his misfortunes perfect, his protector's advice had thrown him
into painting, in spite of the real taste that he showed for wood
carving. And he painted like a whitewasher, mixing his colours as a
hodman mixes his mortar, and managing to make the clearest and
brightest of them quite muddy. His triumph consisted, however, in
combining exactness with awkwardness; he displayed all the naive
minuteness of the primitive painters; in fact, his mind, barely raised
from the clods, delighted in petty details. The stove, with its
perspective all awry, was tame and precise, and in colour as dingy as
mire.

Claude approached and felt full of compassion at the sight of that
painting, and though he was as a rule so harsh towards bad painters,
his compassion prompted him to say a word of praise.

'Ah! one can't say that you are a trickster; you paint, at any rate,
as you feel. Very good, indeed.'

However, the door of the shop had opened, and a good-looking, fair
fellow, with a big pink nose, and large, blue, short-sighted eyes,
entered shouting:

'I say, why does that herbalist woman next door always stand on her
doorstep? What an ugly mug she's got!'

They all laughed, except Mahoudeau, who seemed very much embarrassed.

'Jory, the King of Blunderers,' declared Sandoz, shaking hands with
the new comer.

'Why? What? Is Mahoudeau interested in her? I didn't know,' resumed
Jory, when he had at length grasped the situation. 'Well, well, what
does it matter? When everything's said, they are all irresistible.'

'As for you,' the sculptor rejoined, 'I can see you have tumbled on
your lady-love's finger-nails again. She has dug a bit out of your
cheek!'

They all burst out laughing anew, while Jory, in his turn, reddened.
In fact, his face was scratched: there were even two deep gashes
across it. The son of a magistrate of Plassans, whom he had driven
half-crazy by his dissolute conduct, he had crowned everything by
running away with a music-hall singer under the pretext of going to
Paris to follow the literary profession. During the six months that
they had been camping together in a shady hotel of the Quartier Latin,
the girl had almost flayed him alive each time she caught him paying
attention to anybody else of her sex. And, as this often happened, he
always had some fresh scar to show--a bloody nose, a torn ear, or a
damaged eye, swollen and blackened.

At last they all began to talk, with the exception of Chaine, who went
on painting with the determined expression of an ox at the plough.
Jory had at once gone into ecstasies over the roughly indicated figure
of the vintaging girl. He worshipped a massive style of beauty. His
first writings in his native town had been some Parnassian sonnets
celebrating the copious charms of a handsome pork-butcheress. In
Paris--where he had fallen in with the whole band of Plassans--he had
taken to art criticism, and, for a livelihood, he wrote articles for
twenty francs apiece in a small, slashing paper called 'The Drummer.'
Indeed, one of these articles, a study on a picture by Claude
exhibited at Papa Malgras's, had just caused a tremendous scandal; for
Jory had therein run down all the painters whom the public appreciated
to extol his friend, whom he set up as the leader of a new school, the
school of the 'open air.' Very practical at heart, he did not care in
reality a rap about anything that did not conduce to his own
pleasures; he simply repeated the theories he heard enunciated by his
friends. 'I say, Mahoudeau,' he now exclaimed, 'you shall have an
article; I'll launch that woman of yours. What limbs, my boys! She's
magnificent!'

Then suddenly changing the conversation: 'By the way,' he said, 'my
miserly father has apologised. He is afraid I shall drag his name
through the mud, so he sends me a hundred francs a month now. I am
paying my debts.'

'Debts! you are too careful to have any,' muttered Sandoz, with a
smile.

In fact, Jory displayed a hereditary tightness of fist which much
amused his friends. He managed to lead a profligate life without money
and without incurring debts; and with the skill he thus displayed was
allied constant duplicity, a habit of incessantly lying, which he had
contracted in the devout sphere of his family, where his anxiety to
hide his vices had made him lie about everything at all hours, and
even without occasion. But he now gave a superb reply, the cry of a
sage of deep experience.

'Oh, you fellows, you don't know the worth of money!'

This time he was hooted. What a philistine! And the invectives
continued, when some light taps on one of the window-panes suddenly
made the din cease.

'She is really becoming a nuisance,' said Mahoudeau, with a gesture of
annoyance.

'Eh? Who is it? The herbalist woman?' asked Jory. 'Let her come in; it
will be great fun.'

The door indeed had already been opened, and Mahoudeau's neighbour,
Madame Jabouille, or Mathilde, as she was familiarly called, appeared
on the threshold. She was about thirty, with a flat face horribly
emaciated, and passionate eyes, the lids of which had a bluish tinge
as if they were bruised. It was said that some members of the clergy
had brought about her marriage with little Jabouille, at a time when
the latter's business was still flourishing, thanks to the custom of
all the pious folk of the neighbourhood. The truth was, that one
sometimes espied black cassocks stealthily crossing that mysterious
shop, where all the aromatic herbs set a perfume of incense. A kind of
cloistral quietude pervaded the place; the devotees who came in spoke
in low voices, as if in a confessional, slipped their purchases into
their bags furtively, and went off with downcast eyes. Unfortunately,
some very horrid rumours had got abroad--slander invented by the
wine-shop keeper opposite, said pious folks. At any rate, since the
widower had re-married, the business had been going to the dogs. The
glass jars seemed to have lost all their brightness, and the dried
herbs, suspended from the ceiling, were tumbling to dust. Jabouille
himself was coughing his life out, reduced to a very skeleton. And
although Mathilde professed to be religious, the pious customers
gradually deserted her, being of opinion that she made herself too
conspicuous with young fellows of the neighbourhood now that Jabouille
was almost eaten out of house and home.

For a moment Mathilde remained motionless, blinking her eyes. A
pungent smell had spread through the shop, a smell of simples, which
she brought with her in her clothes and greasy, tumbled hair; the
sickly sweetness of mallow, the sharp odour of elderseed, the bitter
effluvia of rhubarb, but, above all, the hot whiff of peppermint,
which seemed like her very breath.

She made a gesture of feigned surprise. 'Oh, dear me! you have
company--I did not know; I'll drop in again.'

'Yes, do,' said Mahoudeau, looking very vexed. 'Besides, I am going
out; you can give me a sitting on Sunday.'

At this Claude, stupefied, fairly stared at the emaciated Mathilde,
and then at the huge vintaging woman.

'What?' he cried, 'is it madame who poses for that figure? The
dickens, you exaggerate!'

Then the laughter began again, while the sculptor stammered his
explanations. 'Oh! she only poses for the head and the hands, and
merely just to give me a few indications.'

Mathilde, however, laughed with the others, with a sharp, brazen-faced
laughter, showing the while the gaping holes in her mouth, where
several teeth were wanting.

'Yes,' resumed Mahoudeau. 'I have to go out on some business now.
Isn't it so, you fellows, we are expected over yonder?'

He had winked at his friends, feeling eager for a good lounge. They
all answered that they were expected, and helped him to cover the
figure of the vintaging girl with some strips of old linen which were
soaking in a pail of water.

However, Mathilde, looking submissive but sad, did not stir. She
merely shifted from one place to another, when they pushed against
her, while Chaine, who was no longer painting, glanced at her over his
picture. So far, he had not opened his lips. But as Mahoudeau at last
went off with his three friends, he made up his mind to ask, in his
husky voice:

'Shall you come home to-night?'

'Very late. Have your dinner and go to bed. Good-bye.'

Then Chaine remained alone with Mathilde in the damp shop, amidst the
heaps of clay and the puddles of water, while the chalky light from
the whitened windows glared crudely over all the wretched untidiness.

Meantime the four others, Claude and Mahoudeau, Jory and Sandoz,
strolled along, seeming to take up the whole width of the Boulevard
des Invalides. It was the usual thing, the band was gradually
increased by the accession of comrades picked up on the way, and then
came the wild march of a horde upon the war-path. With the bold
assurance of their twenty summers, these young fellows took possession
of the foot pavement. The moment they were together trumpets seemed to
sound in advance of them; they seized upon Paris and quietly dropped
it into their pockets. There was no longer the slightest doubt about
their victory; they freely displayed their threadbare coats and old
shoes, like destined conquerors of to-morrow who disdained bagatelles,
and had only to take the trouble to become the masters of all the
luxury surrounding them. And all this was attended by huge contempt
for everything that was not art--contempt for fortune, contempt for
the world at large, and, above all, contempt for politics. What was
the good of all such rubbish? Only a lot of incapables meddled with
it. A warped view of things, magnificent in its very injustice,
exalted them; an intentional ignorance of the necessities of social
life, the crazy dream of having none but artists upon earth. They
seemed very stupid at times, but, all the same, their passion made
them strong and brave.

Claude became excited. Faith in himself revived amidst the glow of
common hopes. His worry of the morning had only left a vague numbness
behind, and he now once more began to discuss his picture with Sandoz
and Mahoudeau, swearing, it is true, that he would destroy it the next
day. Jory, who was very short-sighted, stared at all the elderly
ladies he met, and aired his theories on artistic work. A man ought to
give his full measure at once in the first spurt of inspiration; as
for himself, he never corrected anything. And, still discussing, the
four friends went on down the boulevard, which, with its comparative
solitude, and its endless rows of fine trees, seemed to have been
expressly designed as an arena for their disputations. When they
reached the Esplanade, the wrangling became so violent that they
stopped in the middle of that large open space. Beside himself, Claude
called Jory a numskull; was it not better to destroy one's work than
to launch a mediocre performance upon the world? Truckling to trade
was really disgusting. Mahoudeau and Sandoz, on their side, shouted
both together at the same time. Some passers-by, feeling uneasy,
turned round to look, and at last gathered round these furious young
fellows, who seemed bent on swallowing each other. But they went off
vexed, thinking that some practical joke had been played upon them,
when they suddenly saw the quartette, all good friends again, go into
raptures over a wet-nurse, dressed in light colours, with long
cherry-tinted ribbons streaming from her cap. There, now! That was
something like--what a tint, what a bright note it set amid the
surroundings! Delighted, blinking their eyes, they followed the nurse
under the trees, and then suddenly seemed roused and astonished to
find they had already come so far. The Esplanade, open on all sides,
save on the south, where rose the distant pile of the Hotel des
Invalides, delighted them--it was so vast, so quiet; they there had
plenty of room for their gestures; and they recovered breath there,
although they were always declaring that Paris was far too small for
them, and lacked sufficient air to inflate their ambitious lungs.

'Are you going anywhere particular?' asked Sandoz of Mahoudeau and
Jory.

'No,' answered the latter, 'we are going with you. Where are _you_
going?'

Claude, gazing carelessly about him, muttered: 'I don't know. That
way, if you like.'

They turned on to the Quai d'Orsay, and went as far as the Pont de la
Concorde. In front of the Corps Legislatif the painter remarked, with
an air of disgust: 'What a hideous pile!'

'Jules Favre made a fine speech the other day. How he did rile
Rouher,' said Jory.

However, the others left him no time to proceed, the disputes began
afresh. 'Who was Jules Favre? Who was Rouher? Did they exist? A parcel
of idiots whom no one would remember ten years after their death.' The
young men had now begun to cross the bridge, and they shrugged their
shoulders with compassion. Then, on reaching the Place de la Concorde,
they stopped short and relapsed into silence.

'Well,' opined Claude at last, 'this isn't bad, by any means.'

It was four o'clock, and the day was waning amidst a glorious powdery
shimmer. To the right and left, towards the Madeleine and towards the
Corps Legislatif, lines of buildings stretched away, showing against
the sky, while in the Tuileries Gardens rose gradients of lofty
rounded chestnut trees. And between the verdant borders of the
pleasure walks, the avenue of the Champs Elysees sloped upward as far
as the eye could reach, topped by the colossal Arc de Triomphe, agape
in front of the infinite. A double current, a twofold stream rolled
along--horses showing like living eddies, vehicles like retreating
waves, which the reflections of a panel or the sudden sparkle of the
glass of a carriage lamp seemed to tip with white foam. Lower down,
the square--with its vast footways, its roads as broad as lakes--was
filled with a constant ebb and flow, crossed in every direction by
whirling wheels, and peopled with black specks of men, while the two
fountains plashed and streamed, exhaling delicious coolness amid all
the ardent life.

Claude, quivering with excitement, kept saying: 'Ah! Paris! It's ours.
We have only to take it.'

They all grew excited, their eyes opened wide with desire. Was it not
glory herself that swept from the summit of that avenue over the whole
capital? Paris was there, and they longed to make her theirs.

'Well, we'll take her one day,' said Sandoz, with his obstinate air.

'To be sure we shall,' said Mahoudeau and Jory in the simplest manner.

They had resumed walking; they still roamed about, found themselves
behind the Madeleine, and went up the Rue Tronchet. At last, as they
reached the Place du Havre, Sandoz exclaimed, 'So we are going to
Baudequin's, eh?'

The others looked as if they had dropped from the sky; in fact, it did
seem as if they were going to Baudequin's.

'What day of the week is it?' asked Claude. 'Thursday, eh? Then
Fagerolles and Gagniere are sure to be there. Let's go to
Baudequin's.'

And thereupon they went up the Rue d'Amsterdam. They had just crossed
Paris, one of their favourite rambles, but they took other routes at
times--from one end of the quays to the other; or from the Porte St.
Jacques to the Moulineaux, or else to Pere-la-Chaise, followed by a
roundabout return along the outer boulevards. They roamed the streets,
the open spaces, the crossways; they rambled on for whole days, as
long as their legs would carry them, as if intent on conquering one
district after another by hurling their revolutionary theories at the
house-fronts; and the pavement seemed to be their property--all the
pavement touched by their feet, all that old battleground whence arose
intoxicating fumes which made them forget their lassitude.

The Cafe Baudequin was situated on the Boulevard des Batignolles, at
the corner of the Rue Darcet. Without the least why or wherefore, it
had been selected by the band as their meeting-place, though Gagniere
alone lived in the neighbourhood. They met there regularly on Sunday
nights; and on Thursday afternoons, at about five o'clock, those who
were then at liberty had made it a habit to look in for a moment. That
day, as the weather was fine and bright, the little tables outside
under the awning were occupied by rows of customers, obstructing the
footway. But the band hated all elbowing and public exhibition, so
they jostled the other people in order to go inside, where all was
deserted and cool.

'Hallo, there's Fagerolles by himself,' exclaimed Claude.

He had gone straight to their usual table at the end of the cafe, on
the left, where he shook hands with a pale, thin, young man, whose
pert girlish face was lighted up by a pair of winning, satirical grey
eyes, which at times flashed like steel. They all sat down and ordered
beer, after which the painter resumed:

'Do you know that I went to look for you at your father's; and a nice
reception he gave me.'

Fagerolles, who affected a low devil-may-care style, slapped his
thighs. 'Oh, the old fellow plagues me! I hooked it this morning,
after a row. He wants me to draw some things for his beastly zinc
stuff. As if I hadn't enough zinc stuff at the Art School.'

This slap at the professors delighted the young man's friends. He
amused them and made himself their idol by dint of alternate flattery
and blame. His smile went from one to the other, while, by the aid of
a few drops of beer spilt on the table, his long nimble fingers began
tracing complicated sketches. His art evidently came very easily to
him; it seemed as if he could do anything with a turn of the hand.

'And Gagniere?' asked Mahoudeau; 'haven't you seen him?'

'No; I have been here for the last hour.'

Just then Jory, who had remained silent, nudged Sandoz, and directed
his attention to a girl seated with a gentleman at a table at the back
of the room. There were only two other customers present, two
sergeants, who were playing cards. The girl was almost a child, one of
those young Parisian hussies who are as lank as ever at eighteen. She
suggested a frizzy poodle--with the shower of fair little locks that
fell over her dainty little nose, and her large smiling mouth, set
between rosy cheeks. She was turning over the leaves of an illustrated
paper, while the gentleman accompanying her gravely sipped a glass of
Madeira; but every other minute she darted gay glances from over the
newspaper towards the band of artists.

'Pretty, isn't she?' whispered Jory. 'Who is she staring at? Why,
she's looking at me.'

But Fagerolles suddenly broke in: 'I say, no nonsense. Don't imagine
that I have been here for the last hour merely waiting for you.'

The others laughed; and lowering his voice he told them about the
girl, who was named Irma Becot. She was the daughter of a grocer in
the Rue Montorgueil, and had been to school in the neighbourhood till
she was sixteen, writing her exercises between two bags of lentils,
and finishing off her education on her father's doorstep, lolling
about on the pavement, amidst the jostling of the throng, and learning
all about life from the everlasting tittle-tattle of the cooks, who
retailed all the scandal of the neighbourhood while waiting for five
sous' worth of Gruyere cheese to be served them. Her mother having
died, her father himself had begun to lead rather a gay life, in such
wise that the whole of the grocery stores--tea, coffee, dried
vegetables, and jars and drawers of sweetstuff--were gradually
devoured. Irma was still going to school, when, one day, the place was
sold up. Her father died of a fit of apoplexy, and Irma sought refuge
with a poor aunt, who gave her more kicks than halfpence, with the
result that she ended by running away, and taking her flight through
all the dancing-places of Montmartre and Batignolles.

Claude listened to the story with his usual air of contempt for women.
Suddenly, however, as the gentleman rose and went out after whispering
in her ear, Irma Becot, after watching him disappear, bounded from her
seat with the impulsiveness of a school girl, in order to join
Fagerolles, beside whom she made herself quite at home, giving him a
smacking kiss, and drinking out of his glass. And she smiled at the
others in a very engaging manner, for she was partial to artists, and
regretted that they were generally so miserably poor. As Jory was
smoking, she took his cigarette out of his mouth and set it in her
own, but without pausing in her chatter, which suggested that of a
saucy magpie.

'You are all painters, aren't you? How amusing! But why do those three
look as if they were sulking. Just laugh a bit, or I shall make you,
you'll see!'

As a matter of fact, Sandoz, Claude, and Mahoudeau, quite taken aback,
were watching her most gravely. She herself remained listening, and,
on hearing her companion come back, she hastily gave Fagerolles an
appointment for the morrow. Then, after replacing the cigarette
between Jory's lips, she strode off with her arms raised, and making a
very comical grimace; in such wise that when the gentleman reappeared,
looking sedate and somewhat pale, he found her in her former seat,
still looking at the same engraving in the newspaper. The whole scene
had been acted so quickly, and with such jaunty drollery, that the two
sergeants who sat nearby, good-natured fellows both of them, almost
died of laughter as they shuffled their cards afresh.

In fact, Irma had taken them all by storm. Sandoz declared that her
name of Becot was very well suited for a novel; Claude asked whether
she would consent to pose for a sketch; while Mahoudeau already
pictured her as a Paris gamin, a statuette that would be sure to sell.
She soon went off, however, and behind the gentleman's back she wafted
kisses to the whole party, a shower of kisses which quite upset the
impressionable Jory.

It was five o'clock, and the band ordered some more beer. Some of the
usual customers had taken possession of the adjacent tables, and these
philistines cast sidelong glances at the artists' corner, glances in
which contempt was curiously mingled with a kind of uneasy deference.
The artists were indeed well known; a legend was becoming current
respecting them. They themselves were now talking on common-place
subjects: about the heat, the difficulty of finding room in the
omnibus to the Odeon, and the discovery of a wine-shop where real meat
was obtainable. One of them wanted to start a discussion about a
number of idiotic pictures that had lately been hung in the Luxembourg
Museum; but there was only one opinion on the subject, that the
pictures were not worth their frames. Thereupon they left off
conversing; they smoked, merely exchanging a word or a significant
smile now and then.

'Well,' asked Claude at last, 'are we going to wait for Gagniere?'

At this there was a protest. Gagniere was a bore. Besides, he would
turn up as soon as he smelt the soup.

'Let's be off, then,' said Sandoz. 'There's a leg of mutton this
evening, so let's try to be punctual.'

Each paid his score, and they all went out. Their departure threw the
cafe into a state of emotion. Some young fellows, painters, no doubt,
whispered together as they pointed at Claude, much in the same manner
as if he were the redoubtable chieftain of a horde of savages. Jory's
famous article was producing its effect; the very public was becoming
his accomplice, and of itself was soon to found that school of the
open air, which the band had so far only joked about. As they gaily
said, the Cafe Baudequin was not aware of the honour they had done it
on the day when they selected it to be the cradle of a revolution.

Fagerolles having reinforced the group, they now numbered five, and
slowly they took their way across Paris, with their tranquil look of
victory. The more numerous they were, the more did they stretch across
the pavement, and carry away on their heels the burning life of the
streets. When they had gone down the Rue de Clichy, they went straight
along the Rue de la Chaussee d'Antin, turned towards the Rue de
Richelieu, crossed the Seine by the Pont des Arts, so as to fling
their gibes at the Institute, and finally reached the Luxembourg by
way of the Rue de Seine, where a poster, printed in three colours, the
garish announcement of a travelling circus, made them all shout with
admiration. Evening was coming on; the stream of wayfarers flowed more
slowly; the tired city was awaiting the shadows of night, ready to
yield to the first comer who might be strong enough to take her.

On reaching the Rue d'Enfer, when Sandoz had ushered his four friends
into his own apartments, he once more vanished into his mother's room.
He remained there for a few moments, and then came out without saying
a word, but with the tender, gentle smile habitual to him on such
occasions. And immediately afterwards a terrible hubbub, of laughter,
argument, and mere shouting, arose in his little flat. Sandoz himself
set the example, all the while assisting the charwoman, who burst into
bitter language because it was half-past seven, and her leg of mutton
was drying up. The five companions, seated at table, were already
swallowing their soup, a very good onion soup, when a new comer
suddenly appeared.

'Hallo! here's Gagniere,' was the vociferous chorus.

Gagniere, short, slight, and vague looking, with a doll-like startled
face, set off by a fair curly beard, stood for a moment on the
threshold blinking his green eyes. He belonged to Melun, where his
well-to-do parents, who were both dead, had left him two houses; and
he had learnt painting, unassisted, in the forest of Fontainebleau.
His landscapes were at least conscientiously painted, excellent in
intention; but his real passion was music, a madness for music, a
cerebral bonfire which set him on a level with the wildest of the
band.

'Am I in the way?' he gently asked.

'Not at all; come in!' shouted Sandoz.

The charwoman was already laying an extra knife and fork.

'Suppose she lays a place for Dubuche, while she is about it,' said
Claude. 'He told me he would perhaps come.'

But they were all down upon Dubuche, who frequented women in society.
Jory said that he had seen him in a carriage with an old lady and her
daughter, whose parasols he was holding on his knees.

'Where have you come from to be so late?' asked Fagerolles of
Gagniere.

The latter, who was about to swallow his first spoonful of soup, set
it in his plate again.

'I was in the Rue de Lancry--you know, where they have chamber music.
Oh! my boy, some of Schumann's machines! You haven't an idea of them!
They clutch hold of you at the back of your head just as if somebody
were breathing down your back. Yes, yes, it's something much more
immaterial than a kiss, just a whiff of breath. 'Pon my honour, a
fellow feels as if he were going to die.'

His eyes were moistening and he turned pale, as if experiencing some
over-acute enjoyment.

'Eat your soup,' said Mahoudeau; 'you'll tell us all about it
afterwards.'

The skate was served, and they had the vinegar bottle put on the table
to improve the flavour of the black butter, which seemed rather
insipid. They ate with a will, and the hunks of bread swiftly
disappeared. There was nothing refined about the repast, and the wine
was mere common stuff, which they watered considerably from a feeling
of delicacy, in order to lessen their host's expenses. They had just
saluted the leg of mutton with a hurrah, and the host had begun to
carve it, when the door opened anew. But this time there were furious
protests.

'No, no, not another soul! Turn him out, turn him out.'

Dubuche, out of breath with having run, bewildered at finding himself
amidst such howling, thrust his fat, pallid face forward, whilst
stammering explanations.

'Really, now, I assure you it was the fault of the omnibuses. I had to
wait for five of them in the Champs Elysees.'

'No, no, he's lying!--Let him go, he sha'n't have any of that mutton.
Turn him out, turn him out!'

All the same, he ended by coming in, and it was then noticed that he
was stylishly attired, all in black, trousers and frock-coat alike,
and cravated and booted in the stiff ceremonious fashion of some
respectable member of the middle classes going out to dinner.

'Hallo! he has missed his invitation,' chaffed Fagerolles. 'Don't you
see that his fine ladies didn't ask him to stay to dinner, and so now
he's come to gobble up our leg of mutton, as he doesn't know where
else to go?'

At this Dubuche turned red, and stammered: 'Oh! what an idea! How
ill-natured you are! And, besides, just attend to your own business.'

Sandoz and Claude, seated next to each other, smiled, and the former,
beckoning to Dubuche, said to him: 'Lay your own place, bring a plate
and a glass, and sit between us--like that, they'll leave you alone.'

However, the chaff continued all the time that the mutton was being
eaten. When the charwoman had brought Dubuche a plate of soup and a
piece of skate, he himself fell in with the jokes good-naturedly. He
pretended to be famished, greedily mopped out his plate, and related a
story about a mother having refused him her daughter because he was an
architect. The end of the dinner thus became very boisterous; they all
rattled on together. The only dessert, a piece of Brie cheese, met
with enormous success. Not a scrap of it was left, and the bread
almost ran short. The wine did run short, so they each swallowed a
clear draught of water, smacking their lips the while amidst great
laughter. And, with faces beaming, and well-filled paunches, they
passed into the bedroom with the supreme content of folks who have
fared very sumptuously indeed.

Those were Sandoz's jolly evenings. Even at the times when he was hard
up he had always had some boiled beef and broth to share with his
comrades. He felt delighted at having a number of them around him, all
friends, inspired by the same ideas. Though he was of their own age,
he beamed with fatherly feelings and satisfied good-nature when he saw
them in his rooms, around him, hand in hand, and intoxicated with
hope. As he had but two rooms, the bedroom did duty as a drawing-room,
and became as much theirs as his. For lack of sufficient chairs, two
or three had to seat themselves on the bed. And on those warm summer
evenings the window remained wide open to let in the air. From it two
black silhouettes were to be seen rising above the houses, against the
clear sky--the tower of St. Jacques du Haut-Pas and the tree of the
Deaf and Dumb Asylum. When money was plentiful there was beer. Every
one brought his own tobacco, the room soon became full of smoke, and
without seeing each other they ended by conversing far into the night,
amidst the deep mournful silence of that deserted district.

On that particular evening, at about nine o'clock, the charwoman came
in.

'Monsieur, I have done. Can I go?'

'Yes, go to bed. You have left the kettle on the fire, haven't you?
I'll make the tea myself.'

Sandoz had risen. He went off at the heels of the charwoman, and only
returned a quarter of an hour afterwards. He had no doubt been to kiss
his mother, whom he tucked up every night before she dozed off.

Meanwhile the voices had risen to a high pitch again. Fagerolles was
telling a story.

'Yes, old fellow; at the School they even correct Nature herself. The
other day Mazel comes up to me and says: "Those two arms don't
correspond"; whereupon I reply: "Look for yourself, monsieur--the
model's are like that." It was little Flore Beauchamp, you know.
"Well," Mazel furiously replies, "if she has them like that, it's very
wrong of her."'

They almost all shrieked, especially Claude, to whom Fagerolles told
the story by way of paying court. For some time previously the younger
artist had yielded to the elder's influence; and although he continued
to paint with purely tricky skill, he no longer talked of anything but
substantial, thickly-painted work, of bits of nature thrown on to
canvas, palpitating with life, such as they really were. This did not
prevent him, though, from elsewhere chaffing the adepts of the
open-air school, whom he accused of impasting with a kitchen ladle.

Dubuche, who had not laughed, his sense of rectitude being offended,
made so bold as to reply:

'Why do you stop at the School if you think you are being brutified
there? It's simple enough, one goes away--Oh, I know you are all
against me, because I defend the School. But, you see, my idea is
that, when a fellow wants to carry on a trade, it is not a bad thing
for him to begin by learning it.'

Ferocious shouts arose at this, and Claude had need of all his
authority to secure a hearing.

'He is right. One must learn one's trade. But it won't do to learn it
under the ferule of professors who want to cram their own views
forcibly into your nut. That Mazel is a perfect idiot!'

He flung himself backward on the bed, on which he had been sitting,
and with his eyes raised to the ceiling, he went on, in an excited
tone:

'Ah! life! life! to feel it and portray it in its reality, to love it
for itself, to behold in it the only real, lasting, and changing
beauty, without any idiotic idea of ennobling it by mutilation. To
understand that all so-called ugliness is nothing but the mark of
individual character, to create real men and endow them with life
--yes, that's the only way to become a god!'

His faith was coming back to him, the march across Paris had spurred
him on once more; he was again seized by his passion for living flesh.
They listened to him in silence. He made a wild gesture, then calmed
down.

'No doubt every one has his own ideas; but the annoyance is that at
the Institute they are even more intolerant than we are. The hanging
committee of the Salon is in their hands. I am sure that that idiot
Mazel will refuse my picture.'

Thereupon they all broke out into imprecations, for this question of
the hanging committee was the everlasting subject of their wrath. They
demanded reforms; every one had a solution of the problem ready--from
universal suffrage, applied to the election of a hanging committee,
liberal in the widest sense of the word, down to unrestricted liberty,
a Salon open to all exhibitors.*

  * The reader will bear in mind that all these complaints made by
    Claude and his friends apply to the old Salons, as organized
    under Government control, at the time of the Second Empire.--ED.

While the others went on discussing the subject, Gagniere drew
Mahoudeau to the open window, where, in a low voice, his eyes the
while staring into space, he murmured:

'Oh, it's nothing at all, only four bars; a simple impression jotted
down there and then. But what a deal there is in it! To me it's first
of all a landscape, dwindling away in the distance; a bit of
melancholy road, with the shadow of a tree that one cannot see; and
then a woman passes along, scarcely a silhouette; on she goes and you
never meet her again, no, never more again.'

Just at that moment, however, Fagerolles exclaimed, 'I say, Gagniere,
what are you going to send to the Salon this year?'

Gagniere did not hear, but continued talking, enraptured, as it were.

'In Schumann one finds everything--the infinite. And Wagner, too, whom
they hissed again last Sunday!'

But a fresh call from Fagerolles made him start.

'Eh! what? What am I going to send to the Salon? A small landscape,
perhaps; a little bit of the Seine. It is so difficult to decide;
first of all I must feel pleased with it myself.'

He had suddenly become timid and anxious again. His artistic scruples,
his conscientiousness, kept him working for months on a canvas the
size of one's hand. Following the track of the French landscape
painters, those masters who were the first to conquer nature, he
worried about correctness of tone, pondering and pondering over the
precise value of tints, till theoretical scruples ended by making his
touch heavy. And he often did not dare to chance a bright dash of
colour, but painted in a greyish gloomy key which was astonishing,
when one remembered his revolutionary passions.

'For my part,' said Mahoudeau, 'I feel delighted at the prospect of
making them squint with my woman.'

Claude shrugged his shoulders. 'Oh! you'll get in, the sculptors have
broader minds than the painters. And, besides, you know very well what
you are about; you have something at your fingers' ends that pleases.
There will be plenty of pretty bits about your vintaging girl.'

The compliment made Mahoudeau feel serious. He posed above all for
vigour of execution; he was unconscious of his real vein of talent,
and despised gracefulness, though it ever invincibly sprung from his
big, coarse fingers--the fingers of an untaught working-man--like a
flower that obstinately sprouts from the hard soil where the wind has
flung its seed.

Fagerolles, who was very cunning, had decided to send nothing, for
fear of displeasing his masters; and he chaffed the Salon, calling it
'a foul bazaar, where all the bad painting made even the good turn
musty.' In his inmost heart he was dreaming of one day securing the
Rome prize, though he ridiculed it, as he did everything else.

However, Jory stationed himself in the middle of the room, holding up
his glass of beer. Sipping every now and then, he declared: 'Well,
your hanging committee quite disgusts me! I say, shall I demolish it?
I'll begin bombarding it in our very next number. You'll give me some
notes, eh? and we'll knock it to pieces. That will be fine fun.'

Claude was at last fully wound up, and general enthusiasm prevailed.
Yes, yes, they must start a campaign. They would all be in it, and,
pressing shoulder to shoulder, march to the battle together. At that
moment there was not one of them who reserved his share of fame, for
nothing divided them as yet; neither the profound dissemblance of
their various natures, of which they themselves were ignorant, nor
their rivalries, which would some day bring them into collision. Was
not the success of one the success of all the others? Their youth was
fermenting, they were brimming over with mutual devotion; they
indulged anew in their everlasting dream of gathering into a phalanx
to conquer the world, each contributing his individual effort; this
one helping that one forward, and the whole band reaching fame at once
in one row. Claude, as the acknowledged chief, was already sounding
the victory, distributing laurels with such lyrical abundance that he
overlooked himself. Fagerolles himself, gibing Parisian though he
might be, believed in the necessity of forming an army; while even
Jory, although he had a coarser appetite, with a deal of the
provincial still about him, displayed much useful comradeship,
catching various artistic phrases as they fell from his companions'
lips, and already preparing in his mind the articles which would
herald the advent of the band and make them known. And Mahoudeau
purposely exaggerated his intentional roughness, and clasped his hands
like an ogre kneading human flesh; while Gagniere, in ecstasy, as if
freed from the everlasting greyishness of his art, sought to refine
sensation to the utmost limits of intelligence; and Dubuche, with his
matter-of-fact convictions, threw in but a word here and there; words,
however, which were like club-blows in the very midst of the fray.
Then Sandoz, happy and smiling at seeing them so united, 'all in one
shirt,' as he put it, opened another bottle of beer. He would have
emptied every one in the house.

'Eh?' he cried, 'we're agreed, let's stick to it. It's really pleasant
to come to an understanding among fellows who have something in their
nuts, so may the thunderbolts of heaven sweep all idiots away!'

At that same moment a ring at the bell stupefied him. Amidst the
sudden silence of the others, he inquired--'Who, to the deuce, can
that be--at eleven o'clock?'

He ran to open the door, and they heard him utter a cry of delight. He
was already coming back again, throwing the door wide open as he said
--'Ah! it's very kind indeed to think of us and surprise us like this!
Bongrand, gentlemen.'

The great painter, whom the master of the house announced in this
respectfully familiar way, entered, holding out both hands. They all
eagerly rose, full of emotion, delighted with that manly, cordial
handshake so willingly bestowed. Bongrand was then forty-five years
old, stout, and with a very expressive face and long grey hair. He had
recently become a member of the Institute, and wore the rosette of an
officer of the Legion of Honour in the top button-hole of his
unpretentious alpaca jacket. He was fond of young people; he liked
nothing so much as to drop in from time to time and smoke a pipe among
these beginners, whose enthusiasm warmed his heart.

'I am going to make the tea,' exclaimed Sandoz.

When he came back from the kitchen, carrying the teapot and cups, he
found Bongrand installed astride a chair, smoking his short cutty,
amidst the din which had again arisen. Bongrand himself was holding
forth in a stentorian voice. The grandson of a farmer of the Beauce
region, the son of a man risen to the middle classes, with peasant
blood in his veins, indebted for his culture to a mother of very
artistic tastes, he was rich, had no need to sell his pictures, and
retained many tastes and opinions of Bohemian life.

'The hanging committee? Well, I'd sooner hang myself than belong to
it!' said he, with sweeping gestures. 'Am I an executioner to kick
poor devils, who often have to earn their bread, out of doors?'

'Still, you might render us great service by defending our pictures
before the committee,' observed Claude.

'Oh, dear, no! I should only make matters worse for you--I don't
count; I'm nobody.'

There was a chorus of protestations; Fagerolles objected, in a shrill
voice:

'Well, if the painter of "The Village Wedding" does not count--'

But Bongrand was getting angry; he had risen, his cheeks afire.

'Eh? Don't pester me with "The Wedding"; I warn you I am getting sick
of that picture. It is becoming a perfect nightmare to me ever since
it has been hung in the Luxembourg Museum.'

This 'Village Wedding'--a party of wedding guests roaming through a
corn-field, peasants studied from life, with an epic look of the
heroes of Homer about them--had so far remained his masterpiece. The
picture had brought about an evolution in art, for it had inaugurated
a new formula. Coming after Delacroix, and parallel with Courbet, it
was a piece of romanticism tempered by logic, with more correctness of
observation, more perfection in the handling. And though it did not
squarely tackle nature amidst the crudity of the open air, the new
school claimed connection with it.

'There can be nothing more beautiful,' said Claude, 'than the two
first groups, the fiddler, and then the bride with the old peasant.'

'And the strapping peasant girl, too,' added Mahoudeau; the one who is
turning round and beckoning! I had a great mind to take her for the
model of a statue.'

'And that gust of wind among the corn,' added Gagniere, 'and the
pretty bit of the boy and girl skylarking in the distance.'

Bongrand sat listening with an embarrassed air, and a smile of inward
suffering; and when Fagerolles asked him what he was doing just then,
he answered, with a shrug of his shoulders:

'Well, nothing; some little things. But I sha'n't exhibit this time. I
should like to find a telling subject. Ah, you fellows are happy at
still being at the bottom of the hill. A man has good legs then, he
feels so plucky when it's a question of getting up. But when once he
is a-top, the deuce take it! the worries begin. A real torture,
fisticuffs, efforts which must be constantly renewed, lest one should
slip down too quickly. Really now, one would prefer being below, for
the pleasure of still having everything to do-- Ah, you may laugh, but
you'll see it all for yourselves some day!'

They were indeed laughing, thinking it a paradox, or a little piece of
affectation, which they excused. To be hailed, like Bongrand, with the
name of master--was that not the height of bliss? He, with his arms
resting on the back of his chair, listened to them in silence,
leisurely puffing his pipe, and renouncing the idea of trying to make
them understand him.

Meanwhile, Dubuche, who had rather domesticated tastes, helped Sandoz
to hand the tea round, and the din continued. Fagerolles related a
story about Daddy Malgras and a female cousin by marriage, whom the
dealer offered as a model on conditions that he was given a
presentment of her in oils. Then they began to talk of models.
Mahoudeau waxed furious, because the really well-built female models
were disappearing. It was impossible to find one with a decent figure
now. Then suddenly the tumult increased again; Gagniere was being
congratulated about a connoisseur whose acquaintance he had made in
the Palais Royal one afternoon, while the band played, an eccentric
gentleman living on a small income, who never indulged in any other
extravagance than that of buying pictures. The other artists laughed
and asked for the gentleman's address. Then they fell foul of the
picture dealers, dirty black-guards, who preyed on artists and starved
them. It was really a pity that connoisseurs mistrusted painters to
such a degree as to insist upon a middleman under the impression that
they would thus make a better bargain. This question of bread and
butter excited them yet more, though Claude showed magnificent
contempt for it all. The artist was robbed, no doubt, but what did
that matter, if he had painted a masterpiece, and had some water to
drink? Jory, having again expressed some low ideas about lucre,
aroused general indignation. Out with the journalist! He was asked
stringent questions. Would he sell his pen? Would he not sooner chop
off his wrist than write anything against his convictions? But they
scarcely waited for his answer, for the excitement was on the
increase; it became the superb madness of early manhood, contempt for
the whole world, an absorbing passion for good work, freed from all
human weaknesses, soaring in the sky like a very sun. Ah! how
strenuous was their desire to lose themselves, consume themselves, in
that brazier of their own kindling!

Bongrand, who had not stirred the while, made a vague gesture of
suffering at the sight of that boundless confidence, that boisterous
joy at the prospect of attack. He forgot the hundred paintings which
had brought him his glory, he was thinking of the work which he had
left roughed out on his easel now. Taking his cutty from between his
lips, he murmured, his eyes glistening with kindliness, 'Oh, youth,
youth!'

Until two in the morning, Sandoz, who seemed ubiquitous, kept on
pouring fresh supplies of hot water into the teapot. From the
neighbourhood, now asleep, one now only heard the miawing of an
amorous tabby. They all talked at random, intoxicated by their own
words, hoarse with shouting, their eyes scorched, and when at last
they made up their minds to go, Sandoz took the lamp to show them a
light over the banisters, saying very softly:

'Don't make a noise, my mother is asleep.'

The hushed tread of their boots on the stairs died away at last, and
deep silence fell upon the house.

It struck four. Claude, who had accompanied Bongrand, still went on
talking to him in the deserted streets. He did not want to go to bed;
he was waiting for daylight, with impatient fury, so that he might set
to work at his picture again. This time he felt certain of painting a
masterpiece, exalted as he was by that happy day of good-fellowship,
his mind pregnant with a world of things. He had discovered at last
what painting meant, and he pictured himself re-entering his studio as
one returns into the presence of a woman one adores, his heart
throbbing violently, regretting even this one day's absence, which
seemed to him endless desertion. And he would go straight to his
canvas, and realise his dream in one sitting. However, at every dozen
steps or so, amidst the flickering light of the gaslamps, Bongrand
caught him by a button of his coat, to repeat to him that, after all,
painting was an accursed trade. Sharp as he, Bongrand, was supposed to
be, he did not understand it yet. At each new work he undertook, he
felt as if he were making a debut; it was enough to make one smash
one's head against the wall. The sky was now brightening, some market
gardeners' carts began rolling down towards the central markets; and
the pair continued chattering, each talking for himself, in a loud
voice, beneath the paling stars.


                                 IV

SIX weeks later, Claude was painting one morning amidst a flood of
sunshine that streamed through the large window of his studio.
Constant rain had made the middle of August very dull, but his courage
for work returned with the blue sky. His great picture did not make
much progress, albeit he worked at it throughout long, silent
mornings, like the obstinate, pugnacious fellow he was.

All at once there came a knock at his door. He thought that Madame
Joseph, the doorkeeper, was bringing up his lunch, and as the key was
always in the door, he simply called: 'Come in!'

The door had opened; there was a slight rustle, and then all became
still. He went on painting without even turning his head. But the
quivering silence, and the consciousness of some vague gentle
breathing near him, at last made him fidgety. He looked up, and felt
amazed; a woman stood there clad in a light gown, her features
half-hidden by a white veil, and he did not know her, and she was
carrying a bunch of roses, which completed his bewilderment.

All at once he recognised her.

'You, mademoiselle? Well, I certainly didn't expect you!'

It was Christine. He had been unable to restrain that somewhat
unamiable exclamation, which was a cry from the heart itself. At first
he had certainly thought of her; then, as the days went by for nearly
a couple of months without sign of life from her, she had become for
him merely a fleeting, regretted vision, a charming silhouette which
had melted away in space, and would never be seen again.

'Yes, monsieur, it's I. I wished to come. I thought it was wrong not
to come and thank you--'

She blushed and stammered, at a loss for words. She was out of breath,
no doubt through climbing the stairs, for her heart was beating fast.
What! was this long-debated visit out of place after all? It had ended
by seeming quite natural to her. The worst was that, in passing along
the quay, she had bought that bunch of roses with the delicate
intention of thereby showing her gratitude to the young fellow, and
the flowers now dreadfully embarrassed her. How was she to give them
to him? What would he think of her? The impropriety of the whole
proceeding had only struck her as she opened the door.

But Claude, more embarrassed still, resorted to exaggerated
politeness. He had thrown aside his palette and was turning the studio
upside down in order to clear a chair.

'Pray be seated, mademoiselle. This is really a surprise. You are too
kind.'

Once seated, Christine recovered her equanimity. He looked so droll
with his wild sweeping gestures, and she felt so conscious of his
shyness that she began to smile, and bravely held out the bunch of
roses.

'Look here; I wished to show you that I am not ungrateful.'

At first he said nothing, but stood staring at her, thunderstruck.
When he saw, though, that she was not making fun of him, he shook both
her hands, with almost sufficient energy to dislocate them. Then he at
once put the flowers in his water-jug, repeating:

'Ah! now you are a good fellow, you really are. This is the first time
I pay that compliment to a woman, honour bright.'

He came back to her, and, looking straight into her eyes, he asked:

'Then you have not altogether forgotten me?'

'You see that I have not,' she replied, laughing.

'Why, then, did you wait two months before coming to see me?'

Again she blushed. The falsehood she was about to tell revived her
embarrassment for a moment.

'But you know that I am not my own mistress,' she said. 'Oh, Madame
Vanzade is very kind to me, only she is a great invalid, and never
leaves the house. But she grew anxious as to my health and compelled
me to go out to breathe a little fresh air.'

She did not allude to the shame which she had felt during the first
few days after her adventure on the Quai de Bourbon. Finding herself
in safety, beneath the old lady's roof, the recollection of the night
she had spent in Claude's room had filled her with remorse; but she
fancied at last that she had succeeded in dismissing the matter from
her mind. It was no longer anything but a bad dream, which grew more
indistinct each day. Then, how it was she could not tell, but amidst
the profound quietude of her existence, the image of that young man
who had befriended her had returned to her once more, becoming more
and more precise, till at last it occupied her daily thoughts. Why
should she forget him? She had nothing to reproach him with; on the
contrary, she felt she was his debtor. The thought of seeing him
again, dismissed at first, struggled against later on, at last became
an all-absorbing craving. Each evening the temptation to go and see
him came strong upon her in the solitude of her own room. She
experienced an uncomfortable irritating feeling, a vague desire which
she could not define, and only calmed down somewhat on ascribing this
troubled state of mind to a wish to evince her gratitude. She was so
utterly alone, she felt so stifled in that sleepy abode, the
exuberance of youth seethed so strongly within her, her heart craved
so desperately for friendship!

'So I took advantage of my first day out,' she continued. 'And
besides, the weather was so nice this morning after all the dull
rain.'

Claude, feeling very happy and standing before her, also confessed
himself, but _he_ had nothing to hide.

'For my part,' said he, 'I dared not think of you any more. You are
like one of the fairies of the story-books, who spring from the floor
and disappear into the walls at the very moment one least expects it;
aren't you now? I said to myself, "It's all over: it was perhaps only
in my fancy that I saw her come to this studio." Yet here you are.
Well, I am pleased at it, very pleased indeed.'

Smiling, but embarrassed, Christine averted her head, pretending to
look around her. But her smile soon died away. The ferocious-looking
paintings which she again beheld, the glaring sketches of the South,
the terrible anatomical accuracy of the studies from the nude, all
chilled her as on the first occasion. She became really afraid again,
and she said gravely, in an altered voice:

'I am disturbing you; I am going.'

'Oh! not at all, not at all,' exclaimed Claude, preventing her from
rising. 'It does me good to have a talk with you, for I was working
myself to death. Oh! that confounded picture; it's killing me as it
is.'

Thereupon Christine, lifting her eyes, looked at the large picture,
the canvas that had been turned to the wall on the previous occasion,
and which she had vainly wished to see.

The background--the dark glade pierced by a flood of sunlight--was
still only broadly brushed in. But the two little wrestlers--the fair
one and the dark--almost finished by now, showed clearly in the light.
In the foreground, the gentleman in the velveteen jacket, three times
begun afresh, had now been left in distress. The painter was more
particularly working at the principal figure, the woman lying on the
grass. He had not touched the head again. He was battling with the
body, changing his model every week, so despondent at being unable to
satisfy himself that for a couple of days he had been trying to
improve the figure from imagination, without recourse to nature,
although he boasted that he never invented.

Christine at once recognised herself. Yes, that nude girl sprawling on
the grass, one arm behind her head, smiling with lowered eyelids, was
herself, for she had her features. The idea absolutely revolted her,
and she was wounded too by the wildness of the painting, so brutal
indeed that she considered herself abominably insulted. She did not
understand that kind of art; she thought it execrable, and felt a
hatred against it, the instinctive hatred of an enemy. She rose at
last, and curtly repeated, 'I must be going.'

Claude watched her attentively, both grieved and surprised by her
sudden change of manner.

'Going already?'

'Yes, they are waiting for me. Good-bye.'

And she had already reached the door before he could take her hand,
and venture to ask her:

'When shall I see you again?'

She allowed her hand to remain in his. For a moment she seemed to
hesitate.

'I don't know. I am so busy.'

Then she withdrew her hand and went off, hastily, saying: 'One of
these days, when I can. Good-bye.'

Claude remained stock-still on the threshold. He wondered what had
come over her again to cause her sudden coolness, her covert
irritation. He closed the door, and walked about, with dangling arms,
and without understanding, seeking vainly for the phrase, the gesture
that could have offended her. And he in his turn became angry, and
launched an oath into space, with a terrific shrug of the shoulders,
as if to rid himself of this silly worry. Did a man ever understand
women? However, the sight of the roses, overlapping the water-jug,
pacified him; they smelt so sweet. Their scent pervaded the whole
studio, and silently he resumed his work amidst the perfume.

Two more months passed by. During the earlier days Claude, at the
slightest stir of a morning, when Madame Joseph brought him up his
breakfast or his letters, quickly turned his head, and could not
control a gesture of disappointment. He no longer went out until after
four, and the doorkeeper having told him one evening, on his return
home, that a young person had called to see him at about five, he had
only grown calm on ascertaining that the visitor was merely a model,
Zoe Piedefer. Then, as the days went by, he was seized with a furious
fit of work, becoming unapproachable to every one, indulging in such
violent theories that even his friends did not venture to contradict
him. He swept the world from his path with one gesture; there was no
longer to be anything but painting left. One might murder one's
parents, comrades, and women especially, and it would all be a good
riddance. After this terrible fever he fell into abominable
despondency, spending a week of impotence and doubt, a whole week of
torture, during which he fancied himself struck silly. But he was
getting over it, he had resumed his usual life, his resigned solitary
struggle with his great picture, when one foggy morning, towards the
end of October, he started and hastily set his palette aside. There
had been no knock, but he had just recognised the footfall coming up
the stairs. He opened the door and she walked in. She had come at
last.

Christine that day wore a large cloak of grey material which enveloped
her from head to foot. Her little velvet hat was dark, and the fog
outside had pearled her black lace veil. But he thought her looking
very cheerful, with the first slight shiver of winter upon her. She at
once began to make excuses for having so long delayed her return. She
smiled at him in her pretty candid manner, confessed that she had
hesitated, and that she had almost made up her mind to come no more.
Yes, she had her own opinions about things, which she felt sure he
understood. As it happened, he did not understand at all--he had no
wish to understand, seeing that she was there. It was quite sufficient
that she was not vexed with him, that she would consent to look in now
and then like a chum. There were no explanations; they kept their
respective torments and the struggles of recent times to themselves.
For nearly an hour they chatted together right pleasantly, with
nothing hidden nor antagonistic remaining between them; it was as if
an understanding had been arrived at, unknown to themselves, and while
they were far apart. She did not even appear to notice the sketches
and studies on the walls. For a moment she looked fixedly at the large
picture, at the figure of the woman lying on the grass under the
blazing golden sun. No, it was not like herself, that girl had neither
her face nor her body. How silly to have fancied that such a horrid
mess of colour was herself! And her friendship for the young fellow
was heightened by a touch of pity; he could not even convey a
likeness. When she went off, it was she who on the threshold cordially
held out her hand.

'You know, I shall come back again--'

'Yes, in two months' time.'

'No, next week. You'll see, next Thursday.'

On the Thursday she punctually returned, and after that she did not
miss a week. At first she had no particular day for calling, simply
taking advantage of her opportunities; but subsequently she selected
Monday, the day allowed her by Madame Vanzade in order that she might
have a walk in the fresh, open air of the Bois de Boulogne. She had to
be back home by eleven, and she walked the whole way very quickly,
coming in all aglow from the run, for it was a long stretch from Passy
to the Quai de Bourbon. During four winter months, from October to
February, she came in this fashion, now in drenching rain, now among
the mists from the Seine, now in the pale sunlight that threw a little
warmth over the quays. Indeed, after the first month, she at times
arrived unexpectedly, taking advantage of some errand in town to look
in, and then she could only stay for a couple of minutes; they had
barely had time enough to say 'How do you do?' when she was already
scampering down the stairs again, exclaiming 'Good-bye.'

And now Claude learned to know Christine. With his everlasting
mistrust of woman a suspicion had remained to him, the suspicion of
some love adventure in the provinces; but the girl's soft eyes and
bright laughter had carried all before them; he felt that she was as
innocent as a big child. As soon as she arrived, quite unembarrassed,
feeling fully at her ease, as with a friend, she began to indulge in a
ceaseless flow of chatter. She had told him a score of times about her
childhood at Clermont, and she constantly reverted to it. On the
evening that her father, Captain Hallegrain, had suddenly died, she
and her mother had been to church. She perfectly remembered their
return home and the horrible night that had followed; the captain,
very stout and muscular, lying stretched on a mattress, with his lower
jaw protruding to such a degree that in her girlish memory she could
not picture him otherwise. She also had that same jaw, and when her
mother had not known how to master her, she had often cried: 'Ah, my
girl, you'll eat your heart's blood out like your father.' Poor
mother! how she, Christine, had worried her with her love of
horseplay, with her mad turbulent fits. As far back as she could
remember, she pictured her mother ever seated at the same window,
quietly painting fans, a slim little woman with very soft eyes, the
only thing she had inherited of her. When people wanted to please her
mother they told her, 'she has got your eyes.' And then she smiled,
happy in the thought of having contributed at least that touch of
sweetness to her daughter's features. After the death of her husband,
she had worked so late as to endanger her eyesight. But how else could
she have lived? Her widow's pension--five hundred francs per annum
--barely sufficed for the needs of her child. For five years Christine
had seen her mother grow thinner and paler, wasting away a little bit
each day until she became a mere shadow. And now she felt remorseful
at not having been more obedient, at having driven her mother to
despair by lack of application. She had begun each week with
magnificent intentions, promising that she would soon help her to earn
money; but her arms and legs got the fidgets, in spite of her efforts;
the moment she became quiet she fell ill. Then one morning her mother
had been unable to get up, and had died; her voice too weak to make
itself heard, her eyes full of big tears. Ever did Christine behold
her thus dead, with her weeping eyes wide open and fixed on her.

At other times, Christine, when questioned by Claude about Clermont,
forgot those sorrows to recall more cheerful memories. She laughed
gaily at the idea of their encampment, as she called it, in the Rue de
l'Eclache; she born in Strasburg, her father a Gascon, her mother a
Parisian, and all three thrown into that nook of Auvergne, which they
detested. The Rue de l'Eclache, sloping down to the Botanical Gardens,
was narrow and dank, gloomy, like a vault. Not a shop, never a
passer-by--nothing but melancholy frontages, with shutters always
closed. At the back, however, their windows, overlooking some
courtyards, were turned to the full sunlight. The dining-room opened
even on to a spacious balcony, a kind of wooden gallery, whose arcades
were hung with a giant wistaria which almost smothered them with
foliage. And the girl had grown up there, at first near her invalid
father, then cloistered, as it were, with her mother, whom the least
exertion exhausted. She had remained so complete a stranger to the
town and its neighbourhood, that Claude and herself burst into
laughter when she met his inquiries with the constant answer, 'I don't
know.' The mountains? Yes, there were mountains on one side, they
could be seen at the end of the streets; while on the other side of
the town, after passing along other streets, there were flat fields
stretching far away; but she never went there, the distance was too
great. The only height she remembered was the Puy de Dome, rounded off
at the summit like a hump. In the town itself she could have found her
way to the cathedral blindfold; one had to turn round by the Place de
Jaude and take the Rue des Gras; but more than that she could not tell
him; the rest of the town was an entanglement, a maze of sloping lanes
and boulevards; a town of black lava ever dipping downward, where the
rain of the thunderstorms swept by torrentially amidst formidable
flashes of lightning. Oh! those storms; she still shuddered to think
of them. Just opposite her room, above the roofs, the lightning
conductor of the museum was always on fire. In the sitting-room she
had her own window--a deep recess as big as a room itself--where her
work-table and personal nick-nacks stood. It was there that her mother
had taught her to read; it was there that, later on, she had fallen
asleep while listening to her masters, so greatly did the fatigue of
learning daze her. And now she made fun of her own ignorance; she was
a well-educated young lady, and no mistake, unable even to repeat the
names of the Kings of France, with the dates of their accessions; a
famous musician too, who had never got further than that elementary
pianoforte exercise, 'The little boats'; a prodigy in water-colour
painting, who scamped her trees because foliage was too difficult to
imitate. Then she skipped, without any transition, to the fifteen
months she had spent at the Convent of the Visitation after her
mother's death--a large convent, outside the town, with magnificent
gardens. There was no end to her stories about the good sisters, their
jealousies, their foolish doings, their simplicity, that made one
start. She was to have taken the veil, but she felt stifled the moment
she entered a church. It had seemed to be all over with her, when the
Superior, by whom she was treated with great affection, diverted her
from the cloister by procuring her that situation at Madame Vanzade's.
She had not yet got over the surprise. How had Mother des Saints Anges
been able to read her mind so clearly? For, in fact, since she had
been living in Paris she had dropped into complete indifference about
religion.

When all the reminiscences of Clermont were exhausted, Claude wanted
to hear about her life at Madame Vanzade's, and each week she gave him
fresh particulars. The life led in the little house at Passy, silent
and shut off from the outer world, was a very regular one, with no
more noise about it than the faint tic-tac of an old-fashioned
timepiece. Two antiquated domestics, a cook and a manservant, who had
been with the family for forty years, alone glided in their slippers
about the deserted rooms, like a couple of ghosts. Now and then, at
very long intervals, there came a visitor: some octogenarian general,
so desiccated, so slight of build that he scarcely pressed on the
carpet. The house was also the home of shadows; the sun filtered with
the mere gleam of a night light through the Venetian blinds. Since
madame had become paralysed in the knees and stone blind, so that she
no longer left her room, she had had no other recreation than that of
listening to the reading of religious books. Ah! those endless
readings, how they weighed upon the girl at times! If she had only
known a trade, how gladly she would have cut out dresses, concocted
bonnets, or goffered the petals of artificial flowers. And to think
that she was capable of nothing, when she had been taught everything,
and that there was only enough stuff in her to make a salaried drudge,
a semi-domestic! She suffered horribly, too, in that stiff, lonely
dwelling which smelt of the tomb. She was seized once more with the
vertigo of her childhood, as when she had striven to compel herself to
work, in order to please her mother; her blood rebelled; she would
have liked to shout and jump about, in her desire for life. But madame
treated her so gently, sending her away from her room, and ordering
her to take long walks, that she felt full of remoras when, on her
return to the Quai de Bourbon, she was obliged to tell a falsehood; to
talk of the Bois de Boulogne or invent some ceremony at church where
she now never set foot. Madame seemed to take to her more and more
every day; there were constant presents, now a silk dress, now a tiny
gold watch, even some underlinen. She herself was very fond of Madame
Vanzade; she had wept one day when the latter had called her daughter;
she had sworn never to leave her, such was her heart-felt pity at
seeing her so old and helpless.

'Well,' said Claude one morning, 'you'll be rewarded; she'll leave you
her money.'

Christine looked astonished. 'Do you think so? It is said that she is
worth three millions of francs. No, no, I have never dreamt of such a
thing, and I won't. What would become of me?'

Claude had averted his head, and hastily replied, 'Well, you'd become
rich, that's all. But no doubt she'll first of all marry you off--'

On hearing this, Christine could hold out no longer, but burst into
laughter. 'To one of her old friends, eh? perhaps the general who has
a silver chin. What a good joke!'

So far they had gone no further than chumming like old friends. He was
almost as new to life as she, having had nothing but chance
adventures, and living in an ideal world of his own, fanciful amid
romantic amours. To see each other in secret like this, from pure
friendship, without anything more tender passing between them than a
cordial shake of the hand at her arrival, and another one when she
left, seemed to them quite natural. Still for her part she scented
that he was shy, and at times she looked at him fixedly, with the
wondering perturbation of unconscious passion. But as yet nothing
ardent or agitating spoilt the pleasure they felt in being together.
Their hands remained cool; they spoke cheerfully on all subjects; they
sometimes argued like friends, who feel sure they will not fall out.
Only, this friendship grew so keen that they could no longer live
without seeing one another.

The moment Christine came, Claude took the key from outside the door.
She herself insisted upon this, lest somebody might disturb them.
After a few visits she had taken absolute possession of the studio.
She seemed to be at home there. She was tormented by a desire to make
the place a little more tidy, for such disorder worried her and made
her uncomfortable. But it was not an easy matter. The painter had
strictly forbidden Madame Joseph to sweep up things, lest the dust
should get on the fresh paint. So, on the first occasions when his
companion attempted to clean up a bit, he watched her with anxious
entreating eyes. What was the good of changing the place of things?
Didn't it suffice to have them at hand? However, she exhibited such
gay determination, she seemed so happy at playing the housewife, that
he let her have her own way at last. And now, the moment she had
arrived and taken off her gloves, she pinned up her dress to avoid
soiling it, and set the big studio in order in the twinkling of an
eye. There was no longer a pile of cinders before the stove; the
screen hid the bedstead and the washstand; the couch was brushed, the
wardrobe polished; the deal table was cleared of the crockery, and had
not a stain of paint; and above the chairs, which were symmetrically
arranged, and the spanned easels propped against the walls, the big
cuckoo clock, with full-blown pink flowers on its dial, seemed to tick
more sonorously. Altogether it was magnificent; one would not have
recognised the place. He, stupefied, watched her trotting to and fro,
twisting about and singing as she went. Was this then the lazybones
who had such dreadful headaches at the least bit of work? But she
laughed; at headwork, yes; but exertion with her hands and feet did
her good, seemed to straighten her like a young sapling. She
confessed, even as she would have confessed some depraved taste, her
liking for lowly household cares; a liking which had greatly worried
her mother, whose educational ideal consisted of accomplishments, and
who would have made her a governess with soft hands, touching nothing
vulgar. How Christine had been chided indeed whenever she was caught,
as a little girl, sweeping, dusting, and playing delightedly at being
cook! Even nowadays, if she had been able to indulge in a bout with
the dust at Madame Vanzade's, she would have felt less bored. But what
would they have said to that? She would no longer have been considered
a lady. And so she came to satisfy her longings at the Quai de
Bourbon, panting with the exercise, all aglow, her eyes glistening
with a woman's delight at biting into forbidden fruit.

Claude by this time grew conscious of having a woman's care around
him. In order to make her sit down and chat quietly, he would ask her
now and then to sew a torn cuff or coat-tail. She herself had offered
to look over his linen; but it was no longer with the ardour of a
housewife, eager to be up and doing. First of all, she hardly knew how
to work; she held her needle like a girl brought up in contempt of
sewing. Besides, the enforced quiescence and the attention that had to
be given to such work, the small stitches which had to be looked to
one by one, exasperated her. Thus the studio was bright with
cleanliness like a drawing-room, but Claude himself remained in rags,
and they both joked about it, thinking it great fun.

How happy were those months that they spent together, those four
months of frost and rain whiled away in the studio, where the red-hot
stove roared like an organ-pipe! The winter seemed to isolate them
from the world still more. When the snow covered the adjacent roofs,
when the sparrows fluttered against the window, they smiled at feeling
warm and cosy, at being lost, as it were, amidst the great silent
city. But they did not always confine themselves to that one little
nook, for she allowed him at last to see her home. For a long while
she had insisted upon going away by herself, feeling ashamed of being
seen in the streets on a man's arm. Then, one day when the rain fell
all of a sudden, she was obliged to let him come downstairs with an
umbrella. The rain having ceased almost immediately, she sent him back
when they reached the other side of the Pont Louis-Philippe. They only
remained a few moments beside the parapet, looking at the Mail, and
happy at being together in the open air. Down below, large barges,
moored against the quay, and full of apples, were ranged four rows
deep, so close together that the planks thrown across them made a
continuous path for the women and children running to and fro. They
were amused by the sight of all that fruit, those enormous piles
littering the banks, the round baskets which were carried hither and
thither, while a strong odour, suggestive of cider in fermentation,
mingled with the moist gusts from the river.

A week later, when the sun again showed itself, and Claude extolled
the solitude of the quays round the Isle Saint Louis, Christine
consented to take a walk. They strolled up the Quai de Bourbon and the
Quai d'Anjou, pausing at every few steps and growing interested in the
various scenes of river life; the dredger whose buckets grated against
their chains, the floating wash-house, which resounded with the hubbub
of a quarrel, and the steam cranes busy unloading the lighters. She
did not cease to wonder at one thought which came to her. Was it
possible that yonder Quai des Ormes, so full of life across the
stream, that this Quai Henri IV., with its broad embankment and lower
shore, where bands of children and dogs rolled over in the sand, that
this panorama of an active, densely-populated capital was the same
accursed scene that had appeared to her for a moment in a gory flash
on the night of her arrival? They went round the point of the island,
strolling more leisurely still to enjoy the solitude and tranquillity
which the old historic mansions seem to have implanted there. They
watched the water seething between the wooden piles of the Estacade,
and returned by way of the Quai de Bethune and the Quai d'Orleans,
instinctively drawn closer to each other by the widening of the
stream, keeping elbow to elbow at sight of the vast flow, with their
eyes fixed on the distant Halle aux Vins and the Jardin des Plantes.
In the pale sky, the cupolas of the public buildings assumed a bluish
hue. When they reached the Pont St. Louis, Claude had to point out
Notre-Dame by name, for Christine did not recognise the edifice from
the rear, where it looked like a colossal creature crouching down
between its flying buttresses, which suggested sprawling paws, while
above its long leviathan spine its towers rose like a double head.
Their real find that day, however, was at the western point of the
island, that point like the prow of a ship always riding at anchor,
afloat between two swift currents, in sight of Paris, but ever unable
to get into port. They went down some very steep steps there, and
discovered a solitary bank planted with lofty trees. It was a charming
refuge--a hermitage in the midst of a crowd. Paris was rumbling around
them, on the quays, on the bridges, while they at the water's edge
tasted the delight of being alone, ignored by the whole world. From
that day forth that bank became a little rustic coign of theirs, a
favourite open-air resort, where they took advantage of the sunny
hours, when the great heat of the studio, where the red-hot stove kept
roaring, oppressed them too much, filling their hands with a fever of
which they were afraid.

Nevertheless, Christine had so far objected to be accompanied farther
than the Mail. At the Quai des Ormes she always bade Claude go back,
as if Paris, with her crowds and possible encounters, began at the
long stretch of quays which she had to traverse on her way home. But
Passy was so far off, and she felt so dull at having to go such a
distance alone, that gradually she gave way. She began by allowing
Claude to see her as far as the Hotel de Ville; then as far as the
Pont-Neuf; at last as far as the Tuileries. She forgot the danger;
they walked arm in arm like a young married couple; and that
constantly repeated promenade, that leisurely journey over the
self-same ground by the river side, acquired an infinite charm, full
of a happiness such as could scarcely be surpassed in after-times.
They truly belonged to each other, though they had not erred. It
seemed as if the very soul of the great city, rising from the river,
wrapped them around with all the love that had throbbed behind the
grey stone walls through the long lapse of ages.

Since the nipping colds of December, Christine only came in the
afternoon, and it was about four o'clock, when the sun was sinking,
that Claude escorted her back on his arm. On days when the sky was
clear, they could see the long line of quays stretching away into
space directly they had crossed the Pont Louis-Philippe. From one end
to the other the slanting sun powdered the houses on the right bank
with golden dust, while, on the left, the islets, the buildings, stood
out in a black line against the blazing glory of the sunset. Between
the sombre and the brilliant margin, the spangled river sparkled, cut
in twain every now and then by the long bars of its bridges; the five
arches of the Pont Notre-Dame showing under the single span of the
Pont d'Arcole; then the Pont-au-Change and the Pont-Neuf, beyond each
of whose shadows appeared a luminous patch, a sheet of bluish satiny
water, growing paler here and there with a mirror-like reflection. And
while the dusky outlines on the left terminated in the silhouettes of
the pointed towers of the Palais de Justice, sharply and darkly
defined against the sky, a gentle curve undulated on the right,
stretching away so far that the Pavillon de Flore, who stood forth
like a citadel at the curve's extreme end, seemed a fairy castle,
bluey, dreamlike and vague, amidst the rosy mist on the horizon. But
Claude and Christine, with the sunlight streaming on them, athwart the
leafless plane trees, turned away from the dazzlement, preferring to
gaze at certain spots, one above all--a block of old houses just above
the Mail. Below, there was a series of one-storied tenements, little
huckster and fishing-tackle shops, with flat terrace roofs, ornamented
with laurel and Virginia creeper. And in the rear rose loftier, but
decrepit, dwellings, with linen hung out to dry at their windows, a
collection of fantastic structures, a confused mass of woodwork and
masonry, overtoppling walls, and hanging gardens, in which coloured
glass balls shone out like stars. They walked on, leaving behind them
the big barracks and the Hotel de Ville, and feeling much more
interest in the Cite which appeared across the river, pent between
lofty smooth embankments rising from the water. Above the darkened
houses rose the towers of Notre-Dame, as resplendent as if they had
been newly gilt. Then the second-hand bookstalls began to invade the
quays. Down below a lighter full of charcoal struggled against the
strong current beneath an arch of the Pont Notre-Dame. And then, on
the days when the flower market was held, they stopped, despite the
inclement weather, to inhale the scent of the first violets and the
early gillyflowers. On their left a long stretch of bank now became
visible; beyond the pepper-caster turrets of the Palais de Justice,
the small, murky tenements of the Quai de l'Horloge showed as far as
the clump of trees midway across the Pont-Neuf; then, as they went
farther on, other quays emerged from the mist, in the far distance:
the Quai Voltaire, the Quai Malaquais, the dome of the Institute of
France, the square pile of the Mint, a long grey line of frontages of
which they could not even distinguish the windows, a promontory of
roofs, which, with their stacks of chimney-pots, looked like some
rugged cliff, dipping down into a phosphorescent sea. In front,
however, the Pavillon de Flore lost its dreamy aspect, and became
solidified in the final sun blaze. Then right and left, on either bank
of the river, came the long vistas of the Boulevard de Sebastopol and
the Boulevard du Palais; the handsome new buildings of the Quai de la
Megisserie, with the new Prefecture of Police across the water; and
the old Pont-Neuf, with its statue of Henri IV. looking like a splash
of ink. The Louvre, the Tuileries followed, and beyond Grenelle there
was a far-stretching panorama of the slopes of Sevres, the country
steeped in a stream of sun rays. Claude never went farther. Christine
always made him stop just before they reached the Pont Royal, near the
fine trees beside Vigier's swimming baths; and when they turned round
to shake hands once more in the golden sunset now flushing into
crimson, they looked back and, on the horizon, espied the Isle Saint
Louis, whence they had come, the indistinct distance of the city upon
which night was already descending from the slate-hued eastern sky.

Ah! what splendid sunsets they beheld during those weekly strolls. The
sun accompanied them, as it were, amid the throbbing gaiety of the
quays, the river life, the dancing ripples of the currents; amid the
attractions of the shops, as warm as conservatories, the flowers sold
by the seed merchants, and the noisy cages of the bird fanciers; amid
all the din of sound and wealth of colour which ever make a city's
waterside its youthful part. As they proceeded, the ardent blaze of
the western sky turned to purple on their left, above the dark line of
houses, and the orb of day seemed to wait for them, falling gradually
lower, slowly rolling towards the distant roofs when once they had
passed the Pont Notre-Dame in front of the widening stream. In no
ancient forest, on no mountain road, beyond no grassy plain will there
ever be such triumphal sunsets as behind the cupola of the Institute.
It is there one sees Paris retiring to rest in all her glory. At each
of their walks the aspect of the conflagration changed; fresh furnaces
added their glow to the crown of flames. One evening, when a shower
had surprised them, the sun, showing behind the downpour, lit up the
whole rain cloud, and upon their heads there fell a spray of glowing
water, irisated with pink and azure. On the days when the sky was
clear, however, the sun, like a fiery ball, descended majestically in
an unruffled sapphire lake; for a moment the black cupola of the
Institute seemed to cut away part of it and make it look like the
waning moon; then the globe assumed a violet tinge and at last became
submerged in the lake, which had turned blood-red. Already, in
February, the planet described a wider curve, and fell straight into
the Seine, which seemed to seethe on the horizon as at the contact of
red-hot iron. However, the grander scenes, the vast fairy pictures of
space only blazed on cloudy evenings. Then, according to the whim of
the wind, there were seas of sulphur splashing against coral reefs;
there were palaces and towers, marvels of architecture, piled upon one
another, burning and crumbling, and throwing torrents of lava from
their many gaps; or else the orb which had disappeared, hidden by a
veil of clouds, suddenly transpierced that veil with such a press of
light that shafts of sparks shot forth from one horizon to the other,
showing as plainly as a volley of golden arrows. And then the twilight
fell, and they said good-bye to each other, while their eyes were
still full of the final dazzlement. They felt that triumphal Paris was
the accomplice of the joy which they could not exhaust, the joy of
ever resuming together that walk beside the old stone parapets.

One day, however, there happened what Claude had always secretly
feared. Christine no longer seemed to believe in the possibility of
meeting anybody who knew her. In fact, was there such a person? She
would always pass along like this, remaining altogether unknown. He,
however, thought of his own friends, and at times felt a kind of
tremor when he fancied he recognised in the distance the back of some
acquaintance. He was troubled by a feeling of delicacy; the idea that
somebody might stare at the girl, approach them, and perhaps begin to
joke, gave him intolerable worry. And that very evening, as she was
close beside him on his arm, and they were approaching the Pont des
Arts, he fell upon Sandoz and Dubuche, who were coming down the steps
of the bridge. It was impossible to avoid them, they were almost face
to face; besides, his friends must have seen him, for they smiled.
Claude, very pale, kept advancing, and he thought it all up on seeing
Dubuche take a step towards him; but Sandoz was already holding the
architect back, and leading him away. They passed on with an
indifferent air and disappeared into the courtyard of the Louvre
without as much as turning round. They had both just recognised the
original of the crayon sketch, which the painter hid away with all the
jealousy of a lover. Christine, who was chattering, had noticed
nothing. Claude, with his heart throbbing, answered her in
monosyllables, moved to tears, brimming over with gratitude to his old
chums for their discreet behaviour.

A few days later, however, he had another shock. He did not expect
Christine, and had therefore made an appointment with Sandoz. Then, as
she had run up to spend an hour--it was one of those surprises that
delighted them--they had just withdrawn the key, as usual, when there
came a familiar knock with the fist on the door. Claude at once
recognised the rap, and felt so upset at the mishap that he overturned
a chair. After that it was impossible to pretend to be out. But
Christine turned so pale, and implored him with such a wild gesture,
that he remained rooted to the spot, holding his breath. The knocks
continued, and a voice called, 'Claude, Claude!' He still remained
quite still, debating with himself, however, with ashen lips and
downcast eyes. Deep silence reigned, and then footsteps were heard,
making the stairs creak as they went down. Claude's breast heaved with
intense sadness; he felt it bursting with remorse at the sound of each
retreating step, as if he had denied the friendship of his whole
youth.

However, one afternoon there came another knock, and Claude had only
just time to whisper despairingly, 'The key has been left in the
door.'

In fact, Christine had forgotten to take it out. She became quite
scared and darted behind the screen, with her handkerchief over her
mouth to stifle the sound of her breathing.

The knocks became louder, there was a burst of laughter, and the
painter had to reply, 'Come in.'

He felt more uncomfortable still when he saw Jory, who gallantly
ushered in Irma Becot, whose acquaintance he had made through
Fagerolles, and who was flinging her youth about the Paris studios.

'She insisted upon seeing your studio, so I brought her,' explained
the journalist.

The girl, however, without waiting, was already walking about and
making remarks, with perfect freedom of manner. 'Oh! how funny it is
here. And what funny painting. Come, there's a good fellow, show me
everything. I want to see everything.'

Claude, apprehensively anxious, was afraid that she might push the
screen aside. He pictured Christine behind it, and felt distracted
already at what she might hear.

'You know what she has come to ask of you?' resumed Jory cheerfully.
'What, don't you remember? You promised that she might pose for
something. And she'll do so if you like.'

'Of course I will,' said Irma.

'The fact is,' replied Claude, in an embarrassed tone, 'my picture
here will take up all my time till the Salon. I have a figure in it
that gives me a deal of trouble. It's impossible to perfect it with
those confounded models.'

Irma had stationed herself in front of the picture, and looked at it
with a knowing air. 'Oh! I see,' she said, 'that woman in the grass,
eh? Do you think I could be of any use to you?'

Jory flared up in a moment, warmly approving the idea, but Claude with
the greatest energy replied, 'No, no madame wouldn't suit. She is not
at all what I want for this picture; not at all.'

Then he went on stammering excuses. He would be only too pleased later
on, but just now he was afraid that another model would quite complete
his confusion over that picture; and Irma responded by shrugging her
shoulders, and looking at him with an air of smiling contempt.

Jory, however, now began to chat about their friends. Why had not
Claude come to Sandoz's on the previous Thursday? One never saw him
now. Dubuche asserted all sorts of things about him. There had been a
row between Fagerolles and Mahoudeau on the subject whether evening
dress was a thing to be reproduced in sculpture. Then on the previous
Sunday Gagniere had returned home from a Wagner concert with a black
eye. He, Jory, had nearly had a duel at the Cafe Baudequin on account
of one of his last articles in 'The Drummer.' The fact was he was
giving it hot to the twopenny-halfpenny painters, the men with the
usurped reputations! The campaign against the hanging committee of the
Salon was making a deuce of a row; not a shred would be left of those
guardians of the ideal, who wanted to prevent nature from entering
their show.

Claude listened to him with impatient irritation. He had taken up his
palette and was shuffling about in front of his picture. The other one
understood at last.

'You want to work, I see; all right, we'll leave you.'

Irma, however, still stared at the painter, with her vague smile,
astonished at the stupidity of this simpleton, who did not seem to
appreciate her, and seized despite herself with a whim to please him.
His studio was ugly, and he himself wasn't handsome; but why should he
put on such bugbear airs? She chaffed him for a moment, and on going
off again offered to sit for him, emphasising her offer by warmly
pressing his hand.

'Whenever you like,' were her parting words.

They had gone at last, and Claude was obliged to pull the screen
aside, for Christine, looking very white, remained seated behind it,
as if she lacked the strength to rise. She did not say a word about
the girl, but simply declared that she had felt very frightened; and
--trembling lest there should come another knock--she wanted to go at
once, carrying away with her, as her startled looks testified, the
disturbing thought of many things which she did not mention.

In fact, for a long time that sphere of brutal art, that studio full
of glaring pictures, had caused her a feeling of discomfort. Wounded
in all her feelings, full of repugnance, she could not get used to it
all. She had grown up full of affectionate admiration for a very
different style of art--her mother's fine water-colours, those fans of
dreamy delicacy, in which lilac-tinted couples floated about in bluish
gardens--and she quite failed to understand Claude's work. Even now
she often amused herself by painting tiny girlish landscapes, two or
three subjects repeated over and over again--a lake with a ruin, a
water-mill beating a stream, a chalet and some pine trees, white with
snow. And she felt surprised that an intelligent young fellow should
paint in such an unreasonable manner, so ugly and so untruthful
besides. For she not only thought Claude's realism monstrously ugly,
but considered it beyond every permissible truth. In fact, she thought
at times that he must be mad.

One day Claude absolutely insisted upon seeing a small sketch-book
which she had brought away from Clermont, and which she had spoken
about. After objecting for a long while, she brought it with her,
flattered at heart and feeling very curious to know what he would say.
He turned over the leaves, smiling all the while, and as he did not
speak, she was the first to ask:

'You think it very bad, don't you?'

'Not at all,' he replied. 'It's innocent.'

The reply hurt her, despite Claude's indulgent tone, which aimed at
making it amiable.

'Well, you see I had so few lessons from mamma. I like painting to be
well done, and pleasing.'

Thereupon he burst into frank laughter.

'Confess now that my painting makes you feel ill! I have noticed it.
You purse your lips and open your eyes wide with fright. Certainly it
is not the style of painting for ladies, least of all for young girls.
But you'll get used to it; it's only a question of educating your eyes
and you'll end by seeing that what I am doing is very honest and
healthy.'

Indeed, Christine slowly became used to it. But, at first, artistic
conviction had nothing to do with the change, especially as Claude,
with his contempt for female opinion, did not take the trouble to
indoctrinate her. On the contrary, in her company he avoided
conversing about art, as if he wished to retain for himself that
passion of his life, apart from the new passion which was gradually
taking possession of him. Still, Christine glided into the habit of
the thing, and became familiarised with it; she began to feel
interested in those abominable pictures, on noticing the important
place they held in the artist's existence. This was the first stage on
the road to conversion; she felt greatly moved by his rageful
eagerness to be up and doing, the whole-heartedness with which he
devoted himself to his work. Was it not very touching? Was there not
something very creditable in it? Then, on noticing his joy or
suffering, according to the success or the failure of the day's work,
she began to associate herself with his efforts. She felt saddened
when she found him sad, she grew cheerful when he received her
cheerfully; and from that moment her worry was--had he done a lot of
work? was he satisfied with what he had done since they had last seen
each other? At the end of the second month she had been gained over;
she stationed herself before his pictures to judge whether they were
progressing or not. She no longer felt afraid of them. She still did
not approve particularly of that style of painting, but she began to
repeat the artistic expressions which she had heard him use; declared
this bit to be 'vigorous in tone,' 'well built up,' or 'just in the
light it should be.' He seemed to her so good-natured, and she was so
fond of him, that after finding excuses for him for daubing those
horrors, she ended by discovering qualities in them in order that she
might like them a little also.

Nevertheless, there was one picture, the large one, the one intended
for the Salon, to which for a long while she was quite unable to
reconcile herself. She already looked without dislike at the studies
made at the Boutin studio and the sketches of Plassans, but she was
still irritated by the sight of the woman lying in the grass. It was
like a personal grudge, the shame of having momentarily thought that
she could detect in it a likeness of herself, and silent
embarrassment, too, for that big figure continued to wound her
feelings, although she now found less and less of a resemblance in it.
At first she had protested by averting her eyes. Now she remained for
several minutes looking at it fixedly, in mute contemplation. How was
it that the likeness to herself had disappeared? The more vigorously
that Claude struggled on, never satisfied, touching up the same bit a
hundred times over, the more did that likeness to herself gradually
fade away. And, without being able to account for it, without daring
to admit as much to herself, she, whom the painting had so greatly
offended when she had first seen it, now felt a growing sorrow at
noticing that nothing of herself remained.

Indeed it seemed to her as if their friendship suffered from this
obliteration; she felt herself further away from him as trait after
trait vanished. Didn't he care for her that he thus allowed her to be
effaced from his work? And who was the new woman, whose was the
unknown indistinct face that appeared from beneath hers?

Claude, in despair at having spoilt the figure's head, did not know
exactly how to ask her for a few hours' sitting. She would merely have
had to sit down, and he would only have taken some hints. But he had
previously seen her so pained that he felt afraid of irritating her
again. Moreover, after resolving in his own mind to ask her this
favour in a gay, off-hand way, he had been at a loss for words,
feeling all at once ashamed at the notion.

One afternoon he quite upset her by one of those bursts of anger which
he found it impossible to control, even in her presence. Everything
had gone wrong that week; he talked of scraping his canvas again, and
he paced up and down, beside himself, and kicking the furniture about.
Then all of a sudden he caught her by the shoulders, and made her sit
down on the couch.

'I beg of you, do me this favour, or it'll kill me, I swear it will.'

She did not understand him.

'What--what is it you want?'

Then as soon as she saw him take up his brushes, she added, without
heeding what she said, 'Ah, yes! Why did not you ask me before?'

And of her own accord she threw herself back on a cushion and slipped
her arm under her neck. But surprise and confusion at having yielded
so quickly made her grave, for she did not know that she was prepared
for this kind of thing; indeed, she could have sworn that she would
never serve him as a model again. Her compliance already filled her
with remorse, as if she were lending herself to something wrong by
letting him impart her own countenance to that big creature, lying
refulgent under the sun.

However, in two sittings, Claude worked in the head all right. He
exulted with delight, and exclaimed that it was the best bit of
painting he had ever done; and he was right, never had he thrown such
a play of real light over such a life-like face. Happy at seeing him
so pleased, Christine also became gay, going as far as to express
approval of her head, which, though not extremely like her, had a
wonderful expression. They stood for a long while before the picture,
blinking at it, and drawing back as far as the wall.

'And now,' he said at last, 'I'll finish her off with a model. Ah! so
I've got her at last.'

In a burst of childish glee, he took the girl round the waist, and
they performed 'a triumphant war dance,' as he called it. She laughed
very heartily, fond of romping as she was, and no longer feeling aught
of her scruples and discomfort.

But the very next week Claude became gloomy again. He had chosen Zoe
Piedefer as a model, but she did not satisfy him. Christine's delicate
head, as he expressed it, did not set well on the other's shoulders.
He, nevertheless, persisted, scratched out, began anew, and worked so
hard that he lived in a constant state of fever. Towards the middle of
January, seized with despair, he abandoned his picture and turned it
against the wall, swearing that he would not finish it. But a
fortnight later, he began to work at it again with another model, and
then found himself obliged to change the whole tone of it. Thus
matters got still worse; so he sent for Zoe again; became altogether
at sea, and quite ill with uncertainty and anguish. And the pity of it
was, that the central figure alone worried him, for he was well
satisfied with the rest of the painting, the trees of the background,
the two little women and the gentleman in the velvet coat, all
finished and vigorous. February was drawing to a close; he had only a
few days left to send his picture to the Salon; it was quite a
disaster.

One evening, in Christine's presence, he began swearing, and all at
once a cry of fury escaped him: 'After all, by the thunder of heaven,
is it possible to stick one woman's head on another's shoulders? I
ought to chop my hand off.'

From the depths of his heart a single idea now rose to his brain: to
obtain her consent to pose for the whole figure. It had slowly
sprouted, first as a simple wish, quickly discarded as absurd; then
had come a silent, constantly-renewed debate with himself; and at
last, under the spur of necessity, keen and definite desire. The
recollection of the morning after the storm, when she had accepted his
hospitality, haunted and tortured him. It was she whom he needed; she
alone could enable him to realise his dream, and he beheld her again
in all her youthful freshness, beaming and indispensable. If he could
not get her to pose, he might as well give up his picture, for no one
else would ever satisfy him. At times, while he remained seated for
hours, distracted in front of the unfinished canvas, so utterly
powerless that he no longer knew where to give a stroke of the brush,
he formed heroic resolutions. The moment she came in he would throw
himself at her feet; he would tell her of his distress in such
touching words that she would perhaps consent. But as soon as he
beheld her, he lost all courage, he averted his eyes, lest she might
decipher his thoughts in his instinctive glances. Such a request would
be madness. One could not expect such a service from a friend; he
would never have the audacity to ask.

Nevertheless, one evening as he was getting ready to accompany her,
and as she was putting on her bonnet, with her arms uplifted, they
remained for a moment looking into each other's eyes, he quivering,
and she suddenly becoming so grave, so pale, that he felt himself
detected. All along the quays they scarcely spoke; the matter remained
unmentioned between them while the sun set in the coppery sky. Twice
afterwards he again read in her looks that she was aware of his
all-absorbing thought. In fact, since he had dreamt about it, she had
began to do the same, in spite of herself, her attention roused by his
involuntary allusions. They scarcely affected her at first, though she
was obliged at last to notice them; still the question seemed to her
to be beyond the range of possibility, to be one of those unavowable
ideas which people do not even speak of. The fear that he would dare
to ask her did not even occur to her; she knew him well by now; she
could have silenced him with a gesture, before he had stammered the
first words, and in spite of his sudden bursts of anger. It was simple
madness. Never, never!

Days went by, and between them that fixed idea grew in intensity. The
moment they were together they could not help thinking of it. Not a
word was spoken on the subject, but their very silence was eloquent;
they no longer made a movement, no longer exchanged a smile without
stumbling upon that thought, which they found impossible to put into
words, though it filled their minds. Soon nothing but that remained in
their fraternal intercourse. And the perturbation of heart and senses
which they had so far avoided in the course of their familiar
intimacy, came at last, under the influence of the all-besetting
thought. And then the anguish which they left unmentioned, but which
they could not hide from one another, racked and stifled them, left
them heaving distressfully with painful sighs.

Towards the middle of March, Christine, at one of her visits, found
Claude seated before his picture, overcome with sorrow. He had not
even heard her enter. He remained motionless, with vacant, haggard
eyes staring at his unfinished work. In another three days the delay
for sending in exhibits for the Salon would expire.

'Well,' she inquired gently, after standing for a long time behind
him, grief-stricken at seeing him in such despair.

He started and turned round.

'Well, it's all up. I sha'n't exhibit anything this year. Ah! I who
relied so much upon this Salon!'

Both relapsed into despondency--a despondency and agitation full of
confused thoughts. Then she resumed, thinking aloud as it were:

'There would still be time.'

'Time? Oh! no indeed. A miracle would be needed. Where am I to find a
model so late in the day? Do you know, since this morning I have been
worrying, and for a moment I thought I had hit upon an idea: Yes, it
would be to go and fetch that girl, that Irma who came while you were
here. I know well enough that she is short and not at all such as I
thought of, and so I should perhaps have to change everything once
more; but all the same it might be possible to make her do. Decidedly,
I'll try her--'

He stopped short. The glowing eyes with which he gazed at her clearly
said: 'Ah! there's you! ah! it would be the hoped-for miracle, and
triumph would be certain, if you were to make this supreme sacrifice
for me. I beseech you, I ask you devoutly, as a friend, the dearest,
the most beauteous, the most pure.'

She, erect, looking very pale, seemed to hear each of those words,
though all remained unspoken, and his ardently beseeching eyes
overcame her. She herself did not speak. She simply did as she was
desired, acting almost like one in a dream. Beneath it all there
lurked the thought that he must not ask elsewhere, for she was now
conscious of her earlier jealous disquietude and wished to share his
affections with none. Yet it was in silence and all chastity that she
stretched herself on the couch, and took up the pose, with one arm
under her head, her eyes closed.

And Claude? Startled, full of gratitude, he had at last found again
the sudden vision that he had so often evoked. But he himself did not
speak; he began to paint in the deep solemn silence that had fallen
upon them both. For two long hours he stood to his work with such
manly energy that he finished right off a superb roughing out of the
whole figure. Never before had he felt such enthusiasm in his art. It
seemed to him as if he were in the presence of some saint; and at
times he wondered at the transfiguration of Christine's face, whose
somewhat massive jaws seemed to have receded beneath the gentle
placidity which her brow and cheeks displayed. During those two hours
she did not stir, she did not speak, but from time to time she opened
her clear eyes, fixing them on some vague, distant point, and
remaining thus for a moment, then closing them again, and relapsing
into the lifelessness of fine marble, with the mysterious fixed smile
required by the pose.

It was by a gesture that Claude apprized her he had finished. He
turned away, and when they stood face to face again, she ready to
depart, they gazed at one another, overcome by emotion which still
prevented them from speaking. Was it sadness, then, unconscious,
unnameable sadness? For their eyes filled with tears, as if they had
just spoilt their lives and dived to the depths of human misery. Then,
moved and grieved, unable to find a word, even of thanks, he kissed
her religiously upon the brow.


                                 V

ON the 15th May, a Friday, Claude, who had returned at three o'clock
in the morning from Sandoz's, was still asleep at nine, when Madame
Joseph brought him up a large bouquet of white lilac which a
commissionaire had just left downstairs. He understood at once.
Christine had wished to be beforehand in celebrating the success of
his painting. For this was a great day for him, the opening day of the
'Salon of the Rejected,' which was first instituted that year,* and at
which his picture--refused by the hanging committee of the official
Salon--was to be exhibited.

  * This was in 1863.--ED.

That delicate attention on Christine's part, that fresh and fragrant
lilac, affected him greatly, as if presaging a happy day. Still in his
nightshirt, with his feet bare, he placed the flowers in his water-jug
on the table. Then, with his eyes still swollen with sleep, almost
bewildered, he dressed, scolding himself the while for having slept so
long. On the previous night he had promised Dubuche and Sandoz to call
for them at the latter's place at eight o'clock, in order that they
might all three go together to the Palais de l'Industrie, where they
would find the rest of the band. And he was already an hour behind
time.

Then, as luck would have it, he could not lay his hands upon anything
in his studio, which had been turned topsy-turvy since the despatch of
the big picture. For more than five minutes he hunted on his knees for
his shoes, among a quantity of old chases. Some particles of gold leaf
flew about, for, not knowing where to get the money for a proper
frame, he had employed a joiner of the neighbourhood to fit four
strips of board together, and had gilded them himself, with the
assistance of his friend Christine, who, by the way, had proved a very
unskilful gilder. At last, dressed and shod, and having his soft felt
hat bespangled with yellow sparks of the gold, he was about to go,
when a superstitious thought brought him back to the nosegay, which
had remained alone on the centre of the table. If he did not kiss the
lilac he was sure to suffer an affront. So he kissed it and felt
perfumed by its strong springtide aroma.

Under the archway, he gave his key as usual to the doorkeeper. 'Madame
Joseph,' he said, 'I shall not be home all day.'

In less than twenty minutes he was in the Rue d'Enfer, at Sandoz's.
But the latter, whom he feared would have already gone, was equally
late in consequence of a sudden indisposition which had come upon his
mother. It was nothing serious. She had merely passed a bad night, but
it had for a while quite upset him with anxiety. Now, easy in mind
again, Sandoz told Claude that Dubuche had written saying that they
were not to wait for him, and giving an appointment at the Palais.
They therefore started off, and as it was nearly eleven, they decided
to lunch in a deserted little _cremerie_ in the Rue St. Honore, which
they did very leisurely, seized with laziness amidst all their ardent
desire to see and know; and enjoying, as it were, a kind of sweet,
tender sadness from lingering awhile and recalling memories of their
youth.

One o'clock was striking when they crossed the Champs Elysees. It was
a lovely day, with a limpid sky, to which the breeze, still somewhat
chilly, seemed to impart a brighter azure. Beneath the sun, of the hue
of ripe corn, the rows of chestnut trees showed new foliage of a
delicate and seemingly freshly varnished green; and the fountains with
their leaping sheafs of water, the well-kept lawns, the deep vistas of
the pathways, and the broad open spaces, all lent an air of luxurious
grandeur to the panorama. A few carriages, very few at that early
hour, were ascending the avenue, while a stream of bewildered,
bustling people, suggesting a swarm of ants, plunged into the huge
archway of the Palais de l'Industrie.

When they were inside, Claude shivered slightly while crossing the
gigantic vestibule, which was as cold as a cellar, with a damp
pavement which resounded beneath one's feet, like the flagstones of a
church. He glanced right and left at the two monumental stairways, and
asked contemptuously: 'I say, are we going through their dirty Salon?'

'Oh! no, dash it!' answered Sandoz. 'Let's cut through the garden. The
western staircase over there leads to "the Rejected."'

Then they passed disdainfully between the two little tables of the
catalogue vendors. Between the huge red velvet curtains and beyond a
shady porch appeared the garden, roofed in with glass. At that time of
day it was almost deserted; there were only some people at the buffet
under the clock, a throng of people lunching. The crowd was in the
galleries on the first floor, and the white statues alone edged the
yellow-sanded pathways which with stretches of crude colour
intersected the green lawns. There was a whole nation of motionless
marble there steeped in the diffuse light falling from the glazed roof
on high. Looking southwards, some holland screens barred half of the
nave, which showed ambery in the sunlight and was speckled at both
ends by the dazzling blue and crimson of stained-glass windows. Just a
few visitors, tired already, occupied the brand-new chairs and seats,
shiny with fresh paint; while the flights of sparrows, who dwelt
above, among the iron girders, swooped down, quite at home, raking up
the sand and twittering as they pursued each other.

Claude and Sandoz made a show of walking very quickly without giving a
glance around them. A stiff classical bronze statue, a Minerva by a
member of the Institute, had exasperated them at the very door. But as
they hastened past a seemingly endless line of busts, they recognised
Bongrand, who, all alone, was going slowly round a colossal,
overflowing, recumbent figure, which had been placed in the middle of
the path. With his hands behind his back, quite absorbed, he bent his
wrinkled face every now and then over the plaster.

'Hallo, it's you?' he said, as they held out their hands to him. 'I
was just looking at our friend Mahoudeau's figure, which they have at
least had the intelligence to admit, and to put in a good position.'
Then, breaking off: 'Have you been upstairs?' he asked.

'No, we have just come in,' said Claude.

Thereupon Bongrand began to talk warmly about the Salon of the
Rejected. He, who belonged to the Institute, but who lived apart from
his colleagues, made very merry over the affair; the everlasting
discontent of painters; the campaign conducted by petty newspapers
like 'The Drummer'; the protestations, the constant complaints that
had at last disturbed the Emperor, and the artistic _coup d'etat_
carried out by that silent dreamer, for this Salon of the Rejected was
entirely his work. Then the great painter alluded to all the hubbub
caused by the flinging of such a paving-stone into that frog's pond,
the official art world.

'No,' he continued, 'you can have no idea of the rage and indignation
among the members of the hanging committee. And remember I'm
distrusted, they generally keep quiet when I'm there. But they are all
furious with the realists. It was to them that they systematically
closed the doors of the temple; it is on account of them that the
Emperor has allowed the public to revise their verdict; and finally it
is they, the realists, who triumph. Ah! I hear some nice things said;
I wouldn't give a high price for your skins, youngsters.'

He laughed his big, joyous laugh, stretching out his arms the while as
if to embrace all the youthfulness that he divined rising around him.

'Your disciples are growing,' said Claude, simply.

But Bongrand, becoming embarrassed, silenced him with a wave of his
hand. He himself had not sent anything for exhibition, and the
prodigious mass of work amidst which he found himself--those pictures,
those statues, all those proofs of creative effort--filled him with
regret. It was not jealousy, for there lived not a more upright and
better soul; but as a result of self-examination, a gnawing fear of
impotence, an unavowed dread haunted him.

'And at "the Rejected,"' asked Sandoz; 'how goes it there?'

'Superb; you'll see.'

Then turning towards Claude, and keeping both the young man's hands in
his own, 'You, my good fellow, you are a trump. Listen! they say I am
clever: well, I'd give ten years of my life to have painted that big
hussy of yours.'

Praise like that, coming from such lips, moved the young painter to
tears. Victory had come at last, then? He failed to find a word of
thanks, and abruptly changed the conversation, wishing to hide his
emotion.

'That good fellow Mahoudeau!' he said, 'why his figure's capital! He
has a deuced fine temperament, hasn't he?'

Sandoz and Claude had begun to walk round the plaster figure. Bongrand
replied with a smile.

'Yes, yes; there's too much fulness and massiveness in parts. But just
look at the articulations, they are delicate and really pretty. Come,
good-bye, I must leave you. I'm going to sit down a while. My legs are
bending under me.'

Claude had raised his head to listen. A tremendous uproar, an
incessant crashing that had not struck him at first, careered through
the air; it was like the din of a tempest beating against a cliff, the
rumbling of an untiring assault, dashing forward from endless space.

'Hallow, what's that?' he muttered.

'That,' said Bongrand, as he walked away, 'that's the crowd upstairs
in the galleries.'

And the two young fellows, having crossed the garden, then went up to
the Salon of the Rejected.

It had been installed in first-rate style. The officially received
pictures were not lodged more sumptuously: lofty hangings of old
tapestry at the doors; 'the line' set off with green baize; seats of
crimson velvet; white linen screens under the large skylights of the
roof. And all along the suite of galleries the first impression was
the same--there were the same gilt frames, the same bright colours on
the canvases. But there was a special kind of cheerfulness, a sparkle
of youth which one did not altogether realise at first. The crowd,
already compact, increased every minute, for the official Salon was
being deserted. People came stung by curiosity, impelled by a desire
to judge the judges, and, above all, full of the conviction that they
were going to see some very diverting things. It was very hot; a fine
dust arose from the flooring; and certainly, towards four o'clock
people would stifle there.

'Hang it!' said Sandoz, trying to elbow his way, 'it will be no easy
job to move about and find your picture.'

A burst of fraternal feverishness made him eager to get to it. That
day he only lived for the work and glory of his old chum.

'Don't worry!' exclaimed Claude; 'we shall get to it all right. My
picture won't fly off.'

And he affected to be in no hurry, in spite of the almost irresistible
desire that he felt to run. He raised his head and looked around him;
and soon, amidst the loud voices of the crowd that had bewildered him,
he distinguished some restrained laughter, which was almost drowned by
the tramp of feet and the hubbub of conversation. Before certain
pictures the public stood joking. This made him feel uneasy, for
despite all his revolutionary brutality he was as sensitive and as
credulous as a woman, and always looked forward to martyrdom, though
he was ever grieved and stupefied at being repulsed and railed at.

'They seem gay here,' he muttered.

'Well, there's good reason,' remarked Sandoz. 'Just look at those
extravagant jades!'

At the same moment, while still lingering in the first gallery,
Fagerolles ran up against them without seeing them. He started, being
no doubt annoyed by the meeting. However, he recovered his composure
immediately, and behaved very amiably.

'Hallo! I was just thinking of you. I have been here for the last
hour.'

'Where have they put Claude's picture?' asked Sandoz. Fagerolles, who
had just remained for twenty minutes in front of that picture studying
it and studying the impression which it produced on the public,
answered without wincing, 'I don't know; I haven't been able to find
it. We'll look for it together if you like.'

And he joined them. Terrible wag as he was, he no longer affected
low-bred manners to the same degree as formerly; he already began to
dress well, and although with his mocking nature he was still disposed
to snap at everybody as of old, he pursed his lips into the serious
expression of a fellow who wants to make his way in the world. With an
air of conviction he added: 'I must say that I now regret not having
sent anything this year! I should be here with all the rest of you,
and have my share of success. And there are really some astonishing
things, my boys! those horses, for instance.'

He pointed to a huge canvas in front of them, before which the crowd
was gathering and laughing. It was, so people said, the work of an
erstwhile veterinary surgeon, and showed a number of life-size horses
in a meadow, fantastic horses, blue, violet, and pink, whose
astonishing anatomy transpierced their sides.

'I say, don't you humbug us,' exclaimed Claude, suspiciously.

But Fagerolles pretended to be enthusiastic. 'What do you mean? The
picture's full of talent. The fellow who painted it understands horses
devilish well. No doubt he paints like a brute. But what's the odds if
he's original, and contributes a document?'

As he spoke Fagerolles' delicate girlish face remained perfectly
grave, and it was impossible to tell whether he was joking. There was
but the slightest yellow twinkle of spitefulness in the depths of his
grey eyes. And he finished with a sarcastic allusion, the drift of
which was as yet patent to him alone. 'Ah, well! if you let yourself
be influenced by the fools who laugh, you'll have enough to do by and
by.'

The three friends had gone on again, only advancing, however, with
infinite difficulty amid that sea of surging shoulders. On entering
the second gallery they gave a glance round the walls, but the picture
they sought was not there. In lieu thereof they perceived Irma Becot
on the arm of Gagniere, both of them pressed against a hand-rail, he
busy examining a small canvas, while she, delighted at being hustled
about, raised her pink little mug and laughed at the crowd.

'Hallo!' said Sandoz, surprised, 'here she is with Gagniere now!'

'Oh, just a fancy of hers!' exclaimed Fagerolles quietly. 'She has a
very swell place now. Yes, it was given her by that young idiot of a
marquis, whom the papers are always talking about. She's a girl who'll
make her way; I've always said so! But she seems to retain a weakness
for painters, and every now and then drops into the Cafe Baudequin to
look up old friends!'

Irma had now seen them, and was making gestures from afar. They could
but go to her. When Gagniere, with his light hair and little beardless
face, turned round, looking more grotesque than over, he did not show
the least surprise at finding them there.

'It's wonderful,' he muttered.

'What's wonderful?' asked Fagerolles.

'This little masterpiece--and withal honest and naif, and full of
conviction.'

He pointed to a tiny canvas before which he had stood absorbed, an
absolutely childish picture, such as an urchin of four might have
painted; a little cottage at the edge of a little road, with a little
tree beside it, the whole out of drawing, and girt round with black
lines. Not even a corkscrew imitation of smoke issuing from the roof
was forgotten.

Claude made a nervous gesture, while Fagerolles repeated
phlegmatically:

'Very delicate, very delicate. But your picture, Gagniere, where is
it?'

'My picture, it is there.'

In fact, the picture he had sent happened to be very near the little
masterpiece. It was a landscape of a pearly grey, a bit of the Seine
banks, painted carefully, pretty in tone, though somewhat heavy, and
perfectly ponderated without a sign of any revolutionary splash.

'To think that they were idiotic enough to refuse that!' said Claude,
who had approached with an air of interest. But why, I ask you, why?'

'Because it's realistic,' said Fagerolles, in so sharp a voice that
one could not tell whether he was gibing at the jury or at the
picture.

Meanwhile, Irma, of whom no one took any notice, was looking fixedly
at Claude with the unconscious smile which the savage loutishness of
that big fellow always brought to her lips. To think that he had not
even cared to see her again. She found him so much altered since the
last time she had seen him, so funny, and not at all prepossessing,
with his hair standing on end, and his face wan and sallow, as if he
had had a severe fever. Pained that he did not seem to notice her, she
wanted to attract his attention, and touched his arm with a familiar
gesture.

'I say, isn't that one of your friends over there, looking for you?'

It was Dubuche, whom she knew from having seen him on one occasion at
the Cafe Baudequin. He was, with difficulty, elbowing his way through
the crowd, and staring vaguely at the sea of heads around him. But all
at once, when Claude was trying to attract his notice by dint of
gesticulations, the other turned his back to bow very low to a party
of three--the father short and fat, with a sanguine face; the mother
very thin, of the colour of wax, and devoured by anemia; and the
daughter so physically backward at eighteen, that she retained all the
lank scragginess of childhood.

'All right!' muttered the painter. 'There he's caught now. What ugly
acquaintances the brute has! Where can he have fished up such
horrors?'

Gagniere quietly replied that he knew the strangers by sight. M.
Margaillan was a great masonry contractor, already a millionaire five
or six times over, and was making his fortune out of the great public
works of Paris, running up whole boulevards on his own account. No
doubt Dubuche had become acquainted with him through one of the
architects he worked for.

However, Sandoz, compassionating the scragginess of the girl, whom he
kept watching, judged her in one sentence.

'Ah! the poor little flayed kitten. One feels sorry for her.'

'Let them alone!' exclaimed Claude, ferociously. 'They have all the
crimes of the middle classes stamped on their faces; they reek of
scrofula and idiocy. It serves them right. But hallo! our runaway
friend is making off with them. What grovellers architects are! Good
riddance. He'll have to look for us when he wants us!'

Dubuche, who had not seen his friends, had just offered his arm to the
mother, and was going off, explaining the pictures with gestures
typical of exaggerated politeness.

'Well, let's proceed then,' said Fagerolles; and, addressing Gagniere,
he asked, 'Do you know where they have put Claude's picture?'

'I? no, I was looking for it--I am going with you.'

He accompanied them, forgetting Irma Becot against the 'line.' It was
she who had wanted to visit the Salon on his arm, and he was so little
used to promenading a woman about, that he had constantly lost her on
the way, and was each time stupefied to find her again beside him, no
longer knowing how or why they were thus together. She ran after them,
and took his arm once more in order to follow Claude, who was already
passing into another gallery with Fagerolles and Sandoz.

Then the five roamed about in Indian file, with their noses in the
air, now separated by a sudden crush, now reunited by another, and
ever carried along by the stream. An abomination of Chaine's, a
'Christ pardoning the Woman taken in Adultery,' made them pause; it
was a group of dry figures that looked as if cut out of wood, very
bony of build, and seemingly painted with mud. But close by they
admired a very fine study of a woman, seen from behind, with her head
turned sideways. The whole show was a mixture of the best and the
worst, all styles were mingled together, the drivellers of the
historical school elbowed the young lunatics of realism, the pure
simpletons were lumped together with those who bragged about their
originality. A dead Jezabel, that seemed to have rotted in the cellars
of the School of Arts, was exhibited near a lady in white, the very
curious conception of a future great artist*; then a huge shepherd
looking at the sea, a weak production, faced a little painting of some
Spaniards playing at rackets, a dash of light of splendid intensity.
Nothing execrable was wanting, neither military scenes full of little
leaden soldiers, nor wan antiquity, nor the middle ages, smeared, as
it were, with bitumen. But from amidst the incoherent ensemble, and
especially from the landscapes, all of which were painted in a
sincere, correct key, and also from the portraits, most of which were
very interesting in respect to workmanship, there came a good fresh
scent of youth, bravery and passion. If there were fewer bad pictures
in the official Salon, the average there was assuredly more
commonplace and mediocre. Here one found the smell of battle, of
cheerful battle, given jauntily at daybreak, when the bugle sounds,
and when one marches to meet the enemy with the certainty of beating
him before sunset.

  * Edouard Manet.--ED.

Claude, whose spirits had revived amidst that martial odour, grew
animated and pugnacious as he listened to the laughter of the public.
He looked as defiant, indeed, as if he had heard bullets whizzing past
him. Sufficiently discreet at the entrance of the galleries, the
laughter became more boisterous, more unrestrained, as they advanced.
In the third room the women ceased concealing their smiles behind
their handkerchiefs, while the men openly held their sides the better
to ease themselves. It was the contagious hilarity of people who had
come to amuse themselves, and who were growing gradually excited,
bursting out at a mere trifle, diverted as much by the good things as
by the bad. Folks laughed less before Chaine's Christ than before the
back view of the nude woman, who seemed to them very comical indeed.
The 'Lady in White' also stupefied people and drew them together;
folks nudged each other and went into hysterics almost; there was
always a grinning group in front of it. Each canvas thus had its
particular kind of success; people hailed each other from a distance
to point out something funny, and witticisms flew from mouth to mouth;
to such a degree indeed that, as Claude entered the fourth gallery,
lashed into fury by the tempest of laughter that was raging there as
well, he all but slapped the face of an old lady whose chuckles
exasperated him.

'What idiots!' he said, turning towards his friends. 'One feels
inclined to throw a lot of masterpieces at their heads.'

Sandoz had become fiery also, and Fagerolles continued praising the
most dreadful daubs, which only tended to increase the laughter, while
Gagniere, at sea amid the hubbub, dragged on the delighted Irma, whose
skirts somehow wound round the legs of all the men.

But of a sudden Jory stood before them. His fair handsome face
absolutely beamed. He cut his way through the crowd, gesticulated, and
exulted, as if over a personal victory. And the moment he perceived
Claude, he shouted:

'Here you are at last! I have been looking for you this hour. A
success, old fellow, oh! a success--'

'What success?'

'Why, the success of your picture. Come, I must show it you. You'll
see, it's stunning.'

Claude grew pale. A great joy choked him, while he pretended to
receive the news with composure. Bongrand's words came back to him. He
began to believe that he possessed genius.

'Hallo, how are you?' continued Jory, shaking hands with the others.

And, without more ado, he, Fagerolles and Gagniere surrounded Irma,
who smiled on them in a good-natured way.

'Perhaps you'll tell us where the picture is,' said Sandoz,
impatiently. 'Take us to it.'

Jory assumed the lead, followed by the band. They had to fight their
way into the last gallery. But Claude, who brought up the rear, still
heard the laughter that rose on the air, a swelling clamour, the roll
of a tide near its full. And as he finally entered the room, he beheld
a vast, swarming, closely packed crowd pressing eagerly in front of
his picture. All the laughter arose, spread, and ended there. And it
was his picture that was being laughed at.

'Eh!' repeated Jory, triumphantly, 'there's a success for you.'

Gagniere, intimidated, as ashamed as if he himself had been slapped,
muttered: 'Too much of a success--I should prefer something
different.'

'What a fool you are,' replied Jory, in a burst of exalted conviction.
'That's what I call success. Does it matter a curse if they laugh? We
have made our mark; to-morrow every paper will talk about us.'

'The idiots,' was all that Sandoz could gasp, choking with grief.

Fagerolles, disinterested and dignified like a family friend following
a funeral procession, said nothing. Irma alone remained gay, thinking
it all very funny. And, with a caressing gesture, she leant against
the shoulder of the derided painter, and whispered softly in his ear:
'Don't fret, my boy. It's all humbug, be merry all the same.'

But Claude did not stir. An icy chill had come over him. For a moment
his heart had almost ceased to beat, so cruel had been the
disappointment And with his eyes enlarged, attracted and fixed by a
resistless force, he looked at his picture. He was surprised, and
scarcely recognised it; it certainly was not such as it had seemed to
be in his studio. It had grown yellow beneath the livid light of the
linen screens; it seemed, moreover, to have become smaller; coarser
and more laboured also; and whether it was the effect of the light in
which it now hung, or the contrast of the works beside it, at all
events he now at the first glance saw all its defects, after having
remained blind to them, as it were, for months. With a few strokes of
the brush he, in thought, altered the whole of it, deepened the
distances, set a badly drawn limb right, and modified a tone.
Decidedly, the gentleman in the velveteen jacket was worth nothing at
all, he was altogether pasty and badly seated; the only really good
bit of work about him was his hand. In the background the two little
wrestlers--the fair and the dark one--had remained too sketchy, and
lacked substance; they were amusing only to an artist's eye. But he
was pleased with the trees, with the sunny glade; and the nude woman
--the woman lying on the grass appeared to him superior to his own
powers, as if some one else had painted her, and as if he had never
yet beheld her in such resplendency of life.

He turned to Sandoz, and said simply:

'They do right to laugh; it's incomplete. Never mind, the woman is all
right! Bongrand was not hoaxing me.'

His friend wished to take him away, but he became obstinate, and drew
nearer instead. Now that he had judged his work, he listened and
looked at the crowd. The explosion continued--culminated in an
ascending scale of mad laughter. No sooner had visitors crossed the
threshold than he saw their jaws part, their eyes grow small, their
entire faces expand; and he heard the tempestuous puffing of the fat
men, the rusty grating jeers of the lean ones, amidst all the shrill,
flute-like laughter of the women. Opposite him, against the
hand-rails, some young fellows went into contortions, as if somebody
had been tickling them. One lady had flung herself on a seat, stifling
and trying to regain breath with her handkerchief over her mouth.
Rumours of this picture, which was so very, very funny, must have been
spreading, for there was a rush from the four corners of the Salon,
bands of people arrived, jostling each other, and all eagerness to
share the fun. 'Where is it?' 'Over there.' 'Oh, what a joke!' And the
witticisms fell thicker than elsewhere. It was especially the subject
that caused merriment; people failed to understand it, thought it
insane, comical enough to make one ill with laughter. 'You see the
lady feels too hot, while the gentleman has put on his velveteen
jacket for fear of catching cold.' 'Not at all; she is already blue;
the gentleman has pulled her out of a pond, and he is resting at a
distance, holding his nose.' 'I tell you it's a young ladies' school
out for a ramble. Look at the two playing at leap-frog.' 'Hallo!
washing day; the flesh is blue; the trees are blue; he's dipped his
picture in the blueing tub!'

Those who did not laugh flew into a rage: that bluish tinge, that
novel rendering of light seemed an insult to them. Some old gentlemen
shook their sticks. Was art to be outraged like this? One grave
individual went away very wroth, saying to his wife that he did not
like practical jokes. But another, a punctilious little man, having
looked in the catalogue for the title of the work, in order to tell
his daughter, read out the words, '_In the Open Air_,' whereupon there
came a formidable renewal of the clamour, hisses and shouts, and what
not else besides. The title sped about; it was repeated, commented on.
'_In the Open Air_! ah, yes, the open air, the nude woman in the air,
everything in the air, tra la la laire.' The affair was becoming a
scandal. The crowd still increased. People's faces grew red with
congestion in the growing heat. Each had the stupidly gaping mouth of
the ignoramus who judges painting, and between them they indulged in
all the asinine ideas, all the preposterous reflections, all the
stupid spiteful jeers that the sight of an original work can possibly
elicit from bourgeois imbecility.

At that moment, as a last blow, Claude beheld Dubuche reappear,
dragging the Margaillans along. As soon as he came in front of the
picture, the architect, ill at ease, overtaken by cowardly shame,
wished to quicken his pace and lead his party further on, pretending
that he saw neither the canvas nor his friends. But the contractor had
already drawn himself up on his short, squat legs, and was staring at
the picture, and asking aloud in his thick hoarse voice:

'I say, who's the blockhead that painted this?'

That good-natured bluster, that cry of a millionaire parvenu resuming
the average opinion of the assembly, increased the general merriment;
and he, flattered by his success, and tickled by the strange style of
the painting, started laughing in his turn, so sonorously that he
could be heard above all the others. This was the hallelujah, a final
outburst of the great organ of opinion.

'Take my daughter away,' whispered pale-faced Madame Margaillan in
Dubuche's ear.

He sprang forward and freed Regine, who had lowered her eyelids, from
the crowd; displaying in doing so as much muscular energy as if it had
been a question of saving the poor creature from imminent death. Then
having taken leave of the Margaillans at the door, with a deal of
handshaking and bows, he came towards his friends, and said
straightway to Sandoz, Fagerolles, and Gagniere:

'What would you have? It isn't my fault--I warned him that the public
would not understand him. It's improper; yes, you may say what you
like, it's improper.'

'They hissed Delacroix,' broke in Sandoz, white with rage, and
clenching his fists. 'They hissed Courbet. Oh, the race of enemies!
Oh, the born idiots!'

Gagniere, who now shared this artistic vindictiveness, grew angry at
the recollection of his Sunday battles at the Pasdeloup Concerts in
favour of real music.

'And they hiss Wagner too; they are the same crew. I recognise them.
You see that fat fellow over there--'

Jory had to hold him back. The journalist for his part would rather
have urged on the crowd. He kept on repeating that it was famous, that
there was a hundred thousand francs' worth of advertisements in it.
And Irma, left to her own devices once more, went up to two of her
friends, young Bourse men who were among the most persistent scoffers,
but whom she began to indoctrinate, forcing them, as it were, into
admiration, by rapping them on the knuckles.

Fagerolles, however, had not opened his lips. He kept on examining the
picture, and glancing at the crowd. With his Parisian instinct and the
elastic conscience of a skilful fellow, he at once fathomed the
misunderstanding. He was already vaguely conscious of what was wanted
for that style of painting to make the conquest of everybody--a little
trickery perhaps, some attenuations, a different choice of subject, a
milder method of execution. In the main, the influence that Claude had
always had over him persisted in making itself felt; he remained
imbued with it; it had set its stamp upon him for ever. Only he
considered Claude to be an arch-idiot to have exhibited such a thing
as that. Wasn't it stupid to believe in the intelligence of the
public? What was the meaning of that nude woman beside that gentleman
who was fully dressed? And what did those two little wrestlers in the
background mean? Yet the picture showed many of the qualities of a
master. There wasn't another bit of painting like it in the Salon! And
he felt a great contempt for that artist, so admirably endowed, who
through lack of tact made all Paris roar as if he had been the worst
of daubers.

This contempt became so strong that he was unable to hide it. In a
moment of irresistible frankness he exclaimed:

'Look here, my dear fellow, it's your own fault, you are too stupid.'

Claude, turning his eyes from the crowd, looked at him in silence. He
had not winced, he had only turned pale amidst the laughter, and if
his lips quivered it was merely with a slight nervous twitching;
nobody knew him, it was his work alone that was being buffeted. Then
for a moment he glanced again at his picture, and slowly inspected the
other canvases in the gallery. And amidst the collapse of his
illusions, the bitter agony of his pride, a breath of courage, a whiff
of health and youth came to him from all that gaily-brave painting
which rushed with such headlong passion to beat down classical
conventionality. He was consoled and inspirited by it all; he felt no
remorse nor contrition, but, on the contrary, was impelled to fight
the popular taste still more. No doubt there was some clumsiness and
some puerility of effort in his work, but on the other hand what a
pretty general tone, what a play of light he had thrown into it, a
silvery grey light, fine and diffuse, brightened by all the dancing
sunbeams of the open air. It was as if a window had been suddenly
opened amidst all the old bituminous cookery of art, amidst all the
stewing sauces of tradition, and the sun came in and the walls smiled
under that invasion of springtide. The light note of his picture, the
bluish tinge that people had been railing at, flashed out among the
other paintings also. Was this not the expected dawn, a new aurora
rising on art? He perceived a critic who stopped without laughing,
some celebrated painters who looked surprised and grave, while Papa
Malgras, very dirty, went from picture to picture with the pout of a
wary connoisseur, and finally stopped short in front of his canvas,
motionless, absorbed. Then Claude turned round to Fagerolles, and
surprised him by this tardy reply:

'A fellow can only be an idiot according to his own lights, my dear
chap, and it looks as if I am going to remain one. So much the better
for you if you are clever!'

Fagerolles at once patted him on the shoulder, like a chum who had
only been in fun, and Claude allowed Sandoz to take his arm. They led
him off at last. The whole band left the Salon of the Rejected,
deciding that they would pass on their way through the gallery of
architecture; for a design for a museum by Dubuche had been accepted,
and for some few minutes he had been fidgeting and begging them with
so humble a look, that it seemed difficult indeed to deny him this
satisfaction.

'Ah!' said Jory, jocularly, on entering the gallery, 'what an
ice-well! One can breathe here.'

They all took off their hats and wiped their foreheads, with a feeling
of relief, as if they had reached some big shady trees after a long
march in full sunlight. The gallery was empty. From the roof, shaded
by a white linen screen, there fell a soft, even, rather sad light,
which was reflected like quiescent water by the well-waxed,
mirror-like floor. On the four walls, of a faded red, hung the plans
and designs in large and small chases, edged with pale blue borders.
Alone--absolutely alone--amidst this desert stood a very hirsute
gentleman, who was lost in the contemplation of the plan of a charity
home. Three ladies who appeared became frightened and fled across the
gallery with hasty steps.

Dubuche was already showing and explaining his work to his comrades.
It was only a drawing of a modest little museum gallery, which he had
sent in with ambitious haste, contrary to custom and against the
wishes of his master, who, nevertheless, had used his influence to
have it accepted, thinking himself pledged to do so.

'Is your museum intended for the accommodation of the paintings of the
"open air" school?' asked Fagerolles, very gravely.

Gagniere pretended to admire the plan, nodding his head, but thinking
of something else; while Claude and Sandoz examined it with sincere
interest.

'Not bad, old boy,' said the former. 'The ornamentation is still
bastardly traditional; but never mind; it will do.'

Jory, becoming impatient at last, cut him short.

'Come along, let's go, eh? I'm catching my death of cold here.'

The band resumed its march. The worst was that to make a short cut
they had to go right through the official Salon, and they resigned
themselves to doing so, notwithstanding the oath they had taken not to
set foot in it, as a matter of protest. Cutting their way through the
crowd, keeping rigidly erect, they followed the suite of galleries,
casting indignant glances to right and left. There was none of the gay
scandal of their Salon, full of fresh tones and an exaggeration of
sunlight, here. One after the other came gilt frames full of shadows;
black pretentious things, nude figures showing yellowish in a
cellar-like light, the frippery of so-called classical art,
historical, genre and landscape painting, all showing the same
conventional black grease. The works reeked of uniform mediocrity,
they were characterised by a muddy dinginess of tone, despite their
primness--the primness of impoverished, degenerate blood. And the
friends quickened their steps: they ran to escape from that reign of
bitumen, condemning everything in one lump with their superb sectarian
injustice, repeating that there was nothing in the place worth looking
at--nothing, nothing at all!

At last they emerged from the galleries, and were going down into the
garden when they met Mahoudeau and Chaine. The former threw himself
into Claude's arms.

'Ah, my dear fellow, your picture; what artistic temperament it
shows!'

The painter at once began to praise the 'Vintaging Girl.'

'And you, I say, you have thrown a nice big lump at their heads!'

But the sight of Chaine, to whom no one spoke about the 'Woman taken
in Adultery,' and who went silently wandering around, awakened
Claude's compassion. He thought there was something very sad about
that execrable painting, and the wasted life of that peasant who was a
victim of middle-class admiration. He always gave him the delight of a
little praise; so now he shook his hand cordially, exclaiming:

'Your machine's very good too. Ah, my fine fellow, draughtsmanship has
no terrors for you!'

'No, indeed,' declared Chaine, who had grown purple with vanity under
his black bushy beard.

He and Mahoudeau joined the band, and the latter asked the others
whether they had seen Chambouvard's 'Sower.' It was marvellous; the
only piece of statuary worth looking at in the Salon. Thereupon they
all followed him into the garden, which the crowd was now invading.

'There,' said Mahoudeau, stopping in the middle of the central path:
'Chambouvard is standing just in front of his "Sower."'

In fact, a portly man stood there, solidly planted on his fat legs,
and admiring his handiwork. With his head sunk between his shoulders,
he had the heavy, handsome features of a Hindu idol. He was said to be
the son of a veterinary surgeon of the neighbourhood of Amiens. At
forty-five he had already produced twenty masterpieces: statues all
simplicity and life, flesh modern and palpitating, kneaded by a
workman of genius, without any pretension to refinement; and all this
was chance production, for he furnished work as a field bears harvest,
good one day, bad the next, in absolute ignorance of what he created.
He carried the lack of critical acumen to such a degree that he made
no distinction between the most glorious offspring of his hands and
the detestably grotesque figures which now and then he chanced to put
together. Never troubled by nervous feverishness, never doubting,
always solid and convinced, he had the pride of a god.

'Wonderful, the "Sower"!' whispered Claude. 'What a figure! and what
an attitude!'

Fagerolles, who had not looked at the statue, was highly amused by the
great man, and the string of young, open-mouthed disciples whom as
usual he dragged at his tail.

'Just look at them, one would think they are taking the sacrament,
'pon my word--and he himself, eh? What a fine brutish face he has!'

Isolated, and quite at his ease, amidst the general curiosity,
Chambouvard stood there wondering, with the stupefied air of a man who
is surprised at having produced such a masterpiece. He seemed to
behold it for the first time, and was unable to get over his
astonishment. Then an expression of delight gradually stole over his
broad face, he nodded his head, and burst into soft, irresistible
laughter, repeating a dozen times, 'It's comical, it's really
comical!'

His train of followers went into raptures, while he himself could find
nothing more forcible to express how much he worshipped himself. All
at once there was a slight stir. Bongrand, who had been walking about
with his hands behind his back, glancing vaguely around him, had just
stumbled on Chambouvard, and the public, drawing back, whispered, and
watched the two celebrated artists shaking hands; the one short and of
a sanguine temperament, the other tall and restless. Some expressions
of good-fellowship were overheard. 'Always fresh marvels.' 'Of course!
And you, nothing this year?' 'No, nothing; I am resting, seeking--'
'Come, you joker! There's no need to seek, the thing comes by itself.'
'Good-bye.' 'Good-bye.' And Chambouvard, followed by his court, was
already moving slowly away among the crowd, with the glances of a
king, who enjoys life, while Bongrand, who had recognised Claude and
his friends, approached them with outstretched feverish hands, and
called attention to the sculptor with a nervous jerk of the chin,
saying, 'There's a fellow I envy! Ah! to be confident of always
producing masterpieces!'

He complimented Mahoudeau on his 'Vintaging Girl'; showed himself
paternal to all of them, with that broad-minded good-nature of his,
the free and easy manner of an old Bohemian of the romantic school,
who had settled down and was decorated. Then, turning to Claude:

'Well, what did I tell you? Did you see upstairs? You have become the
chief of a school.'

'Ah! yes,' replied Claude. 'They are giving it me nicely. You are the
master of us all.'

But Bongrand made his usual gesture of vague suffering and went off,
saying, 'Hold your tongue! I am not even my own master.'

For a few moments longer the band wandered through the garden. They
had gone back to look at the 'Vintaging Girl,' when Jory noticed that
Gagniere no longer had Irma Becot on his arm. Gagniere was stupefied;
where the deuce could he have lost her? But when Fagerolles had told
him that she had gone off in the crowd with two gentlemen, he
recovered his composure, and followed the others, lighter of heart now
that he was relieved of that girl who had bewildered him.

People now only moved about with difficulty. All the seats were taken
by storm; groups blocked up the paths, where the promenaders paused
every now and then, flowing back around the successful bits of bronze
and marble. From the crowded buffet there arose a loud buzzing, a
clatter of saucers and spoons which mingled with the throb of life
pervading the vast nave. The sparrows had flown up to the forest of
iron girders again, and one could hear their sharp little chirps, the
twittering with which they serenaded the setting sun, under the warm
panes of the glass roof. The atmosphere, moreover, had become heavy,
there was a damp greenhouse-like warmth; the air, stationary as it
was, had an odour as of humus, freshly turned over. And rising above
the garden throng, the din of the first-floor galleries, the tramping
of feet on their iron-girdered flooring still rolled on with the
clamour of a tempest beating against a cliff.

Claude, who had a keen perception of that rumbling storm, ended by
hearing nothing else; it had been let loose and was howling in his
ears. It was the merriment of the crowd whose jeers and laughter swept
hurricane-like past his picture. With a weary gesture he exclaimed:

'Come, what are we messing about here for? I sha'n't take anything at
the refreshment bar, it reeks of the Institute. Let's go and have a
glass of beer outside, eh?'

They all went out, with sinking legs and tired faces, expressive of
contempt. Once outside, on finding themselves again face to face with
healthy mother Nature in her springtide season, they breathed noisily
with an air of delight. It had barely struck four o'clock, the
slanting sun swept along the Champs Elysees and everything flared: the
serried rows of carriages, like the fresh foliage of the trees, and
the sheaf-like fountains which spouted up and whirled away in golden
dust. With a sauntering step they went hesitatingly down the central
avenue, and finally stranded in a little cafe, the Pavillon de la
Concorde, on the left, just before reaching the Place. The place was
so small that they sat down outside it at the edge of the footway,
despite the chill which fell from a vault of leaves, already fully
grown and gloomy. But beyond the four rows of chestnut-trees, beyond
the belt of verdant shade, they could see the sunlit roadway of the
main avenue where Paris passed before them as in a nimbus, the
carriages with their wheels radiating like stars, the big yellow
omnibuses, looking even more profusely gilded than triumphal chariots,
the horsemen whose steeds seemed to raise clouds of sparks, and the
foot passengers whom the light enveloped in splendour.

And during nearly three hours, with his beer untasted before him,
Claude went on talking and arguing amid a growing fever, broken down
as he was in body, and with his mind full of all the painting he had
just seen. It was the usual winding up of their visit to the Salon,
though this year they were more impassioned on account of the liberal
measure of the Emperor.

'Well, and what of it, if the public does laugh?' cried Claude. 'We
must educate the public, that's all. In reality it's a victory. Take
away two hundred grotesque canvases, and our Salon beats theirs. We
have courage and audacity--we are the future. Yes, yes, you'll see it
later on; we shall kill their Salon. We shall enter it as conquerors,
by dint of producing masterpieces. Laugh, laugh, you big stupid Paris
--laugh until you fall on your knees before us!'

And stopping short, he pointed prophetically to the triumphal avenue,
where the luxury and happiness of the city went rolling by in the
sunlight. His arms stretched out till they embraced even the Place de
la Concorde, which could be seen slantwise from where they sat under
the trees--the Place de la Concorde, with the plashing water of one of
its fountains, a strip of balustrade, and two of its statues--Rouen,
with the gigantic bosom, and Lille, thrusting forward her huge bare
foot.

'"In the open air"--it amuses them, eh?' he resumed. 'All right, since
they are bent on it, the "open air" then, the school of the "open
air!" Eh! it was a thing strictly between us, it didn't exist
yesterday beyond the circle of a few painters. But now they throw the
word upon the winds, and they found the school. Oh! I'm agreeable. Let
it be the school of the "open air!"'

Jory slapped his thighs.

'Didn't I tell you? I felt sure of making them bite with those
articles of mine, the idiots that they are. Ah! how we'll plague them
now.'

Mahoudeau also was singing victory, constantly dragging in his
'Vintaging Girl,' the daring points of which he explained to the
silent Chaine, the only one who listened to him; while Gagniere, with
the sternness of a timid man waxing wroth over questions of pure
theory, spoke of guillotining the Institute; and Sandoz, with the
glowing sympathy of a hard worker, and Dubuche, giving way to the
contagion of revolutionary friendship, became exasperated, and struck
the table, swallowing up Paris with each draught of beer. Fagerolles,
very calm, retained his usual smile. He had accompanied them for the
sake of amusement, for the singular pleasure which he found in urging
his comrades into farcical affairs that were bound to turn out badly.
At the very moment when he was lashing their spirit of revolt, he
himself formed the firm resolution to work in future for the Prix de
Rome. That day had decided him; he thought it idiotic to compromise
his prospects any further.

The sun was declining on the horizon, there was now only a returning
stream of carriages, coming back from the Bois in the pale golden
shimmer of the sunset. And the exodus from the Salon must have been
nearly over; a long string of pedestrians passed by, gentlemen who
looked like critics, each with a catalogue under his arm.

But all at once Gagniere became enthusiastic: 'Ah! Courajod, there was
one who had his share in inventing landscape painting! Have you seen
his "Pond of Gagny" at the Luxembourg?'

'A marvel!' exclaimed Claude. 'It was painted thirty years ago, and
nothing more substantial has been turned out since. Why is it left at
the Luxembourg? It ought to be in the Louvre.'

'But Courajod isn't dead,' said Fagerolles.

'What! Courajod isn't dead! No one ever sees him or speaks of him
now.'

There was general stupefaction when Fagerolles assured them that the
great landscape painter, now seventy years of age, lived somewhere in
the neighbourhood of Montmartre, in a little house among his fowls,
ducks, and dogs. So one might outlive one's own glory! To think that
there were such melancholy instances of old artists disappearing
before their death! Silence fell upon them all; they began to shiver
when they perceived Bongrand pass by on a friend's arm, with a
congestive face and a nervous air as he waved his hand to them; while
almost immediately behind him, surrounded by his disciples, came
Chambouvard, laughing very loudly, and tapping his heels on the
pavement with the air of absolute mastery that comes from confidence
in immortality.

'What! are you going?' said Mahoudeau to Chaine, who was rising from
his chair.

The other mumbled some indistinct words in his beard, and went off
after distributing handshakes among the party.

'I know,' said Jory to Mahoudeau. 'I believe he has a weakness for
your neighbour, the herbalist woman. I saw his eyes flash all at once;
it comes upon him like toothache. Look how he's running over there.'

The sculptor shrugged his shoulders amidst the general laughter.

But Claude did not hear. He was now discussing architecture with
Dubuche. No doubt, that plan of a museum gallery which he exhibited
wasn't bad; only there was nothing new in it. It was all so much
patient marquetry of the school formulas. Ought not all the arts to
advance in one line of battle? Ought not the evolution that was
transforming literature, painting, even music itself, to renovate
architecture as well? If ever the architecture of a period was to have
a style of its own, it was assuredly the architecture of the period
they would soon be entering, a new period when they would find the
ground freshly swept, ready for the rebuilding of everything. Down
with the Greek temples! there was no reason why they should continue
to exist under our sky, amid our society! down with the Gothic
cathedrals, since faith in legend was dead! down with the delicate
colonnades, the lace-like work of the Renaissance--that revival of the
antique grafted on mediaevalism--precious art-jewellery, no doubt, but
in which democracy could not dwell. And he demanded, he called with
violent gestures for an architectural formula suited to democracy;
such work in stone as would express its tenets; edifices where it
would really be at home; something vast and strong, great and simple
at the same time; the something that was already being indicated in
the new railway stations and markets, whose ironwork displayed such
solid elegance, but purified and raised to a standard of beauty,
proclaiming the grandeur of the intellectual conquests of the age.

'Ah! yes, ah! yes,' repeated Dubuche, catching Claude's enthusiasm;
'that's what I want to accomplish, you'll see some day. Give me time
to succeed, and when I'm my own master--ah! when I'm my own master.'

Night was coming on apace, and Claude was growing more and more
animated and passionate, displaying a fluency, an eloquence which his
comrades had not known him to possess. They all grew excited in
listening to him, and ended by becoming noisily gay over the
extraordinary witticisms he launched forth. He himself, having
returned to the subject of his picture, again discussed it with a deal
of gaiety, caricaturing the crowd he had seen looking at it, and
imitating the imbecile laughter. Along the avenue, now of an ashy hue,
one only saw the shadows of infrequent vehicles dart by. The side-walk
was quite black; an icy chill fell from the trees. Nothing broke the
stillness but the sound of song coming from a clump of verdure behind
the cafe; there was some rehearsal at the Concert de l'Horloge, for
one heard the sentimental voice of a girl trying a love-song.

'Ah! how they amused me, the idiots!' exclaimed Claude, in a last
burst. 'Do you know, I wouldn't take a hundred thousand francs for my
day's pleasure!'

Then he relapsed into silence, thoroughly exhausted. Nobody had any
saliva left; silence reigned; they all shivered in the icy gust that
swept by. And they separated in a sort of bewilderment, shaking hands
in a tired fashion. Dubuche was going to dine out; Fagerolles had an
appointment; in vain did Jory, Mahoudeau, and Gagniere try to drag
Claude to Foucart's, a twenty-five sous' restaurant; Sandoz was
already taking him away on his arm, feeling anxious at seeing him so
excited.

'Come along, I promised my mother to be back for dinner. You'll take a
bit with us. It will be nice; we'll finish the day together.'

They both went down the quay, past the Tuileries, walking side by side
in fraternal fashion. But at the Pont des Saints-Peres the painter
stopped short.

'What, are you going to leave me?' exclaimed Sandoz.

'Why, I thought you were going to dine with me?'

'No, thanks; I've too bad a headache--I'm going home to bed.'

And he obstinately clung to this excuse.

'All right, old man,' said Sandoz at last, with a smile. 'One doesn't
see much of you nowadays. You live in mystery. Go on, old boy, I don't
want to be in your way.'

Claude restrained a gesture of impatience; and, letting his friend
cross the bridge, he went his way along the quays by himself. He
walked on with his arms hanging beside him, with his face turned
towards the ground, seeing nothing, but taking long strides like a
somnambulist who is guided by instinct. On the Quai de Bourbon, in
front of his door, he looked up, full of surprise on seeing a cab
waiting at the edge of the foot pavement, and barring his way. And it
was with the same automatical step that he entered the doorkeeper's
room to take his key.

'I have given it to that lady,' called Madame Joseph from the back of
the room. 'She is upstairs.'

'What lady?' he asked in bewilderment.

'That young person. Come, you know very well, the one who always
comes.'

He had not the remotest idea whom she meant. Still, in his utter
confusion of mind, he decided to go upstairs. The key was in the door,
which he slowly opened and closed again.

For a moment Claude stood stock still. Darkness had invaded the
studio; a violet dimness, a melancholy gloom fell from the large
window, enveloping everything. He could no longer plainly distinguish
either the floor, or the furniture, or the sketches; everything that
was lying about seemed to be melting in the stagnant waters of a pool.
But on the edge of the couch there loomed a dark figure, stiff with
waiting, anxious and despairing amid the last gasp of daylight. It was
Christine; he recognised her.

She held out her hands, and murmured in a low, halting voice:

'I have been here for three hours; yes, for three hours, all alone,
and listening. I took a cab on leaving there, and I only wanted to
stay a minute, and get back as soon as possible. But I should have
stayed all night; I could not go away without shaking hands with you.'

She continued, and told him of her mad desire to see the picture; her
prank of going to the Salon, and how she had tumbled into it amidst
the storm of laughter, amidst the jeers of all those people. It was
she whom they had hissed like that; it was on herself that they had
spat. And seized with wild terror, distracted with grief and shame,
she had fled, as if she could feel that laughter lashing her like a
whip, until the blood flowed. But she now forgot about herself in her
concern for him, upset by the thought of the grief he must feel, for
her womanly sensibility magnified the bitterness of the repulse, and
she was eager to console.

'Oh, friend, don't grieve! I wished to see and tell you that they are
jealous of it all, that I found the picture very nice, and that I feel
very proud and happy at having helped you--at being, if ever so
little, a part of it.'

Still, motionless, he listened to her as she stammered those tender
words in an ardent voice, and suddenly he sank down at her feet,
letting his head fall upon her knees, and bursting into tears. All his
excitement of the afternoon, all the bravery he had shown amidst the
jeering, all his gaiety and violence now collapsed, in a fit of sobs
which well nigh choked him. From the gallery where the laughter had
buffeted him, he heard it pursuing him through the Champs Elysees,
then along the banks of the Seine, and now in his very studio. His
strength was utterly spent; he felt weaker than a child; and rolling
his head from one side to another he repeated in a stifled voice:

'My God! how I do suffer!'

Then she, with both hands, raised his face to her lips in a transport
of passion. She kissed him, and with her warm breath she blew to his
very heart the words: 'Be quiet, be quiet, I love you!'

They adored each other; it was inevitable. Near them, on the centre of
the table, the lilac she had sent him that morning embalmed the night
air, and, alone shiny with lingering light, the scattered particles of
gold leaf, wafted from the frame of the big picture, twinkled like a
swarming of stars.


                                 VI

THE very next morning, at seven o'clock, Christine was at the studio,
her face still flushed by the falsehood which she had told Madame
Vanzade about a young friend from Clermont whom she was to meet at the
station, and with whom she should spend the day.

Claude, overjoyed by the idea of spending a whole day with her, wanted
to take her into the country, far away under the glorious sunlight, so
as to have her entirely to himself. She was delighted; they scampered
off like lunatics, and reached the St. Lazare Station just in time to
catch the Havre train. He knew, beyond Mantes, a little village called
Bennecourt, where there was an artists' inn which he had at times
invaded with some comrades; and careless as to the two hours' rail, he
took her to lunch there, just as he would have taken her to Asnieres.
She made very merry over this journey, to which there seemed no end.
So much the better if it were to take them to the end of the world! It
seemed to them as if evening would never come.

At ten o'clock they alighted at Bonnieres; and there they took the
ferry--an old ferry-boat that creaked and grated against its chain
--for Bennecourt is situated on the opposite bank of the Seine. It was
a splendid May morning, the rippling waters were spangled with gold in
the sunlight, the young foliage showed delicately green against the
cloudless azure. And, beyond the islets situated at this point of the
river, how delightful it was to find the country inn, with its little
grocery business attached, its large common room smelling of soapsuds,
and its spacious yard full of manure, on which the ducks disported
themselves.

'Hallo, Faucheur! we have come to lunch. An omelette, some sausages,
and some cheese, eh?'

'Are you going to stay the night, Monsieur Claude?'

'No, no; another time. And some white wine; eh? you know that pinky
wine, that grates a bit in the throat.'

Christine had already followed mother Faucheur to the barn-yard, and
when the latter came back with her eggs, she asked Claude with her
artful peasant's laugh:

'And so now you're married?'

'Well,' replied the painter without hesitation, 'it looks like it
since I'm with my wife.'

The lunch was exquisite: the omelette overdone, the sausages too
greasy, and the bread so hard that he had to cut it into fingers for
Christine lest she should hurt her wrist. They emptied two bottles of
wine, and began a third, becoming so gay and noisy that they ended by
feeling bewildered in the long room, where they partook of the meal
all alone. She, with her cheeks aflame, declared that she was tipsy;
it had never happened to her before, and she thought it very funny.
Oh! so funny, and she burst into uncontrollable laughter.

'Let us get a breath of air,' she said at last.

'Yes, let's take a stroll. We must start back at four o'clock; so we
have three hours before us.'

They went up the village of Bennecourt, whose yellow houses straggle
along the river bank for about a couple of thousand yards. All the
villagers were in the fields; they only met three cows, led by a
little girl. He, with an outstretched arm, told her all about the
locality; seemed to know whither he was going, and when they had
reached the last house--an old building, standing on the bank of the
Seine, just opposite the slopes of Jeufosse--turned round it, and
entered a wood of oak trees. It was like the end of the world, roofed
in with foliage, through which the sun alone penetrated in narrow
tongues of flame. And there they could stroll and talk and kiss in
freedom.

When at last it became necessary for them to retrace their steps,
they found a peasant standing at the open doorway of the house by
the wood-side. Claude recognised the man and called to him:

'Hallo, Porrette! Does that shanty belong to you?'

At this the old fellow, with tears in his eyes, related that it did,
and that his tenants had gone away without paying him, leaving their
furniture behind. And he invited them inside.

'There's no harm in looking; you may know somebody who would like to
take the place. There are many Parisians who'd be glad of it. Three
hundred francs a year, with the furniture; it's for nothing, eh?'

They inquisitively followed him inside. It was a rambling old place
that seemed to have been cut out of a barn. Downstairs they found an
immense kitchen and a dining-room, in which one might have given a
dance; upstairs were two rooms also, so vast that one seemed lost in
them. As for the furniture, it consisted of a walnut bedstead in one
of the rooms, and of a table and some household utensils in the
kitchen. But in front of the house the neglected garden was planted
with magnificent apricot trees, and overgrown with large rose-bushes
in full bloom; while at the back there was a potato field reaching as
far as the oak wood, and surrounded by a quick-set hedge.

'I'd leave the potatoes as they are,' said old Porrette.

Claude and Christine looked at each other with one of those sudden
cravings for solitude and forgetfulness common to lovers. Ah! how
sweet it would be to love one another there in the depths of that
nook, so far away from everybody else! But they smiled. Was such a
thing to be thought of? They had barely time to catch the train that
was to take them back to Paris. And the old peasant, who was Madame
Faucheur's father, accompanied them along the river bank, and as they
were stepping into the ferry-boat, shouted to them, after quite an
inward struggle:

'You know, I'll make it two hundred and fifty francs--send me some
people.'

On reaching Paris, Claude accompanied Christine to Madame Vanzade's
door. They had grown very sad. They exchanged a long handshake, silent
and despairing, not daring to kiss each other there.

A life of torment then began. In the course of a fortnight she was
only able to call on three occasions; and she arrived panting, having
but a few minutes at her disposal, for it so happened that the old
lady had just then become very exacting. Claude questioned her,
feeling uneasy at seeing her look so pale and out of sorts, with her
eyes bright with fever. Never had that pious house, that vault,
without air or light, where she died of boredom, caused her so much
suffering. Her fits of giddiness had come upon her again; the want of
exercise made the blood throb in her temples. She owned to him that
she had fainted one evening in her room, as if she had been suddenly
strangled by a leaden hand. Still she did not say a word against her
employer; on the contrary, she softened on speaking of her: the poor
creature, so old and so infirm, and so kind-hearted, who called her
daughter! She felt as if she were committing a wicked act each time
that she forsook her to hurry to her lover's.

Two more weeks went by, and the falsehoods with which Christine had to
buy, as it were, each hour of liberty became intolerable to her. She
loved, she would have liked to proclaim it aloud, and her feelings
revolted at having to hide her love like a crime, at having to lie
basely, like a servant afraid of being sent away.

At last, one evening in the studio, at the moment when she was
leaving, she threw herself with a distracted gesture into Claude's
arms, sobbing with suffering and passion. 'Ah! I cannot, I cannot
--keep me with you; prevent me from going back.'

He had caught hold of her, and was almost smothering her with kisses.

'You really love me, then! Oh, my darling! But I am so very poor, and
you would lose everything. Can I allow you to forego everything like
this?'

She sobbed more violently still; her halting words were choked by her
tears.

'The money, eh? which she might leave me? Do you think I calculate? I
have never thought of it, I swear it to you! Ah! let her keep
everything and let me be free! I have no ties, no relatives; can't I
be allowed to do as I like?'

Then, in a last sob of agony: 'Ah, you are right; it's wrong to desert
the poor woman. Ah! I despise myself. I wish I had the strength. But I
love you too much, I suffer too much; surely you won't let me die?'

'Oh!' he cried in a passionate transport. 'Let others die, there are
but we two on earth.'

It was all so much madness. Christine left Madame Vanzade in the most
brutal fashion. She took her trunk away the very next morning. She and
Claude had at once remembered the deserted old house at Bennecourt,
the giant rose-bushes, the immense rooms. Ah! to go away, to go away
without the loss of an hour, to live at the world's end in all the
bliss of their passion! She clapped her hands for very joy. He, still
smarting from his defeat, at the Salon, and anxious to recover from
it, longed for complete rest in the country; yonder he would find the
real 'open air,' he would work away with grass up to his neck and
bring back masterpieces. In a couple of days everything was ready, the
studio relinquished, the few household chattels conveyed to the
railway station. Besides, they met with a slice of luck, for Papa
Malgras gave some five hundred francs for a score of sketches,
selected from among the waifs and strays of the removal. Thus they
would be able to live like princes. Claude still had his income of a
thousand francs a year; Christine, too, had saved some money, besides
having her outfit and dresses. And away they went; it was perfect
flight, friends avoided and not even warned by letter, Paris despised
and forsaken amid laughter expressive of relief.

June was drawing to a close, and the rain fell in torrents during the
week they spent in arranging their new home. They discovered that old
Porrette had taken away half the kitchen utensils before signing the
agreement. But that matter did not affect them. They took a delight in
dabbling about amidst the showers; they made journeys three leagues
long, as far as Vernon, to buy plates and saucepans, which they
brought back with them in triumph. At last they got shipshape,
occupying one of the upstairs rooms, abandoning the other to the mice,
and transforming the dining-room into a studio; and, above all, as
happy as children at taking their meals in the kitchen off a deal
table, near the hearth where the soup sang in the pot. To wait upon
them they engaged a girl from the village, who came every morning and
went home at night. She was called Melie, she was a niece of the
Faucheurs, and her stupidity delighted them. In fact, one could not
have found a greater idiot in the whole region.

The sun having shown itself again, some delightful days followed, the
months slipping away amid monotonous felicity. They never knew the
date, they were for ever mixing up the days of the week. Every day,
after the second breakfast, came endless strolls, long walks across
the tableland planted with apple trees, over the grassy country roads,
along the banks of the Seine through the meadows as far as La
Roche-Guyon; and there were still more distant explorations, perfect
journeys on the opposite side of the river, amid the cornfields of
Bonnieres and Jeufosse. A person who was obliged to leave the
neighbourhood sold them an old boat for thirty francs, so that they
also had the river at their disposal, and, like savages, became seized
with a passion for it, living on its waters for days together, rowing
about, discovering new countries, and lingering for hours under the
willows on the banks, or in little creeks, dark with shade. Betwixt
the eyots scattered along the stream there was a shifting and
mysterious city, a network of passages along which, with the lower
branches of the trees caressingly brushing against them, they softly
glided, alone, as it were, in the world, with the ringdoves and the
kingfishers. He at times had to spring out upon the sand, with bare
legs, to push off the skiff. She bravely plied the oars, bent on
forcing her way against the strongest currents, and exulting in her
strength. And in the evening they ate cabbage soup in the kitchen,
laughing at Melie's stupidity, as they had laughed at it the day
before; to begin the morrow just in the same fashion.

Every evening, however, Christine said to Claude:

'Now, my dear, you must promise me one thing--that you'll set to work
to-morrow.'

'Yes, to-morrow; I give you my word.'

'And you know if you don't, I shall really get angry this time. Is it
I who prevent you?'

'You! what an idea. Since I came here to work--dash it all! you'll see
to-morrow.'

On the morrow they started off again in the skiff; she looked at him
with an embarrassed smile when she saw that he took neither canvas nor
colours. Then she kissed him, laughing, proud of her power, moved by
the constant sacrifice he made to her. And then came fresh
affectionate remonstrances: 'To-morrow, ah! to-morrow she would tie
him to his easel!'

However, Claude did make some attempts at work. He began a study of
the slopes of Jeufosse, with the Seine in the foreground; but
Christine followed him to the islet where he had installed himself,
and sat down on the grass close to him with parted lips, her eyes
watching the blue sky. And she looked so pretty there amidst the
verdure, in that solitude, where nothing broke the silence but the
rippling of the water, that every minute he relinquished his palette
to nestle by her side. On another occasion, he was altogether charmed
by an old farmhouse, shaded by some antiquated apple trees which had
grown to the size of oaks. He came thither two days in succession, but
on the third Christine took him to the market at Bonnieres to buy some
hens. The next day was also lost; the canvas had dried; then he grew
impatient in trying to work at it again, and finally abandoned it
altogether. Throughout the warm weather he thus made but a pretence to
work--barely roughing out little bits of painting, which he laid aside
on the first pretext, without an effort at perseverance. His passion
for toil, that fever of former days that had made him rise at daybreak
to battle with his rebellious art, seemed to have gone; a reaction of
indifference and laziness had set in, and he vegetated delightfully,
like one who is recovering from some severe illness.

But Christine lived indeed. All the latent passion of her nature burst
into being. She was indeed an amorosa, a child of nature and of love.

Thus their days passed by and solitude did not prove irksome to them.
No desire for diversion, of paying or receiving visits, as yet made
them look beyond themselves. Such hours as she did not spend near him,
she employed in household cares, turning the house upside down with
great cleanings, which Melie executed under her supervision, and
falling into fits of reckless activity, which led her to engage in
personal combats with the few saucepans in the kitchen. The garden
especially occupied her; provided with pruning shears, careless of the
thorns which lacerated her hands, she reaped harvests of roses from
the giant rose-bushes; and she gave herself a thorough back-ache in
gathering the apricots, which she sold for two hundred francs to some
of the Englishmen who scoured the district every year. She was very
proud of her bargain, and seriously talked of living upon the garden
produce. Claude cared less for gardening; he had placed his couch in
the large dining-room, transformed into a studio; and he stretched
himself upon it, and through the open window watched her sow and
plant. There was profound peace, the certainty that nobody would come,
that no ring at the bell would disturb them at any moment of the day.
Claude carried this fear of coming into contact with people so far as
to avoid passing Faucheur's inn, for he dreaded lest he might run
against some party of chums from Paris. Not a soul came, however,
throughout the livelong summer. And every night as they went upstairs,
he repeated that, after all, it was deuced lucky.

There was, however, a secret sore in the depths of his happiness.
After their flight from Paris, Sandoz had learnt their address, and
had written to ask whether he might go to see Claude, but the latter
had not answered the letter, and so coolness had followed, and the old
friendship seemed dead. Christine was grieved at this, for she
realised well enough that he had broken off all intercourse with his
comrades for her sake. She constantly reverted to the subject; she did
not want to estrange him from his friends, and indeed she insisted
that he should invite them. But, though he promised to set matters
right, he did nothing of the kind. It was all over; what was the use
of raking up the past?

However, money having become scarce towards the latter days of July,
he was obliged to go to Paris to sell Papa Malgras half a dozen of his
old studies, and Christine, on accompanying him to the station, made
him solemnly promise that he would go to see Sandoz. In the evening
she was there again, at the Bonnieres Station, waiting for him.

'Well, did you see him? did you embrace each other?'

He began walking by her side in silent embarrassment. Then he answered
in a husky voice:

'No; I hadn't time.'

Thereupon, sorely distressed, with two big tears welling to her eyes,
she replied:

'You grieve me very much indeed.'

Then, as they were walking under the trees, he kissed her, crying
also, and begging her not to make him sadder still. 'Could people
alter life? Did it not suffice that they were happy together?'

During the earlier months they only once met some strangers. This
occurred a little above Bennecourt, in the direction of La
Roche-Guyon. They were strolling along a deserted, wooded lane, one of
those delightful dingle paths of the region, when, at a turning, they
came upon three middle-class people out for a walk--father, mother,
and daughter. It precisely happened that, believing themselves to be
quite alone, Claude and Christine had passed their arms round each
other's waists; she, bending towards him, was offering her lips; while
he laughingly protruded his; and their surprise was so sudden that
they did not change their attitude, but, still clasped together,
advanced at the same slow pace. The amazed family remained transfixed
against one of the side banks, the father stout and apoplectic, the
mother as thin as a knife-blade, and the daughter, a mere shadow,
looking like a sick bird moulting--all three of them ugly, moreover,
and but scantily provided with the vitiated blood of their race. They
looked disgraceful amidst the throbbing life of nature, beneath the
glorious sun. And all at once the sorry girl, who with stupefied eyes
thus watched love passing by, was pushed off by her father, dragged
along by her mother, both beside themselves, exasperated by the sight
of that embrace, and asking whether there was no longer any country
police, while, still without hurrying, the lovers went off
triumphantly in their glory.

Claude, however, was wondering and searching his memory. Where had he
previously seen those heads, so typical of bourgeois degeneracy, those
flattened, crabbed faces reeking of millions earned at the expense of
the poor? It was assuredly in some important circumstance of his life.
And all at once he remembered; they were the Margaillans, the man was
that building contractor whom Dubuche had promenaded through the Salon
of the Rejected, and who had laughed in front of his picture with the
roaring laugh of a fool. A couple of hundred steps further on, as he
and Christine emerged from the lane and found themselves in front of a
large estate, where a big white building stood, girt with fine trees,
they learnt from an old peasant woman that La Richaudiere, as it was
called, had belonged to the Margaillans for three years past. They had
paid fifteen hundred thousand francs for it, and had just spent more
than a million in improvements.

'That part of the country won't see much of us in future,' said
Claude, as they returned to Bennecourt. 'Those monsters spoil the
landscape.'

Towards the end of the summer, an important event changed the current
of their lives. Christine was _enceinte_. At first, both she and
Claude felt amazed and worried. Now for the first time they seemed to
dread some terrible complications in their life. Later on, however,
they gradually grew accustomed to the thought of what lay before them
and made all necessary preparations. But the winter proved a terribly
inclement one, and Christine was compelled to remain indoors, whilst
Claude went walking all alone over the frost-bound, clanking roads.
And he, finding himself in solitude during these walks, after months
of constant companionship, wondered at the way his life had turned,
against his own will, as it were. He had never wished for home life
even with her; had he been consulted, he would have expressed his
horror of it; it had come about, however, and could not be undone,
for--without mentioning the child--he was one of those who lack the
courage to break off. This fate had evidently been in store for him,
he felt; he had been destined to succumb to the first woman who did
not feel ashamed of him. The hard ground resounded beneath his
wooden-soled shoes, and the blast froze the current of his reverie,
which lingered on vague thoughts, on his luck of having, at any rate,
met with a good and honest girl, on how cruelly he would have suffered
had it been otherwise. And then his love came back to him; he hurried
home to take Christine in his trembling arms as if he had been in
danger of losing her.

The child, a boy, was born about the middle of February, and at once
began to revolutionise the home, for Christine, who had shown herself
such an active housewife, proved to be a very awkward nurse. She
failed to become motherly, despite her kind heart and her distress at
the sight of the slightest pimple. She soon grew weary, gave in, and
called for Melie, who only made matters worse by her gaping stupidity.
The father had to come to the rescue, and proved still more awkward
than the two women. The discomfort which needlework had caused
Christine of old, her want of aptitude as regards the usual
occupations of her sex, revived amid the cares that the baby required.
The child was ill-kept, and grew up anyhow in the garden, or in the
large rooms left untidy in sheer despair, amidst broken toys,
uncleanliness and destruction. And when matters became too bad
altogether, Christine could only throw herself upon the neck of the
man she loved. She was pre-eminently an amorosa and would have
sacrificed her son for his father twenty times over.

It was at this period, however, that Claude resumed work a little. The
winter was drawing to a close; he did not know how to spend the bright
sunny mornings, since Christine could no longer go out before mid-day
on account of Jacques, whom they had named thus after his maternal
grandfather, though they neglected to have him christened. Claude
worked in the garden, at first, in a random way: made a rough sketch
of the lines of apricot trees, roughed out the giant rose-bushes,
composed some bits of 'still life,' out of four apples, a bottle, and
a stoneware jar, disposed on a table-napkin. This was only to pass his
time. But afterwards he warmed to his work; the idea of painting a
figure in the full sunlight ended by haunting him; and from that
moment his wife became his victim, she herself agreeable enough,
offering herself, feeling happy at affording him pleasure, without as
yet understanding what a terrible rival she was giving herself in art.
He painted her a score of times, dressed in white, in red, amidst the
verdure, standing, walking, or reclining on the grass, wearing a
wide-brimmed straw hat, or bare-headed, under a parasol, the
cherry-tinted silk of which steeped her features in a pinky glow. He
never felt wholly satisfied; he scratched out the canvases after two
or three sittings, and at once began them afresh, obstinately sticking
to the same subject. Only a few studies, incomplete, but charmingly
indicated in a vigorous style, were saved from the palette-knife, and
hung against the walls of the dining-room.

And after Christine it became Jacques' turn to pose. They stripped him
to the skin, like a little St. John the Baptist, on warm days, and
stretched him on a blanket, where he was told not to stir. But devil a
bit could they make him keep still. Getting frisky, in the sunlight,
he crowed and kicked with his tiny pink feet in the air, rolling about
and turning somersaults. The father, after laughing, became angry, and
swore at the tiresome mite, who would not keep quiet for a minute. Who
ever heard of trifling with painting? Then the mother made big eyes at
the little one, and held him while the painter quickly sketched an arm
or a leg. Claude obstinately kept at it for weeks, tempted as he felt
by the pretty tones of that childish skin. It was not as a father, but
as an artist, that he gloated over the boy as the subject for a
masterpiece, blinking his eyes the while, and dreaming of some
wonderful picture he would paint. And he renewed the experiment again
and again, watching the lad for days, and feeling furious when the
little scamp would not go to sleep at times when he, Claude, might so
well have painted him.

One day, when Jacques was sobbing, refusing to keep still, Christine
gently remarked:

'My dear, you tire the poor pet.'

At this Claude burst forth, full of remorse:

'After all! you are right; I'm a fool with this painting of mine.
Children are not intended for that sort of thing.'

The spring and summer sped by amidst great quietude. They went out
less often; they had almost given up the boat, which finished rotting
against the bank, for it was quite a job to take the little one with
them among the islets. But they often strolled along the banks of the
Seine, without, however, going farther afield than a thousand yards or
so. Claude, tired of the everlasting views in the garden, now
attempted some sketches by the river-side, and on such days Christine
went to fetch him with the child, sitting down to watch him paint,
until they all three returned home with flagging steps, beneath the
ashen dusk of waning daylight. One afternoon Claude was surprised to
see Christine bring with her the old album which she had used as a
young girl. She joked about it, and explained that to sit behind him
like that had roused in her a wish to work herself. Her voice was a
little unsteady as she spoke; the truth was that she felt a longing to
share his labour, since this labour took him away from her more and
more each day. She drew and ventured to wash in two or three
water-colours in the careful style of a school-girl. Then, discouraged
by his smiles, feeling that no community of ideas would be arrived at
on that ground, she once more put her album aside, making him promise
to give her some lessons in painting whenever he should have time.

Besides, she thought his more recent pictures very pretty. After that
year of rest in the open country, in the full sunlight, he painted
with fresh and clearer vision, as it were, with a more harmonious and
brighter colouring. He had never before been able to treat reflections
so skilfully, or possessed a more correct perception of men and things
steeped in diffuse light. And henceforth, won over by that feast of
colours, she would have declared it all capital if he would only have
condescended to finish his work a little more, and if she had not
remained nonplussed now and then before a mauve ground or a blue tree,
which upset all her preconceived notions of colour. One day when she
ventured upon a bit of criticism, precisely about an azure-tinted
poplar, he made her go to nature and note for herself the delicate
bluishness of the foliage. It was true enough, the tree was blue; but
in her inmost heart she did not surrender, and condemned reality;
there ought not to be any blue trees in nature.

She no longer spoke but gravely of the studies hanging in the
dining-room. Art was returning into their lives, and it made her muse.
When she saw him go off with his bag, his portable easel, and his
sunshade, it often happened that she flung herself upon his neck,
asking:

'You love me, say?'

'How silly you are! Why shouldn't I love you?'

'Then kiss me, since you love me, kiss me a great deal, a great deal.'

Then accompanying him as far as the road, she added:

'And mind you work; you know that I have never prevented you from
working. Go, go; I am very pleased when you work.'

Anxiety seemed to seize hold of Claude, when the autumn of the second
year tinged the leaves yellow, and ushered in the cold weather. The
season happened to be abominable; a fortnight of pouring rain kept him
idle at home; and then fog came at every moment, hindering his work.
He sat in front of the fire, out of sorts; he never spoke of Paris,
but the city rose up over yonder, on the horizon, the winter city,
with its gaslamps flaring already at five o'clock, its gatherings of
friends, spurring each other on to emulation, and its life of ardent
production, which even the frosts of December could not slacken. He
went there thrice in one month, on the pretext of seeing Malgras, to
whom he had, again, sold a few small pictures. He no longer avoided
passing in front of Faucheur's inn; he even allowed himself to be
waylaid at times by old Porrette, and to accept a glass of white wine
at the inn, and his glance scoured the room as if, despite the season,
he had been looking for some comrades of yore, who had arrived there,
perchance, that morning. He lingered as if awaiting them; then, in
despair at his solitude, he returned home, stifling with all that was
fermenting within him, ill at having nobody to whom he might shout the
thoughts which made his brain almost burst.

However, the winter went by, and Claude had the consolation of being
able to paint some lovely snow scenes. A third year was beginning,
when, towards the close of May, an unexpected meeting filled him with
emotion. He had that morning climbed up to the plateau to find a
subject, having at last grown tired of the banks of the Seine; and at
the bend of a road he stopped short in amazement on seeing Dubuche, in
a silk hat, and carefully-buttoned frock coat, coming towards him,
between the double row of elder hedges.

'What! is it you?'

The architect stammered from sheer vexation:

'Yes, I am going to pay a visit. It's confoundedly idiotic in the
country, eh? But it can't be helped. There are certain things one's
obliged to do. And you live near here, eh? I knew--that is to say, I
didn't. I had been told something about it, but I thought it was on
the opposite side, farther down.'

Claude, very much moved at seeing him, helped him out of his
difficulty.

'All right, all right, old man, there is no need to apologise. I am
the most guilty party. Ah! it's a long while since we saw one another!
If you knew what a thump my heart gave when I saw your nose appear
from behind the leaves!'

Then he took his arm and accompanied him, giggling with pleasure,
while the other, in his constant worry about his future, which always
made him talk about himself, at once began speaking of his prospects.
He had just become a first-class pupil at the School, after securing
the regulation 'honourable mentions,' with infinite trouble. But his
success left him as perplexed as ever. His parents no longer sent him
a penny, they wailed about their poverty so much that he might have to
support them in his turn. He had given up the idea of competing for
the Prix de Rome, feeling certain of being beaten in the effort, and
anxious to earn his living. And he was weary already; sick at scouring
the town, at earning twenty-five sous an hour from ignorant
architects, who treated him like a hodman. What course should he
adopt? How was he to guess at the shortest route? He might leave the
School; he would get a lift from his master, the influential
Dequersonniere, who liked him for his docility and diligence; only
what a deal of trouble and uncertainty there would still be before
him! And he bitterly complained of the Government schools, where one
slaved away for years, and which did not even provide a position for
all those whom they cast upon the pavement.

Suddenly he stopped in the middle of the path. The elder hedges were
leading to an open plain, and La Richaudiere appeared amid its lofty
trees.

'Hold hard! of course,' exclaimed Claude, 'I hadn't thought about it
--you're going to that shanty. Oh! the baboons; there's a lot of ugly
mugs, if you like!'

Dubuche, looking vexed at this outburst of artistic feeling, protested
stiffly. 'All the same, Papa Margaillan, idiot as he seems to you, is
a first-rate man of business. You should see him in his
building-yards, among the houses he runs up, as active as the very
fiend, showing marvellous good management, and a wonderful scent as to
the right streets to build and what materials to buy! Besides, one
does not earn millions without becoming a gentleman. And then, too, it
would be very silly of me not to be polite to a man who can be useful
to me.'

While talking, he barred the narrow path, preventing his friend from
advancing further--no doubt from a fear of being compromised by being
seen in his company, and in order to make him understand that they
ought to separate there.

Claude was on the point of inquiring about their comrades in Paris,
but he kept silent. Not even a word was said respecting Christine, and
he was reluctantly deciding to quit Dubuche, holding out his hand to
take leave, when, in spite of himself, this question fell from his
quivering lips:

'And is Sandoz all right?'

'Yes, he's pretty well. I seldom see him. He spoke to me about you
last month. He is still grieved at your having shown us the door.'

'But I didn't show you the door,' exclaimed Claude, beside himself.
'Come and see me, I beg of you. I shall be so glad!'

'All right, then, we'll come. I'll tell him to come, I give you my
word--good-bye, old man, good-bye; I'm in a hurry.'

And Dubuche went off towards La Richaudiere, whilst Claude watched his
figure dwindle as he crossed the cultivated plain, until nothing
remained but the shiny silk of his hat and the black spot of his coat.
The young man returned home slowly, his heart bursting with nameless
sadness. However, he said nothing about this meeting to Christine.

A week later she had gone to Faucheur's to buy a pound of vermicelli,
and was lingering on her way back, gossiping with a neighbour, with
her child on her arm, when a gentleman who alighted from the
ferry-boat approached and asked her:

'Does not Monsieur Claude Lantier live near here?'

She was taken aback, and simply answered:

'Yes, monsieur; if you'll kindly follow me--'

They walked on side by side for about a hundred yards. The stranger,
who seemed to know her, had glanced at her with a good-natured smile;
but as she hurried on, trying to hide her embarrassment by looking
very grave, he remained silent. She opened the door and showed the
visitor into the studio, exclaiming:

'Claude, here is somebody for you.'

Then a loud cry rang out; the two men were already in each other's
arms.

'Oh, my good old Pierre! how kind of you to come! And Dubuche?'

'He was prevented at the last moment by some business, and he sent me
a telegram to go without him.'

'All right, I half expected it; but you are here. By the thunder of
heaven, I am glad!'

And, turning towards Christine, who was smiling, sharing their
delight:

'It's true, I didn't tell you. But the other day I met Dubuche, who
was going up yonder, to the place where those monsters live--'

But he stopped short again, and then with a wild gesture shouted:

'I'm losing my wits, upon my word. You have never spoken to each
other, and I leave you there like that. My dear, you see this
gentleman? He's my old chum, Pierre Sandoz, whom I love like a
brother. And you, my boy; let me introduce my wife. And you have got
to give each other a kiss.'

Christine began to laugh outright, and tendered her cheek heartily.
Sandoz had pleased her at once with his good-natured air, his sound
friendship, the fatherly sympathy with which he looked at her. Tears
of emotion came to her eyes as he kept both her hands in his, saying:

'It is very good of you to love Claude, and you must love each other
always, for love is, after all, the best thing in life.'

Then, bending to kiss the little one, whom she had on her arm, he
added: 'So there's one already!'

While Christine, preparing lunch, turned the house up-side down,
Claude retained Sandoz in the studio. In a few words he told him the
whole of the story, who she was, how they had met each other, and what
had led them to start housekeeping together, and he seemed to be
surprised when his friend asked him why they did not get married. In
faith, why? Because they had never even spoken about it, because they
would certainly be neither more nor less happy; in short it was a
matter of no consequence whatever.

'Well,' said the other, 'it makes no difference to me; but, if she was
a good and honest girl when she came to you, you ought to marry her.'

'Why, I'll marry her whenever she likes, old man. Surely I don't mean
to leave her in the lurch!'

Sandoz then began to marvel at the studies hanging on the walls. Ha,
the scamp had turned his time to good account! What accuracy of
colouring! What a dash of real sunlight! And Claude, who listened to
him, delighted, and laughing proudly, was just going to question him
about the comrades in Paris, about what they were all doing, when
Christine reappeared, exclaiming: 'Make haste, the eggs are on the
table.'

They lunched in the kitchen, and an extraordinary lunch it was; a dish
of fried gudgeons after the boiled eggs; then the beef from the soup
of the night before, arranged in salad fashion, with potatoes, and a
red herring. It was delicious; there was the pungent and appetising
smell of the herring which Melie had upset on the live embers, and the
song of the coffee, as it passed, drop by drop, into the pot standing
on the range; and when the dessert appeared--some strawberries just
gathered, and a cream cheese from a neighbour's dairy--they gossiped
and gossiped with their elbows squarely set on the table. In Paris?
Well, to tell the truth, the comrades were doing nothing very original
in Paris. And yet they were fighting their way, jostling each other in
order to get first to the front. Of course, the absent ones missed
their chance; it was as well to be there if one did not want to be
altogether forgotten. But was not talent always talent? Wasn't a man
always certain to get on with strength and will? Ah! yes, it was a
splendid dream to live in the country, to accumulate masterpieces, and
then, one day, to crush Paris by simply opening one's trunks.

In the evening, when Claude accompanied Sandoz to the station, the
latter said to him:

'That reminds me, I wanted to tell you something. I think I am going
to get married.'

The painter burst out laughing.

'Ah, you wag, now I understand why you gave me a lecture this
morning.'

While waiting for the train to arrive, they went on chatting. Sandoz
explained his ideas on marriage, which, in middle-class fashion, he
considered an indispensable condition for good work, substantial
orderly labour, among great modern producers. The theory of woman
being a destructive creature--one who killed an artist, pounded his
heart, and fed upon his brain--was a romantic idea against which facts
protested. Besides, as for himself, he needed an affection that would
prove the guardian of his tranquillity, a loving home, where he might
shut himself up, so as to devote his whole life to the huge work which
he ever dreamt of. And he added that everything depended upon a man's
choice--that he believed he had found what he had been looking for, an
orphan, the daughter of petty tradespeople, without a penny, but
handsome and intelligent. For the last six months, after resigning his
clerkship, he had embraced journalism, by which he gained a larger
income. He had just moved his mother to a small house at Batignolles,
where the three would live together--two women to love him, and he
strong enough to provide for the household.

'Get married, old man,' said Claude. 'One should act according to
one's feelings. And good-bye, for here's your train. Don't forget your
promise to come and see us again.'

Sandoz returned very often. He dropped in at odd times whenever his
newspaper work allowed him, for he was still free, as he was not to be
married till the autumn. Those were happy days, whole afternoons of
mutual confidences when all their old determination to secure fame
revived.

One day, while Sandoz was alone with Claude on an island of the Seine,
both of them lying there with their eyes fixed on the sky, he told the
painter of his vast ambition, confessed himself aloud.

'Journalism, let me tell you, is only a battle-ground. A man must
live, and he has to fight to do so. Then, again, that wanton, the
Press, despite the unpleasant phases of the profession, is after all a
tremendous power, a resistless weapon in the hands of a fellow with
convictions. But if I am obliged to avail myself of journalism, I
don't mean to grow grey in it! Oh, dear no! And, besides, I've found
what I wanted, a machine that'll crush one with work, something I'm
going to plunge into, perhaps never to come out of it.'

Silence reigned amid the foliage, motionless in the dense heat. He
resumed speaking more slowly and in jerky phrases:

'To study man as he is, not man the metaphysical puppet but
physiological man, whose nature is determined by his surroundings, and
to show all his organism in full play. That's my idea! Is it not
farcical that some should constantly and exclusively study the
functions of the brain on the pretext that the brain alone is the
noble part of our organism? Thought, thought, confound it all! thought
is the product of the whole body. Let them try to make a brain think
by itself alone; see what becomes of the nobleness of the brain when
the stomach is ailing! No, no, it's idiotic; there is no philosophy
nor science in it! We are positivists, evolutionists, and yet we are
to stick to the literary lay-figures of classic times, and continue
disentangling the tangled locks of pure reason! He who says
psychologist says traitor to truth. Besides, psychology, physiology,
it all signifies nothing. The one has become blended with the other,
and both are but one nowadays, the mechanism of man leading to the sum
total of his functions. Ah, the formula is there, our modern
revolution has no other basis; it means the certain death of old
society, the birth of a new one, and necessarily the upspringing of a
new art in a new soil. Yes, people will see what literature will
sprout forth for the coming century of science and democracy.'

His cry uprose and was lost in the immense vault of heaven. Not a
breath stirred; there was nought but the silent ripple of the river
past the willows. And Sandoz turned abruptly towards his companion,
and said to him, face to face:

'So I have found what I wanted for myself. Oh, it isn't much, a little
corner of study only, but one that should be sufficient for a man's
life, even when his ambition is over-vast. I am going to take a
family, and I shall study its members, one by one, whence they come,
whither they go, how they re-act one upon another--in short, I shall
have mankind in a small compass, the way in which mankind grows and
behaves. On the other hand, I shall set my men and women in some given
period of history, which will provide me with the necessary
surroundings and circumstances,--you understand, eh? a series of
books, fifteen, twenty books, episodes that will cling together,
although each will have a separate framework, a series of novels with
which I shall be able to build myself a house for my old days, if they
don't crush me!'

He fell on his back again, spread out his arms on the grass, as if he
wanted to sink into the earth, laughing and joking all the while.

'Oh, beneficent earth, take me unto thee, thou who art our common
mother, our only source of life! thou the eternal, the immortal one,
in whom circulates the soul of the world, the sap that spreads even
into the stones, and makes the trees themselves our big, motionless
brothers! Yes, I wish to lose myself in thee; it is thou that I feel
beneath my limbs, clasping and inflaming me; thou alone shalt appear
in my work as the primary force, the means and the end, the immense
ark in which everything becomes animated with the breath of every
being!'

Though begun as mere pleasantry, with all the bombast of lyrical
emphasis, the invocation terminated in a cry of ardent conviction,
quivering with profound poetical emotion, and Sandoz's eyes grew
moist; and, to hide how much he felt moved, be added, roughly, with a
sweeping gesture that took in the whole scene around:

'How idiotic it is! a soul for every one of us, when there is that big
soul there!'

Claude, who had disappeared amid the grass, had not stirred. After a
fresh spell of silence he summed up everything:

'That's it, old boy! Run them through, all of them. Only you'll get
trounced.'

'Oh,' said Sandoz, rising up and stretching himself, 'my bones are too
hard. They'll smash their own wrists. Let's go back; I don't want to
miss the train.'

Christine had taken a great liking to him, seeing him so robust and
upright in his doings, and she plucked up courage at last to ask a
favour of him: that of standing godfather to Jacques. True, she never
set foot in church now, but why shouldn't the lad be treated according
to custom? What influenced her above all was the idea of giving the
boy a protector in this godfather, whom she found so serious and
sensible, even amidst the exuberance of his strength. Claude expressed
surprise, but gave his consent with a shrug of the shoulders. And the
christening took place; they found a godmother, the daughter of a
neighbour, and they made a feast of it, eating a lobster, which was
brought from Paris.

That very day, as they were saying good-bye, Christine took Sandoz
aside, and said, in an imploring voice:

'Do come again soon, won't you? He is bored.'

In fact, Claude had fits of profound melancholy. He abandoned his
work, went out alone, and prowled in spite of himself about Faucheur's
inn, at the spot where the ferry-boat landed its passengers, as if
ever expecting to see all Paris come ashore there. He had Paris on the
brain; he went there every month and returned desolate, unable to
work. Autumn came, then winter, a very wet and muddy winter, and he
spent it in a state of morose torpidity, bitter even against Sandoz,
who, having married in October, could no longer come to Bennecourt so
often. Claude only seemed to wake up at each of the other's visits;
deriving a week's excitement from them, and never ceasing to comment
feverishly about the news brought from yonder. He, who formerly had
hidden his regret of Paris, nowadays bewildered Christine with the way
in which he chatted to her from morn till night about things she was
quite ignorant of, and people she had never seen. When Jacques fell
asleep, there were endless comments between the parents as they sat by
the fireside. Claude grew passionate, and Christine had to give her
opinion and to pronounce judgment on all sorts of matters.

Was not Gagniere an idiot for stultifying his brain with music, he who
might have developed so conscientious a talent as a landscape painter?
It was said that he was now taking lessons on the piano from a young
lady--the idea, at his age! What did she, Christine, think of it? And
Jory had been trying to get into the good graces of Irma Becot again,
ever since she had secured that little house in the Rue de Moscou!
Christine knew those two; two jades who well went together, weren't
they? But the most cunning of the whole lot was Fagerolles, to whom
he, Claude, would tell a few plain truths and no mistake, when he met
him. What! the turn-coat had competed for the Prix de Rome, which, of
course, he had managed to miss. To think of it. That fellow did
nothing but jeer at the School, and talked about knocking everything
down, yet took part in official competitions! Ah, there was no doubt
but that the itching to succeed, the wish to pass over one's comrades
and be hailed by idiots, impelled some people to very dirty tricks.
Surely Christine did not mean to stick up for him, eh? She was not
sufficiently a philistine to defend him. And when she had agreed with
everything Claude said, he always came back with nervous laughter to
the same story--which he thought exceedingly comical--the story of
Mahoudeau and Chaine, who, between them, had killed little Jabouille,
the husband of Mathilde, that dreadful herbalist woman. Yes, killed
the poor consumptive fellow with kindness one evening when he had had
a fainting fit, and when, on being called in by the woman, they had
taken to rubbing him with so much vigour that he had remained dead in
their hands.

And if Christine failed to look amused at all this, Claude rose up
and said, in a churlish voice: 'Oh, you; nothing will make you laugh
--let's go to bed.'

He still adored her, but she no longer sufficed. Another torment had
invincibly seized hold of him--the passion for art, the thirst for
fame.

