LADY WINDERMERE.  To stay in this house any longer is impossible.
To-night a man who loves me offered me his whole life.  I refused
it.  It was foolish of me.  I will offer him mine now.  I will give
him mine.  I will go to him!  [Puts on cloak and goes to the door,
then turns back.  Sits down at table and writes a letter, puts it
into an envelope, and leaves it on table.]  Arthur has never
understood me.  When he reads this, he will.  He may do as he
chooses now with his life.  I have done with mine as I think best,
as I think right.  It is he who has broken the bond of marriage--
not I.  I only break its bondage.

[Exit.]

[PARKER enters L. and crosses towards the ball-room R.  Enter MRS.
ERLYNNE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Is Lady Windermere in the ball-room?

PARKER.  Her ladyship has just gone out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Gone out?  She's not on the terrace?

PARKER.  No, madam.  Her ladyship has just gone out of the house.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Starts, and looks at the servant with a puzzled
expression in her face.]  Out of the house?

PARKER.  Yes, madam--her ladyship told me she had left a letter for
his lordship on the table.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  A letter for Lord Windermere?

PARKER.  Yes, madam.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thank you.

[Exit PARKER.  The music in the ball-room stops.]  Gone out of her
house!  A letter addressed to her husband!  [Goes over to bureau
and looks at letter.  Takes it up and lays it down again with a
shudder of fear.]  No, no!  It would be impossible!  Life doesn't
repeat its tragedies like that!  Oh, why does this horrible fancy
come across me?  Why do I remember now the one moment of my life I
most wish to forget?  Does life repeat its tragedies?  [Tears
letter open and reads it, then sinks down into a chair with a
gesture of anguish.]  Oh, how terrible!  The same words that twenty
years ago I wrote to her father! and how bitterly I have been
punished for it!  No; my punishment, my real punishment is to-
night, is now!  [Still seated R.]

[Enter LORD WINDERMERE L.U.E.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have you said good-night to my wife?  [Comes C.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Crushing letter in her hand.]  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Where is she?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  She is very tired.  She has gone to bed.  She said
she had a headache.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I must go to her.  You'll excuse me?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Rising hurriedly.]  Oh, no!  It's nothing serious.
She's only very tired, that is all.  Besides, there are people
still in the supper-room.  She wants you to make her apologies to
them.  She said she didn't wish to be disturbed.  [Drops letter.]
She asked me to tell you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Picks up letter.]  You have dropped something.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh yes, thank you, that is mine.  [Puts out her hand
to take it.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [Still looking at letter.]  But it's my wife's
handwriting, isn't it?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Takes the letter quickly.]  Yes, it's--an address.
Will you ask them to call my carriage, please?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Certainly.

[Goes L. and Exit.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks!  What can I do?  What can I do?  I feel a
passion awakening within me that I never felt before.  What can it
mean?  The daughter must not be like the mother--that would be
terrible.  How can I save her?  In the absence of one of these three
the order of the other two shall be sufficient.

"Item, it is ordered that the mandes, {35} or customary alms, be
made daily to the value of what would suffice for the support of
four monks.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Dear lady, I am in such suspense!  May I not have
an answer to my request?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus, listen to me.  You are to take Lord
Windermere down to your club at once, and keep him there as long as
possible.  You understand?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  But you said you wished me to keep early hours!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Nervously.]  Do what I tell you.  Do what I tell
you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  And my reward?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Your reward?  Your reward?  Oh! ask me that to-
morrow.  But don't let Windermere out of your sight to-night.  If
you do I will never forgive you.  I will never speak to you again.
I'll have nothing to do with you.  Remember you are to keep
Windermere at your club, and don't let him come back to-night.

[Exit L.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, really, I might be her husband already.
Positively I might.  [Follows her in a bewildered manner.]

ACT DROP.


THIRD ACT


SCENE

Lord Darlington's Rooms.  A large sofa is in front of fireplace R.
At the back of the stage a curtain is drawn across the window.
Doors L. and R.  Table R. with writing materials.  Table C. with
syphons, glasses, and Tantalus frame.  Table L. with cigar and
cigarette box.  Lamps lit.


LADY WINDERMERE.  [Standing by the fireplace.]  Why doesn't he
come?  This waiting is horrible.  He should be here.  Why is he not
here, to wake by passionate words some fire within me?  I am cold--
cold as a loveless thing.  Arthur must have read my letter by this
time.  If he cared for me, he would have come after me, would have
taken me back by force.  But he doesn't care.  He's entrammelled by
this woman--fascinated by her--dominated by her.  If a woman wants
to hold a man, she has merely to appeal to what is worst in him.
We make gods of men and they leave us.  Others make brutes of them
and they fawn and are faithful.  How hideous life is! . . . Oh! it
was mad of me to come here, horribly mad.  And yet, which is the
worst, I wonder, to be at the mercy of a man who loves one, or the
wife of a man who in one's own house dishonours one?  What woman
knows?  What woman in the whole world?  But will he love me always,
this man to whom I am giving my life?  What do I bring him?  Lips
that have lost the note of joy, eyes that are blinded by tears,
chill hands and icy heart.  I bring him nothing.  I must go back--
no; I can't go back, my letter has put me in their power--Arthur
would not take me back!  That fatal letter!  No!  Lord Darlington
leaves England to-morrow.  I will go with him--I have no choice.
[Sits down for a few moments.  Then starts up and puts on her
cloak.]  No, no!  I will go back, let Arthur do with me what he
pleases.  I can't wait here.  It has been madness my coming.  I
must go at once.  As for Lord Darlington--Oh! here he is!  What
shall I do?  What can I say to him?  Will he let me go away at all?
I have heard that men are brutal, horrible . . . Oh!  [Hides her
face in her hands.]

[Enter MRS. ERLYNNE L.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere!  [LADY WINDERMERE starts and looks
up.  Then recoils in contempt.]  Thank Heaven I am in time.  You
must go back to your husband's house immediately.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Must?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Authoritatively.]  Yes, you must!  There is not a
second to be lost.  Lord Darlington may return at any moment.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don't come near me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You are on the brink of ruin, you are on the
brink of a hideous precipice.  You must leave this place at once,
my carriage is waiting at the corner of the street.  You must come
with me and drive straight home.

[LADY WINDERMERE throws off her cloak and flings it on the sofa.]

What are you doing?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne--if you had not come here, I would
have gone back.  But now that I see you, I feel that nothing in the
whole world would induce me to live under the same roof as Lord
Windermere.  You fill me with horror.  There is something about you
that stirs the wildest--rage within me.  And I know why you are
here.  My husband sent you to lure me back that I might serve as a
blind to whatever relations exist between you and him.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You don't think that--you can't.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Go back to my husband, Mrs. Erlynne.  He belongs
to you and not to me.  I suppose he is afraid of a scandal.  Men
are such cowards.  They outrage every law of the world, and are
afraid of the world's tongue.  But he had better prepare himself.
He shall have a scandal.  He shall have the worst scandal there has
been in London for years.  He shall see his name in every vile
paper, mine on every hideous placard.

MRS. Giorio, but I have not got it in my sketch of that place.

The attendant who took us round S.
Michele denied that it was the gallows, but I think it must have
been. Also, the attendant showed us one place which is called Il
Salto della belle Alda.it was infamous--infamous.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [C.]  Lady Windermere, you wrong me horribly--you
wrong your husband horribly.  He doesn't know you are here--he
thinks you are safe in your own house.  He thinks you are asleep in
your own room.  He never read the mad letter you wrote to him!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [R.]  Never read it!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No--he knows nothing about it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How simple you think me!  [Going to her.]  You
are lying to me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Restraining herself.]  I am not.  I am telling you
the truth.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If my husband didn't read my letter, how is it
that you are here?  Who told you I had left the house you were
shameless enough to enter?  Who told you where I had gone to?  My
husband told you, and sent you to decoy me back.  [Crosses L.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [R.C.]  Your husband has never seen the letter.  I--
saw it, I opened it.  I--read it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Turning to her.]  You opened a letter of mine to
my husband?  You wouldn't dare!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Dare!  Oh! to save you from the abyss into which you
are falling, there is nothing in the world I would not dare,
nothing in the whole world.  Here is the letter.  Your husband has
never read it.  He never shall read it.  [Going to fireplace.]  It
should never have been written.  [Tears it and throws it into the
fire.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [With infinite contempt in her voice and look.]
How do I know that that was my letter after all?  You seem to think
the commonest device can take me in!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! why do you disbelieve everything I tell you?
What object do you think I have in coming here, except to save you
from utter ruin, to save you from the consequence of a hideous
mistake?  That letter that is burnt now WAS your letter.  I swear
it to you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Slowly.]  You took good care to burn it before I
had examined it.  I cannot trust you.  You, whose whole life is a
lie, could you speak the truth about anything?  [Sits down.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [Hurriedly.]  Think as you like about me--say what
you choose against me, but go back, go back to the husband you
love.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Sullenly.]  I do NOT love him!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You do, and you know that he loves you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  He does not understand what love is.  He
understands it as little as you do--but I see what you want.  It
would be a great advantage for you to get me back.  Dear Heaven!
what a life I would have then!  Living at the mercy of a woman who
has neither mercy nor pity in her, a woman whom it is an infamy to
meet, a degradation to know, a vile woman, a woman who comes
between husband and wife!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [With a gesture of despair.]  Lady Windermere, Lady
Windermere, don't say such terrible things.  You don't know how
terrible they are, how terrible and how unjust.  Listen, you must
listen!  Only go back to your husband, and I promise you never to
communicate with him again on any pretext--never to see him--never
to have anything to do with his life or yours.  The money that he
gave me, he gave me not through love, but through hatred, not in
worship, but in contempt.  The hold I have over him -

LADY WINDERMERE.  [Rising.]  Ah! you admit you have a hold!

