Produced by Mark C. Orton, Thomas Strong, Linda McKeown
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


  {Transcriber's Note: Obvious typographical and printing errors have
    been corrected. Any other inconsistencies are as in the original.
    List of books by the same author has been moved to the end of the
    book to enhance readability.}


  In the Border Country


  [Illustration]


  [Illustration: On a low stool there sat an old woman....]


  [Illustration]

            In the Border Country.

                      by

           Josephine Daskam Bacon.

        Clara Elsene Peck, Decorator.


    New York Doubleday, Page & Company,
                   1909


         THE HUT IN THE WOODS
  Copyright, 1908, by P.F. Collier & Son.


        THE FARM BY THE FOREST
  Copyright, 1908, by P.F. Collier & Son.


       THE CASTLE ON THE DUNES
  Copyright, 1909, by Harper & Brothers.


        IN THE BORDER COUNTRY
  Copyright, 1909, by Josephine D. Bacon.


  [Illustration]

  Contents
                                                              page

    I. The Hut in the woods                                      3

   II. The Farm by the Forest                                   39

  III. The Castle on the Dunes                                  89


  [Illustration]

  Illustrations


  On a low stool there sat an old woman....            Frontispiece

                                                        Facing page
  The glass of that window has strange properties.              28

  There were no lights but the great moon.                      54

  The Dame stood high on wooden clogs and hummed
      a ballad.                                                 62

  Here they sat down to tapestry work, green and blue
      and russet weavings.                                     116


The First Lesson

In the Border Country

THE HUT IN THE WOOD


The woman who told me this, and other strange tales which I may one day
try to put together, had no gift of writing, but only a pathetic regard
for those who had. I say pathetic, because to me her extraordinary
experiences so far outvalue the tinkling art of recording them as to
make her simple admiration for the artist little short of absurd. She
had herself a pretty talent for painting, of which I knew her to have
made much in the years before we met. It was, indeed, because I
remembered what hopes she had encouraged in her teachers in this and
older countries, and how eagerly she had laboured at her craft, finding
no trick of technique too slight, no repetition too arduous, no
sacrifice too great, if only they might justify their faith in her,
that I asked her one day, when I had come to know her well, why it was
that she had stopped so suddenly in the work that many of us had learned
to know before we knew her. For now she paints only quaint toys for her
many lovely children, or designs beautiful gardens for her husband,
himself an able artist and her first teacher, or works at the wonderful
robes in which he paints her, burning in the autumn woods or mist-like
through spring boughs.

We sat, that morning, I remember, on the edge of the wood that finishes
their wide estate among the hills, looking down its green mazy aisles,
listening to the droning of the June air, lapped in the delicious peace
of early summer. "Why did you?" I asked, "what happened?"

She gave me a long look.

"I have often thought I would tell you," she said, "for you can tell the
others. When I hear this warm, droning noise, this time of the year, it
always reminds me----"

She looked at me, but I knew that she saw something or someone else.
After a long pause her lips began to form a word, when suddenly she drew
a short, frightened breath.

"What--do you smell it, too? Am I going away again--_what_ is that
odour?"

I sniffed the air. A dull, sweet taste flavoured it, unpleasant, vaguely
terrifying. I looked about carefully and caught sight of a wide-mouthed
bottle lying on its side, the cork half loosened. A brown moth fluttered
feebly in the bottle.

"It is only chloroform," I assured her, remembering that the two oldest
children were collecting butterflies, and I tightened the cork.

"Oh, yes," she said, a deep and unaccountable relief in her voice, "I
see. That odour has the strangest effect on me ever since----" she
waited a long time. At last she said she would try to tell me
something, if I would ask her questions to make it easier for her, and
never discuss it afterward unless she should invite the discussion.

I do not, of course, pretend to tell the story as she told it to me. It
was broken by long pauses and many questions on my part. Her phrasing,
though wonderfully effective at times, was empty and inadequate at
others, when she simply could not say what she meant, neither pen nor
tongue being her natural medium of expression. But if the style that I
have used is not hers, it best translates, at least, the mood into which
she threw me.

       *       *       *       *       *

The surgeon, who knew her well, took her hand on the threshold of the
operating room.

"Even now, dear friend," he said, "we may turn back. You know what I
think of this."

"You promised me!" she cried eagerly. "I have your word that I should
not risk this."

"You have my word," said he, "that in your present state of mind and
under the present conditions you should not risk it. But I am by no
means sure that you could not change both your state of mind and the
conditions. If you say you cannot, then, indeed, I will not let you risk
it. But if you would only say you could! Then I would risk anything.
Will you not say it?"

"I cannot say it," she said. "Open the door!"

"Listen!" said the surgeon; "if when you are on the table, if even when
the ether is at your lips, you will raise your finger, I will stop it.
Will you remember? For you, too, you know, run a risk in doing this."

"I shall remember," she said, "but I shall not raise my finger." And he
opened the door.

Her mind was so busy with a rush of memories and plans, crowded
together at will to shut out her fear, that she was unconscious of the
little bustle about her, the blunt, crude details of preparation.

"Breathe deeply, please," someone said in her ear, "harder, harder
still--so!"

"I am breathing deeply, I am! How can I do this forever? I tell you I
_am_ breathing deeply!" she screamed to them, but they paid no
attention. The surgeon's face looked sadly at her and receded, small and
fine, to an infinite distance. Though she called loudly to them, she
realized that in some way the sound did not reach them, that it was
useless. She prayed that they might not think her unconscious, for she
had never reasoned more clearly. Now her ankles were submerged, now her
knees, now her hips, now it was at her chest, now her throat.

"It is all over--you can begin now!" she said deeply, and in order to
save herself from a sickening struggle, she bent her soul, as one bends
one's body to dive under a combing breaker, and dipped under the wave
that threatened her.

Just as one slips through the breathless surf she slipped through, and
left them. She heard someone breathing heavily in the room she had left
and hurried away from the horrid sound, intending to find her room and
change the loose gray gown and the soft fur-lined boots she had put on
for her journey to the terrible room. But the hoarse, heavy breathing
followed her and threw her into a panic of fear, so that she turned into
a side corridor and ran blindly down it, stumbling through a little
narrow door at the end of it. The door swung to with a long sigh and she
heard the breathing no more.

As she rested in the little room, which was perfectly empty, a door at
the other side of it opened suddenly and a woman rushed in. She, too,
had on a long gown, and her dark hair hung in two thick braids, one over
each shoulder.

"Can you tell me the way out?" she said quickly, "I can't stay here--I
can't breathe."

"But you aren't dressed--we must find our rooms first."

"No, no! There are nurses everywhere. We shall be seen! Come this way,"
and she pointed, shaking, to a long window that opened on a fire escape.
The steps were broad and easy; a moment and they were in the street.

"Here is my carriage--I saw it from the window. Let me take you where
you want to go," said the woman; "home, directly, James."

The door of the carriage was swinging wide; they had only to step in. As
they sank on the seat the fat coachman leaned out and slammed it.

"Drat that door!" he said loudly. "She'll have to go back to the factory
again." The footman made some remark and the coachman swore angrily.

"I think I see myself standing here two hours!" he growled. "The gray's
nervous as it is. I'm going up through the Park and let them out a
little at the other end."

The carriage started. The woman half rose in it and tapped imperiously
on the glass.

"James! James!" she cried, but no one answered her. She pressed the knob
of the door, but it did not turn.

"I can't make him hear?" she complained, "what shall I do? What do you
think is the matter--he acts as if there were nobody in the carriage!"

They looked fearfully at each other.

"He will stop surely--somewhere," said the other, but her heart felt
chilled. She could not think--she dared not.

They trotted swiftly on; her companion's eyes were fixed ahead of her,
her lips moved.

"Hail Mary!" she muttered, and then, "now and at the hour of our death!"

"Don't say that, don't!" she begged the woman, but still the mutterings
went on. The door of the carriage swung open; the horses dropped to a
walk. All around were trees and grass; great rocks lined the driveway.

"I could slip behind the bushes and my gown would not be noticed," she
thought feverishly, "for I cannot bear to hear her," and as the carriage
almost halted she swung herself easily down from the low step.

"Now and at the hour of our death!" she heard as the carriage rolled on,
and shuddered when the coachman slammed the door upon that pale, crazed
creature.

Behind the bushes she was well screened, and the few people that drove
and walked through the wild, beautiful woodland never looked in her
direction. Once a couple, intertwined and deep in each other's eyes,
almost ran against her, but though she drew away, startled and
apologizing, they walked on with no reply to her excuses.

Her heart sank strangely.

"I wish they had spoken to me," she whispered to herself. "I wish I
could think better--I know there is something wrong. The next person I
meet I will ask----"

But she walked steadily away from the great driveway, deeper and deeper
into the wood.

"In a moment I will stop and think this out--in a moment," she murmured,
but she did not stop; she ran like a hunted animal, farther and farther.

The wood was utterly quiet. Sometimes a little furry beast slipped
across the narrow path she ran along, sometimes a large bird flapped
heavily into the air ahead of her; but no person walked or called.

Soon a great fatigue seized her, and hunger. She moved languidly; her
legs seemed to walk of themselves.

"I must eat--I must rest," she moaned, "but why did they not speak to
me?"

At last she realized that she could drag herself no farther, that she
was alone and lost, fearful and worn out, in a dense wood.

"I will get to that little path," she said, trembling, "and there I
will drop, and if I must think, I must."

She staggered up the little path, and it lead to a tiny hut, the colour
of the four great trees that stood about it. Its door hung wide open,
and in the middle of it, on a low stool, there sat an old woman, wrapped
in a long cloak, looking kindly at her.

She threw herself across the threshold and fell upon the earthen floor.

"Oh, will _you_ speak to me? Will _you_ see me? Pray, pray answer me!"
she cried.

"And why should I not see you, my child?" said the old woman.

She gasped with joy.

"I don't know--I thought--the coachman slammed the door--I don't know
what I thought! It was terrible!" she panted.

"I know, I know," said the old woman; "but you are here now. You can
rest now. It took you a long time, you are so strong. Look, I have a bed
for you!"

She looked, and in the corner of the hut was a couch of pine boughs,
odorous and soft.

"You may lie on my cloak," said the old woman, and spread it on the
springy couch. She dropped on it.

"Oh, I ache!--every bone in me aches!" she sobbed, and for the first
time she wept.

"That is right," said the old woman, and soothed her with her hand, "now
sleep, and I will have something for you when you wake."

Her body sank, relaxed, upon the soft boughs, and it was as if a sponge
were wiped across her mind, and she slept.

Time passed over her; she had no way of knowing if they were minutes or
hours that ran by.

When she awoke, a gentle, steady humming filled the air; a murmurous,
musical sound that calmed every sense. It was like the turning of a
great wheel or the rocking of an old cradle.

"What is that?" she asked faintly.

"They are my bees, child," said the old woman. "They have come home."

She was slender, with brown eyes like brook water, and though she was
wrinkled finely, she was straight and strong, for she lifted up her
guest and half carried her to the opposite corner of the hut.

"Now wash," she said, "and then you must eat."

A cold, deep spring welled up in that corner, and as she plunged her
face into it she opened her hot eyes to let the icy water cool them--and
gazed at the white moon far below her and the small stars.

All space seemed spread before her and she drew out, frightened, but
when she glanced quickly at the spring from above, she thought she must
have dreamed, for it was like any other spring, only a little deeper.
Then she washed her hands till they tingled and warmed. When she had
braided her hair afresh she turned and saw that the old woman had set
out a meal for her on the low stool; a brown loaf, a comb of golden
honey and an earthen jug of milk.

"Eat, my child," she said.

She fell upon the food and it was like wine and meat to her. The blood
ran swiftly through her veins again and she forgot the terror and
fatigue and the cloud in her mind.

"You are most kind to me, mother," she said, for she had lived in the
old countries where it is easy to speak kindly to the old; "how do you
happen to live here? I should have died but for you. All my courage had
gone and it seemed that some terrible thing must be true, but I dared
not think what it might be. Now I am strong again and I will thank you
and go on."

"Where will you go, my child?" said the old woman.

She looked out of the door and saw that the wood was so dense that only
a dim light pierced through the boughs far above her head.

"It is always twilight here," said the old woman.

"But you can tell me the way, surely you know the way out?" she begged.

"I know my way," said the old woman, "but not your way. I come from the
other side."

"And how do you come?" she asked, almost fearfully, for something about
the old woman began to frighten her.

"I follow my bees," said the old woman.

"But I cannot wait for your bees," she cried, vexed and alarmed. "I must
get back--I was mad to have come here. I have work to do. Everything has
gone wrong with me since--since--oh, I must go back and get at my work!"

"And what is your work?" the old woman asked.

"I am an artist," she said.

"What is that?"

"I paint pictures," she said.

"Why do you do that?" asked the old woman.

"Why? Why?" she repeated. "Why does anyone do his work? Because I am
told by good workmen that I do it well, and that I shall every year do
it better. Because I would give up food and sleep for it. Because I
shall, if I live, some day do some one thing that will be remembered
after I am past all work."

"You will never do that with a picture," said the old woman quietly.

She stamped her foot upon the earthen floor.

"How dare you say so, you?" she cried. "What do you know of art or the
great world of cities beyond this horrible wood? What are you?"

"They call me the Bee-woman, in this part of the wood," she answered,
"but I have many duties. What are yours?"

"I have told you," she said sullenly, for under the other's eyes her own
fell.

"Not so," said the Bee-woman quickly, a hand on her shoulder, "you have
told me only your pleasures. I do not ask you for what you _would_
sacrifice food and sleep--though you seem unable to go without either
for very long--but for what you _should_ sacrifice them?"

She clasped her hands and faced the Bee-woman proudly.

"Art is the one thing in this world that makes these two the same," said
she, "to the artist his art is both his pleasure and his duty."

"That is the reason that artists are not women, then," replied the
Bee-woman, "for their duties cannot be their pleasures very long or very
often."

At this she would have run away, but her knees were still weak, and the
thought of the trackless woods stopped her heart a moment with fear.

"A Bee-woman may know much of bees," she said coldly, "but the world
beyond this wood has a wider space to overlook, and while you have been
growing old in the wood, mother, the humming of your charges has
stopped your ears to the voices of the young who fill the world outside.
They would tell you, if you could understand, that Art is the one word
that is one for men and women."

"My child," said the Bee-woman, "so long as bees hive and trees root in
the earth there will be no such word. For the words of the world were
made to match the things of the world, and that is so in this wood and
out of it."

She looked at the Bee-woman and felt troubled and on the eve of
something great and sad.

"You are no common peasant woman, I am sure," she said gently, "and
indeed, I have heard wiser and more travelled persons than you say very
much the thing that I think you mean. But like you, they were old."

"That is to say, that they had seen more of the life they speak of, I
suppose," said the Bee-woman.

"But the world moves, mother," she said.

"That is to say, that it runs round and round, I suppose," said the
Bee-woman, "but not that it gets any farther from the sun."

"But women have learned many new things since you were young, mother."

"That is to say, that they have all the more to teach their children, I
suppose," said the Bee-woman, "and they had more than a little, before."

"Who spoke of children?" she cried harshly, "not I! I spoke of work--the
world's work, that I am free to do!"

"So long as bees hive and seeds fly on the wind," said the Bee-woman,
"the world has one work for you to do, and you are bound, not free, to
do it!"

Then she sank on the floor beside the old woman and began to beg her,
for it seemed to her, as often it seems in dreams, that before she could
go any farther she must win over this one who stood between her and
where she would go.

"You think me vain," she cried, "but, indeed, with me this is no girlish
fancy, mother. Men greater and wiser than I have told me that mine will
be work for which the world will be the better."

"I think that they have spoken truly, my child," said the Bee-woman,
"and that is why I was waiting for you."

"Then let me go and work!" she cried, and rose from her knees.

"Go quickly, indeed," said the Bee-woman, "but work with flesh and
blood, as does God the Creator, not with paint and canvas, as does man,
the mimic!"

Then this old bee woman grew tall and terrible to her, and she saw that
she had been led into the wood as into a trap and that she must fight
hard for her freedom.

"I do not know what you are!" she cried wildly, "but you talk like an
old song mumbled over the hearthstone, and it is to the hearthstone that
you would chain me. Was I given eyes that can sweep the horizon only to
turn them downward to that narrow hearth?"

"My child," said the old woman, and her voice was like a bell that tolls
across the ancient fields, "so long as bees hive and fire burns on the
hearths of men will the daughters of men walk in this wood and tell me
that the hearth is narrow; and yet it is wider than the width of the
womb whence all men come, and wider than the width of the grave whither
all men go. And all men know this."

She put her hand over her heart, as one who covers a wound, and her hand
touched a folded paper under her gray gown. She drew it out in triumph
and her face grew bright.

"Not all men, mother, not all men!" she boasted. "See--I took this with
me when I went in to the trial from which I escaped. (Though what I have
suffered in this wood is worse than that from which I ran away.) Read
this letter from my husband, and you will see that not all men would
chain their mates--that to-day the jailer himself throws away the key!"

"Read me the letter," said the Bee-woman. And she read:

"_I love you because you think my thoughts with me, because our work is
the same and we understand each other. Let us work on together hand in
hand._"

"Now dip this letter in the spring," said the Bee-woman, "and read it to
me again. For now the paper can show you only what the pen has written."

Wondering, she dipped it in the spring, and the writing, which had been
black, turned blood red and was not the same when she read it:

"_I love you because your eyes are blue and have drowned my heart,
because after I have done my work, which I cannot explain to you, I lie
in your arms and cease to think. Give me a son with your eyes, for I
shall never understand you._"

She crushed the paper in her hand and flung it out of the door of the
hut.

To be sure, folks does like our butter, and it always fetches a
pretty good price,--_he's_ very proud on't.

I tell him he oughtn't to be,--we oughtn't to be proud of anything."

And now Mrs.

Katy, giving a look at the old clock, told Mary it was time to set the
tea-table; and forthwith there was a gentle movement of expectancy.
The little mahogany tea-table opened its brown wings, and from a drawer
came forth the snowy damask covering. It was etiquette, on such occasions,
to compliment every article of the establishment successively, as
it appeared; so the Deacon's wife began at the table-cloth.

"Well, I do declare, Miss Scudder beats us all in her table-cloths,"
she said, taking up a corner of the damask, admiringly; and Mrs.

Jones forthwith jumped up and seized the other corner.

"Why, this 'ere must have come from the Old Country. It's 'most the
beautiflest thing I ever did see."
"It's my own spinning," replied Mrs. Katy, with conscious dignity.
"There was an Irish weaver came to Newport the year before I was
married, who wove beautifully,--just the Old-Country patterns,--and
I'd been spinning some uncommonly fine flax then.

I remember Mr.

Scudder used to read to me while I was spinning,"--and Aunt Katy
looked afar, as one whose thoughts are in the past, and dropped out
the last words with a little sigh, unconsciously, as to herself.

"Well, now, I must say," said Mrs. Jones, "this goes quite beyond me.
I thought I could spin some; but I sha'n't never dare to show mine."

"I'm sure, Mrs.

Jones, your towels that you had out bleaching, this spring, were
wonderful," said Aunt Katy. "But I don't pretend to do much now," she
continued, straightening her trim figure.

"I'm getting old, you know; we must let the young folks take up these
things. Mary spins better now than I ever did. Mary, hand out those
napkins."

And so Mary's napkins passed from hand to hand.

"Well, well," said Mrs.

Twitchel to Mary, "it's easy to see that _your_ linen-chest will be
pretty full by the time _he_ comes along; won't it, Miss Jones?"--and
Mrs. Twitchel looked pleasantly facetious, as elderly ladies generally
do, when suggesting such possibilities to younger ones.

Mary was vexed to feel the blood boil up in her cheeks in a most unexpected
and provoking way at the suggestion; whereat Mrs. Twitchel nodded knowingly
at Mrs. Jones, and whispered something in a mysterious aside, to
which plump Mrs. Jones answered,--"Why, do tell! now I never!"
"It's strange," said Mrs.

Twitchel, taking up her parable again, in such a plaintive tone that all
knew something pathetic was coming, "what mistakes some folks will
make, a-fetchin' up girls.

Now there's your Mary, Miss Scudder,--why, there a'n't nothin' she
can't do; but law, I was down to Miss Skinner's, last week,
a-watchin' with her, and re'lly it 'most broke my heart to see her.

Her mother was a most amazin' smart woman; but she brought Suky up, for
all the world, as if she'd been a wax doll, to be kept in the
drawer,--and sure enough, she was a pretty cretur,--and now she's
married, what is she?

She ha'n't no more idee how to take hold than nothin'.

The poor child means well enough, and she works so hard she most
kills herself; but then she is in the suds from mornin' till
night,--she's one the sort whose work's never done,--and poor George
Skinner's clean discouraged."

"There's everything in _knowing how_," said Mrs.

Katy. "Nobody ought to be always working; it's a bad sign.

I tell Mary,--'Always do up your work in the forenoon.'--Girls must
learn that. I never work afternoons, after my dinner-dishes are got
away; I never did and never would."

"Nor I, neither," chimed in Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Twitchel,--both anxious
to show themselves clear on this leading point of New England
house-keeping.

"There's another thing I always tell Mary," said Mrs.

Katy, impressively. "'Never say there isn't time for a thing that ought
to be done.

If a thing is _necessary_, why, life is long enough to find a place
for it.

That's my doctrine. When anybody tells me they _can't find_ time for this
or that, I don't think much of 'em.

I think they don't know how to work,--that's all.'"
Here Mrs.

Twitchel looked up from her knitting, with an apologetic giggle,
at Mrs.

Brown.

"Law, now, there's Miss Brown, she don't know nothin' about it, 'cause
she's got her servants to every turn.

I s'pose she thinks it queer to hear us talkin' about our work.

Miss Brown must have her time all to herself.

I was tellin' the Deacon the other day that she was a privileged woman."

"Ask me no more, mother," she said faintly, "but tell me this: why is
life so cruel? For you know everything and this wood is not what I
thought."

"Child," said the Bee-woman, "for I suppose you call it cruel because it
does not please you, why life is as it is, I do not know; but that it is
so no one can doubt who has tried to make it otherwise and failed. Now,
what will you do?"

She bent her head before the eyes of the Bee-woman, ashamed, because in
her deep brown eyes she saw reflected her lost years.

"What shall I do?" she asked meekly.

"Go back, child," said the Bee-woman, and her voice warmed like summer
sunshine on the wall at noon, "go back and let men make pictures: do you
make men!"

Then outside the door she saw the little path and suddenly she seemed to
know where it would lead and how, and she had no fear at all of the
wood.

"Good-bye, mother, God keep you!" she said and stepped over the
threshold.

"So long as I keep my bees, child, God will doubtless keep me," said the
Bee-woman, "and that is true in this wood and out of it. Now hurry back,
for you have stayed almost too long."

She waved her hand and turned from the hut, threading her way among the
trees.

"I must go back, I must go back!" she said to herself, and moved more
and more quickly, for something drew her almost off the ground.

Once she thought she heard a low cry behind her, and as she looked back
she saw some one running hotly through the wood across her track.

She called aloud to help the poor creature, for she saw that it was a
woman in deadly terror, wrapped in a long gown, with two great braids of
dark hair, that hit against her back like whips, who turned her pale,
crazed face--and it was the woman in whose carriage she had driven to
the edge of the wood.

"Come back!" she called, "this is the way! Come back!"

But the runner clasped her shaking hands upon her heart and leaned hotly
forward in one last burst of speed, and fell fainting across the
threshold of the Bee-woman's hut.

Then a panic terror caught the woman who had left that hut, a terror to
which her first fright was as nothing.

"In God's name," she screamed, "where am I? _What am I_? Who is that
wrinkled woman with young eyes? What wood is this?"

So screaming she whirled about and missed her footing, and fell heavily
over the root of a great tree, striking her head in the fall.

A sickening pain washed in great waves through every nerve, and she
struggled, turning her head feebly from side to side, closing her eyes
against the blinding light that pierced her brain like knives.

The tall trees swam and wavered before her, the boughs tossed and swayed
and receded till they were like a forest seen in a picture. Then she saw
that they were framed in a window, with empty space behind them, and
that she was staring at them from a bed in a strange room.

Over her eyes bent two brown eyes, young and kind.

"Do you see me? Can you speak to me?" she heard.

"I do not hear the bees," she muttered, "I miss them. And yet you are
the Bee-woman, are you not? I know your eyes----"

"I am the nurse," said the voice, "there are no bees here. You hear the
rumbling in the street below. I am glad to see you open your eyes--we
were growing worried. You remember you are at the hospital, do you not?
Would you like to see your husband? He is just outside the door."

She looked long at the nurse. "My husband," she murmured. "Oh, yes.
Does he know that I got away? How did you bring me back here? Tell the
doctor that--that I could not bear it and that he must take me through
without it. He--he will be glad--"

"The operation is over," said the nurse, "and you have nothing to bear,
now. You are just coming out of the ether. Do you understand? Everything
is all right. You have only to lie quiet, now, and you may see your
husband, if you wish. He wanted to see you as soon as you were safely
out of the wood, he said."

The tears gathered in her eyes, but she was too weak to wipe them.

"'Out of the wood,'" she whispered, "'out of the wood'! So that is what
they mean! But he will never go into that wood ... yes, call him in."


The Next Lesson

THE FARM BY THE FOREST


It was years afterward, and in October, the very climax of a late and
lingering autumn, that I sat by my friend one afternoon in the ripe
orchard and knew suddenly that we were going to speak of one of those
strange experiences of hers that, for me, set her more effectually apart
from others than any of her many and varied gifts and graces. As before,
we fell into the matter suddenly, with no warning, and at a light
question from me the like of which I must have asked her many times with
no such answer as I then got.

All about us lay the windfalls, piled evenly, rich heaps of sunset
colour. The better fruit gleamed through the boughs like fairy lamps and
great ladders leaned against these on which the men climbed, picking
carefully. Below them the maidservants, laughing and excited at this
pleasant change of labour, handed the baskets and filled the gaping
barrels. And up the ladders and through the trees and among the tinted
heaps raced and played the children of the house, sniffing the heady
flavour of the rich fruit, teasing the maids, cajoling the men,
staggering under the heavy baskets, pelting each other, even, with the
crimson and yellow globes, bringing each specially large and perfect one
to their mother for congratulation. She, stopping for the moment her
strange, jewelled embroidery, that alone would have marked her for an
artist of high powers, would lean over each boy and girl, murmuring her
praise, soothing in the same breath the unlucky ones who had not found
the most gorgeous fruit, warning the men not to trouble the yet unready
apples, quieting the maids if they grew too boisterous, an eye and an
ear for everyone and everything.

As the lowering sun struck full on the nearest heap of red and gold, and
turned the russet fruit on the bough to bronze nuggets wrapped in
leaves of wonderfully wrought jade, a sudden thought tempted me and I
spoke quickly, glancing slyly at her calm, contented face.

"Look at that colour!" I said, "does it not cry out to you to be
painted? Does it not make you remember that spring orchard of yours that
everyone praised so, and from which the great Master predicted your
future? Would you not like to escape from all this pleasant, tiny
bustle, this network of ceaseless demands upon your hands, your heart,
your brain, and once again attack a real work?"

She looked curiously at me.

"A real work?" she repeated.

"I mean an enduring work," I explained, "a thing from which you can lift
your hand some day and say, 'This is done. To the best of my power it is
finished. Let it stand, and judge me by it.'"

She nodded her head slowly and I saw that she was not really looking at
me, though she seemed to be, but beyond me, across the splendid orchard
piles, into the stacked gold of the corn far afield.

"That's it," she murmured, "that's just what I told her--'an enduring
work.' And what was it she said to me? Oh! I am going again--I am partly
there now! Don't you see it? Is that the Lower Orchard? Are those the
gray gables of the Farm?"

Her voice thrilled strangely and her eyes were staring, vague: it was as
if she hung between sleep and waking. I looked where she pointed, but it
was only an enormous ledge of gray rock, curiously slanted, and I said
so, softly.

"It is only a rock, broken at the gable angle, dear."

Then she faced me, herself perfectly.

"Oh, you think so?" she answered me with a smile.

The words were strange enough in themselves, but without them her
manner would have taught me that she was going to speak of stranger
things yet, and I was not disappointed.

"It was just such a day as this," she began, "and the smell of the
apples always takes me back, though never as strongly as now. We were in
the orchard ... ah, my dear, you will tell it wonderfully well when I
have told you, and many will learn as I have learned, but you can never
make them see the Dame as I saw her!"

Then she told me the tale of that adventure.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What you need," said her friend, the great physician, "is change.
Change and rest. Where can you go and be sure of absolute quiet?"

"I cannot tell you," she said wearily, "there is always something that I
must do----"

"----or think that you must do," he interrupted her.

"It is all the same," she said.

He sighed, and looked at her quietly for a long time.

"It has taken me fifty years to learn that, my dear child," said he,
"and you toss it at me in a moment's talk. Since you have learned it,
why are you not well and happy?"

"Since I have learned it, I can never be," she told him, and again he
looked long at her.

"What is that that you are trying to do?" he asked her at last. "Think
carefully and tell me in one sentence."

"I have already thought carefully," she said, "and I can tell you. I am
trying to live my husband's life, which I ought not to give up, my
children's life, which I must not give up, and my own life, which I
cannot give up."

He looked even longer than before at her and the late sun slipped down
the polished fittings of his desk and down the gilded covers of the
book-filled shelves behind him. Longer than before he looked and the
lines deepened in his face and his eyes seemed to grow deeper in his
head as she looked back at him. At last he spoke.

"My child," he said, "if I were a poor and hungry doctor it is not to be
doubted that I should give you something in a bottle and tell you to
come to me again. But I am a wealthy physician and I can afford to tell
you truth. I can do nothing for you. You must cure yourself, or fail to
do it so completely that I shall be needed to enable you to fail again.
When you have repeated this last process sufficiently, I shall no longer
be thus enabled and you will die. That is all."

"Die?" said she; "I shall die?"

"You will die," he said, "with everything that the world calls good
fortune in your lap. With no excuse for doing so, but with every reason
to be glad that you are doing so. Leaving behind you someone who needed
you and more whom you needed. Now go home and think, and before you go,
drink this."

Silently he poured out for her a tiny glassful of some colourless,
aromatic liquid and in silence she drank it and left the room, where the
dying sun glinted upon the gilded books. It seemed to her that he
touched a bell on the desk with his hand, and though the cordial had
already begun to affect her head strangely, she was able to observe that
it was in answer to this bell that his office nurse appeared at the door
as she reached it and put a steadying arm behind her.

"Come this way," said the nurse, "and sit a moment; do you feel a little
dizzy?"

"A little," she answered, and her voice seemed to come from far away; "I
am afraid that drink was stronger than it should have been ... if I
could sit down ... the doctor...."

She knew that the nurse was helping her to a couch in a tiny room she
had never been in before; she knew that she sank upon it and that the
nurse settled her upon a bright crimson cushion; she heard her soothing
murmur and nodded to show that she was not alarmed, only vexed at her
own weakness, and then she ceased to struggle with the overwhelming
drowsiness that oppressed her, and slept.

When she woke it was dark in the room. In the street the electric lights
glowed, and the people passed steadily by the window; was it midnight,
she wondered, or only early dusk? How strange that the doctor and the
nurse had forgotten her!

"But, of course he would not have wished me waked," she said, and rose,
straightened her dress, waited a moment, and then pulled impatiently at
an old-fashioned bell-rope that hung by the door. There was no answer.
Again she rang, but the house lay dark and silent. A little housemaid
with brown, startled eyes, came at last, just as she was beginning to
grow alarmed at the darkness and stillness, and stared at her.

"Was it you that rang, madam?" asked this little housemaid; "the doctor
is out: he will not be back to-night."

"And the nurse?" she inquired, vexed at this lack of thought of her.

"The nurse has gone long ago, madam, for the night."

A flood of nervous anger broke over her.

"How disgraceful!" she cried; "how unkind! To leave me here like this!
What time is it, pray?"

"It is very late, madam; I could not tell you the hour."

The little housemaid yawned and pressed her tumbled cap straight.

She bit her lips to keep herself from angry tears and rushed through the
heavy street door, down the stone steps, out upon the pavement. Angrily
she sped along, brushing by the people, who, in turn, stumbled rudely
against her. The jostling crowd brimmed her eyes; she walked as one in a
mist.

"How cruel everyone is to me!" she whispered to herself and walked
faster. Suddenly a thought came to her. Where was she going? Surely she
ought not to attempt to walk all the way to her home, so late at night?
She must call a carriage. She fumbled vaguely in the little bag at her
wrist, but no purse was there; only a few small coins.

"I must get into a street-car," she thought dully, and just then a
noisy, lighted street-car rushed toward her on a cross-street and she
entered it as it stopped to take in a group of workmen. They shouldered
by her roughly, and one of them laid his greasy bundle half upon her
lap; she shrunk into a corner. She held out her coin to the brisk
collector, but he passed her by, took one from all of the others, and
left her, shaking, haunted by a nameless dread.

"Here is my fare!" she called to him, but he, whistling, left her in her
corner.

She hid her face in her hands and tried to control her whirling
thoughts, but her brain raced like a mill stream and her legs shook
under her trailing skirt. All too late she remembered that her carriage
was waiting for her at the doctor's: she ought not to have rushed into
the street. She was giddy and confused, and knew that her mind was the
mind of one in the grip of fever. On and on the street-car rumbled; one
by one the workmen brushed by her and got out.

"Have I been here hours or minutes?" she wondered, but dared not speak.

Now she was alone in the car. She peered through the window and saw that
it was passing over water; the lights blurred in the dark, shining
mirror below.

"Oh, this is wrong! I should never have come this way!" she moaned, and
knew that she was lost, lost and alone.

When she dared look through the window again the water was gone, and she
felt the motion of the car to be slower. Soon it had stopped. Trembling,
she rose from her corner and walked unsteadily to the door.

"Will you kindly tell me where we are? I have made a mistake," she said
to the man who had refused to take her money.

He looked at her and spoke to his companion.

"I suppose we're booked for the usual half-hour wait, Jim," he said; "I
don't see any green light."

She cried aloud and rushed out of it.

"I think I am mad!" she wept. "I wish I had died with my head on that
crimson cushion! What will happen to me? That cruel doctor will have
killed me!"

"What is it, madam? Can I help you?"

A soft voice spoke close to her and she grasped the arm of a slender,
girlish creature who turned two brown, startled eyes up at her. Now it
was for joy that she wept, and clung to the girl, whom her confused
brain took to be the brown-eyed housemaid who had spoken to her last.

"Indeed, indeed, you can help me!" she cried. "I am lost--I have come
into the country, it seems, a long way, in a terrible street-car where
no one would speak to me, and I ought to be in the city, in my home, for
I am afraid I am very ill: I seem to be in a sort of fever. Do you know
where we are? I have never been here. When will it be day?"

"Very soon, madam," said the little maid, supporting her firmly for all
her slenderness, "and I know well where we are. Come home with me; Karen
and I plan to be at the Farm by daybreak."

She looked, and there beside them stood a tiny donkey, saddled with a
sort of leather chair, and almost at the level of his rough, thin
shoulder stood a great sleek-coated hound.

"Let me help you into the saddle, madam," the little maid went on, "and
you will find how well you sit there. I am very strong, and I can walk
beside."

As in a dream she let the girl half lift her into the seat, and the
donkey walked easily along, the hound stepping nobly by them, his
mistress leading the sure-footed beast.

There were no lights but the great moon and the kindly little stars, and
no streets but narrow lanes, winding through feathery maples and stocky
oaks that would be sulphur-yellow and iron-red with the sun behind them,
but were now only their own whispering ghosts.

"This must be far from the city," she said softly, and the little maid
answered:

"I do not know, madam; I was never there. We have come far, Karen and I,
but not from the way you were running. We are going to the Farm to help
in the orchard. The Dame sent for me and father always wishes to oblige
the Dame. So we came at once."

"And can you send someone back with me?"

"I do not know, madam. The Dame will take care of it."

"I will pay whatever is right--I am not poor," she muttered, holding to
one side of the saddle.

"The Dame will know, madam," the little maid repeated, and they went on
their way under a lightening sky, for the dawn was coming up white, and
even now the moon was paling.

She had no way of telling how long that journey was, for more than once
her head nodded forward on her breast and she knew that she fell into a
kind of sleep that was not wholly sleep, for she was aware of the little
donkey's gentle gait, of the winding, leaf-strewn paths, of the winking
stars. Once they went through a bit of rolling pasture-land where the
cattle drowsed, dim, misty bulks on either hand, and the steaming breath
of a curious horse bathed her startled face. He galloped away and his
hurrying feet woke her to the sense that the dawn was upon them. The
light was now a pale rosy glow and straight from its heart a beaming
arrow struck upon a long brown gable that she took for one of the great
ledges of massive rock that time and again had risen beside them. But
the little maid knew better, and skipped beside the hound.

[Illustration: There were no lights but the great moon.]

"See, madam," she cried, "here is the Farm! And there is my little
window in the roof! And there are the doves above the long barn."

She looked and saw that all these things were so, but great weariness
filled her and she could think of nothing but the long way back, for she
knew that they had come a great way from the city.

"This may all be well for you, child, but it is not the same to me," she
said sadly.

"And why not, madam? The Dame is kind to all," the little maid replied,
and urged the donkey on.

"What is your name?" she asked, looking for the first time at her guide
in the full light of early day. The girl was quaintly dressed, she saw,
with a black bodice laced across her young body, a shorter skirt than
grown girls wear now, and a scarlet ribbon twisted among the long, dark
braids that hung down her shoulders. She had travelled much in older
countries than her own and to her eyes this girl had the air of a
winsome little peasant that knew her simple station and was happy in it.

"Joan is my name, madam--and I have been told that the miller's Dyrk has
called the new brown foal for me--the finest one at the Farm!" she said
with a bubble of laughter.

"Now, madam, we are here at last. Let me help you down, and we will
surprise the Dame for once, for not often does one catch her asleep. She
will be the first always--and here she is!"

They were in the very dooryard of a thriving, deep-eaved farm-house.
Asters glistened with dew about the doorstep, a straw-filled kennel for
the great hound stood close by, the cocks welcomed in the day from
behind a trim green hedge, and slowly across the back-stretching meadow
came home a file of sleek, heavy-uddered cattle. She stared at them
unseeing, for her head reeled, but Joan mistook her staring and began to
prattle:

"You are surprised, no doubt, madam, to see the cows come in from the
pasture this early, but here at the Farm the air is so dry and pure that
they leave them in the fields all night, and the milk tastes of honey
and meadow grass, the miller's Dyrk does say----"

"Child, child, will you never be done with your chatter? The stranger is
sick--too sick, I see, to mind herself of the Farm's cows. Help me to
take her in!"

"You must be the Dame," she said, and tried to look steadily at the
woman who came out of the oaken door to lead her in. She was a strong,
sturdy woman, neither tall nor short, with brown, smooth hair and a
brown, smooth skin with red blood beneath. Her eyes were like brook
water in the sun, that runs over clean pebbles, and she was
deep-chested, and stood firm in her quaintly buckled shoes. She wore a
chintz gown dyed with little red and yellow flowers that was looped up
over the hips, and at her waist hung a bunch of heavy, wrought keys.

"Nay, now, never try to talk," she said, and put a strong arm about her
drooping guest. "You are past talking, poor thing! You have done far too
much--for others, I'll be bound. Rest first, and then talk after that.
Help her up the stairs, now, Joan, and hush thy chatter."

"But you do not know why I am here," she murmured, leaning hard upon the
black oaken rail of the polished stair.

"I know you are here, do I not?" the Dame answered quietly; "I should
not get you to bed the quicker, whatever I knew. Softly, Joan; softly!"

One last effort and they stood within a long, low-beamed chamber, whose
leaded panes shone no more brightly than the polished floor below them.
In the centre a great posted bed reared its snowy canopy, and copper
jars of water and piles of linen and other washing gear reminded her
that she was unworthy of that white bed. On the deep window-sill bloomed
pots of gay flowers, and the tall chairs with winged backs were covered
with dim prints pictured with strange birds and lions.

"Now," said the Dame, "undress her and into the bed!"

"But I am not clean," she said; "I am dusty from the street."

"Then we will wash you clean," said the Dame. "Joan, go get warm water,
child, and the great copper, and make haste with fresh sheets; Lotte
will help you."

Deftly she was undressed and her chilled body was chafed and rubbed till
Joan and another girl came staggering under a great copper bowl a yard
wide. They filled it with steaming water which, as she crouched in it,
the Dame poured over her shaking shoulders.

"How white she is," the girls whispered; "how soft her skin must be!"

"Run Lotte," cried the Dame, "and bring me the ruby cordial from the
cordial-room, and you, Joan, get the little copper pannikin and heat
that bit of broth by the hob and warm the bedgown with the lace your
mother made for me!"

The ruby cordial was poured into the bath and a sweet and penetrating
odour filled the room. It seemed that her bones ceased to ache from that
moment, and when, wrapped in the warmed gown, nestled in fragrant
sheets, she sipped at the hot broth Joan held to her lips while Lotte
braided her long hair, a peace she had not known fell down upon her, and
pillowing her head gently she fell into a deep and restful sleep.

She was wakened by the cooing of many doves and the broad sun of
middle-morning that streamed across her white bed. Her mind was as clear
as the mind of a child and she laughed a little as she sprang from the
great deep bed and put on the clean short petticoat and buckled shoes
that lay beside it, glad that her own dusty garments were not there. She
wound her long braids about her head and pinned a blue kerchief over her
shoulders, then she slipped down the stairs and through the great
kitchen with its twinkling pans and sanded stone floor. A woman, bent
over the wide fireplace, turned her head in its white cap and spoke to
her:

"Dame is in the dairy--'tis built over the brook. Perhaps you will take
this with you?"

She lifted the willow-woven basket in her hand and went out through the
door across the barnyard, where the doves preened themselves among the
clean straw, and found the little stone house above the brook. All about
her she heard the busy noises of the country morning; soft voices, men's
calls, the stamping of farm horses, the clatter of the household ware,
the splash of cleansing water poured, the hissing kettle; but she saw
no one. It seemed to her that eyes were upon her and that pauses in the
cheery bustle followed her as she walked, but whenever she stopped and
tried to meet these eyes there was no one. She moved alone among the
unseen workers, and yet she knew they watched her.

In the cool stone dairy the Dame stood at work, pressing and patting at
the soft coloured butter. Beaded brown jars of cream were by her and
great, fair pans of milk, mounds and balls of primrose-tinted butter,
white cheeses wrapped in grape-leaves, clotted cream that quivered at a
touch, tall pitchers of whey, loppered milk ready for the spoon and
buttermilk in new-washed churns. Through the moist freshness of the
stone room the brook ran, chuckling and lapping; great stones roughly
mortared together made the floor on either side of it; the Dame stood
high on wooden clogs and hummed a ballad wherein the birds sang in the
morning, but at night the eggs were broken, and the wind was high and
scattered the fledglings.

[Illustration: The Dame stood high on wooden clogs and hummed a ballad.]

Even the freshness of her late rest in her heart, her eyes filled at the
Dame's song, and often afterward she thought of it when the wind was
rising.

"And did you rest well?" said the Dame to her when the song was done.

"Never so well since I was a child," she said. "I have come to thank you
for all your care, and to ask you when you can send me home, for I have
no idea where I am, and I am sure I have come a long way."

"A long way, indeed!" said the Dame, and looked at her strangely, but
when she questioned her this busy Dame only smiled, and told her that it
was good to hear of her freshening sleep but no surprise, since all made
the same report of the Farm.

From childhood, her love for James had been so deep, equable, and intense,
that it had never disturbed her with thrills and yearnings; it had
grown up in sisterly calmness, and, quietly expanding, had taken
possession of her whole nature, without her once dreaming of its
power.

But this last interview seemed to have struck some great nerve of
her being,--and calm as she usually was, from habit, principle, and
good health, she shivered and trembled, as she heard his retreating
footsteps, and saw the orchard-grass fly back from under his feet.

It was as if each step trod on a nerve,--as if the very sound of the
rustling grass was stirring something living and sensitive in her
soul.

And, strangest of all, a vague impression of guilt hovered over her.
_Had_ she done anything wrong? She did not ask him there; she had not
spoken love to him; no, she had only talked to him of his soul, and how
she would give hers for his,--oh, so willingly!--and that was not love;
it was only what Dr. H. said Christians must always feel.

"Child, what _have_ you been doing?"

said Aunt Katy, who sat in full flowing chintz petticoat and spotless
dimity shortgown, with her company knitting-work in her hands;
"your cheeks are as red as peonies.

Have you been crying? What's the matter?"

"There is the Deacon's wife, mother," said Mary, turning confusedly,
and darting to the entry-door.

Enter Mrs. Twitchel,--a soft, pillowy little elderly lady, whose whole
air and dress reminded one of a sack of feathers tied in the middle
with a string.

A large, comfortable pocket, hung upon the side, disclosed her knitting-work
ready for operation; and she zealously cleansed herself with a checked
handkerchief from the dust which had accumulated during her ride
in the old "one-hoss shay," answering the hospitable salutation of
Katy Scudder in that plaintive, motherly voice which belongs to
certain nice old ladies, who appear to live in a state of mild
chronic compassion for the sins and sorrows of this mortal life
generally.

"Why, yes, Miss Scudder, I'm pretty tol'able. I keep goin', and goin'.

That's my way. I's a-tellin' the Deacon, this-mornin', I didn't see how
I _was_ to come here this afternoon; but then I _did_ want to see
Miss Scudder and talk a little about that precious sermon, Sunday.

How is the Doctor? blessed man!

Well, his reward must be great in heaven, if not on earth, as I was
a-tellin' the Deacon; and he says to me, says he, 'Polly, we mustn't
be man-worshippers.' There, dear," (_to Mary_,) "don't trouble
yourself about my bonnet; it a'n't my Sunday one, but I thought 'twould
do.

Says I to Cerinthy Ann, 'Miss Scudder won't mind, 'cause her heart's set
on better things.'

I always like to drop a word in season to Cerinthy Ann, 'cause she's clean
took up with vanity and dress.

Oh, dear! oh, dear me!

so different from your blessed daughter, Miss Scudder! Well, it's a great
blessin' to be called in one's youth, like Samuel and Timothy; but
then we doesn't know the Lord's ways.
Sometimes I gets clean discouraged with my children,--but then ag'in
I don't know; none on us does.

Cerinthy Ann is one of the most master hands to turn off work; she takes
hold and goes along like a woman, and nobody never knows when that
gal finds the time to do all she does do; and I don't know nothin'
what I _should_ do without her.

Deacon was saying, if ever she was called, she'd be a Martha, and
not a Mary; but then she's dreadful opposed to the doctrines. Oh, dear
me!

oh, dear me!
Somehow they seem to rile her all up; and she was a-tellin' me
yesterday, when she was a-hangin' out clothes, that she never should
get reconciled to Decrees and 'Lection, 'cause she can't see, if
things is certain, how folks is to help 'emselves.

Says I, 'Cerinthy Ann, folks a'n't to help 'emselves; they's to
submit unconditional.' And she jest slammed down the clothes-basket and
went into the house."
When Mrs.

Twitchel began to talk, it flowed a steady stream, as when one turns
a faucet, that never ceases running till some hand turns it back
again; and the occasion that cut the flood short at present was the
entrance of Mrs.

Brown.

Mr. Simeon Brown was a thriving shipowner of Newport, who lived in a
large house, owned several negro-servants and a span of horses, and
affected some state and style in his worldly appearance.

The Dame blew a little silver whistle hanging among her keys and at once
there was a bustle and a running and some dozen maids came hurrying from
all parts of the rambling farm-house to hear her orders. But before she
busied herself with these she spoke to her guest.

"My dear," she said, "if you come to my time of life and have not found
your pleasure in your work, you will never find it in this world. Sit
down and think of this."

She sat down upon a carven chest by the open window, where the asters
sent out a spicy odour and the hum of bees was not too far distant, and
dropped her chin into the cup of her hands and thought.

Meantime, the Dame laid out for each girl her task, not hurried nor yet
slow, but so that each was started fairly.

"You, Lotte, order the cordial-room so that there is room for the new
bottles and write them down in the store-book. Remember to leave no
drippings nor spillings, nor do I look to see my best napkins used for
this. Janet, find Big Hans and make the apple-cellar ready for the
barrels. Lois, I warn you that I shall go through all the chambers soon,
and if all is as well there as when last I peeped under the beds and
through the panes and looked at my face in the coppers, when the
shoemaker comes, after Michaelmas, there shall be a pair of trim red
shoes for those busy feet, and no cost to your father. Trude, the old
hen-wife has more of her aches and pains to-day, and you must feed the
pullets their extra grain and see to the eggs. Elspeth, the linen is all
in to-day and 'tis for you to count it. Joan, if thy sparrow's tongue
can hold still for an hour, thou shalt come with me and give out the
stores for the pantry and kitchen. Perhaps a bit of potted quince will
hold thy teeth together. Hannah, I know, is wise and trusty, and can
busy herself as I would, with no telling what and where. But I could not
trust you two, Margot and Mary, and old Greta must keep you by her with
the candle-work. And should she box your ears, come not into my
storeroom with your cryings, but work the harder for it. You others,
help in the kitchen, and make ready for the men when they are done with
the apples, and hungry. If Will comes to ask about the ale, he may see
me in the pantry, but I have no time for Dyrk and his accounts to-day.
Nay, now, Sparrow, there is no need to pull at my skirt! 'Tis strange,
indeed, that the miller's matters must always be looked into when thou
art with me."

They scattered each to her work, and some sang together in rounds and
catches and some were silent, but all grew quickly busy. There was but
one idle, and she, ashamed of this and trying to still the fear that
hung behind her thoughts, followed the fair-haired Elspeth to the
linen-room and watched her lift the fragrant white matters from the deep
willow crates and pile them on the deeper shelves among twists of blue
lavender and strewings of old roses.

"Shall I trouble you by talking?" she asked her, and Elspeth shook her
head shyly and answered:

"No, madam, except when I must count the piles, and then I will tell
you."

"Do you always do this work?" she said.

"No, madam," Elspeth answered her, "the Dame will have each girl learn
all manner of work, so we take it turn about. Before this I was at the
washing, and beat the linen on the brook-stones--oh, it was fine to see
the fresh air blow through it and sweeten all so quickly! Then Margot
and Mary taught me clear-starching. Last year I tied the herbs and
tended the herb-attic; I grew the rosemary and sweet-basil in my own
garden, and Big Hans brought us marjoram. There is no thyme and summer
savoury like the Dame's, though."

"And what does the Dame pay you for all this?" she asked.

"Each of us has a great piece of the fine weaving--enough for
body-linen," said Elspeth, "and some of the coarser to lay aside for our
chests; a gown and shoes at Christmas; a goose to send home at
Michaelmas (and Dame always adds a good flitch of bacon--she is so
generous, the Dame!) and a gold piece at Easter. When little Myrta was
married she had a silk gown and a great bag of fine flour and pillows
and mattress for her bed. And it is well known that Joan will have a
silver porringer and spoons and the carved chest with real Damask
napkins."

"And you have no sports--no games? You slave here the year round for a
flitch of bacon and a bit of linen?"

"No, indeed, madam; it is not so! We are always having a treat! Why,
think now: at Christmas, the holidays, the gifts, the carols and the
games, with fiddler and spiced wine and all manner of cakes; at harvest,
the great dance, the prizes, the ale; at Easter, the church trimming,
the gold-pieces sent home and the pick of the lambs for the one that
does best at Catechism (but that is the little ones); at mid-summer, the
fairings----"

"And who come to these fairs?" she asked quickly.

Elspeth hung her head and coloured, glancing about as one caught in a
trap.

"Enough of this nonsense!" the woman cried, upsetting the spotless linen
angrily. "Tell me where I am and what game you play here! I will go
myself and soon be quit of this wonderful Farm of yours and this
masquerading Dame!"

"Elspeth," said the grave voice of the Dame herself, "you will be always
at the talk, my child, and now you have made trouble, and you, my dear,
if I were to tell you where you were, how would it help you to go
elsewhere? Listen to me. Through yonder door you may go at this moment,
but I advise you not to go without the great hound, for much is on the
moors that is far from safe. And at the end he will only bring you here,
for he knows no other way, and you would wander endlessly there."

She looked, and around the edge of the tilled land she saw mile upon
mile of desolate moor. Rushing to the window at the end of the hall,
she saw the pasture-land she had come through and beyond that a deep
forest.

"But I came over water ..." she murmured, and the Dame said gravely:

"I know. All who come here come over water. But they do not go back over
it."

Then her eyes grew wide with terror, not at the Dame's simple words, but
at something strange that seemed to lie behind them, and she gave her
hand to the Dame and walked quietly beside her to the orchard.

Here among the ripe fruit they sat down, the Dame busy at knitting,
herself with twisted, idle hands, and she fought away her fear as she
saw the stalwart men and the merry girls at work upon the clover-scented
piles.

"Why am I afraid? These are simple people working--they are real; they
talk and sing!" she said to herself, but her hands trembled and the high
sun seemed to her more like the unreal glory of the coloured windows in
some great church than the sun she knew.

Hardly was the Dame seated when two fine young boys ran toward her,
struggling with each other to reach her first.

"Oh, mother, I have learned my book!" cried one, and the other, "Oh,
dear mother, I can do the sum now!"

She kissed them fondly and told them she would hear them soon.

"And where are your sisters?" she asked them.

"Alda is among her doves and Grizel is coming to you for help with the
hood she is knitting," said one, and the other:

"But May Ellen is with Joan down in the nut-bins, and mother, they are
quarrelling about young Dyrk! Each will have it that he likes her best,
the foolish things!"

"Run, then, Roger, and bring them to me," said the Dame; "they are o'er
young for such quarrels. We will set them at the apples."

Now, before the Dame had gone once around her knitting she was called
from it ten times. Would the Dame have them bring in the russets first?
Would the Dame look to the new honey, for they dared not take off the
bees alone? Would the Dame hear a sum? Would the Dame say which of two
disputants had the right? Would the Dame see the miller? Would she take
the pay for the gray mare? And such like questionings that left her
alone not a moment.

She who sat idle plucked at the Dame's sleeve and spoke timidly to her.

"One could not work at some great matter, Dame, with so many calls aside
from it, I think."

"I think so, too, my dear," the Dame answered her, "and that is why I
will be knitting, which is no great matter from which to be called
aside."

She bit her lip, and thought, and spoke again.

"Great laws must be made, Dame, and these who make them must keep away
from these stinging gnats."

"I know that well," said the Dame, and looked straight at her, "but I,
thank God, need never make great laws, but only teach my household to
obey them."

She sighed, but spoke again.

"It is not only laws, Dame, but beautiful things the world over must not
be disturbed in the making. You could not make a great picture or a
great song with Roger and Grizel pulling you here and there."

"And that is true, too," the Dame said, "but I need not make great
songs, thank God, but only teach them to my children."

"And still there must be great songs," she said.

"And still there must be great children," said the Dame.

"I know, I know!" she cried, and pressed her hands to her forehead. "I
learned that once--in a deep wood. And I have the children. But I would
make great pictures, too. Not instead of the children, but with them,
Dame, with them!"

"You cannot, nor any other woman," said the Dame, and turned to her
knitting.

"But if I tried, if I tried ..." she pleaded.

"It is not by trying that these things are done," said the Dame coldly,
"Lotte will not lift the load of russets yonder though she break her
back at it, little fool. See, now she is so tired that Hans must carry
both them and her."

"She is a country girl," said the pale woman, eagerly.

"Outside and inside she is made after the pattern of yourself and all
other women," said the Dame, "and the one truth is true for us all."

"Good Dame," she said, after a moment, while the wagons creaked through
the orchard and the girls laughed as the sun slipped lower, "what if I
strove no more for greatness, but only made me little pictures to
pleasure a few that love me and myself?"

"Why, as for that," said the Dame more kindly--"have a care there,
Roger, you will hurt your sister if you play too roughly with her!--as
for that, I can see no harm in it. Neither can I see how it should be
worth any woman's while, if the thing be not great, and she knows it. It
is a child's game."

"That is true," she said bitterly, "though how you should know it who
pass your days on a petty farm, far from the great world, I cannot see."

Brown's bonnet was taken and she was seated, when Mrs. Twitchel subsided
into a corner and rattled her knitting-needles to conceal her emotion.

New England has been called the land of equality; but what land
upon earth is wholly so?

Even the mites in a bit of cheese, naturalists say, have great tumblings
and strivings about position and rank; he who has ten pounds will
always be a nobleman to him who has but one, let him strive as
manfully as he may; and therefore let us forgive meek little Mrs.

Twitchel for melting into nothing in her own eyes when Mrs. Brown came
in, and let us forgive Mrs. Brown that she sat down in the rocking-chair
with an easy grandeur, as one who thought it her duty to be affable and
meant to be. It was, however, rather difficult for Mrs.
Brown, with her money, house, negroes, and all, to patronize Mrs. Katy
Scudder, who was one of those women whose natures seem to sit on thrones,
and who dispense patronage and favor by an inborn right and aptitude,
whatever be their social advantages.

It was one of Mrs.
Brown's trials of life, this secret, strange quality in her neighbor,
who stood apparently so far below her in worldly goods. Even the quiet,
positive style of Mrs. Katy's knitting made her nervous; it was an
implication of independence of her sway; and though on the present
occasion every customary courtesy was bestowed, she still felt, as
she always did when Mrs. Katy's guest, a secret uneasiness.

She mentally contrasted the neat little parlor, with its white sanded
floor and muslin curtains, with her own grand front-room, which boasted
the then uncommon luxuries of Turkey carpet and Persian rug, and
wondered if Mrs.

Katy did really feel as cool and easy in receiving her as she appeared.

You must not understand that this was what Mrs. Brown _supposed_ herself
to be thinking about; oh, no! by no means! All the little, mean work
of our nature is generally done in a small dark closet just a little
back of the subject we are talking about, on which subject we suppose
ourselves of course to be thinking;--of course we are thinking of
it; how else could we talk about it?And man, her greatest work, will one day die and moulder into
roses that other men shall one day pick. Our men-children finish their
lovely toys and set them on the shelf, but our work is too great that
we should ever finish it; it is so great that it must needs be made of
many tiny matters, done now and again like the growing rains and
sheltering snows. We can never be at rest--till God himself rests. Do
you understand what I would be saying?"

She wept and laid her head in the Dame's lap and the yellow apples fell
about her knees as she knelt. But she answered:

"Yes, dear Dame, I understand. But, oh, Dame, why is it so?"

"I do not know, my dear," answered the Dame, "but I know that we must
learn it or we cannot live in the world. Now sleep, for you have been
almost too long at the Farm."

She felt the Dame's strong hands upon her head, she heard the voices of
the maids and the men, crying, "Sing us a song, dear Dame! Will you not
sing us a song?"

Then the Dame began an old, sad ballad of a knight that loved a lady
and went for her sake to fight the Pagans; but the moon rose cold over
her marble tomb when he came back, and her falcon wailed beneath his
hood. There was much more of this quaint sorrow and though she never
could remember it she thought of it always when she walked in orchards.

Then she felt that she was being lifted, and in her dream she heard the
Dame's deep voice:

"Push her through the wicket--hurry, Joan, she must be off the Farm soon
or it will be too late, poor child! Is Karen saddled? Push her!--make
haste, make haste! I hear the river--make haste, there! Push!"

"I will not leave the Farm! I will not!" she muttered and struggled to
wake and fight with Joan. The red sun cut her opening eyes like a knife,
she fought the arms that held her arms and struggled awake, staring into
Joan's brown eyes.

But was it Joan? Joan wore no white cap, no tight black dress. The red
glow in her eyes, was it the sun or a crimson cushion beneath her head?
Whose stern, bearded lips unbent and smiled at her?

"Push, keep pushing!" he said, and raised and lowered her arms.

"Smell this, dear friend," and a strong, smarting odour filled her
nostrils, so that she coughed and choked.

"That is better," said someone; "we were frightened. Why did you not
tell us your heart was weaker than usual?"

The office nurse fanned her; a strong light was in her face.

"The doctor felt terribly about you--that cordial was not so very
strong, he thought. You are all right, now?"

"It was Lotte that kept the cordial-room," she said vaguely, but with
speaking her mind cleared and she came to herself again.

"Was I--was it for long?" she asked.

"It was longer than we liked," said the nurse; "of course, you had no
idea of what was happening to you. We tried everything."

"I know that a great deal happened," she said; "let me see the doctor
before I go."


The Last Lesson

THE CASTLE ON THE DUNES


I saw much of my friend as the years hurried by us; years in which I
seemed to myself to lag shamefully, sometimes, and win nothing new out
of life, but from which she drew fresh vigour of spirit with every
season.

Many things she taught me, and of them all I best remember the one she
told me last, when I had known her twenty years. She was at that time
fully sixty, with a fine crown of silver hair, a tall, full figure and
piercing dark eyes, for as she grew older her whole regard grew, as it
seemed to me, keener and more commanding, and not, as with some women,
softer and less powerful.

I had been with her all the white winter evening, on one of those
errands of discerning charity that occupied so many of her hours and
thoughts--dangerously many, as we who loved her would often say,
considering that she spent herself unnecessarily upon much for which
others might well have acted deputy. The sun had set early, for it was
midwinter, and white points of winter stars were pricking through the
frozen sky. The snow, iced over with a glistening crust, sent back pale
reflections to the bars of cold green and thin rosy glows that stood for
sunset, and a threatening wind began to rise, that shook down little
icicles from the window ledge and made the stiff, chill branches of the
oaks and beeches creak warningly.

I shivered to myself with pleasure and thanked sincerely the slender
girl that brought hot tea to me and unwrapped my long furs. It was not
my friend's daughter--the youngest of these was now happily married, and
she would have been alone, were it not for the girls that she kept with
her, training and guiding them into some of the wisdom and charm that
distinguished her gracious self--a sort of unchartered school, where
less gifted mothers sought eagerly to install their daughters.

As she accepted the services of two of these, and dispatched by a
messenger some comforts to be sent to the suffering creature we had just
returned from visiting, I lingered by the window and saw the first
shadowy flakes of a new storm. The wind rose quickly to a howl, an icy
branch tapped at the pane; we had narrowly escaped a dangerous
home-coming. I could not resist a somewhat pettish complaint.

"Don't you think," I began, "that you have earned a rest from these
expeditions, these insistent girls of yours, this constant
responsibility? You are magnificently strong and well--yes; but even
your vitality has its limits and too many people hang upon you, my dear!
Do you shake us all off for a while and do something for yourself, your
own pleasure and relaxation. Surely at your age you deserve rest! Your
own have ceased to need you--why invite others?"

She looked strangely at me and in the dusk I saw her face white.

"There!" I went on, "you have harrowed yourself unnecessarily with that
poor creature's pain and want--surely you could have sent money? There
are people whose sole business it is to attend to such cases, and their
nerves are coarser than yours--they are not so wrung by what is daily
work to them."

At that moment a great fall of snow slid from one of the sloping roofs,
so that the air was white before us. It swept to the ground with a
dense, rushing crash and heaped itself into fantastic towers and walls;
close by a red lantern shone out; the wind moaned sadly.

"Look! look!" she cried, one hand at her side, "the Dunes again! Surely
you see that Castle, too? Or is it the sign--Oh, I am ready! Believe me,
I am ready!"

I caught her hand.

"Those are no dunes, my dear friend, only black shadows on the snow of
your own lands," I assured her, "and it is one of your own men with a
lantern going on your own errand. It is the fallen snow that takes those
strange spire-like shapes--no castle. This wind wails too much for your
nerves. Look in, at the fire and the warm hall."

"No, no," she said quietly, "I love to look out--I am not afraid. I
never know when I may see the Castle. And what you said about my
rest.... Well, it seems to open my lips. It was on just such a night
... how cold the stars were! And I had nearly lost myself--hunting for
my rest! When the moon rises I will tell you."

And then I knew that I was to hear one of those strange experiences of
hers. As always, she spoke quickly, often halting for long between swift
gushes of narrative, now as one who reads from an old book about a
stranger, now like the adventurer himself. She did not always or
steadily employ the style into which I have thrown her words, but she
wrapped me in an atmosphere, and from that and the remembrance of a
rising winter moon and a still, cold night, I write.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her old friend the great physician, who now, in the evening of his busy
life, attended only upon those whose necessities baffled the less
experienced, pursed his lips and stared at her out of a grizzle of white
hair.

"And what will you do," he asked abruptly, "when I have convinced them
that you are unable to keep up these various relations that have been so
many years a-building? Where will you go for this great rest?"

"Somewhere where I can be alone," she answered him, firmly, "where I can
fold my hands by some quiet, lonely river, and think, where I can
realize what I am; a widow, lonely for her best and life-long friend, a
mother whose children need her no longer, a woman who has tasted life
long enough and paid her debt to the world, and would slip out of it
quietly. Surely that is little to ask?"

"I should say that the fact of your living showed you had not yet paid
your debt to life," he said drily, "and I confess that I cannot see any
great value in realizing these things you speak of. If they are so, they
are so. Let them be."

"Oh, you are a man!" she cried bitterly.

"And I know, therefore, what a woman needs," he said, "and you,
especially, who have many gifts denied, mostly, to your sex. Believe me,
there is only one river for you--it is, literally, the River of Life."

"It is Lethe," she said obstinately, "and you shall not deny it to me. I
tell you I am weary of my thoughts, and all the business of this River
of yours. I have gained the bank; it is philosophy. Before I am driven
far Inland--where even you cannot come and get me--and lose it
altogether, I claim the right to begin the journey of my own accord. I
want you to give me again that delicious, soothing treatment, that
electric whirring, that takes away my thoughts--will you?"

He mused a while, seemed to have forgotten her.

"No, I will not," he said at length. And it was in vain that she urged
him for he held to the refusal.

"Ours is no time of life to soothe away thought, dear friend," he said,
"you need no treatment of mine."

While she begged him there came an urgent call from an inner office and
he left the room quickly, asking her to wait. And as she sat there,
baffled and a little resentful, the sight of the bright, mysterious
machine so obedient there and always ready with its delicious oblivion,
put a wild idea into her brain.

"We are old friends," she said to herself, "I know how he does it--why
not? He will soon be here!"

And she pressed the well-known knob and watched the great discs begin to
whir softly around under their glass dome. At the familiar sound her
hunger for the coming comfort mounted fiercely, and she seized the long,
supple, silk-wrapped cords and pressed the bulbs to either temple. A
slight shock ran through her blood and with the realization of her folly
came the knowledge that she could not take down her hands. The whirring
grew, doubled, multiplied in volume; the room seemed to sway and rock; a
low rumbling, like thunder, filled the air. Blind terror seized her, and
shame for what she had done and could not undo, and as the office door
flew open and a sharp, angry exclamation rose above the roaring, she
summoned all her strength of will, tore away her hands, and fled, sick
with fear, through a door covered by a velvet curtain. Through a small
passage she stumbled, and then, as hurrying feet sounded behind her, and
the roaring and whirring grew momently, she wove her way among a network
of back stairs and halls and fell upon a small door under some steps,
thinking it must lead to a cellar and stupidly remembering the safety
of such spots in explosions and earthquakes--for now the whole house was
quivering with the throbs of the terrible force she had set in motion.
Down the narrow stair she plunged and hurried through the dim, earthy
cellar, past bins of coal and great coiling pipes and drains. The jar
seemed lessened here, but her humiliation and fright were no less.

"I can never meet his eyes again!" she murmured. "Will he ever forgive
me? I must find a way out, down here."

But in the dim light and her utter ignorance of that part of the house,
she could find no way out, though she went steadily away, during many
minutes, from the stair she had descended. A great rat whisked across
her foot and with a shriek of disgust she pressed the knob of a low
door, forced it open, and found herself at the head of another flight of
steps, of heavy stone. This would be a sub-cellar, she reasoned, and
drew back, but the clattering feet of the rat behind her scared away
all judgment and she plunged downward; the door closed heavily behind
her.

These steps seemed interminable, twisted like a tower, and wearied the
muscles of her legs terribly. At last they ended, and she found herself
in a great arched vault like some ancient catacomb, empty, so far as she
could see, but for cobwebs and dust. At least it was utterly silent;
there was no more of that throbbing, and her eyes had by now accustomed
themselves to the dimness. How broad this cellar might be she dared not
adventure to find out, for a few paces from the wall the darkness
swallowed everything.

"It must be that all the houses are connected at this depth," she
thought, her mind still so confused from the shock she had sustained and
all her hurry and fright, that she did not perceive the folly of her
wandering farther, "for I have certainly gone far beyond the length of a
city block, even. Perhaps I am in the heart of a great aqueduct
system--it is all walled and ceiled with stone."

At last the dim glow faded and she was in the utter dark. But she dared
not go back, for she had no clew to the stone stairs and had lost all
her reckoning.

A piercing chill grew in the dead air; the silence was terrifying. But
just as her brain cleared and fear began to creep into her blood, such
fatigue had laid hold on her that the fear could not choke her--she was
too far spent.

"To die like a rat in a drain!" she whimpered. "To stifle underground!
Oh, I am too old for it! He might have let me die in my bed!"

Just then she saw ahead of her--she could not say if it were far or
near--an arch, the outline of a low door, lighted through the cracks of
it, and she drove her weary feet toward this and bent upon it, but
uselessly, for it was thick stone. With her last remnant of strength she
set her mouth to the crack and screamed, and it seemed to her that
three loud knocks upon the other side answered her in some sort. She
screamed again. Again came the three knocks and close against the crack
a voice whispered.

"In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, I adjure you,
wandering soul, be quiet!"

The voice was shaking with a fear as great as her own, and this gave her
courage. She put her lips to the crack and cried:

"I am no wandering soul, but a poor woman! I am lost in this great
vault--open, and let me out!"

"Do you swear this by the Holy Trinity, the Wounds of Christ and--and
the Sorrows of Mary?"

"I swear it by anything you wish," she called, "if you will open the
door and see how little you have to fear from me! But I shall soon be as
dead as you think me, unless you make haste, for I am nearly frozen."

Now a rusty key grated, and after much tugging and panting from the
other side, the door opened a little way and the scared head of a brown
friar, such as one sees in the old countries, hooded and tonsured,
peeped out.

"Mother of us all!" he cried fearfully, "and what--who art thou, then?"

"Only a woman, father," she said gently, for he was clearly ready to
shut her back into the dark. "I am here by mistake. I only ask to be put
on my way again, and I will not trouble your monastery."

For she had travelled much abroad and though she supposed herself to
have entered through the cellar some church-school or cathedral
establishment, of which there were not a few in her city, unconsciously
she spoke of a monastery, as if she had met this holy brother in such a
place.

"Monastery!" he repeated, but more assured now and opening the door
wider, "why do you speak of that, my daughter? Who looks for a monastery
on the Dunes?"

So simple and sincere he seemed that she could not doubt him and stared
around her, to see herself in a rich, if small chapel, of rough stone,
with coloured windows and a carved altar. The candles were but half
alight; her cries had stopped this friar in his pious task, evidently.
Holly was twined about among the carvings, and the effigy of a knight in
full armour, his crossed feet upon a crouched hound, had candles on
either side and the choicest berries and glossiest leaves upon his
breastplate, but she did not stop to look at these but rushed to the
only door she saw besides the one she had entered, the monk watching her
curiously the while.

This door led to a narrow passage, that in turn to a broader, hung with
rich tapestry, lighted with torches, set alternately with branching deer
horns. This would never take her out, certainly, and she turned in
confusion to the waiting friar.

"Is there no door to the street?" she said, impatiently.

He stared curiously at her.

"The street? The street," he repeated, "my daughter, what are you
thinking of? Look through this pane and recollect your whereabouts."

He pointed to an empty pane among the coloured pieces of the window
through which, now and then, the wind blew powdery snow. She put her
eyes to it and looked out upon a great bare moorland, white under a cold
winter moon. Here and there sprang a fir tree, but for the most part the
land stretched away to the horizon, empty as death--and as chill. So
close to her eye that she must hold her head back in order to see it,
rose a great square tower with stretches of tiled roof, mostly
snow-covered, spreading out below it; this chapel was the end of the
building, it was plain.

Now a strange, uncertain doubt fell over her, and forgetting the terrors
of the dark cellar and the long vaults, she turned to the little door
again.

"Open that," she said, "and I will try my luck at getting back. For I
have come farther than I knew, it seems."

The friar crossed himself. "Back!" he cried, "back through those ancient
tombs, Christ knows where? Never dream of it, my daughter! Besides," as
she rushed to the door, "it would be impossible. The old key broke in
the lock even as I laboured over it, and ten men could not stir it now."

"Tombs?" she murmured, fearfully, "what do you mean by tombs? I came
through a cellar...."

"My daughter in Christ," said the friar, advancing firmly toward her and
holding out with shaking hands an ivory crucifix so that it touched her
breast, "if thou art a mad-woman only, God pity thee, but if thou art
more--and worse--then know this sign, before Whom all devils tremble,
and vanish! For thou art covered inches deep with the dust of tombs so
old that they are forgotten utterly of us who tend the ashes of their
descendants, and the cobweb that drapes thy body like a shawl so that I
cannot tell for my life the fashion of thy garments, or if thou art
young or old, maid or widow, has been a-thickening these hundred years
and more!"

At this the moon struck sharply through the empty pane and she saw
herself for what he had said and swooned with the cold and her deadly
fear.

She came to herself in a soft whispering and rustling of skirts, and
knew that women were moving around her.

"What will happen to her?" said one voice, "I had not thought such
things possible, hadst thou, Alys?"

"I know that old Ursula who was here in the old Countess's day told of
something like it, and that the old Countess ordered a bath made ready,
_such_, she said, _as her grandmother had ordered_. It seems they are
always prepared."

"Be still, girls, she is stirring at the eyelids! How is it with you,
madam?"

She opened her eyes and saw three or four young women in fanciful
dresses looped up with chains, with jewelled nets upon their heads, and
seed pearls braided into their hair. Their gowns of brocaded silk clung
closely to the body and left the neck and shoulders bare.

"This is evidently no monastery," she said, and then, "where am I? I am
so cold!"

"Soon you will be warm, madam," said the tallest of the girls, with two
long braids of dark hair over her shoulders and a wine-red gown trimmed
with black fur; "could you find it possible to walk between two of us,
think you? Come, Mawdlyn, your arm!"

But little Mawdlyn shrank back. "I am in great fear of all that cobweb,
cousin Alys," she whimpered, and no scowls availed to move her.

"Let me help you, Mistress Alys," said, very gravely, a young boy,
stepping forward with a plumed cap in his hand and a short hunting knife
at his leather girdle.

The tired woman leaned heavily on his arm, and it was he that led her
gently and carefully along the great hall between the moving
tapestries. Before a curtained door he paused.

"I can go no farther, madam, but if I may ever serve you, which is my
true hope, call for me. "Mr. Brown's a master thinker; there's nothing
pleases that man better than a hard doctrine; he says you can't
get 'em too hard for him.

He don't find any difficulty in bringing his mind up; he just reasons
it out all plain; and he says, people have no need to be in the dark; and
that's _my_ opinion. 'If folks know they ought to come up to anything,
why _don't_ they?' he says; and I say so too."
"Mr. Scudder used to say that it took great afflictions to bring his
mind to that place," said Mrs. Katy. "He used to say that an old
paper-maker told him once, that paper that was shaken only one way in
the making would tear across the other, and the best paper had to be
shaken every way; and so he said we couldn't tell, till we had
been turned and shaken and tried every way, where we should tear."

Mrs.

Twitchel responded to this sentiment with a gentle series of groans,
such as were her general expression of approbation, swaying herself
backward and forward; while Mrs. Brown gave a sort of toss and snort,
and said that for her part she always thought people knew what
they did know,--but she guessed she was mistaken.

The conversation was here interrupted by the civilities attendant on the
reception of Mrs.

Jones,--a broad, buxom, hearty soul, who had come on horseback from a
farm about three miles distant.

Smiling with rosy content, she presented Mrs. Katy a small pot of golden
butter,--the result of her forenoon's churning.

There are some people so evidently broadly and heartily of this world,
that their coming into a room always materializes the conversation. We
wish to be understood that we mean no disparaging reflection on such
persons;--they are as necessary to make up a world as cabbages to make
up a garden; the great healthy principles of cheerfulness and
animal life seem to exist in them in the gross; they are wedges and
ingots of solid, contented vitality.

Certain kinds of virtues and Christian graces thrive in such people as
the first crop of corn does in the bottom-lands of the Ohio.

Mrs. Jones was a church-member, a regular church-goer, and planted
her comely person plump in front of Dr. H.
every Sunday, and listened to his searching and discriminating
sermons with broad, honest smiles of satisfaction.

Those keen distinctions as to motives, those awful warnings and urgent
expostulations, which made poor Deacon Twitchel weep, she listened to
with great, round, satisfied eyes, making to all, and after all, the
same remark,--that it was good, and she liked it, and the Doctor
was a good man; and on the present occasion, she announced her pot
of butter as one fruit of her reflections after the last discourse.

"You see," she said, "as I was a-settin' in the spring-house, this
mornin', a-workin' my butter, I says to Dinah,--'I'm goin' to carry a
pot of this down to Miss Scudder for the Doctor,--I got so much
good out of his Sunday's sermon.

And Dinah she says to me, says she,--'Laws, Miss Jones. I thought
you was asleep, for sartin!'

But I wasn't; only I forgot to take any caraway-seed in the mornin', and
so I kinder missed it; you know it 'livens one up. But I never lost
myself so but what I kinder heerd him goin' on, on, sort o'
like,--and it sounded _all_ sort o' _good;_ and so I thought of the
Doctor to-day."

She watched them gravely, tingling still from that strange
bath, trying to shape out in her mind what she would say to lead them to
explain to her the place she had fallen upon, and why they played this
pretty jest, and spoke and dressed so quaintly.

Now the Countess touched a silver bell and the old woman drew a heavy
curtain before the bath and the daïs and placed a carved chair, and when
Alys had led her to it, the same youth appeared with a tray in his hand,
holding fine wheat bread and a graceful flagon of rosy wine and a
fragment of honeycomb. He knelt before her, seriously, with eyes never
raised above his silken knees, but his very presence moved her strangely
and she put her hand softly on his head when he said, "Will you eat,
madam, and refresh yourself?" and hastened to taste of all on his tray
before he could be offended.

"And now, Alys, where is your mistress?" she said, when her strength was
stayed and her eyes and voice bright again with the comforting wine,
"for I must talk with her."

"Presently, madam, presently," said the girl, "none may speak with her
at the moment, for she is gone to Mass--'tis the Count's name-day and
the night, too, when God and St. Michael took him, fighting, and we have
been out all day for holly for the chapel. We are all to go--will you
come with us?"

"No," she said, thinking to make her way out when they were all gone and
find out where this wild tract could be, "no, I will wait here. I am not
of your religion, Alys."

The girl sprang back from her with frightened eyes and crossed herself.

"Madam!" she cried, "never speak so! If they thought a Moslem here--and
to-night--hush, there go the men!"

There was a great tramping, and along the tapestries, before the drawn
curtain, came a company of men-at-arms, clanking in full armour, with
set, hard faces under the helmets.

She grasped at the arms of her oak chair wildly; these harsh men sent a
chill through her--was some horrid treachery thus hinted to her? Then as
Alys sped along behind them she felt her hand kissed softly and the
little page-boy was there.

"There is none to hurt you--if you stay quiet here," he said softly,
and she knew she dared not move or spy about.

Now arose a low chanting and then murmured prayers, and soon a smell of
incense reached them. Then at last the mystic bell struck mellow on the
night air and she knew that God was made and that men, maids, and
Countess-widow were bowed before this mystery. The page bent low and
crossed himself and a strange jealousy rushed over her that he should be
of this sort, when she was not, for she loved the boy unreasonably.

"Your mother is a good Catholic, I see," she said, when the chant grew
louder and covered her voice.

"I do not know, madam," he said.

"You do not know?" she cried, "and why not?"

"Because I do not know my mother, dear madam," he answered, and flushed
to where his slim neck was hidden by his long hair.

Then a keen trouble rose in her and grew ever stronger, and the boy's
eyes frightened her and yet she must watch him. Steadily she looked at
him and sat as one in a dream and thought no more of going away, but
when the Countess and her train came back and the men had vanished and
the maids-in-waiting were whispering around the great fireplace, she put
out her hand and caught the young widow's silken gown.

"Who--who is his mother?" she asked eagerly.

"Who should be?" the Countess answered strangely, "whom hath he a look
of, guest of mine?"

The boy lifted his face as she put a shaking finger under his round chin
and turned his eyes up to her, and a shiver ran through her--for they
were her own eyes.

"This--this is no boy of mine!" she gasped, shaking with more than
terror.

"He might have been," said the young Countess with grave gentleness,
"but you would not have him. So that he must come to us."

"But that--all that was long ago," she whispered, thinking that she
spoke aloud, her eyes lost in the boy's.

"Here they grow slowly, being nearly soulless when they come," said the
Countess. "He would have been your oldest son, had he stayed with you."

"'Here!' In God's name, where am I?" she cried. "Am I dead, then, at
last? But I had not thought--I had hoped for peace. I had counted on
rest."

"Rest?" the Countess echoed her, "and why should you look for that, my
guest? What, in all the worlds of God, rests? You are a strange people,
beyond the Dunes.... But you are not dead. No dead come here."

She took her by the hand, the boy clinging to the other, and walked with
her to the great fire. Here they sat down to tapestry work, green and
blue and russet weavings, and the woman folded her hands in her lap and
watched them moodily. At last she spoke.

[Illustration: Here they sat down to tapestry work, green and blue and
russet weavings.]

"You will never make a huntsman at that rate, Alys--one would think him
standing on his horse."

"Help her, then," said the Countess, and her guest took a piece of
charcoal and drew out a fair pattern for the girl.

"And mine, madam?" "And mine?" cried the others, and she leaned over the
shoulder of each and made her a true picture for her work. But her eye
was often on the boy and when the girls were all busy at last, she spoke
softly to him.

"What is your name?" she asked.

"Madam, they call me Gildres," said he.

"And what do you do, Gildres, in this strange castle?"

"Is it strange?" said the boy. "I do not know. I am to be squire to the
lord, my lady's brother, soon, and now I learn falconry and the care of
his armour and sometimes I serve the Mass. Brown supposed to be in her
own thoughts, was the last Sunday's sermon on the doctrine of entire
Disinterested Benevolence, in which good Doctor H. had proclaimed
to the citizens of Newport their duty of being so wholly absorbed in
the general good of the universe as even to acquiesce in their own
final and eternal destruction, if the greater good of the whole
might thereby be accomplished.

"Well, now, dear me!" said Mrs.

Twitchel, while her knitting-needles trotted contentedly to the mournful
tone of her voice,--"I was tellin' the Deacon, if we only could
get there!

Sometimes I think I get a little way,--but then ag'in I don't know; but
the Deacon he's quite down,--he don't see no evidences in himself.
"The Countess is tired," whispered Alys to their guest, "for she has
been twice on the Dunes; once to tend a poor woodcutter of a broken leg
and again when one of the shepherd's wives was found to be a-dying."

"In the city--which I have just left, we do these things differently
now," said the woman. "There is so much pain and sickness that one
woman's hands--or one hundred--would avail little enough to stem the
tide. So it is organized and attended to by a few who do nothing else,
and thus the others are left free."

"Free for what?" said the Countess, suddenly; "to seek rest?"

The woman looked coldly at her. "I do not know who you are," she said,
"nor what you do here, but it is plain to see, at least, that you are a
young woman. I am not. At your age, believe me, I did not rest. I have
done better work of its kind than your tapestries. I have done other
work, too--I have borne and reared children and they have children of
their own. I have tended to his death a good man and laid him in his
grave. My work is done. Now I look for some quiet room with a window to
face the autumn sunsets, that I may sit by it, and think, and find out
what life may be, perhaps, before I leave it. Why do you goad me on and
seem to seek to prevent me?"

The Countess ran to her and kneeled by her and seized her hand.

"I goad you because I must, dear guest," she said; "believe me, I
know--none better--what you have done. The tapestry which you drew
to-day shall meet eyes you do not dream on now; the phoenix that made
pattern for our Gildres here shall teach more than him. And it is in
such that you must rest. For women were not made to sit and think what
life may be--trust me for it. We are running streams, that muddy if we
settle. We have to live, and find life out in living. Did it not seem
clearer to you, what time you leaned so wisely over my heedless little
Mawdlyn?"

Now the woman breathed hard, as one who runs a race, and stared at her
who spoke.

"Yes, it did--I knew it did!" she cried, "but who are you that tell me
this so young? And if you have learned so much, you are far too wise
and necessary to those you teach to risk your life in this terrible
cold, visiting wood-cutters!"

"If I am young, dear guest, I am yet not so young that I have not known
this," said she of the coronet, "that I learned what I know on just such
visitings! Mothers of Sorrow are we all, dear friend, and if we hold
ourselves too far from sorrow, we are no true mothers of the world we
make. If all did a little, there would be no need of a few who should do
all--or so it seems to us on the Dunes."

"But we think--in my city--that these unhappy ones, the poor, the sick,
the ignorant, gain more from the few who should do all," she argued.

"Maybe. But you gain the less who fail to do them," said the Countess.

"Child," said the woman, sternly, "the poor were not created for our
discipline."

"I do not know how you know that," said the Countess.

At this the woman's eyes grew wide, and she stared at the embroidery
frames and the stags' heads and the arras, and all the quiet maidens in
their looped skirts, with eyes that saw them not. At last she sighed and
rose from her carved chair humbly.

"Thank God, I am not too old to learn!" she said; "I see I have not
earned my rest, while so many of the world lack theirs. Perhaps in
heaven, if I win there, I may take it. But it is hard. Once in my life,
yes, and twice, I was all for urging on and doing, and two women, in
strange places, one very old and one of middle age, taught me sharply
that it might not be, and bridled and haltered my young strength. Now
that I am content to be nothing, you, a young woman, urge me on. Are you
the third, then? How many more must there be?"

Then the Countess rose and threw herself on her knees before her and
kissed her trembling hand.

"No more, no more, O mother of six!" I suppose that a man's mind does
in time form a neutral salt with the elements in the universe for which
it has special elective affinities. In fact, I look upon a library as
a kind of mental chemist's shop, filled with the crystals of all forms
and hues which have come from the union of individual thought with
local circumstances or universal principles.

When a man has worked out his special affinities in this way, there is
an end of his genius as a real solvent.

But a very
holy hermit that lives beneath Merlin Oak, in the very midst and heart
of the Dunes, to whom I brought a relic from Jerusalem as a pious
offering, set me right and told me I was not made for a religious. 'It
may be, my daughter, that in too much thought on your religion you will
lose it,' he said, 'and end in tears and kissings of the Feet, for which
not many of the saints have power, for long. Make of thy deep heart a
crystal spring, with continual bubbling, which is despised of the wise
fools of this world, but ordained forever from the Throne.'"

"And yet he learned his wisdom from meditating in solitude, and freedom
from the cares of every day?" said the woman softly.

"He was a man," said the Countess, "and it is permitted to them to go
into the desert and think. Ah, consider only, dear friend, for how
little time had that good man of yours to do, or your father, with that
seed of life which you and your mother must bear for days and months of
days, till it should be born indeed! One hour with him--and he hath
given you work for years. And hath he sleepless nights and breathless
days, then? Nay, indeed! He is off to new dreams by morning, and there
is only you to watch that they shall be no dreams, but realities. And
when that watch is over, then look for the dawn indeed--but not this
side the Dunes!"

"Then let me go back," said the woman quietly, "and do for the sake of
the doing what once I longed to do for the sake of the world. Though
now my powers are less and I doubt I shall accomplish very much."

"Have no fear," said the Countess gladly, "have no fear, my sister.
Alys, bring what you know for my sister," and Alys went out and returned
with a silver coronet on a cushion, studded with sapphires. The young
Gildres knelt low to offer it, and as the Countess bade her, she herself
put it upon her own head, and they walked stately together, lighted by
the page and attended by the maidens, to a great beamed bedchamber with
a crucifix on the wall and a high carved bed of state raised upon a
daïs, and with pillows of silk and curtains of rich tapestry.

"Now rest, dear sister, and say good-bye to me," said this Countess, and
when they had laid her, robed and crowned, upon the bed, she kissed her
on the mouth.

"Shall I never see you again?" said the woman.

"Ask rather if you never saw me before," said she, and then, "look at
me!"

The cold moon shone through the leaded pane and struck her face full,
and as the woman looked it seemed that wrinkles grew about her eyes and
that the moonlight turned her hair as white as snow.

"You are the Bee-woman!" she cried.

"Look again," said the Countess.

And now her cheeks were like warm russet apples and her shoulders were
broad.

"You are the Dame at the Farm!" said the woman, "and I thought you
young!"

Sad as the necessity is to their delicate sensibilities, they never
hesitate to advertise him of the decline of his powers, and to press
upon him the propriety of retiring before he sinks into imbecility.

Trusting to their kind offices, I shall endeavor to fulfil----
_Bridget enters and begins clearing the table._
The following poem is my (the Professor's) only contribution to the
great department of Ocean-Cable literature.

As all the poets of this country will be engaged for the next six weeks
in writing for the premium offered by the Crystal-Palace Company for
the Barns Centenary, (so called, according to our Benjamin Franklin,
because there will be nary a cent for any of us,) poetry will be
very scarce and dear.

Now a trouble came over the face of the Countess and she shivered in the
moonlight.

"Ask me not, sister and daughter--and yet I must answer if thou ask me,
who wearest a crown. I cannot tell why this is laid upon me--although it
is well known to be so. Nor have any but a wonderful and holy few
learned in any other wise. I cannot tell ... sometimes I think that
though the lessons were set in each dish and coat and friendly hand of
everyday--as Our Lady knows they are, for the matter of that!--you
cannot read them, out there. They are too plain, perhaps. So all must be
put before the eyes too full for sight in a manner (as one should call
it) quaint. Though truly one thing has never been more quaint than
another! But I do not speak clearly.... Good night, my sister."

Now she heard a sob and knew it was from young Gildres.

"Shall I never see her again, then, my lady?" he whispered.

"Why, that is as may be, Gildres," said the Countess, "but I do think
so. It comes to me that when this my sister sets forth she shall pass
through here, and thou shalt accompany her farther on. Do then thy
service here the more diligently, as in the hope of it."

"Madam, I will," said he joyfully, and she,

"Now soothe her hand, Alys, with me, for she should be sleeping now."

Then they took each a hand and stroked it, and she lost herself in
sleep, dreamless, save for the winter moonlight and the chanting and the
hum of bees.

When she woke her hand was still held, but very firmly, and the humming
was seen to be the revolving of light discs under their dome of glass.

"Ah! Now we have a steady pulse," said the doctor, "and you--too dear a
friend to lose by your own folly!--I shall not scold you yet. But what a
fright to give me! A little more and you would have found your Lethe
oversoon, old friend."

She shook her head and smiled. "No longer, no longer!" she said. "So
long as the current bears me, I am for that River of Life that you and I
must keep at flood."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that she has dropped these strange tales, and gone too far for me to
hear her voice, I find that in picking them up they have lost much of
the force and clearness her telling gave them. Yet I cannot see that I
have left anything out. It may be that my dull pen has clouded them.
Blame me, then, and not the tales, for they were made most wonderfully
plain to me.

That things very real occurred to her, no one could doubt who could
hear her relate them. And if they have grown unreal and feeble in the
telling, the fault must be wholly mine--the imperfect and unsuccessful
scribe.

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  The Madness of Philip
  Her Fiancé
  Memoirs of a Baby
  Middle-Aged Love Stories
  Whom the Gods Destroyed
  Domestic Adventures
  The Imp and the Angel
  Poems
  An Idyll of All Fools' Day
  Fables for the Fair
  Ten to Seventeen (a Boarding School Diary)
  Smith College Stories
  Sister's Vocation