The clergy, as all readers know, the clerks, were the first to 
take the lead in civil affairs, being more enlightened than the 
other classes, and holding in their body all the education of 
the earlier times. It is unnecessary to add to this fact that, 
among really Christian people, the voice of religion is listened 
to before all others. And is it not to-day a well-ascertained 
fact that, in the main, the influence exerted by the clergy on 
the formation of modern European kingdoms was in favor of a well-
regulated freedom based on the first law--the law of God--that 
primal source of true liberty and civilization? To the clergy, 
certainly, and to the monks, is chiefly due the abolition of 
slavery; and the bishops took a very active and prominent part 
in the movements of the communes, to which the Third Estate owes 
its birth.

A malignant ingenuity has been displayed by many writers, in 
ransacking the pages of history, in order to fasten on certain 
prelates of the Church charges of despotism and oppression. But, 
apart from the fact that the narratives so carefully compiled 
have, in many cases, turned out to be perversions of the truth, 
and granting even that all these allegations are impartial and 
true, the general tenor and tendency of the history of those 
times is now admitted to be ample refutation of such accusations,
and impartial writers confess that the ecclesiastical influence,
during those ages, was clearly set against the oppression of 
the people, and finally resulted in the formation of those 
representative and moderate governments which are the boast of 
the present age; and that the principles enunciated by the great 
schoolmen, led by Thomas Aquinas, founded the order of society 
on justice, religion, and right. The more history is studied 
honestly, investigated closely, and viewed impartially, the more 
plainly does the great fact shine forth that the Catholic 
hierarchy, in the various European nations, constituted the 
vanguard of true freedom and order.

With regard to the papal power, it is a curious instance of the 
reversal of human judgment, and a very significant fact, that 
those very Popes who, a hundred years ago, were looked upon, 
even by Catholic writers, as the embodiment of supercilious 
arrogance and sacrilegious presumption, namely, Gregory VII., 
Innocent III., and Boniface VIII., are now acknowledged to have 
been the greatest benefactors to Europe in their time, and true 
models of supreme Christian bishops.

But, if these two facts be admitted, the question recurs, How is 
it that the governments of several kingdoms, and that of England 
in particular, had, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries,
merged into complete and unalloyed despotism? As our present 
interest in the question is restricted to England, we confine 
ourselves to that country, and proceed to treat of it in a few 
words.

Under the Tudors, the government grew to be altogether 
irresponsible, personal, and despotic, chiefly because under 
previous reigns, and constantly since the establishment of the 
Norman line of kings, the authority of Rome, which formed the 
only great counterpoise to kingly power at the time, had been 
gradually undermined, while the bishops, being deprived of the 
aid of the supreme Pontiff, had become mere tools in the hands 
of the monarchs.

The particular shape which the opposition to Rome took in 
England, compared with a similar opposition in Germany, has been 
already touched upon; it was found to be involved chiefly in the 
question of tribute-money and benefices, the latter being also 
reduced to a money difficulty. It was seen that the monks and 
the people sided generally with the kings, and gradually took a 
dislike and mistrust to every thing coming from Rome; the 
authority of the monarch, though not precisely strengthened 
thereby, was left without the control of a superior tribunal to 
direct him, and consequently the kings, if they chose, were left 
to follow the impulse of their own caprice, which, according to 
St. Thomas, forms the characteristic of tyranny.

Other causes, doubtless, contributed to pave the way for and 
consolidate the despotism of the Kings of England. Among such 
causes may be mentioned the extraordinary successes which 
attended the English arms, led by their warrior kings in France, 
and the frightful convulsions subsequently arising from the Wars 
of the Roses; but we doubt not the one mentioned above was the 
chief, and, of itself, would in the long-run have brought about 
the same result.

Protestantism, therefore, was neither the growth of freedom in 
England, nor did it plant freedom there at its introduction, 
inasmuch as the royal power became more absolute than ever by 
its predominance, and by the first principle which it laid down, 
that the king was supreme in Church as well as in state. Can its 
origin in England, then, be accounted for by the existence of a 
higher civilization, anterior to it in point of time, out of 
which it grew, or, at least, by a true aspiration toward such.

This question is as easy of solution as the first: There can be 
no doubt that the nations which remained either entirely or in 
the main faithful to the Church, in point of learning and 
civilization, ranked far beyond the Northern nations, where 
heresy so early found a permanent footing, and that in the South 
also the tendencies toward a higher civilization were at that 
time of a most marked and extraordinary character, so much so 
that the reign of Leo X. has become a household phrase to 
express the perfection of culture.

England, as a nation, was at that period only just beginning to 
emerge from barbarism, and in fact was the last of the European 
nations to adopt civilized customs and manners in the political, 
civil, and social relations of life.

In politics she was, until that epoch, plunged in frightful 
dynastic revolutions, and as yet had not learned the first 
principles of good government. In civil affairs, her code was 
the most barbarous, her feudal customs the most revolting, her 
whole history the most appalling of all Christendom. In social 
habits, she had scarcely been able to retain a few precious 
fragments of good old Catholic times; and the fearful scenes 
through which the nation had passed, which, according to J. J. 
Rousseau, for once expressing the truth, render the reading of 
that period of her history almost impossible to a humane man, 
had sunk her almost completely in degradation. The reader will 
understand that the England here spoken of is the England of 
three centuries ago, and not of to-day.

If by civilization is understood learning and the fine arts, 
what, in general phrase, is expressed by culture and refinement, 
how could England compare at the time with Italy, Flanders, 
Spain, France, all Latin or Celtic nations? How can it be 
pretended that she was better fitted for the reception of a more 
spiritual and elevating religion than any of the countries 
mentioned?

Two great names may be brought forward as proving that the 
expressions used are harsh and ill-founded--Shakespeare and 
Milton; a third, Bacon, we omit for reasons which our space 
forbids us to give.

Shakespeare, whose name may rank with those of Homer and Dante, 
was not a product of those times. He was a gift of Heaven. At 
any other epoch he would have been as great, perhaps greater. 
What he received from his surroundings and from the 
"civilization" with which he was blessed, he has handed down to 
us in the uncouth form, the intricacy of plot and adventures, 
which would have rendered barbarous a poet less naturally gifted.
And, although the question has never been definitely settled, 
it is probable that he was born and lived a Catholic; and it is 
strange how Elizabeth, who, tradition tells us, was present at 
some of his plays, could endure his faithful portrayal of friars 
and nuns, while she was persecuting their originals so 
barbarously at the time; strangest of all, how she could bear to 
look upon the true and noble image of Katherine of Aragon, whom 
Henry in his good moment pronounces "the queen of earthly queens,
" contrasted with her own mother, to whom the shrewd old court 
lady tells the story:

"There was a lady once ('tis an old story), That would not be a 
queen, that would she not, For all the mud in Egypt :--Have you 
heard it?"

Thus did Shakespeare contrast Elizabeth's wanton mother with the 
noble woman whom Henry discarded for a toy. And some critics can 
only find a reason for the composition of the "Merry Wives of 
Windsor" and the "Sonnets" as an offering to the lewd queen. 
Nothing more did he owe to his time.

And Milton, who, though his father was a Catholic, was himself a 
rank Puritan, something of what we have said of Shakespeare may 
be said of him. At all events, all his cultivation and taste 
came from Italy. The poets of that really civilized country had 
polished his uncouth nature, as it were in spite of itself, and 
added to the depth of his wonderful genius the beauty and soft 
harmony of verse that ever flowed freely, and the strength of a 
nervous and sonorous prose.

Now comes the question: If the origin of Protestantism in 
England cannot be attributed to freedom and civilization, may it 
not, at least, be maintained that the natural result of 
Protestantism was the acquisition of true freedom and of a 
higher civilization? Is it not true that to-day Protestant 
nations are in advance of others in both these respects? And to 
what other cause can such advancement be ascribed than to the 
"reformed religion?" Is it not the freedom which has come to the 
human mind, after the rejection of the yoke of spiritual 
authority, and the proclamation of the rights of individual 
reason, that has brought about the present advanced state of 
affairs

We know all these fine-sounding phrases which are so 
continuously dinned into our ears, and republished day after day 
in a thousand forms. The question, we admit, is not so easy of 
solution as the first, and might, indeed, without suspicion of 
evasion, be discarded as not coming under the head of this 
chapter, which spoke of origin and not of consequences. 
Nevertheless, a few words may be devoted to the subject, to 
prove that the answer must still be in the negative.

The first result of Protestantism was undoubtedly to extinguish 
as completely as possible the remaining sparks of truly liberal 
thought promulgated in Europe by the Catholic doctors of the 
middle ages. Wherever the new doctrines spread, secular rulers 
were not only freed from pontifical control, but were themselves 
invested with supreme ecclesiastical power. The effective check 
which the paternal and bold voice issuing from the Vatican had 
exercised on kings and princes was in a moment taken away. In 
Germany, England, and Scandinavia, the kings and petty princes, 
and dukes even, became each so many popes in their own dominions.
 And this took place with the consent and frequently at the 
earnest request of the Reformers.

Even the European states which did not fall away from the old 
faith of Christendom took advantage, it might almost be said, of 
the difficult position in which the Holy Father found himself, 
to countenance new doctrines with respect to the limits of the 
authority of the Supreme Pontiff; and the new errors which so 
suddenly appeared in France and elsewhere, during the prevalence 
and at the extinction of the great schism, limiting the power of 
the Popes in many matters where it had been considered binding, 
broke out again, in France principally, under the lead of 
Protestant or Erastian parliamentarians and legists, under the 
name of Gallican liberties--pretended liberties, which would 
really make the Church a subordinate adjunct of the State, 
instead of what it is, a spiritual living body ruled exclusively 
by a spiritual head.

How could the cause of true liberty in Europe be promoted by 
such altered circumstances as these?--to say nothing of the 
disastrous imprudence with which those blind rulers and so-
called theologians took away the key-stone of the European 
social edifice, which grew weaker from that day forth, until now 
we see it tottering to its fall.

The introduction of Protestantism, then, was one of the chief 
causes of the change by which a much greater personal power was 
transferred to the hands of the sovereign than he had ever 
before held, and it is no surprise to see the absolutism of 
emperors and kings, in Christian Europe, date from its coming.

As time passed on, the cause acting on a larger scale, embracing 
a wider circumference, and drawing within its circle vaster 
territories, the world saw absolute rule established in England, 
France, Spain, and Germany. Previous to the sixteenth century, 
the word 'absolutism' was unknown in Christendom, as was the 
doctrine of the "divine right of kings" understood and preached 
as it has since been in England.

But, to furnish details which should render these reflections 
more striking, would require an unravelling of the whole tangled 
skein of history during those times.

Nevertheless, we must come to consider the last refuge of 
Protestant liberalism. Did not the Reformation really emancipate 
modern nations, and gradually bring about the whole system of 
representative governments, which, starting from England, have 
now, in fact, become, more or less, general throughout Europe?

Our answer is, Yes and No. It may be granted that Protestantism 
did give rise to a certain kind of liberalism very prevalent in 
our days; but such liberalism is very far from bestowing on 
nations true liberty and stability; hence their constant 
agitation, and the perils of society which threaten all, even 
the specially favored Protestant nations themselves as much as 
any.

It was indeed the new doctrines which brought about the 
"Commonwealth" in England, and the subsequent Revolution of 1688;
between which two events, however, great differences exist.

The destruction of monarchy under and in the person of Charles I.
 was the just retribution dealt by Providence to the English 
kings, who had been the first openly to shake off from a great 
nation the wise and beneficent yoke of Rome. At all events, one 
thing is certain, that under the "Protector," the child of the 
Revolution, as little as under the Protestant Tudors, could the 
English scarcely be regarded as freemen.

Cromwell banished from their hall the representatives of the 
people. He could scarcely find epithets opprobrious enough for 
Magna Charta, which the people considered, and rightly, as the 
palladium of English liberty. In his scornful order to "take 
away that bawble," though the "bawble" immediately referred to 
was the Speaker's mace, the word meant the freedom of the nation.
He was as absolute a monarch as ever ruled England. The liberty 
enjoyed under his regime was as meaningless for every class as 
for the Catholics, whom he more immediately oppressed, and was 
ill compensated for by the material prosperity which his genius 
knew so well how to secure.

It was his despotic rule, in fact, and the fear of anarchy which 
affrighted the minds of the people at his death--the dread of a 
government of rival soldiers--which rendered so easy the 
triumphant restoration of the worthless Stuarts, in the person 
of the most worthless of them all, Charles II.

The true constitutional liberty of which England may fairly 
boast was the work of a long series of years subsequent to the 
Revolution of 1688. It was the work of the whole eighteenth 
century, in fact, and was grounded on the fragments of old 
Catholic doctrines and customs. In no sense can it be called the 
result of Protestantism, save as coming after it in point of 
time.

Whoever is acquainted with the state of religion and society in 
England, during the latter part of the seventeenth and the whole 
of the eighteenth century, needs not to be told that, among the 
ruling classes, faith in a revealed religion had ceased to exist.
The yoke of Rome once shaken off, the human mind was quick to 
draw all the consequences of the principle of entire 
independence in religious matters. Tindal, Collins, Hobbes, 
Shaftesbury, and other philosophers, had openly denounced 
revelation, and that portion of the nation which esteemed itself 
enlightened embraced their new doctrines. It would be false to 
imagine that, in 1700 and afterward, the English were as firm 
believers in the Church of England's Thirty-nine Articles as 
they seemed to be at the beginning of this century. The whole of 
the last century was for all Europe, with the exception of the 
two peninsulas of Italy and Spain, a period of avowed disbelief.

Even Presbyterian Scotland did not escape the contagion, and 
some theologians and preachers of the Kirk at that time are now 
praised for their liberal views of religion, that is, for their 
want of real faith. The influence of Wesley and his fellow-
workers on the English mind, and the dread of the spread of 
French infidelity and jacobinism, were more extensive and 
effectual than people are apt to imagine; and there is no doubt 
that, seventy years ago England was far more of a believing 
country than she had been for a hundred years before.

But, if even Scotch Presbyterian ministers and Church of England 
men, such as Laurence Sterne, were unworthy of the name of 
Christian, what are we to think of those who had to profess no 
outward faith in Christianity, because of ministerial offices? 
There is no doubt that, in the mass, they were almost completely 
void of any faith in revealed religion.

To such men as these is England indebted for the development of 
her constitution. If Protestantism had any share in it at all, 
it did not go beyond preparing the way for the destruction of 
Christianity in the mind and heart of the people; or, rather, 
constitutional liberty in England has no connection whatever 
with religion. The English, left to their own ingenuity and 
skill, displayed a vast amount of statesmanlike qualities in 
devising for themselves a system of check and counter-check, 
which protected the subject and defined the rights of the ruler; 
and this gave the nation an undoubted superiority over their 
neighbors on the Continent. But it cannot be attributed, except 
in a very remote manner, to the Protestant doctrine of the 
independence of the human mind.

Were we to examine the effect which the example of England 
produced on other nations, we should find that, instead of 
spreading liberty, it was the cause of the diffusion of an 
unbridled license under the name of liberalism.

In England itself; the lower orders of society having been kept 
in ignorance, and consequently in subjection to the ruling 
classes, and the latter finding it to their interest to preserve 
order and stability in the state, no frightful commotions could 
ensue to threaten the destruction of society.

In Continental countries, the middle and even the lowest classes 
were more readily caught by doctrines which, when kept within 
due bounds, may be promotive of exterior prosperity, but which, 
pushed to their extremes and logical consequences, may embroil 
the whole nation in revolution and calamities.

Such has been the case in our own days, and in days immediately 
preceding our own; and England is now experiencing the recoil of 
those convulsions, and seems on the eve of being convulsed 
herself more terribly, perhaps, than any other nation has yet 
been.

These few reflections must suffice, as to extend them would go 
beyond our present scope. But now comes the question, Why was 
Ireland unprepared for the reception of Protestantism? Why did 
she reject it absolutely and permanently?

According to the theorists who attribute the success of 
Protestantism in the North of Europe to a higher civilization 
and a more ardent love of freedom, the contrary characteristics 
should distinguish those nations which remained faithful to the 
Church, and particularly the Irish. Was the lack of a higher 
civilization and more ardent love for freedom really the cause, 
then, for Ireland's undergoing so many fearful sacrifices merely 
for the sake of her religion?

We should not dread entering upon a comparison of the 
Scandinavian and Celtic races in these two articular points, as 
they existed at the time of the Tudors. We are confident that a 
detailed survey of both would result in a glorious vindication 
of the Irish character, although, owing to six hundred years of 
cruel wars with Dane and Anglo-Norman, the actual prosperity of 
the country was far inferior to that of England. But the outline 
of so vast a subject must content us here.

In judging of the elevation of a nation's sentiments, the first 
thing that strikes us is the motive assigned by the Irish 
representatives for refusing to pass the bill of supremacy. 
"Five or six changes of religion in twelve years were too much 
for conscientious people." Such was the answer sent back to 
Elizabeth, and spoken as though easy of comprehension. Had they 
deemed that their language could have been misunderstood, they 
would undoubtedly have expressed themselves in stronger terms.

Strange that such an obvious and common-sense remark had never 
occurred to the intelligent and highly-civilized members of the 
English Parliament--those ardent lovers of freedom--when applied 
to by a new English monarch to acknowledge and confirm, as law, 
the religious system he had determined to establish!

Apparently, then, at this time, Ireland possessed a conscience 
which England either laid no claim on, or made no pretensions to;
and it might not be too much to lay this down as the first 
reason why Ireland remained faithful to her religion. In fact, 
the whole history of the period bears out this general 
observation. The subserviency of the proud English aristocracy, 
of those pretended statesmen and legislators, in matters so 
intimately connected with the soul, its convictions and its 
morality, shows conclusively that the word "conscience" had no 
meaning for them, or that, if they were aware of the existence 
of such a thing, they made so little account of it that they 
were ready at all times to barter it for position, what they 
considered honor, and wealth.

On the other hand, the constant, unshaken, and emphatic refusal 
of the Irish to renounce their religion for the novel 
"speculations" of pretended theologians-- in reality, heretical 
teachers --at the beck of king or queen; their willingness to 
submit to all the rigor of extreme penal laws rather than 
disobey their sense of right, proves too well that they 
possessed a conscience, knew what it meant, and resolved to 
follow it. There is not a single fact of their, history, general 
or particular, taking them collectively as a nation, when, by 
their actions, they spoke as one people or individually, when 
priest and friar, great man or mean man, chose to lose position, 
property, name--life itself--rather than be false to their 
religion and God--which does not prove that they owned a 
conscience and obeyed its voice.

Can a nation, deprived of this, be esteemed really free and 
truly civilized? and can a nation which possesses it be 
considered barbarous? The answer cannot be doubtful, and is of 
itself a sufficient solution of the question under examination.

But, to come to more special details. The Irish idea of 
civilization was certainly of a very different character from 
that of the English; but was it the less true? From the landing 
of the first invasion, the Norman nobles and prelates looked 
down on the invaded people as barbarous and uncouth, as they 
previously looked down upon the Anglo-Saxons. Later on, they 
spoke of the Irish customs as "lewd;" and, later still, the 
majority of them adopted those "lewd customs."

If the question be merely one of refinement of outward manners, 
and aquaintance with the artificial code established by a 
society with which the Irish, up to that time, had never come in 
contact, the Normans may be granted whatever benefit may accrue 
to them from such, though, even here, the Irish chieftains might 
later on compare favorably with their foes. For instance, if is 
doubtful whether Hugh O'Donnell and O'Sullivan Beare, one of 
whom went to Spain, and the other to Portugal--and the second, 
Philip II. commanded to be treated as a Spanish grandee --were 
not as courteous and dignified as Cecil or Walsingham, or Essex 
or Raleigh, at the court of Elizabeth. And, if we take the case 
of the descendants of Strongbow's warriors, who became "more 
Irish than the Irish," there is no reason why we should not 
prefer the manners and bearing of young Gerald Desmond, when, 
after leaving Rome, he appeared at the court of Tuscany, to 
those of the young lords who danced at Windsor, under the eyes 
of Henry, with Anne Boleyn. But, treating the subject seriously, 
and examining it more closely, we may find a necessity for 
reversing the opinion which is too commonly entertained.

Civilization does not consist only, or chiefly, in refinement of 
manners, but in all things which exalt a nation; and, after the 
"conscience" of which we have spoken, nothing is so important in 
making a nation civilized as the institutions under which it 
lives.

The laws are the great index of a people's civilization, chiefly 
as regards their execution. Nothing can be more indicative of it 
than the criminal code of a people.

The law of England at that time compares poorly with the Irish 
compilation known as the "Senchus Mor," which scholars have only 
recently been able to study, and which is being printed as we 
write, and to be illustrated with learned notes. From all 
accounts given by competent reviewers, it is clear that wisdom, 
sound judgment, equity, and Christian feeling, constitute the 
essence of those laws which Edmund Campian found the young 
Irishmen of his day studying under such strange circumstances 
and with such ardor and application as to spend sixteen or 
eighteen years at it.

And in what manner were those very Christian enactments which 
lay at the foundation of the English legislation executed at the 
same period? What, for instance, were the features of its 
criminal code? It is unnecessary to depict what all the world 
knows.

In extenuation of the barbarous blood-thirstiness which 
characterized it, it may be said that torture, cruel punishments,
and fearful chastisement for slight offences, formed the 
general features of the criminal code of most Christian nations. 
They had been handed down by barbarous ancestors, the relics of 
Scandinavian cruelty for the most part, added to the Roman slave 
penalties, which were the remnants of pagan inhumanity. This 
answer would be insufficient when comparing the English with the 
Brehon law, but it does not hold good even with reference to 
other Continental nations. In no country at that time was 
punishment so pitiless as in England. The details, now well 
known, can only be published for exceptional readers; to find a 
comparison for them Dr. Madden says:

"We must come down to the reign of terror in France, to the 
massacres of September, to the wholesale executions of 
conventional times; to find the mob insulting the victims, and 
the executioner himself adding personal affront to the 
disgusting fulfilment of his horrible office."

Passing from the laws to the usages of warfare, and chiefy to 
domestic strife, here the most vulnerable point in the Irish 
character shows itself. The constant feuds resulting from the 
clan system furnish a never-failing theme to those who accuse 
the Irish of barbarism. Yet is there no parallel to them in the 
horrors of those dynastic revolutions which preceded the Tudors 
in England, and which the Tudors only put an end to by the 
completest despotism, and by shedding the best blood of the 
country in torrents? The Irish feuds never depopulated the 
country. It is even admitted by most reliable historians that, 
while those dissensions were rifest, the land was really teeming 
with a happy people, and rich in every thing which an 
agricultural country can enjoy. The great battles of the various 
clans resulted often in the killing of a few dozen warriors. 
Such, in fact, was the manner in which chroniclers estimated the 
gains or losses of each of those victories or defeats.

But, in the Wars of the Roses, England lost a great part of her 
adult population; so much so, that she was altogether 
incapacitated from waging war with any external nation. She 
could not even afford to send any reenforcements to the English 
Pale in Ireland--not even a few hundred which at times would 
have proved so serviceable. It was in fact high time and almost 
a happy thing for England that the crushing despotism of the 
Tudors came in to save the nation from total ruin.

Finally, can it be said that the Irish were inferior in 
civilization to the English by reason of their social habits, 
when Danes, Anglo-Saxons and Normans, in turn, invariably 
adopted Irish manners in preference to their own, after living a 
sufficient time in the country to be able to appreciate the 
difference between the one and the other?

The writers of whom we speak ascribe the spread of Protestantism 
not only to a higher civilization, or at least a special aptness 
and fitness for it, but also say that it was due to the greater 
love for freedom which possessed those who accepted it; whereas 
the Irish, as they allege, have been forever priest-ridden and 
cowered under the lash.

The connection between English Protestantism and freedom has 
been sufficiently touched upon. But in Ireland the whole 
resistance of the Irish people to the change of religion is the 
most conspicuous proof which could be advanced of their inherent 
love for freedom.

What is the meaning of this word "priest-ridden?" If, as 
attached to the Irish, it means that they have remained 
faithfully devoted to their spiritual guides, and protected them 
at cost of life and limb against the execution of barbarous laws,
this epithet which is flung at them as a reproach is a glory to 
them, and a true one.

Are they to be accused of cowardice because they were never bold 
enough to demolish a single Catholic chapel--a favorite 
amusement of the English mobs from Elizabeth's reign to 
Victoria's--or because they could not find the courage in their 
hearts to mock a martyr at the stake, or imbrue their hands in 
his blood, as did the nation of a higher civilization and a more 
ardent love for freedom?

The Irish cower under the lash! It could never be applied, until 
calculating treachery had first rendered them naked and 
defenceless, and removed from their reach every weapon of 
defence. And the man who in such a case receives the lash is a 
coward, while he who safely applies it is a hero!

Our observations so far have cleared the ground for the right 
solution and understanding of the present question. It may now 
be said that the Irish were not prepared for the reception of 
Protestantism, and remained firm in their faith because--

1. They possessed a conscience.

2. There had existed no religious abuses, worthy of the name, in 
their country which called for reform. Such abuses had in 
England and Germany furnished the pretext for a change of 
religion. It was a mere pretext, for the alleged abuses might 
all be remedied without intrenching on the domain of faith, and 
unsettling the religious convictions of the whole nation. There 
is no greater crime possible than to introduce among people 
enjoying all the benefits resulting from a firm belief in holy 
truth a simple doubt, a simple hesitating surmise, calculated to 
make them waver in the least in what had previously been a solid 
and well-grounded faith. But to consider that crime carried to 
the extent of so sapping the foundation of Christian belief as 
to bring about the inevitable consequence of opening under 
nations the fearful abyss of atheism and despair--there is no 
word sufficiently strong to express the indignation which such a 
course of action must naturally excite. And that the ultimate 
result of the new heresy was to carry men to the very brink of 
the abyss is plain enough to-day, and was foreseen by Luther 
himself. In all probability he had a clear perception of it, 
since the latter half of his life was devoted to propping up the 
crumbling walls of his hastily-erected edifice by whatever 
supports he could steal from the old faith, and fighting hard 
against all those who had already drawn the ultimate conclusions 
of his own principles.

For those, then, who in the sixteenth century set in motion the 
chaos which threatens to overwhelm us to-day, the religious 
abuses existing at the time can offer no excuse for their 
destruction of Religion, because stains happened to sully the 
purity of her outward garment.

But in Ireland no such abuses existed; and consequently there 
was there not even a pretext for the introduction of 
Protestantism, and by the very reason of their sense of good and 
right the Irish were unprepared for heresy.

3. Even had it entered into their minds to wish for a 
reformation of some kind, they were certainly unprepared for the 
one offered them. The first reform of the new order was to close 
the religious houses which the people loved, which were the 
seats of learning, holiness, and education. Their Catholic 
ancestors had founded those religious houses; they themselves 
enjoyed the spiritual and even temporal advantages attached to 
them, for they constituted in fact the only important and useful 
establishments which their country possessed; they had been 
consecrated by the lives and deaths of a thousand saints within 
their walls; and they suddenly beheld pretended ministers of a 
new religion of which they knew nothing, backed by ferocious 
Walloon or English troopers, turn out or slay their inmates, 
close them, set them on fire, pillage them, or convert them into 
private dwellings for the convenience of an imported aristocracy.
This was the first act of the "introduction " of the 
"Reformation " into Ireland. The people were enabled to judge of 
the sanctity of the new creed at its first appearance among them.
 And this alone, apart from their firm adherence to the faith of 
their fathers, was quite enough to justify them in their 
resistance to such a substitute.

But, above all, when they beheld how the inmates of those holy-
houses were treated, when they saw them cast out into the world, 
penniless, reduced to penury and want, persecuted, declared 
outcasts, hunted down, insulted by the soldiery, arrested, 
cruelly beaten, bound hand and foot, and hung up either before 
the door of their burning monastery, or even in the church 
itself before the altar--what wonder that they were unprepared 
to receive the new religion?

The barbarity displayed throughout England and Ireland toward 
Catholicism was specially fiendish when directed against 
religious of both sexes; and, as in Ireland no class of persons 
was more justly and dearly loved, what wonder that the Irish 
literally hated the religion that came to them from beyond the 
sea?

Without going over the other aspects of the religious question 
of the time, and comparing article with article of the new and 
old beliefs, this single feature of the case alone is sufficient.
The process might be carried out with advantage, but is not 
necessary.

4. The new order of things, in one word, resolved itself into 
rapacity and wanton bloodshed. And, despite whatever may be said 
of Irish outrages by those who are never tired of alluding to 
them, Irish nature is opposed to such excesses. If they are ever 
guilty of such, it is only when they have previously been 
outraged themselves, and in such cases they are the first to 
repent of their action in their cooler moments. On the other 
hand, the men who first set all these outrages going never find 
reason to accuse themselves of any thing, are even perfectly 
satisfied with and convinced of their own perfection; and, as 
from the first they acted coolly and systematically, their self-
equanimity is never disturbed, they continue unshaken in the 
calm conviction that they have always been in the right, 
whatever may have been the consequences of the initiative 
movement and its steady continuance.

But we repeat advisedly--the Irish nature is opposed to rapacity 
and wanton shedding of blood, and this formed another strong 
reason for their opposition to the religious revolution which 
immersed them in so bloody a baptism.

5. Yet perhaps the most radical and real cause of their 
persistent refusal to embrace Protestantism lies in their 
traditional spirit, of which we have previously spoken. There is 
no rationalistic tendency in their character.

And all the points well considered, which, after all, is the 
better, the simply traditional or strictly rationalistic nature? 
What has been the result of those philosophical speculations 
from which Protestantism sprang? Whither are men tending to-day 
in consequence of it? Would it not have been better for mankind 
to have stood by the time-honored traditions of former ages, 
independently of the strong and convincing claims which 
Catholicity offers to all? This is said without in the least 
attributing the fault to sound philosophy, without casting the 
slightest slur on those truly great and illustrious men who have 
widened the limits of the human intellect, and deserved well of 
mankind by the solid truths they have opened up in their works 
for the benefit and instruction of minds less gifted than their 
own.


CHAPTER XI.


THE IRISH AND THE STUARTS.--LOYALTY AND CONFISCATION.

Upon the death of Elizabeth, in 1603, the son of the unfortunate 
Mary Stuart was called to the throne of England, and for the 
first time in their history the Irish people accepted English 
rule, gave their willing submission to an English dynasty, and 
afterward displayed as great devotedness in supporting the 
falling cause of their new monarchs, as in defending their 
religion and nationality.

This feeling of allegiance, born so suddenly and strangely in 
the Irish breast, cherished so ardently and at the price of so 
many sacrifices, finally raising the nation to the highest pitch 
of heroism, is worth studying and investigating its true cause.

What ought to have been the natural effect produced on the Irish 
people by the arrival of the news that James of Scotland had 
succeeded to Elizabeth? The first feeling must have been one of 
deep relief that the hateful tyranny of the Tudors had passed 
away, to be supplanted by the rule of their kinsmen the Stuarts--
kinsmen, because the Scottish line of kings was directly 
descended from that Dal Riada colony which Ireland had sent so 
long ago to the shores of Albania, to a branch of which 
Columbkill belonged.

For those who were not sufficiently versed in antiquarian 
genealogy to trace his descent so far back, the thought that 
James was the son of Mary Stuart was sufficient. If any people 
could sympathize with the ill-starred Queen of Scots, that 
people was the Irish. It could not enter into their ideas that 
the son of the murdered Catholic queen, should have feelings 
uncongenial to their own. It is easy, then, to understand how, 
when the news of Elizabeth's death and of the accession of James 
arrived, the sanguine Irish heart leaped with a new hope and 
joyful expectation.

As for the real disposition of that strangest of monarchs, James 
I,, writers are at variance. Matthew O'Connor, the elder, who 
had in his hands the books and manuscripts of Charles O'Connor 
of Bellingary, is very positive in his assertions on his side of 
the question:

"James was a determined and implacable enemy to the Catholic 
religion; he alienated his professors from all attachment to his 
government by the virulence of his antipathy. One of his first 
gracious proclamations imported a general jail-delivery, except 
for 'murderers and papists.' By another proclamation he pledged 
himself 'never to grant any toleration to the Catholics,' and 
entailed a curse on his posterity if they granted any."

Turning now to Dr. Madden's "History of the Penal Laws," we 
shall feel disposed to modify so positive an opinion. There we 
read:

"It is very evident that his zeal for the Protestant Church had 
more to do with a hatred of the Puritans than of popery, and 
that he had a hankering, after all, for the old religion which 
his mother belonged to, and for which she had been persecuted by 
the fanatics of Scotland."

Hume seems to support this judgment of Dr. Madden when he says 
that "the principles of James would have led him to earnestly 
desire a unity of faith of the Churches which had been separated."

Both opinions, however, agree in the long-run, since Dr. Madden 
is obliged to confess that "new measures of severity, as the 
bigotry of the times became urgent, were wrung from the timid 
king. He had neither moral nor political courage."

Still, on the day of his coronation, the Irish could little 
imagine what was in store for them at the hands of the son of 
Mary Stuart; hence their great rejoicing, till the first stroke 
of bitter disappointment came to open their eyes, and awaken 
them to the hard reality. This was the flight of Tyrone and 
Tyrconnell, which had been brought about by treachery and low 
cunning. These chieftains were, as they deserved to be, the 
idols of the nation. They were compelled to fly because, as Dr. 
Anderson, a Protestant minister, says, "artful Cecil had 
employed one St. Lawrence to entrap the Earls of Tyrone and 
Tyrconnell, the Lord of Devlin, and other Irish chiefs, into a 
sham plot which had no evidence but his."

The real cause of their flight was that adventurers and 
"undertakers" desired to "plant" Ulster, though the final treaty 
with Mountjoy had left both earls in possession of their lands. 
That treaty yielded not an acre of plunder, and was consequently 
in English eyes a failure. The long, bloody, and promising wars 
of Elizabeth's reign had ended, after all, in forcing coronets on
the brows of O'Neill and O'Donnell, with a royal deed added, securing
to them their lands, and freedom of worship to all the north.

James was met by the importunate demand for land. O'Neill, 
O'Donnell, and several other Irish chieftains, were sacrificed 
to meet this demand; they were compelled to fly; and they had 
scarcely gone when millions of acres in Ulster were declared to 
be forfeited to the crown, and thrown open for "planting."

And here a new feature in confiscation presents itself, which 
was introduced by the first of the Stuart dynasty, and proved 
far more galling to Irishmen than any thing they had yet 
encountered in this shape.

In the invasion led by Strongbow, in the absorption of the 
Kildare estates by Henry VIII., in the annexation of King's and 
Queen's Counties under Philip and Mary, even in the last 
"plantation" of Munster by Elizabeth's myrmidons at the end of 
the Desmond war, the land had been immediately distributed among 
the chief officers of the victorious armies. The conquered knew 
that such would be the law of war; the great generals and 
courtiers who came into possession scarcely disturbed the 
tenants. A few of the great native and Anglo-Irish families 
suffered sorely from the spoliation; the people at large 
scarcely felt it, except by the destruction of clanship and the 
introduction of feudal grievances. Moreover, the new proprietors 
were interested in making their tenants happy, and not 
unfrequently identified themselves with the people--becoming in 
course of time true Irishmen.

But, with the accession of the first of the Stuarts to the 
English throne, a great alteration took place in the disposal of 
the land throughout Ireland.

The Tyrone war had ended five years before, and those who had 
taken part in the conflict had already received their portion; 
the vanquished, of misfortune--the conquerors, of gain. James 
brought in with him from Scotland a host of greedy followers; 
and all, from first to last, expected to rise with their king 
into wealth and honor. England was not wide enough to hold them, 
nor rich enough to satiate their appetites. The puzzled but 
crafty king saw a way out of his difficulties in Ireland. He no 
longer limited the distribution of land in that country to 
soldiers and officers of rank chiefly. He gave it to Scotch 
adventurers, to London trades companies. He settled it on 
Protestant colonies whose first use of their power was to evict 
the former tenants or clansmen, and thus effect a complete 
change in the social aspect of the north.

Well did they accomplish the task assigned them. Ulster became a 
Protestant colony, and the soil of that province has ever since 
remained in the hands of a people alien to the country. 	

Yet the Ulstermen had been led to believe that James purposed 
securing them in their possessions; for, according to Mr. 
Prendergast, in his Introduction to the "Cromwellian settlement:"

"On the 17th of July, 1607, Sir Arthur Chichester, Lord Deputy, 
accompanied by Sir John Davies and other commissioners, 
proceeded to Ulster, with powers to inquire what land each man 
held. There appeared before them, in each county they visited, 
the chief lords and Irish gentlemen, the heads of creaghts, and 
the common people, the Brehons and Shanachies, who knew all the 
septs and families, and took upon themselves to tell what 
quantity of land every man ought to have. They thus ascertained 
and booked their several lands, and the Lord-Deputy promised 
them estates in them. 'He thus,' says Sir John Davies, 'made it 
a year of jubilee to the poor inhabitants, because every man was 
to return to his own house, and be restored to his ancient 
possessions, and they all went home rejoicing.'

"Notwithstanding these promises, the king, in the following year,
issued his scheme for the plantation of Ulster, urged to it, it 
would seem, by Sir Arthur Chichester, who so largely profited by 
it. . . . It could not be said that the flight of the earls gave 
occasion for this change, inasmuch as the king, immediately 
after, issued a proclamation--which he renewed on taking 
possession of both earls' territories--assuring the inhabitants 
that they should be protected and preserved in their estates."

It looks, indeed, as though the whole transaction, including the 
promises and the call for ascertaining the quantity of land 
occupied by each inhabitant, as also the sham plot into which 
the earls were inveigled, was but a cunning device to bring 
about the plantation, in which manors of one thousand, fifteen 
hundred, and three thousand acres, were offered to such English 
and Scotch as should undertake to plant their lots with British 
Protestants, and engage that no Irish should dwell upon them. 
Meanwhile, all who had been in arms during Tyrone's war were to 
be transplanted with their families, cattle, and followers, to 
waste places in Munster and Connaught, and there set down at a 
distance from one another.

Over and above this, the Irish were indebted to James for a new 
project--a most ingenious invention for successful plunder. He 
was the real author of the celebrated "Commission for the 
investigation of defective titles."

It would seem that the province of Ulster was too small for the 
rapacity of those who were constantly urging upon the king a 
greater thoroughness in his plans. It was clear, moreover, that 
the English occupation of the other three provinces had hitherto 
proved a failure. The island had failed to become Anglicised, 
and it was necessary to begin the work anew.

The new commission was presented to the Irish people in a most 
alluring guise. That political hypocrisy, which to-day stands 
for statesmanship, is not a growth of our own times. The 
intention of James confined itself to putting an end to all 
uncertainty on the subject of titles, and bestowing on each land-
owner one which, for the future, should be unimpeachable. But 
the result went beyond his intention. This measure became, in 
fact, an engine of universal spoliation. It failed to secure 
even those who succeeded in retaining a portion of their former 
estates in possession, as Strafford made manifest, who, despite 
all the unimpeachable titles conferred by James, managed to 
confiscate to his own profit the greater part of the province of 
Connaught.

It is fitting to give a few details of this new measure of James,
in order to show the gratitude which the Irish owed the Stuarts,
if on that account only. In "Ireland under English Rule," the 
Rev. A. Perraud justly remarks: "Most Irish families held 
possession of their lands but by tradition, and their rights 
could not be proved by regular title-deeds. By royal command, a 
general inquiry was instituted, and whoever could not prove his 
right to the seat of his ancestors, by authentic documents, was 
mercilessly but juridically despoiled of it; the pen of the lawyer
thus making as many conquests as the blade of the mercenary."

The advisers of James--those who aided him in this scheme --were 
fully alive to its efficiency in serving their ends. A few years 
previously, Arthur Chichester and Sir John Davies had only to 
consult the Brehon lawyers and the chroniclers of the tribes, 
whose duty it was to become thoroughly acquainted with the 
limits of the various territories, and keep the records in their 
memory, in order to procure from the Ulster men the proofs of 
their rights to property. Up to that time the word of those who 
were authorized, by custom, to pronounce on such subjects, was 
law to every Irishman. And, indeed, the verdict of these was all-
sufficient, inasmuch as the task was not overtaxing to the 
memory of even an ordinary man, since it consisted in 
remembering, not the landed property of each individual, but the 
limits of the territory of each clan.

The clan territories were as precisely marked off as in any 
European state to-day; and, if any change in frontier occurred, 
it was the result of war between the neighboring clans, and 
therefore known to all. To suppose, then, under such a state of 
land tenure, that the territory of the Maguire clan, for 
instance, belonged exclusively to Maguire, and that he could 
prove his title to the property by legal documents, was 
erroneous--in fact, such a thing was impossible. Yet, such was 
the ground on which the king based his establishment of the 
odious commission.

The measure meant nothing less than the simple spoliation of all 
those who came under its provisions at the time. Matthew 
O'Connor has furnished some instances of its workings, which may 
bring into stronger light the enormity of such an attempt.

"The immense possessions of Bryan na Murtha O'Rourke had been 
granted to his son Teige, by patent; in the first year of the 
king's reign, and to the heirs male of his body. Teige died, 
leaving several sons; their titles were clear; no plots or 
conspiracies could be urged to invalidate them. By the medium of 
those inquisitions, they were found, one and all, to be bastards.
The eldest son, Bryan O'Rourke, vas put off with a miserable 
pension, and detained in England lest he should claim his 
inheritance. Yet, in this case, the title was actually in existence.

"In the county of Longford, three-fourths of nine hundred and 
ninety-nine cartrons, the property of the O'Farrells, were 
granted to adventurers, to the undoing and beggary of that 
princely family. Twenty-five of the septs were dispossessed of 
their all, and to the other septs were assigned mountainous and 
barren tracts about one-fourth of their former possessions.

"The O'Byrnes, of Wicklow, were robbed of their property by a 
conspiracy unparalleled even in the annals of those times; 
fabricated charges of treason, perjury, and even legal murder, 
were employed; and, though the innocence of those victims of 
rapacious oppression was established, yet they were never restored."

With regard to the Anglo-Irish, and even such of the natives as 
had consented to accept titles from the English kings, those 
titles, some of which went back as far as Strongbow's invasion, 
were brought under the "inquiry" of the new commission--with 
what result may be imagined. An astute legist can discover flaws 
in the best-drawn legal papers. In the eye of the law, the 
neglect of recording is fatal; and it was proved that many 
proprietors, whose titles had been bestowed by Henry VIII. and 
Elizabeth, were not recorded, simply by bribing the clerks who 
were charged with the office of recording them.

This portion of our subject must present strange features to 
readers acquainted with the laws concerning property which 
obtain among civilized nations. In making the necessary studies 
for this most imperfect sketch, the writer has been surprised at 
finding that not one of the authors whom he has consulted has 
spoken of any thing beyond the cruelty of compelling Irish 
landowners to exhibit title-deeds, which it was known they did 
not and could not possess. Not a single one has ever said a word 
of "prescription;" yet, this alone was enough to arrest the 
proceedings of any English court, if it followed the rules of 
law which govern civilized communities.

Most of the estates, then declared to be escheated to the king, 
had been in possession of the families to which the holders 
belonged, for centuries; we may go so far, in the case of some 
Irish families and tribes, as to say for thousands of years. But,
to disturb property which has been held for even less than a 
century, would convulse any nation subjected to such a revolutionary
process. No country in the world could stand such a test; it would
loosen in a day all the bonds that hold society together.

If the commission set on foot by James did not go to the extreme 
lengths to which it was carried by those who came after him, he 
it was who established what bore the semblance of a legal 
precedent for the excesses of Strafford, under Charles I., which 
reached their utmost limits in the hands of Cromwell's 
parliamentary commissioners. James set the engine of destruction 
in action: they worked it to its end. The Irish might justly lay 
at his door all the woes which ensued to them from the 
principles emanating from him. Even during his reign they saw, 
with instinctive horror, the abyss which he had opened up to 
swallow all their inheritance. The first commission of James 
commenced its operations by reporting three hundred and eighty-
five thousand acres in Leinster alone as "discovered," inasmuch 
as the titles "were not such as ought " (in their judgment) "to 
stand in the way of his-Majesty's designs."

Hence, long before the death of James, all the hopes which his 
accession had raised in the minds of the Irish had vanished; yet,
strange to say, they were not cured of their love for the 
Stuart dynasty. They hailed the coming of Charles, the husband 
of a Catholic princess, with joy. His marriage took place a year 
previous to the death of his father; and, to know that Henrietta 
of France was to be their queen, was enough to assure the Irish 
that, henceforth, they would enjoy the freedom of their religion.
The same motive always awakes in them hope and joy. Men may 
smile at such an idea, but it is with a profound respect for the 
Irish character that such a sentence is written. Hope of 
religious freedom is the noblest sentiment which can move the 
breast of man; and if there be reason for admiration in the 
motive which urges men to fight and die for their firesides and 
families, how much more so in that which causes them to set 
above all their altars and their God!

This time their hope seemed well-founded; for the treaty 
concluded between England and France conferred the right on the 
Catholic princess of educating her children by this marriage 
till the age of thirteen. And, in addition, conditions favorable 
to the English Catholics were inserted in the same treaty.

But people were not then aware of the reason for the insertion 
of those conditions. Hume, later on, being better acquainted 
with what at the time was a secret, states in his history that 
"the court of England always pretended, even in the memorials to 
the French court, that all the conditions favorable to the 
English Catholics were inserted in the marriage treaty merely to 
please the Pope, and that their strict execution was, by an 
agreement with France, secretly dispensed with."

The Irish rejoiced, however; and Charles and his ministers 
encouraged their expectations. Lord Falkland, in the name of the 
king, promised that, if the Catholic lords should present 
Charles, who needed money, with a voluntary tribute, he would in 
return grant them certain immunities and protections, which 
acquired later on a great celebrity under the name of "graces."

The chief of these were--to allow "recusants" to practise in the 
courts of law, and to sue out the livery of their land, merely 
on taking an act of civil allegiance instead of the oath of 
supremacy; that the claims of the crown should be limited to the 
last sixty years--a period long enough in all conscience; and 
that the inhabitants of Connaught should be allowed to make a 
new enrolment of their estates, to be accepted by the king. A 
Parliament was promised to sit in a short time, in order to 
confirm all these "graces."

The subsidy promised by the Irish lords amounted to the then 
enormous sum of forty thousand pounds sterling, to be paid 
annually for three years. Two-thirds of it was paid, according 
to Matthew O'Connor, but no one of the "graces" was forthcoming, 
the king finding he had promised more than he could perform.

Instead of enabling the land-owners of Connaught to obtain a new 
title by a new enrolment, Strafford, with the connivance of 
Charles, devised a project which would have enabled the king to 
dispose of the whole province to the enriching of his exchequer. 
This project consisted in throwing open the whole territory to 
the court of "defective titles." To legalize this spoliation, 
the parchment grant, five hundred years old, given to Roderic 
O'Connor and Richard de Burgo, by Henry II., was set up as 
rendering invalid the claims of immemorial possession by the 
Irish, although confirmed by recent compositions.

In the counties of Roscommon, Mayo, and Sligo, juries were found 
for the crown. The honesty and courageous resistance of a Galway 
jury prevented the carrying out of the measure in that county. 
Strafford resented this rebuff deeply; and the brave Galway 
jurors were punished without mercy for their "contumacy," for 
they had been told openly to find for the king. Compelled to 
appear in the Castle chamber, they were each fined four thousand 
pounds, their estates seized, and themselves imprisoned until 
their fines should be paid; while the sheriff, who was also 
fined to the same amount, not being able to pay, died in prison. 
Such were a few of the "graces" granted the Irish on the 
accession of Charles I.

Meanwhile, the king's difficulties with his English subjects 
drove him to turn for hope to the Scotch, upon whom he had 
attempted to force Episcopalianism. The resistance of the Scotch,
and the celebrated Covenant by which they bound themselves, are 
well known. Charles, finally, granted the Covenanters not only 
liberty of conscience, but even the religious supremacy of 
Presbyterianism, paying their army, moreover, for a portion of 
the time it passed under service in the rebellion against 
himself.

The example of the Scotch was certainly calculated to inflame 
the Irish with ardor, and drive them likewise into rebellion. 
What was the oppression of Scotland compared to that under which 
Ireland had so long groaned? Surely the final attempt of the 
chief minister of Charles to rob them of the one province which 
had hitherto escaped, was enough to open their eyes, and convert 
their faith in the Stuart dynasty into hatred and determined 
opposition. Yet were they on the eve of carrying their devotion 
to this faithless and worthless line to the height of heroism. 
The generosity of the nature which is in them could find an 
excuse for Charles. "He would have done us right," they thought, 
"had he been left free." From the rebellion of his subjects, in 
England and Scotland, they could only draw one conclusion--that 
he was the victim of Puritanism, for which they could entertain 
no feeling but one of horror; and it is a telling fact that 
their attachment to their religion kept them faithful to the 
sovereign to whom they had sworn their allegiance, however 
unworthy he might be.

Thus in the famous rising of 1641, when in one night Ireland, 
with the exception of a few cities, freed herself from the 
oppressor (the failure of the plan in Dublin being the only 
thing which prevented a complete success; the English of the 
Pale still refusing to combine with the Irish), the native Irish 
alone, left to their own resources, proclaimed emphatically in 
explicit terms their loyalty to the king, whom they credited 
with a just and tolerant disposition, if freed from the 
restraints imposed upon him by the Puritanical faction. A 
further fact stranger still, and still more calculated to shake 
their confidence in the monarch, occurred shortly after, which 
indeed raises the loyalty of the nation to a height 
inconceivable and impossible to any people, unless one whose 
conscience is swayed by the sense of stern duty.

When the Scottish Covenanters, whose rebellion had secured them 
in possession of all they demanded, heard of the Irish movement, 
they were at once seized with a fanatical zeal urging them to 
stamp out the Irish "Popish rebellion." King Charles, who was 
then in Edinburgh, expressed his gratification at their proposal,
and no time was lost in shipping a force of two thousand Scots 
across the Channel. They landed at Antrim, when they began those 
frightful massacres which opened by driving into the sea three 
thousand Irish inhabitants of the island Magee.

When, according to M. O'Connor's "Irish Catholics," "letters 
conveying the news of the intended invasion of the Scots were 
intercepted; when the speeches of leading members in the English 
Commons, the declaration of the Irish Lord-Justices, and of the 
principal members of the Dublin Council, countenanced those 
rumors; when Mr. Pym gave out that he would not leave a Papist 
in Ireland; when Sir Parsons declared that within a twelvemonth 
not a Catholic should be seen in the whole country; when Sir 
John Clotworthy affirmed that the conversion of the Papists was 
to be effected with the Bible in one hand and the sword in the 
other," and the King all the while seemed to allow and consent 
to it, the Irish were not in the least dismayed by those rumors, 
but set about establishing in the convulsed island a sort of 
order in the name of God and the king!

Then for the first time did native and Anglo-Irish Catholics 
take common side in a common cause. This was the union which 
Archbishop Browne had foreseen, which had shown itself in 
symptoms from time to time, but which had oftener been broken by 
the old animosity. But, at last, convinced that the only party 
on which they could rely, and the party which truly supported 
the reigning dynasty, was that of the Ulster chiefs, the 
Catholic lords of the Pale threw themselves heart and soul into 
it, and, under the guidance of the Catholic bishops who then 
came forward, together they formed the celebrated "Confederation 
of Kilkenny" in 1642.

Had Charles even then possessed the courage, honesty, or wisdom 
to recognize and acknowledge his true friends, he might have 
been spared the fate which overtook him; but all he did was 
almost to break up the only coalition which stood up boldly in 
his favor.

A circumstance not yet touched upon meets us here. Protestantism 
was at this time effecting a complete change in the rules of 
judgment and conduct which men had hitherto followed. In place 
of the old principles of political morality which up to this 
period had regulated the actions of Christians, notions of 
independence, of subversion of existing governments, of 
revolutions in Church and state, were for the first time in 
Christian history scattered broadcast through the world, and 
beginning that series of catastrophes which has made European 
history since, and which is far from being exhausted yet. The 
Irish stood firm by the old principles, and, though they became 
victims to their fidelity, they never shrank from the 
consequences of what they knew to be their duty, and to those 
principles they remain faithful to-day.

To return from this short digression: The Irish hierarchy, the 
native Irish and the Anglo-Irish lords of the Pale, had combined 
together to form the "Confederation of Kilkenny," in which 
confederation lay the germ of a truly great nation. Early in the 
struggle the Catholic hierarchy saw that it was for them to take 
the initiative in the movement, and they took it in right 
earnest. They could not be impassive spectators when the 
question at issue was the defence of the Catholic religion, 
joined this time with the rights of their monarch. They met in 
provincial synod at Kells, where, after mature deliberation, the 
cause of the confederates, "God and the king," freedom of 
worship and loyalty to the legitimate sovereign, was declared 
just and holy, and, after lifting a warning voice against the 
barbarities which had commenced on both sides, and ordaining the 
abolition and oblivion of all distinctions between native Irish 
and old English, they took measures for convoking a national 
synod at Kilkenny.

It met on the 10th of May, 1643. An oath of association bound 
all Catholics throughout the land. It was ordained that a 
general assembly comprising all the lords spiritual and temporal 
and the gentry should be held; that the assembly should select 
members from its body to represent the different provinces and 
principal cities, to be called the Supreme Council, which should 
sit from day to day, dispense justice, appoint to offices, and 
carry on the executive government of the country.

Meanwhile the Irish abroad, the exiles, had heard of the 
movement, and several prominent chieftains came back to take 
part in the struggle; while those who remained away helped the 
cause by gaining the aid of the Catholic sovereigns, and sending 
home all the funds and munitions of war they could procure. 
Among these, one of the most conspicuous was the learned Luke 
Wadding, then at Rome engaged in writing his celebrated works, 
who dispatched money and arms contributed by the Holy Father. 
John B. Rinuccini, Archbishop of Fermo, sent by the Pope as 
Nuncio, sailed in the same ship which conveyed those 
contributions to Ireland.

The Catholic prelates thus originated a free government with 
nothing revolutionary in its character, but combining some of 
the forms of the old Irish Feis with the chief features of 
modern Parliamentary governments. Matthew O'Connor makes the 
following just observations on this subject in his "Irish 
Catholics:"

"The duty of obedience to civil government was so deeply 
impressed on the Catholic mind, at this period, in Ireland, that 
it degenerated into passive submission. These impressions 
originated in religious zeal, and were fostered by persecution. 
The spiritual authority of the clergy was found requisite to 
soften those notions, and temper them with ideas of the 
constitutional, social, and Christian right of resistance in 
self-defence. The nobility and gentry fully concurred in those 
proceedings of the clergy, and the nation afterward ratified 
them in a general convention held at Kilkenny, in the subsequent 
month of October. The national union seemed to be at last 
cemented by the wishes of all orders, and the interests of all 
parties."

The fact is, the nation had been brought to life, and took its 
stand on a new footing. When the general assembly met, in 
October, eleven bishops and fourteen lay lords formed what may 
be called the Irish peerage; two hundred and twenty-six 
commoners represented the large majority of the Irish 
constituencies; a great lawyer of the day, Patrick Darcy, was 
elected chancellor; and a Supreme Council of six members from 
each province constituted what may be called the Executive.

This government, which really ruled Ireland without any 
interference until Ormond succeeded in breaking it up, was 
obeyed and acknowledged throughout the land. It undertook and 
carried out all the functions of its high office, such as the 
coining of money, appointing circuit-judges, sending ambassadors 
abroad, and commissioning officers to direct the operations of 
the national army. Among these latter, one name is sufficient to 
vouch for their efficiency: that of Owen Roe O'Neill, who had 
returned, with many others, from the Continent, in the July of 
that year, and formally, assumed the command of the army of 
Ulster.

Owen Roe O'Neill was grand-nephew to Hugh of Tyrone. Unknown, 
even now, to Europe, his name still lives in the memory of his 
countrymen. "The head of the Hy-Niall race, the descendant of a 
hundred kings, the inheritor of their virtues, without a taint 
of their vices, he would have deserved a crown, and, on a larger 
theatre, would have acquired the title of a hero."--(M. O'Connor.)

Had Charles recognized this government, which proclaimed him 
king, discharged from office the traitors, Borlase and Parsons, 
who plotted against him, and not surrendered his authority to 
Ormond, Ireland would probably have been saved from the horrors 
impending, and Charles himself from the scaffold. Whatever the 
issue might have been, the fact remains that the Irish then 
proved they could establish a solid government of their own, and 
that it is an altogether erroneous idea to imagine them 
incapable of governing themselves.

It is impossible to enter here upon the details of the intricate 
complications which ensued--complications which were chiefly 
owing to the plots of Ormond; but, it may be stated fearlessly 
that, the more the history of those times is studied, the more 
certainly is the "national" party, with the Nuncio Rinuccini for 
head and director, recognized as the one which, better than any 
other, could have saved Ireland. At least, no true Irishman will 
now pretend that the "peace party," headed by Ormond, which was 
pitted against the "Nuncionists," could bring good to the 
country; on the contrary, its subsequent misfortunes are to be 
ascribed directly to it.

To stigmatize it as it deserves, needs no more than to say that 
among its chief leaders were Ormond, its head and projector, and 
Murrough O'Brien, of Inchiquin, to this day justly known as 
Murrough of the burnings. These two men were the product of the 
"refined policy" of England to kill Catholicism in the higher 
classes by the operation of one of the laws that governed the 
oppressed nation--wardship.

Both Inchiquin and Ormond were born of Catholic fathers, and all 
their relations, during their lives, remained Catholics. But, 
their fathers dying during the minority of both, the law took 
their education out of the hands of the nearest kin, to give it 
to English Protestant wardens, in the name of the king, who was 
supposed by the law to be their legitimate guardian. This was 
one of the fruits of feudalism. They were duly brought up by 
these wardens in the Protestant religion, and received a 
Protestant education. They grew up, fully impressed with the 
idea that the country which gave them birth was a barbarous 
country; the parents to whom they owed their lives were 
idolaters; and their fellow-countrymen a set of villains, only 
fitted to become, and forever remain, paupers and slaves.

There is no exaggeration in these expressions, as anybody must 
concede who has studied the opinions and prejudices entertained 
by the English with regard to the Irish, from that period down 
almost to our own days. At any rate, to one acquainted with the 
workings of the "Court of Wards," there is nothing surprising in 
the fact that Ormond, the descendant of so many illustrious men 
of the great Butler family--a family at all times so attached to 
the Catholic faith, and which afterward furnished so many 
victims to the transplantation schemes of Cromwell--should 
himself become an inveterate enemy to the religion of his own 
parents, and to those who professed it; and that he should 
employ the great gifts which God had granted him, solely to 
scheme against this religion, and prevent his native countrymen 
from receiving even the scanty advantages which Charles at one 
time was willing to concede to them, through Lord Glanmorgan.

It was Ormond who prevented the execution of the treaty between 
that lord and the confederates, the provisions of which were--

1. The Catholics of Ireland were to enjoy the free and public 
exercise of their religion.

2. They were to hold, and have secure for their use, all the 
Catholic churches not then in actual possession of Protestants.

3. They were to be exempt from the jurisdiction of the 
Protestant clergy.

But, thanks to his education, such provisions were too much for 
Ormond, the son of a Catholic father, and whose mother, at the 
very time living a pious and excellent life, would have rejoiced 
to see those advantages secured to her Church and herself, in 
common with the rest of her countrymen and women.

In like manner, Murrough O'Brien, the Baron of Inchiquin, the 
descendant of so many Catholic kings and saints, whose name was 
a glory in itself, and so closely linked to the Catholic glories 
of the island, was converted, by the education which he had 
received, into a most cruel oppressor of the Church of his 
baptism. His expeditions, through the same country which his 
ancestors had ruled, were characterized by all the barbarities 
practised at the time by Munro, Coote, and all the parliamentary 
leaders of the Scotch Puritans, and would have fitted him as a 
worthy compeer of Cromwell and Ireton, who were soon to follow. 
The name of Cashel and its cathedral, where he murdered so many 
priests, women, and children, around the altar adorned by the 
great and good Cormac McCullinan, would alone suffice to hand 
his name down to the execration of posterity.

Ormond and Murrough being the two chiefs of the "peace party," 
what wonder that the prelates, who had so earnestly labored at 
the formation of the Kilkenny Confederation, and the Nuncio at 
their head, refused to have aught to do with projects in which 
such men were concerned, when it is borne in mind also that 
several provisions of that "peace treaty" were directly opposed 
to the oath taken by the Confederates? But, unfortunately, 
Ormond was a skilful diplomat, had been dispatched by the king, 
and was supposed to be carrying out the ideas suggested to him 
by the unhappy monarch. His representations, therefore, could 
not fail to carry weight, principally with the Anglo-Irish lords 
of the Pale, many of whom, influenced by his courtly manners and 
address, declared openly for the proposed peace.

Thus did the peace sow the germs of division and even war among 
the Irish. The unity among the Catholics, so full of promise, 
was soon broken up; and those who had met each other in such a 
brotherly spirit in the day when the native chiefs and Anglo-
Irish lords assembled together at Tara, who swore then that the 
division of centuries should exist no longer, began to look upon 
each other again as enemies. Without going at length into the 
vicissitudes of those various contentions, it is enough to say 
that in the end war broke out between those who had so recently 
taken the oath of confederation together. Owen Roe O'Neill, the 
victor of Benburb, and the only man who could direct the Irish 
armies, was attacked by Preston and other lords of the Pale, and 
died, as some historians allege, of poison administered to him 
by one of them.

This was the result of the intrigues of Ormond; nevertheless, 
Charles continued to place confidence in him, and though he had 
been twice obliged to resign his lieutenancy, and once to fly 
the country, the infatuated sovereign sent him back once more.

If was only at the end of the struggle, when the ill-fated king 
was at length in the hands of his enemies, that Ormond could be 
brought to consent to conditions acceptable to the national 
party. But then it was too late; the parliamentary forces had 
carried every thing before them in England; England was already 
republican to the core; and the armies which had been employed 
against the Cavaliers, once the efforts of the latter had ceased 
with the death of the king, were at liberty to leave the country,
now submissive to parliamentary rule, and cross over to Ireland,
with Cromwell at their head, to crush out the nation almost, 
and concentrate on that fated soil, within the short space of 
nine months, all the horrors of past centuries.

By the death of Owen Roe O'Neill just at that time, Ireland was 
left without a leader fit to cope with the great republican 
general. The country had already been devastated by Coote, Munro,
St. Leger, and other Scotch and English Puritans; but the 
massacres which, until the coming of Cromwell, had been, at 
least, only local and checked by the troops of Owen Roe, soon 
extended throughout the island, unarrested by any forces in the 
field. The Cromwellian soldiers, not content with the character 
of warriors, came as "avengers of the Lord," to destroy an 
"idolatrous people."

That their real design was to exterminate the nation, and use 
the opportunity which then presented itself for that purpose, 
there can by no doubt. It was only after a fair trial that the 
project was found to be impossible, and that other expedients 
were devised. Coote had previously acted with this design in 
view, as is now an ascertained fact, and had been encouraged in 
the course he pursued by the Dublin government. 1 (1 See Matthew 
O'Connor's "Irish Catholics.") The same might be shown of St. 
Leger, in Munster, toward the beginning of the insurrection. At 
all events, all doubt in the matter, if any existed, ceased with 
the landing of Cromwell in 1649, when the real object of the war 
at once showed itself everywhere.

The result of this man's policy has been painted by Villemain, 
in his "Histoire de Cromwell," in a sentence: "Ireland became a 
desert which the few remaining inhabitants described by the 
mournful saying, 'There was not water enough to drown a man, not 
wood enough to hang him, not earth enough to bury him.'"

The French writer attributes to the whole island what was said 
of only a part of it. To this day, the name of Cromwell is 
justly execrated in Ireland, and "the curse of Cromwell " is one 
of the bitterest which can be invoked upon a person's head. But, 
at present, the fidelity of the Irish to the Stuarts concerns us,
and a few reflections will put it in a strong but true light 
before us.

Ever since the restoration of Charles II., many Englishmen have 
professed great reverence for the memory of the "martyr-king." 
Even the subsequent Revolution of 1658 left the monument erected 
to him untouched. Many British families continued steady in 
their devotion to the Scotch line, and the name of Jacobite was 
for them a title of honor. Yet what were their sufferings for 
the cause of the king during his struggle with the Parliament, 
and after his execution? A few noblemen lost their lives and 
estates; some went into exile and followed the fortunes of the 
Pretenders who tried to gain possession of the throne. But the 
bulk of the nation--England--may be said to have suffered 
nothing by the great revolution which led to the Commonwealth. 
On the contrary, it is acknowledged that the administration of 
Cromwell at least brought peace to the country, and raised the 
power of Great Britain to a higher eminence in Europe than it 
had ever known before. As usual, the English made great 
profession of loyalty, but, as a rule, were particularly careful 
that no great inconvenience should come to them from it.

Treated with contempt and distrust by Charles and his advisers, 
so insulted in every thing that was dear to her that it is still 
a question for historians if, in many instances, the king and 
the royalists did not betray her, Ireland alone, after having 
taken her stand for a whole decade of years for God and the king,
resolved to face destruction unflinchingly in support of what 
she imagined to be a noble cause.

After the landing of Cromwell, when to any sensible man there no 
longer remained hope of serving the cause of the king, when the 
desire which is natural to every human heart, of saving what can 
be saved, might, not only without dishonor, but with justice and 
right, have dictated the necessity of coming to terms with the 
parliamentarians, and of abandoning a cause which was hopeless, 
"on the 4th of December, 1649, Eber McMahon, Bishop of Clogher, 
a mere Irishman by name, by descent, by enthusiastic attachment 
to his country, exerted his great abilities to rouse his 
countrymen to a persevering resistance to Cromwell, and to unite 
all hearts and hands in the support of Ormond's administration. .
 . . All the bishops concurred in his views, and subscribed a 
solemn declaration that they would, to the utmost of their power,
forward his Majesty's rights, and the good of the nation. . . . 
Ormond, at last, either sensible that no reliance could be 
placed on them, or that the treachery of Inchiquin's troops was, 
at least, on the part of the Irish, a fair ground of distrust 
and suspicion of the remainder, consented to their removal."--
("Irish Catholics.")

"At last!" will be the reader's exclamation, while he wonders if 
another people could be found forbearing enough to wait eight 
years for the adoption of such a necessary measure.

And the only reward for their fidelity to King Charles I. could 
under the circumstances be destruction. They waited with 
resignation for the impending gloom to overshadow them. Terrible 
moment for a nation, when despair itself fails to nerve it for 
further resistance and possible success! Such was the position 
of the Irish at the death of Charles.

Who shall describe that loyalty? After Ormond had met with the 
defeat he deserved in the field; after the cities had fallen one 
after another into the hands of the destroyer, who seldom 
thought himself bound to observe the conditions of surrender; 
after the chiefs, who might have protracted the struggle, had 
disappeared either by death or exile, the doom of the nation was 
sealed; yet it shrank not from the consequences.

The barbarities of Cromwell and his soldiers had depopulated 
large tracts of territory to such an extent that the troops 
marching through them were compelled to carry provisions as 
through a desert. The cattle, the only resource of an 
agricultural country, had been all consumed in a ten years' war. 
It was reported that, after every successful engagement, the 
republican general ordered all the men from the age of sixteen 
to sixty to be slaughtered without mercy, all the boys from six 
to sixteen to be deprived of sight, and the women to have a red-
hot iron thrust through their breasts. Rumors such as these, 
exaggerated though they may be, testify at least to the terror 
which Cromwell inspired. As for the captured cities, there can 
be no doubt of the wholesale massacres carried out therein by 
his orders. Of the entire population of Tredagh only thirty 
persons survived, and they were condemned to the labor of slaves.
Hugh Peters, the chaplain of Fairfax, wrote after this 
barbarous execution: "We are masters of Tredagh; no enemy was 
spared; I just come from the church where I had gone to thank 
the Lord."

The same fate awaited Wexford, and, later on, Drogheda. Cromwell,
when narrating those bloody massacres, concluded by saying, 
"People blame me, but it was the will of God."

The Bible, the holy word of God, misread and misunderstood by 
those fanatics, persuaded them that it would be a crime not to 
exterminate the Irish, as the Lord punished Saul for having 
spared Agag and the chief of the Amalekites. Whoever wishes for 
further details of these sickening atrocities, committed in the 
name of God, may find them in a multitude of histories of the 
time, but chiefly in the "Threnodia" of Friar Morrison.

Certain modern Irish historians would seem not to understand the 
heroism of their own countrymen. "Bitterly," says A. M. 
O'Sullivan, "did the Irish people pay for their loyalty to an 
English sovereign. Unhappily for their worldly fortunes, if not 
for their fame, they were high-spirited and unfearing, where 
pusillanimity would certainly have been safety, and might have 
been only prudence."

But the verdict of posterity, always a just one, calls such a 
high-spirited and unfearing attitude true heroism, and spurns 
pusillanimity even when it insures safety and may be called 
prudence, if its result is the surrender of holy faith and 
Christian truth. Safety and prudence characterized the conduct 
of the English nation under the iron rule of Cromwell, as under 
the tyranny of the Tudors. Can the reader of history admire the 
nation on that account? Who shall affirm that the result of the 
craven spirit of the English was the prosperity which ensued, 
and that of Irish heroism destruction and gloom? The history of 
either nation is far from ended yet; and bold would be the man 
who dare assert that the prosperity of England is everlasting, 
and the humiliation of Ireland never to know an end.

However that may be, this at least is undeniable: the opinion 
current of the Irish character is demonstrated to be altogether 
an erroneous one by the incontrovertible facts cursorily 
narrated above. Determination of purpose, adherence to 
conscience and principle, consistency of conduct, are terms all 
too weak to convey an idea of the magnanimity displayed by the 
people, and of their heroic bearing throughout those stirring 
events.

At last, after a bloody struggle with Cromwell and Ireton, on 
May 12, 1652, "the Leinster army of the Irish surrendered at 
Kilkenny on terms which were successively adopted by the other 
principal bodies of troops, between that time and the September 
following, when the Ulster forces came to composition." Then 
began the real woes of Ireland. Never was the ingenuity of man 
so taxed to destroy a whole nation as in the measures adopted by 
the Protector for that purpose. It is necessary to present a 
brief sketch of them, since all that the Irish suffered was 
designed to punish them for their attachment to their religion, 
and, be it borne in mind, their devotion to the lawful dynasty 
of the Stuarts.

First, then, to render easy of execution the stern and cruel 
resolve of the new government, the defenders of the nation were 
not only to be disarmed, but put out of the way. Hence Cromwell 
was gracious enough to consent that they be permitted to leave 
the country and take service in the armies of the foreign powers 
then at peace with the Commonwealth. Forty thousand men, 
officers and soldiers, adopted this desperate resolution.

"Soon agents from the King of Spain, the King of Poland, and the 
Prince de Conde, were contending for the service of the Irish 
troops. Don Ricardo White, in May, 1672, shipped seven thousand 
in batches from Waterford, Kinsale, Galway, Limerick, and Bantry,
for the King of Spain. Colonel Christopher Mayo got liberty in 
September to beat his drums, to raise three thousand more for 
the same destination. Lord Muskerry took with him five thousand 
to the King of Poland. In July, 1654, three thousand five 
hundred went to serve the Prince de Conde. Sir Walter Dungan and 
others got liberty to beat their drums in different garrisons 
for various destinations."--(Prendergast.)

To prove that the desperate resolution of leaving their country 
did not originate with the Irish, notwithstanding what some have 
written to the contrary, it is enough to remark that their 
expatriation was made a necessary condition of their surrender 
by the new government. For instance, Lord Clanrickard, according 
to Matthew O'Connor, "deserted and surrounded, could obtain no 
terms for the nation, nor indeed for himself and his troops, 
except with the sad liberty of transportation to any other 
country in amity with the Commonwealth."

To prove, if necessary, still further that the expatriation of 
the Irish troops was part of a scheme already resolved upon, it 
is enough to remember the indisputable fact that from the 
surrender at Kilkenny in 1652, until the open announcement in 
the September of 1653, that the Parliament had assigned 
Connaught for the dwelling-place of the Irish nation, whither 
they were to be "transplanted" before the 1st of May, 1654, the 
various garrisons and small armies which had fought so gallantly 
for Ireland and the Stuarts were successively urged (and urged 
by Cromwell meant compelled) to leave the country; and it was 
only when the last of the Irish regiments had departed that the 
doom of the nation was boldly and clearly announced.

But these forced exiles were not restricted to the warrior class.
"The Lord Protector," says Prendergast, "applied to the Lord 
Henry Cromwell, then major-general of the forces of Ireland, to 
engage soldiers . . . . and to secure a thousand young Irish 
girls to be shipped to Jamaica. Henry Cromwell answered that 
there would be no difficulty, only that force must be used in 
taking them; and he suggested the addition of fifteen hundred or 
two thousand boys of from twelve to fourteen years of age. . . . 
The numbers finally fixed were one thousand boys and one 
thousand girls."

The total number of children disposed of in the same way, from 
1652 to 1655, has been variously estimated at from twenty 
thousand to one hundred thousand. The British Government at last 
was compelled to interfere and put a stop to the infamous 
traffic, when, the mere Irish proving too scarce, the agents 
were not sufficiently discriminating in their choice, but 
shipped off English children also to the Tobacco Islands.

At last the island was left utterly without defenders, and 
sufficiently depopulated. It is calculated that, when the last 
great measure was announced and put into execution, only half a 
million of Irish people remained in the country, the rest of the 
resident population being composed of the Scotch and English, 
introduced by James I., and the soldiers and adventurers let in 
by Cromwell.

The main features of the celebrated "act of settlement" are 
known to all. It was an act intended to dispose quietly of half 
a million human beings, destined certainly in the minds of its 
projectors to disappear in due time, without any great violence--
to die off --and leave the whole island in the possession of 
the "godly."

Connaught is famed as being the wildest and most barren province 
of Ireland. At the best, it can support but a scanty population. 
At this time it had been completely devastated by a ten years' 
war and by the excesses of the parliamentary forces. This 
province then was mercifully granted to the unhappy Irish race; 
it was set apart as a paradise for the wretched remnant to dwell 
in all Connaught, except a strip four miles wide along the sea, 
and a like strip along the right bank of the Shannon. This 
latter judicious provision was undoubtedly intended to prevent 
them from dwelling by the ocean, whence they might derive 
subsistence or assistance, or means of escape in the event of 
their ever rising again; and, on the other hand, from crossing 
the Shannon, on the east side of which their homes might still 
be seen. This cordon of four miles' width was drawn all around 
what was the Irish nation, and filled with the fiercest zealots 
of the "army of the Lord" to keep guard over the devoted victims.

Surely the doom of the race was at last sealed!

But let all justice be done to the Protector. The act was to the 
effect that, on the first day of May, 1654, all who, throughout 
the war, had not displayed a constant good affection to the 
Parliament of England in opposition to Charles I., were to be 
removed with their families and servants to the wilds of a poor 
and desolated province, where certain lands were to be given 
them in return for their own estates. But, who of the Irish 
could prove that they had displayed a "constant good affection" 
to the English Parliament during a ten years' war? The act was 
nothing less than a proscription of the whole nation. The 
English of the Pale were included among the old natives, and 
even a few Protestant royalists, who had taken of the cause of 
the fallen Stuarts. The only exception made was in favor of 
"husbandmen, ploughmen, laborers, artificers, and others of the 
inferior sort." The English and Scotch--constituted by this act 
of settlement lords and masters of the three richest provinces 
of Ireland-- could not condescend to till the soil with their 
own hands and attend to the mechanical arts required in civil 
society. Those duties were reserved for the Irish poor. It was 
hoped that, deprived of their nobility and clergy, they might be 
turned to any account by their new masters, and either become 
good Protestants or perish as slaves. Herein mentita est 
iniquitas sibi.

The heart-rending details of this outrage on humanity may be 
seen in Mr. Prendergast's "Cromwellian Settlement." There all 
who read may form some idea of the extent of Ireland's 
misfortunes.

It is a wonder which cannot fail to strike the reader, how, 
after so many precautions had been taken, not only against the 
further increase of the race, but for its speedy demolition, how,
reduced to a bare half million, penned off on a barren tract of 
land, left utterly at the mercy of its persecutors, without 
priests, without organization of any kind, it not only failed to 
perish, but, from that time, has gone on, steadily increasing, 
until to-day it spreads out wide and far, not only on the island 
of its birth, but on the broad face of two vast continents.

In the space at our disposal, it is impossible to satisfy the 
curiosity of the reader on this very curious and interesting 
topic. A few remarks, however, may serve to broadly indicate the 
chief causes of this astonishing fact, taken apart from the 
miraculous intervention of God in their favor.

First, then, Connaught became more Irish than ever, and a 
powerful instrument, later on, to assist in the resurrection of 
the nation. In fact, as will soon be seen, it preserved life to 
it. Again, the outcasts, who were allowed to remain in the other 
three provinces as servants, or slaves, rather, were not found 
manageable on the score of religion; and, although new acts of 
Parliament forbade any bishop or priest to remain in the island, 
many did remain, some of them coming back from the Continent, 
whither they had been exported, to aid their unfortunate 
countrymen in this their direst calamity.

As Matthew O'Connor rightly says : "The ardent zeal, the 
fortitude and calm resignation of the Catholic clergy during 
this direful persecution, might stand a comparison with the 
constancy of Christians during the first ages of the Church. In 
the season of prosperity they may have pushed their pretensions 
too far"--this is M. O'Connor's private opinion of the 
Confederation of Kilkenny-- "but, in the hour of trial, they 
rose superior to human infirmities. . . . Sooner than abandon 
their flocks altogether, they fled from the communion of men, 
concealed themselves in woods and caverns, from whence they 
issued, whenever the pursuit of their enemies abated, to preach 
to the people, to comfort them in their afflictions, to 
encourage them in their trials;. . . their haunts were objects 
of indefatigable search; bloodhounds, the last device of human 
cruelty, were employed for the purpose, and the same price was 
set on the head of a priest as on that of a wolf."--(Irish 
Catholics.)

But, the expectation that the Irish of the lower classes, bereft 
of their pastors as well as of the guidance of their chieftains, 
would fall a prey to proselytizing ministers, and lose at once 
their nationality and their religion, was doomed to meet with 
disappointment.

Perhaps the cause more effective than all others in preserving 
the Irish nation from disappearing totally, came from a quarter 
least expected, or rather the most improbable and wonderful.

No device seemed better calculated to succeed in Protestantizing 
Ireland than the decree of Parliament which set forth that not 
only the officers, but even the common soldiers of the 
parliamentary army should be paid for their services, not in 
money, but in land; and that the estates of the old owners 
should be parcelled out and distributed among them in payment, 
as well as among those who, in England, had furnished funds for 
the prosecution of the war. Although many soldiers objected to 
this mode of compensation, some selling for a trifle the land 
allotted to them and returning to their own country, the great 
majority was compelled to rest satisfied with the government 
offer, and so resolved to settle down in Ireland and turn 
farmers. But a serious difficulty met them: women could not be 
induced to abandon their own country and go to dwell in the 
sister isle, while the Irish girls, being all Catholics, a 
decree of Parliament forbade the soldiers to marry them, unless 
they first succeeded in converting them to Protestantism. After 
many vain attempts, doubtless, the Cromwellian soldiers soon 
found the impossibility of bringing the "refractory" daughters 
of Erin to their way of thinking, and could find only one mode 
of bridging over the difficulty--to marry them first, without 
requiring then to apostatize; and secure their prize after by 
swearing that their wives were the most excellent of Protestants.
Thus while perjury became an every-day occurrence, the 
victorious army began to be itself vanquished by a powerful 
enemy which it had scarcely calculated upon, and was utterly 
unprepared to meet, and finally resting from its labors, enjoyed 
the sweets of peace and the fat of the land.

But woman, once she feels her power, is exacting, and in course 
of time the Cromwellian soldiers found that further sacrifices 
still were required of them, which they had never counted upon. 
Their wives could, by no persuasion, be induced to speak English,
so that, however it might go against the grain, the husbands 
were compelled to learn Irish and speak it habitually as best 
they might. Their difficulties began to multiply with their 
children, when they found them learning Irish in the cradle, 
irresistible in their Irish wit and humor, and lisping the 
prayers and reverencing the faith they had learned at their 
mothers' knees. So that, from that time to this, the posterity 
of Cromwell's "Ironsides," of such of them at least as remained 
in Ireland, have been devoted Catholics and ardent Irishmen.

The case was otherwise with the chief officers of the 
parliamentary army, who had received large estates and could 
easily obtain wives from England. They remained stanch 
Protestants, and their children have continued in the religion 
received with the estates which came to them from this wholesale 
confiscation. But the bulk of the army, instead of helping to 
form a Protestant middle class and a Protestant yeomanry, has 
really helped to perpetuate the sway of the Catholic religion in 
Ireland, and the feeling of nationality so marked to-day. This 
very remarkable fact has been well established and very plainly 
set forth, a few years ago, by eminent English reviewers.

Meanwhile, Ireland was a prey to all the evils which can afflict 
a nation. Pestilence was added to the ravages of war and the 
woes of transplantation, and it raged alike among the conquerors 
and the conquered. Friar Morrisson's "Threnodia" reads to-day 
like an exaggerated lament, the burden of which was drawn from a 
vivid imagination. Yet can there be little doubt that it 
scarcely presented the whole truth; an exact reproduction of all 
the heart-rending scenes then daily enacted in the unfortunate 
island would prove a tale as moving as ever harrowed the pitying 
heart of a reader.

And all this suffering was the direct consequence of two things--
the attachment of the Irish to the Catholic religion, and their 
devotion to the Stuart dynasty. Modern historians, in 
considering all the circumstances, express themselves unable to 
understand the constancy of this people's affection for a line 
of kings from whom they had invariably experienced, not only 
neglect, but positive opposition, if not treachery. In their 
opinion, only the strangest obliquity of judgment can explain 
such infatuation. Some call it stupidity; but the Irish people 
have never been taxed with that. Even in the humblest ranks of 
life among them, there exists, not only humor, but a keenness of 
perception, and at times an extraordinary good sense, which is 
quick to detect motives, and find out what is uppermost in the 
minds of others.

There is but one reading of the riddle, consistent with the 
whole character of the people: they clung to the Stuarts because 
they were obedient to the precepts and duties of religion, and 
labored under the belief, however mistaken, that from the 
Stuarts alone could they hope for any thing like freedom. Their 
spiritual rulers had insisted on the duty of sustaining at all 
hazard the legitimate authority of the king, and they were 
firmly convinced that they could expect from no other a 
relaxation of the religious penal statutes imposed on them by 
their enemies. The more frequent grew their disappointments in 
the measures adopted by the sovereigns on whom they had set 
their hopes, the more firmly were they convinced that their 
intentions were good, but rendered futile by the men who 
surrounded and coerced them.

Religion can alone explain this singular affection of the Irish 
people for a race which, in reality, has caused the greatest of 
their misfortunes.

The subsequent events of this strange history are in perfect 
keeping with those preceding. A few words will suffice to sketch 
them.

On the death of Oliver Cromwell, his son Richard, being unable 
and indeed unwilling to remain at the head of the English state, 
the nation, tired of the iron rule of the Protector, fearful 
certainly of anarchy, and preferring the conservative measures 
of monarchy to the ever-changing revolutions of a commonwealth, 
recalled the son of Charles I. to the throne.

But a kind of bargain had been struck by him with those who 
disposed of the crown; and he undertook and promised to disturb 
as little as possible the vested interests created by the 
revolution, that is to say, he pledged himself to let the 
settlement of property remain as he found it. In England that 
promise was productive of little mischief to the nation at large,
though fatal to the not very numerous families who had been 
deprived of their estates by the Parliament. But, in Ireland, it 
was a very different matter; for there the interests of the 
whole nation were ousted to make room for these "vested 
interests" of proprietors of scarcely ten years' standing.

The Irish nobility and gentry, at first unaware of the existence 
of this bargain, were in joyful expectation that right would at 
last be done them, as it was for loyalty to the father of the 
new king that they had been robbed of all their possessions. 
They were soon undeceived. To their surprise, they learned that 
the speculators, army-officers, and soldiers already in 
possession of their estates, were not to be disturbed, short as 
the possession had been; and that only such lands as were yet 
unappropriated should be returned to their rightful owners, 
provided only they were not papists, or could prove that they 
had been "innocent papists."

The consequences of this bargain are clear. The Irish of the old 
native race who had been, as now appeared, so foolishly ardent 
in their loyalty to the throne, were to be abandoned to the fate 
to which Cromwell had consigned them, and could expect to 
recover nothing of what they had so nobly lost. So flagrantly 
unjust was the whole proceeding, that after a time many 
Englishmen even saw the injustice of the decision, and lifted up 
their voices in defence of the Irish Catholics who alone could 
hope for nothing from the restoration of royalty. To put a stop 
to this, the infamous "Oates" fabrication was brought forward, 
which destroyed a number of English Catholic families and 
stifled the voice of humanity in its efforts to befriend the 
Irish race; and so sudden, universal, and lasting, was the 
effect of this plot in closing the eyes of all to the claims of 
the Irish, that when its chief promoter, Shaftesbury, was 
dragged to the Tower and there imprisoned as a miscreant, and 
Oates himself suffered a punishment too mild for his villany, 
nevertheless no one thought of again taking up the cause of the 
Irish natives.

It is almost impossible in these days to realize what has 
occupied our attention in this chapter. The unparalleled act of 
spoliation by which four-fifths of the Irish nation were 
deprived of their property by Cromwell because of their devotion 
to Charles I., for the alleged reason that they could not prove 
a constant good affection for the English regicide Parliament, 
that spoliation was ratified by the son of Charles within a few 
years after the rightful owners, who had sacrificed their 
property for the sake of his father, had been dispossessed, 
while the parliamentarians, who by force of arms had broken down 
the power of Charles and enabled the members of the Long 
Parliament to try their king and bring him to the block, those 
very soldiers and officers were left in possession of their ill-
gotten plunder, at a time when many of the owners were only a 
few miles away in Connaught, or even inhabiting the out-houses 
of their own mansions, and tilling the soil as menial servants 
of Cromwell's troopers.

The case, apparently similar, which occurred in after-years, of 
the French emigrant nobility, cannot be compared with the result 
of this strange concession of Charles II. In fact, it may be 
said that the spoliations of 1792-'93 in France would probably 
never have taken place but for the successful example held up to 
the eyes of the legislators of the French Republic by the 
English Revolution.

As for the share which Charles II. himself bore in the measure, 
it is best told by the fact that the work of spoliation was 
carried on so vigorously during the reign of the "merry monarch,"
that when a few years later William of Orange came to the 
throne there was no land left for him to dispose of among his 
followers save the last million of acres. All the rest had been 
portioned off. Well might Dr. Madden say: "The whole of Ireland 
has been so thoroughly confiscated that the only exception was 
that of five or six families of English blood, some of whom had 
been attainted in the reign of Henry VIII., but recovered 
flourished ever since. Yet did they not refuse the accessory 
with the principal. Deluded men they may be called by many; but 
people cannot ordinarily understand the high motives which move 
men swayed only by the twofold feeling of religion and nationality.

Nothing in our opinion could better prove that the Irish were 
really a nation, at the time we speak of, than the remarks just 
set forth. When all minds are so unanimous, the wills so ready, 
the arms so strong and well prepared to strike together, it must 
be admitted that in the whole exists a common feeling, a 
national will. Self-government may be wanting; it may have been 
suppressed by sheer force and kept under by the most unfavorable 
state of affairs, but the nation subsists and cannot fail 
ultimately to rise.

In those eventful times shone forth too that characteristic 
which has already been remarked upon of a true conservative 
spirit and instinctive hatred for every principle which in our 
days is called radical and revolutionary. Had there existed in 
the Irish disposition the least inclination toward those social 
and moral aberrations, productive to-day of so many and such 
widespread evils, surely the period of the English Revolution 
was the fitting time to call them forth, and turn them from 
their steady adherence to right and order into the new channels, 
toward which nations were being then hurried, and which would 
really have favored for the time being their own efforts for 
independence. Then would the Irish have presented to future 
historians as stirring an episode of excitement and activity as 
was furnished by the English and Scotch at that time, by the 
French later on, and which to-day most European nations offer.

The temptation was indeed great. They saw with what success 
rebellion was rewarded among the English and Scotch. They 
themselves were sure to be stamped as rebels whichever side they 
took; and, as was seen, Charles II. allowed his commissioners in 
his act of settlement so to style them, and punish them for it-- 
for supporting the cause of his father against the Parliament.

Would it not have been better for them to have become once, at 
least, rebels in true earnest, and reap the same advantage from 
rebellion which all around them reaped? Yet did they stand proof 
against the demoralizing doctrines of Scotch Covenanter and 
English republican. Hume, who was openly adverse to every thing 
Irish, is compelled to describe this Catholic people as "loyal 
from principle, attached to regal power from religious education,
uniformly opposing popular frenzy, and zealous vindicators of 
royal prerogatives."

All this was in perfect accord with their traditional spirit and 
historical recollections. Revolutionary doctrines have always 
been antagonistic to the Irish mind and heart. This will appear 
more fully when recent times come under notice, and it may be a 
surprise to some to find that, with the exception of a few 
individuals, who in nowise represent the nation, the latest and 
favorite theories of the world, not only on religion, science, 
and philosophy, but likewise on government and the social state, 
have never found open advocates among them. They, so far, 
constitute the only nation untouched, as yet, by the blight 
which is passing over and withering the life of modern society. 
Thus, it may be said that the exiled nobility still rules in 
Ireland by the recollection of the past, though there can no 
longer exist a hope of reconstructing an ancient order which has 
passed away forever. The prerogatives once granted to the 
aristocratic classes are now disowned and repudiated on all 
sides; in Ireland they would be submitted to with joy tomorrow, 
could the actual descendants of the old families only make good 
their claims. It must not be forgotten that the Irish nobility, 
as a class, deserved well of their country, sacrificed 
themselves for it when the time of sacrifice came, and therefore 
it is fitting that they should live in the memory of the people 
that sees their traces but finds them not. The dream of finding 
rulers for the nation from among those who claim to be the 
descendants of the old chieftains, is a dream and nothing more; 
but, even still to many Irishmen, it is within the compass of 
reality, so deeply ingrained is their conservative spirit, and 
so completely, in this instance, at least, are they free from 
the influx of modern ideas.

The Stuarts, then, were supported by the Irish, not merely from 
religious, but also from national motives, inasmuch as that 
family was descended from the line of Gaelic kings, and, however 
unworthy they themselves may have been, their rights were upheld 
and acknowledged against all comers. But, the Stuarts gone, 
allegiance was flung to the winds.

The success of Cromwell and his republic was the doom of all 
prospects of the reunion of the two islands; and the subsequent 
Revolution of 1688, which commenced so soon after the death of 
the Protector, left the Irish in the state in which the 
struggles of four hundred years with the Plantagenets and Tudors 
had placed and left them in relation to their connection with 
England--a state of antagonism and mutual repulsion, wherein the 
Irish nation, the victim of might, was slowly educated by 
misfortune until the time should come for the open 
acknowledgment of right.


CHAPTER XII.


A CENTURY OF GLOOM.--THE PENAL LAWS.

William III., of Orange, was inclined to observe, in good faith, 
the articles agreed upon at the surrender of Limerick, namely, 
to allow the conquered liberty of worship, citizen rights, so 
much as remained to them of their property, and the means for 
personal safety recognized before the departure of Sarsfield and 
his men.

The lords justices even issued a proclamation commanding "all 
officers and soldiers of the army and militia, and all other 
persons whatsoever, to forbear to do any wrong or injury, or to 
use unlawful violence to any of his Majesty's subjects, whether 
of the British or Irish nation, without distinction, and that 
all persons taking the oath of allegiance, and behaving 
themselves according to law, should be deemed subjects under 
their Majesties' protection, and be equally entitled to the 
benefit of the law."--(Harris, "Life of William.")

This first proclamation not having been generally obeyed, 
another was published denouncing "the utmost vengeance of the 
law against the offenders;" and the author above quoted adds 
that "the satisfaction given to the Irish was a source of 
lasting gratitude to the person and government of William."

It is even asserted that, not only did the new monarch thus 
ratify the treaty of Limerick, but that "he inserted in the 
ratification a clause of the last importance to the Irish, which 
had been omitted in the draught signed by the lords justices and 
Sarsfield. That clause extended the benefits of the capitulation 
to "all such as were under the protection of the Irish army in 
the counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, and Mayo. A great 
quantity of Catholic property depended on the insertion of this 
clause in the ratification, and the English Privy Council 
hesitated whether to take advantage of the omission. The honesty 
of the king declared it to be a part of the articles."

The final confirmation was issued from Westminster on February 
24, 1692, in the name of William and Mary.

But the party which had overcome the honest leanings of James I.,
if he ever had any, and of his son and grandson, was at this 
time more powerful than ever, and could not consent to extend 
the claims of justice and right to the conquered. This party was 
the Ulster colony, which Cromwell's settlement had spread to the 
two other provinces of Leinster and Munster, and which was 
confirmed in its usurpation by the weakness of the second 
Charles. The motives for the bitter animosity which caused it to 
set its face against every measure involving the scantiest 
justice toward its fellow-countrymen may be summed up in two 
words--greed and fanaticism.

Until the time when the first of the Stuarts ascended the 
English throne, all the successive spoliations of Ireland, even 
the last under Elizabeth, at the end of the Geraldine war, were 
made to the advantage of the English nobility. Even the younger 
sons of families from Lancashire, Cheshire, and Dorsetshire, who 
"planted" Munster after the ruin of the Desmonds, had noble 
blood in their veins, and were consequently subject more or less 
to the ordinary prejudices of feudal lords. The life of the 
agriculturist and grazier was too low down in the social scale 
to catch their supercilious glance. The consequence of which was,
that the Catholic tenants of Munster were left undisturbed in 
their holdings. Instead of the "dues" exacted by their former 
chieftains, they now paid rent to their new lords.

But the rabble let loose on the island by James I. was afflicted 
with no such dainty notions as these. To supercilious glances 
were substituted eyes keen as the Israelites', for the "main 
chance." The new planters, intent only on profit and gain, 
thought with the French peasant of an after-date, that, for 
landed estate to produce its full value, "there is nothing like 
the eye of a master." The Irish peasant was therefore removed 
from at least one-half the farms of Ulster, and driven to live 
as best he might among the Protestant lords of Munster. And in 
order to have an entirely Protestant "plantation," it became 
incumbent on the new owners so to frame the legislation as to 
deprive the Irish Catholics of any possibility of recovering 
their former possessions. Thus, laws were passed declaring null 
and void all purchases made by "Irish papists."

Who has not witnessed, at some period in his life, the effect 
produced on the people in his neighborhood by one avaricious but 
wealthy man, intent only on increasing his property, and 
profiting by the slavish labor of the poor under his control? 
Who has not detested, in his inmost soul, the grinding tyranny 
of the miser gloating over the hard wealth which he has wrung 
from the misery and tears of all around him, and who boasts of 
the cunning shrewdness, the success of which is only too visible 
in the desolation that encircles him? Imagine such scenes 
enacted throughout a large territory, beginning with Ulster, 
spreading thence to Munster and Connaught, and finally through 
the whole island, and we have an exact picture of the effects of 
the Protestant "plantation." Each year, almost, of the 
seventeenth century witnessed fresh swarms of these foreign 
adventurers settling on the island, interrupted in their 
operations only by the Confederation of Kilkenny, but 
multiplying faster and faster after the destruction of that 
truly national government, until at the time now under our 
consideration, "Scotch thrift," as it is called, had become the 
chief virtue of most of the owners of land--Scotch thrift, which 
is but another name for greed.

It were easy to show, by long details, that this great 
characteristic of the new "plantation" would suffice to explain 
that general and terrible pauperism which has since become the 
striking feature of once-happy Ireland. But only a few words can 
be allowed.

It is the fanaticism of the new "planters" which will chiefly 
occupy our attention. These were composed, first, of the Scotch 
Presbyterians of Knox, whom James I. had dispatched, and 
afterward of the ranting soldiers and officers of Cromwell's 
army, more Jew than Christian, since their mouths were ever 
filled with Bible texts of that particular character wherein the 
wrath of God is denounced against the impious and cruel tribes 
of Palestine. It is doubtful whether the ideas of God and man, 
promulgated and spread among the people by Calvin and Knox, have 
ever been equalled in evil consequences by the most 
superstitious beliefs of ancient pagans. Let us look well at 
those teachings. According to them, God is the author of evil: 
he issues forth his decrees of election or reprobation, 
irrespective of merit or demerit; inflicting eternal torments on 
innumerable souls which never could have been saved, and for 
whom the Son of God did not die. What any rational being must 
consider as the most revolting cruelty and injustice, these men 
called acts of pure justice executed by the hand of God. God 
saves blindly those whom he saves, and takes them home to his 
bosom, though reeking with the unrepented and unexpiated crimes 
of their lives--unexpiable, in fact, on the part of man--merely 
because they persuade themselves that they are of "the elect."

In that system, man is a mere machine, unendowed with the 
slightest symptom of free-will, but inflated with the most 
overbearing pride; deeming all others but those of his sect the 
necessary objects of the blind wrath of God, cast off and 
reprobate from all eternity in the designs of Providence; for 
whom "the elect" can feel no more pity or affection than 
redeemed men can for the arch-fiend himself, both being alike 
redeemless and unredeemed.

No system of pretended religion, invented by the perverted mind 
of man, under the inspiration of the Evil One, could go further 
in atrocity than this.

Yet such was the pure, undiluted essence of Calvinism in its 
beginning. In our times its doctrines have been radically 
modified, as its adherents could not escape the soothing 
operations of time and calm reason. But, at the period of which 
we speak, its absurd and revolting tenets were fresh, and taken 
religiously to the letter.

The new colonists, therefore, believed, and acted on the belief, 
that all men outside of their own body were the enemies of God 
and had God for their enemy. What a convenient doctrine for men 
of an "itching palm! " The papists, in particular, were worse 
than idolaters, and to "root them out" was only to render a 
service to God. In the event of this holy desire not being 
altogether possible of execution, the nearest approach to the 
goodly work was to strip them of all rights, and render the life 
of such reprobates more miserable than the death which was to 
condemn them to the eternal torments planned out for them in the 
eternal decrees, and so give them a foretaste here of the life 
destined for them hereafter.

The reader, then, may understand how the Scotch Presbyterians of 
the time, overflowing as they were with free and republican 
ideas as far as regarded their own welfare, when it came to a 
question of extending the same to their Catholic fellow-men, if 
they would have admitted the term, scouted such a preposterous 
and ungodly idea. These latter were unworthy the enjoyment of 
such benefit. And thus the hoot of Protestant ascendancy, 
"Protestant liberty and right! " came up as war-cries to stifle 
out all efforts tending to extend even the most ordinary 
privileges of the liberty which is man's by nature, to any but 
Protestants of the same class as themselves.

Here a curious reflection, full of meaning, and causing the mind 
almost to mock at the type of a free constitution, presents 
itself. The eighteenth century witnessed the development of the 
British Constitution as now known. It embraced in its bosom all 
British citizens, raising up the nation to the pinnacle of 
material prosperity, while at the same time and all through it, 
whole classes of citizens of the British Empire, both in Great 
Britain and Ireland, were openly, unblushingly, legally, without 
a thought of mercy or pity--not to mention such an ugly word as 
logic--denied the protection of the common charter and the 
common rights.

Under Cromwell the doctrines of Calvin and Knox did not show 
themselves quite so obtrusively. The officers and soldiers of 
his armies, in common with their general, thought the 
Presbyterian Kirk too aristocratic and unbending. They formed a 
new sect of Independents, now called Congregationalists. But the 
chief feature of the new religious system became as productive 
of evil to Ireland as the stern dogmas of Calvin ever could be. 
The principle that the Scriptures constituted the only rule of 
faith was beginning to bear its fruits. It is needless to remark 
that Holy Scripture, when abandoned to the free interpretation 
of all, becomes the source of many errors, as it may be the 
source of many crimes. The historian and novelist even have ere 
now frequently told us to what purpose the "Word of God " was 
manipulated by Scottish Covenanter and Cromwellian freebooter.

The Covenanter, or freebooter, saw in the antagonists of his 
"real rebellion" and opposers of the designs of his dark policy, 
only the enemies of God and the adversaries of his Providence. 
He believed himself divinely commissioned to destroy Catholics 
and butcher innocent women and children, as the armies of Joshua 
were authorized to fight against Amalek, and possess themselves 
of a country occupied by a people whose cruel idolatry was 
ineradicable, and rendered them absolutely irreconcilable. Thus 
to the stern and odious tenets of Calvinism the new invaders 
joined the fanaticism of self-deluded Jews, never having 
received any commission from the God whom they blasphemed, yet 
bearing themselves with all the solemnity of his instruments.

There is consequently nothing to surprise us in the atrocities 
committed by the Scotch troops in 1641, when they first invaded 
the island from the north, as little as there is in the numerous 
massacres which first attended the march of the troops of 
Cromwell, Ireton, and other leaders, and which were only 
discontinued when the voice of Europe rose up in revolt at the 
recital, and they themselves became thoroughly convinced that 
the complete destruction of the people was impossible, and the 
only next best thing to be done was to export as many as could 
be exported and reduce the rest to slavery.

Thus did the new colony commence its workings, and it is easy to 
comprehend how such intensely Protestant doctrines, remaining 
implanted in the breasts of the people who came to make Ireland 
their home, could not fail to oppose an insurmountable barrier 
to the fusion of the new and the old inhabitants, and impart a 
fearful reality to the theory of "Protestant ascendancy" and 
"Protestant liberty and right "--the liberty and right to 
oppress those of another creed.

These watchwords form the key to the understanding of all the 
miseries and woes of Irishmen during the whole of the eighteenth 
century. We now turn to contemplate the commencement of the 
workings of this fanatic intolerance which ushered in the 
century of gloom.

The lords justices had just returned, after concluding the 
treaty of peace with Sarsfield, when the first mutterings of the 
thunder were heard that presaged the coming storm. Dr. Dopping, 
the Protestant Bishop of Meath, while preaching before them on 
the Sunday following their return to Dublin, reproached them 
openly in Christ Church for their indulgence to the Irish, and 
urged that no faith was to be kept with such a cruel and 
perfidious race. This sort of doctrine has been heard before, 
and from men of the stamp of Dr. Dopping; it is still heard 
every day, but it is generally thrown into the teeth of 
Catholics and saddled on them as their doctrine, however 
frequently refuted.

The doctor stated broadly that with such people no treaties were 
binding, and that therefore the articles of Limerick were not to 
be observed.

William and his Irish government endeavored to check this 
intemperance; but the feelings of the sectarians were too ardent 
to be thus easily smothered, and the greater the opposition they 
encountered, the more they insisted on proclaiming their views, 
to which naturally they gained many adherents among the 
colonists of the Protestant plantation.

The Irish Parliament soon assembled in Dublin. The majority, 
imbued with the gloomy Calvinism of the times, and fearing to 
face the opposition of the respectable minority of Catholic 
members, who had come to take their seats, passed an act 
imposing a new oath, in contradiction to one of the articles of 
the treaty. That oath included an abjuration of James's right de 
jure, a renunciation of the spiritual authority of the Pope, and 
(as though that were not enough to exclude Catholics) a 
declaration against the doctrine of transubstantiation and other 
fundamental tenets of their creed. Persons who refused to take 
this oath were debarred from all offices and emoluments, as well 
as from both Houses of the Irish Parliament.

The Catholic members were compelled to withdraw at once; and no 
Catholic ever took part in the legislation of his own country 
from that day until the Emancipation in 1829.

After this withdrawal, which in the times of the French 
Convention would have been called an epuration, the Irish 
Parliament became the bane of the country. In fact, it only 
represented parliamentary England, and subjected Ireland to 
every measure required by English ultraists for the attainment 
of their selfish purposes. Possessed by a gloomy fanaticism, its 
main object was to root out of the island every vestige that 
remained of the religion which had once flourished there. All 
its legislative spirit was concentrated in the two questions: 
Are the laws already in existence against the further growth of 
Popery rigidly enforced? and, cannot some new law be introduced 
to further the same object.?

Many a time were these two questions put in the assembly called 
the Irish Parliament, until near the end of the eighteenth 
thunder were heard that presaged the coming storm. Dr. Dopping, 
the Protestant Bishop of Meath, while preaching before them on 
the Sunday following their return to Dublin, reproached them 
openly in Christ Church for their indulgence to the Irish, and 
urged that no faith was to be kept with such a cruel and 
perfidious race. This sort of doctrine has been heard before, 
and from men of the stamp of Dr. Dopping; it is still heard 
every day, but it is generally thrown into the teeth of 
Catholics and saddled on them as their doctrine, however 
frequently refuted.

The doctor stated broadly that with such people no treaties were 
binding, and that therefore the articles of Limerick were not to 
be observed.

William and his Irish government endeavored to check this 
intemperance; but the feelings of the sectarians were too ardent 
to be thus easily smothered, and the greater the opposition they 
encountered, the more they insisted on proclaiming their views, 
to which naturally they gained many adherents among the 
colonists of the Protestant plantation.

The Irish Parliament soon assembled in Dublin. The majority, 
imbued with the gloomy Calvinism of the times, and fearing to 
face the opposition of the respectable minority of Catholic 
members, who had come to take their seats, passed an act 
imposing a new oath, in contradiction to one of the articles of 
the treaty. That oath included an abjuration of James's right de 
jure, a renunciation of the spiritual authority of the Pope, and 
(as though that were not enough to exclude Catholics) a 
declaration against the doctrine of transubstantiation and other 
fundamental tenets of their creed. Persons who refused to take 
this oath were debarred from all offices and emoluments, as well 
as from both Houses of the Irish Parliament.

The Catholic members were compelled to withdraw at once; and no 
Catholic ever took part in the legislation of his own country 
from that day until the Emancipation in 1829.

After this withdrawal, which in the times of the French 
Convention would have been called an epuration, the Irish 
Parliament became the bane of the country. In fact, it only 
represented parliamentary England, and subjected Ireland to 
every measure required by English ultraists for the attainment 
of their selfish purposes. Possessed by a gloomy fanaticism, its 
main object was to root out of the island every vestige that 
remained of the religion which had once flourished there. All 
its legislative spirit was concentrated in the two questions: 
Are the laws already in existence against the further growth of 
Popery rigidly enforced? and, cannot some new law be introduced 
to further the same object.?

Many a time were these two questions put in the assembly called 
the Irish Parliament, until near the end of the eighteenth 
Popery, and, in the next place, it makes evident the necessity 
there is of cultivating and preserving a good understanding 
among all Protestants in this kingdom."'

Let the reader bear in mind that language such as this, and its 
result in the shape of atrocious legislation, continued 
throughout the whole of the eighteenth century in Ireland, and 
he will find no difficulty in understanding the meaning of 
Edmund Burke's words when he said : "The code against the 
Catholics was a machine of wise and elaborate contrivance; and 
as well fitted for the oppression, impoverishment, and 
degradation of a people, and the debasement in them of human 
nature itself, as ever proceeded from the perverted ingenuity of 
man." And, elsewhere: "To render men patient under the 
deprivation of all the rights of human nature, every thing which 
could give them a knowledge and feeling of those rights was 
rationally forbidden. To render humanity fit to be insulted, it 
was fit that it should be degraded."

But it is very pertinent to our purpose to give a sketch of 
those good laws, as Wharton calls them, before seeing how the 
Irish preferred to submit to them rather than lose their faith 
by "conforming." The subject has been already investigated by 
many writers, and of late far more completely than formerly. But 
the authors never presented the laws as a whole, contenting 
themselves, for the most part, by transcribing them in the 
chronological order in which they were enacted, or, if 
occasionally they endeavored to combine and thus present a more 
striking idea of the effect which such laws must have produced 
on the people, they were never, as far as is known to the writer,
reduced to a plan, and consequently fail to bring forth the 
effect intended to be produced by them.

It is impossible here to give the text of those various laws-- 
impossible even to give a fairly accurate idea of the whole. 
They shall be classified, however, to the best of our ability, 
and as fully as circumstances permit.

Mr. Prendergast seems to consider their ultimate object always 
to have been the robbing of the Irish of their lands, or 
securing the plunder if already in possession. That this was one 
of the great objects always kept in view in their enactment, we 
do not feel inclined to contest; but that it was their only or 
even chief cause, we may be allowed to question, with the 
greatest deference to the opinion of the celebrated author of 
the often-quoted "Cromwellian Settlement."

We believe those laws to have been produced chiefly by sectarian 
fanaticism; or, if some of their framers, such as Lord Wharton, 
possessed no religious feelings of any kind, and could not be 
called fanatics, their intent was to pander to the real 
fanaticism of the English people, as it existed at the time, and 
particularly of the colony planted in Ireland, which hated 
Popery to the death, and would have given all its possessions 
and lands for the destruction of the Scarlet Woman.

In order to attain the great result proposed, the aim of the 
"penal statute" was one in its very complexity. For it had to 
deal with complex rights, which it took away one after another 
until the unity of the system was completed by the suppression 
of them all.

We classify these under the heads of political, civil, and human 
rights. The result of the whole policy was to degrade the Irish 
to the level of the wretched helots under Sparta, with this 
difference: while the slaves of the Lacedaemonians numbered but 
a few thousands, the Irish were counted by millions.

The system, as a whole, was the work of time, and, under William 
of Orange--even under Queen Anne--it had not yet attained its 
maturity, though the principal and the severest measures were 
carried and put in force from the very beginning. The ingenious 
little devices regarding short and small leases, the possession 
of valuable horses, etc., were mere fanciful adjuncts which the 
witty and inventive legislators of the Hanoverian dynasty were 
happy enough to find unrecorded in the statute-books, and which 
they had the honor of setting there, and thus adding a new 
piquancy and vigorous flavor to the whole dish.

Toward the middle of the eighteenth century, the system may be 
said to have reached its perfection. After that time it would, 
in all likelihood, have been impossible to improve further, and 
render the yoke of slavery heavier and more galling to the Irish.
The beauty and simplicity of the whole consisted in the fact 
that the great majority of these measures were not decreed in so 
many positive and express terms against Catholics in the form of 
open and persecuting statutes. It was merely mentioned in the 
laws that, to enjoy such and such a particular right, it was 
necessary that every subject of the crown should take such and 
such an oath, which no Catholic could take. Thus, the entire 
Irish population was set between their religion and their rights,
and at any moment, by merely taking the oath, they were at 
liberty to enjoy all the privileges which rendered the colonists 
living in their midst so happy and contented, and so proud of 
their "Protestant ascendency."

It was hoped, no doubt, that, if at first and for a certain time,
the faith of the Irish would stand proof and prompt them to 
sacrifice every thing held dear in life, rather than surrender 
that faith, nevertheless, worn out at length, and disheartened 
by wretchedness, unable longer to sustain their heavy burden, 
they would finally succumb, and, by the mere action of such an 
easy thing as recording an oath in accordance with the law, 
though against their conscience, become men and citizens. It was 
what the French Conventionalists of 1793 called "desoler la
patience" of their victims.

This unholy hope was disappointed; and, with the exception of a 
comparatively few weak Christians among their number, the nation 
stood firm and preferred the "ignominy of the cross of Christ" 
to the enjoyments of this perishable life.

Their political rights were, as was seen, the first to be taken 
away. The Parliament of 1691 required of its members the oath 
referred to, and for the repudiation of which, all the Catholic 
members were compelled at once to withdraw. But the contrivance 
of swearing being found such an excellent instrument to use 
against men possessed of a conscience, the ruling body--now 
reduced to the former Protestant majority--required that the 
same oath be taken by all electors, magistrates, and officers of 
whatever grade, from the highest to the lowest in the land.

The oath itself was an elastic formula, capable of being 
stretched or contracted, according to circumstances, so that, by 
the addition of an incidental phrase or two, it might be framed 
to meet new exigencies, and give expression to the lively 
imagination of ingenious members of Parliament. It would be 
curious to collect an account of the variety of shapes it 
assumed, and to comment on the different occasions which gave 
rise to these different developments. A long history of 
persecuting frenzy might thus be condensed into a commentary of 
a comparatively few pages. Even at the so-called Catholic 
Emancipation it was not abolished; on the contrary, it was 
sacredly preserved, and two new formulas drawn up, the one for 
the Protestant and the other for the Catholic members of the 
legislature, Lords and Commons, and so it remains, to this day, 
except that the most offensive clauses of the last century have 
disappeared.

Imagine, then, the spectacle offered by the island whenever an 
election for representatives, magistrates, or petty officers, 
took place; whenever those entitled to select holders of offices 
which were not subject to election, made known the persons of 
their choice. This vast array of aristocratic masters was chosen 
from the ranks of the English colonists, and had for its avowed 
object to preserve the Protestant ascendency, and consequently 
grind under the heel of the most abject oppression the whole 
mass of the population of the island. There was no other meaning 
in all these political combinations and changes, recurring 
periodically, and heralded forth by the voice of the press and 
the thunder of the hustings. Politics in Ireland was nothing 
else than the expression given to the despotism of an 
insignificant minority over almost the entire body of the people.
For, despite all their repressive measures, the enemies of the 
Catholic faith could never pretend even to a semblance in point 
of numbers, much less to a majority, over the children of the 
creed taught by Patrick. Ireland remained Catholic throughout; 
and its oppressors could not fail to feel the bitter humiliation 
of their constant numerical inferiority. Hence the words quoted 
in the speech of Wharton, the lord-lieutenant.

This has always been the case, in spite of the combination of a 
multitude of circumstances adverse to the spread of the Catholic 
population. It may not be amiss to give room for the statistics 
and remarks of Abbe Perraud on this most interesting subject, 
contained in his book on "Ireland under British rule."

"In 1672, the total population of Ireland was 1,100,000 (it is 
to be remembered that this was after the massacres and 
transportations of Cromwell's period). Of that number

                800,000 were Catholics.
                 50,000  "   Dissenters.
                150,000  "   Church-of-Ireland men.

"In 1727, the Anglican Primate of Ireland, Boulter, Archbishop 
of Armagh, wrote to his English colleague, the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, that  'we have, in all probability, in this kingdom, 
at least five Papists for every Protestant.' Those proportions 
are confirmed by official statistics under Queen Anne.

"In 1740, according to a kind of official census, confirmed by 
Wakefield, the number of Protestant heads of families did not 
exceed 96,067.

"Twenty-six years later, the Dublin House of Lords caused a 
comparative table of Protestant and Catholic families to be 
drawn up for each county. The result was the following:

Protestant families . . 130,263
Catholic families   . . 305,680

"In 1834, exact statistical returns being made of the members of 
each communion, the following was the result: The total 
population being estimated at 7,943,940, the Church-of-Ireland 
members amounted only to the number of 852,064. The remaining 7,
091,876 were thus divided:

Presbyterians . . . . . . 642,350
Other Dissenters  . . . .  21,808
Catholics . . . . . . . 6,427,718

"The censuses of 1841 and 1851 contained no information upon 
this important question. Thirty years had therefore elapsed 
since official figures had given the exact proportions of each 
Church.

"This silence of the Blue Books had given rise, among the 
Protestant press of England and Ireland, to the opinion, too 
hastily adopted on the Continent by publicists of great weight, 
that emigration and famine had resulted in the equalization of 
the numbers of Protestants and Catholics in Ireland. The evident 
conclusion joyfully drawn from this supposed fact by the 
defenders of the Anglican Church was, that the scandal of a 
Protestant establishment in the midst and at the expense of a 
Catholic people was gradually dying away.

"The forlorn hope of the Tory and Orange press went still 
further. They boldly disputed Ireland's right to the title of 
Catholic. So, although, ten years and twenty years before, these 
same journals furiously opposed the admission of religious 
denominations into the statistics of the census, yet, when the 
census of 1861 drew near, they quite as loudly demanded its 
insertion. They made it a matter of challenge to the Catholics.

"The ultramontane journals accepted the challenge. The Catholics 
unanimously demanded a denominational census. The results were 
submitted to the representatives of the nation in July, 1861. No 
shorter, more decisive, or more triumphant answer could have 
been given to the sarcasms and challenges of the old Protestant 
party."

We confine ourselves here to the total sums, leaving out minor 
details:

Catholics . . . . . . . . 4,490,583 
Establishment . . . . . .   687,661 
Dissenters  . . . . . . .   595,577 
Jews  . . . . . . . . . .       322

Thus in this century, as throughout the whole of the century of 
gloom, the island is truly and really Catholic.

By way of contrast, a few words on the same subject may not be 
out of place with reference to England. We have already stated, 
and given some of the reasons for so doing, that, at the death 
of Elizabeth, England was already Protestant to the core.

In his "Memoirs," vol. ii., Sir John Dalrymple has published a 
curious official report of the numbers of Catholics in England, 
in the reign of William of Orange, found after his death in the 
iron chest of that vigilant monarch. From this authentic 
document we take the following extract:

Number of Freeholders in England.1 (1 Dr. Madden's "Penal Laws.")

                 Conformists.     Papists.      Non-Conformists.
Province of
Canterbury,        2,123,362	     93,151        11,878

Province of
York,                353,892         15,525         1,978

Totals             2,477,254        108,676        13,856

It is known also that, under George III., the number of 
Catholics in the whole of Great Britain did not exceed sixty 
thousand, so thorough had been the separation of England from 
the true Church.

To return to the ostracism of a whole nation from its political 
rights. No individual really belonging to it could take the 
slightest share in the administration of its affairs. They were 
all left to the control of aliens, whose boast it was that they 
were English; and whose chief object was to secure English 
ascendency, and subject every thing Irish to the rule of force.

Yet all this while a new era was dawning on the world; a 
multitude of voices were proclaiming new social and political 
doctrines; all were to be free, to possess privileges that might 
not be intrenched upon--to wit, a voice in the affairs of the 
nation, trial by their peers, no taxation without due 
representation, and the like--while a whole nation by the 
unanimous consent of the loudest of these freedom-mongers was 
excluded from every benefit of the new ideas, was literally 
placed in bondage, and left without the possibility of being 
heard and admitted to the enjoyment of the common rights, 
because the one voice which would have declared in their favor, 
which in former times had so often and so loudly spoken, when so 
to speak was to offend the powers of this world, was deprived of 
the right of being heard. The doctrine that the Papal supremacy 
was a usurpation, and the Pope himself an enemy of freedom, was 
laid down as a cardinal principle. After such public 
renunciation of former doctrines, all these new and so-called 
liberal theories were a mere delusion and a snare. There was no 
possibility of effectually securing freedom, in spite of so much 
promised to all and granted to some; no possibility of really 
protecting the rights of all. The public right newly proclaimed 
ended finally in might. Majorities ruled despotically over the 
minorities, and, as the despotism of the multitude is ever 
harsher and more universal than that of any monarch, the reign 
of cruel injustice was let in upon Ireland. And in her case the 
injustice was peculiarly aggravated, inasmuch as it was a small 
alien minority which trampled under foot the rights of a great 
native majority.

But, although the deprivation of political rights is perhaps 
more fatal to a nation than that of any other, on account of 
what follows in its train, particularly in the framing of the 
laws, nevertheless the deprivation of civil rights is generally 
more acutely felt, because the grievances resulting from it meet 
man at every turn, at every moment of his life, in his household 
and domestic circle. In fact, the penal laws stripped Catholics 
of every civil right which modern society can conceive, and it 
was chiefly there that the ingenuity of their oppressors labored 
during the greater part of a century to make a total wreck of 
Irish welfare.

Those rights may be classified generally as the right of 
possessing and holding landed property, the right of earning an 
honorable living by profession or trade, the right of protection 
against injustice by equal laws, the right of fair trial before 
condemnation: such are the chief. It is doubtful if there is any 
thing of importance left of which a citizen can be deprived, 
unless indeed he be openly and unjustly deprived of life.

It has been already indicated how the policy of England, with 
regard to Ireland, from that first invasion, in the time of 
Henry II., was prompted by the desire of gaining possession of 
the soil, and how after seven hundred years of struggle it 
succeeded in attaining its object; so that the whole island had 
been confiscated, and in some instances two or three times over. 
The object of the penal laws, therefore, could not be to deprive 
the Irish of the land which they no longer possessed, but to 
prevent them acquiring any land in any quantity whatever, and 
from reentering into possession, by purchase or otherwise, of 
any portion of their own soil and of the estates which belonged 
to their ancestors. So harsh and cunning a design, we doubt not, 
never entered the minds of any former legislators, even in pagan 
antiquity.

The great stimulus to exertion in civil society consists of the 
acquisition of property, chiefly of land. In feudal times 
seignorial estates could be purchased by none but those of noble 
blood; but with allodial estates it was different all through 
Europe. Yet just at the time when feudal laws were passing into 
disuse the Irish were prevented, by carefully-drawn enactments, 
from purchasing even a rood of their native soil. "The 
prohibition had been already extended to the whole nation by the 
Commonwealth government, and when the lands forfeited by the 
wars of 1690 came to be sold at Chichester House in 1703, the 
Irish were declared by the English Parliament incapable of 
purchasing at the auction, or of taking a lease of more than two 
acres."--(Prendergast.)


The same author adds in a note: "But it was when the estate was 
made the property of the first Protestant discoverer, that 
animation was put into this law. Discoverers then became like 
hounds upon the scent after lands secretly purchased by the 
Irish. Gentlemen fearing to lose their lands, found it now 
necessary to conform--namely, to abjure Catholicism. Between 
1703 and 1709 there were only thirty-six conformers in Ireland; 
in the next ten years (after the Discovery Act), the conformists 
were one hundred and fifty."

But the full object was not only to prevent the Irish from 
becoming even moderately rich in land; they were to be reduced 
to actual pauperism. Hence the prohibitory laws did not stop at 
this first outrage; almost impossible occurrences were supposed 
and provided for, lest there might be a chance of their 
realization at some time. It was actually provided that, if the 
produce of their farms brought a greater profit to the Irish 
than was expected, notwithstanding all these measures against 
the possible occurrence of such an evil, the lease was void, and 
the "discoverer" should receive the amount.

There was no loop-hole by which the people might escape from 
this degradation. But there was still the chance left of 
engaging in trade, acquiring personal property by its practice, 
and becoming the owners of a sum of money in bank, or of a 
dwelling-house in the city. The English law of succession was 
understood to be a law for all, and consequently, in some out-of-
the-way cases, a stray Irish family might be found in course of 
time with an elder branch possessed of a fair amount of property,
and able to emerge from the dead level of the common misery. 
Such a possibility could not of course be permitted by the 
English colonists who ruled the land. So the law of gavelkind, 
to which the Irish had at one time been so attached, was now to 
be forced upon them, and upon them alone of all the British 
subjects. It was decreed that, upon the death of every Irishman, 
whatever of personal property he left behind him was to be 
divided equally among all his children, who, being generally 
numerous, would each receive but a trifle, and so perpetrate the 
pauperism of the race.

Where the surprise, then, in finding the whole nation reduced 
since that time to a state of the most abject poverty? It was 
the will of the rulers that so it should be, and their scheme, 
guarded and enforced by so many legislative acts, could not fail 
to succeed in producing the effect intended. Granting even the 
smallest amount of truth in what is so often flung at the Irish 
as a reproach--their carelessness and want of foresight--how 
could it be otherwise, to what cause can such failings, even if 
they exist, be assigned, save to the utter impossibility of 
succeeding in any effort which they chose to make?

The true origin of the state in which the Irish at home now 
appear to the eyes of foreign travellers, is the deliberate 
intention, sternly acted upon for more than a century, to make 
the island one vast poorhouse.

The wretched situation in which they have ever since remained, 
confessed by all to be without parallel on earth, is certainly 
not to be laid at the door of the present population of England, 
nor even to the colony still intrenched on Irish soil; but with 
what right can it be brought forward as a reproach against the 
Irish themselves, when its real cause is so evident, and when 
history speaks so plainly on the subject?

All sensible Englishmen of our days will readily acknowledge 
that, without indulging in mutual recrimination, the duty of all 
is to repair the injuries of the past, and to do away with the 
last remnants of its sad consequences. Wounds so deep and many 
in a nation cannot be healed by half measures; and it is only a 
thorough change of system, and a complete reversal of 
legislation, that can leave the English of to-day without 
reproach.

Pauperism, then, is the necessary misfortune, not the crime of 
Ireland; we may even go further, and assert that, if millions of 
Irishmen have lived and died paupers, owing to the barbarous 
laws enacted for that special purpose, few indeed among them 
have been reduced even by hard necessity and the extreme of 
misery to manifest a pauper spirit and a miserly bent.

There is no doubt that the almost invariable result of suffering 
and want is to create selfishness in the sufferer, and cause him 
to cling desperately to the little he may possess. Self 
preservation and self-indulgence, in such a case, form the law 
of human nature, and no one even expects to find a really poor 
man generous, when he can scarcely meet his bare necessities and 
the imperious wants of his family. It is the peculiarity of the 
Irish to know how to combine generosity with the deprivation 
almost of the common necessaries of life. When masters of their 
own soil, a large hospitality and a free-handed "bestowing of 
gifts"--such, we believe, was the Irish expression--was 
universal among them; the poorest clansman would have been 
ashamed not to imitate, in his degree, the liberal spirit of his 
prince. They often gave all they had, regardless of the future; 
and, when their chieftains demanded of the clansmen what the 
Book of Rights imposed upon them, their exclamation was, "Spend 
me but defend me."

Though the people of Erin have been reduced to the sad necessity 
of forgetting that old proverb of the nation, the spirit which 
gave rise to it lives in their hearts and is proved by their 
deeds. What other nation, even the richest and most prosperous, 
could have accomplished what the world has seen them bring to-
pass during this century? The laws which, so long ago, forbade 
them to be generous, and prohibited them from providing openly 
for the worship of their God, for the education of their 
children, for the help of the sick and needy among them, have at 
last been made inoperative by their oppressors. But, when they 
were at length left free to follow the freedom and generosity of 
their hearts, they found--what? In their once beautiful and 
Christian country, a universal desolation; the blackened ruins 
of what had been their abbeys, churches, hospitals, and asylums; 
the very ground on which they stood stolen away from them, and 
the Protestant establishment in full enjoyment of the revenues 
of the Catholics. They found every thing in the same state that 
they had known for centuries. Nothing was restored to them. They 
were at liberty to spend what they did not possess, since they 
were as poor as men could be. Every thing had to be done by them 
toward the reestablishing of their churches, schools, and 
various asylums, and they had nothing wherewith to do it.

There is no need of going item by item over what they did. The 
present prosperous state of the Irish Catholic public 
institutioris-- churches, schools, and all--is owing to their 
poorly-filled pockets. God alone knows how it all came about. We 
can only see in them the poor of Christ, rich in all gifts, 
"even alms-deeds most abundant."

It is only too evident that the degradation which the English 
wished to fasten upon them forever, could not be accomplished 
even by the measures best adapted to debase a people. The Celtic 
nature rose superior to the dark designs of the most ingenious 
opponents, and continued as ever noble, generous, and 
openhearted. Nevertheless, the sufferings of the victims were at 
times unutterable; and one of the inevitable effects of such 
tyrannical measures soon made itself fearfully active and 
destructive in the shape of those periodical famines which have 
ever since devastated the island.

In the days of her own possession, there was never mention of 
famine there. The whole island teemed with the grain of her 
fields, consumed by a healthy population, and was alive with 
vast herds of cattle and flocks of sheep. What were the heca-
tombs of ancient Greece compared with the thousands of kine 
prescribed annually by the Book of Rights? Who ever heard of 
people perishing of want in the midst of abundance such as this? 
Even during the fiercest wars, waged by clan against clan, we 
often see the image of death in many shapes, but never that of a 
large population reduced to roots and grass for food.

When, later on, the wars of the Reformation transformed Munster 
into a wilderness, and we read for the first time in Irish 
history of people actually turning green and blue, according to 
the color of the unwholesome weeds they were driven to devour in 
order to support life, at least it was in the wake of a terrible 
war that famine came. It was reserved for the eighteenth century 
to disclose to us the woful spectacle of a people perishing of 
starvation in the midst of the profoundest peace, frequently of 
the greatest plenty, the food produced in abundance by the labor 
of the inhabitants being sold and sent off to foreign countries 
to enrich absentee landlords. Nay, those desolating famines at 
last grew to be periodical, so that every few years people 
expected one, and it seemed as though Ireland were too barren to 
produce the barely sufficient supply of food necessary for her 
scanty population. The people worked arduously and without 
intermission; the land was rich, the seasons propitious; yet 
they almost constantly suffered the pangs of hunger, which 
spread sometimes to wholesale starvation. This was another 
result of those laws devised by the English colonists to keep 
down the native population of the island, and prevent it from 
becoming troublesome and dangerous. Such was the effect of the 
humane measures taken to preserve the glory of Protestant 
ascendency, and secure the rights and liberties of a handful of 
alien masters.

It is proper to describe some of those awful scourges, which 
have never ceased since, and at sight of which, in our own days, 
we have too often sickened. For the Emancipation of 1829 was far 
from removing all the causes of Irish misery. On the 17th of 
March, 1727, Boulter, the Protestant Archbishop of Armagh, wrote 
to the Duke of Newcastle: "Since my arrival in this country, the 
famine has not ceased among the poor people. The dearness of corn
last year was such that thousands of families had to quit their
dwellings, to seek means of life elsewhere; many hundred perished."

At the same period Swift wrote: "The families of farmers who pay great
rents, live in filth and nastiness, on buttermilk and potatoes."

The following is a short and simple description of the famine of 
1741, given by an eye-witness, and copied by Matthew O'Connor 
from a pamphlet entitled "Groans of Ireland," published in the 
same year:

"Having been absent from this country some years, on my return 
to it last summer, I found it the most miserable scene of 
distress that I ever read of in history. Want and misery on 
every face, the rich unable to relieve the poor, the roads 
spread with dead and dying bodies; mankind the color of the 
docks and nettles which they fed on; two or three, sometimes 
more, on a car, going to the grave for want of bearers to carry 
them, and many buried only in the fields and ditches where they 
perished. The universal scarcity was followed by fluxes and 
malignant fevers, which swept off multitudes of all sorts, so 
that whole villages were laid waste. If one for every house in 
the kingdom died--and that is very probable--the loss must be 
upward of four hundred thousand souls. If only half, a loss too 
great for this ill-peopled country to bear, as they are mostly 
working people. When a stranger travels through this country, 
and beholds its wide, extended, and fertile plains, its great 
flocks of sheep and black cattle, and all its natural wealth and 
conveniences for tillage, manufacture, and trade, he must be 
astonished that such misery and want should be felt by its 
inhabitants."

At the time these lines were written, the astonishment was 
sincere, and the answer to the question "How can this be?" 
seemed impossible; the phenomenon utterly inexplicable. In our
own days, when this same picture of woe has been so often presented
in the island, the reasons for it are well known; and what seems
inexplicable is that, the cause being so clear, and the remedy
so simple, the remedy has not yet been thoroughly applied.

In 1756 and 1757, the same scenes were repeated, with the same 
frightful results. Charles O'Connor, at that time the champion 
of his much- abused countrymen, wrote thus, in his letter to Dr. 
Curry, May 21, 1756:

"Two-thirds of the inhabitants are perishing for want of bread; 
meal is come to eighteen-pence a stone, and, if the poor had 
money, it would exceed by--I believe--double that sum. Every 
place is crowded with beggars, who were all house-keepers a 
fortnight ago, and this is the condition of a country which 
boasts of its constitution, its laws, and the wisdom of its 
legislature."

These words, although sweeping enough, and universally 
applicable, are far from conveying to our minds, to-day, the 
real picture of the state of the country. When the writer speaks 
of "meal," it must be understood to mean rye, oats, and, barley; 
and even this coarse and heavy food being, as he remarks, 
inaccessible to the poor, potatoes had become the only bread of 
the country, and the inhabitants were perishing for the want of it.

For the first time in the history of the two nations, the 
English Government thought of relieving the distress of the 
people, and to this purpose applied the magnificent sum of 
twenty thousand pounds. Such was the generous amount granted by 
a wealthy and prosperous country to procure food for the 
inhabitants of an island as large as Ireland is known to be. As 
to effecting any change in the laws, which were really the cause 
of this unutterable misery, such an idea never entered into the 
heads of the legislators. Hence it is not surprising to hear 
that "the distress in the interior of the country revived the 
frightful image of the miseries of 1741, nor did the calamity 
cease, until the equilibrium between the population and the 
means of subsistence was restored by the accumulated waste of 
famine and pestilence;" that is to say, until all those had been 
destroyed whom the laws of the time could, as they had been 
designed to do, destroy.

These details appear calculated only to shock the feelings of 
the reader, already sufficiently acquainted with the lot of the 
Irish cottier and laborer, from the beginning of the last 
century. Nevertheless, we cannot close this part of our subject 
without giving publicity to the following description of the 
mass of the Irish population in 1762, by Matthew O'Connor:

"The popery laws had, in the course of half a century, 
consummated the ruin of the lower orders. Their habitations, 
visages, dress, and despondency, exhibited the deep distress of 
a people ruled with the iron sceptre of conquest. The lot of the 
negro slave, compared with that of the Irish helot, was 
happiness itself. Both were subject to the capricious cruelty of 
mercenary task-masters and unfeeling proprietors; but the negro 
slave was well-fed, well clothed, and comfortably lodged. The 
Irish peasant was half starved, half naked, and half housed; the 
canopy of heaven being often the only roof to the mud-built 
walls of his cabin. The fewness of negroes gave the West India 
proprietor an interest in the preservation of his slave; a 
superabundance of helots superseded all interest in the comfort 
or preservation of an Irish cottier. The code had eradicated 
every feeling of humanity, and avarice sought to stifle every 
sense of justice. That avarice was generated by prodigality, the 
hereditary vice of the Irish gentry, and manifested itself in 
exorbitant rack-rents wrung from their tenantry, and in the low 
wages paid for their labor. Since the days of King William, the 
price of the necessaries of life had trebled, and the day's hire-
-fourpence-- had continued stationary. The oppression of tithes 
was little inferior to the tyranny of rack-rents; while the 
great landholder was nearly exempt from this pressure, a tenth 
of the produce of the cottier's labor was exacted for the 
purpose of a religious establishment from which he derived no 
benefit. . . . The peasant had no resource: not trade or 
manufactures--they were discouraged; not emigration to France--
the vigilance of government precluded foreign enlistment; not 
emigration to America --his poverty precluded the means. Ireland,
the land of his birth, became his prison, where he counted the 
days of his misery in the deepest despondency."

Is it to be wondered at that conspiracies, secret associations, 
and insurrections, were the result; or should the wonder be that 
such commotions were less universal and prolonged?

The craving of hunger is perpetual in Ireland. Multitudes of 
details from a multitude of different and independent sources 
might be brought forward to show this.

Duvergier de Hauranne, a Frenchman who visited the island in 
1826, writes: "Ireland is the land of anomalies; the most 
deplorable destitution on the richest of soils. . . . Nowhere 
does man live in such wretchedness. The Irish peasant is born, 
suffers, and dies--such is life for him."

In 1836, Dr. Doyle, Bishop of Kildare, being asked what was the 
state of the population, wrote: "What it has always been; people 
are perishing as usual."

In 1843, Mr. Thackeray, as little a friend to Ireland as he was 
a foe to his own country, recounting what he saw in his travels, 
said that, in the south and west of the island, the traveller 
had before him the spectacle of a people dying of hunger, and 
that by millions, in the very richest counties.

There is no need of repeating what has been written of the 
fearful scourge that swept over the country in 1846 and 1847. 
The details are too harrowing. At last even the London Times had 
to acknowledge the cause of these calamities: "The ulcer of 
Ireland drains the resources of the empire. It was to be 
expected that it should be so. The people of England have most 
culpably and foolishly connived at a national iniquity. Without 
going back beyond the Union (in 1800), and only within the last 
half-century, it has been notorious all that time that Ireland 
was the victim of an unexampled social crime. The landlords 
exercise their rights there with a hand of iron, and deny their 
duty with a brow of brass. Age, infirmity, sickness, every 
weakness, is there condemned to death. The whole Irish people is 
debased by the spectacle and contact of beggars and of those who 
notoriously die of hunger; and England stupidly winked at this 
tyranny. We begin now to expiate a long curse of neglect. Such 
is the law of justice. If we are asked why we have to support 
half the population of Ireland, the answer lies in the question 
itself; it is that we have deliberately allowed them to be 
crushed into a nation of beggars!"

The writers of the Times laid the true cause of that appalling 
misfortune at the door of the landlords. They would not trace 
back the origin of the evil beyond 1800: they could not or would 
not appreciate the Christian heroism displayed by the nation 
while under the infliction of such a fatal scourge. But it must 
not be forgotten by all admirers of virtue that, in the midst of 
a distress which baffles description, many of the victims of 
famine were at the same time martyrs to honesty and faith. "Come 
here and let us die together," said a wife to her husband, 
"rather than touch what belongs to another."

The civil right of acquiring land and enjoying its products has 
so far been the only one considered by us; and the subject has 
been entered upon at some length, as agriculture has at all 
times formed the chief occupation of the Irish people. But the 
penal laws embraced many other objects; and, as their intent was 
evidently to debase the people and reduce it to a state of 
actual slavery and want, other civil rights were equally invaded 
by their tyrannical provisions.

A portion of the population in all countries devotes itself to 
the intellectual pursuits necessary for the life of every 
cultivated nation. Whoever chooses must have the right of 
devoting his life to the professions of medicine and law, of 
entering the Church or the army, if his tastes run in any one of 
those directions. Not so in Catholic Ireland. The oath to be 
taken by every barrister prevented the Catholic Irishman from 
devoting his powers to such a purpose. There was only one Church 
for him, and that one proscribed. In the army not only could he 
not attain to any rank, but he was not allowed to enter it even 
as a private, the holding of a musket being prohibited to him. 
So that, through mere fanatical hatred of every thing Catholic, 
England deprived herself for a whole century of the services of 
a people, forming to-day more than half of her army and navy, 
whose efforts have helped to cover her flag with honor, and 
whose memorable absence from the English ranks at Fontenoy wrung 
that bitter expression from the heart of George II. when the 
victorious tide of the English battle was rolled back by the Irish
brigade, "Cursed be the laws which deprive me of such subjects!"

These few words are enough to show that the penal laws were in 
reality a decree of outlawry against the Irish--stamping them, 
not as true subjects, but as mere slaves and helots, fit only to 
be hewers of wood and drawers of water at the bidding of their 
lords and masters.

But there are mere human rights, inalienable in man, and sacred 
among all nations, which were trampled upon in that desolated 
land together with all inferior rights. Such are the rights of 
worshipping God, of properly educating children, of preserving a 
just subordination in the family and promoting harmony and 
happiness among its members. These natural rights were more 
openly and shamelessly violated, if that were possible, than all 
others; and this in itself would have made the eighteenth 
century one of gloom and woe for Irishmen.

It was for their religion chiefly that the Irish had undergone 
all the calamities and scourges which have been described. Had 
they only, at the very beginning of the Reformation, bowed to 
the new dogma of the spiritual supremacy of the English kings; 
had they a little later accepted the Thirty-nine Articles of 
Queen Elizabeth; had they, at a subsequent epoch, opined in 
chorus with the Scotch Presbyterians, and given the Bible as 
their authority for all kinds of absurdities and atrocities, 
mental and moral; had they, in a word, as they remarked to 
Sussex, changed their religion four times in twelve years, they 
would have escaped the wrath of Henry VIII., the crafty and 
cruel policy of Elizabeth, the shifty expediency of the Stuarts, 
the barbarity of the Cromwellian era, and finally the ingenious 
atrocities of the penal laws.

Even if, in the midst of some of the extremities to which they 
had been reduced, they had at any time resolved to conform and 
take the oaths prescribed, all their miseries would have been at 
an end, and their immediate admission to all the rights and 
privileges of British citizens secured. From time to time, in 
individual cases, they witnessed the sudden and magical effect 
produced by conformity on the part of those who gave up 
resistance altogether, and who, from whatever motive, bowed to 
the inevitable conditions on which men were admitted to live 
peaceably on Irish soil, and to the enjoyment of the blessings 
of this life; such condition being the abjuration of Catholicity.
But so few were found to take advantage of this easy chance 
forever held out to them, that a man might well wonder at their 
constancy did he not reflect that they set their duty to God 
above all things. The fact is patent--they had a conscience, and 
knew what it meant.

Having then surrendered their all for the sake of their religion,
the free exercise of that might at least have been left them; 
and since the choice lay between the two alternatives of 
enjoying the natural right of worshipping their God or 
submitting to all the sacrifices previously mentioned (seemingly 
the meaning of the various oaths prescribed by law), it can only 
be looked upon as an additional cruelty to violently deprive 
them of what they chose to preserve at all cost. But the authors 
of the statutes did not see the matter in this light. They could 
not lose such an opportunity of inflicting new tortures on their 
victims; on the contrary, they would have considered all their 
labor lost had they not endeavored to coerce the very thing 
least subject to coercion, the religious feeling of the human 
soul. Accordingly, the resolution was taken to deprive them of 
every possible facility for the exercise of their religion, that 
the fire within might give no sign of its warmth.

True, the Irish Catholics were not, as the Christians under the 
edicts of old Rome, to be summoned before the public courts and 
there abjure their religion or die. It is strange that the 
rulers of Ireland stopped short at this; that they invented 
nothing in their laws at least equivalent, unless the statutes 
that compelled every person under fine to be present at 
Protestant worship on Sundays be interpreted to mean, what it 
very much resembles, an attempt at coercion of the very soul. 
Still there was no edict openly proscribing the name of Catholic,
and punishing its bearer with death.

But the measures adopted and actually enforced were in reality 
equivalent, and would more effectually than any pagan edict have 
produced the same result, if the Irish race had shown the least 
wavering in their traditional steadiness of purpose.

The first of the measures devised for this end would have been 
completely efficacious with any other people or race. It was a 
twofold measure: 1. All bishops, priests, and monks, were to 
depart from the kingdom, liable to capital punishment should 
they return. 2. All laymen were to be compelled to assist at the 
Protestant service every Sunday, under penalty of a fine for 
each offence: the fine mounting with the repetition of the 
offence, so that, in the end, it would reach an enormous sum. 
Only let such a policy as this be persevered in for a quarter of 
a century in any country on earth except Ireland, and, in that 
country the Catholic religion will cease to exist.

"The Catholic clergy," says Matthew O'Connor--and the reader 
will remember he was a witness of what he described-- "submitted 
to their hard destiny with Christian resignation. They repaired 
to the seaport towns fixed for their embarcation, and took an 
everlasting farewell of their country and friends, of every 
thing dear and valuable in this world. Many of them were 
descending in the vale of years, and must have been anxious to 
deposit their bones with the ashes of their ancestors; they were 
now transported to foreign lands, where they would find no fond 
breast to rely upon, no 'pious tear' to attend their obsequies. 
Yet their enemies could not deprive them of the consolations of 
religion: that first-born offspring of Heaven still cheered them 
in adversity and exile, smoothed the rugged path of death, and 
closed their last faltering accents with benedictions on their 
country, and prayers for their persecutors.

"Such as were apprehended after the time limited for deportation,
were loaded with irons and imprisoned until transported, to 
attest, on some foreign shore, the weakness of the government, 
and the cruelty of their countrymen. Some few, disabled from age 
and infirmities from emigration, sought shelter in caves, or 
implored and received the concealment of Protestants, whose 
humane feelings were superior to their prejudices, and who 
atoned, in a great degree, by their generous sympathy, for the 
wanton cruelty of their party.

"The clause inflicting the punishment of death on such as should 
return from exile was suited only for the sanguinary days of 
Tiberius or Domitian, and shocked the humanity of an enlightened 
age. William of Orange, whose necessities compelled him to give 
his sanction to the clause, would never consent to its execution."

Nevertheless, it was afterward enforced on several occasions, 
and, during the whole century of penal laws, it not only 
remained on the statute-book ad terrorem, but whatever clergyman 
disregarded it could only expect to be treated with its utmost 
rigor. From Captain South's account, it appears that in 1698 the 
number of clergy in Ireland consisted of four hundred and ninety-
five regulars and eight hundred and ninety-two seculars; and the 
number of regulars shipped off that year to foreign parts 
amounted to four hundred and twenty-four--namely, from Dublin, 
one hundred and fifty-three; from Galway, one hundred and ninety;
from Cork, seventy-five; and twenty-six from Waterford.

But such a measure was of too sweeping a character to be carried 
out to the letter; many of the proscribed priests, seculars for 
the most part, escaped the pursuit of the government spies, and 
remained concealed in the country. The bishops had all been 
obliged to fly; but a few years later, under Anne, several 
returned, for they knew that, without the exercise of their 
religious functions, the Catholic religion must have perished; 
and, in order that they might continue the succession of the 
priesthood, confirm the children, and encourage the people to 
stand firm in their faith, they ran the hazard of the gibbet. Of 
this fact the persecutors soon became aware, and the Commons of 
Ireland declared openly that "several popish bishops had lately 
come into the kingdom, and exercised ecclesiastical jurisdiction 
within the same, and continued the succession of the Romish 
priesthood by ordaining great numbers of popish clergymen, and 
that their return was owing to defect in the laws."

To cover this defect, they invented the "registry law." They did 
not state in express terms their intention of exporting them 
again, but their object was clearly manifested by the subsequent 
enactment of 1704. By the registry law "all popish priests then 
in the kingdom should, at the general quarter sessions in each 
county, register their places of abode, age, parishes, and time 
of ordination, the names of the respective bishops who ordained 
them, and give security for their constant residence in their 
respective districts, under penalty of imprisonment and 
transportation, and of being treated as 'high traitors' in case 
of return."

It is clear that, with the execution of this law, the exertions 
of the police and of informers would have been superfluous, as 
the clergy were compelled to act as their own police and inform 
on themselves. The act, moreover, seems to have been prepared 
with a view to another bill, which was soon after passed, for 
total expulsion. It was therefore nothing else than a 
preliminary measure devised to insure the success of this second 
act, and prevent the recurrence of the former "defect in the 
laws."

A new explanatory statute was accordingly drawn up, requiring 
the clergy to take the oath of abjuration before the 23d of 
March, 1710, under the penalties of transportation for life, and 
of high-treason if ever after found in the country. This bill, 
then, set them the alternative of abandoning either their 
country or their principles.

At the same time, for the encouragement of informers, the 
Commons resolved that "the prosecuting and informing against 
papists was an honorable service." Never before had a like 
declaration issued from any body in any nation, least of all by 
legislators, in favor of the confessedly meanest of all 
occupations; and it is doubtful if the most tyrannical of the 
Roman Caesars would ever have thought of mentioning the 
"honorable service" of the delatores whom they employed for the 
speedy destruction of those whose wealth they coveted. "Genus 
hominum," says Tacitus, "publico exitio repertum."

While on this subject, it has been remarked that most of the 
Irish informers amassed wealth by their bills of "discovery," 
whereas those of the days of Tiberius generally fell victims to 
their own artifices.

The eagerness for blood-money tracked the clergy to their 
loneliest retreats, and dragged them thence before persecuting 
tribunals, by whose sentence they were doomed to perpetual 
banishment. They must all have finally disappeared from the 
island, if the people, at last grown indignant at such baseness 
and cruelty, had not, by the loudness of their execrations, 
checked the activity of the priest-hunters. Wherever they dared 
show themselves, they were pelted with stones, and exposed to 
the summary vengeance of a maddened people.

The detestable "profession" became at last so infamous and 
unprofitable that foreign Jews were almost the only ones found 
willing to undertake this "honorable service;" and it is stated 
in the "Historia Dominicana," that one Garzia, a Portuguese Jew, 
was the most active of those human blood-hounds, and that, in 
1718, he contrived to have seven of the proscribed clergy 
detected and apprehended.

We cannot speak of the most revolting measure ever intended to 
be taken against Catholic priests; namely mutilation, so long 
and with such energy denied by Protestants, who were themselves 
indignant at the mere mention of it, but now clearly proved by 
the archives of France, where documents exist showing that the 
non-enactment of such an infamy was solely due to the severe 
words of remonstrance sent to England by the Duke of Orleans, 
regent of France during the minority of Louis XV.

As late as the middle of the century, in 1744, a sudden increase 
of rigor took place; intentions of conspiracy were ascribed to 
Catholics as usual, and without any motive whatever, unless it 
was caused by the sight of some religious houses, which had been 
quietly and unobtrusively reopened during the few years previous.
All at once the government issued a proclamation for "the 
suppression of monasteries, the apprehension of ecclesiastics, 
the punishment of magistrates remiss in the execution of the 
laws, and the encouragement of spies and informers by an 
increase of reward."

It was a repetition of the old story; a cruel persecution broke 
out in every part of the island. From the country priests fled 
to the metropolis, seeking to hide themselves amid the multitude 
of its citizens. Others fled to mountains and caverns, and the 
holy sacrifice was again offered up in lone places under the 
bare heavens, with sentinels to watch for the "prowling of the 
wolf," and no other outward dignity than that the grandeur of 
the forest and the rugged mountains gave.

In the cities the Catholics assisted at the celebration of the 
divine mysteries in stable-yards, garrets, and such obscure 
places as sheltered them from the pursuit of the magistrates. On 
one occasion, while the congregation (assembled in an old 
building) was kneeling to receive the benediction, the floor 
gave way, and all were buried beneath the ruin; many were killed,
the priest among others; some were maimed for life, and 
remained to the end of their lives monuments of the cruelty of 
the government. The dead and dying, and the wounded, were 
carried through the streets on carts; and the sad spectacle at 
last moved the Protestants themselves to sympathy. The 
government was compelled to give way, and allow the persecuted 
Catholics to enjoy without further molestation the private 
exercise of their religion.

But that this was not a willing concession on the part of the 
reigning power is manifest enough from the steady, unswerving, 
contrary policy pursued until that time. It was simply forced to 
give way to outraged public opinion, then openly opposed 
throughout Europe to persecution for conscience' sake.

With religion education was also proscribed. Already, under 
William of Orange, had papist school-masters been forbidden to 
teach, but the penalty of their disobedience to the law did not 
go beyond a fine of a few pounds. So that the Irish youth could 
still, with some precautionary prudence, find teachers of the 
Greek and Latin languages, of mathematics, history, and 
geography. In Munster particularly schools and academies of 
literature flourished; the ardor of the people for the 
acquirement of knowledge could not be balked by such paltry 
obstacles as the laws of William III.

But the Irish Parliament under Anne could not rest satisfied 
with such mild measures. By the "Explanatory Act" of 1710, the 
school-master in Ireland was subjected to the same punishment as 
the priest whom he accompanied everywhere. Prison, 
transportation, death itself, became the reward of teaching. And 
in proportion as other laws, severer yet, prevented the people 
from sending their children abroad to be educated, and these 
laws were renewed occasionally and made more stringent and 
effective, the result was the total impossibility of Catholic 
children receiving any education higher than that of the house.

The final result is known to all. The "hedge-school" was 
established, that being the only way left of imparting 
elementary knowledge; and it required Irish ingenuity and Irish 
aptitude for shifts to invent such a system, for system it was, 
and carry it through for so long a time.

But even the last sanctuary of home was yet to be sacrilegiously 
invaded; the most sacred of human rights could not be left to 
the persecuted people, and the strongest bonds of family 
affection were if possible to be broken asunder. What tyranny 
had never yet dared attempt in any age or country was to become 
a law in Ireland; and that holy feeling by which the members of 
a family are held together, in obedence to one of the most 
necessary and solemn commandments of God, could not be left 
undisturbed in the bosom of an Irish child. The father's rule 
over his children and the honor and love due by the child to its 
parent, were, in fact, declared by English legislation of no 
value, and fit subjects for cruel interference, introducing 
irresistible temptation.

Yes, by the laws enacted in the reign of Anne, the son was to be 
set against the father, and this for the sake of religion! It 
was a part of the Irish statutes, and for a long time it took 
occasional effect, that any son of a Catholic who should turn 
Protestant at any age, even the tenderest, should alone succeed 
to the family estate, which from the day of the son's conversion 
could neither be sold nor charged even with a debt of legacy. 
From that same day the son was taken from his father's roof and 
delivered into the custody of some Protestant guardian. No tie, 
however sacred, no claim, however dear, was respected by those 
statesmen, who at the very time were the loudest to boast of 
their love for freedom, while trampling under foot the most 
indispensable rights of Nature.

The wickedest ingenuity of man could certainly not go beyond 
this to debase, degrade, and destroy a nation. After 
unprecedented calamities of former ages, we find millions of men 
reduced by other men, calling themselves Christians, to a 
condition of pagan helots, deprived of all rights and treated 
more barbarously than slaves. And all the while they were 
allowed, induced, encouraged to put an end to their misery by 
simply saying one word, taking one oath, "conforming " as the 
expression had it. Nevertheless they steadily refused to speak 
that word, to take that oath, to conform; that is to say, to 
abjure their religion. A few, weak in faith, or carried away by 
sudden passion, a burst of despair, subscribe to the required 
oath, assist as demanded at the religious services on Sunday, 
suddenly rise to distinction, are sure of preserving their 
wealth, or even enter into sole possession of the family 
property, to the exclusion of all its other members. But such 
rare examples, instead of rousing the envy of the rest, excite 
only their contempt and execration. To them they are henceforth 
apostates, renegades to their faith, cast out from the bosom of 
the nation; and their countrymen hug their misery rather than 
exchange it for honors and wealth purchased by broken honor, 
lost faith, and cowardly desertion of the cause for which their 
country was what it was.

While the cowards were so few, and the brave men so many, the 
latter constituting indeed the whole bulk of the people, they 
were knit together as a band of brethren, never to be estranged 
from each other. If any thing is calculated to form a nation, to 
give it strength, to render it indestructible, imperishable, it 
is undoubtedly the ordeal through which they passed without 
shrinking, and out of which they came with one mind, one purpose,
animated by one holy feeling, the love of their religion, and 
the determination to keep it at all hazard.

Yes, at any moment throughout this long century, they might have 
changed their condition and come out at once to the enjoyment of 
all the rights dear to men, by what means is best expressed in 
the few words of Edmund Burke:

"Let three millions of people" (the number of Irishmen at the 
time he spoke) "but abandon all that they and their ancestors 
have been taught to believe sacred, and forswear it publicly in 
terms most degrading, scurrilous, and indecent, for men of 
integrity and virtue, and abuse the whole of their former lives, 
and slander the education they have received, and nothing more 
is required of them. There is no system of folly, or impiety, or 
blasphemy, or atheism, into which they may not throw themselves, 
and which they may not profess openly and as a system, 
consistently with the enjoyment of all the privileges of a free 
citizen in the happiest constitution in the world."

Thus does the reason of man commend their constancy; but that 
constancy required something more than human strength. God it 
was who supported them. He alone could grant power of will 
strong enough to uphold men plunged for so long a time in such 
an abyss of wretchedness. To him could they cry out with truth: 
"It is only owing to Divine mercy that we have not perished;" 
misericordias Domini, quod non sumus consumpti!

But human reason can better comprehend the effect produced on a 
vast multitude of people by oppression so unexampled in its 
severity. An immense development of manhood and self-dependence, 
an heroic determination to bear every trial for conscience' sake,
and a certainty of succeeding, in the long-run, in breaking the 
heavy chain and casting off the intolerable yoke --such was the 
effect.

It has been asserted by some authors, who have written on that 
terrible eighteenth century in Ireland, that the spirit of the 
people was entirely broken, that there was no energy left among 
them, and that the imposition of burdens heavier still, were 
such a thing possible, could scarcely elicit from them even the 
semblance of remonstrance. It was only natural to think so; but, 
in our opinion, this is only true of the external despondency 
under which the people was bowed, but utterly false with respect 
to a lack of mental energy.

There certainly was no general attempt at insurrection on their 
part; nor did they take refuge in that last resource of despair--
death after a vain vengeance. If the writers referred to would 
have preferred this last fatal resource of wounded pride, they 
are right in their estimate of the Irish; but they forget that 
the victims were Christians, and could lend no ear to a 
vengeance which is futile and a despair which is forbidden. 
There was a better course open before them, and they followed it:
to resign themselves to the will of a God they believed in and 
for whom they suffered, and wait patiently for the day of 
deliverance. It was sure to come; and if those then living were 
doomed not to see that happy day, they knew that they would 
leave it as an inheritance to their children.

Those writers would doubtless have been satisfied of the 
existence of a will among the people, and their conduct would 
have met with greater approval, had the attempts of some 
individuals at private revenge been more general and successful; 
if the bands of Rapparees, White Boys, and others, had wrought 
more evil upon their oppressors, although they could not prepare 
them to renew the struggle on a large scale with better prospect 
of success.

But this could not be; success could never have been reached by 
such a road, and it was useless to attempt it. At that time, 
there existed no possibility of the Irish recovering their 
rights by force. Meanwhile Providence was not forgetful of those 
who were fighting the braver moral battle of suffering and 
endurance for their religion. It was preparing the nation for a 
future life of great purposes, by purifying it in the crucible 
of affliction, and preserving the people pure and undebased.

Nowhere has the period of calamity been so protracted and so 
severe. Ireland stands alone in a history of wretchedness of 
seven centuries' duration. She stands alone, particularly 
inasmuch as, with her, the affliction has gone on continually 
increasing until quite recently, unrefreshed by periods of 
relief and glimpses of bright hope. The sinking spirits of the 
people, it is true, have been buoyed up from time to time by 
sanguine expectations; but only to find their expectations 
crowned with bitter disappointment and sink deeper again in the 
sea of their afflictions.

Nevertheless, through all that time the Irish continued morally 
strong, and ready at the right moment to leap into the stature 
of giants in strength and resolution. How they did so will be 
seen, and the simplicity of the explanation will be matter for 
surprise. But it is fitting first to set in the strongest light 
the assertion that the Irish were really debased by the 
calamities of that age, that they possessed no self-dependence 
at a time when that was the only thing left to them.

This view is thus expressed in Godkin's "History of Ireland:" 
"Too well did the penal code accomplish its dreadful work of 
debasement on the intellects, morals, and physical condition of 
a people sinking in degeneracy from age to age, till all manly 
spirit, all virtuous sense of personal independence and 
responsibility was nearly extinct, and the very features--vacant,
timid, cunning, and unreflective--betrayed the crouching slave 
within."

And the writer, a well-disposed Protestant, did not see how it 
could well be otherwise, and took it for granted that every one 
would admit the truth of his assertions without the slightest 
hesitation.

For he adds, a little farther on: "Having no rights of franchise-
-no legal protection of life or property--disqualified to handle 
a gun, even as a common soldier or a game-keeper-- forbidden to 
acquire the elements of knowledge at home or abroad--forbidden 
even to render to God what conscience dictated as his due--what 
could the Irish be but abject serfs? What nature in their 
circumstances could have been otherwise? Is it not amazing that 
any social virtue could have survived such an ordeal--that any 
seeds of good, any roots of national greatness could have 
outlived such a long tempestuous winter? "

Still Mr. Godkin was mistaken; the Irish had suffered no 
"debasement of the intellects, of the morals, not even of the 
physical condition," notwithstanding the plenitude of causes 
existing to bring such results about.

Their intellect had been kept in ignorance. Unable to procure 
instruction for their children, except by stealth and in 
opposition to the laws, few of them could acquire even the first 
elements of mental culture. But the intellect of a nation is not 
necessarily debased on that account. As a general rule, it is 
true that ignorance begets mental darkness and error, and will 
often debase the mind and sink the intellectual faculties to the 
lowest human level. But this happens only to people who, having 
no religious substratum to rest upon, are left at the mercy of 
error and delusions. One great thought, at least, was ever 
present to their minds, and that thought was in itself 
sufficient to preserve their intellect from being degraded; it 
was this "Man is nobler than the brute and born to a higher 
destiny." This truth was deeply engraved in their minds; and in 
defence of it they battled, and fought, and bled, all down the 
painful course of their history.

Had the intellect of the nation been really debased, would not 
their religious principles have been the first things to be 
thrown overboard? Would they not have adopted unhesitatingly all 
the tenets successively proposed to them by the various 
"reformers" of England? What is truth, when there is no mind to 
receive it? It requires a strong mind indeed to say, "I will 
suffer every thing, death itself, rather thin repudiate what I 
know comes from God." It is useless to dwell longer on these 
considerations. The man who sees not in such an heroic 
determination proof of a strong and noble mind may be possessed 
of a great, but to common-sense people it will look like a very 
limited intelligence.

Mr. Godkin cannot have duly weighed his expressions when he 
spoke of the debasement of morals among the Irish. It is no 
hyperbole to speak of the nation as a martyr; a martyr in any 
sense of the word: to the Christian, a Christian martyr. And yet 
it is by that fact guilty of immorality, or, as he puts it, 
debased in morals! The point is not worth arguing. But in 
contrasting the two nations, the nation debased and the nation 
that wrought its debasement, we are irresistibly reminded of the 
words used by Our Lord in reference to John the Baptist, then in 
prison and liable at any moment to be condemned to death: "What 
went ye out in the desert to see? A man clothed in soft 
garments? Lo! they that are clothed in soft garments dwell in 
the houses of kings."

If we would find a people really debased in morals, we must go 
to those whose material prosperity breeds corruption and gives 
to all the means of satisfying their evil passions. The orgies 
of the Babylonians under their last king, of the effeminate 
Persians later on, of the Roman patricians during the empire, 
need no more than mention. The cause of the immorality 
prevailing at these several epochs is well known, and has been 
told very plainly by conscientious historians, some of them 
pagans themselves. But, that a people ground down so long under 
a yoke of iron, gasping for very breath, yet refusing to 
surrender its belief and the worship of its God as its countless 
saints worshipped him, to follow the wild vagaries of sectarians 
and fanatics, should at the same time be accused of corruption 
and debasement of its morals, is too much for an historian to 
assert or a reader to believe.

But, beyond all argument, it has been generally conceded, in 
spite of prejudices, that the Irish, of all peoples, had been 
preeminently moral and Christian. No one has dared accuse them 
of open vice, however they may have been accused of folly. 
Intemperance is the great foible flung at them by many who, 
careful to conceal their own failings, are ever, ready to "cast 
the first stone" at them. It would be well for them to ponder 
over the rebuke of the Saviour to the accusers of the woman 
taken in adultery; when perhaps they may think twice before 
repeating the time-worn accusation.

Coming to the "people sinking in degeneracy from age to age;" if 
by this is meant that, for a whole century, many of them have 
suffered the direst want and died of hunger, that scanty food 
has impressed on many the deep traces of physical suffering and 
bodily exhaustion, no one will dispute the fact, while the blame 
of it is thrown where it deserves to be thrown. But it will be a 
source of astonishment to find that, despite of this, the race 
has not degenerated even physically; that it is still, perhaps, 
the strongest race in existence, and that no other European, no 
Englishman or Teuton, can endure the labor of any ordinary 
Irishman. In the vast territory of the United States, the public 
works, canals, roads, railways, huge fabrics, immense 
manufactories, bear witness to the truth of this statement, and 
the only explanation that can be satisfactorily given for this 
strange fact is, that their morals are pure and they do not 
transmit to their children the seeds of many diseases now 
universal in a universally corrupt society.

There remains the final accusation of the "very features-- 
vacant, timid, cunning, and unreflective--betraying the 
crouching slave within."

Granting the truth of this--which we by no means do, every 
school-geography written by whatever hand attesting the contrary 
to-day--where would have been the wonder that they, subjected so 
long to an unbending harshness and never-slumbering tyranny, 
accustomed to those continual "domiciliary visits" so common in 
Ireland during the whole of last century, dragged so often 
before the courts of "justice," to be there insulted, falsely 
accused, harshly tried and convicted without proof--were obliged 
to be continually on their guard, to observe a deep reserve, the 
very opposite to the promptings of their genial nature, to 
return ambiguous answers, full, by the way, of natural wit and 
marvellous acuteness? It was the only course left them in their 
forlorn situation. They pitted their native wit against a 
wonderfully devised legislation, and often came off the victors. 
Suppose it were true, was it not natural that, under such a 
system of unrelaxing oppression and hatred toward them, their 
faces should be "vacant, timid, cunning, and unreflective, 
betraying the crouching slave within?"

Could they give back a proud answer, when a proud look was an 
accusation of rebellion? Are prudence, cunning, and just reserve,
vacancy and want of reflection? The man who penned those words 
should remember the choice of alternatives ever present to the 
mind of an Irishman, however unjustly suspected or accused--the 
probability of imprisonment or hanging, of being sent to the 
workhouse or transported to the "American plantations."

The Irishman must have changed very materially and very rapidly 
since Mr. Godkin wrote. The features he would stamp upon him 
might be better applied to the Sussex yokel or the English 
country boor of whatever county. The generality of travellers 
strangely disagree with Mr. Godkin. They find the Irishman the 
type of vivacity, good humor, and wit; and they are right. For, 
under the weight of such a load of misery, under the ban of so 
terrible a fate, the moral disposition of the Irishman never 
changed; his manhood remained intact. To-day, the world attests 
to the same exuberance of spirits, the same tenacity of purpose, 
which were ever his. This indeed is wonderful, that this people 
should have been thus preserved amid so many causes for change 
and deterioration. Who shall explain this mystery? What had they,
all through that age of woe, to give them strength to support 
their terrible trials, to preserve to them that tenacity which 
prevented their breaking down altogether? Something there was 
indeed not left to them, since it was forbidden under the 
severest penalties; something, nevertheless, to which they clung,
in spite of all prohibitions to the contrary.

It was the Mass-Rock, peculiar to the eighteenth century, now 
known only by tradition, but at that time common throughout the 
island. The principal of those holy places became so celebrated 
at the time that, on every barony map of Ireland, numbers of 
them are to be found marked under the appropriate title of 
"Corrigan-Affrion"--the mass-rock.

Whenever, in some lonely spot on the mountain, among the crags 
at its top, or in some secret recess of an unfrequented glen, 
was found a ledge of rock which might serve the purpose of an 
altar, cut out as it were by Nature, immediately the place 
became known to the surrounding neighborhood, but was kept a 
profound secret from all enemies and persecutors. There on the 
morning appointed, often before day, a multitude was to be seen 
kneeling, and a priest standing under the canopy of heaven, amid 
the profound silence of the holy mysteries. Though the surface 
of the whole island was dotted with numerous churches, built in 
days gone by by Catholics, but now profaned, in ruins, or 
devoted to the worship of heresy, not one of them was allowed to 
serve for a place where a fraction even of the bulk of the 
population might adore their God according to the rites approved 
of by their conscience. Shut off from these temples so long 
hallowed by sweet remembrance as the spots once occupied by the 
saints and consecrated to the true worship of their God, this 
faithful nation was consecrating the while by its prayers, by 
its blood, and by its tears, other places which in future times 
should be remembered as the only spots left to them for more 
than a century wherein to celebrate the divine rites.

This was the only badge of nationality they had preserved, but 
it was the most sacred, the surest, and the sweetest. Who shall 
tell of the many prayers that went up thence from devoted minds 
and hearts, to be received by angels and carried before the 
throne of God? Who shall say that those prayers were not 
hearkened to when to-day we see the posterity of those holy 
worshippers receiving or on the point of receiving the full 
measure of their desires?

There, indeed, it was that the nation received its new birth; in 
sorrow and suffering, as its Saviour was born, but for that very 
reason sacred in the eyes of God and man. Their enemies had 
sworn complete separation from them, eternal animosity against 
them; the new nation accepted the challenge, and that complete 
separation decreed by their enemies was the real means of their 
salvation and of making them a People.

As has already been observed, the various attempts to make 
Protestants of them, attempts sometimes cunning and crafty, at 
others open and cruel, always persevered in, never lost sight of,
began to imbue the people with a new feeling of nationality, 
never experienced before, and constantly increasing in intensity.

This was witnessed under the Tudors. Their infatuation for the 
Stuart dynasty served the same end, and it may be said that, 
from all the evils which that attachment brought upon them, 
burst forth that great recompense of national sentiment which 
almost compensated them for the terrible calamities which 
followed in its train. It was under Charles I. that the 
Confederation of Kilkenny first gave them a real constitution, 
better adapted for the nation than the old regime of their Ard-
Righs.

But it was chiefly under the English Commonwealth, when they 
were so mercilessly crushed down by Cromwell and his brutal 
soldiery, when there seemed no earthly hope left them, that the 
solid union of the old native with the Anglo-Irish families, 
which had already been attempted--and almost successfull by the 
Confederation of Kilkenny yet never consummated was finally 
brought about once for all; their common misery uniting them in 
the bonds of brotherly affection, blotting out forever their 
long-standing divisions and antipathies which had never been 
quite laid aside.

It was thus that the nation was formed and prepared by martyrdom 
for the glorious resurrection, the greater future kept in store 
for it by Providence; the people all the while remaining 
undebased under their crushing evils.

Lastly, the intensity of the suffering produced by the penal 
laws, during the eighteenth century, linked the nation in closer 
bonds of union still, and this time gave them a unanimity which 
became invincible. Their final motto was then adopted, and will 
stand forever unchanged. In the clan period it was "Our sept and 
our chieftain;" under the Tudors, "Our religion and our native 
lords;" under the Stuarts it suddenly became "God and the King; 
"--it changed once more, never to change again: it was embraced 
in one word, the name of Him who had never deserted them, who 
alone stood firm on their side--"Our God!"


CHAPTER XIII.


RESURRECTION.-DELUSIVE HOPES.

By delusive hopes are here meant some of the various schemes in 
which Irishmen have indulged and still indulge with the view of 
bettering their country. This chapter will aim at showing that, 
for the resurrection of Ireland, the reconstruction of her past 
is impossible; parliamentary independence or "home rule," 
insufficient, physical force and violent revolution, in 
conjunction with European radicals particularly, is as unholy as 
it is impracticable.

The resurrection of the Irish nation began with the end of last 
century. As, to use their own beautiful expression, "'Tis always 
the darkest the hour before day," so the gloom had never settled 
down so darkly over the land, when light began to dawn, and the 
first symptoms of returning life to flicker over the face of the,
to all seeming, dead nation. Its coming has been best described 
in the "History of the Catholic Association" by Wyse. On reading 
his account, it is impossible not to be struck with the very 
small share that men have had in this movement; it was purely a 
natural process directed by a merciful God. As with all natural 
processes, it began by an almost imperceptible movement among a 
few disconnected atoms, which, by seeming accident approaching 
and coming into contact, begin to form groups, which gather 
other groups toward them in ever-increasing numbers, thus giving 
shape to an organism which defines itself after a time, to be 
finally developed into a strong and healthy being. This process 
differed essentially from those revolutionary uprisings which 
have since occurred in other nations, to the total change in the 
constitution and form of the latter, without any corresponding 
benefit arising from them.

Before entering upon the full investigation of this uprising, it 
may be well to dispel some false notions too prevalent, even in 
our days, among men who are animated with the very best 
intentions, who wish well to the Irish cause, but who seem to 
fail in grasp in the right idea of the question. Reconstruction, 
say they, is impossible-at least as far as the past history of 
the country goes. Where are her leaders, her chieftains, her 
nobility? Feudalism broke the clans, persecution put an 
effectual stop to the labors of genealogists and bards. Where, 
to-day, are the O'Neill, the O'Brien, the O'Donnell, and the 
rest? Until new leaders are found, offshoots, if possible, of 
the old families, more faithful and trustworthy than those who 
so far have volunteered to guide their countrymen, how is it 
possible to expect a people such as the Irish have always been, 
to assume once more a corporate existence, and enjoy a truly 
national government?

I. That the Irish nobility has disappeared forever may be 
granted. In giving our reasons for believing in the 
impossibility of connecting the present with the past through 
that class, and thus restoring a truly national government, and 
in strengthening this opinion by what follows, we shall show at 
the same time that, in that regard, Ireland is on a par with all 
other nationalities, among whom the aristocratic classes have 
quite lost the prestige that once belonged to them, and can no 
longer be said to rule modern nations.

The question of nobility is certainly an important one for the 
Irish--nay, for all peoples. Up to quite recently, profound 
thinkers never imagined it possible for a people to enjoy peace 
and happiness save under the guidance of those then held to be 
natural guides with aristocratic blood in their veins, who were 
destined by God himself to rule the masses. We are far from 
falling in with the fashion, so common nowadays, of deriding 
those ideas. Men like Joseph de Maistre, who was certainly an 
upholder of the theory, and who could not suppose a nation to 
exist without a superior class appointed by Providence to guide 
those whose blood was less pure, have a right to be listened to 
with respect, and none of their deliberate opinions should be 
treated with levity.

And, in truth, no nobility ever existed more worthy of the title,
as far as the origin of its power went, than the Irish. Its 
last days were spent, like those of true heroes, fighting for 
their country and their God. It is a remarkable fact that they, 
the truest, were the first of the aristocratic classes to fall. 
After them, all the aristocracies of Europe, with the exception 
perhaps of the English, which still exists at least in name, 
gradually saw their power wrested from them, so that, to-day, it 
may be said with truth that the "noble" blood has lost its 
prerogative of rule.

Various are the theories on these superior classes; a few words 
on some of them may be as appropriate as interesting.

Of all those advanced, Vico's are the least defensible, though 
they seem to rest on a deep knowledge of antiquity. No Christian 
can accept his view of a universal savage state of society after 
the Flood; and his explanation of the origin of aristocratic 
races, and of the plebeians, their slaves, is purely the work of 
imagination, however well read in classic lore may have been the 
author of "Scienza Nuova." To suppose with him that the primeval 
"nobles" reached the first stage of civilization by inventing 
language, agriculture, and religion, and by imposing the yoke of 
servitude on the "brutes" who were not yet possessed of the 
first characteristics of humanity, is revolting to reason, and 
contradictory to all sound philosophy and knowledge of history. 
His aristocracy is a brutal institution which he does well to 
doom to extinction as soon as the plebs is sufficiently 
instructed and powerful enough to seize upon the reins of 
government, before it, in its turn, is brought under by the 
progressive march of monarchy, with which his system culminates.

The feudal ideas concerning "noble" blood rested on an entirely 
different basis. The feudal monarch is but the first of the 
nobles, and the possession of land is the true prerogative and 
charter of nobility. The inferior classes being excluded from 
that privilege, are also excluded from all political rights, and 
are nothing more nor less than the conquered races which were 
first reduced to slavery. Christianity was the only power which 
effected a change, and a deep one, in the relations of these two 
classes to each other; the rigorous application of the system by 
the Northmen being entirely opposed to the elementary teachings 
of our holy religion.

From the change thus brought about resulted the Christian idea 
of aristocratic and monarchical government which had the support 
of some gifted writers of the last and present centuries. It was 
in fact a return to the old system realized by Charlemagne in 
the great empire of which he was the founder--a system whose 
glorious march was interrupted by the invasion of feudalism in 
its severest form, which, according to what was before said, 
came down from Scandinavia in the time of Charlemagne's 
immediate successors. Under the regime of the noble emperor, the 
Church, the Aristocracy, and the People, formed three Estates, 
each with its due share in the government. This mode of 
administering public affairs became general in Europe, and stood 
for nearly a thousand years.

But is it the particular form of government necessary for the 
happiness of a nation, as it was held to be by some powerful 
minds? If it is, then are we born, indeed, in unhappy times; for 
the corner-stone of the edifice, the aristocratic idea, has 
crumbled away, and is apparently gone forever.

Any one, looking at Europe as it stands to-day, must feel 
constrained to admit that its history for the last hundred years 
may be summed up in the one phrase: admission of the middle 
classes of society to the chief seat of government. Russia now 
makes the solitary exception to this rule; for in England, which 
seems the most feudal of all nations, the middle classes have 
attained to a high position, and, through their special 
representatives, have often taken the chief lead in public 
affairs, ever since the Revolution of 1688, a lead which is now 
uncontested. And as individuals of the middle class are often 
admitted into the ranks of the aristocracy, it would indeed be a 
hard thing to find purely "noble" blood in the vast majority of 
aristocratic families now existing in Great Britain.

The history of the gradual decline of what is called the 
nobility in the various states of Europe would require volumes. 
In many instances it would certainly be found to have been 
richly merited, in France particularly, perhaps, where the 
corruption of that class was one of the chief causes which led 
to the first French Revolution.

But in Ireland the original idea of nobility was different from 
that entertained elsewhere; the action of the institution on the 
people at large was peculiar in its character; and if, in early 
times, those rude chieftains were often guilty of acts of 
violence and outrage against religion and morality, they atoned 
for this by that last long struggle of theirs, so nobly waged in 
defence of both. But the destruction of the order was final and 
complete, and seems to have left no hope of resurrection.

In our first chapter, when treating of the clan system, the 
origin of chieftainship among the Celts was referred back to the 
family: all the chieftains, or nobles, were each the head of a 
sept or tribe, which is the nearest approach to a family; all 
the clansmen were related by blood to the chieftain. The order 
of nobility among the Celts was therefore natural and not 
artificial; being neither the result of some conventional 
understanding nor of brute force. Nature was with them the 
parent of nobility and chieftainship; and the ennobling, or 
raising a person by mere human power to the dignity of noble, 
was unknown to them: a state of things peculiar to the race.

In Vico's system, aristocracy sprang from physical force or 
skill; consequently, nobility was founded on no natural right, 
although the author does his best to prove the contrary, chiefly 
by ascribing to the aristocratic class the discovery or 
invention of right (jus) which thus becomes a mere derivative of 
force.

In feudalism, pure and unmixed, after it had penetrated farther 
south, under the lead of the Scandinavians, nobility was derived 
from conquest and armed force. It is true that, by this system, 
the viking, monarch, or sovereign lord, was the one who 
distributed the territory, won from conquered nations, among his 
faithful followers, and thus land and its consequence, nobility, 
were apparently the award of merit; but the merit in question 
being equivalent to success in battle, it again resolved itself 
into armed force. In fact, the power of feudalism proper rested 
in the army; the chief nobles were duces or combats (dukes or 
counts), the inferior nobles were equites (knights) and milites 
(men-at-arms). All power and title began and ended with force of 
arms, which was the only foundation of right: jus captionis et 
possessionis--the right of taking and of keeping.

Eventually feudal ideas underwent considerable change among the 
aristocracy of Christendom, by the gradual spread of Christian 
manners; and the first establishment of nobility by Charlemagne, 
which was anterior to pure feudalism, afterward revived, and 
lasted a thousand years. Then it was conferred by the monarch on 
merit of any kind, and it was understood that those whom 
superior authority had raised to the dignity had won their title 
by their deeds, which were sufficient to prove their noble blood,
and that they were empowered to transmit the title to their 
posterity. The idea was a grand one, and gave proof of its vast 
political and social usefulness in the immense benefits which it 
brought upon Europe during so many ages. Unfortunately, the 
inroad of the Scandinavians, following closely on the death of 
its great founder, introduced feudalism as better known to us, 
interfered with the institution which Charlemagne had 
established in such admirable equipoise, and added to it many 
barbarous adjuncts, which for a long time entered into the idea 
of nobility itself. Thus the titles of feudal lords were 
retained--duce, comites, equites, milites--with, all the 
paraphernalia of brute force which the harsh mind of northern 
despotism had made divine. Thus was the holding of landed 
property allowed to the nobles alone; the great mass of the 
population being composed of men--ascripti glebae-- who were 
incapable from their position of rising in the social scale; so 
that all were duly impressed with the idea that the mass of the 
people had been conquered and reduced, if not to slavery, to 
what greatly resembled it--serfdom. From this order of things 
arose that fruitful source of all modern revolutions, the 
division of Europe into two great classes antagonistic to each 
other and separated by an almost impassable gulf--the lords and 
the "villeins."

To be sure, the supreme lord had the power to raise even a 
villein to the rank of noble, after he had proved his superior 
elevation of mind by heroic achievements; but what superhuman 
exertions did not those achievements call for; what a concourse 
of fortuitous circumstances rarely occurring, so as to render 
almost illusory the hope of rising held out by the feudal theory!
The Church alone opened her highest grades to all 
indiscriminately; and, in her, true merit was really an 
assurance of advance.

Further details are not needed. The difference between the idea 
of the nobility entertained in Celtic countries, and that held 
by the rest of Europe, is already in favor of the former.

For this reason the action of the Irish aristocracy on the 
people at large was happily altogether free from those causes of 
irritation so common in feudal countries. A close intimacy and 
personal devotion naturally existed between the chieftain of a 
clan and his men--an intimacy manifested by the free manners of 
the humblest among them, and that ease of social intercourse 
between all classes of people, which was a matter of so much 
surprise to the Norman barons at their primitive invasion.

At first sight, the Celtic system appears, in one respect at 
least, inferior to that which prevailed throughout the rest of 
Europe: the simple clansmen could never indulge in the hope of 
attaining to the chieftainship, being naturally excluded from 
that high office. Only the actual members of the chieftain's own 
family could hope to succeed him after his death, by election, 
and take the lead of the sept; thus nobility was entirely 
exclusive, and regulated by the very laws of Nature. The office 
was really not transferable, and no degree of exertion, of 
whatever nature, could win it for any person born out of the one 
family. But the difference was scarcely one in fact; and we know 
how illusory, often was that ambition which the system of merit 
inspired in the man born of an inferior class in other races 
than the Celtic. The broad assertion, that no man could rise 
from the condition in which he happened to be born, remains true 
for nearly all cases.

But, on the other hand, there were motives of ambition besides 
that of becoming chieftain, or entering on the road thereto, by 
being admitted into the ranks of the nobility, which lay open to 
the Celt; and if the desire of a mere clansman to become a 
chieftain lay within the bounds of possibility, the social state 
of Celtic countries would have been broken up and become 
intolerable, and society would have been dissolved into its 
primitive elements. Two considerations of importance:

The whole of Irish history teaches one lesson, or, rather, 
impresses one fact: that every member of a clan took as much 
pride in the sept to which he belonged, and labored as zealously 
for its head, as he could have done had the advantage turned all 
to himself. The peculiar features engendered by the system were 
such that each man identified himself with the whole tribe and 
particularly with its leader; and this is easily understood, as 
we see the same sort of feeling existing to-day among families. 
It is in the very essence of natural ties to merge the 
individual in the community to which he belongs, as in questions 
which affect the whole family to merge self in the whole, to 
forget one's own identity, to be ready for any sacrifice, 
particularly when the sacrifice is called forth in defence of a 
beloved parent.

To judge by the ancient annals of Ireland which are accessible, 
this was undoubtedly the sentiment pervading Celtic clans, and 
it is easy to conceive how, under such conditions, ambitious 
thoughts of the chieftainship or nobility could not well enter 
there. Moreover, we repeat, had such ambitious thoughts been 
within the compass of realization, the whole system would have 
been destroyed.

The greatest source of quarrels, feuds, wars, and general 
calamities among the Irish people, was the insane aspiration 
among the inferior members of a chieftain's family after supreme 
power. The institution of Tanist, or heir-apparent, particularly,
which was general for all offices, from the highest to the 
lowest, was a constant source of trouble and contention to septs 
which, without it, would have remained united and in harmony. 
Montalembert has well said that it seems as if an incurable 
fatality accompanied the Irish everywhere, and condemned nearly 
all the highest among them to have their blood shed either by 
others or by their own hand, and that few indeed are those 
renowned chieftains and kings who died quietly in their beds. 
Their annals are filled throughout with tales of blood; and, 
when we know of their strong attachment to religion, of their 
tenderheartedness for women, children, old and feeble men, it is 
hard to conceive how they came to shed blood so often, and show 
themselves proof against the simplest claims of humanity.

But the difficulty is sufficiently explained by their own annals 
and the state of society under which they lived. The Tanistry 
was the great source of all those evils. The position of a 
chieftain was so honorable, so influential, and powerful, that 
all natural sentiments, even those of family affection, were 
often extinguished by the insane ambition of attaining to it, in 
those whom Nature had set on the road toward it.

It looks like a contradiction, yet nothing is so well 
established as their deep affection for their near relatives and 
the fury engendered against their nearest of kin when allured by 
the prospect of the chieftainship. What the case might have been,
had all the inferior clansmen been influenced by the same 
motive, one shudders to think. Happily the possibility of such a 
position was denied them, and thus were they spared all the 
crime and horrors which it entailed. Let us now turn to the fall 
of the Irish nobility, in order to see how that fall was final 
and decisive, leaving little or no room for the hope of their 
resurrection.

The great wars of Henry VIII. and Elizabeth upon the island 
often drove some of the Irish chieftains to quit their country 
for a time; a thing scarcely ever known before, where the Pale 
was so contracted and the power of the English kings so limited. 
But those first voyages of Irish lords to foreign countries had 
generally no other destination than England itself, whither they 
sometimes repaired to justify themselves in the presence of the 
sovereign against the imputations of their enemies, or to pay 
court to him for the purpose of obtaining some coveted object. 
Occasionally their children were brought up at the English court,
either with the view of instilling Protestantism into their 
artless minds, or to make them friends of England, so that many 
of them thus became king's or queen's men. In this manner the 
Irish nobility first came to look out beyond their own country.

When, as events went on, some great family was crushed or nearly 
so, as were the Kildares by Henry Tudor and the Geraldines by 
Elizabeth, the outraged nobility began to think of foreign 
alliances, and cast their eyes abroad over Spain, Belgium, or 
France, above all toward Rome, which was the centre of their 
religion, attachment to which was one of their chief crimes, 
where the Holy Father was ever ready to encourage and receive 
them with open arms, Thus history tells us of the narrow escape 
of young Gerald Desmond.

He was still a child of twelve years, and the sole survivor of 
the historic house of Kildare, when his life was sought after 
with an eagerness which resembled that of Herod, but the 
devotion of his clansmen defeated all attempts at his capture. 
"Alternately the guest of his aunts, married to the daughter of 
the chief of Offaly and Donegal, the sympathy everywhere felt 
for him lead to a confederacy between the northern and southern 
chieftains, which had long been felt wanting, and never could be 
accomplished. A loose league was formed, including the O'Neills 
of both branches, O'Donnell, O'Brien, the Earl of Desmond, and 
the chiefs of Moylurg and Breffni. The child, object of so much 
natural and chivalrous affection, was harbored for a time in 
Munster; then transported, through Connaught, into Donegal; and 
finally, after four years, in which he engaged more the minds of 
the statesmen than any other individual under the rank of 
royalty, he was safely landed in France."-(A. M. O'Sullivan.)

But the intercourse between the Irish nobility and foreign 
powers was chiefly increased during the reign of Elizabeth, when 
by the great league of the Desmond Geraldines in the south, 
which was followed by that of the O'Neills and O'Donnells in the 
north, they entered into open treaty with the Popes and the 
Kings of Spain; and, when reverses came, no other resource was 
left to the outlawed chieftains than flight to the Continent, 
where they abode till the storm blew over, sometimes for the 
remainder of their lives.

James Fitzmaurice stayed a long time in Italy, where, on hearing 
of the imprisonment of his cousins, the Desmonds, he planned the 
first great league in defence of religion, no longer for the 
purpose only of righting family wrongs, but of waging a holy war 
which might draw the cooperation of all the Catholic powers.

These few details are here furnished, because they mark a new 
starting-point in the history of the race, when the nobility of 
the land first went abroad to live with a view of finding allies 
for the Irish cause; while the Irish at home looked anxiously to 
their chieftains abroad to return to them with the promised 
succor.

A few words on the policy exercised toward the Irish nobility by 
Henry VIII., Elizabeth, and James I., at the beginning of his 
reign, will give us a sufficiently clear insight into the means 
adopted for the gradual attack upon them, which resulted first 
in their partial subjugation, finally in their total destruction.
Those monarchs thought that, to reduce Ireland to an English 
colony, all they had to do was to destroy the chieftains, and 
the subjugation of the country was complete. They were 
strengthened in this opinion by the outbreak of Protestantism, 
which had deprived the lower classes not only of their material 
comfort and religious consolations, but of all the immunities 
and liberties which the middle ages had left to them. While the 
mass of the nation was not only denied all political influence, 
but even all right to any consideration whatsoever on the part 
of the state, when the highest nobles were cowering at the feet 
of royalty, utterly at the mercy of the Tudor despots, how could 
the plebs of England and Ireland dare show its front even to 
testify to mere existence?

The English monarchs were aware that the spirit of the Irish 
nobles was not broken like that of their English vassals; and 
they resolved on bringing the proud lords of the Pale and the 
chieftains of the old race to a like submission with their own 
nobles. But of the common clansmen they made no more account 
than of the English rabble, and herein lay their great mistake. 
Subsequent history proved that the national leaders of the Irish 
race might be utterly annihilated, and yet the Irish question 
remain as great a difficulty as ever, owing to the stubborn, 
though sometimes passive resistance of the peasantry. But at 
that time such a thing was not contemplated.

All the cunning of diplomacy, all the artifice of the law, 
finally all the material resources of England, were called in, 
one after the other, or together, to achieve that great object 
of the policy of the Tudors and of the first Stuart. It is not 
necessary to go over what every person conversant with the 
history of the time knows by heart; it is only proper to 
indicate, as briefly as possible, the gradual results of that 
crafty and stern policy.

The Geraldine war ended with the total destruction of the 
Catholic Anglo-Irish nobles of the south, whose place was filled 
by the younger sons of Protestant nobles from England. With the 
Geraldines, or shortly after them, fell the O'Sullivans of Beare,
the McGeohegans, the O'Driscolls, and O'Connors of Kerry, whom 
Spain and Portugal received.

Then the whole efforts of Elizabeth were turned to the 
destruction of the native chieftains of the north. She failed; 
and the war resulted in a peace which left their lands and the 
open practice of their religion to the Ulster chiefs.

But James I., though he seemed willing to abide by the articles 
of the treaty, was driven by hard pressure to employ deceit, 
fraud, intimidation, and force, to bring the northern nobility 
into his power, and "the flight of the earls" was the 
consequence.

From this date the "Irish exiles" began in good earnest, 
originally consisting, for the most part, of families belonging 
to the first blood of the land, with minor chiefs and captains 
in their retinue. Many letters written at the time, which have 
been preserved, as well as reports of spies and informers, 
dispatched to the court of England from Spain, Portugal, Belgium,
France, and Italy, give us an insight into the life led by 
those noblemen in foreign countries. They were sometimes 
supported by the sovereigns who received them; but at others 
neglected and reduced to shifts for a living.

The "flight" itself and all its details are given by the Rev. C.
P. Meehan. The entire number of souls on board the small vessel 
which bore them away was, according to Teigue O'Keenan, Ollamh 
of Maguire, "ninety-nine, having little sea-store, and being 
otherwise miserably accommodated." This was indeed the first 
emigration of the Irish nobles and gentry, which was to be 
followed by many another, to their final extinction.

Sir John Davies took an English view of the subject when he 
wrote, about that time, to Lord Salisbury: "We are glad to see 
the day wherein the countenance and majesty of the law and civil 
government hath banished Tyrone out of Ireland, which the best 
army in Europe, and the expense of two million pounds sterling, 
did not bring to pass. And we hope his Majesty's government will 
work a greater miracle in this kingdom than ever St. Patrick did;
for St. Patrick did only banish the poisonous worms, but 
suffered the men full of poison to inhabit the land still; but 
his Majesty's blessed genius will banish all those generations 
of vipers out of it, and make it, ere it be long, a right 
fortunate island."

Davies's prophecy ought to have been accomplished long ago, for 
it is long since all the Irish nobility, "those generations of 
vipers," has been destroyed; yet the poor island is still far 
from being "right fortunate."

The chief means employed at the time to encompass the 
destruction of the nobles was the infamous revelations of spies 
and informers. The existence of these agents has long been known 
to all; but the extent of their workings was not suspected even 
until the state papers and the correspondence of political men, 
and holders of offices at the time, came to be examined by 
writers desirous of investigating the whole truth.

It was then found that every man in the English Government, 
beginning from the highest, the king's ministers, through the 
Lords-Lieutenants and Chief-Justices of Ireland, down to the 
lowest officials, one and all kept in their pay men of all ranks 
of life, who, at the bidding of their employers, were ready to 
circumvent the victims of an odious policy, and under the guise 
of friendship, interest, common acquaintance, to discover, and 
even, if needed, to invent facts and circumstances which might 
be turned against them, or against any other persons obnoxious 
to England, with the view of destroying them. So that, to 
England in Europe, and to Elizabeth in England, belongs the 
dubious honor of having invented that great agent of modern 
governments--the secret police.

But the operations of those informers were not confined to 
England and Ireland alone, although those two kingdoms may be 
said to have literally swarmed with them; all foreign countries 
were made the scenes of their infamous machinations, wherever in 
fact the Irish nobles or English Catholics fled for refuge from 
persecution. At the courts of Spain and Rome they were to be 
found; in Brussels and Louvain, in Paris and Rheims, as well as 
in the by-lanes of London and the lowest quarters of Dublin. The 
ecclesiastical establishments particularly, which were founded 
by the Irish Catholics for the education of their priesthood, 
were infested with them: they found means to penetrate into 
their most secluded recesses, and sometimes the vilest and most 
shameful hypocrisy was resorted to in order to gain admittance 
into those holy cloisters devoted to science and virtue.

All the great houses and hotels in foreign countries, where the 
banished nobility of Ireland passed the tedious hours, months, 
and years, of their exile, were the places easiest of access to 
those base tools of the English Government.

On the reports furnished by these men the British policy was 
based, and the nobility and gentry still left in the island fell 
into the meshes so cautiously spread around them. How many of 
their number were cast into the Tower of London or the Castle of 
Dublin, on the mere word of these pests of society! How many, 
suddenly warned of the treachery intended, had to fly in haste 
lest they should fall into the hands of their enemies! We know 
that the first "flight of the earls" was brought about by such 
means as these, but our readers would be mistaken in imagining 
that that was an exceptional case, scarcely ever repeated. It 
was in reality the ordinary way of getting rid of this hated 
race of Irishmen.

The great misfortune was that, even among the Irish themselves, 
nay, among friars and priests belonging to the race, the English 
Government sometimes, though Heaven be thanked! rarely, found 
ready tools and most useful informers. Mean and sordid souls are 
to be found everywhere; our Lord himself was betrayed by an 
apostle, while giving him the kiss of peace; but among the Irish,
people this class was confined to a few needy adventurers, 
sometimes to men who, from some personal grievance, real or 
imaginary, were blinded by the spirit of revenge to deliver 
those whose destruction they thirsted for into the hands of 
their common enemies, to their own eternal shame and perdition. 
The common people were too noble-hearted ever to join in such 
infamy, and to those who would have tempted them with gold to 
betray the men concealed by them, the response was ever ready: 
"The King of England is not rich enough to buy me!"

Thus, piecemeal, as it were, during the reign of Elizabeth and 
James I., and a part, at least, of that of Charles I., numbers 
of the Irish nobles were imprisoned or slain at home, or 
compelled to go into exile.

Nor, when James I., going lower in the social scale, began to 
dispossess the ordinary people, the clansmen, the tenants of 
Ulster, in order to make room for his Scotch Presbyterians, was, 
the war on the nobility discontinued on that account. The most 
prominent and, in its results, universal feature of his reign, 
was the breaking up of the clans all over the island, whereby he 
effected a complete change in the social state of the country. 
But the most efficacious means of bringing that result about was 
the total destruction of the nobility and gentry. The crafty 
monarch knew that so long as the Irish could see and converse 
with their natural chieftains and lords, so long would it be 
impossible to extinguish or abate, in the slightest degree, the 
clan-spirit. It was only when the key-stone which held their 
social edifice together-the head of the sept-had disappeared, 
that the whole fabric would tumble into ruins.

After a long trial of this policy of treachery and craft, came 
Cromwell to complete the work with violence and brutal force. 
There still remained in the island a great number of noble 
families, and the ollamhs and genealogists kept clear the rolls 
of the respective pedigrees. There is no doubt, at the time of 
Cromwell's war of extermination, even when the English 
Parliament had passed the Act of Settlement, that all the Irish 
septs still knew where to find their lawful natural chiefs, who, 
if no longer on the island, were at the head of some regiment in 
Flanders, France, Austria, or Spain. But, as time went on, the 
Irish brigades naturally came to identify themselves more and 
more with the countries into whose service they had passed, and 
where they had taken up their permanent abode; while in the 
island itself, force came to degrade what was left of the nobles,
and to annihilate forever the national state institutions 
preserved by the genealogists and bards.

One of the features which most forcibly strikes the reader of 
the history of those times is, what took place all over the 
island when the English Parliament issued that celebrated 
proclamation in which it was declared that "it was not their 
intention to extirpate this whole nation."-(October 11, 1652.)

By that time the chief officers of Cromwell's army had already 
taken possession of a great number of the castles and estates of 
the nobility who had not left the country. The rest had fallen 
into the hands of the adventurers of 1641, who had advanced 
money for the purpose of raising a private army to conquer lands 
for themselves; while the body of Cromwell's troops looked on, 
awaiting the small pittance of a few hundred acres; which was to 
be their share of the spoil. Here is the strange and awe-
inspiring picture of the conquered island in the seventeenth 
century:

The nobles, who had survived the fighting and defeat, were 
allowed to remain a short time until their transportation to 
Connaught. But, driven away from their mansions, where the new 
"landlords"-the word then came into use for the first time--
occupied what had been their apartments, they had to live in 
some ruinous out-buildings, and to till with their own hands a 
few roods of land for the support of their perishing families. A 
few garans (dray-horses), and a few cows and sheep, were the 
only aid in labor and production left to them. They were allowed,
by sufferance; to raise some small crops of grain and roots, 
but all their time had to be occupied in purely manual labor.

Such is the image which fixes itself indelibly on the memory of 
any one who reads attentively the common occurrences of those 
days. It was a picture presented in every province of the island;
in the most distant mountain-fastnesses as well as in the still 
smiling plains of the lowlands.

The nobles were, as a class, utterly destroyed; few of them fell 
to the inferior rank of yeomen; while the mass of the people--
was at once plunged to the dead level of common peasants and 
laborers. If some of the former class still retained a few 
faithful servants, their help was required for the drudgery 
about the farm or the miserable dwelling. None of them could be 
spared to keep up "the glory of the house." Would it not have 
been bitter irony to talk to this remnant of pedigree and their 
long line of ancestors? And would their enemies, who were now 
their masters, have countenanced the proscribed offices of files 
and shanachies, when laws against them specially had been so 
long enacted if not enforced? Now was the exact time for the 
rigid execution of those laws so evidently designed for the 
transformation of the freeborn natives into feudal serfs.

Hence, when the bitter day at last came, which was to deprive 
them of even the sight of the hereditary territory of the family,
which was to transplant them to Connaught-among countrymen, 
indeed, but none the less strangers to them, whose presence 
could not fail to be unwelcome, and bring disturbance, confusion,
and disorder-how, in such a case, could they hope to retain or 
revive their prestige as the old lords of the country? It is 
said that, for this, many of the Munster chieftains preferred to 
go into exile to Spain, or even to the islands of America, 
rather than take up their abode in Connaught, where they were 
sure to find bitter enemies in the old inhabitants of that 
desolate province.

This state of things knew no change, except with a very few of 
the Anglo-Irish, when Charles II. came to the throne, after the 
death of the Protector. He was in truth merely the executor of 
the great Act of Settlement, and carried into effect what had 
been enacted by the Parliament which had brought his father to 
the block, and driven himself into exile.

He only restored their estates to a few families of "innocent 
papists." Such was the phrase applied to them in derision, 
doubtless. The generality of the old families continued to sink 
deeper and deeper in degradation, and the forgetfulness of all 
they had once been.

It took the greater part of a century, from 1607 to 1689, to 
effect the almost total disappearance of the Irish nobility. As 
Colonel Myles Byrne, in his "Irish at Home and Abroad," says: 
"Few facts in history are more surprising than the rapidity and 
completeness of the fall of the Irish families stricken down by 
the penal laws. Reduced to beggary at once, and with habits 
acquired in affluence, surrounded only by contemporaries 
similarly crushed, or by the despoilers revelling and rioting in 
possession of their forfeited lands, friendless and unpitied, 
regarded as 'suspects' from the reasons for discontent so 
abundantly furnished them, they seemed struck with stupor, and 
utterly incapable of any effort to rise out of the abyss into 
which they had been precipitated. Dispirited, heart-broken, 
unmanned, they suffered the little personal property left them 
to melt away; and, on its exhaustion, were compelled to resort 
to the most humiliating means to prolong existence, and to 
accept for their helpless offspring the humblest condition which 
promised them a maintenance. A 'trade' was the general resort 
sought for the son of the chief of a clan, landholder, or 
gentleman.

"This gave rise to Swift's observation to Pope: 'If you would 
seek the gentry of Ireland, you must look for them on the coal-
quay or in the liberty.'

"Thus, in my youth, 'the Devoy,' the head of one of the most 
powerful and distinguished of our septs, was a blacksmith, I 
have often seen a mechanic, named James Dungan, who was said to 
be a descendant of James Dungan, Earl of Limerick; and 'the 
Chevers' (Lord Mount Leinster) was the clerk of Mrs. Byrnes, who 
carried on the business of a rope-maker.

"Maddened and embittered by humiliation and suffering, 
renouncing all hope of recovering their stolen lands, those 
victims of 'bills of discovery,' or of confiscation, burned or 
destroyed, or threw aside, as worse than useless, the records of 
their former possessions, the proofs of their former 
respectability, and seemed, in fact, desirous to efface all 
evidence of it. I know one case in which the title-deeds of an 
estate were searched for an important occasion, and in which it 
appeared that they had been given to tailors to cut into strips 
or measures for purposes of their trade.

"A claim was set up to a dormant peerage, and a relation of mine 
having been applied to for information in support of it, he said:
'You are positively in remainder; but you are in the condition 
of the descendants of many Irish families, whose great 
difficulty is to prove who was their grandfather.'"

The reader is naturally struck, when the sudden appearance of 
James II. on the island presents to his eyes another Irish army, 
and a new Irish nation, fighting again for God and the king, but 
with few of the old names among those who then appeared on the 
scene. The leaders throughout the three years' struggle, which 
decided the ultimate fate of the country, for the most part have 
names unknown to Ireland, and unassociated with its former 
history, so completely had the aristocracy of the island 
perished and disappeared.

It may be well imagined, then, that, after the passage of 
another century of woe such as was described in the last chapter,
it would be impossible to reconstruct the genealogies of the 
old families who might be entitled to lead the rising generation.
Some few names are still advanced as entitled to the hereditary 
honors of once noble families, and thus we still hear of 
pretensions to title of "the O'Brien," "the O'Donaghue," and a 
few others. That such pretensions are acknowledged by the 
generality of the nation, it would be questionable to assert.

To think, then, of reconstructing the Irish nation out of its 
former elements, as they once existed, would be an idle dream. 
Those elements are dissolved and forever destroyed, and all that 
the nation can do with respect to its past is to preserve in 
pious remembrance the former race of men who once shed down such 
a glory over Irish annals. It was a happy and patriotic thought 
of the antiquarian societies of the island to investigate the 
old national records; to illustrate, explain, and bring them 
before the public in a language intelligible to the present 
generation. It is doubtful if in any other country the 
aristocracy fell with a heroism and glory so pure and unalloyed. 
Among all modern nations, as was said previously, the old class 
of noblemen has either passed out of sight, or is fast 
disappearing from living history. Ireland, then, does not stand 
alone in that respect. She was the first to lose her nobility, 
and she lost it more utterly than any other nation. But in the 
variety of movements, complications, revolutions, which now go 
to form the daily current of events in Europe, where do we find 
the nobles regarded as a power, as an element calculated to 
restore or even to preserve? The "noblemen" are well enough 
satisfied nowadays, if they are not persecuted, proscribed, or 
destroyed; if they are enabled to take their stand amid the 
crowd of men of inferior rank and share in the affairs of their 
country; content to see their names once so exclusively glorious,
set on a par with those of plebeians, to lead the modernized 
peoples into the new paths whither they are rapidly drifting. 
Nay, so low have the mighty fallen, that even dethroned kings 
and princes sometimes ask to be admitted as simple citizens in 
the countries which they or their ancestors once ruled.

Here the thought will naturally occur: If the phenomenon is 
universal with respect to the position allotted now to men of 
"noble blood"--since it is evident that for those nations which 
feel no veneration for it a future history is designed, and that 
future is to be utterly independent of such an idea--then 
Ireland is no worse off than any other country in that regard, 
nay, the veneration for noble blood perhaps exists, in its right 
sense, now in her bosom alone, and, though no longer available 
for any purpose, is still an element of conservatism worthy of 
preservation and far from despicable.

Therefore, when we number among false hopes the one entertained 
by a few Irishmen whose thoughts still cling fondly to the past, 
and who would fain reconstruct it, it is not with the intention 
of treating those aspirations slightingly, which we ought to 
honor and would share, were there only the faintest possibility 
of calling again to life what we cannot but consider passed away 
forever.

II. Let us move on to the consideration of our second delusive 
hope, one of a much deeper import, which to-day of all others 
occupies public attention--a separate Irish Parliament and home-
rule government.

The desire for a separate Irish Parliament is certainly a 
national aspiration, it may even be called a right; for the 
people of the island can justly complain of being at the mercy 
of a rival nation, of which they are supposed to form a part, 
and are consequently heavily taxed for the support of it without 
any adequate return. The day may not be far distant when this 
wish of theirs will have to be complied with, as were so many 
other rights once as strenuously denied.

Nevertheless it is our opinion, and we say it advisedly, there 
is no reason for believing that this would prove a universal 
panacea for Ireland's woes, sure to bring health, happiness, and 
prosperity to the nation, uniting in itself all blessings, all 
future success, all germs of greatness; nor is there reason to 
believe that with it the resurrection of the nation is assured, 
as without it, it would remain dead.

To speak still more clearly--the representation of a people by 
its deputies being according to modern ideas an element of free 
constitution for all nations, and Ireland having for so long a 
time enjoyed a privilege very similar to it under her own 
national monarchs, our object cannot be understood to depreciate 
a political institution which seems to have become a necessity 
of the times, owing to the eager aspiration of all minds and 
hearts toward it. But we think it a delusion to imagine that, by 
its possession, national happiness is necessarily and fully 
secured.

Whatever may be the general experience of parliamentary rule, 
its record for Ireland is a sad one. The old Feis of the nation 
are not here alluded to; they had very little in common with 
modern Parliaments, being merely assemblies of the chief heads 
of clans, to which were added in Christian times the prelates of 
the Church. Neither is the "General Assembly," which was 
intrusted with legislative and executive powers by the 
Confederation of Kilkenny, alluded to; this could not be 
reproduced to-day exactly as it then existed.

The Parliament here meant is such as presents itself at once to 
the mind of a man of the nineteenth century, with its members of 
both Houses elected by the people, as in America, or those of 
the Upper House in the nomination of the crown; its opposing 
parties often degenerating into mere factions; its views limited 
to material progress, and its aims and aspirations altogether 
worldly; deeply imbued with the modern ideas of liberalism, yet 
knowing very little, if any thing, of true liberty; often 
following the lead of a few talented members, whose real merits 
are seldom an index of conscience and sense of right.

Such a liberal institution as this, which, if proposed to-day 
for Ireland by the English Government, would be hailed with 
unbounded joy by all ranks of people in that country, would 
nevertheless be no sure harbinger of happiness to the nation, 
and, to repeat what was said above, the record of such an 
institution in Ireland is a sad one.

There is no need of entering upon a history of Irish Parliaments.
If an impartial and fair-minded author were to take up such a 
work, it might serve to open the eyes of many, and show them 
that it is after all better to rely on Divine Providence than on 
such an aid to national prosperity.

Dr. Madden, in his "Connection of Ireland with England," 
conclusively shows that the right of a free and independent 
Parliament similar to that of England was granted to Ireland by 
King John at the very beginning of the "Conquest." Such a 
Parliament was granted to the handful of Anglo-Normans, who were 
already busy in building their castles for the purpose of 
reducing the whole mass of the clans to feudal slavery after 
having deprived them of all their free national assemblies and 
customs. For nearly four hundred years the Irish Parliaments, 
when not completely subjected to English control, as they 
finally were by "Poyning's Act," were mere legislative machines 
devised for the purpose of subduing, cowing, and finally rooting 
out every thing Irish in the land. The language of Sir John 
Davies was very clear on this subject.

This being such a well-known fact to-day, it seems strange that 
a writer who is so well informed, so acute and discerning, and 
so thoroughly Catholic, as Dr. Madden undoubtedly is, should 
attach such great importance to the institution of Parliament as 
first granted by the English monarchs. They had in their eye 
only the small English colony settled on the island, with all 
their feudal customs, and no thought of granting liberty to the 
mass of the nation. The case of Molyneux, which is so often 
quoted and praised by Irish writers, should be set aside and 
forgotten by any man animated by a true love for Irish 
prosperity. It was merely a revival of the old parties of 
English by blood and English by birth, without a single thought 
of the rights of Irishmen. It was a case of siding with one 
English party against another, both aiming at making Ireland a 
colony of England, the while the unfortunate country was crushed 
between them, certain in either case to be the victim. The 
native race had nothing to say or do in the matter, beyond 
assisting at the spectacle of their enemies wrangling among 
themselves.

The same remarks will apply to the pamphlets of Dr. Lucas, which 
created so much interest at the time, and which Dr. Madden 
quotes at such length. Lucas, it will be remembered, was a 
violent anti-Catholic, and consequently anti-Irish partisan.

Yet the Catholic Association made all the use they could of the 
arguments of Molyneux and Lucas, because these possessed some 
vestige of the national spirit, inasmuch as they spoke for 
Ireland, whose very name was hated by the opposite party; and at 
that time the Association was perfectly right: but matters have 
altered since then.

It is certainly strange that, when serious attempts were made by 
Henry VIII. to introduce Protestantism into Ireland, not only 
were Anglo-Irish Catholics summoned to Parliament, but even 
native chieftains also, some of whom spoke nothing but Irish, so 
that their speeches required translating.

But, as was previously shown, this was nothing more nor less 
than a crafty device to make genuine Irishmen unconsciously 
confirm, by what was called their vote, former decrees in which 
the Act of Supremacy had been passed; to make it appear that 
they had abjured their religion, and were now good Protestants; 
and, worse still, to set in the statute-book, as acknowledged by 
all, the law of spiritual supremacy vested in the king, of 
abjuration of papal authority, of submission to all decrees 
passed in England with the purpose of effecting an entire change 
in the religion of the nation.

To such vile uses was the machinery of Parliament reduced. 
Thenceforth it became an engine for the issuing of decrees of 
persecution. Catholic members occasionally appeared in it when a 
lull in the execution of the laws occurred, and they could take 
their seats without being guilty of apostasy. But, by making 
close boroughs of his Protestant colonies, James I. secured, 
once for all, the majority of representatives on the side of the 
Protestants, and, as a natural consequence, nothing more 
grinding, sharp, piercing, and strong, could be imagined than 
this engine of law called the Irish Parliament, as it existed 
under the Stuarts. "Nothing" would be incorrect: there was 
something worse; it came in with the Revolution of 1688, and its 
results have been witnessed in a previous chapter.

Owing to the various oaths imposed upon members in the time of 
William of Orange, no Catholic could any longer sit in the Irish 
Parliament without abjuring his faith. And, thence-forth, the 
state institution sitting in Dublin became more than ever a 
persecuting and debasing power, intent only on making, altering, 
improving, and enforcing laws designed for the complete 
degradation of the people.

There came, however, a period of eighteen years, called "the 
Rise of the Irish Nation" by Sir Jonah Barrington. It would be a 
pleasure to set this down as a real exception to the whole 
previous or later history of Ireland; but such pleasure cannot 
be indulged in.

At the period referred to France had embraced the cause of the 
North American colonies of Great Britain, and the English 
vessels were not the only ones upon the seas. Large French 
fleets were conveying troops to their new allies, and in 1779 
the English Government sent warning to Ireland that American or 
French privateers were to be expected on the Irish coast, and no 
troops could be dispatched for the protection of the island. 
Then arose the great volunteer movement. Every Irishman entitled 
to bear arms enrolled himself in some regiment raised with the 
ostensible design of opposing a hostile landing, but really 
intended by the patriots to force the repeal of Poyning's Act 
from England, to obtain for the Parliament in Dublin real 
independence of English dictation.

The result is well known. One hundred thousand Irishmen were 
soon under arms, who not only took the field as soldiers, and 
formed themselves into regiments of infantry, troops of horse, 
and artillery, but, strange to say, as citizens, sent delegates 
to conventions, and demanded with a loud voice that England 
should not only grant free trade to the sister isle, but 
likewise invest the Irish Parliament with independent powers.

This political open-air contest lasted two years, and, on the 
receipt of the news that the British army had capitulated at 
Yorktown, and that the American War had come to a successful 
termination on the side of the colonists, the Ulster volunteers 
decided to hold a national convention of delegates from every 
city in the province. On Friday, February 15, 1782, the meeting 
took place at Dungannon, County Tyrone, and there the delegates 
swore allegiance to a new and as yet unwritten charter, refusing 
to acknowledge "the claim of any body of men, other than the 
King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland, to make laws to bind this 
kingdom."

The same resolution was adopted in successive meetings of 
volunteer delegates, municipal corporations, and citizens 
generally, all over the island.

The English Government could not resist the pressure. After some 
attempt at temporizing and delaying the concession, on April 15, 
1782, by the firmness of Grattan and his supporters in the 
Dublin House of Commons, the great measure was finally carried 
unanimously:

"That the kingdom of Ireland is a distinct kingdom, with a 
Parliament of her own, the sole legislature thereof; that there 
is no body of men competent to make laws to bind the nation, but 
the King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland, nor any Parliament 
which has any authority or power of any sort whatever in this 
country, save only the Parliament of Ireland; that we humbly 
conceive that in this right the very essence of our liberty 
exists, a right which we, on the part of all the people of 
Ireland, do claim as their birthright, and which we cannot yield 
but with our lives." The italics are our own.

"The news," says Sir Jonah Barrington, "soon spread through the 
nation; every city, town, or village, in Ireland blazed with the 
emblems of exultation, and resounded with the shouts of triumph."

Within a month the whole had been accepted by the new British 
administration. "The visionary and impracticable idea had become 
an accomplished fact; the splendid phantom had become a glorious 
reality; the heptarchy-the old Irish constitution-had not been 
restored; yet Ireland had won complete legislative independence."

Thus does the kind-hearted author of the "Rise and Fall of the 
Irish Nation" commemorate the great event. It is a pity that it 
so soon ended, as it deserved to end, in smoke; for the 
"unanimous vote" of the Dublin House of Commons was not sincere, 
but intended to exclude from the benefit of the newly-acquired 
liberty the great mass of the people; that is, all Catholics, 
without exception.

Already, during the volunteer excitement, Catholics had looked 
on at the movement with pleasure and hope that, at least, some 
relaxation of the barbarous code enacted against them might 
ensue. Unable to take an active part in the movement, the laws 
not allowing them to bear arms and enlist, they willingly 
brought such muskets as they possessed to give to their 
Protestant neighbors. When the final burst of enthusiasm came at 
the news that a free and independant Parliament was to meet at 
Dublin, surely they were justified in expecting that, at last, 
their natural and civil rights might be restored them in an age 
so enlightened. They had heard too of the success of the 
American colonies in winning those rights for all in their happy 
country, beyond the Atlantic; and we may be sure that not a few 
of them had heard how, at the conclusion of the War of 
Independence, the chief officers of the American army had gone 
in state with their French allies to the Catholic Church in 
Philadelphia, there to join in thanksgiving to the Almighty, 
before a Catholic altar. Moreover, they had Grattan and many of 
the volunteers on their side.

The all-comprehensive phrase, too, had been inserted in the 
resolution so unanimously carried, and made law by the British 
Government: "We humbly conceive that, in this right, the very 
essence of our liberty consists, a right which we, on the part 
of all the people of Ireland, do claim as their birthright, and 
which we cannot yield but with our lives."

Was it possible for the originators and successful promoters of 
this great change in the government of the nation to interpret 
such a phrase in a restricted sense? Did not the Irish Catholics,
the great bulk of the people, form a part, at least, of "all in 
Ireland?" One would imagine so: yet what followed soon after 
showed the preposterousness of such an idea.

The new Parliament met; several measures favorable to the trade 
and manufactures of the island had been carried; but it was soon 
found that the electoral law, as it stood, failed to correspond 
with the altered circumstances of the time. The legislative body 
was returned by an antiquated electoral system which could not 
be said to represent the nation. Boroughs and seats were openly 
and literally owned by particular families or private persons; 
the voting constituency sometimes not numbering more than a 
dozen. As a matter of fact, less than one hundred persons owned 
seats or boroughs capable of constituting a majority in the 
Commons!

As everywhere else in revolutionary times, the question of 
parliamentary reform was not debated in the Parliament only; 
every man in the nation, each in his own sphere, took part in 
the stormy contest which began to rage all over the island. The 
volunteers were still in their glory. Flushed with victory, they 
did not cease from their political agitations. In September, 
1783, they met once more in convention at Dungannon, the 
specific object of which, Dr. Madden tells us, was parliamentary 
reform, and they then determined "to hold another grand national 
convention of volunteer delegates in Dublin, in the month of 
November following."

In that extraordinary assembly, the question of the rights of 
Catholics was naturally brought up, and, to his honor be it said,
the Protestant Bishop of Derry proposed to extend the elective 
franchise to them.

That some fanatics would oppose this motion was only to be 
expected; and it would have caused no surprise to find the 
opposition confined to a number of men of inferior station, 
still deeply imbued with narrow Protestant ideas. But when the 
leaders of the movement for national independence, Lord 
Charlemont and Mr. Flood, appeared in the ranks of the 
determined opponents of the proposition, it was cause for wonder 
indeed. It was chiefly owing to the exertions and influence of 
Lord Charlemont that the efforts of the revolution had been 
finally turned to the side of freedom; while Flood was a greater 
nationalist than Grattan himself, whose eloquence was so 
memorable in the last momentous debates of the Irish House of 
Commons. Flood carried his patriotism so far as to suspect the 
British Government of not being sincere in its concessions, when 
Grattan thought that "nothing dishonorable and disgraceful ought 
to be supposed in motives until facts render them suspicious."

Nevertheless, it was Charlemont and Flood who stood firm for the 
exclusion of Catholics from the franchise demanded for them by a 
Protestant bishop; and Flood's plan was the one finally adopted.

In order to make a stronger impression on the public mind, a 
number of delegates, who were also members of Parliament, 
proceeded, on November 29th, directly from the convention to the 
House of Commons, some of them dressed in their volunteer 
uniforms, for the purpose of supporting the plan of Mr. Flood to 
exclude the Catholics from the franchise.

In the midst of the tumult, the bill of reform failed, seventy-
seven voting for, and one hundred and fifty against it. There 
was therefore no change in the Parliament, and Catholics 
remained in their old position, in consequence of the blunders 
of the chiefs of the volunteer movement for independence.

It is true that, at the same time, the whole volunteer movement 
itself fell to the ground. From that moment it dragged on a 
doomed life. "One would have thought," says Dr. Madden, "there 
was national vigor in it for more than an existence of fifteen 
years, and power to effect more than an ephemeral independence 
which lasted only eighteen years."

But the Catholics had their eyes opened; they saw that the day 
of resurrection was not yet come for them. It was not to be 
brought about by any Irish Parliament. So far, therefore, we 
were right in stating that the parliamentary record for Ireland 
is a sad one. It should be said, however, that, from that time, 
many Protestants, like the Bishop of Derry, Grattan, and others, 
have always been firm in their demand for freedom to all, and 
have remained the stanchest supporters of Catholic rights. What 
we have hitherto called James I's Ulster colony, thus was 
reduced to the Orange party; and, in that sense, the volunteer 
movement was a real and permanent benefit to the country. There 
is no need to mention the names of many distinguished Protestants
of our own times, whose whole life has been devoted by act, or
speech, or both, to the service of all. All honor to them!

But it is alleged that the Irish Legislature, as framed by the 
Constitution of 1782, gave to the country an uninterrupted flow 
of prosperity for eighteen years, and hence the volunteer 
movement was of great benefit to the race, at least temporarily. 
We will present the case in the strongest light possible 
contrary to our own opinion, and for this we can do no better 
than borrow the arguments of Mr. W.J. O'N. Daunt, in his 
pamphlet on the "Irish Question" (1869):

"Accustomed as we are," he says, "since the Union-in 1800-to the 
national distress and chronic disturbance attested by the Devon 
Commissions, Famine Reports, and other official sources of 
information, there seems something scarcely credible in the 
account of Irish pre-Union prosperity-a prosperity which 
contrasted so strongly with the condition of Ireland under a 
Parliament which is called 'Imperial,' but which is essentially 
and overwhelmingly English. But the accounts are given on 
unimpeachable authority.

"Mr. Jebb, member for Callan in the Irish Parliament, thus 
speaks of the advance of the country in prosperity, in a 
pamphlet published in 1798:

"'In the course of fifteen years, our commerce, our agriculture, 
and our manufactures, have swelled to an amount that the most 
sanguine friends of Ireland would not have dared to 
prognosticate.'

"The bankers of Dublin, tolerably competent witnesses, held a 
meeting on the 18th of December, 1798, at which they resolved, 
'that, since the renunciation of Great Britain, in 1782, to 
legislate for Ireland, the commerce and prosperity of this 
kingdom have eminently increased.'

"The Dublin Guild of Merchants did the same on the 14th of 
January, 1797."

But this testimony and that of others whom we could quote was 
the testimony of men opposed to the "Union." Let us look at a 
few admissions made by the supporters of that measure:

"First comes its author, Mr. Pitt, who, in his speech in the 
English House of Commons, January 31, 1799, having alluded to 
the prosperous condition of Irish commerce in 1785, goes on to 
say: 'But how stands the case now? The trade is at this time 
infinitely more advantageous to Ireland.'

"Lord Clare, one of Mr. Pitt's chief instruments in effecting 
the Union, published, in 1798, a pamphlet containing, as quoted 
by Grattan, the following account of Irish progress subsequently 
to 1782: 'There is not a nation on the habitable globe which has 
advanced in cultivation and commerce, in agriculture and 
manufactures, with the same rapidity in the same period.'

"Finally, Mr. Secretary Coke, in a Unionist pamphlet, said at 
that time: 'We have had the experience of these twenty years; 
for it is universally admitted that no country in the world ever 
made such rapid advances as Ireland has done in these respects.'"

All this was undoubtedly true; and it is not our intention to 
admire what was called the Union, nor to advocate it. Those of 
the various writers cited, who spoke so dogmatically in the 
above passages, had in their minds only material and external 
prosperity, and that even of only one class of citizens. Those 
who wish well to Ireland cannot be satisfied with this.

Not a single name of the favorers or opposers of the Union, here 
quoted as witnesses, is Celtic. It would be interesting to know 
what the Celts of the island, that is, the greater part of its 
inhabitants, thought at the time, not of the Union, but of their 
own Parliament, and how much of this great material prosperity 
fell to their portion.

Surely they were all opposed to a Union which for a variety of 
reasons had grown odious in their sight; but, did they, could 
they, approve of the acts of their Legislature prior to the 
Union with England? Were they satisfied with those tokens of 
prosperity in favor of a class which had systematically 
oppressed them? Even granting that they were Christian enough 
not to feel envy at the success of their Protestant fellow-
countrymen, did they not, and were they not right to, rue the 
day which, by an act of that same Legislature, shut them off as 
a body from all those advantages.

For it must be remembered that it was at the instigation of many 
of those volunteers who had been so ready to receive the muskets 
from their Catholic neighbors, for the purpose of striking a 
blow for liberty, that none of the penal statutes were repealed, 
and the Irish Catholics continued to groan, at least as far as 
the law went, under the fearful oppressions of which the last 
chapter furnished a feeble sketch. Hence, to speak in their 
presence of their commerce, of their manufactures, of their 
agriculture, of the increase of their wealth, and so on, was a 
bitter mockery, which they could not but resent in their inmost 
soul.

Was the cause of all their miseries removed by such a free and 
independent Parliament? Where could be the agricultural 
prosperity of a people which was not entitled, legally, to own 
an inch of their soil, or lease more than two acres of it? How 
could they engage in prosperous trade when, at the suit of a 
"discoverer," they were liable to be compelled to hand over to 
him the surplus of a paltry income? How could they even 
contemplate engaging in any manufactures, when the laws reduced 
them to the frightful state of pauperism which we have 
shudderingly glanced at? And those laws were preserved, and 
retained on the statute-book, by the very men who vaunted of the 
prosperity of Ireland!

It cannot, then, be too strongly reasserted that the social 
position of Ireland had experienced no change whatever, and that 
the separation of classes, spoken of with such well-merited 
rebuke by Edmund Burke, still stood unaltered:

"They divided the nation into two distinct parties, without 
common interest, sympathy, or connection. One of these bodies 
was to possess all the franchises, all the property, all the 
education; the other was to be composed of drawers of water and 
cutters of turf for them.

Every measure was pleasing and popular just in proportion as it 
tended to harass and ruin a set of people who were looked upon 
as enemies to God and man; and, indeed, as a race of bigoted 
savages, who were a disgrace to human nature itself.

"To render humanity fit to be insulted, it was fit that it 
should be degraded."

And, even supposing the prosperity of which so much talk was 
made to have been universal, so that all had a real share in it, 
how long would it have remained so, if the Irish Parliament had 
continued to exist, and not become merged in the English, or, as 
it was termed, Imperial Legislature? How long could the two 
separated bodies, sitting, the one in Dublin, the other in 
Westminster, have acted in concert, without breaking out into 
violent and mutual recrimination, with all its attendant evils?

The difficulty showed itself at the very outset, and when the 
first question of the relative status of both Legislatures arose.

Mr. Fox, the great Liberal minister of the king, endeavored to 
solve this difficulty by making a distinction between internal 
and external legislation: Ireland was never to be interfered 
with in her Parliament, with respect to her internal questions, 
while the English legislative body possessed the right to step 
in in all measures regarding external legislation. This seems 
very much like what is now proposed by home-rule.

Here is the answer given to this in the tribune of Dublin by Mr. 
Walsh: "With respect to the fine-spun distinction of the English 
minister between the internal and external legislation, it seems 
to me the most absurd position, and at the same time the most 
ridiculous one, that possibly could be laid down, when applied 
to an independent people.

"Ireland is independent, or she is not; if she is independent, 
no power on earth can make laws to bind her, internally or 
externally, but the King, Lords, and Commons of Ireland."

Mr. Walsh, a very influential member of the Irish House of 
Commons, saw, as doubtless did many others, cause of disturbance 
already for the mutual tranquillity of the two nations. And, 
indeed, his fears soon showed themselves only too well grounded. 
Dr. Madden tells the story;

"A month had scarcely elapsed since the opening of the new Irish 
Parliament in 1782, before Lord Abingdon, in the British House 
of Peers, moved for leave to bring in a declaratory bill, to 
reassert the right of England to legislate externally for 
Ireland, in matters appertaining to the commerce of the latter. 
A similar motion was made in the British House of Commons by Sir 
George Young.

"One clause of Lord Abingdon's bill stated that Queen Elizabeth, 
having formerly forbade the King of France to build more ships 
than he then had, without her leave first obtained, it is 
enacted that no kingdoms, as above stated, Ireland as well as 
others, should presume to build a navy or any ships-of-war, 
without leave from the Lord High Admiral of England."

It is easy to foresee the pretty quarrel preparing. Once again, 
then, it may be asserted that the record of Irish Parliaments is 
a sad one.

But could more have been expected of it? Is the scope of 
measures, within the capabilities of any legislative assembly of 
modern times, comprehensive enough to embrace every thing of 
importance to a Catholic people, such as the Irish nation has 
ever been?


The general question of parliamentary rule is a very complicated 
one. The modern Parliament is a very different thing from the 
old assemblies of the representatives of various orders in any 
state. With the Church originated those ancient institutions, 
which in certain parts of Europe partook at once of the twofold 
nature of councils and political assemblies.

This order has passed away, and no one thinks to-day of reviving 
those time-honored institutions, however much political writers 
may be inclined to favor despotism on the one hand, or anarchy 
on the other. What, then, is the origin of the modern 
Parliament? It grew into being in England during the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, emanating as it were, slowly, out of 
the decomposition of the old Parliaments; the aristocracy, and 
the Church chiefly, losing more and more the influence once 
belonging to them, which, in old times, made them paramount in 
those state deliberations. This is one of the chief features of 
the newly-modelled British Constitution, which is of very recent 
growth, and became fixed and settled only after the downfall of 
the Stuart dynasty, receiving additional modifications in the 
contest of parties under the Brunswick and Hanover lines of 
kings.

It is, consequently, an altogether British growth of recent date,
particularly well adapted for England, whose prosperity since 
its establishment has ever been on the increase. But it is very 
doubtful whether other countries have derived equal benefit from 
its adoption.

Toward the end of last century, some few Frenchmen of note 
attempted, with Mounier at their head, to reproduce a feeble 
copy of it in France. Their failure is too well known to the 
world: how their English ideas were scouted by the people, while 
a far more radical revolution swept away every vestige of the 
old French Constitution, without substituting in its stead any 
thing save crude and infidel ideas, which resulted in anarchy.

The lamentable failure of the first attempt was no 
discouragement to other political theorists; and the century has 
witnessed and still witnesses every day essays at English 
legislation, as embodied in the constitution of its Parliaments 
chiefly, all over Europe; and all, as sanguine writers would 
have us believe, to serve as the stepping-stone for the 
"Universal Republic," which is to regenerate the world.

The great questions in all those assemblies are of material 
interests, material prosperity, material projects. Of the moral 
well-being of the people seldom or never a word is heard; and, 
whenever a moral question does come up for discussion, the 
vagueness of the theories advanced and discussed, the indecision 
of the measures proposed, the want of unity in the views 
developed, show how unfit are modern legislators for even 
touching on what concerns the soul of man. The legislators 
themselves feel that their character is far from being a sacred 
one, and that the spiritual element is not comprehended in their 
world. And they are certainly right.

Even the measures of external policy are not universally 
successful in securing the material well-being of the people. In 
France, at least, the various legislatures which have succeeded 
one another have perhaps been productive of as much harm in that 
regard as the liberty of the press and freedom of public 
discussion, which have always had and always will have their 
ardent advocates, and the existence of which is compatible with 
public order in some countries, but not in others.

The same, with certain reservations, is true of the Spanish-
American republics, Brazil, and now of Spain, Italy, and other 
European nations. The legislative machine which is found to work 
so well in England, and what were or still are her colonies, 
seems to get out of order in climates and among nations 
unaccustomed to it, even as far as material prosperity is 
concerned.

But it is neither our object to write a history of Parliaments, 
nor absolutely to condemn those modern institutions by the few 
words devoted to them. All we wish to insist upon is, that all 
the evils of nations are not cured by them, and that they should 
not be taken as in themselves absolutely desirable and all-
sufficient.
	
As to their probable fate in the future, their modern dress is 
not yet two centuries old, and the seeds of decay already appear 
in many places. A few questions are sufficient to demonstrate 
this: Can a Parliament, as understood to-day, last for any 
length of time and work successfully, when composed for a great 
part of corrupt legislators who have been returned by corrupt 
electors? Has not the progress of corruption on both sides, 
elected and electors, been of late alarmingly on the increase? 
What space of time is requisite for legislation to come to a 
stand-still, and prove to modern nations the impossibility of 
carrying on even material affairs with such corrupt machinery? 
It requires no great foresight to reply to these questions.

And yet it is on this tottering institution that the Ireland of 
our days has set her hope. She imagines that, this once gained, 
prosperity and happiness are insure; that, without it, she 
cannot but be discontented, as she is and must be if she 
possesses any feeling. And such is the anomaly of her position 
that, with this conviction firmly set before us, we believe she 
is right in demanding home-rule, and that by insisting upon it 
she will eventually attain it; yet are we convinced that, having 
obtained it, her evils will not be cured, nor her happiness 
served. We prize her highly enough to think her worthy of 
something better, which "something" we are sure God keeps in 
reserve for her.

Suppose her earnest wish granted, and a home Parliament given 
her. Suppose even the old question of her relations with the 
English Legislature determined. A great difficulty has been 
settled satisfactorily, though it is difficult to see how this 
may come about. But supposing the questions for her discussion 
and free-determination being clearly defined, home-rule becomes 
possible without exciting the opposition of the rival Parliament 
of Great Britain.

What is likely to be the composition of her state institution? 
and what the programme of its labors?

In the composition of her two Houses, if she have two, the 
Catholics will not be excluded as they were in 1782; a great 
change certainly, and fraught no doubt with great benefit to the 
country. But will the English element cease to predominate? The 
native race has been kept so long in a state of bondage that few 
members of it certainly will take a leading part in the 
discussions. How many even will be allowed to influence the 
election of members by their votes or their capacity? Universal 
suffrage can scarcely be anticipated, perhaps even it would not 
be desirable. The question is certainly a doubtful one. Of one 
thing are we certain regarding the composition of an Irish 
Parliament: it would not really represent the nation.

For the nation is Catholic to the core; the sufferings of more 
than two centuries have made religion dearer to her than life; 
all she has been, all she is to-day, may be summed up in one 
word--Catholic. Nothing has been left her but this proud and 
noble title, which of all others her enemies would have wrested 
from her. The nation exists to-day, independently of 
parliamentary enactments, in spite of the numberless 
parliamentary decrees of former times; she is living, active, 
working, and doing wonders, which shall come under notice. See 
how busy she has been since first allowed to do. Her altars, her 
religious houses, her asylums, every thing holy that was in 
ruins--all have been restored.

Not satisfied with working so energetically on her own soil, she 
has crossed over to England, where the great and unexpected 
Catholic revival, which has struck such awe and fear into the 
hearts of sectarians, is in great measure due to her.

Cross the broad Atlantic, and even the vast Southern Ocean, and 
the contemplation of Irish activity in North America, Australia, 
and all the English colonies, the intense vitality displayed by 
this so long down-trodden people is amazing. But all this 
activity, all this vitality, is employed in establishing on a 
firm and indestructible basis everywhere the holy Catholic 
Church.

Looking on all this, say then whether Ireland is truly Catholic, 
whether the nation is any thing but Catholic.

But can her new Parliament be Catholic?

No! No one imagines such a thing possible; no one thinks, no one 
dreams of it. It is clear, then, that it cannot represent the 
nation.

Who will go to compose it? Men who will discard-such is the 
modern expression-discard their creed, and leave it at the door. 
Nothing better can be expected. It is true that the bitter 
feeling engendered for so long a time by religious questions is 
not likely to show itself again; or though, to speak more 
correctly, a religious question never was raised in Ireland, the 
whole people being one on that subject; but it may be hoped that 
the bitter persecution against every thing Catholic is not 
likely to recur, whatever may be the composing elements of the 
new Houses of Parliament.

In the impossibility of even guessing at the probable opinions 
of the men who are to have the future fate of Ireland in their 
hands, it may be fairly predicted that, within their legislative 
halls, religious and consequently moral questions will only be 
approached in the spirit of liberalism. Probably, the only thing 
attempted will be the rendering of the people externally happy 
and prosperous, supposing the majority of the members animated 
by true patriotic principles; and indeed the aspirations of all 
who wish well to Ireland are limited to external or material 
prosperity; and, for our own part, we do not consider this of 
slight moment. But is this all that the Irish people require?

They have been brought so low in the scale of humanity that 
every thing has to be accomplished to bring about their 
resurrection; and the "every thing" is comprised in substituting 
flesh-meat for potatoes and good warm clothing for rags. Whoever 
says that the Irish people can be contented with such a 
restoration as this, knows little of their noble nature, and has 
never read their heart.

Assuredly, they have a right to those worldly blessings of which 
they have been so long deprived; and we would not be understood 
as saying that one of the primary objects of good government is 
not to confer those material blessings on the people; nay, it is 
our belief that, when a whole nation has been so long subjected 
to all the evils which not only render this life miserable, but 
absolutely intolerable, it is incumbent on those intrusted with 
the direction of affairs to remedy those evils instantly, and 
endeavor to make the people forget their misfortunes by, at 
least, the enjoyments of this life's ordinary comforts. 
Forgetfulness of the past can be obtained by no other means. And 
this is a very simple, but, at the same time, very satisfactory 
answer to the question so often put and so often replied to in 
such a variety of ways, "Why is Ireland discontented?"

But, while admitting the truth, nay, the necessity of all this, 
the government of a Catholic people has not fulfilled its whole 
duty when it has exerted itself to the utmost to procure, and 
finally succeeded in procuring, the temporal happiness of the 
nation. In addition to this, it must consult its moral and 
religious wants, or a great part of its duty remains neglected.

This, indeed, does not nowadays occur to the minds of the 
majority of men, who have, it would appear, agreed among 
themselves to consider it an axiom of government that the rulers 
of a people should have no other object in view than the 
material comfort and welfare of the masses. They do not reflect 
that the wants of a nation must be satisfied in their entirety, 
and that its moral and religious needs are of no less importance,
to say the least, than the temporal. This is evident in all 
those countries where, in imitation of England, or at her 
instigation, parliamentary governments are now in operation--
countries which include not only Europe, without excepting 
Greece and her chief islands, but Southern Africa at the Cape, 
America, North and South, Australia, and the, large islands of 
Jamaica, Tasmania, New Zealand, and several groups of Polynesia, 
preparing Asia for the boon which, probably, is destined to show 
itself in Japan first, spreading thence all over the largest 
continent of the world.

Wherever modern Parliaments flourish, there material interests 
alone are consulted. This is a new feature of Japhetism; and God 
alone knows how long nations will be satisfied with such a state 
of things!

But if non-Catholic nations thus limit their aspirations, there 
is all the more reason why a Catholic people cannot imitate them 
in such a course, particularly if that people has for centuries 
submitted to every evil of this life in order to preserve its 
religion, showing that, in its eyes, religious blessings rank 
far above all imaginable material advantages; and we all know 
such to be the case for Ireland.

But, it may be asked, what are those religious wants which must 
be satisfied, and how are we to know them? The answer, to a 
Catholic, is plain, and nothing is easier of recognition. What 
the spiritual guides of the nation consider of paramount 
importance and of absolute necessity, is of that character, and 
the government which neglects to listen to remonstrances coming 
from such a quarter, shows thereby that it is ignorant of, or 
slights, its plain duty. Ever since the load of tyranny, which 
weighed down the Irish people, has been removed, if not entirely,
at least suffered a very appreciable reduction, since the 
rulers of the Church in that unhappy country have been able to 
lift up their voice, and proclaimed what they considered of 
supreme importance to those under their charge, is it not a 
strange truth that their voice has never ceased remonstrating, 
and that, at this very moment, it is as loud in protestation as 
ever? When has it been listened to as it should be? Is it likely 
to meet more regard if Ireland obtains home-rule? It grieves us 
to say that the only answer which can be given to this last 
question is still an emphatic "No!"

And for the very simple reason, already given, that Ireland 
cannot have a truly Catholic Parliament, and that all the great 
measures which would occupy the attention of the Catholic 
members, in the event of their meeting at Dublin, would be 
shemes for the advancement of manufactures, trade, the 
construction of ships, tenant-right laws, etc.; all very 
excellent things in their way, and to which Ireland has an 
undoubted right, which will be strongly contested, and in the 
struggle for which she may again be worsted; which, even if she 
obtains, will not enable her to compete with England, and which, 
after and above all, do not correspond to the heart-beat of the 
nation--the restoration complete and entire of the Catholic 
Church all over her broad land.

It may be well to remark that the broad assertion just laid down 
involves no reprisals against the rights of the minority. That 
minority, backed by the English Government, has enjoyed nearly 
three centuries of oppression and tyranny, has taxed human 
ingenuity to the utmost for the purpose of concocting schemes of 
destruction against the majority: it has failed. The majority, 
which at last breathes freely, can well afford not to raise a 
finger in retaliation, and to leave what is called freedom of 
conscience to those who so long refused it. The result may be 
left to the operation of natural laws and the holy workings of 
Providence. But their religious rights ought, at east, to be 
secured to them entire; the rights of their Church to be left 
forever perfectly free and untrammelled.

But, how much has been done against this, even of late? Why has 
a Protestant university so many privileges, while a similar 
Catholic institution is refused recognition? To answer what 
purpose have the Queen's Colleges been established? The Catholic 
bishops certainly possess rights with regard to the education of 
their flocks; with what persistence have not those rights been 
either attacked or circumvented! If the Protestant Establishment 
has been finally abolished, have not its ministers obtained by 
the very act of abolition concessions which give them still 
great weight, morally and materially, in the scale opposed to 
Catholic proselytism, nay, preservation? Is it not a stain even 
yet, if not in the eye of the law, at least in that of the 
English colonized in Ireland, to be a "Roman Catholic?" Is 
"souperism" so completely dead that it never can revive? How 
many means are still left in the hands of the Protestant 
minority to vex, annoy, and impoverish the supposed free 
majority?

Whoever considers the matter seriously cannot but acknowledge 
that in Ireland there exists still a vast amount of open or 
silent opposition to the Church of the majority, and a Church 
which the majority loves with such deep affection that, so long 
as the least remnant of the old oppression remains, so long must 
Ireland remain discontented.

And it is more than doubtful whether home-rule would be a 
sufficient remedy for such a state of things, owing to the fact, 
already insisted upon, that the new Parliament could not be a 
Catholic Parliament.

The reader may easily perceive what was meant by saying that the 
entire restoration of the Catholic Church in the island does not 
suppose the consequent extirpation of heresy; but it clearly 
supposes the perfectly free exercise of all her rights by the 
Church. Nothing short of this can satisfy the Irish people.

III. We pass on to the consideration of a third delusive hope, 
that of the people regaining all their rights by the 
overwhelming force of numbers and armed resistance to tyranny--
the advocacy of physical force, as it is called; in other words, 
the right and necessity of open insurrection, or underhand and 
secret associations, evidently requiring for success the 
cooperation of the numerous revolutionary societies of Europe: a 
criminal delusion, which has brought many evils upon the country,
and which is still cherished by too many of her sons. Though we 
purpose speaking freely on this subject, we hope that our 
language may be that of moderation and justice.

To a Catholic, who has either witnessed or heard of the 
frightful evils brought on modern nations by the doctrine of the 
right of insurrection, of armed force, of open rebellion, 
against real or fancied wrong, that doctrine cannot but be 
loathsome and detestable.

True, there is for nations, as for individuals, something 
resembling the right of self-defence. No Catholic theologian can 
assert that a people is bound to bow under the yoke of tyranny, 
when it can shake that tyranny off; and it is this truth which 
affords a pretext to many advocates of what is called the right 
of insurrection. Moreover, there is no doubt that, in the case 
of Ireland particularly, the Irish had for many centuries a 
legitimate government of their own, and when attacked by 
foreigners, who landed on their shores under whatever pretext, 
they had a perfect right, nay, it was the duty of the heads of 
clans, the provincial kings and princes, to protect the whole 
nation, and the part of it intrusted to their special care in 
particular, against open or covert foes. The name of "rebels" 
was given them by the invaders, with no shadow of possible 
pretext, and the name was as justly resented as it was unjustly 
applied.

Under the Stuart dynasty the state of the case is still more 
clear: for then they were fighting on the side of the English 
sovereigns to whom they had submitted; and, in waging war 
against the enemies of their king and country, they were not 
only enforcing their right, but performing a highly-meritorious 
and in some cases heroic duty. Yet the name of "rebels" was 
again applied to them, and its penalty inflicted upon them, as 
has been seen.

After their complete subjugation, the right of retaliating on 
their oppressors, even if justifiable in theory, was often 
illusory and indefensible in fact, because of the impossibility 
of successful resistance; and the secret associations known 
under the names of "Tories," "Rapparees," "White Boys," 
"Ribbonmen," were, with the exception of the first, condemned by 
the Church.

But in modern times the right of insurrection cannot possibly be 
defended, if, as can scarcely be avoided, the cause of a 
Catholic nation is linked with the various revolutionary 
societies and conspiracies which disgrace modern Europe, 
endanger society, and have all been condemned by the sovereign 
Pontiff.

An extensive discussion of both cases--the stubborn resistance 
made after the fall of the Stuarts, and some of the attempts at 
independence of later times--would show at once the difference 
between the two cases, and prevent thinking men from ranking the 
"Tories" of ancient times with the avowed revolutionists of our 
days. Mr. Prendergast has given a fair sketch of the former in 
the second edition of his "Cromwellian Settlement."

The reader who may peruse this very interesting account can 
notice a remarkable coincidence; one, however, which to our 
knowledge has not yet been pointed out: the very scenes enacted 
in Ireland, during the long resistance offered to oppression 
after the downfall of the Stuart dynasty, were reenacted in 
France during the Reign of Terror, and for some time after, 
throughout the districts which had risen in insurrection against 
the tyranny of the Convention, and both cases were certainly 
examples of right warring against might.

In fact, to a person acquainted with the history of the violent 
changes which, during the last century, modern theories, 
metaphysical systems, and, above all, the working of secret 
societies, have caused, the reading of the history of England 
and Ireland, from the Reformation down, offers new sources of 
interest, by showing how the last frightful convulsion in France 
was merely a copy of the first in England, at least as far as 
the means employed in each go, if not in the ultimate object.

In England the revolution was begun by the monarch himself, with 
a view of rendering his power more absolute and universal by the 
rejection of the papal supremacy, and, consequently, the 
destruction of the Catholic Church. In France the revolution was 
begun by the leaders of the middle classes, who made use of the 
immense power given them by the secret societies which then 
flourished, and the influence of an unbridled press, to destroy 
royalty and aristocracy, that they might themselves obtain the 
supreme power and rule the country. The object of the two 
revolutions was therefore widely different; but the means 
employed in bringing them about, when considered in detail, are 
found to have been perfectly identical.

In both countries, on the side of the revolutionary party or of 
the National Assembly, various oaths were imposed and enforced, 
troops dispatched, battles fought, devastating bands ravaged the 
country while in a state of insurrection, the same barbarous 
orders in La Vendee as in Ireland, so that the language even 
employed in the second case is an exact counterpart of that in 
the first. There is destruction resolved upon; then the 
authorities desisting and resolving on a change of policy, 
though with a rigid continuance of the police measures, 
including in both cases "domiciliary visits," inquests by 
commissioners, courts-martial in the first case, revolutionary 
tribunals in the second--consequent wholesale executions on both 
sides. There were the decrees of confiscation carried out with 
the utmost barbarity, resulting in sudden changes of fortune, 
the class that was aristocratic being often reduced to beggary, 
while its wealth was enjoyed by the new men of the middle 
classes. The peasants derive very little benefit from the 
revolution in France--none whatever, or rather the very reverse 
of benefit, in Ireland. And, to go into the minutest details, 
there are the same informers, spies, troops of armed police, or 
adventurers on the hunt to discover, prosecute, and destroy the 
last remnants of the insurgents in France as well as in Ireland.

In considering the religious side of the question, the parallel 
would be found still more striking, as the proscribed ministers 
of religion were of the same faith in France as in the British 
Isles, while the means adopted for their destruction were 
exactly similar.

On the side of the insurgents the same comparison holds good. In 
both cases there is the first refusal to obey unjust decrees, 
the same stubborn opposition to more stringent acts of 
legislature, the emigration of the aristocratic classes, the 
devotedness of the clergy, with here and there an unfortunate 
exception, the same mode of concealment resorted to--false doors,
traps, secret closets, disguise, etc.; the flying to the 
country and concealment in woods, caves, hills, or mountains; 
and, when the burden grows intolerable, and open resistance, 
even without hope of success, becomes inevitable, there are the 
same resources, method of organization, attack, call to arms, 
call to Heaven, the same heroism: yes, and the same approval of 
religion and admiration of all noble hearts throughout the world.

The only difference consists in the fact that in France the 
struggle lasted a few years only; in Ireland, centuries. In 
France the fury of the revolution soon spent itself in horrors; 
in Ireland the sternness of the persecuting power stood grim and 
unrelaxing for ages, adding decree to decree, army to army. In 
France, numerous hunters of priests and of "brigands," as they 
were called, flourished only for a short decade of years; in 
Ireland similar hunters of priests and of "Tories" carried on 
their infamous trade for more than a century.

In the case of the latter country, too, the confiscation was 
much more thorough and permanent, the emigration complete and 
final; but, in both cases, the Catholic religion outlived the 
storm, and lifted up her head more gloriously than ever as soon 
as its fury had abated.

Finally, to come to the point, which calls now more immediately 
for attention, if the campaigns of Owen Roe O'Neill, of 
Brunswick, and Sarsfield, were the models of the great 
insurrection of La Vendee and Brittany, the bands of "Tories" 
and "rebels," scattered through Ireland at the time of the 
Cromwellian settlement, gave an example for the "Chouan" raids 
which in France followed the blasted hopes of the royalists.

How ought both cases to be considered with reference to the 
general rules of morality? How were they considered at the time 
by religious and conscientious men?

There is no doubt that excesses were committed by Tories in 
Ireland, and Chouans in France, which every Christian must 
condemn; but there can also be little doubt that such of them as 
were not deranged by passion, but allowed their inborn religious 
feelings to speak even in those dreadful times, were restrained, 
either by their own consciences or by the advice of the men of 
God whom they consulted, from committing many crimes which would 
otherwise have resulted from their unfortunate position. All 
this, however, resolves itself into a consideration of 
individual cases which cannot here be taken into account.

Our only question is the cause of both Tories and Chouans in the 
abstract. From the beginning it was clearly a desperate cause, 
and, admitting that the motive which prompted it was generous, 
honorable, and praiseworthy, nothing could be expected to ensue 
from its advocacy but accumulated disaster and greater 
misfortunes still. Of either case, then, abstractly considered, 
religion cannot speak with favor.

But, when an impartial and fair-minded man takes into 
consideration all the circumstances of both cases, particularly 
of that presented in Ireland, as given by Mr. Prendergast, with 
all the glaring injustice, atrocious proceedings, and barbarous 
cruelty of the opposing party taken into account, who will dare 
say that men, driven to madness by such an accumulation of 
misery and torture, were really accountable before God for all 
the consequences resulting from their wretched position?

In the words quoted by the author of the "Cromwellian Settlement:"
"Had they not a right to live on their own soil? were they 
obliged in conscience to go to a foreign country, with the 
indelible mark left on them by an atrocious and originally 
illegitimate government?" And, if the simple act of remaining in 
their country, to which they had undoubtedly a right, forced 
them to live as outlaws, and adopt a course of predatory warfare,
otherwise unjustifiable, but in their circumstances the only 
one possible for them, to whom could the fault be ascribed? Are 
they to be judged harshly as criminals and felons, worthy only 
of the miserable end to which all of them, sooner or later, were 
doomed? Is all the reproach and abuse to be lavished on them, 
and not a breath of it to fall on those who made them what they 
were? Who of us could say whether, if placed in the same position,
he would not have considered the life they led, and the inevitable
death they faced, as the only path of duty and honor?

We are thoroughly convinced that the first Irish "Tories" deemed 
it their right to make themselves the avengers of Ireland's 
wrongs, and consider themselves as true patriots and the heroic 
defenders of their country, and that many honorable and 
conscientious men then living agreed with them. And the people, 
who always sided with and aided them, had after all certainly a 
right to their opinion as the only true representatives of the 
country left in those unfortunate times.

Thus far we have considered the right of resistance on the part 
of the old "Tories;" we now come to what has been called the 
second case--the right of insurrection advocated by modern 
revolutionists, chiefly when connected with the unlawful 
organizations so widely spread to-day. This, indeed, is the 
great delusive hope of to-day, which must be gone into more 
thoroughly, in order to show that Ireland, instead of 
encouraging among her children the slightest attachment to the 
modern revolutionary spirit, ought to insist on their all, if 
faithful to the noble principles of their forefathers, opposing 
it, as indeed the great mass of the nation has opposed it, 
strenuously, though it has met with the almost constant support 
of England, who has spread it broadcast to suit her own purposes.
Ireland's hope must come from another quarter.

Let us look clearly at the origin and nature of this 
revolutionary spirit, so different from the lawful right of 
resistance always advocated by the great Catholic theologians.

The nature of this spirit is to produce violent changes in 
government and society by violent means; and it originated in 
first weakening and then destroying the power of the Popes over 
Christendom. Two words only need be said on both these 
interesting topics--words which, we hope, may be clear and 
convincing.

The very word revolutionary indicates violence; and it is so 
understood by all who use it with a knowledge of its meaning. A 
revolutionary proceeding in a state, is one which is sanctioned 
neither by the law nor the constitution, but is rapidly carried 
on for any purpose whatever. Violence has always been used in 
the various revolutions of modern times, and, when people talk 
of a peaceful revolution, it is at once understood that the term 
is not used in its ordinary significance.

On this point, probably, all are agreed; and, therefore, there 
is no need of further explanation. On the other hand, many will 
be inclined to controvert the second proposition; and, therefore,
its unquestionable truth must be shown.

That the position held by the Popes at the head of Christendom 
for many ages was of paramount influence, and that to them, in 
fact, is due the existence of the state of Europe, known as 
Christendom, is now admitted almost by all since the 
investigations of learned and painstaking historians, 
Protestants as well Catholics, have been given to the world. But 
had the Popes any particular line of policy, and did they favor 
one kind of government more than another? This is a very fair 
question, and well worthy of consideration.

Any kind of government is good only according to the 
circumstances of the nation subjected to it. What may suit one 
people would not give happiness to another, and democratic, 
aristocratic, or monarchical governments, have each their 
respective uses, so that none of them can be condemned or 
approved absolutely. No one will ever be able to show that the 
Roman Pontiffs held any exclusive theory on this subject, and 
adopted a stern policy from which they did not recede.

But a positive line of policy they did hold to, namely, the 
insuring the stability of society by securing the stability of 
governments.

Whoever reads the life of Gregory VII side by side with that of 
William the Conqueror, is at first astonished to find Hildebrand,
who, though not yet Pope, was already powerful in the counsels 
of the Papacy, favoring the Norman king, although William 
eventually proved far from grateful. But, when the reader comes 
to inquire what can have moved the great monk to take up this 
line of action, he will find that a deep political motive lay at 
the bottom of it, which throws a flood of light over the policy 
of the Popes and the history of Europe during the middle ages. 
He finds Hildebrand persuaded that William of Normandy possessed 
the true hereditary right to the crown of England, and the 
policy of the Popes was already in favor of hereditary right in 
kingdoms, thereby to insure the stability of dynasties, and 
consequently that of society itself.

Harold, son of Godwin, belonged in no way to the royal race of 
Anglo-Saxon kings. The Dukes of Normandy had contracted 
alliances by marriage with the Anglo-Saxon monarchs, and were 
thought to be more nearly related to Edward the Confessor than 
Harold, whose only title was derived from his sister.

What had been the state of Europe up to that time? Since the 
establishment and conversion of the northern races, a constant 
change of rulers, an ever-recurring moving of territorial limit, 
and consequently an endless disturbance in all that secures the 
stability of rights, was common everywhere: in England, under 
the heptarchy; in France, under the Carlovingians; in the 
various states of Germany; everywhere, except, perhaps, in a 
part of Italy, where small republics were springing up from 
municipal communes, which were better adapted to the wants of 
the people.

The great evils of those times were owing to these perpetual 
changes, which all came from the undefined rights of succession 
to power, as left by Charlemagne; a striking proof that a 
monarch may be a man of genius, a great and acceptable ruler, 
and still fail to see the consequences to future times of the 
legacy he leaves them in the incomplete institutions of his own 
time. Well has Bossuet said, that "human wisdom is always short 
of something."

Those rapid, and, to us, wonderful partitions of empires and 
kingdoms; those loose and ill-defined rules of succession in 
Germany, France, England, and elsewhere; productive of 
revolution at the death of every sovereign, and often during 
every reign, showed the Popes that hereditary rights ought to be 
clear and fixed, and confined to one person in each nation. From 
that period, date the long lines of the Capetians in France, the 
Plantagenets in England; while rights of a similar kind are 
introduced into Spain and Portugal; likewise into the various 
states of Northern Germany, or Scandinavia; and Southern Italy, 
or Norman Sicily--the rest of Italy and Germany are placed on a 
different footing, the empire and the popedom being both 
elective.

Such was the grand policy of the Popes inaugurated by Hildebrand,
which came out in all its strong features, at the same time, 
under his powerful influence. Such was the policy which insured 
the stability of Europe for upward of six hundred years; a set 
of views to which a word only can be devoted here, but on which 
volumes would not be thrown away.

In consequence of it, for six hundred years dynasties seldom 
changed; the territorial limits of each great division of Europe 
remained, on the whole, settled; and an order of society ensued, 
of such a nature that any father of a family might rest assured 
of the state of his children and grandchildren after him.

In this respect, therefore, as in many others, the papacy was 
the key-stone of Christendom.

But as soon as Protestantism came to contest, not only the 
temporal, but even the spiritual supremacy of the Popes; when, 
taking advantage of the trouble of the Church, the so-called 
Catholic sovereigns, while pretending to render all honor to the 
spiritual supremacy of the sovereign Pontiffs, refused to 
acknowledge in them any right of lifting their warning voice, 
and calling on the powers of the world to obey the great and 
unchangeable laws of religion and justice, then did the long-
established stability of Europe begin to give way, while the 
whole continent entered upon its long era of revolution, which 
is still in full way, and, as yet, is far from having produced 
its last consequences.

England, the most guilty, was the first to feel the effect of 
the shock. The Tudors flattered themselves that, by throwing 
aside what they called the yoke of Rome, they had vastly 
increased their power, and so they did for the moment, while the 
dynasty that succeeds them sees rebellion triumphant, and the 
head of a king fall beneath the axe of an executioner.

She is said to have benefited, nevertheless, by her great 
revolution, and by the subsequent introduction of a new dynasty. 
She has certainly chanted a loud paean of triumph, and at this 
moment is still exultant over the effects of her modern policy, 
from the momentary success of the new ideas she has disseminated 
through the world, and above all from that immense spread of 
parliamentary governments which have sprung into existence 
everywhere under her guidance, and mainly through her agency.

And the cause of her triumph was that, after a few years of 
commotion, she seemed to have obtained a kind of stability which 
was a sufficiently good copy of the old order under the Popes, 
and won for her apparently the gratitude of mankind; but that 
stability is altogether illogical, and cannot long stand. There 
is an old, though now trite, saying to the effect that when you 
"sow the wind you must reap the whirlwind," and no one can fail 
to see the speedy realization of the truth of this adage on her 
part. Over the full tide of her prosperity there is a mighty, 
irresistible, and inevitable storm visibly gathering. At last 
she has come to nearly the same state of mental anarchy which 
she has been so powerful to spread in Europe. After reading 
"Lothair," the work of one of her great statesmen, all 
intelligent readers must exclaim, "Babylon! how hast thou fallen!
" Within a few years, possibly, nothing will remain of her 
former greatness but a few shreds, and men will witness another 
of those awful examples of a mighty empire falling in the midst 
of the highest seeming prosperity.

When a nation has no longer any fixed principle to go by, when 
the minds of her leaders are at sea on all great religious and 
moral questions, when the people openly deny the right of the 
few to rule, when a fabric, raised altogether on aristocracy, 
finds the substratum giving way, and democratic ideas seated 
even upon the summit of the edifice, there must be, as is said, 
"a rattling of old bones," and a shaking of the skeleton of what 
was a body.

How long, then, will the mock stability established by the deep 
wisdom of England's renowned statesmen have stood? A century or 
two of dazzling material prosperity succeeded by long ages of 
woe, such as the writer of the "Battle of Dorking," with all his 
imagination, could not find power enough to describe; for no 
Prussian, or any other foreign army, will bring that catastrophe 
about, but the breath of popular fury.

But our purpose is not to utter prophecies--rather to rehearse 
facts already accomplished.

England, then, was the first to feel the shock of the earthquake 
which was to overthrow the old stability of Europe. It is known 
how Germany has ever since been a scene of continual wars, 
dynastic changes, and territorial confusion. What evils have not 
the wars of the present century brought upon her! Yet, owing to 
the phlegmatic disposition, one might call it the stolidity of 
the majority of Germans, the disturbances have been so far 
external, and the lower masses of society have scarcely been 
agitated, except by the first rude explosion of Protestantism, 
and the sudden patriotic enthusiasm of young plebeians, in 1814. 
But mark the suddenness with which, in 1848, all the thrones of 
Germany fell at once under the mere breath of what is called 
"the people!" It is almost a trite thing to say that, where 
religion no longer exists, there no longer is security or peace. 
Impartial travellers, Americans chiefly, have observed of late 
that, in certain parts of France, there is, in truth, very 
little religious feeling; while in all Protestant Germany, 
particularly in that belonging to Prussia, there is none at all. 
How long, then, is the "new Germanic Empire," so loudly trumpeted
at Versailles, and afterward so gloriously celebrated at Berlin,
without the intervention of any religion whatever, likely to stand?
How long? Can it exist till the end of this century? He would be
a bold prophet who could confidently say, "Yes."

As to France, formerly the steadiest of all nations, so deeply 
attached to her dynasty of eight hundred years, although some of 
her kings were little worthy true affection; many of whose 
citizens have been born in houses a thousand years old, from 
families whose names went back to the darkness of heroic times; 
which was once so retentive of her old memories, living in her 
traditions, her former deeds of glory, even in the monuments 
raised in honor of her kings, her great captains, her 
illustrious citizens; which was chiefly devoted to her time-
honored religion, mindful that she was born on the day of the 
baptism of Clovis; that she grew up during the Crusades; that a 
virgin sent by Heaven saved her from the yoke of the stranger; 
that, on attaining her full maturity, it was religion which 
chiefly ennobled her; and that her greatest poets, orators, 
literary men, respected and honored religion as the basis of the 
state, and, by their immortal masterpieces, threw a halo around 
Catholicism--France, which still retains in her external 
appearance something of her old steadiness and immutability, so 
that to the eye of a stranger, who sees her for the first time, 
solidity is the word which comes naturally to his mind, as 
expressive of every thing around him, has only the look of what 
she was in her days of greatness, and on the surface of the 
earth there is not to-day a more unsteady, shaky, insecure spot, 
scarcely worthy of being chosen by a nomad Tartar as a place 
wherein to pitch his tent for the night, and hurry off at the 
first appearance of the rising sun on the morrow. Can the 
shifting sands of Libya, the ever-shaking volcanic mountains of 
equatorial America, the rapidly-forming coral islands of the 
southern seas, give an idea of that fickleness, constant 
agitation, and unceasing clamor for change, which have made 
France a by-word in our days? Who of her children can be sure 
that the house he is building for himself will ever be the 
dwelling of his son; that the city he lives in to-day will 
tomorrow acknowledge him as a member of its community? Who can 
be certain that the constitution of the whole state may not 
change in the night, and he wake the next day to find himself an 
outlaw and a fugitive?

It is a lamentable fact that for the last hundred years a great 
nation has been reduced to such a state of insecurity, that no 
one dares to think of the future, though all have repudiated the 
past, and thus every thing is reduced for them to the present 
fleeting moment.

And what is likely to be the future destiny of a nation of forty 
million souls, when their present state is such, and such the 
uncertainty of their dearest interests? They are unwilling to 
quit the soil; for they have lost all power of expansion by 
sending colonies to foreign shores; it is difficult for them to 
take a real interest in their own soil, for the great moving 
spring of interest is broken up by the total want of security. 
May God open their eyes to their former folly; for the folly was 
all of their own making! They have allowed themselves to be thus 
thoroughly imbued with this revolutionary spirit--the first 
revolution they hailed with enthusiasm; when they saw it become 
stained with frightful horrors, they paused a moment, and were 
on the point of acknowledging their error; but scribblers and 
sophists came to show them that it failed in being a glorious 
and happy one only because it was not complete; another and then 
another, and another yet, would finish the work and make them a 
great nation. Thus have they become altogether a revolutionary 
people; and they must abide by the consequences, unless they 
come at last to change their mind.

But the worst has not been said. This terrible example, instead 
of proving a warning to nations, has, on the contrary, drawn 
nearly all of them into the same boiling vortex. England and 
France have led the whole European world captive: people ask for 
a government different to the one they have; revolution is the 
consequence, and, with the entry of the revolutionary spirit, 
good-by to all stability and security. Let Italy and Spain bear 
witness if this is not so.

And the great phenomenon of the age is the collecting of all 
those revolutionary particles into one compact mass, arranged 
and preordained by some master-spirits of evil, who would be 
leaders not of a state or nation only, but of a universal 
republic embracing first Europe, and then the world. So we hear 
to-day of the Internationalists receiving in their "congresses" 
deputies not only from all the great European centres, not only 
from both ends of America, which is now Europeanized, but from 
South Africa, from Australia, New Zealand, from countries which 
a few years back were still in quiet possession of a 
comparatively few aborigines.

To come back, then, to the point from which we started, it is in 
this revolutionary spirit, in those conspiracies for revolutions 
to come, that some Irishmen set their hopes for the regeneration 
of their country. It would be well to remind them of the sayings 
of our Lord: "Can men gather grapes from thorns?" "By their 
fruits ye shall know them."

Let the Irish who are truly devoted to their country reflect 
well on the kind of men they would have as allies. What has 
Ireland in common with these men? If they know Ireland at all, 
they detest her because of her Catholicism; and, if Ireland 
knows them, she cannot but distrust and abominate them.

It has seemed a decree of kind Providence that all attempts at 
rebellion on her part undertaken with the hope of such help, 
have so far not only been miserable failures, but most 
disgracefully miscarried and been spent in air, leaving only 
ridicule and contempt for the originators of and partakers in 
the plots.

If the vast and unholy scheme which is certainly being organized,
and which is spreading its fatal branches in all directions, 
should ever succeed, it could not but result in the most 
frightful despotism ever contemplated by men. Ireland in such an 
event would be the infinitesimal part of a chaotic system worthy 
of Antichrist for head.

But we are confident that such a scheme cannot succeed and come 
to be realized, unless indeed it enter for a short period into 
the designs of an avenging God, who has promised not to destroy 
mankind again by another flood, but assured us by St. Peter that 
he will purify it by fire.

As a mere design of man, intended for the regeneration of 
humanity and the new creation of an abnormal order of things, it 
cannot possibly succeed, because it is opposed to the nature of 
men, among whom as a whole there can be no perfect unity of 
external government and internal organization, owing to the 
infinite variety of which we spoke at the beginning, which is as 
strong in human beings as elsewhere. No other body than the 
Catholic Church can hope to adapt itself to all human races, and 
govern by the same rules all the children of Adam. The decree 
issued of old from the mouth of God is final, and will last as 
long as the earth itself. It is contained in Moses' Canticle:

"When the Most High divided the nations, when he separated the 
sons of Adam, he appointed the bounds of each people, according 
to the number of the children of Israel," or, as the Hebrew text 
has it, "He fixed the limits of each people." On this passage 
Aben Ezra remarks that interpreters understand the text as 
alluding to the dispersion of nations (Genesis xi.). Those 
interpreters, were clearly right, although only Jewish rabbies.

When God deprived man of the unity of language, he took away at 
the same time the possibility of unity of institutions and 
government; and it will be as hard for men to defeat that design 
of Providence as for Julian the apostate to rebuild the Temple 
of Jerusalem, of which our Saviour had declared that there 
should not remain "a stone upon a stone."

But, though the monstrous scheme cannot ultimately succeed, it 
can and will produce untold evils to human society. By alluring 
workmen and other people of the lower class, it draws into the 
intricate folds of conspiracy, dark projects, and universal 
disorder, an immense array of human beings, whom the 
revolutionary spirit had not yet, or at least had scarcely, 
touched; it undermines and disturbs society in its lowest depths 
and widest-spread foundations, since the lower class always has 
been and still is the most numerous, including by far the great 
majority of men. It consequently renders the stability of order 
more difficult, if not absolutely impossible; it opens up a new 
era of revolutions, more disastrous than any yet known; for, as 
has already been remarked, and it should be well borne in mind, 
in order that the whole extent of the evil in prospect may be 
seen, so far, all the agitations in Europe, all the convulsions 
which have rendered our age so unlike any previous one, and 
productive of so many calamities, private as well as public, 
have been almost exclusively confined to the middle classes, and 
should be considered only as a reaction of the simple 
bourgeoisie against the aristocratic class. Those agitations and 
convulsions are only the necessary consequence of the secular 
opposition, existing from the ninth and tenth centuries and 
those immediately following, between the strictly feudal 
nobility, which arrogated to itself all prerogatives and rights, 
and the more numerous class of burghers, set on the lower step 
of the social ladder. These latter wanted, not so much to get up 
to the level of their superiors, as to bring them down to their 
own, and even precipitate them into the abyss of nothingness 
below. They have almost succeeded; and the prestige of noble 
blood has passed away, perhaps forever, in spite of Vico's well-
known theory. But the now triumphant burgher in his turn sees 
the dim mass, lost in the darkness and indistinctness of the 
lowest pool of humanity, rising up grim and horrible out of the 
abyss, hungry and fierce and not to be pacified, to threaten the 
new-modelled aristocracy of money with a worse fate than that it 
inflicted upon the old nobility.
	
And, to render the prospect more appalling, the chief means, 
which so eminently aided the bourgeoisie to take their position, 
namely, the wide-spread influence of secret societies, whose 
workings even lately have astonished the world by the facile and 
apparently inexplicable revolutions effected in a few days, are 
now in the full possession of the lower classes, who, no longer 
rude and unintelligent, but possessed of leaders of experience 
and knowledge, can also powerfully work those mighty engines of 
destruction.

In the presence of those past, present, and coming revolutions, 
the face of heaven entirely clouded, the presence of God 
absolutely ignored, his rights over mankind denied, the designs 
of his Providence openly derided, and man, pretending to decide 
his own destiny by his own unaided efforts, scornfully rejecting 
any obligation to a superior power, not looking on high for 
assistance, but taking only for his guide his pretended wisdom, 
his unbounded pride, and his raging passions; such is now our 
world.

Is Ireland to launch herself on that surging sea of wild impulse,
in whose depths lies destruction and whose waves never kiss a 
peaceful coast? When she claimed and exercised a policy of her 
own, she wisely persisted in not mixing herself up with the 
troubles of Europe, content to enjoy happiness in her own way, 
on her ocean-bound island, she thanked God that no portion of 
her little territory touched any part of the Continent of Europe,
stretching out vainly toward her shores. So she stood when, 
under God, she was mistress of her own destiny. If ever she 
thought of Europe, it was only to send her missionaries to its 
help, or to receive foreign youth in her large schools which 
were open to all, where wisdom was imparted without restriction 
and without price. But to follow the lead of European theorists 
and vendors of so-called wisdom and science; to originate new 
schemes of pretended knowledge, or place herself in the wake of 
bold adventurers on the sea of modern inventions, she was ever 
steadfast in her refusal.

And now that her autonomy is almost once again within her grasp, 
now that she can carve out a destiny of her own, would she hand 
over the guidance of herself to men who know nothing of her, who 
have only heard of her through the reports of her enemies, and 
who will scarcely look at her if she is foolish enough to ask to 
be admitted within their ranks?

Every one who wishes well to Ireland ought to thank God that so 
far few indeed, if any, of her children have ever joined in the 
plots and conspiracies of modern times, and that in this last 
scheme just referred to, not one of them, probably, has fully 
engaged himself. In the late horrors of the Paris Commune, no 
Irish name could be shown to have been implicated, and, when the 
contrary was asserted, a simple denial was sufficient to set the 
question at rest. Let them so continue to refrain from sullying 
their national honor by following the lead of men with whom they 
have nothing in common.

After all, the great thing which the Irish desire is, with the 
entire possession of their rights, to enjoy that peace and 
security in their own island, which they relish so keenly when 
they find it on foreign shores. But no peace or security is 
possible with the attempt to subvert all human society by wild 
and impracticable theories, in which human and divine laws are 
alike set at naught. Further words are unnecessary on this 
subject, as the simple good sense and deep religious feeling of 
the Irish will easily preserve them from yielding to such 
temptation.

Yet, a last consideration seems worthy of note. When, later on, 
we present our views, and explain by what means we consider that 
the happiness of the Irish nation may be secured, and its 
mission fulfilled, a more fitting opportunity will be presented 
of speaking of the ways by which Providence has already led them 
through former difficulties, and the consideration of those holy 
designs and past favors may enable us better to understand what 
may be hoped and attempted in the future.

Here it is enough to observe that, in whatever progress the 
Irish have made of late in obtaining a certain amount of their 
rights, insurrection, revolution, plots, and the working of 
secret societies condemned by the Church, have absolutely gone 
for nothing, and the little of it all, in which Irishmen have 
indulged, really formed one of the main obstacles to the 
enjoyment of what they had already obtained, and to the securing 
of a greater amount for the future.

There is no doubt that revolutions abroad and dangers at home 
have been the greatest inducements to England to relax her grasp 
and change her tyrannical policy toward Ireland. The success of 
the revolt of the North American colonies was the main cause of 
the volunteer movement of 1782, and of the concessions then 
temporarily granted. The fearful upheaval of revolutionary 
France, which filled the English heart with a wholesome dread, 
was also a great means of obtaining for Ireland the concession 
of being no longer treated as though it were a lair of wild 
beasts or a nest of outlaws. The act of Catholic Emancipation in 
1829 was certainly granted in view of immediate revolutions 
ready to burst forth, one of which did explode in France in the 
year following. But, in all those outbursts of popular fury, 
Ireland never joined; and if she found in them new ground for 
hope, if she awaited anxiously the anticipated result turning in 
her favor, she never took any active part whatever in them. She 
only relied on God, who always knows how to draw good from evil; 
she, however, profited by them, and saw her shackles fall off of 
themselves, and herself brought back, step by step, to liberty.

But so soon as any body of Irishmen entered into a scheme of a 
similar nature, imitating the secret plottings and deeds of 
European revolutionists, Ireland never gained a single inch of 
ground, nor reaped the slightest advantage from such attempts. 
On the contrary, ridicule, contempt, increase of burdens, 
penalties, and harsh treatment, were the only result which ever 
came from them, and, worst of all, no one pitied the victims of 
all those foolish enterprises. There is no need of entering here 
into details. The first of those attempts failed long ago; the 
last is still on record, and cannot be yet said to belong to 
past history.


CHAPTER XIV.


RESURRECTION.-EMIGRATION.

To the eye of a keen beholder, Ireland to-day presents the 
appearance of a nation entering upon a new career. She is 
emerging from a long darkness, and opening again to the free 
light of heaven. Whoever compares her present position with that 
she occupied a century ago, cannot fail to be struck with wonder 
no less at the change in her than at the agencies which brought 
that change about. And when to this is added the further 
reflection that she is still young, though sprung from so old-an-
origin-young in feeling, in buoyancy, in aspirations, in purity 
and simplicity-the conclusion forces itself upon the mind that a 
high destiny is in store for her, and that God proposes a long 
era of prosperity and active life to an ancient nation which is 
only now beginning to live.

In such cases, whether it be a people or an individual, which is 
entering upon its life, crowds of advisers are ever to be found 
ready to display their wisdom and lay down the plans whose 
adoption will infallibly bring prosperity and happiness to the 
individual or people in question.

Ireland, to-day, suffers from no lack of wise counsellors and 
ardent well-wishers. Unfortunately, their various projects do 
not always harmonize; indeed, they are sometimes contradictory, 
and, as their number is by no means small, the only difficulty 
is where to choose which road the nation should take in order to 
march in the right direction.

In entering upon this portion of our work, where we have to deal 
with actual questions of the day, and if not to draw the 
horoscope of the future, at least to give utterance to our ideas 
for the promotion of the welfare of the nation, we shall appear 
to come under the same catalogue of advisers, fully persuaded, 
with the rest, that our advice is the right, our voice the only 
one worthy of attention.

Our purpose is far humbler; our reflections take another shape; 
we merely say

During the last hundred years, Ireland has changed wonderfully 
for the better; and although the old wounds are not yet quite 
healed up, though they still smart, though she is still poor and 
disconsolate, and her trials and afflictions far from being 
ended; nevertheless, though sorely tried, Providence has been 
kind to her. Many of her rights have been restored, and she is 
no longer the slave of hard task-masters. When she now speaks, 
her voice is no longer met by the gibe and sneer, but with a 
kind of awe akin to respect, her enemies seeming to feel 
instinctively that it is the voice of a nation which no longer 
may be safely despised.

This fact being indisputable, the conviction forces itself upon 
us that her improved condition is mainly, perhaps solely, due to 
Providence; and that the career upon which she has entered, and 
which she is now pursuing with a clear determination of her own, 
has been marked out, designed, and already partially run, under 
the guidance of that God for whom alone she has suffered, and 
who never fails in his own good time to dry up the tears shed 
for his sake, and crown his martyrs with victory.

Our task is merely to examine the progress made, the manner of 
its making, the direction toward which it tends, with the aim, 
if possible, of adding to its speed. We have no new plan to 
offer, no gratuitous advice to give. The plan is already 
sketched out--God has sketched it; and our only aim is to see 
how man may cooperate with designs far higher than any proposed 
by human wisdom.

The first thing that strikes us, standing on the verge of this 
new region, opening out dimly but gloriously before our eyes, is 
one great fact which is plain to all; which is greater than all 
England's concessions to Ireland, more fruitful of happy 
consequences, not alone to the latter country itself, but to the 
world at large; a fact which is the strongest proof of the 
vitality of the Irish race, which now begins to win for it 
respect by bringing forth its real strength, a strength to 
astonish the world; which began feebly when the evils of the 
country were at their height, but has gone on constantly 
increasing until it has now grown to extraordinary proportions; 
and which instead of, as their enemies fondly supposed, wresting 
Ireland from the Irish, has made their claim to the native soil 
securer than ever, by spreading strong supporters of their 
rights through the world. This great fact is emigration.

At this moment, Irishmen are scattered abroad over the earth. In 
many regions they have numbers, and form compact bodies. 
Wherever this occurs, they acquire a real power in the land 
which they have made their new home. That power is certainly 
intended by Almighty God to be used wisely, prudently, but 
actively and energetically; not only for the good of those who 
have been thus transplanted in a new soil, but also for the good 
of the mother-country which they cannot, if they would, forget. 
How can they utilize for such a purpose the power so recently 
acquired, the wealth, the influence, the consideration they 
enjoy, in their new country? How may such a course benefit the 
land of their nativity as of their origin? These are important 
questions; they are not airy theories, but rise up clearly from 
a standing and stupendous fact. The turning their power of 
expansion to its right use, the reproduction with Christian aim 
of that old power of expansion peculiar to the Celtic race three 
thousand years ago, is what we call the first true issue of the 
Irish question:- Emigration and its Possible Effects.

In order to judge with proper understanding of the prospective 
effects of Irish emigration, it is fitting to study the fact in 
all its bearings; to examine the origin and various phases of 
the mighty movement, the religious direction it has invariably 
taken, the immediate good it has produced, and the special 
consideration of the vast proportions which it has finally 
assumed. The task may be a long one; but it is certainly 
important and interesting; and it is only after the details of 
it have been thoroughly sifted that one may be in a position to 
judge rightly of the aid it has already furnished, and which it 
is destine to furnish in a still greater degree, to the uprising 
of the nation.

The movement originated with the Reformation. It began with the 
flight of a few of the nobility in the reign of Henry VIII.; 
their number was increased under Elizabeth, and grew to larger 
proportions still under James I.; but a far greater number, 
sufficient to make a very sensible diminution in the population 
of the country, was doomed to exile by Cromwell and the Long 
Parliament. It then became a compulsory banishment.

The next following movement on a large scale occurred after the 
surrender of Kilkenny, when the Irish commanders, Colonel 
Fitzpatrick, Clanricard, and others, could obtain no better 
terms than emigration to any foreign country then at peace with 
England. The Irish troops were eagerly caught up by the various 
European monarchs, so highly were their services esteemed. The 
number that thus left their native land, many of them never to 
return, amounted, according to well-informed writers, to forty 
thousand men, of noble blood most of them, many of the first 
nobility of the land, and almost all children of the old race. 
The details of this first exodus are to be found in the pages of 
many modern authors, particularly in Mr. Prendergast's 
"Cromwellian Settlement."

The example thus given was followed on many occasions. The 
Treaty of Limerick, October 3, 1691, gave the garrison under 
Saarsfield liberty to join the army of King William or enter the 
service of France. Mr. A.M. O'Sullivan has given a spirited 
sketch of the making of their choice by the heroic garrison as 
it defiled out of the city:

"On the morning of the 5th of October the Irish regiments were 
to make their choice between exile for life or service in the 
armies of their conqueror. At each end of a gently-rising ground 
beyond the suburbs were planted on one side the royal standard 
of France, and on the other that of England. It was agreed that 
the regiments, as they marched out with all the honors of war, 
drums beating, colors flying, and matches lighted, should, on 
reaching the spot, wheel to the left or to the right, beneath 
that flag under which they elected to serve. At the head of the 
Irish marched the Foot Guards, the finest regiment in the 
service, fourteen hundred strong. All eyes were fixed on this 
splendid body of men. On they came, amid breathless silence and 
acute suspense; for well both the English and Irish generals 
knew that the choice of the first regiment would powerfully 
influence all the rest. The Guards marched up to the critical 
spot, and in a body wheeled to the colors of France, barely 
seven men turning to the English side! Ginckle, we are told, was 
greatly agitated as he witnessed the proceeding. The next 
regiment, however (Lord Iveagh's), marched as unanimously to the 
Williamite banner, as did also portions of two others. But the 
bulk of the Irish army defiled under fleur-de-lys of King Louis, 
only one thousand and forty-six, out of nearly fourteen thousand 
men, preferring the service of England."

From that time out a large number of the Irish nobility and 
gentry continued to enlist under French, Spanish, or Austrian 
colors; and the several Irish brigades became celebrated all 
over Europe until the end of the eighteenth century. It is said 
by l'abbe McGeohegan that six hundred thousand Irishmen perished 
in the armies of France alone. The abbe is generally very 
accurate, and from his long residence in France had every means 
at his disposal of arriving at the truth. Some pretend that 
double the number enlisted in foreign service. There is no doubt 
that in all a million men left the island to take service under 
the banners of Catholic sovereigns, and it is needless to dwell 
on the bravery and devotion of those men whom the persecution of 
an unwise and cruel Protestant government drove out of Ireland 
during the eighteenth century-it is needless to dwell upon it, 
for the record is known to the world.

Without following the fortunes of the Irish brigades, the 
history of one of which, that in the service of France, has been 
given us in the very interesting and valuable narrative of John 
R. O'Callaghan-its various fortunes and final dissolution at the 
breaking out of the French republic, when the English Government 
was glad to receive back the scattered remnants of it-the 
question which bears most on our present subject is: What was 
the occupation of those Irishmen on the Continent when not 
actually engaged in war? What service did their voluntary or 
compulsory exile do their native country? Was that long 
emigration of a century productive of something out of which 
Providence may have drawn good?

The first departure of a few under Hugh O'Neill and Hugh 
O'Donnell had already spread the name of Ireland through Spain, 
Italy, and Belgium. The reports of the numerous English spies, 
employed to dog their steps and watch their movements, reports 
some of which have been finally brought to light, conclusively 
prove that most of the exiles held honorable positions in Spain 
and Portugal, at Valladolid and Lisbon, where the O'Sullivans 
and O'Driscolls lived; at the very court of Spain, or in the 
Spanish navy, like the Bourkes and the Cavanaghs.

In Flanders, under the Austrian archdukes, were stationed the 
McShanes, on the Groyne; the Daniells at Antwerp; the posterity 
of the earls themselves with that of their former retinue. All 
held rank in the Austrian army, and even in times of peace were 
occupied in thinking of possible entanglements whereby they 
might serve their country, while they made the Irish name 
honored and respected all over that rich land. In Italy, at 
Naples, Leghorn, Florence, and Rome, in the great centres of the 
peninsula, the same thing was taking place, and there, at least, 
the calumnies, everywhere so industriously circulated about 
Ireland, could not penetrate, or, if they did, only to be 
received with scorn.

But, when the next emigration, at the end of the Cromwellian and 
Williamite wars, landed forty thousand soldiers, and twelve 
thousand more a few years afterward, on the European Continent, 
these armed men proved to the nations, by their bravery, their 
deep attachment to their religion, their perfect honor and 
generosity, that the people from which a persecuting power had 
driven them forth could not be composed of the outlaws and blood-
thirsty cutthroats which the reports of their enemies would make 
them. How striking and permanent must have been the effect 
produced on impartial minds by the contrast between the aspect 
of the reality and the base fabrications of skilfully-scattered 
rumor!

And be it borne in mind that those men founded families in the 
countries where they settled; as well as those who continued to 
flock thither during the whole of the eighteenth century. They 
carried about with them, in their very persons even, the history 
of Ireland's wrongs; and the mere sight of them was enough to 
interest all with whom they came in contact in favor of their 
country. Hence the esteem and sympathy which Ireland and her 
people have always met with in France, where the calumnies and 
ridicule lavished on them could never find an entrance.

It would be a great error to imagine that they were to be found 
only in the camp or in the garrisons of cities. They made 
themselves a home in their new country, and their children 
entered upon all the walks of life opened up to the citizens of 
the country in which they resided. Thus, at least, the name of 
Ireland did not die out altogether during that age of gloom, 
when their native isle was only the prison of the race, where it 
was chained down in abject misery, out of the sight of the world,
the life of it stifled out in the deep dungeon of oblivion.

In all honorable professions they became distinguished-in the 
Church and in trade, as in the army. Thus, speaking only of 
France, an Irishman-Edgeworth-was chosen by Louis XVI. to 
prepare him for death and stand by him during his last ordeal of 
ignominy; another-Lally Tollendal-would have wrested India from 
England, if his ardent temperament had not brought him enemies 
where he ought to have met with friends; another yet-Walsh-
during the American War, employed the wealth acquired by trade, 
in sending cruisers against the English to American waters.

It would take long pages to record what those noble exiles 
accomplished for the good of their country and religion, quite 
apart from the heroism they displayed on battle-fields, and 
their fidelity to principle during times of peace. Their very 
presence in foreign countries was, perhaps, the best protest 
against the enslavement of their own. They showed by their 
bearing that they owed no allegiance to England, and that brute 
force could never establish right. By identifying themselves 
with the nations which offered them hospitality and a new right 
of citizenship, they proved to the world that their native isle 
could be governed by native citizens. Their honorable conduct 
and successful activity in every pursuit of life showed that, as 
they were capable of governing themselves, so likewise could 
they claim self-government for their country.

The moral condition of France during the eighteenth century, and 
the depths of corruption into which the higher class sank in so 
short a time, are known to all. To the honor of the Irish 
nobility and gentry then in France, not a single Irish name is 
to be met with in that long list of noble names which have 
disgraced that page of French history. Not in the luxurious 
bowers and palaces of Louis XV. were they to be found, but on 
the battle-fields of Dettingen and Fontenoy. It was a Scotchman-
Law-who infected the higher circles of the natives with the rage 
for speculation, and the folly of gambling in paper. It was an 
Italian- Cagliostro-who traded on the superstitious credulity of 
men who had lost their faith. It was an Englishman-Lord 
Derwentwater-and another Scotchman-Ramsay-who, by the 
introduction of the first Masonic Lodge into France, opened the 
floodgates of future revolutions.

Among those of foreign birth, no Irishman was found in France to 
contribute to the corruption of the nation, and give his aid to 
set agoing that long era of woe not yet ended.

And needless is it to add that never is one of them mentioned, 
among those who were so active in propagating that broad 
infidelity peculiar to that age. If a few of them shared to some 
extent in the general delusion, and took part with the vast 
multitude in the insane derision, then so fashionable, of every 
thing holy, their number was small indeed, and none of them 
acquired in that peculiar line, the celebrity which crowned so 
many others. -the Grimms, the Gallianis, and later on the Paines,
the Cloots, and other foreigners.

As a body, the Irish remained faithful to the Church of their 
fathers, honoring her by their conduct, and their respectful 
demeanor toward holy names and holy things. Eventually they, in 
common with all Frenchmen, had to share in the misfortunes, 
brought on by the subversion of all the former guiding 
principles; but, though sharing in the punishment, they took no 
part in the great causes which called it down.

These few words will suffice for the emigration of the Irish 
nobility, and its effects on foreign countries; as well as 
Ireland itself.

But another class of noblemen had emigrated to the Continent 
side by side with those of whom we have just spoken; namely, 
bishops, priests, monks, and learned men. England would not 
suffer the Catholic clergy in Ireland; she was particularly 
careful not to allow Irish youth the benefit of any but a 
Protestant education. Irish clergymen were compelled to fly and 
open houses of study abroad. Their various colleges in Spain, 
France, Belgium, and Italy, are well known; they have already 
been referred to, and it is not necessary to enlarge on the 
subject. But, though mention has been made of the renown thus 
acquired by Irishmen then residing on the Continent, it is 
fitting to speak of them again in their character of emigrants.

They took upon themselves the noble task of making the 
literature and the history of their nation known to all people; 
and in so doing they have preserved a rich literature which must 
otherwise have perished.

What was their situation on the Continent? They had been driven 
by persecution from their country, sometimes in troops of exiles 
to be cast on some remote shore; sometimes escaping singly and 
in disguise, they went out alone to end their lives under a 
foreign sky. Behind them they left the desolate island; their 
friends bowed down in misery, their enemies triumphant and in 
full power. The convents, where they had spent their happiest 
days, were either demolished or turned to vile uses; their 
churches desecrated; heresy ruling the land, truth compelled to 
be silent. All the harrowing details given by the "Prophet of 
Lamentations" might be applied to their beloved country.

True, they could find peace and rest among those who offered 
them their hospitality; at least, the worship of God would be 
free and untrammelled there. But it was not the place of their 
birth, where they had received their first education; it was not 
the mission intrusted to them when they consecrated their lives 
to God. They would bear another language, see around them 
different manners, begin life anew, perhaps, in their old age. 
What a contrast to their former hopes! What a sad ending to the 
closing days of their life!

Nevertheless, they might be of use to their countrymen. It was 
not for them now to convert Europe, and preach Christianity to 
barbarous tribes, as did their ancestors of old. The world which 
received them was languishing with excess of refined 
civilization; corruption had entered in, and was fast destroying 
it; and they could scarcely hope to hold it back from its 
downward career. But, at least, they might open houses for the 
reception of the youth of their own country, where they should 
receive an education according to the teachings of the true 
Church, which was denied them at home. So they went to Salamanca,
to Valladolid, to Paris, Louvain, Douai, Rheims, Rome, wherever 
there was hope or possibility of directing Irish youth in the 
ways of true piety and learning.

The labors to which they devoted themselves, though unknown to 
posterity, were of great utility at the time. They saw the youth 
they educated grow up under their care; when their studies were 
concluded, they sent them to labor in the ministry among their 
countrymen; they heard of them from time to time of their 
arduous life, the dangers they braved, the many persecutions 
they underwent, their imprisonment when captured, their 
conviction, torture often, and death by martyrdom. And thus, 
through the exertions of those emigrant monks and priests, the 
true Gospel was preached in Ireland, and the faith of the people 
kept alive and strong.

A few of them chose another path, and consecrated the remainder 
of their days to literary labors, which have shed down on their 
persecuted country a halo of immortal glory.

Some Franciscan friars (two of them the brothers O'Cleary) had 
already begun this work in the island itself, when driven from 
their quiet homes to take refuge in the obscure "convents," that 
is, out-of-the-way farm-houses mentioned before, where they were 
received and hidden away from the world. The literature of 
Ireland was fast perishing; the rage of their enemies being as 
violently directed against their books as against their houses 
and churches. Precious manuscripts were every day given to the 
flames and wantonly destroyed, seemingly for the mere pleasure 
of destruction. A very few years would have sufficed to render 
the former history of the country a perfect blank. In no spot of 
the same size on earth had so many interesting books ever been 
written and treasured up; but before long there would remain no 
friars on the island to preserve them, no library to contain 
them, no one to care for them in the least. The brothers 
O'Cleary saw this with dismay; and they, with two companions, 
became known as the "Four Masters." They interested in their 
work the faithful Irish who still retained possession of a farm, 
or a cabin with a few acres of ground attached; the men, and 
women even, were to search the country round for every volume 
concealed or preserved, for every parchment and relic, for 
vellum manuscripts, even a stray solitary page, did one remain 
alone. The annals of Ireland were thus saved by the literary 
patriotism of poor and unknown peasants. All that remains of 
Irish lore was collected together in the rural convent of the 
O'Clearys, and an ardent flame was enkindled which lasted the 
whole of the seventeenth century.

To this initiative must be referred the subsequent labors of 
Ward, Colgan, Lynch, and others; herculean labors truly, which 
have enabled antiquarians of our days to resume the thread, so 
near being snapped, of that long and tangled web of history 
wherein is woven all that can interest the patriot and the 
Christian of the island.

Knowing the position in which the writers found themselves, it 
is astonishing to see what they wrote. It was not a work of 
fancy to which their pens were devoted: A strong, feeling heart 
and an active imagination were certainly theirs; but of little 
service could either prove to them in the ungrateful task of 
collecting manuscripts, classifying, reading them through, 
ascertaining their age and authenticity, and finally using them 
for the purpose of preserving the annals and hagiography of the 
nation.

The large libraries they found in the various cities which 
received them could be of little use to them. They had first to 
collect their own libraries, to summon their authorities from 
distant lands; many books were to be procured from Ireland 
itself. With what precautions! It was real, (though lawful) 
smuggling; for the export of Irish books was not only under 
tariff, but strictly prohibited; the mere sight of them was more 
hateful to a British custom-house officer of those days than the 
sight of a crucifix to a Japanese official of Nagasaki. It would 
be interesting to know the various stratagems devised to conceal 
them, tarry them away, and convey them triumphantly to Louvain, 
Paris, or Rome.

But Ireland was not the only repository of Irish books. Many 
letters, official documents, copies of old MSS., interesting 
relics of antiquity, had been gathered ages before and during 
all the intervening time, in convents, churches, houses of 
education, on the Continent, along the Rhine chiefly. It is said 
that even to-day the richest mines of yet unexplored lore of 
this character are scattered along both sides of the great 
German river. The frequent movements of various armies, the 
sieges of cities, the horrors of war which have raged there 
constantly from the days of Arminius and Varro down, have not 
destroyed every thing, could not exhaust the rich deposit of 
Irish manuscripts there concealed. But the labor of striking the 
mine!-of' opening those musty pages falling to pieces between 
the fingers and leaving in the hand nothing but illegible 
fragments of half-blackened parchment; and the further labor of 
deciphering them, of discovering what they speak about, and if 
they are likely to prove useful to the purposes.

It is needless to descant on such a theme. It is impossible to 
give any true idea of the literary labors of those men, without 
having seen and perused their huge folios, many of which have 
not yet been published to the world. Poor Colgan could give us 
little more than his "Trial Thaumaturga and that was only 
destined to form the portal of the edifice he purposed erecting 
as a shrine to the memory of the whole host of saints nurtured 
in the island-the Acta Sanctorum Hiberniae

The grand idea, which first germinated in the minds of those men,
expanded afterward in others under circumstances more favorable.
Did they not suggest to Bollandus and his fellows the thought 
whose realization has immortalized them?

In tasks such as these were the Irish emigrant monks of the time 
employed.

There was yet another class of involuntary Irish exiles those 
shipped to the " plantations" of America, to the 11 tobacco" and 
11 sugar" islands, to Virginia and Jamaica, but principally to 
the Barbadoes. The origin of this new kind of emigration, 
already touched upon, is worthy of the times and of the men who 
called it forth.

After forty thousand soldiers had been allowed, or rather 
compelled, by Cromwell to enlist in foreign armies, it was found 
that many had left behind them their wives and children. What 
was to be done with these " widows" whose husbands and numerous 
offspring were still living ? They could not be sent to Coff as 
women, with children only, could not be expected to "plant" that 
desolate province; they could not be expected to "plant" that 
desolate province; they could not be allowed to remain in their 
native place, as the decree had gone forth that all the Irish 
were to "transplant" or be transported: it would have been 
inconvenient and inexcusable to do what had been so often done 
in the war-massacre them in cold blood-as the war was over.

To relieve the government of this difficulty, Bristol merchants, 
and merchants probably from other English cities, trading with 
the new British colonies of North America, thought it a 
providential opening for a great profit to accrue to the soils 
of the benighted Irish women and children, and likely at the 
same time to add something to their own purses and those of 
their friends, the West India planters.

It was only under Elizabeth that permanent colonies were sent 
out from England to the continent and islands of the New World. 
The Cavaliers of Virginia are as well known in the South as the 
Puritans of New England in the North. This last colony dated 
only from the time of the Stuart dynasty. The great question for 
all those transatlantic establishments was that of labor; but in 
the South it was more difficult of solution than in the North, 
where Europeans could work in the fields, a thing scarcely 
possible in the tropics. The natives as we know, were first 
employed in the South by the Spaniards, and soon succumbed to 
the demands of European rapacity.

In the West Indies, natives of two different races existed: the 
soft and delicate Indian of Hayti and Cuba, and the ferocious 
Caribs of many other islands. The first race soon disappeared; 
the other continued refractory, indomitable, choosing to perish 
rather than labor; and some remnants of it still remain, saved 
by the Catholic Church. As yet, African negroes had not been 
conveyed there in sufficient numbers.

A brilliant thought struck the minds, at once pious, active, and 
business-like, of those above-mentioned Bristol merchants-a 
thought which was the doom of thousands of Irish women and 
children.

