Nor must he think himself too good for the sacrifice; there had been
greater men than he, no doubt, burned up in the Wilderness, and
blown to pieces by the cannon at "Bloody Angle"; there had been
dreamers of mighty dreams among them--and they were dead, and all
their dreams were dead. And neither must he love his own too dearly;
there had been women who had suffered and died in that War, and
babes who had perished by tens of thousands; and they, too, had been
born with agony, had been loved and yearned for, and wept and prayed
for.

So, out of the dead past, were voices calling to Thyrsis; he heard
them in the night--time as one mighty symphony of grief. They had
died for nothing, unless the Republic should be saved, unless their
dream of freedom and justice could be made real. And for what was
the poet but that? So that the new generations might know what their
fathers had done--that the youth of America might be roused and
thrilled once more! Surely it could not be that the land was all
sunk in selfishness and unfaith--that there were no longer any
generous souls who could be stirred by a trumpet-call, and led forth
to strike a new blow for the great hope of Humanity!

Section 17. The long winter dragged by, and the fury of it seemed to
increase; they were as if besieged by demons of cold and storm.
There came another blizzard, and the snows drifted down to their
hollow by the edge of the woods, so that it was two days before they
could get out, even to the farm-house. And there was no place for
them to walk--a path from their house to Thyrsis' study was a labor
of half a day to dig. Also Corydon caught a cold, which ran in due
course through the little family, and added to their misery and
discomfort.

The snow seemed to be symbolical, walling them in from all the
world. "There is no help", it seemed to say to them; whatever
strength they got they must wring out of their own hearts. Here in
this place, it seemed to Thyrsis, he learned the real meaning of
Winter; he saw it as primitive man had seen it, a cruel and
merciless assailant, a fiend that came ravening, dealing destruction
and death. He thought of the ode by Thomas Campbell--

   "Archangel! Power of desolation!
        Fast descending as thou art,
    Say, hath mortal invocation
        Spells to touch thy stony heart?"

Surely no Runic Odin, who "howled his war-song to the gale", no
Lapland savage who cowered in his hut, ever panted for the respite
of the spring-time more than these two lovers in their tiny cottage.

It was evident that Corydon was going down-hill under the strain.
She became more and more nervous and wretched, her headaches and her
fits of exhaustion were more frequent. Then, too, her old mental
trouble, the habit of "thinking things", was plaguing her again--
She would come to Thyrsis with long accounts of her psychological
entanglements, and he would patiently unravel the skein. Or
sometimes, if he was very tired, he might give some signs of a
desire to escape the ordeal; and then he would see a look of terror
stealing into Corydon's eyes. So these things were real after
all--they were real even to Thyrsis!

One morning he opened his eyes, and looked from his study-window, to
find that another heavy snow had fallen; and when he had dressed and
gone over to the house, he found Corydon in bed. She complained of a
headache, and had had chills during the night, and was now quite
evidently feverish. He was alarmed, and after he had made her as
comfortable as he could, he dressed the baby and took him upon his
shoulder, and made his way with difficulty to the farm-house. He
left the baby there, and with a horse and sleigh set out for town.
The horse had to walk all the way, and several times the sleigh was
upset in the drifts, so that it was two hours before he reached his
destination. As the doctor was out upon his rounds, he had to wait a
couple of hours more--and then only to learn that the man could not
possibly attempt the trip. He had several patients who were
dangerously ill, and he had to be on hand.

He sent Thyrsis to another doctor, but this one said exactly the
same; and so the boy spent the day wandering about the town. The
thought of Corydon's lying there alone, helpless and suffering, made
him wild; but everywhere he met with the same response--the cold
weather had apparently brought an epidemic of disease, and there was
no doctor in the place who could spare three or four hours to make
the long journey in the snow.

So there was nothing for him to do but go back. The farmer's wife
offered to take care of the baby over night, and he went down to the
cottage alone where he found Corydon much worse. He sat and held her
hand, a terror clutching at his heart; and all night long he sat and
tended her--he filled hot water bottles when she was chilled, and
got ice when she was hot, and made cool lemonade, and prepared
tidbits and tempted her to eat. He would whisper to her and soothe
her; and later, when she fell into a doze, he sat nodding in his
chair and shivering with cold, but afraid to touch the fire for fear
of disturbing her.

Then, towards dawn, she wakened; and Thyrsis was almost beside
himself with anguish and fear--for she was delirious, and did not
know where she was, or what she was doing. She kept talking as if to
the baby--in their baby-talk. Thyrsis would listen, until he would
choke up with tears.

He left her, and went up to the farm, and got the horse and sleigh
again, and drove to another town. It made no difference what doctor
he got--to Thyrsis all doctors were alike, the keepers of the keys
of health. After several hours' pursuit he found that this man also
was busy. All he could say was that he would try to get out that
night.

So Thyrsis went back again, to find his wife with flushed face, and
beads of perspiration upon her forehead; now sitting up and babbling
aimlessly, now sinking back exhausted. He sat once more through a
night of torment, holding her hot hands in his, and praying in vain
for the coming of the doctor.

It was afternoon of the next day before the man finally came, and
brought some relief to Thyrsis' soul, and perhaps also to Corydon's
body. He took her temperature and listened to her breathing, and
pronounced it a severe attack of grippe, with a touch of
bronchitis; and he laid out an assortment of capsules and liquids,
and promised to come again if Thyrsis sent for him.

And so the boy set out in the double role of trained nurse and
mother's assistant. He gave Corydon her medicines, and brought fresh
water for her, and smoothed her pillows and talked to her, and
prepared some delicacies for her when she wished to eat; also he
dressed and bathed the baby, and cooked his complex meals and fed
them to him; he put on his rubbers and his leggings and his mittens,
and the overcoat and peaked hood (which Corydon had devised for him
out of eighty cents' worth of woolly red cloth), and turned him out
to "bongie cowtoos" in the snow. Likewise he got his own meals and
washed the dishes, and tended the fires and emptied the ashes and
filled the lamps and swept the floors; and in the interim between
these various duties he fought new battles within himself, and got
new side-lights upon Chickamauga and "Bloody Angle".

Section 18. It was two weeks before this siege was lifted, and
Corydon was able to take up her burdens once more. It was then
March, and the snow had given place to cold sleety rains, and the
fields and the ground about their home were miniature swamps full of
mud. Thyrsis would tramp through this to the hill-tops where the
storm-winds howled, and there vow defiance to his foes, and come
home to pour new hope and courage and resolution into a bottomless
pit.

