Produced by Distributed Proofreaders


                          ENGLAND, MY ENGLAND

                                   BY
                             D. H. LAWRENCE


_Contents_

ENGLAND, MY ENGLAND

TICKETS, PLEASE

THE BLIND MAN

MONKEY NUTS

WINTRY PEACOCK

YOU TOUCHED ME

SAMSON AND DELILAH

THE PRIMROSE PATH

THE HORSE DEALER'S DAUGHTER

FANNY AND ANNIE


_England, My England_


He was working on the edge of the common, beyond the small brook that ran
in the dip at the bottom of the garden, carrying the garden path in
continuation from the plank bridge on to the common. He had cut the rough
turf and bracken, leaving the grey, dryish soil bare. But he was worried
because he could not get the path straight, there was a pleat between his
brows. He had set up his sticks, and taken the sights between the big
pine trees, but for some reason everything seemed wrong. He looked again,
straining his keen blue eyes, that had a touch of the Viking in them,
through the shadowy pine trees as through a doorway, at the green-grassed
garden-path rising from the shadow of alders by the log bridge up to the
sunlit flowers. Tall white and purple columbines, and the butt-end of the
old Hampshire cottage that crouched near the earth amid flowers,
blossoming in the bit of shaggy wildness round about.

There was a sound of children's voices calling and talking: high,
childish, girlish voices, slightly didactic and tinged with domineering:
'If you don't come quick, nurse, I shall run out there to where there are
snakes.' And nobody had the _sangfroid_ to reply: 'Run then, little
fool.' It was always, 'No, darling. Very well, darling. In a moment,
darling. Darling, you _must_ be patient.'

His heart was hard with disillusion: a continual gnawing and resistance.
But he worked on. What was there to do but submit!

The sunlight blazed down upon the earth, there was a vividness of flamy
vegetation, of fierce seclusion amid the savage peace of the commons.
Strange how the savage England lingers in patches: as here, amid these
shaggy gorse commons, and marshy, snake infested places near the foot of
the south downs. The spirit of place lingering on primeval, as when the
Saxons came, so long ago.

Ah, how he had loved it! The green garden path, the tufts of flowers,
purple and white columbines, and great oriental red poppies with their
black chaps and mulleins tall and yellow, this flamy garden which had
been a garden for a thousand years, scooped out in the little hollow
among the snake-infested commons. He had made it flame with flowers, in a
sun cup under its hedges and trees. So old, so old a place! And yet he
had re-created it.

The timbered cottage with its sloping, cloak-like roof was old and
forgotten. It belonged to the old England of hamlets and yeomen. Lost
all alone on the edge of the common, at the end of a wide, grassy,
briar-entangled lane shaded with oak, it had never known the world of
today. Not till Egbert came with his bride. And he had come to fill it
with flowers.

The house was ancient and very uncomfortable. But he did not want to
alter it. Ah, marvellous to sit there in the wide, black, time-old
chimney, at night when the wind roared overhead, and the wood which he
had chopped himself sputtered on the hearth! Himself on one side the
angle, and Winifred on the other.

Ah, how he had wanted her: Winifred! She was young and beautiful and
strong with life, like a flame in sunshine. She moved with a slow grace
of energy like a blossoming, red-flowered bush in motion. She, too,
seemed to come out of the old England, ruddy, strong, with a certain
crude, passionate quiescence and a hawthorn robustness. And he, he was
tall and slim and agile, like an English archer with his long supple legs
and fine movements. Her hair was nut-brown and all in energic curls and
tendrils. Her eyes were nut-brown, too, like a robin's for brightness.
And he was white-skinned with fine, silky hair that had darkened from
fair, and a slightly arched nose of an old country family. They were a
beautiful couple.

The house was Winifred's. Her father was a man of energy, too. He had
come from the north poor. Now he was moderately rich. He had bought this
fair stretch of inexpensive land, down in Hampshire. Not far from the
tiny church of the almost extinct hamlet stood his own house, a
commodious old farmhouse standing back from the road across a bare
grassed yard. On one side of this quadrangle was the long, long barn or
shed which he had made into a cottage for his youngest daughter
Priscilla. One saw little blue-and-white check curtains at the long
windows, and inside, overhead, the grand old timbers of the high-pitched
shed. This was Prissy's house. Fifty yards away was the pretty little new
cottage which he had built for his daughter Magdalen, with the vegetable
garden stretching away to the oak copse. And then away beyond the lawns
and rose trees of the house-garden went the track across a shaggy, wild
grass space, towards the ridge of tall black pines that grew on a
dyke-bank, through the pines and above the sloping little bog, under the
wide, desolate oak trees, till there was Winifred's cottage crouching
unexpectedly in front, so much alone, and so primitive.

It was Winifred's own house, and the gardens and the bit of common and
the boggy slope were hers: her tiny domain. She had married just at the
time when her father had bought the estate, about ten years before the
war, so she had been able to come to Egbert with this for a marriage
portion. And who was more delighted, he or she, it would be hard to say.
She was only twenty at the time, and he was only twenty-one. He had about
a hundred and fifty pounds a year of his own--and nothing else but his
very considerable personal attractions. He had no profession: he earned
nothing. But he talked of literature and music, he had a passion for
old folk-music, collecting folk-songs and folk-dances, studying the
Morris-dance and the old customs. Of course in time he would make money
in these ways.

Meanwhile youth and health and passion and promise. Winifred's father was
always generous: but still, he was a man from the north with a hard head
and a hard skin too, having received a good many knocks. At home he kept
the hard head out of sight, and played at poetry and romance with his
literary wife and his sturdy, passionate girls. He was a man of courage,
not given to complaining, bearing his burdens by himself. No, he did not
let the world intrude far into his home. He had a delicate, sensitive
wife whose poetry won some fame in the narrow world of letters. He
himself, with his tough old barbarian fighting spirit, had an almost
child-like delight in verse, in sweet poetry, and in the delightful game
of a cultured home. His blood was strong even to coarseness. But that
only made the home more vigorous, more robust and Christmassy. There was
always a touch of Christmas about him, now he was well off. If there was
poetry after dinner, there were also chocolates and nuts, and good little
out-of-the-way things to be munching.

Well then, into this family came Egbert. He was made of quite a different
paste. The girls and the father were strong-limbed, thick-blooded people,
true English, as holly-trees and hawthorn are English. Their culture was
grafted on to them, as one might perhaps graft a common pink rose on to a
thornstem. It flowered oddly enough, but it did not alter their blood.

And Egbert was a born rose. The age-long breeding had left him with a
delightful spontaneous passion. He was not clever, nor even 'literary'.
No, but the intonation of his voice, and the movement of his supple,
handsome body, and the fine texture of his flesh and his hair, the slight
arch of his nose, the quickness of his blue eyes would easily take the
place of poetry. Winifred loved him, loved him, this southerner, as a
higher being. A _higher_ being, mind you. Not a deeper. And as for him,
he loved her in passion with every fibre of him. She was the very warm
stuff of life to him.

Wonderful then, those days at Crockham Cottage, the first days, all alone
save for the woman who came to work in the mornings. Marvellous days,
when she had all his tall, supple, fine-fleshed youth to herself, for
herself, and he had her like a ruddy fire into which he could cast
himself for rejuvenation. Ah, that it might never end, this passion, this
marriage! The flame of their two bodies burnt again into that old
cottage, that was haunted already by so much by-gone, physical desire.
You could not be in the dark room for an hour without the influences
coming over you. The hot blood-desire of by-gone yeomen, there in this
old den where they had lusted and bred for so many generations. The
silent house, dark, with thick, timbered walls and the big black
chimney-place, and the sense of secrecy. Dark, with low, little windows,
sunk into the earth. Dark, like a lair where strong beasts had lurked and
mated, lonely at night and lonely by day, left to themselves and their
own intensity for so many generations. It seemed to cast a spell on the
two young people. They became different. There was a curious secret glow
about them, a certain slumbering flame hard to understand, that enveloped
them both. They too felt that they did not belong to the London world any
more. Crockham had changed their blood: the sense of the snakes that
lived and slept even in their own garden, in the sun, so that he, going
forward with the spade, would see a curious coiled brownish pile on the
black soil, which suddenly would start up, hiss, and dazzle rapidly away,
hissing. One day Winifred heard the strangest scream from the flower-bed
under the low window of the living room: ah, the strangest scream, like
the very soul of the dark past crying aloud. She ran out, and saw a long
brown snake on the flower-bed, and in its flat mouth the one hind leg of
a frog was striving to escape, and screaming its strange, tiny, bellowing
scream. She looked at the snake, and from its sullen flat head it looked
at her, obstinately. She gave a cry, and it released the frog and slid
angrily away.

That was Crockham. The spear of modern invention had not passed through
it, and it lay there secret, primitive, savage as when the Saxons first
came. And Egbert and she were caught there, caught out of the world.

He was not idle, nor was she. There were plenty of things to be done, the
house to be put into final repair after the workmen had gone, cushions
and curtains to sew, the paths to make, the water to fetch and attend to,
and then the slope of the deep-soiled, neglected garden to level, to
terrace with little terraces and paths, and to fill with flowers. He
worked away, in his shirt-sleeves, worked all day intermittently doing
this thing and the other. And she, quiet and rich in herself, seeing him
stooping and labouring away by himself, would come to help him, to be
near him. He of course was an amateur--a born amateur. He worked so hard,
and did so little, and nothing he ever did would hold together for long.
If he terraced the garden, he held up the earth with a couple of long
narrow planks that soon began to bend with the pressure from behind, and
would not need many years to rot through and break and let the soil
slither all down again in a heap towards the stream-bed. But there you
are. He had not been brought up to come to grips with anything, and he
thought it would do. Nay, he did not think there was anything else except
little temporary contrivances possible, he who had such a passion for his
old enduring cottage, and for the old enduring things of the bygone
England. Curious that the sense of permanency in the past had such a hold
over him, whilst in the present he was all amateurish and sketchy.

Winifred could not criticize him. Town-bred, everything seemed to her
splendid, and the very digging and shovelling itself seemed romantic. But
neither Egbert nor she yet realized the difference between work and
romance.

Godfrey Marshall, her father, was at first perfectly pleased with the
ménage down at Crockham Cottage. He thought Egbert was wonderful, the
many things he accomplished, and he was gratified by the glow of physical
passion between the two young people. To the man who in London still
worked hard to keep steady his modest fortune, the thought of this young
couple digging away and loving one another down at Crockham Cottage,
buried deep among the commons and marshes, near the pale-showing bulk of
the downs, was like a chapter of living romance. And they drew the
sustenance for their fire of passion from him, from the old man. It was
he who fed their flame. He triumphed secretly in the thought. And it was
to her father that Winifred still turned, as the one source of all surety
and life and support. She loved Egbert with passion. But behind her was
the power of her father. It was the power of her father she referred to,
whenever she needed to refer. It never occurred to her to refer to
Egbert, if she were in difficulty or doubt. No, in all the _serious_
matters she depended on her father.

For Egbert had no intention of coming to grips with life. He had no
ambition whatsoever. He came from a decent family, from a pleasant
country home, from delightful surroundings. He should, of course, have
had a profession. He should have studied law or entered business in some
way. But no--that fatal three pounds a week would keep him from starving
as long as he lived, and he did not want to give himself into bondage. It
was not that he was idle. He was always doing something, in his
amateurish way. But he had no desire to give himself to the world, and
still less had he any desire to fight his way in the world. No, no, the
world wasn't worth it. He wanted to ignore it, to go his own way apart,
like a casual pilgrim down the forsaken sidetracks. He loved his wife,
his cottage and garden. He would make his life there, as a sort of
epicurean hermit. He loved the past, the old music and dances and customs
of old England. He would try and live in the spirit of these, not in the
spirit of the world of business.

But often Winifred's father called her to London: for he loved to have
his children round him. So Egbert and she must have a tiny flat in town,
and the young couple must transfer themselves from time to time from the
country to the city. In town Egbert had plenty of friends, of the same
ineffectual sort as himself, tampering with the arts, literature,
painting, sculpture, music. He was not bored.

Three pounds a week, however, would not pay for all this. Winifred's
father paid. He liked paying. He made her only a very small allowance,
but he often gave her ten pounds--or gave Egbert ten pounds. So they both
looked on the old man as the mainstay. Egbert didn't mind being
patronized and paid for. Only when he felt the family was a little _too_
condescending, on account of money, he began to get huffy.

Then of course children came: a lovely little blonde daughter with a head
of thistle-down. Everybody adored the child. It was the first exquisite
blonde thing that had come into the family, a little mite with the white,
slim, beautiful limbs of its father, and as it grew up the dancing,
dainty movement of a wild little daisy-spirit. No wonder the Marshalls
all loved the child: they called her Joyce. They themselves had their own
grace, but it was slow, rather heavy. They had everyone of them strong,
heavy limbs and darkish skins, and they were short in stature. And now
they had for one of their own this light little cowslip child. She was
like a little poem in herself.

But nevertheless, she brought a new difficulty. Winifred must have a
nurse for her. Yes, yes, there must be a nurse. It was the family decree.
Who was to pay for the nurse? The grandfather--seeing the father himself
earned no money. Yes, the grandfather would pay, as he had paid all the
lying-in expenses. There came a slight sense of money-strain. Egbert was
living on his father-in-law.

After the child was born, it was never quite the same between him and
Winifred. The difference was at first hardly perceptible. But it was
there. In the first place Winifred had a new centre of interest. She was
not going to adore her child. But she had what the modern mother so often
has in the place of spontaneous love: a profound sense of duty towards
her child. Winifred appreciated her darling little girl, and felt a deep
sense of duty towards her. Strange, that this sense of duty should go
deeper than the love for her husband. But so it was. And so it often is.
The responsibility of motherhood was the prime responsibility in
Winifred's heart: the responsibility of wifehood came a long way second.

Her child seemed to link her up again in a circuit with her own family.
Her father and mother, herself, and her child, that was the human trinity
for her. Her husband--? Yes, she loved him still. But that was like play.
She had an almost barbaric sense of duty and of family. Till she married,
her first human duty had been towards her father: he was the pillar, the
source of life, the everlasting support. Now another link was added to
the chain of duty: her father, herself, and her child.

Egbert was out of it. Without anything happening, he was gradually,
unconsciously excluded from the circle. His wife still loved him,
physically. But, but--he was _almost_ the unnecessary party in the
affair. He could not complain of Winifred. She still did her duty towards
him. She still had a physical passion for him, that physical passion on
which he had put all his life and soul. But--but--

It was for a long while an ever-recurring _but_. And then, after the
second child, another blonde, winsome touching little thing, not so proud
and flame-like as Joyce--after Annabel came, then Egbert began truly to
realize how it was. His wife still loved him. But--and now the but had
grown enormous--her physical love for him was of secondary importance to
her. It became ever less important. After all, she had had it, this
physical passion, for two years now. It was not this that one lived from.
No, no--something sterner, realer.

She began to resent her own passion for Egbert--just a little she began
to despise it. For after all there he was, he was charming, he was
lovable, he was terribly desirable. But--but--oh, the awful looming cloud
of that _but!_--he did not stand firm in the landscape of her life like a
tower of strength, like a great pillar of significance. No, he was like a
cat one has about the house, which will one day disappear and leave no
trace. He was like a flower in the garden, trembling in the wind of life,
and then gone, leaving nothing to show. As an adjunct, as an accessory,
he was perfect. Many a woman would have adored to have him about her all
her life, the most beautiful and desirable of all her possessions. But
Winifred belonged to another school.

The years went by, and instead of coming more to grips with life, he
relaxed more. He was of a subtle, sensitive, passionate nature. But he
simply _would_ not give himself to what Winifred called life, _Work_. No,
he would not go into the world and work for money. No, he just would not.
If Winifred liked to live beyond their small income--well, it was her
look-out.

And Winifred did not really want him to go out into the world to work for
money. Money became, alas, a word like a firebrand between them, setting
them both aflame with anger. But that is because we must talk in symbols.
Winifred did not really care about money. She did not care whether he
earned or did not earn anything. Only she knew she was dependent on her
father for three-fourths of the money spent for herself and her children,
that she let that be the _casus belli_, the drawn weapon between herself
and Egbert.

What did she want--what did she want? Her mother once said to her, with
that characteristic touch of irony: 'Well, dear, if it is your fate to
consider the lilies, that toil not, neither do they spin, that is one
destiny among many others, and perhaps not so unpleasant as most. Why do
you take it amiss, my child?'

The mother was subtler than her children, they very rarely knew how to
answer her. So Winifred was only more confused. It was not a question of
lilies. At least, if it were a question of lilies, then her children were
the little blossoms. They at least _grew_. Doesn't Jesus say: 'Consider
the lilies _how they grow_.' Good then, she had her growing babies. But
as for that other tall, handsome flower of a father of theirs, he was
full grown already, so she did not want to spend her life considering him
in the flower of his days.

No, it was not that he didn't earn money. It was not that he was idle. He
was _not_ idle. He was always doing something, always working away, down
at Crockham, doing little jobs. But, oh dear, the little jobs--the garden
paths--the gorgeous flowers--the chairs to mend, old chairs to mend!

It was that he stood for nothing. If he had done something
unsuccessfully, and _lost_ what money they had! If he had but striven
with something. Nay, even if he had been wicked, a waster, she would have
been more free. She would have had something to resist, at least. A
waster stands for something, really. He says: 'No, I will not aid and
abet society in this business of increase and hanging together, I will
upset the apple-cart as much as I can, in my small way.' Or else he says:
'No, I will _not_ bother about others. If I have lusts, they are my own,
and I prefer them to other people's virtues.' So, a waster, a scamp,
takes a sort of stand. He exposes himself to opposition and final
castigation: at any rate in story-books.

But Egbert! What are you to do with a man like Egbert? He had no vices.
He was really kind, nay generous. And he was not weak. If he had been
weak Winifred could have been kind to him. But he did not even give her
that consolation. He was not weak, and he did not want her consolation or
her kindness. No, thank you. He was of a fine passionate temper, and of a
rarer steel than she. He knew it, and she knew it. Hence she was only the
more baffled and maddened, poor thing. He, the higher, the finer, in his
way the stronger, played with his garden, and his old folk-songs and
Morris-dances, just played, and let her support the pillars of the future
on her own heart.

And he began to get bitter, and a wicked look began to come on his face.
He did not give in to her; not he. There were seven devils inside his
long, slim, white body. He was healthy, full of restrained life. Yes,
even he himself had to lock up his own vivid life inside himself, now she
would not take it from him. Or rather, now that she only took it
occasionally. For she had to yield at times. She loved him so, she
desired him so, he was so exquisite to her, the fine creature that he
was, finer than herself. Yes, with a groan she had to give in to her own
unquenched passion for him. And he came to her then--ah, terrible, ah,
wonderful, sometimes she wondered how either of them could live after the
terror of the passion that swept between them. It was to her as if pure
lightning, flash after flash, went through every fibre of her, till
extinction came.

But it is the fate of human beings to live on. And it is the fate of
clouds that seem nothing but bits of vapour slowly to pile up, to pile up
and fill the heavens and blacken the sun entirely.

So it was. The love came back, the lightning of passion flashed
tremendously between them. And there was blue sky and gorgeousness for a
little while. And then, as inevitably, as inevitably, slowly the clouds
began to edge up again above the horizon, slowly, slowly to lurk about
the heavens, throwing an occasional cold and hateful shadow: slowly,
slowly to congregate, to fill the empyrean space.

And as the years passed, the lightning cleared the sky more and more
rarely, less and less the blue showed. Gradually the grey lid sank down
upon them, as if it would be permanent.

Why didn't Egbert do something, then? Why didn't he come to grips with
life? Why wasn't he like Winifred's father, a pillar of society, even if
a slender, exquisite column? Why didn't he go into harness of some sort?
Why didn't he take _some_ direction?

Well, you can bring an ass to the water, but you cannot make him drink.
The world was the water and Egbert was the ass. And he wasn't having any.
He couldn't: he just couldn't. Since necessity did not force him to work
for his bread and butter, he would not work for work's sake. You can't
make the columbine flowers nod in January, nor make the cuckoo sing in
England at Christmas. Why? It isn't his season. He doesn't want to. Nay,
he _can't_ want to.

And there it was with Egbert. He couldn't link up with the world's work,
because the basic desire was absent from him. Nay, at the bottom of him
he had an even stronger desire: to hold aloof. To hold aloof. To do
nobody any damage. But to hold aloof. It was not his season.

Perhaps he should not have married and had children. But you can't stop
the waters flowing.

Which held true for Winifred, too. She was not made to endure aloof. Her
family tree was a robust vegetation that had to be stirring and
believing. In one direction or another her life _had_ to go. In her own
home she had known nothing of this diffidence which she found in Egbert,
and which she could not understand, and which threw her into such dismay.
What was she to do, what was she to do, in face of this terrible
diffidence?

It was all so different in her own home. Her father may have had his own
misgivings, but he kept them to himself. Perhaps he had no very profound
belief in this world of ours, this society which we have elaborated with
so much effort, only to find ourselves elaborated to death at last. But
Godfrey Marshall was of tough, rough fibre, not without a vein of
healthy cunning through it all. It was for him a question of winning
through, and leaving the rest to heaven. Without having many illusions
to grace him, he still _did_ believe in heaven. In a dark and
unquestioning way, he had a sort of faith: an acrid faith like the sap of
some not-to-be-exterminated tree. Just a blind acrid faith as sap is
blind and acrid, and yet pushes on in growth and in faith. Perhaps he was
unscrupulous, but only as a striving tree is unscrupulous, pushing its
single way in a jungle of others.

In the end, it is only this robust, sap-like faith which keeps man going.
He may live on for many generations inside the shelter of the social
establishment which he has erected for himself, as pear-trees and currant
bushes would go on bearing fruit for many seasons, inside a walled
garden, even if the race of man were suddenly exterminated. But bit by
bit the wall-fruit-trees would gradually pull down the very walls that
sustained them. Bit by bit every establishment collapses, unless it is
renewed or restored by living hands, all the while.

Egbert could not bring himself to any more of this restoring or renewing
business. He was not aware of the fact: but awareness doesn't help much,
anyhow. He just couldn't. He had the stoic and epicurean quality of his
old, fine breeding. His father-in-law, however, though he was not one bit
more of a fool than Egbert, realized that since we are here we may as
well live. And so he applied himself to his own tiny section of the
social work, and to doing the best for his family, and to leaving the
rest to the ultimate will of heaven. A certain robustness of blood made
him able to go on. But sometimes even from him spurted a sudden gall of
bitterness against the world and its make-up. And yet--he had his own
will-to-succeed, and this carried him through. He refused to ask himself
what the success would amount to. It amounted to the estate down in
Hampshire, and his children lacking for nothing, and himself of some
importance in the world: and _basta!--Basta! Basta!_

Nevertheless do not let us imagine that he was a common pusher. He was
not. He knew as well as Egbert what disillusion meant. Perhaps in his
soul he had the same estimation of success. But he had a certain acrid
courage, and a certain will-to-power. In his own small circle he would
emanate power, the single power of his own blind self. With all his
spoiling of his children, he was still the father of the old English
type. He was too wise to make laws and to domineer in the abstract. But
he had kept, and all honour to him, a certain primitive dominion over the
souls of his children, the old, almost magic prestige of paternity. There
it was, still burning in him, the old smoky torch or paternal godhead.

And in the sacred glare of this torch his children had been brought up.
He had given the girls every liberty, at last. But he had never really
let them go beyond his power. And they, venturing out into the hard white
light of our fatherless world, learned to see with the eyes of the world.
They learned to criticize their father, even, from some effulgence of
worldly white light, to see him as inferior. But this was all very well
in the head. The moment they forgot their tricks of criticism, the old
red glow of his authority came over them again. He was not to be
quenched.

Let the psycho-analyst talk about father complex. It is just a word
invented. Here was a man who had kept alive the old red flame of
fatherhood, fatherhood that had even the right to sacrifice the child to
God, like Isaac. Fatherhood that had life-and-death authority over the
children: a great natural power. And till his children could be brought
under some other great authority as girls; or could arrive at manhood and
become themselves centres of the same power, continuing the same male
mystery as men; until such time, willy-nilly, Godfrey Marshall would keep
his children.

It had seemed as if he might lose Winifred. Winifred had _adored_ her
husband, and looked up to him as to something wonderful. Perhaps she had
expected in him another great authority, a male authority greater, finer
than her father's. For having once known the glow of male power, she
would not easily turn to the cold white light of feminine independence.
She would hunger, hunger all her life for the warmth and shelter of true
male strength.

And hunger she might, for Egbert's power lay in the abnegation of power.
He was himself the living negative of power. Even of responsibility. For
the negation of power at last means the negation of responsibility. As
far as these things went, he would confine himself to himself. He would
try to confine his own _influence_ even to himself. He would try, as far
as possible, to abstain from influencing his children by assuming any
responsibility for them. 'A little child shall lead them--' His child
should lead, then. He would try not to make it go in any direction
whatever. He would abstain from influencing it. Liberty!--

Poor Winifred was like a fish out of water in this liberty, gasping for
the denser element which should contain her. Till her child came. And
then she knew that she must be responsible for it, that she must have
authority over it.

But here Egbert silently and negatively stepped in. Silently, negatively,
but fatally he neutralized her authority over her children.

There was a third little girl born. And after this Winifred wanted no
more children. Her soul was turning to salt.

So she had charge of the children, they were her responsibility. The
money for them had come from her father. She would do her very best for
them, and have command over their life and death. But no! Egbert would
not take the responsibility. He would not even provide the money. But he
would not let her have her way. Her dark, silent, passionate authority he
would not allow. It was a battle between them, the battle between liberty
and the old blood-power. And of course he won. The little girls loved him
and adored him. 'Daddy! Daddy!' They could do as they liked with him.
Their mother would have ruled them. She would have ruled them
passionately, with indulgence, with the old dark magic of parental
authority, something looming and unquestioned and, after all, divine: if
we believe in divine authority. The Marshalls did, being Catholic.

And Egbert, he turned her old dark, Catholic blood-authority into a sort
of tyranny. He would not leave her her children. He stole them from her,
and yet without assuming responsibility for them. He stole them from her,
in emotion and spirit, and left her only to command their behaviour. A
thankless lot for a mother. And her children adored him, adored him,
little knowing the empty bitterness they were preparing for themselves
when they too grew up to have husbands: husbands such as Egbert, adorable
and null.

Joyce, the eldest, was still his favourite. She was now a quicksilver
little thing of six years old. Barbara, the youngest, was a toddler of
two years. They spent most of their time down at Crockham, because he
wanted to be there. And even Winifred loved the place really. But now, in
her frustrated and blinded state, it was full of menace for her children.
The adders, the poison-berries, the brook, the marsh, the water that
might not be pure--one thing and another. From mother and nurse it was a
guerilla gunfire of commands, and blithe, quicksilver disobedience from
the three blonde, never-still little girls. Behind the girls was the
father, against mother and nurse. And so it was.

'If you don't come quick, nurse, I shall run out there to where there are
snakes.'

'Joyce, you _must_ be patient. I'm just changing Annabel.'

There you are. There it was: always the same. Working away on the common
across the brook he heard it. And he worked on, just the same.

Suddenly he heard a shriek, and he flung the spade from him and started
for the bridge, looking up like a startled deer. Ah, there was
Winifred--Joyce had hurt herself. He went on up the garden.

'What is it?'

The child was still screaming--now it was--'Daddy! Daddy! Oh--oh, Daddy!'
And the mother was saying:

'Don't be frightened, darling. Let mother look.'

But the child only cried:

'Oh, Daddy, Daddy, Daddy!'

She was terrified by the sight of the blood running from her own knee.
Winifred crouched down, with her child of six in her lap, to examine the
knee. Egbert bent over also.

'Don't make such a noise, Joyce,' he said irritably. 'How did she do it?'

'She fell on that sickle thing which you left lying about after cutting
the grass,' said Winifred, looking into his face with bitter accusation
as he bent near.

He had taken his handkerchief and tied it round the knee. Then he lifted
the still sobbing child in his arms, and carried her into the house and
upstairs to her bed. In his arms she became quiet. But his heart was
burning with pain and with guilt. He had left the sickle there lying on
the edge of the grass, and so his first-born child whom he loved so
dearly had come to hurt. But then it was an accident--it was an accident.
Why should he feel guilty? It would probably be nothing, better in two or
three days. Why take it to heart, why worry? He put it aside.

The child lay on the bed in her little summer frock, her face very white
now after the shock, Nurse had come carrying the youngest child: and
little Annabel stood holding her skirt. Winifred, terribly serious and
wooden-seeming, was bending over the knee, from which she had taken his
blood-soaked handkerchief. Egbert bent forward, too, keeping more
_sangfroid_ in his face than in his heart. Winifred went all of a lump of
seriousness, so he had to keep some reserve. The child moaned and
whimpered.

The knee was still bleeding profusely--it was a deep cut right in the
joint.

'You'd better go for the doctor, Egbert,' said Winifred bitterly.

'Oh, no! Oh, no!' cried Joyce in a panic.

'Joyce, my darling, don't cry!' said Winifred, suddenly catching the
little girl to her breast in a strange tragic anguish, the _Mater
Dolorata_. Even the child was frightened into silence. Egbert looked at
the tragic figure of his wife with the child at her breast, and turned
away. Only Annabel started suddenly to cry: 'Joycey, Joycey, don't have
your leg bleeding!'

Egbert rode four miles to the village for the doctor. He could not help
feeling that Winifred was laying it on rather. Surely the knee itself
wasn't hurt! Surely not. It was only a surface cut.

The doctor was out. Egbert left the message and came cycling swiftly
home, his heart pinched with anxiety. He dropped sweating off his bicycle
and went into the house, looking rather small, like a man who is at
fault. Winifred was upstairs sitting by Joyce, who was looking pale and
important in bed, and was eating some tapioca pudding. The pale, small,
scared face of his child went to Egbert's heart.

'Doctor Wing was out. He'll be here about half past two,' said Egbert.

'I don't want him to come,' whimpered Joyce.

'Joyce, dear, you must be patient and quiet,' said Winifred. 'He won't
hurt you. But he will tell us what to do to make your knee better
quickly. That is why he must come.'

Winifred always explained carefully to her little girls: and it always
took the words off their lips for the moment.

'Does it bleed yet?' said Egbert.

Winifred moved the bedclothes carefully aside.

'I think not,' she said.

Egbert stooped also to look.

'No, it doesn't,' she said. Then he stood up with a relieved look on his
face. He turned to the child.

'Eat your pudding, Joyce,' he said. 'It won't be anything. You've only
got to keep still for a few days.'

'You haven't had your dinner, have you, Daddy?'

'Not yet.'

'Nurse will give it to you,' said Winifred.

'You'll be all right, Joyce,' he said, smiling to the child and pushing
the blonde hair off her brow. She smiled back winsomely into his face.

He went downstairs and ate his meal alone. Nurse served him. She liked
waiting on him. All women liked him and liked to do things for him.

The doctor came--a fat country practitioner, pleasant and kind.

'What, little girl, been tumbling down, have you? There's a thing to be
doing, for a smart little lady like you! What! And cutting your knee!
Tut-tut-tut! That _wasn't_ clever of you, now was it? Never mind, never
mind, soon be better. Let us look at it. Won't hurt you. Not the least in
life. Bring a bowl with a little warm water, nurse. Soon have it all
right again, soon have it all right.'

Joyce smiled at him with a pale smile of faint superiority. This was
_not_ the way in which she was used to being talked to.

He bent down, carefully looking at the little, thin, wounded knee of the
child. Egbert bent over him.

'Oh, dear, oh, dear! Quite a deep little cut. Nasty little cut. Nasty
little cut. But, never mind. Never mind, little lady. We'll soon have it
better. Soon have it better, little lady. What's your name?'

'My name is Joyce,' said the child distinctly.

'Oh, really!' he replied. 'Oh, really! Well, that's a fine name too, in
my opinion. Joyce, eh?--And how old might Miss Joyce be? Can she tell me
that?'

'I'm six,' said the child, slightly amused and very condescending.

'Six! There now. Add up and count as far as six, can you? Well, that's a
clever little girl, a clever little girl. And if she has to drink a
spoonful of medicine, she won't make a murmur, I'll be bound. Not like
_some_ little girls. What? Eh?'

'I take it if mother wishes me to,' said Joyce.

'Ah, there now! That's the style! That's what I like to hear from a
little lady in bed because she's cut her knee. That's the style--'

The comfortable and prolix doctor dressed and bandaged the knee and
recommended bed and a light diet for the little lady. He thought
a week or a fortnight would put it right. No bones or ligatures
damaged--fortunately. Only a flesh cut. He would come again in a day or
two.

So Joyce was reassured and stayed in bed and had all her toys up. Her
father often played with her. The doctor came the third day. He was
fairly pleased with the knee. It was healing. It was healing--yes--yes.
Let the child continue in bed. He came again after a day or two. Winifred
was a trifle uneasy. The wound seemed to be healing on the top, but it
hurt the child too much. It didn't look quite right. She said so to
Egbert.

'Egbert, I'm sure Joyce's knee isn't healing properly.'

'I think it is,' he said. 'I think it's all right.'

'I'd rather Doctor Wing came again--I don't feel satisfied.'

'Aren't you trying to imagine it worse than it really is?'

'You would say so, of course. But I shall write a post-card to Doctor
Wing now.'

The doctor came next day. He examined the knee. Yes, there was
inflammation. Yes, there _might_ be a little septic poisoning--there
might. There might. Was the child feverish?

So a fortnight passed by, and the child _was_ feverish, and the knee was
more inflamed and grew worse and was painful, painful. She cried in the
night, and her mother had to sit up with her. Egbert still insisted it
was nothing, really--it would pass. But in his heart he was anxious.

Winifred wrote again to her father. On Saturday the elderly man appeared.
And no sooner did Winifred see the thick, rather short figure in its grey
suit than a great yearning came over her.

'Father, I'm not satisfied with Joyce. I'm not satisfied with Doctor
Wing.'

'Well, Winnie, dear, if you're not satisfied we must have further advice,
that is all.'

The sturdy, powerful, elderly man went upstairs, his voice sounding
rather grating through the house, as if it cut upon the tense atmosphere.

'How are you, Joyce, darling?' he said to the child. 'Does your knee hurt
you? Does it hurt you, dear?'

'It does sometimes.' The child was shy of him, cold towards him.

'Well, dear, I'm sorry for that. I hope you try to bear it, and not
trouble mother too much.'

There was no answer. He looked at the knee. It was red and stiff.

'Of course,' he said, 'I think we must have another doctor's opinion. And
if we're going to have it, we had better have it at once. Egbert, do you
think you might cycle in to Bingham for Doctor Wayne? I found him very
satisfactory for Winnie's mother.'

'I can go if you think it necessary,' said Egbert.

'Certainly I think it necessary. Even if there if nothing, we can have
peace of mind. Certainly I think it necessary. I should like Doctor Wayne
to come this evening if possible.'

So Egbert set off on his bicycle through the wind, like a boy sent on an
errand, leaving his father-in-law a pillar of assurance, with Winifred.

Doctor Wayne came, and looked grave. Yes, the knee was certainly taking
the wrong way. The child might be lame for life.

Up went the fire and fear and anger in every heart. Doctor Wayne came
again the next day for a proper examination. And, yes, the knee had
really taken bad ways. It should be X-rayed. It was very important.

Godfrey Marshall walked up and down the lane with the doctor, beside the
standing motor-car: up and down, up and down in one of those
consultations of which he had had so many in his life.

As a result he came indoors to Winifred.

'Well, Winnie, dear, the best thing to do is to take Joyce up to London,
to a nursing home where she can have proper treatment. Of course this
knee has been allowed to go wrong. And apparently there is a risk that
the child may even lose her leg. What do you think, dear? You agree to
our taking her up to town and putting her under the best care?'

'Oh, father, you _know_ I would do anything on earth for her.'

'I know you would, Winnie darling. The pity is that there has been this
unfortunate delay already. I can't think what Doctor Wing was doing.
Apparently the child is in danger of losing her leg. Well then, if you
will have everything ready, we will take her up to town tomorrow. I will
order the large car from Denley's to be here at ten. Egbert, will you
take a telegram at once to Doctor Jackson? It is a small nursing home for
children and for surgical cases, not far from Baker Street. I'm sure
Joyce will be all right there.'

'Oh, father, can't I nurse her myself!'

'Well, darling, if she is to have proper treatment, she had best be in a
home. The X-ray treatment, and the electric treatment, and whatever is
necessary.'

'It will cost a great deal--' said Winifred.

'We can't think of cost, if the child's leg is in danger--or even her
life. No use speaking of cost,' said the elder man impatiently.

And so it was. Poor Joyce, stretched out on a bed in the big closed
motor-car--the mother sitting by her head, the grandfather in his short
grey beard and a bowler hat, sitting by her feet, thick, and implacable
in his responsibility--they rolled slowly away from Crockham, and from
Egbert who stood there bareheaded and a little ignominious, left behind.
The day of election came, and passed peacefully. The unconditional
Union ticket was elected by a sweeping majority of five thousand
votes.

The result throughout the State was not less decisive and surprising.
Of the entire number of delegates composing the convention, not one was
chosen who had dared to express secession sentiments before the people;
and the aggregate majority of the Union candidates in the State amounted
to about eighty thousand. The shock of this defeat for the moment
paralyzed the conspirators; but their evil inspirations soon put them to
work again. Their organs in Missouri assumed an unfriendly tone towards
the convention, which was to meet in Jefferson City. The legislature
that had called the convention remained in session in the same
place, but made no fit preparations for the assembling of the
convention, or for the accommodation and pay of the members.

The debate in the legislature on the bill for appropriations for these
purposes was insulting to the convention, the more ill-tempered and
ill-bred secession members intimating that such a body of 'submissionists'
were unworthy to represent Missouri, and undeserving of any pay.

The manifest ill feeling between the two bodies--the legislature elected
eighteen months previously, and without popular reference to the question
of secession, and the convention chosen fresh from the people, to decide
on the course of the State--soon indicated the infelicity of the two
remaining in session at the same time and in the same place. Accordingly,
within a few days after the organization of the convention, it adjourned
its session to the city of St. Louis. It did not meet a cordial reception
there. So insolent had the secession spirit already grown, that on the
day of the assembling of the convention in that city, the members
were insulted by taunts in the streets and by the ostentatious
floating of the rebel flag from the Democratic head-quarters, hard
by the building in which they assembled.

Being left in the undisputed occupancy of the seat of government, the
governor, lieutenant-governor, and legislature gave themselves up to
the enactment of flagrant and undisguised measures of hostility to the
federal government.

Commissioners from States that had renounced the Constitution, and
withdrawn, as they claimed, from the Union, arrived at Jefferson City
as apostles of treason. They were received as distinguished and honorable
ambassadors. A joint session of the legislature was called to hear their
communications. The lieutenant-governor, Reynolds, being the presiding
officer of the joint session, required that the members should rise when
these traitors entered, and receive them standing and uncovered. The
commissioners were allowed to harangue the representatives of
Missouri, by the hour, in unmeasured abuse of the federal government,
in open rejoicings over its supposed dissolution, and in urgent
appeals to the people of Missouri to join the rebel States in their
consummated treason.

Noisy demonstrations of applause greeted these commissioners; and
legislators, and the governor himself, in a public speech in front of
the executive mansion, pledged them that Missouri would shortly be found
ranged on the side of seceded States. The treason of the governor and
legislature did not stop with these manifestations. They proceeded
to acts of legislation, preparatory to the employment of force, after
the manner of their 'Southern bretheren.' First, it was necessary to get
control of the city of St.

Louis. The Republican party held the government of the city, mayor,
council, and police force--a formidable Union organization. The
legislature passed a bill repealing that part of the city charter
that, gave to the mayor the appointment of the police, and constituting
a board of police commissioners, to be appointed by the governor,
who should exercise that power.

He named men that suited his purposes. The Union police were discharged,
and their places filled by secessionists.
Next, the State militia was to be organized in the interests of rebellion,
and a law was passed to accomplish that end. The State was set off into
divisions; military camps were to be established in each; all able-bodied
men between the ages of eighteen and fifty were liable to be called
into camp and drilled a given number of days in the year; and,
when summoned to duty, instead of taking the usual oath to support the
Constitution of the United States, they were required only to be
sworn 'to obey the orders of the governor of the State of Missouri.'

These camps were styled camps of instruction. One of them was established
at St. Louis, within the corporate limits of the city, about two
miles west of the court-house, on a commanding eminence.

Thus the lines began to be drawn closely around the Unionists of St.
Louis.

The State convention had adjourned, and its members had gone home, having
done but little to re-assure the loyalists. They had, indeed, passed an
ordinance declaring that Missouri would adhere to the Union; but the
majority of the members had betrayed such hesitancy and indecision,
such a lack of stomach to grapple with the rude issues of the rebellion,
that their action passed almost without moral effect.
Their ordinance was treated with contempt by the secessionists, and
nearly lost sight of by the people; so thoroughly were all classes
lashed into excitement by the storm of revolution now blackening
the whole Southern Hemisphere.

The friends of the Union could look to but one quarter for aid, that
was Washington, where a new administration had so recently been
installed, amid difficulties that seemed to have paralyzed its
power. The government had been defied by the rebellion at every point; its
ships driven by hostile guns from Southern ports; its treasures seized;
its arsenals occupied, and its abundant arms and munitions appropriated.

Nowhere had the federal arm resented insult and robbery with a
blow.
This had not been the fault of the government that was inaugurated on
the fourth of March. It was the fruit of the official treason of the
preceding administration, that had completely disarmed the government,
and filled the new executive councils with confusion, by the numberless
knaves it had placed in all departments of the public service,
whose daily desertions of duty rendered the prompt and honest
execution of the laws impossible.

But the fact was indisputable; and how could St. Louis hope for
protection that had nowhere else been afforded? The national government
had an arsenal within the city limits. It comprised a considerable area
of ground, was surrounded by a high and heavy stone wall, and supplied
with valuable arms.

But so far from this establishment being a protection to the loyal population,
it seemed more likely, judging by what had occurred in other States, that
it would serve as a temptation to the secession mob that was evidently
gathering head for mischief, and that the desire to take it would
precipitate the outbreak. The Unionists felt their danger; the rebels
saw their opportunity. Already the latter were boasting that they would
in a short time occupy this post, and not a few of the prominent Union
citizens of the town were warned by secession leaders that they would
soon be set across the Mississippi river, exiles from their homes
forever.

As an instance of the audacity of the rebel element at this time, and
for weeks later, the fact is mentioned that the United States soldiers,
who paced before the gates of the arsenal as sentinels on duty, had
their beats defined for them by the new secession police, and were
forbidden to invade the sacred precincts of the city's highway.

The arsenal was unquestionably devoted to capture, and it would have
been a prize to the rebels second in value to the Gosport navy-yard.
It contained at this time sixty-six thousand stand of small arms,
several batteries of light artillery and heavy ordnance, and at least
one million dollars' worth of ammunition. It was besides supplied with
extensive and valuable machinery for repairing guns, rifling barrels,
mounting artillery, and preparing shot and shell. The future, to the
Union men of St. Louis, looked gloomy enough; persecution, and, if
they resisted, death, seemed imminent; and no voice from abroad
reached them, giving them good cheer.

But deliverance was nigh at hand.

About the middle of January, Capt. Nathaniel Lyon, of the Second
Infantry, U.S.A., arrived in St. Louis with his company; and his rank
gave him command of all the troops then at the arsenal and Jefferson
Barracks, a post on the river, ten miles below, the department
being under the command of Brigadier General Harney.

Capt. Lyon had been garrisoning a fort in Kansas. He was known to some of
the Union men of St. Louis; and his resolute spirit and devoted
patriotism marked him as their leader in this crisis. Frank Blair at
once put himself in communication with Capt. Lyon, and advised him fully
and minutely as to the political situation. He exposed to him the existence
of his volunteer military organization. At his request Capt. Lyon visited
and reviewed the regiments; and it was arranged between them that if an
outbreak should occur, or any attempt be made to seize the arsenal,
Capt. Lyon should receive this volunteer force to his assistance, arm it
from the arsenal, and take command for the emergency. It should be
known, however, to the greater credit of the Union leaders of St. Louis,
that they had already, from private funds, procured about one
thousand stand of arms, with which their nightly drills, as heretofore
stated, had been conducted.

As soon as Capt. Lyon's connection with this organization was suspected,
an attempt was made to have him removed, by ordering him to Kansas on the
pretext of a court of inquiry; but this attempt was defeated. Thus matters
stood for a time, the Union men beginning to be reassured, but still
doubtful of the end. After a while, Fort Sumter was opened upon, and
fell under its furious bombardment. The torch of war was lit. President
Lincoln issued his proclamation for volunteers. Gov. Jackson telegraphed
back an insolent and defiant refusal, in which he denounced the
'war waged by the federal government' as 'inhuman and diabolical.'

Frank Blair instantly followed this traitorous governor's dispatch by
another, addressed to the Secretary of War, asking him to accept and muster
into service the volunteer regiments he had been forming. This offer was
accepted, and the men presented themselves. But Brig. Gen. Harney,
fearing that the arming of these troops would exasperate the
secession populace, and bring about a collision with the State
militia, refused to permit the men to be mustered into service and
armed.

This extraordinary decision was immediately telegraphed to the
government, and Gen. Harney was relieved, leaving Capt. Lyon in full
command. This was the 23d of April. In a week four full regiments
were mustered in, and occupied the arsenal. A memorial was prepared and
sent to Washington by Frank Blair, now colonel of the first of these
regiments, asking for the enrolment of five other regiments of
Home Guards.

Permission was given, and in another week these regiments also were
organized and armed.

The conflict was now at hand. Simultaneously with this arming on the
part of the government for the protection of the arsenal, the order
went forth for the assembling of the State troops in their camps
of instruction.

On Monday, the 6th of May, the First Brigade of Missouri militia,
under Gen.

D.M. Frost, was ordered by Gov. Jackson into camp at St. Louis, avowedly
for purposes of drill and exercise. At the same time encampments were
formed, by order of the governor, in other parts of the State. The
governor's adherents in St. Louis intimated that the time for taking
the arsenal had arrived, and the indiscreet young men who made up the
First Brigade openly declared that they only awaited an order from
Gov.

Jackson--an order which they evidently had been led to expect--to attack
the arsenal and possess it, in spite of the feeble opposition they
calculated to meet from 'the Dutch' Home Guards enlisted to defend it. A
few days previously, an agent of the governor had purchased at St.

Louis several hundred kegs of gun-powder, and succeeded, by an adroit
stratagem, in shipping it to Jefferson City. The encampment at St. Louis,
'Camp Jackson,' so called from the governor, was laid off by streets, to
which were assigned the names 'Rue de Beauregard,' and others similarly
significant; and when among the visitors whom curiosity soon began to bring
to the camp a 'Black Republican' was discovered by the soldiers,--and
this epithet was applied to all unconditional Unionists,--he was
treated with unmistakable coldness, if not positive insult.

If additional proof of the hostile designs entertained against
the federal authority by this camp were needed, it was furnished on
Thursday, the 9th, by the reception within the camp of several pieces
of cannon, and several hundred stand of small arms, taken from the federal
arsenal at Baton Rouge, Louisiana, which was then in the possession of
the rebels. These arms were brought to St.

Louis by the steamboat _J.C.
Swon_, the military authorities at Cairo having been deceived by
the packages, which were represented to contain marble slabs. On
the arrival of the _Swon_ at the St. Louis levee, the arms were taken from
her, sent to Camp Jackson, and received there with demonstrations
of triumph.

When Capt. Lyon was entrusted with full command at St. Louis,
President Lincoln had named, in his orders to him, a commission of six
loyal and discreet citizens with whom he should consult in matters
pertaining to the public safety, and with whose counsel he might declare
martial law.

These citizens were John How, Samuel T. Glover, O.D. Filley, Jean J.
Witsig, James O. Broadhead, and Col. Frank P. Blair. The last mentioned--Colonel
Blair--was Capt. Lyon's confidential and constant companion.

They were comrades in arms, and a unit in counsel. Their views were
in full accord as to the necessity of immediately reducing Camp Jackson.
Defiance was daily passing between the marshalling hosts, not face to
face, but through dubious partisans who passed from camp to camp,
flitting like the bats of fable in the confines of conflict. Capt.
Lyon's decision, urged thereto by Col.

Blair, was made without calling a council of the rest of his advisers.
They heard of it, however, and, though brave and loyal men all, they
gathered around him in his quarters at the arsenal, Thursday evening, and
besought him earnestly to change his purpose.

The conference was protracted the livelong night, and did not close
till six o'clock, Friday morning, the 10th. They found Capt.
Lyon inexorable,--the fate of Camp Jackson was decreed. Col. Blair's
regiment was at Jefferson Barracks, ten miles below the arsenal, at
that hour. It was ordered up; and about noon on that memorable
Friday, Capt.

Lyon quietly left the arsenal gate at the head of six thousand troops,
of whom four hundred and fifty were regulars, the remainder United States
Reserve Corps or Home Guards, marched in two columns to Camp Jackson, and
before the State troops could recover from the amazement into which
the appearance of the advancing army threw them, surrounded the camp,
planting his batteries upon the elevations around, at a distance
of five hundred yards, and stationing his infantry in the roads
leading from the grove wherein their tents were pitched.

The State troops were taken completely by surprise; for, although there
had been vague reports current in camp of an intended attack from the
arsenal, the cry of the visitors at the grove, 'They're coming!' 'They're
coming!'

raised just as the first column appeared in sight, found them
strolling leisurely under the trees, chatting with their friends
from the city, or stretched upon the thick green grass, smoking and
reading

.

* * * * *

BEAUFORT DISTRICT,--PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE.

The sovereign State of South Carolina seems from the beginning to
have been actuated by the desire not only to mold its institutions
according to a system differing entirely from that of its sister
States, but even to divide its territory in a peculiar manner, for
which reason we find in it 'districts' taking the place of counties.

The south-west of these bears the name of its principal town, 'Beaufort.'
It is bounded on the west by the Savannah River, and on the south
by the Atlantic.

Its length from north to south is fifty-eight miles, its breadth
thirty-three miles, and it contains about one and a quarter millions
of acres of land and water.

Considered geologically, Beaufort is one of the most remarkable sections
of the United States.

As recent events have brought it so prominently before us, we propose
to consider its history, capacities, and prospects.

From its proximity to the Spanish settlements in the peninsula of
Florida, its beautiful harbors and sounds were early explored and
taken possession of by the Spaniards.

It is now certain they had established a post here called 'Fort St.
Phillip,' at St. Elena,[B] as early as 1566-7; this was probably situated
on the south-western point of St.
Helena Island, and some remains of its entrenchment can still be traced.

From this fort Juan Pardo, its founder, proceeded on an expedition to the
north-west, and explored a considerable part of the present States
of South Carolina and Georgia.

How long the Spaniards remained here is now uncertain, but they long
claimed all this coast as far north as Cape Fear. The French planted a
colony in South Carolina, and gave the name Port Royal to the
harbor and what is now called Broad River; but they were driven off by
the Spaniards, and history is silent as to any incidents of their
rule for a century.

In 1670 a few emigrants arrived in a ship commanded by Capt.
Hilton, and landed at what is now known as 'Hilton's Head,' the south-western
point of Port Royal harbor, which still perpetuates his name. The colony
was under the management of Col. Sayle; but the Spaniards at St. Augustine
still claimed the domains, and the settlers, fearing an attack,
soon removed to the site of Old Charleston, on Ashley River. In 1682,
Lord Cardoss led a small band from Scotland hither, which settled
on Port Royal Island, near the present site of Beaufort.

He claimed co-ordinate authority with the governor and council at
Charleston. During the discussion of this point the Spaniards sent an
armed force and dislodged the English, most of whom returned to their
native country. A permanent settlement was finally made on Port Royal
Island in 1700. The town of Beaufort was laid out in 1717, and an
Episcopal church erected in 1720.

The name was given from a town in Anjou, France, the birthplace of
several of the Huguenot settlers.

For many years the Spaniards threatened the coast as far north as Charleston,
but the settlement increased, and extended over St. Helena and other
islands. Slavery was here coeval with settlement, and the peculiar
institution was so earnestly fostered, that in 1724 it was estimated that
South Carolina contained 18,000 slaves to only 14,000 whites. The
slaves were mostly natives of Africa of recent importation, and were
poorly adapted to clear up the forests and prepare the way for extensive
plantations, but their cost was small, and every year they improved in
capacity and value. In the succeeding half century were laid the fortunes
of the prominent families who have controlled the district, and
often greater interests, to our day.

Grants of land could be had almost for the asking, especially by men of
influence; and fertile islands were given, containing hundreds and sometimes
thousands of acres, to a single family, who have here been monarchs
of all they survey, including hundreds of slaves, till _the Hegira_ or
_flight_ A.D.
1861.

When we take into account the salubrity of the climate and the fertility
of the soil, we must allow that this district has many natural
advantages which can not be excelled by any section of the same
extent in this country.

A considerable part of the district is composed of islands, which are
supposed to be of a comparatively recent formation, many of them
beautiful to the eye, and rich in agricultural facilities; they are
in number upwards of fifty, not less than thirty of them being of
large size.

Upon the sea-coast are Reynolds, Prentice, Chaplins, Eddings, Hilton Head,
Dawfuskie, Turtle, and the Hunting Islands. Behind these lie St. Helena,
Pinckney, Paris, Port Royal, Ladies', Cane, Bermuda, Discane, Bells,
Daltha, Coosa, Morgan, Chissolm, Williams Harbor, Kings, Cahoussue, Fording,
Barnwell, Whale, Delos, Hall, Lemon, Barrataria, Lopes, Hoy, Savage, Long,
Round, and Jones Islands.

These are from one to ten miles in length, and usually a proportional half
in width. St. Helena is over twenty miles in extent, and could well support
an agricultural population of twenty thousand. Port Royal is next in size,
but, being of a more sandy formation, is not so fertile.

These islands are all of an alluvial formation,--the result of the action
of the rivers and the sea. There is no rock of any kind, not
even a pebble stone, to be found in the whole district.

The soil of these islands is composed mostly of a fine sandy loam, very
easily cultivated. In most of them are swamps and marshes, which serve
to furnish muck and other vegetable deposits for fertilizing; but the
idea of furnishing anything to aid the long over-worked soil seems to
these proprietors like returning to the slave some of the earnings
taken from him or his ancestors, and is seldom done till nature
is at last exhausted, and then it is allowed only a few years'
repose.

Situated under the parallel of 32°, there is scarcely a product grown
in our country, of any value, that can not be produced here. Previous to
the Revolution the principal staple for market was indigo, and that
raised in this district always commanded the highest price. It was from
the proceeds of this plant that the planters were enabled for a long
period to purchase slaves and European and northern American
productions.

Soon after the Revolution their attention was turned to cotton; but the
difficulty of separating it from the seed seemed to make it impossible
to furnish it in any profitable quantity, for so slow was the process
then followed that, with the utmost diligence, a negro could not, by
hand labor, clean over a few pounds per day. The genius of Whitney,
however, opened a new era to the cotton planters, who were much
more eager to avail themselves of his invention than to remunerate
him.

It was soon perceived that the cotton raised on these islands was far
superior to that produced in the interior, which is still called Upland,
only to distinguish it from the 'Sea Island.' It was also noticed
that while the common variety produced a seed nearly green with a rough
skin, the seed of the islands soon became black with a smooth skin;
the effect entirely of location and climate, as it soon resumes its
original color when transported back to the interior.

The cultivation of this variety is limited to a tract of country of about
one hundred and fifty miles in length, and not over twenty-five miles
in breadth, mostly on lands adjacent to the salt water, the finest 'grades'
being confined to the islands within this district.

It is true that black-seed cotton is cultivated to some extent along the
coast from Georgetown, S.C., to St.
Augustine, but a great part of it is of an inferior quality and
staple, and brings in the market less than one-half the price of
the real 'Sea Island.'

So far he could identify himself with himself. Then there was
a lapse.

After a time he seemed to wake up again, and waking, to know that he was
at the front, and that he was killed. He did not open his eyes. Light was
not yet his. The clanging pain in his head rang out the rest of his
consciousness. So he lapsed away from consciousness, in unutterable sick
abandon of life.

Bit by bit, like a doom came the necessity to know. He was hit in the
head. It was only a vague surmise at first. But in the swinging of the
pendulum of pain, swinging ever nearer and nearer, to touch him into an
agony of consciousness and a consciousness of agony, gradually the
knowledge emerged--he must be hit in the head--hit on the left brow; if
so, there would be blood--was there blood?--could he feel blood in his
left eye? Then the clanging seemed to burst the membrane of his brain,
like death-madness.

Was there blood on his face? Was hot blood flowing? Or was it dry blood
congealing down his cheek? It took him hours even to ask the question:
time being no more than an agony in darkness, without measurement.

A long time after he had opened his eyes he realized he was seeing
something--something, something, but the effort to recall what was too
great. No, no; no recall!

Were they the stars in the dark sky? Was it possible it was stars in the
dark sky? Stars? The world? Ah, no, he could not know it! Stars and the
world were gone for him, he closed his eyes. No stars, no sky, no world.
No, No! The thick darkness of blood alone. It should be one great lapse
into the thick darkness of blood in agony.

Death, oh, death! The world all blood, and the blood all writhing with
death. The soul like the tiniest little light out on a dark sea, the sea
of blood. And the light guttering, beating, pulsing in a windless storm,
wishing it could go out, yet unable.

There had been life. There had been Winifred and his children. But the
frail death-agony effort to catch at straws of memory, straws of life
from the past, brought on too great a nausea. No, No! No Winifred, no
children. No world, no people. Better the agony of dissolution ahead than
the nausea of the effort backwards. Better the terrible work should go
forward, the dissolving into the black sea of death, in the extremity of
dissolution, than that there should be any reaching back towards life. To
forget! To forget! Utterly, utterly to forget, in the great forgetting of
death. To break the core and the unit of life, and to lapse out on the
great darkness. Only that. To break the clue, and mingle and commingle
with the one darkness, without afterwards or forwards. Let the black sea
of death itself solve the problem of futurity. Let the will of man break
and give up.

What was that? A light! A terrible light! Was it figures? Was it legs of
a horse colossal--colossal above him: huge, huge?

The Germans heard a slight noise, and started. Then, in the glare of a
light-bomb, by the side of the heap of earth thrown up by the shell, they
saw the dead face.


_Tickets, Please_


There is in the Midlands a single-line tramway system which boldly
leaves the county town and plunges off into the black, industrial
countryside, up hill and down dale, through the long ugly villages of
workmen's houses, over canals and railways, past churches perched high
and nobly over the smoke and shadows, through stark, grimy cold little
market-places, tilting away in a rush past cinemas and shops down to the
hollow where the collieries are, then up again, past a little rural
church, under the ash trees, on in a rush to the terminus, the last
little ugly place of industry, the cold little town that shivers on the
edge of the wild, gloomy country beyond. There the green and creamy
coloured tram-car seems to pause and purr with curious satisfaction. But
in a few minutes--the clock on the turret of the Co-operative Wholesale
Society's Shops gives the time--away it starts once more on the
adventure. Again there are the reckless swoops downhill, bouncing the
loops: again the chilly wait in the hill-top market-place: again the
breathless slithering round the precipitous drop under the church: again
the patient halts at the loops, waiting for the outcoming car: so on and
on, for two long hours, till at last the city looms beyond the fat
gas-works, the narrow factories draw near, we are in the sordid streets
of the great town, once more we sidle to a standstill at our terminus,
abashed by the great crimson and cream-coloured city cars, but still
perky, jaunty, somewhat dare-devil, green as a jaunty sprig of parsley
out of a black colliery garden.

To ride on these cars is always an adventure. Since we are in war-time,
the drivers are men unfit for active service: cripples and hunchbacks.
So they have the spirit of the devil in them. The ride becomes a
steeple-chase. Hurray! we have leapt in a clear jump over the canal
bridges--now for the four-lane corner. With a shriek and a trail of
sparks we are clear again. To be sure, a tram often leaps the rails--but
what matter! It sits in a ditch till other trams come to haul it out. It
is quite common for a car, packed with one solid mass of living people,
to come to a dead halt in the midst of unbroken blackness, the heart of
nowhere on a dark night, and for the driver and the girl conductor to
call, 'All get off--car's on fire!' Instead, however, of rushing out in a
panic, the passengers stolidly reply: 'Get on--get on! We're not coming
out. We're stopping where we are. Push on, George.' So till flames
actually appear.

The reason for this reluctance to dismount is that the nights are
howlingly cold, black, and windswept, and a car is a haven of refuge.
From village to village the miners travel, for a change of cinema, of
girl, of pub. The trams are desperately packed. Who is going to risk
himself in the black gulf outside, to wait perhaps an hour for another
tram, then to see the forlorn notice 'Depot Only', because there is
something wrong! Or to greet a unit of three bright cars all so tight
with people that they sail past with a howl of derision. Trams that pass
in the night.

This, the most dangerous tram-service in England, as the authorities
themselves declare, with pride, is entirely conducted by girls, and
driven by rash young men, a little crippled, or by delicate young men,
who creep forward in terror. The girls are fearless young hussies. In
their ugly blue uniform, skirts up to their knees, shapeless old
peaked caps on their heads, they have all the _sang-froid_ of an old
non-commissioned officer. With a tram packed with howling colliers,
roaring hymns downstairs and a sort of antiphony of obscenities upstairs,
the lasses are perfectly at their ease. They pounce on the youths who try
to evade their ticket-machine. They push off the men at the end of their
distance. They are not going to be done in the eye--not they. They fear
nobody--and everybody fears them.

'Hello, Annie!'

'Hello, Ted!'

'Oh, mind my corn, Miss Stone. It's my belief you've got a heart of
stone, for you've trod on it again.'

'You should keep it in your pocket,' replies Miss Stone, and she goes
sturdily upstairs in her high boots.

'Tickets, please.'

She is peremptory, suspicious, and ready to hit first. She can hold her
own against ten thousand. The step of that tram-car is her Thermopylae.

Therefore, there is a certain wild romance aboard these cars--and in the
sturdy bosom of Annie herself. The time for soft romance is in the
morning, between ten o'clock and one, when things are rather slack: that
is, except market-day and Saturday. Thus Annie has time to look about
her. Then she often hops off her car and into a shop where she has spied
something, while the driver chats in the main road. There is very good
feeling between the girls and the drivers. Are they not companions in
peril, shipments aboard this careering vessel of a tram-car, for ever
rocking on the waves of a stormy land?

Then, also, during the easy hours, the inspectors are most in evidence.
For some reason, everybody employed in this tram-service is young: there
are no grey heads. It would not do. Therefore the inspectors are of the
right age, and one, the chief, is also good-looking. See him stand on a
wet, gloomy morning, in his long oil-skin, his peaked cap well down over
his eyes, waiting to board a car. His face is ruddy, his small brown
moustache is weathered, he has a faint impudent smile. Fairly tall and
agile, even in his waterproof, he springs aboard a car and greets Annie.

'Hello, Annie! Keeping the wet out?'

'Trying to.'

There are only two people in the car. Inspecting is soon over. Then for a
long and impudent chat on the foot-board, a good, easy, twelve-mile chat.

The inspector's name is John Thomas Raynor--always called John Thomas,
except sometimes, in malice, Coddy. His face sets in fury when he is
addressed, from a distance, with this abbreviation. There is considerable
scandal about John Thomas in half a dozen villages. He flirts with the
girl conductors in the morning, and walks out with them in the dark
night, when they leave their tram-car at the depot. Of course, the girls
quit the service frequently. Then he flirts and walks out with the
newcomer: always providing she is sufficiently attractive, and that she
will consent to walk. It is remarkable, however, that most of the girls
are quite comely, they are all young, and this roving life aboard the car
gives them a sailor's dash and recklessness. What matter how they behave
when the ship is in port. Tomorrow they will be aboard again.

Annie, however, was something of a Tartar, and her sharp tongue had kept
John Thomas at arm's length for many months. Perhaps, therefore, she
liked him all the more: for he always came up smiling, with impudence.
She watched him vanquish one girl, then another. She could tell by the
movement of his mouth and eyes, when he flirted with her in the morning,
that he had been walking out with this lass, or the other, the night
before. A fine cock-of-the-walk he was. She could sum him up pretty well.

In this subtle antagonism they knew each other like old friends, they
were as shrewd with one another almost as man and wife. But Annie had
always kept him sufficiently at arm's length. Besides, she had a boy of
her own.

The Statutes fair, however, came in November, at Bestwood. It happened
that Annie had the Monday night off. It was a drizzling ugly night, yet
she dressed herself up and went to the fair ground. She was alone, but
she expected soon to find a pal of some sort.

The roundabouts were veering round and grinding out their music, the side
shows were making as much commotion as possible. In the coco-nut shies
there were no coco-nuts, but artificial war-time substitutes, which the
lads declared were fastened into the irons. There was a sad decline in
brilliance and luxury. None the less, the ground was muddy as ever, there
was the same crush, the press of faces lighted up by the flares and the
electric lights, the same smell of naphtha and a few fried potatoes, and
of electricity.

Who should be the first to greet Miss Annie on the showground but John
Thomas? He had a black overcoat buttoned up to his chin, and a tweed cap
pulled down over his brows, his face between was ruddy and smiling and
handy as ever. She knew so well the way his mouth moved.

She was very glad to have a 'boy'. To be at the Statutes without a fellow
was no fun. Instantly, like the gallant he was, he took her on the
dragons, grim-toothed, round-about switchbacks. It was not nearly so
exciting as a tram-car actually. But, then, to be seated in a shaking,
green dragon, uplifted above the sea of bubble faces, careering in a
rickety fashion in the lower heavens, whilst John Thomas leaned over her,
his cigarette in his mouth, was after all the right style. She was a
plump, quick, alive little creature. So she was quite excited and happy.

John Thomas made her stay on for the next round. And therefore she could
hardly for shame repulse him when he put his arm round her and drew her a
little nearer to him, in a very warm and cuddly manner. Besides, he was
fairly discreet, he kept his movement as hidden as possible. She looked
down, and saw that his red, clean hand was out of sight of the crowd. And
they knew each other so well. So they warmed up to the fair.

After the dragons they went on the horses. John Thomas paid each time, so
she could but be complaisant. He, of course, sat astride on the outer
horse--named 'Black Bess'--and she sat sideways, towards him, on the
inner horse--named 'Wildfire'. But of course John Thomas was not going to
sit discreetly on 'Black Bess', holding the brass bar. Round they spun
and heaved, in the light. And round he swung on his wooden steed,
flinging one leg across her mount, and perilously tipping up and down,
across the space, half lying back, laughing at her. He was perfectly
happy; she was afraid her hat was on one side, but she was excited.

He threw quoits on a table, and won for her two large, pale-blue
hat-pins. And then, hearing the noise of the cinemas, announcing another
performance, they climbed the boards and went in.

Of course, during these performances pitch darkness falls from time to
time, when the machine goes wrong. Then there is a wild whooping, and a
loud smacking of simulated kisses. In these moments John Thomas drew
Annie towards him. After all, he had a wonderfully warm, cosy way of
holding a girl with his arm, he seemed to make such a nice fit. And,
after all, it was pleasant to be so held: so very comforting and cosy and
nice. He leaned over her and she felt his breath on her hair; she knew he
wanted to kiss her on the lips. And, after all, he was so warm and she
fitted in to him so softly. After all, she wanted him to touch her lips.

But the light sprang up; she also started electrically, and put her hat
straight. He left his arm lying nonchalantly behind her. Well, it was
fun, it was exciting to be at the Statutes with John Thomas.

When the cinema was over they went for a walk across the dark, damp
fields. He had all the arts of love-making. He was especially good at
holding a girl, when he sat with her on a stile in the black, drizzling
darkness. He seemed to be holding her in space, against his own warmth
and gratification. And his kisses were soft and slow and searching.

So Annie walked out with John Thomas, though she kept her own boy
dangling in the distance. Some of the tram-girls chose to be huffy. But
there, you must take things as you find them, in this life.

There was no mistake about it, Annie liked John Thomas a good deal. She
felt so rich and warm in herself whenever he was near. And John Thomas
really liked Annie, more than usual. The soft, melting way in which she
could flow into a fellow, as if she melted into his very bones, was
something rare and good. He fully appreciated this.

But with a developing acquaintance there began a developing intimacy.
Annie wanted to consider him a person, a man; she wanted to take an
intelligent interest in him, and to have an intelligent response. She did
not want a mere nocturnal presence, which was what he was so far. And she
prided herself that he could not leave her.

Here she made a mistake. John Thomas intended to remain a nocturnal
presence; he had no idea of becoming an all-round individual to her. When
she started to take an intelligent interest in him and his life and his
character, he sheered off. He hated intelligent interest. And he knew
that the only way to stop it was to avoid it. The possessive female was
aroused in Annie. So he left her.

It is no use saying she was not surprised. She was at first startled,
thrown out of her count. For she had been so _very_ sure of holding him.
For a while she was staggered, and everything became uncertain to her.
Then she wept with fury, indignation, desolation, and misery. Then she
had a spasm of despair. And then, when he came, still impudently, on to
her car, still familiar, but letting her see by the movement of his head
that he had gone away to somebody else for the time being, and was
enjoying pastures new, then she determined to have her own back.

She had a very shrewd idea what girls John Thomas had taken out. She went
to Nora Purdy. Nora was a tall, rather pale, but well-built girl, with
beautiful yellow hair. She was rather secretive.

'Hey!' said Annie, accosting her; then softly, 'Who's John Thomas on with
now?'

'I don't know,' said Nora.

'Why tha does,' said Annie, ironically lapsing into dialect. 'Tha knows
as well as I do.'

'Well, I do, then,' said Nora. 'It isn't me, so don't bother.'

'It's Cissy Meakin, isn't it?'

'It is, for all I know.'

'Hasn't he got a face on him!' said Annie. 'I don't half like his cheek.
I could knock him off the foot-board when he comes round at me.'

'He'll get dropped-on one of these days,' said Nora.

'Ay, he will, when somebody makes up their mind to drop it on him. I
should like to see him taken down a peg or two, shouldn't you?'

'I shouldn't mind,' said Nora.

'You've got quite as much cause to as I have,' said Annie. 'But we'll
drop on him one of these days, my girl. What? Don't you want to?'

'I don't mind,' said Nora.

But as a matter of fact, Nora was much more vindictive than Annie.

One by one Annie went the round of the old flames. It so happened that
Cissy Meakin left the tramway service in quite a short time. Her mother
made her leave. Then John Thomas was on the _qui-vive_. He cast his eyes
over his old flock. And his eyes lighted on Annie. He thought she would
be safe now. Besides, he liked her.

She arranged to walk home with him on Sunday night. It so happened that
her car would be in the depot at half past nine: the last car would come
in at 10.15. So John Thomas was to wait for her there.

At the depot the girls had a little waiting-room of their own. It was
quite rough, but cosy, with a fire and an oven and a mirror, and table
and wooden chairs. The half dozen girls who knew John Thomas only too
well had arranged to take service this Sunday afternoon. So, as the cars
began to come in, early, the girls dropped into the waiting-room. And
instead of hurrying off home, they sat around the fire and had a cup of
tea. Outside was the darkness and lawlessness of wartime.

John Thomas came on the car after Annie, at about a quarter to ten. He
poked his head easily into the girls' waiting-room.

'Prayer-meeting?' he asked.

'Ay,' said Laura Sharp. 'Ladies only.'

'That's me!' said John Thomas. It was one of his favourite exclamations.

'Shut the door, boy,' said Muriel Baggaley.

'On which side of me?' said John Thomas.

'Which tha likes,' said Polly Birkin.

He had come in and closed the door behind him. The girls moved in their
circle, to make a place for him near the fire. He took off his great-coat
and pushed back his hat.

'Who handles the teapot?' he said.

Nora Purdy silently poured him out a cup of tea.

'Want a bit o' my bread and drippin'?' said Muriel Baggaley to him.

'Ay, give us a bit.'

And he began to eat his piece of bread.

'There's no place like home, girls,' he said.

They all looked at him as he uttered this piece of impudence. He seemed
to be sunning himself in the presence of so many damsels.

'Especially if you're not afraid to go home in the dark,' said Laura
Sharp.

'Me! By myself I am.'

They sat till they heard the last tram come in. In a few minutes Emma
Houselay entered.

'Come on, my old duck!' cried Polly Birkin.

'It _is_ perishing,' said Emma, holding her fingers to the fire.

'But--I'm afraid to, go home in, the dark,' sang Laura Sharp, the tune
having got into her mind.

'Who're you going with tonight, John Thomas?' asked Muriel Baggaley,
coolly.

'Tonight?' said John Thomas. 'Oh, I'm going home by myself tonight--all
on my lonely-O.'

'That's me!' said Nora Purdy, using his own ejaculation.

The girls laughed shrilly.

'Me as well, Nora,' said John Thomas.

'Don't know what you mean,' said Laura.

'Yes, I'm toddling,' said he, rising and reaching for his overcoat.

'Nay,' said Polly. 'We're all here waiting for you.'

'We've got to be up in good time in the morning,' he said, in the
benevolent official manner.

They all laughed.

'Nay,' said Muriel. 'Don't leave us all lonely, John Thomas. Take one!'

'I'll take the lot, if you like,' he responded gallantly.

'That you won't either,' said Muriel, 'Two's company; seven's too much of
a good thing.'

'Nay--take one,' said Laura. 'Fair and square, all above board, and say
which.'

'Ay,' cried Annie, speaking for the first time. 'Pick, John Thomas; let's
hear thee.'

'Nay,' he said. 'I'm going home quiet tonight. Feeling good, for once.'

'Whereabouts?' said Annie. 'Take a good 'un, then. But tha's got to take
one of us!'

'Nay, how can I take one,' he said, laughing uneasily. 'I don't want to
make enemies.'

'You'd only make _one_' said Annie.

'The chosen _one_,' added Laura.

'Oh, my! Who said girls!' exclaimed John Thomas, again turning, as if to
escape. 'Well--good-night.'

'Nay, you've got to make your pick,' said Muriel. 'Turn your face to the
wall, and say which one touches you. Go on--we shall only just touch your
back--one of us. Go on--turn your face to the wall, and don't look, and
say which one touches you.'

He was uneasy, mistrusting them. Yet he had not the courage to break
away. They pushed him to a wall and stood him there with his face to it.
Behind his back they all grimaced, tittering. He looked so comical. He
looked around uneasily.

'Go on!' he cried.

'You're looking--you're looking!' they shouted.

He turned his head away. And suddenly, with a movement like a swift cat,
Annie went forward and fetched him a box on the side of the head that
sent his cap flying and himself staggering. He started round.

But at Annie's signal they all flew at him, slapping him, pinching him,
pulling his hair, though more in fun than in spite or anger. He, however,
saw red. His blue eyes flamed with strange fear as well as fury, and he
butted through the girls to the door. It was locked. He wrenched at it.
Roused, alert, the girls stood round and looked at him. He faced them, at
bay. At that moment they were rather horrifying to him, as they stood in
their short uniforms. He was distinctly afraid.

'Come on, John Thomas! Come on! Choose!' said Annie.

'What are you after? Open the door,' he said.

'We shan't--not till you've chosen!' said Muriel.

'Chosen what?' he said.

'Chosen the one you're going to marry,' she replied.

He hesitated a moment.

'Open the blasted door,' he said, 'and get back to your senses.' He spoke
with official authority.

'You've got to choose!' cried the girls.

'Come on!' cried Annie, looking him in the eye.' Come on! Come on!'

He went forward, rather vaguely. She had taken off her belt, and swinging
it, she fetched him a sharp blow over the head with the buckle end. He
sprang and seized her. But immediately the other girls rushed upon him,
pulling and tearing and beating him. Their blood was now thoroughly up.
He was their sport now. They were going to have their own back, out of
him. Strange, wild creatures, they hung on him and rushed at him to bear
him down. His tunic was torn right up the back, Nora had hold at the back
of his collar, and was actually strangling him. Luckily the button burst.
He struggled in a wild frenzy of fury and terror, almost mad terror. His
tunic was simply torn off his back, his shirt-sleeves were torn away, his
arms were naked. The girls rushed at him, clenched their hands on him and
pulled at him: or they rushed at him and pushed him, butted him with all
their might: or they struck him wild blows. He ducked and cringed and
struck sideways. They became more intense.

At last he was down. They rushed on him, kneeling on him. He had neither
breath nor strength to move. His face was bleeding with a long scratch,
his brow was bruised.

Annie knelt on him, the other girls knelt and hung on to him. Their faces
were flushed, their hair wild, their eyes were all glittering strangely.
He lay at last quite still, with face averted, as an animal lies when it
is defeated and at the mercy of the captor. Sometimes his eye glanced
back at the wild faces of the girls. His breast rose heavily, his wrists
were torn.

'Now, then, my fellow!' gasped Annie at length. 'Now then--now--'

At the sound of her terrifying, cold triumph, he suddenly started to
struggle as an animal might, but the girls threw themselves upon him with
unnatural strength and power, forcing him down.

'Yes--now, then!' gasped Annie at length.

And there was a dead silence, in which the thud of heart-beating was to
be heard. It was a suspense of pure silence in every soul.

'Now you know where you are,' said Annie.

The sight of his white, bare arm maddened the girls. He lay in a kind of
trance of fear and antagonism. They felt themselves filled with
supernatural strength.

Suddenly Polly started to laugh--to giggle wildly--helplessly--and Emma
and Muriel joined in. But Annie and Nora and Laura remained the same,
tense, watchful, with gleaming eyes. He winced away from these eyes.

'Yes,' said Annie, in a curious low tone, secret and deadly. 'Yes! You've
got it now! You know what you've done, don't you? You know what you've
done.'

He made no sound nor sign, but lay with bright, averted eyes, and
averted, bleeding face.

'You ought to be _killed_, that's what you ought,' said Annie, tensely.
'You ought to be _killed_.' And there was a terrifying lust in her voice.

Polly was ceasing to laugh, and giving long-drawn Oh-h-hs and sighs as
she came to herself.

'He's got to choose,' she said vaguely.

'Oh, yes, he has,' said Laura, with vindictive decision.

'Do you hear--do you hear?' said Annie. And with a sharp movement, that
made him wince, she turned his face to her.

'Do you hear?' she repeated, shaking him.

But he was quite dumb. She fetched him a sharp slap on the face. He
started, and his eyes widened. Then his face darkened with defiance,
after all.

'Do you hear?' she repeated.

He only looked at her with hostile eyes.

'Speak!' she said, putting her face devilishly near his.

'What?' he said, almost overcome.

'You've got to _choose_!' she cried, as if it were some terrible menace,
and as if it hurt her that she could not exact more.

'What?' he said, in fear.

'Choose your girl, Coddy. You've got to choose her now. And you'll get
your neck broken if you play any more of your tricks, my boy. You're
settled now.'

There was a pause. Again he averted his face. He was cunning in his
overthrow. He did not give in to them really--no, not if they tore him to
bits.

'All right, then,' he said, 'I choose Annie.' His voice was strange and
full of malice. Annie let go of him as if he had been a hot coal.

'He's chosen Annie!' said the girls in chorus.

'Me!' cried Annie. She was still kneeling, but away from him. He was
still lying prostrate, with averted face. The girls grouped uneasily
around.

'Me!' repeated Annie, with a terrible bitter accent.

Then she got up, drawing away from him with strange disgust and
bitterness.

'I wouldn't touch him,' she said.

But her face quivered with a kind of agony, she seemed as if she would
fall. The other girls turned aside. He remained lying on the floor, with
his torn clothes and bleeding, averted face.

'Oh, if he's chosen--' said Polly.

'I don't want him--he can choose again,' said Annie, with the same rather
bitter hopelessness.

'Get up,' said Polly, lifting his shoulder. 'Get up.'

He rose slowly, a strange, ragged, dazed creature. The girls eyed him
from a distance, curiously, furtively, dangerously.

'Who wants him?' cried Laura, roughly.

'Nobody,' they answered, with contempt. Yet each one of them waited for
him to look at her, hoped he would look at her. All except Annie, and
something was broken in her.

He, however, kept his face closed and averted from them all. There was a
silence of the end. He picked up the torn pieces of his tunic, without
knowing what to do with them. The girls stood about uneasily, flushed,
panting, tidying their hair and their dress unconsciously, and watching
him. He looked at none of them. He espied his cap in a corner, and went
and picked it up. He put it on his head, and one of the girls burst into
a shrill, hysteric laugh at the sight he presented. He, however, took no
heed, but went straight to where his overcoat hung on a peg. The girls
moved away from contact with him as if he had been an electric wire. He
put on his coat and buttoned it down. Then he rolled his tunic-rags into
a bundle, and stood before the locked door, dumbly.

'Open the door, somebody,' said Laura.

'Annie's got the key,' said one.

Annie silently offered the key to the girls. Nora unlocked the door.

'Tit for tat, old man,' she said. 'Show yourself a man, and don't bear a
grudge.'

But without a word or sign he had opened the door and gone, his face
closed, his head dropped.

'That'll learn him,' said Laura.

'Coddy!' said Nora.

'Shut up, for God's sake!' cried Annie fiercely, as if in torture.

'Well, I'm about ready to go, Polly. Look sharp!' said Muriel.

The girls were all anxious to be off. They were tidying themselves
hurriedly, with mute, stupefied faces.


_The Blind Man_


Isabel Pervin was listening for two sounds--for the sound of wheels on
the drive outside and for the noise of her husband's footsteps in the
hall. Her dearest and oldest friend, a man who seemed almost
indispensable to her living, would drive up in the rainy dusk of the
closing November day. The trap had gone to fetch him from the station.
And her husband, who had been blinded in Flanders, and who had a
disfiguring mark on his brow, would be coming in from the outhouses.

He had been home for a year now. He was totally blind. Yet they had been
very happy. The Grange was Maurice's own place. The back was a farmstead,
and the Wernhams, who occupied the rear premises, acted as farmers.
Isabel lived with her husband in the handsome rooms in front. She and he
had been almost entirely alone together since he was wounded. They talked
and sang and read together in a wonderful and unspeakable intimacy. Then
she reviewed books for a Scottish newspaper, carrying on her old
interest, and he occupied himself a good deal with the farm. Sightless,
he could still discuss everything with Wernham, and he could also do a
good deal of work about the place--menial work, it is true, but it gave
him satisfaction. He milked the cows, carried in the pails, turned the
separator, attended to the pigs and horses. Life was still very full and
strangely serene for the blind man, peaceful with the almost
incomprehensible peace of immediate contact in darkness. With his wife he
had a whole world, rich and real and invisible.

They were newly and remotely happy. He did not even regret the loss of
his sight in these times of dark, palpable joy. A certain exultance
swelled his soul.

But as time wore on, sometimes the rich glamour would leave them.
Sometimes, after months of this intensity, a sense of burden overcame
Isabel, a weariness, a terrible _ennui_, in that silent house approached
between a colonnade of tall-shafted pines. Then she felt she would go
mad, for she could not bear it. And sometimes he had devastating fits of
depression, which seemed to lay waste his whole being. It was worse than
depression--a black misery, when his own life was a torture to him, and
when his presence was unbearable to his wife. The dread went down to the
roots of her soul as these black days recurred. In a kind of panic she
tried to wrap herself up still further in her husband. She forced the old
spontaneous cheerfulness and joy to continue. But the effort it cost her
was almost too much. She knew she could not keep it up. She felt she
would scream with the strain, and would give anything, anything, to
escape. She longed to possess her husband utterly; it gave her inordinate
joy to have him entirely to herself. And yet, when again he was gone in a
black and massive misery, she could not bear him, she could not bear
herself; she wished she could be snatched away off the earth altogether,
anything rather than live at this cost.

Dazed, she schemed for a way out. She invited friends, she tried to give
him some further connexion with the outer world. But it was no good.
After all their joy and suffering, after their dark, great year of
blindness and solitude and unspeakable nearness, other people seemed to
them both shallow, prattling, rather impertinent. Shallow prattle seemed
presumptuous. He became impatient and irritated, she was wearied. And so
they lapsed into their solitude again. For they preferred it.

But now, in a few weeks' time, her second baby would be born. The first
had died, an infant, when her husband first went out to France. She
looked with joy and relief to the coming of the second. It would be her
salvation. But also she felt some anxiety. She was thirty years old, her
husband was a year younger. They both wanted the child very much. Yet she
could not help feeling afraid. She had her husband on her hands, a
terrible joy to her, and a terrifying burden. The child would occupy her
love and attention. And then, what of Maurice? What would he do? If only
she could feel that he, too, would be at peace and happy when the child
came! She did so want to luxuriate in a rich, physical satisfaction of
maternity. But the man, what would he do? How could she provide for him,
how avert those shattering black moods of his, which destroyed them both?

She sighed with fear. But at this time Bertie Reid wrote to Isabel. He
was her old friend, a second or third cousin, a Scotchman, as she was a
Scotchwoman. They had been brought up near to one another, and all her
life he had been her friend, like a brother, but better than her own
brothers. She loved him--though not in the marrying sense. There was a
sort of kinship between them, an affinity. They understood one another
instinctively. But Isabel would never have thought of marrying Bertie. It
would have seemed like marrying in her own family.

Bertie was a barrister and a man of letters, a Scotchman of the
intellectual type, quick, ironical, sentimental, and on his knees before
the woman he adored but did not want to marry. Maurice Pervin was
different. He came of a good old country family--the Grange was not a
very great distance from Oxford. He was passionate, sensitive, perhaps
over-sensitive, wincing--a big fellow with heavy limbs and a forehead
that flushed painfully. For his mind was slow, as if drugged by the
strong provincial blood that beat in his veins. He was very sensitive to
his own mental slowness, his feelings being quick and acute. So that he
was just the opposite to Bertie, whose mind was much quicker than his
emotions, which were not so very fine.

From the first the two men did not like each other. Isabel felt that they
_ought_ to get on together. But they did not. She felt that if only each
could have the clue to the other there would be such a rare understanding
between them. It did not come off, however. Bertie adopted a slightly
ironical attitude, very offensive to Maurice, who returned the Scotch
irony with English resentment, a resentment which deepened sometimes into
stupid hatred.

This was a little puzzling to Isabel. However, she accepted it in the
course of things. Men were made freakish and unreasonable. Therefore,
when Maurice was going out to France for the second time, she felt that,
for her husband's sake, she must discontinue her friendship with Bertie.
She wrote to the barrister to this effect. Bertram Reid simply replied
that in this, as in all other matters, he must obey her wishes, if these
were indeed her wishes.

For nearly two years nothing had passed between the two friends. Isabel
rather gloried in the fact; she had no compunction. She had one great
article of faith, which was, that husband and wife should be so important
to one another, that the rest of the world simply did not count. She and
Maurice were husband and wife. They loved one another. They would have
children. Then let everybody and everything else fade into insignificance
outside this connubial felicity. She professed herself quite happy and
ready to receive Maurice's friends. She was happy and ready: the happy
wife, the ready woman in possession. Without knowing why, the friends
retired abashed and came no more. Maurice, of course, took as much
satisfaction in this connubial absorption as Isabel did.

He shared in Isabel's literary activities, she cultivated a real interest
in agriculture and cattle-raising. For she, being at heart perhaps an
emotional enthusiast, always cultivated the practical side of life, and
prided herself on her mastery of practical affairs. Thus the husband and
wife had spent the five years of their married life. The last had been
one of blindness and unspeakable intimacy. And now Isabel felt a great
indifference coming over her, a sort of lethargy. She wanted to be
allowed to bear her child in peace, to nod by the fire and drift vaguely,
physically, from day to day. Maurice was like an ominous thunder-cloud.
She had to keep waking up to remember him.

When a little note came from Bertie, asking if he were to put up a
tombstone to their dead friendship, and speaking of the real pain he felt
on account of her husband's loss of sight, she felt a pang, a fluttering
agitation of re-awakening. And she read the letter to Maurice.

'Ask him to come down,' he said.

'Ask Bertie to come here!' she re-echoed.

'Yes--if he wants to.'

Isabel paused for a few moments.

'I know he wants to--he'd only be too glad,' she replied. 'But what about
you, Maurice? How would you like it?'

'I should like it.'

'Well--in that case--But I thought you didn't care for him--'

'Oh, I don't know. I might think differently of him now,' the blind man
replied. It was rather abstruse to Isabel.

'Well, dear,' she said, 'if you're quite sure--'

'I'm sure enough. Let him come,' said Maurice.

So Bertie was coming, coming this evening, in the November rain and
darkness. Isabel was agitated, racked with her old restlessness and
indecision. She had always suffered from this pain of doubt, just an
agonizing sense of uncertainty. It had begun to pass off, in the lethargy
of maternity. Now it returned, and she resented it. She struggled as
usual to maintain her calm, composed, friendly bearing, a sort of mask
she wore over all her body.

A woman had lighted a tall lamp beside the table, and spread the cloth.
The long dining-room was dim, with its elegant but rather severe pieces
of old furniture. Only the round table glowed softly under the light. It
had a rich, beautiful effect. The white cloth glistened and dropped its
heavy, pointed lace corners almost to the carpet, the china was old and
handsome, creamy-yellow, with a blotched pattern of harsh red and deep
blue, the cups large and bell-shaped, the teapot gallant. Isabel looked
at it with superficial appreciation.

Her nerves were hurting her. She looked automatically again at the high,
uncurtained windows. In the last dusk she could just perceive outside a
huge fir-tree swaying its boughs: it was as if she thought it rather
than saw it. The rain came flying on the window panes. Ah, why had she
no peace? These two men, why did they tear at her? Why did they not
come--why was there this suspense?

She sat in a lassitude that was really suspense and irritation. Maurice,
at least, might come in--there was nothing to keep him out. She rose to
her feet. Catching sight of her reflection in a mirror, she glanced at
herself with a slight smile of recognition, as if she were an old friend
to herself. Her face was oval and calm, her nose a little arched. Her
neck made a beautiful line down to her shoulder. With hair knotted
loosely behind, she had something of a warm, maternal look. Thinking this
of herself, she arched her eyebrows and her rather heavy eyelids, with a
little flicker of a smile, and for a moment her grey eyes looked amused
and wicked, a little sardonic, out of her transfigured Madonna face.

Then, resuming her air of womanly patience--she was really fatally
self-determined--she went with a little jerk towards the door. Her eyes
were slightly reddened.

She passed down the wide hall, and through a door at the end. Then she
was in the farm premises. The scent of dairy, and of farm-kitchen, and of
farm-yard and of leather almost overcame her: but particularly the scent
of dairy. They had been scalding out the pans. The flagged passage in
front of her was dark, puddled and wet. Light came out from the open
kitchen door. She went forward and stood in the doorway. The farm-people
were at tea, seated at a little distance from her, round a long, narrow
table, in the centre of which stood a white lamp. Ruddy faces, ruddy
hands holding food, red mouths working, heads bent over the tea-cups:
men, land-girls, boys: it was tea-time, feeding-time. Some faces caught
sight of her. Mrs. Wernham, going round behind the chairs with a large
black teapot, halting slightly in her walk, was not aware of her for a
moment. Then she turned suddenly.

'Oh, is it Madam!' she exclaimed. 'Come in, then, come in! We're at tea.'
And she dragged forward a chair.

'No, I won't come in,' said Isabel, 'I'm afraid I interrupt your meal.'

'No--no--not likely, Madam, not likely.'

'Hasn't Mr. Pervin come in, do you know?'

'I'm sure I couldn't say! Missed him, have you, Madam?'

'No, I only wanted him to come in,' laughed Isabel, as if shyly.

'Wanted him, did ye? Get you, boy--get up, now--'

Mrs. Wernham knocked one of the boys on the shoulder. He began to scrape
to his feet, chewing largely.

'I believe he's in top stable,' said another face from the table.

'Ah! No, don't get up. I'm going myself,' said Isabel.

'Don't you go out of a dirty night like this. Let the lad go. Get along
wi' ye, boy,' said Mrs. Wernham.

'No, no,' said Isabel, with a decision that was always obeyed. 'Go on
with your tea, Tom. I'd like to go across to the stable, Mrs. Wernham.'

'Did ever you hear tell!' exclaimed the woman.

'Isn't the trap late?' asked Isabel.

'Why, no,' said Mrs. Wernham, peering into the distance at the tall, dim
clock. 'No, Madam--we can give it another quarter or twenty minutes yet,
good--yes, every bit of a quarter.'

'Ah! It seems late when darkness falls so early,' said Isabel.

'It do, that it do. Bother the days, that they draw in so,' answered Mrs.
Wernham.' Proper miserable!'

'They are,' said Isabel, withdrawing.

She pulled on her overshoes, wrapped a large tartan shawl around her, put
on a man's felt hat, and ventured out along the causeways of the first
yard. It was very dark. The wind was roaring in the great elms behind the
outhouses. When she came to the second yard the darkness seemed deeper.
She was unsure of her footing. She wished she had brought a lantern. Rain
blew against her. Half she liked it, half she felt unwilling to battle.

She reached at last the just visible door of the stable. There was no
sign of a light anywhere. Opening the upper half, she looked in: into a
simple well of darkness. The smell of horses, and ammonia, and of warmth
was startling to her, in that full night. She listened with all her ears,
but could hear nothing save the night, and the stirring of a horse.

'Maurice!' she called, softly and musically, though she was afraid.
'Maurice--are you there?'

Nothing came from the darkness. She knew the rain and wind blew in upon
the horses, the hot animal life. Feeling it wrong, she entered the
stable, and drew the lower half of the door shut, holding the upper part
close. She did not stir, because she was aware of the presence of the
dark hindquarters of the horses, though she could not see them, and she
was afraid. Something wild stirred in her heart.

She listened intensely. Then she heard a small noise in the distance--far
away, it seemed--the chink of a pan, and a man's voice speaking a brief
word. It would be Maurice, in the other part of the stable. She stood
motionless, waiting for him to come through the partition door. The
horses were so terrifyingly near to her, in the invisible.

The loud jarring of the inner door-latch made her start; the door was
opened. She could hear and feel her husband entering and invisibly
passing among the horses near to her, in darkness as they were, actively
intermingled. The rather low sound of his voice as he spoke to the horses
came velvety to her nerves. How near he was, and how invisible! The
darkness seemed to be in a strange swirl of violent life, just upon her.
She turned giddy.

Her presence of mind made her call, quietly and musically:

'Maurice! Maurice--dea-ar!'

'Yes,' he answered. 'Isabel?'

She saw nothing, and the sound of his voice seemed to touch her.

'Hello!' she answered cheerfully, straining her eyes to see him. He was
still busy, attending to the horses near her, but she saw only darkness.
It made her almost desperate.

'Won't you come in, dear?' she said.

'Yes, I'm coming. Just half a minute. _Stand over--now_! Trap's not come,
has it?'

'Not yet,' said Isabel.

His voice was pleasant and ordinary, but it had a slight suggestion of
the stable to her. She wished he would come away. Whilst he was so
utterly invisible she was afraid of him.

'How's the time?' he asked.

'Not yet six,' she replied. She disliked to answer into the dark.
Presently he came very near to her, and she retreated out of doors.

'The weather blows in here,' he said, coming steadily forward, feeling
for the doors. She shrank away. At last she could dimly see him.

'Bertie won't have much of a drive,' he said, as he closed the doors.

'He won't indeed!' said Isabel calmly, watching the dark shape at the
door.

'Give me your arm, dear,' she said.

She pressed his arm close to her, as she went. But she longed to see him,
to look at him. She was nervous. He walked erect, with face rather
lifted, but with a curious tentative movement of his powerful, muscular
legs. She could feel the clever, careful, strong contact of his feet with
the earth, as she balanced against him. For a moment he was a tower of
darkness to her, as if he rose out of the earth.

In the house-passage he wavered, and went cautiously, with a curious look
of silence about him as he felt for the bench. Then he sat down heavily.
He was a man with rather sloping shoulders, but with heavy limbs,
powerful legs that seemed to know the earth. His head was small, usually
carried high and light. As he bent down to unfasten his gaiters and boots
he did not look blind. His hair was brown and crisp, his hands were
large, reddish, intelligent, the veins stood out in the wrists; and his
thighs and knees seemed massive. When he stood up his face and neck were
surcharged with blood, the veins stood out on his temples. She did not
look at his blindness.

Isabel was always glad when they had passed through the dividing door
into their own regions of repose and beauty. Furthermore, he kept his eye
upon the list of burghers, lending money to needy citizens, putting
good things in the way of struggling traders, building up the fortunes
of men who were disposed to favour his party in the State, ruining
his opponents by the legitimate process of commercial competition,
and, when occasion offered, introducing new voters into the Florentine
Council by paying off the debts of those who were disqualified by
poverty from using the franchise.

While his capital was continually increasing he lived frugally, and employed
his wealth solely for the consolidation of his political influence.

By these arts Cosimo became formidable to the oligarchs and beloved
by the people.

His supporters were numerous, and held together by the bonds of
immediate necessity or personal cupidity.

The plebeians and the merchants were all on his side. The Grandi and the
Ammoniti, excluded from the State by the practices of the Albizzi,
had more to hope from the Medicean party than from the few families
who still contrived to hold the reins of government.

It was clear that a conflict to the death must soon commence between
the oligarchy and this new faction.

VIII

At last, in 1433, war was declared.

The first blow was struck by Rinaldo degli Albizzi, who put himself
in the wrong by attacking a citizen indispensable to the people at
large, and guilty of no unconstitutional act.

On September 7th of that year, a year decisive for the future
destinies of Florence, he summoned Cosimo to the Public Palace,
which he had previously occupied with troops at his command.

There he declared him a rebel to the State, and had him imprisoned in a
little square room in the central tower.

The tocsin was sounded; the people were assembled in parliament upon the
piazza.

The Albizzi held the main streets with armed men, and forced the Florentines
to place plenipotentiary power for the administration of the commonwealth
at this crisis in the hands of a Balia, or committee selected by themselves.
It was always thus that acts of high tyranny were effected in
Florence.

A show of legality was secured by gaining the compulsory sanction of
the people, driven by soldiery into the public square, and hastily
ordered to recognise the authority of their oppressors.

The bill of indictment against the Medici accused them of sedition
in the year 1378--that is, in the year of the Ciompi Tumult--and of
treasonable practice during the whole course of the Albizzi administration.
It also strove to fix upon them the odium of the unsuccessful war against
the town of Lucca. As soon as the Albizzi had unmasked their batteries,
Lorenzo de' Medici managed to escape from the city, and took with him
his brother Cosimo's children to Venice.
Cosimo remained shut up within the little room called Barberia in Arnolfo's
tower.

From that high eagle's nest the sight can range Valdarno far and wide.
Florence with her towers and domes lies below; and the blue peaks of
Carrara close a prospect westward than which, with its villa-jewelled
slopes and fertile gardens, there is nought more beautiful upon the face
of earth. The prisoner can have paid but little heed to this fair
landscape. He heard the frequent ringing of the great bell that
called the Florentines to council, the tramp of armed men on the piazza,
the coming and going of the burghers in the palace halls beneath. On all
sides lurked anxiety and fear of death. Each mouthful he tasted might be
poisoned.

For many days he partook of only bread and water, till his gaoler
restored his confidence by sharing all his meals. In this peril he
abode twenty-four days. The Albizzi, in concert with the Balia they
had formed, were consulting what they might venture to do with him. Some
voted for his execution. Others feared the popular favour, and thought
that if they killed Cosimo this act would ruin their own power. The
nobler natures among them determined to proceed by constitutional
measures.

At last, upon September 29th, it was settled that Cosimo should be
exiled to Padua for ten years.

The Medici were declared Grandi, by way of excluding them from
political rights.

But their property remained untouched; and on October 3rd, Cosimo
was released.

On the same day Cosimo took his departure. His journey northward resembled
a triumphant progress.

He left Florence a simple burgher; he entered Venice a powerful prince.
Though the Albizzi seemed to have gained the day, they had really
cut away the ground beneath their feet.

They committed the fatal mistake of doing both too much and too little--too
much because they declared war against an innocent man, and roused
the sympathies of the whole people in his behalf; too little, because
they had not the nerve to complete their act by killing him outright
and extirpating his party.

Machiavelli, in one of his profoundest and most cynical critiques,
remarks that few men know how to be thoroughly bad with honour to
themselves.

Their will is evil; but the grain of good in them--some fear of public
opinion, some repugnance to committing a signal crime--paralyses
their arm at the moment when it ought to have been raised to strike.

He instances Gian Paolo Baglioni's omission to murder Julius II.,
when that Pope placed himself within his clutches at Perugia.

He might also have instanced Rinaldo degli Albizzi's refusal to push things
to extremities by murdering Cosimo. It was the combination of despotic
violence in the exile of Cosimo with constitutional moderation in
the preservation of his life, that betrayed the weakness of the
oligarchs and restored confidence to the Medicean party.

IX

In the course of the year 1434 this party began to hold up its
head.
Powerful as the Albizzi were, they only retained the government by artifice;
and now they had done a deed which put at nought their former
arts and intrigues. A Signory favourable to the Medici came into office,
and on September 26th, 1434, Rinaldo in his turn was summoned to the
palace and declared a rebel. He strove to raise the forces of his party,
and entered the piazza at the head of eight hundred men. The menacing
attitude of the people, however, made resistance perilous. Rinaldo
disbanded his troops, and placed himself under the protection of Pope
Eugenius IV., who was then resident in Florence. This act of submission
proved that Rinaldo had not the courage or the cruelty to try the chance
of civil war. Whatever his motives may have been, he lost his hold upon
the State beyond recovery. On September 29th, a new parliament was
summoned; on October 2nd, Cosimo was recalled from exile and the
Albizzi were banished.

The intercession of the Pope procured for them nothing but the liberty to
leave Florence unmolested. Einaldo turned his back upon the city he had
governed, never to set foot in it again. On October 6th, Cosimo, having
passed through Padua, Ferrara, and Modena like a conqueror, reentered
the town amid the plaudits of the people, and took up his dwelling
as an honoured guest in the Palace of the Republic.

The subsequent history of Florence is the history of his family.

In after years the Medici loved to remember this return of Cosimo.

His triumphal reception was painted in fresco on the walls of their
villa at Cajano under the transparent allegory of Cicero's entrance
into Rome.

X

By their brief exile the Medici had gained the credit of injured innocence,
the fame of martyrdom in the popular cause. Their foes had struck the
first blow, and in striking at them had seemed to aim against the
liberties of the republic.

The mere failure of their adversaries to hold the power they had acquired,
handed over this power to the Medici; and the reprisals which the
Medici began to take had the show of justice, not of personal hatred,
or petty vengeance.

Cosimo was a true Florentine.

He disliked violence, because he knew that blood spilt cries for
blood.

His passions, too, were cool and temperate.

No gust of anger, no intoxication of success, destroyed his balance.

His one object, the consolidation of power for his family on the
basis of popular favour, was kept steadily in view; and he would
do nothing that might compromise that end.

Yet he was neither generous nor merciful. We therefore find that from the
first moment of his return to Florence he instituted a system of
pitiless and unforgiving persecution against his old opponents.

The Albizzi were banished, root and branch, with all their followers,
consigned to lonely and often to unwholesome stations through the
length and breadth of Italy.

If they broke the bonds assigned them, they were forthwith declared
traitors and their property was confiscated.

After a long series of years, by merely keeping in force the first
sentence pronounced upon them, Cosimo had the cruel satisfaction
of seeing the whole of that proud oligarchy die out by slow degrees
in the insufferable tedium of solitude and exile.

Even the high-souled Palla degli Strozzi, who had striven to remain
neutral, and whose wealth and talents were devoted to the revival of
classical studies, was proscribed because to Cosimo he seemed too
powerful.

Separated from his children, he died in banishment at Padua.

In this way the return of the Medici involved the loss to Florence of
some noble citizens, who might perchance have checked the Medicean tyranny
if they had stayed to guide the State.
The plebeians, raised to wealth and influence by Cosimo before his exile,
now took the lead in the republic. He used these men as catspaws,
rarely putting himself forward or allowing his own name to appear, but
pulling the wires of government in privacy by means of intermediate
agents.

The Medicean party was called at first _Puccini_ from a certain
Puccio, whose name was better known in caucus or committee than
that of his real master.

To rule through these creatures of his own making taxed all the
ingenuity of Cosimo; but his profound and subtle intellect was
suited to the task, and he found unlimited pleasure in the exercise
of his consummate craft.

We have already seen to what extent he used his riches for the acquisition
of political influence.

Now that he had come to power, he continued the same method, packing the
Signory and the Councils with men whom he could hold by debt between
his thumb and finger.

His command of the public moneys enabled him to wink at peculation
in State offices; it was part of his system to bind magistrates and
secretaries to his interest by their consciousness of guilt condoned
but not forgotten.

Not a few, moreover, owed their living to the appointments he procured
for them.

While he thus controlled the wheel-work of the commonwealth by means of
organised corruption, he borrowed the arts of his old enemies to oppress
dissentient citizens.

If a man took an independent line in voting, and refused allegiance to
the Medicean party, he was marked out for persecution. No violence was
used; but he found himself hampered in his commerce--money, plentiful
for others, became scarce for him; his competitors in trade were
subsidised to undersell him.

And while the avenues of industry were closed, his fortune was taxed
above its value, until he had to sell at a loss in order to discharge
his public obligations.

In the first twenty years of the Medicean rule, seventy families had to
pay 4,875,000 golden florins of extraordinary imposts, fixed by
arbitrary assessment.

The more patriotic members of his party looked with dread and loathing
on this system of corruption and exclusion. To their remonstrances
Cosimo replied in four memorable sayings: 'Better the State spoiled than
the State not ours.' 'Governments cannot be carried on with paternosters.'
'An ell of scarlet makes a burgher.' 'I aim at finite ends.' These maxims
represent the whole man,--first, in his egotism, eager to gain
Florence for his family, at any risk of her ruin; secondly, in his
cynical acceptance of base means to selfish ends; thirdly, in his
bourgeois belief that money makes a man, and fine clothes suffice
for a citizen; fourthly, in his worldly ambition bent on positive
success.

It was, in fact, his policy to reduce Florence to the condition of a
rotten borough: nor did this policy fail. One notable sign of the influence
he exercised was the change which now came over the foreign relations
of the republic.

Up to the date of his dictatorship Florence had uniformly fought
the battle of freedom in Italy.

It was the chief merit of the Albizzi oligarchy that they continued
the traditions of the mediæval State, and by their vigorous action
checked the growth of the Visconti.

Though they engrossed the government they never forgot that they were
first of all things Florentines, and only in the second place men
who owed their power and influence to office.

In a word, they acted like patriotic Tories, like republican
patricians.

Therefore they would not ally themselves with tyrants or countenance
the enslavement of free cities by armed despots.

Their subjugation of the Tuscan burghs to Florence was itself part
of a grand republican policy.

Cosimo changed all this. When the Visconti dynasty ended by the death
of Filippo Maria in 1447, there was a chance of restoring the independence
of Lombardy. Milan in effect declared herself a republic, and by the
aid of Florence she might at this moment have maintained her liberty.
Cosimo, however, entered into treaty with Francesco Sforza, supplied him
with money, guaranteed him against Florentine interference, and saw
with satisfaction how he reduced the duchy to his military tyranny.

The Medici were conscious that they, selfishly, had most to gain by
supporting despots who in time of need might help them to confirm their
own authority. With the same end in view, when the legitimate line of
the Bentivogli was extinguished, Cosimo hunted out a bastard pretender
of that family, presented him to the chiefs of the Bentivogli faction,
and had him placed upon the seat of his supposed ancestors at Bologna.
This young man, a certain Santi da Cascese, presumed to be the son of
Ercole de' Bentivogli, was an artisan in a wool factory when Cosimo
set eyes upon him.

At first Santi refused the dangerous honour of governing a proud republic;
but the intrigues of Cosimo prevailed, and the obscure craftsman ended
his days a powerful prince.

By the arts I have attempted to describe, Cosimo in the course of
his long life absorbed the forces of the republic into himself.

While he shunned the external signs of despotic power he made himself
the master of the State. His complexion was of a pale olive; his stature
short; abstemious and simple in his habits, affable in conversation,
sparing of speech, he knew how to combine that burgher-like civility
for which the Romans praised Augustus, with the reality of a despotism
all the more difficult to combat because it seemed nowhere and was
everywhere.

When he died, at the age of seventy-five, in 1464, the people whom he
had enslaved, but whom he had neither injured nor insulted, honoured
him with the title of _Pater Patriæ_.

This was inscribed upon his tomb in S. Lorenzo.

He left to posterity the fame of a great and generous patron,[14] the
infamy of a cynical, self-seeking, bourgeois tyrant.

Such combinations of contradictory qualities were common enough at
the time of the Renaissance.

Did not Machiavelli spend his days in tavern-brawls and low amours, his
nights among the mighty spirits of the dead, with whom, when he
had changed his country suit of homespun for the habit of the Court,
he found himself an honoured equal?

XI

Cosimo had shown consummate skill by governing Florence through a
party created and raised to influence by himself.

The jealousy of these adherents formed the chief difficulty with which
his son Piero had to contend.

Unless the Medici could manage to kick down the ladder whereby
they had risen, they ran the risk of losing all.

As on a former occasion, so now they profited by the mistakes of
their antagonists.

Three chief men of their own party, Diotisalvi Neroni, Agnolo Acciaiuoli,
and Luca Pitti, determined to shake off the yoke of their masters,
and to repay the Medici for what they owed by leading them to ruin.

Niccolo Soderini, a patriot, indignant at the slow enslavement of
his country, joined them.

At first they strove to undermine the credit of the Medici with the
Florentines by inducing Piero to call in the moneys placed at
interest by his father in the hands of private citizens.

This act was unpopular; but it did not suffice to move a revolution.
To proceed by constitutional measures against the Medici was judged
impolitic.

Therefore the conspirators decided to take, if possible, Piero's life. The
plot failed, chiefly owing to the coolness and the cunning of the
young Lorenzo, Piero's eldest son.

Public sympathy was strongly excited against the aggressors.

Neroni, Acciaiuoli, and Soderini were exiled.

Pitti was allowed to stay, dishonoured, powerless, and penniless, in
Florence.

Meanwhile, the failure of their foes had only served to strengthen
the position of the Medici.

The ladder had saved them the trouble of kicking it down.

The congratulations addressed on this occasion to Piero and Lorenzo
by the ruling powers of Italy show that the Medici were already
regarded as princes outside Florence.

Lorenzo and Giuliano, the two sons of Piero, travelled abroad to the
Courts of Milan and Ferrara with the style and state of more than simple
citizens.

At home they occupied the first place on all occasions of public
ceremony, receiving royal visitors on terms of equality, and
performing the hospitalities of the republic like men who had been
born to represent its dignities.

Lorenzo's marriage to Clarice Orsini, of the noble Roman house,
was another sign that the Medici were advancing on the way
toward despotism. Cosimo had avoided foreign alliances for his children.
His descendants now judged themselves firmly planted enough to risk the
odium of a princely match for the sake of the support outside the
city they might win.

XII

Piero de' Medici died in December 1469. His son Lorenzo was then barely
twenty-two years of age. The chiefs of the Medicean party, all-powerful
in the State, held a council, in which they resolved to place him in
the same position as his father and grandfather. This resolve seems
to have been formed after mature deliberation, on the ground that
the existing conditions of Italian politics rendered it impossible
to conduct the government without a presidential head.

Florence, though still a democracy, required a permanent chief to
treat on an equality with the princes of the leading cities.

Here we may note the prudence of Cosimo's foreign policy.

When he helped to establish despots in Milan and Bologna he was
rendering the presidency of his own family in Florence necessary.

Lorenzo, having received this invitation, called attention to his youth
and inexperience. Yet he did not refuse it; and, after a graceful display
of diffidence, he accepted the charge, entering thus upon that
famous political career, in the course of which he not only established
and maintained a balance of power in Italy, with Florence for the
central city, but also contrived to remodel the government of the
republic in the interest of his own family and to strengthen the
Medici by relations with the Papal See.

The extraordinary versatility of this man's intellectual and social
gifts, his participation in all the literary and philosophical
interests of his century, his large and liberal patronage of art,
and the gaiety with which he joined the people of Florence in their
pastimes--Mayday games and Carnival festivities--strengthened his
hold upon the city in an age devoted to culture and refined pleasure.

Whatever was most brilliant in the spirit of the Italian Benaissance seemed
to be incarnate in Lorenzo.

Not merely as a patron and a dilettante, but as a poet and a critic,
a philosopher and scholar, he proved himself adequate to the varied
intellectual ambitions of his country.

Penetrated with the passion for erudition which distinguished
Florence in the fifteenth century, familiar with her painters and
her sculptors, deeply read in the works of her great poets, he
conceived the ideal of infusing the spirit of antique civility into
modern life, and of effecting for society what the artists were
performing in their own sphere.

To preserve the native character of the Florentine genius, while he added
the grace of classic form, was the aim to which his tastes and instincts
led him.

At the same time, while he made himself the master of Florentine
revels and the Augustus of Renaissance literature, he took care
that beneath his carnival masks and ball-dress should be concealed
the chains which he was forging for the republic.

What he lacked, with so much mental brilliancy, was moral greatness.
The age he lived in was an age of selfish despots, treacherous
generals, godless priests.

It was an age of intellectual vigour and artistic creativeness; but
it was also an age of mean ambition, sordid policy, and vitiated
principles.

Lorenzo remained true in all respects to the genius of this age:
true to its enthusiasm for antique culture, true to its passion for
art, true to its refined love of pleasure; but true also to its
petty political intrigues, to its cynical selfishness, to its lack
of heroism.

For Florence he looked no higher and saw no further than Cosimo had
done.

If culture was his pastime, the enslavement of the city by bribery
and corruption was the hard work of his manhood.

As is the case with much Renaissance art, his life was worth more for its
decorative detail than for its constructive design.

In richness, versatility, variety, and exquisiteness of execution, it
left little to be desired; yet, viewed at a distance, and as a whole,
it does not inspire us with a sense of architectonic majesty.

XIII

Lorenzo's chief difficulties arose from the necessity under which, like
Cosimo, he laboured of governing the city through its old institutions
by means of a party.

To keep the members of this party in good temper, and to gain their
approval for the alterations he effected in the State machinery of
Florence, was the problem of his life.

The successful solution of this problem was easier now, after two
generations of the Medicean ascendency, than it had been at first.

Meanwhile the people were maintained in good humour by public shows,
ease, plenty, and a general laxity of discipline. The splendour
of Lorenzo's foreign alliances and the consideration he received from all
the Courts of Italy contributed in no small measure to his popularity and
security at home. By using his authority over Florence to inspire respect
abroad, and by using his foreign credit to impose upon the burghers,
Lorenzo displayed the tact of a true Italian diplomatist.

His genius for statecraft, as then understood, was indeed of a rare
order, equally adapted to the conduct of a complicated foreign
policy and to the control of a suspicious and variable Commonwealth.

In one point alone he was inferior to his grandfather.

He neglected commerce, and allowed his banking business to fall
into disorder so hopeless that in course of time he ceased to be
solvent.

Meanwhile his personal expenses, both as a prince in his own palace,
and as the representative of majesty in Florence, continually
increased.

The bankruptcy of the Medici, it had long been foreseen, would involve
the public finances in serious confusion.

He was of a slightly better class than his
corporal, more personable. Careful about his appearance, he shaved every
day. 'I haven't got much of a face,' said Albert. 'If I was to shave
every day like you, Joe, I should have none.'

There was plenty of life in the little goods-yard: three porter youths,
a continual come and go of farm wagons bringing hay, wagons with timber
from the woods, coal carts loading at the trucks. The black coal seemed
to make the place sleepier, hotter. Round the big white gate the
station-master's children played and his white chickens walked, whilst
the stationmaster himself, a young man getting too fat, helped his wife
to peg out the washing on the clothes line in the meadow.

The great boat-shaped wagons came up from Playcross with the hay. At
first the farm-men waggoned it. On the third day one of the land-girls
appeared with the first load, drawing to a standstill easily at the head
of her two great horses. She was a buxom girl, young, in linen overalls
and gaiters. Her face was ruddy, she had large blue eyes.

'Now that's the waggoner for us, boys,' said the corporal loudly.

'Whoa!' she said to her horses; and then to the corporal: 'Which boys do
you mean?'

'We are the pick of the bunch. That's Joe, my pal. Don't you let on that
my name's Albert,' said the corporal to his private. 'I'm the corporal.'

'And I'm Miss Stokes,' said the land-girl coolly, 'if that's all the boys
you are.'

'You know you couldn't want more, Miss Stokes,' said Albert politely.
Joe, who was bare-headed, whose grey flannel sleeves were rolled up to
the elbow, and whose shirt was open at the breast, looked modestly aside
as if he had no part in the affair.

'Are you on this job regular, then?' said the corporal to Miss Stokes.

'I don't know for sure,' she said, pushing a piece of hair under her hat,
and attending to her splendid horses.

'Oh, make it a certainty,' said Albert.

She did not reply. She turned and looked over the two men coolly. She was
pretty, moderately blonde, with crisp hair, a good skin, and large blue
eyes. She was strong, too, and the work went on leisurely and easily.

'Now!' said the corporal, stopping as usual to look round, 'pleasant
company makes work a pleasure--don't hurry it, boys.' He stood on the
truck surveying the world. That was one of his great and absorbing
occupations: to stand and look out on things in general. Joe, also
standing on the truck, also turned round to look what was to be seen. But
he could not become blankly absorbed, as Albert could.

Miss Stokes watched the two men from under her broad felt hat. She had
seen hundreds of Alberts, khaki soldiers standing in loose attitudes,
absorbed in watching nothing in particular. She had seen also a good many
Joes, quiet, good-looking young soldiers with half-averted faces. But
there was something in the turn of Joe's head, and something in his
quiet, tender-looking form, young and fresh--which attracted her eye. As
she watched him closely from below, he turned as if he felt her, and his
dark-blue eye met her straight, light-blue gaze. He faltered and turned
aside again and looked as if he were going to fall off the truck. A
slight flush mounted under the girl's full, ruddy face. She liked him.

Always, after this, when she came into the sidings with her team, it was
Joe she looked for. She acknowledged to herself that she was sweet on
him. But Albert did all the talking. He was so full of fun and nonsense.
Joe was a very shy bird, very brief and remote in his answers. Miss
Stokes was driven to indulge in repartee with Albert, but she fixed her
magnetic attention on the younger fellow. Joe would talk with Albert, and
laugh at his jokes. But Miss Stokes could get little out of him. She had
to depend on her silent forces. They were more effective than might be
imagined.

Suddenly, on Saturday afternoon, at about two o'clock, Joe received a
bolt from the blue--a telegram: 'Meet me Belbury Station 6.00 p.m. today.
M.S.' He knew at once who M.S. was. His heart melted, he felt weak as if
he had had a blow.

'What's the trouble, boy?' asked Albert anxiously.

'No--no trouble--it's to meet somebody.' Joe lifted his dark-blue eyes in
confusion towards his corporal.

'Meet somebody!' repeated the corporal, watching his young pal with keen
blue eyes. 'It's all right, then; nothing wrong?'

'No--nothing wrong. I'm not going,' said Joe.

Albert was old and shrewd enough to see that nothing more should be said
before the housewife. He also saw that Joe did not want to take him into
confidence. So he held his peace, though he was piqued.

The two soldiers went into town, smartened up. Albert knew a fair
number of the boys round about; there would be plenty of gossip in the
market-place, plenty of lounging in groups on the Bath Road, watching the
Saturday evening shoppers. Then a modest drink or two, and the movies.
They passed an agreeable, casual, nothing-in-particular evening, with
which Joe was quite satisfied. He thought of Belbury Station, and of
M.S. waiting there. He had not the faintest intention of meeting her. And
he had not the faintest intention of telling Albert.

And yet, when the two men were in their bedroom, half undressed, Joe
suddenly held out the telegram to his corporal, saying: 'What d'you think
of that?'

Albert was just unbuttoning his braces. He desisted, took the telegram
form, and turned towards the candle to read it.

'_Meet me Belbury Station 6.00 p.m. today. M.S._,' he read, _sotto voce_.
His face took on its fun-and-nonsense look.

'Who's M.S.?' he asked, looking shrewdly at Joe.

'You know as well as I do,' said Joe, non-committal.

'M.S.,' repeated Albert. 'Blamed if I know, boy. Is it a woman?'

The conversation was carried on in tiny voices, for fear of disturbing
the householders.

'I don't know,' said Joe, turning. He looked full at Albert, the two men
looked straight into each other's eyes. There was a lurking grin in each
of them.

'Well, I'm--_blamed_!' said Albert at last, throwing the telegram down
emphatically on the bed.

'Wha-at?' said Joe, grinning rather sheepishly, his eyes clouded none the
less.

Albert sat on the bed and proceeded to undress, nodding his head with
mock gravity all the while. Joe watched him foolishly.

'What?' he repeated faintly.

Albert looked up at him with a knowing look.

'If that isn't coming it quick, boy!' he said. 'What the blazes! What ha'
you bin doing?'

'Nothing!' said Joe.

Albert slowly shook his head as he sat on the side of the bed.

'Don't happen to me when I've bin doin' nothing,' he said. And he
proceeded to pull off his stockings.

Joe turned away, looking at himself in the mirror as he unbuttoned his
tunic.

'You didn't want to keep the appointment?' Albert asked, in a changed
voice, from the bedside.

Joe did not answer for a moment. Then he said:

'I made no appointment.'

'I'm not saying you did, boy. Don't be nasty about it. I mean you didn't
want to answer the--unknown person's summons--shall I put it that way?'

'No,' said Joe.

'What was the deterring motive?' asked Albert, who was now lying on his
back in bed.

'Oh,' said Joe, suddenly looking round rather haughtily. 'I didn't want
to.' He had a well-balanced head, and could take on a sudden distant
bearing.

'Didn't want to--didn't cotton on, like. Well--_they be artful, the
women_--' he mimicked his landlord. 'Come on into bed, boy. Don't loiter
about as if you'd lost something.'

Albert turned over, to sleep.

On Monday Miss Stokes turned up as usual, striding beside her team. Her
'whoa!' was resonant and challenging, she looked up at the truck as her
steeds came to a standstill. Joe had turned aside, and had his face
averted from her. She glanced him over--save for his slender succulent
tenderness she would have despised him. She sized him up in a steady
look. Then she turned to Albert, who was looking down at her and smiling
in his mischievous turn. She knew his aspects by now. She looked straight
back at him, though her eyes were hot. He saluted her.

'Beautiful morning, Miss Stokes.'

'Very!' she replied.

'Handsome is as handsome looks,' said Albert.

Which produced no response.

'Now, Joe, come on here,' said the corporal. 'Don't keep the ladies
waiting--it's the sign of a weak heart.'

Joe turned, and the work began. Nothing more was said for the time being.
As the week went on all parties became more comfortable. Joe remained
silent, averted, neutral, a little on his dignity. Miss Stokes was
off-hand and masterful. Albert was full of mischief.

The great theme was a circus, which was coming to the market town on the
following Saturday.

'You'll go to the circus, Miss Stokes?' said Albert.

'I may go. Are you going?'

'Certainly. Give us the pleasure of escorting you.'

'No, thanks.'

'That's what I call a flat refusal--what, Joe? You don't mean that you
have no liking for our company, Miss Stokes?'

'Oh, I don't know,' said Miss Stokes. 'How many are there of you?'

'Only me and Joe.'

'Oh, is that all?' she said, satirically.

Albert was a little nonplussed.

'Isn't that enough for you?' he asked.

'Too many by half,' blurted out Joe, jeeringly, in a sudden fit of
uncouth rudeness that made both the others stare.

'Oh, I'll stand out of the way, boy, if that's it,' said Albert to Joe.
Then he turned mischievously to Miss Stokes. 'He wants to know what M.
stands for,' he said, confidentially.

'Monkeys,' she replied, turning to her horses.

'What's M.S.?' said Albert.

'Monkey nuts,' she retorted, leading off her team.

Albert looked after her a little discomfited. Joe had flushed dark, and
cursed Albert in his heart.

On the Saturday afternoon the two soldiers took the train into town. They
would have to walk home. They had tea at six o'clock, and lounged about
till half past seven. The circus was in a meadow near the river--a great
red-and-white striped tent. Caravans stood at the side. A great crowd of
people was gathered round the ticket-caravan.

Inside the tent the lamps were lighted, shining on a ring of faces, a
great circular bank of faces round the green grassy centre. Along with
some comrades, the two soldiers packed themselves on a thin plank seat,
rather high. They were delighted with the flaring lights, the wild
effect. But the circus performance did not affect them deeply. They
admired the lady in black velvet with rose-purple legs who leapt so
neatly on to the galloping horse; they watched the feats of strength and
laughed at the clown. But they felt a little patronizing, they missed the
sensational drama of the cinema.

Half-way through the performance Joe was electrified to see the face of
Miss Stokes not very far from him. There she was, in her khaki and her
felt hat, as usual; he pretended not to see her. She was laughing at the
clown; she also pretended not to see him. It was a blow to him, and it
made him angry. He would not even mention it to Albert. Least said,
soonest mended. He liked to believe she had not seen him. But he knew,
fatally, that she had.

When they came out it was nearly eleven o'clock; a lovely night, with a
moon and tall, dark, noble trees: a magnificent May night. Joe and Albert
laughed and chaffed with the boys. Joe looked round frequently to see if
he were safe from Miss Stokes. It seemed so.

But there were six miles to walk home. At last the two soldiers set off,
swinging their canes. The road was white between tall hedges, other
stragglers were passing out of the town towards the villages; the air was
full of pleased excitement.

They were drawing near to the village when they saw a dark figure ahead.
Joe's heart sank with pure fear. It was a figure wheeling a bicycle; a
land girl; Miss Stokes. Albert was ready with his nonsense. Miss Stokes
had a puncture.

'Let me wheel the rattler,' said Albert.

'Thank you,' said Miss Stokes. 'You _are_ kind.'

'Oh, I'd be kinder than that, if you'd show me how,' said Albert.

'Are you sure?' said Miss Stokes.

'Doubt my words?' said Albert. 'That's cruel of you, Miss Stokes.'

Miss Stokes walked between them, close to Joe.

'Have you been to the circus?' she asked him.

'Yes,' he replied, mildly.

'Have _you_ been?' Albert asked her.

'Yes. I didn't see you,' she replied.

'What!--you say so! Didn't see us! Didn't think us worth looking at,'
began Albert. 'Aren't I as handsome as the clown, now? And you didn't as
much as glance in our direction? I call it a downright oversight.'

'I never _saw_ you,' reiterated Miss Stokes. 'I didn't know you saw me.'

'That makes it worse,' said Albert.

The road passed through a belt of dark pine-wood. The village, and the
branch road, was very near. Miss Stokes put out her fingers and felt for
Joe's hand as it swung at his side. To say he was staggered is to put it
mildly. Yet he allowed her softly to clasp his fingers for a few moments.
But he was a mortified youth.

At the cross-road they stopped--Miss Stokes should turn off. She had
another mile to go.

'You'll let us see you home,' said Albert.

'Do me a kindness,' she said. 'Put my bike in your shed, and take it to
Baker's on Monday, will you?'

'I'll sit up all night and mend it for you, if you like.'

'No thanks. And Joe and I'll walk on.'

'Oh--ho! Oh--ho!' sang Albert. 'Joe! Joe! What do you say to that, now,
boy? Aren't you in luck's way. And I get the bloomin' old bike for my
pal. Consider it again, Miss Stokes.'

Joe turned aside his face, and did not speak.

'Oh, well! I wheel the grid, do I? I leave you, boy--'

'I'm not keen on going any further,' barked out Joe, in an uncouth voice.
'She hain't my choice.'

The girl stood silent, and watched the two men.

'There now!' said Albert. 'Think o' that! If it was _me_ now--' But he
was uncomfortable. 'Well, Miss Stokes, have me,' he added.

Miss Stokes stood quite still, neither moved nor spoke. And so the three
remained for some time at the lane end. At last Joe began kicking the
ground--then he suddenly lifted his face. At that moment Miss Stokes was
at his side. She put her arm delicately round his waist.

'Seems I'm the one extra, don't you think?' Albert inquired of the high
bland moon.

Joe had dropped his head and did not answer. Miss Stokes stood with her
arm lightly round his waist. Albert bowed, saluted, and bade good-night.
He walked away, leaving the two standing.

Miss Stokes put a light pressure on Joe's waist, and drew him down the
road. They walked in silence. The night was full of scent--wild cherry,
the first bluebells. Still they walked in silence. A nightingale was
singing. They approached nearer and nearer, till they stood close by his
dark bush. The powerful notes sounded from the cover, almost like flashes
of light--then the interval of silence--then the moaning notes, almost
like a dog faintly howling, followed by the long, rich trill, and
flashing notes. Then a short silence again.

Miss Stokes turned at last to Joe. She looked up at him, and in the
moonlight he saw her faintly smiling. He felt maddened, but helpless. Her
arm was round his waist, she drew him closely to her with a soft pressure
that made all his bones rotten.

Meanwhile Albert was waiting at home. He put on his overcoat, for the
fire was out, and he had had malarial fever. He looked fitfully at the
_Daily Mirror_ and the _Daily Sketch_, but he saw nothing. It seemed a
long time. He began to yawn widely, even to nod. At last Joe came in.

Albert looked at him keenly. The young man's brow was black, his face
sullen.

'All right, boy?' asked Albert.

Joe merely grunted for a reply. There was nothing more to be got out of
him. So they went to bed.

Next day Joe was silent, sullen. Albert could make nothing of him. He
proposed a walk after tea.

'I'm going somewhere,' said Joe.

'Where--Monkey nuts?' asked the corporal. But Joe's brow only became
darker.

So the days went by. Almost every evening Joe went off alone, returning
late. He was sullen, taciturn and had a hang-dog look, a curious way of
dropping his head and looking dangerously from under his brows. And he
and Albert did not get on so well any more with one another. For all his
fun and nonsense, Albert was really irritable, soon made angry. And Joe's
stand-offish sulkiness and complete lack of confidence riled him, got on
his nerves. His fun and nonsense took a biting, sarcastic turn, at which
Joe's eyes glittered occasionally, though the young man turned unheeding
aside. Then again Joe would be full of odd, whimsical fun, outshining
Albert himself.

Miss Stokes still came to the station with the wain: Monkey-nuts,
Albert called her, though not to her face. For she was very clear and
good-looking, almost she seemed to gleam. And Albert was a tiny bit
afraid of her. She very rarely addressed Joe whilst the hay-loading was
going on, and that young man always turned his back to her. He seemed
thinner, and his limber figure looked more slouching. But still it had
the tender, attractive appearance, especially from behind. His tanned
face, a little thinned and darkened, took a handsome, slightly sinister
look.

'Come on, Joe!' the corporal urged sharply one day. 'What're you doing,
boy? Looking for beetles on the bank?'

Joe turned round swiftly, almost menacing, to work.

'He's a different fellow these days, Miss Stokes,' said Albert to the
young woman. 'What's got him? Is it Monkey nuts that don't suit him, do
you think?'

'Choked with chaff, more like,' she retorted. 'It's as bad as feeding a
threshing machine, to have to listen to some folks.'

'As bad as what?' said Albert. 'You don't mean me, do you, Miss Stokes?'

'No,' she cried. 'I don't mean you.'

Joe's face became dark red during these sallies, but he said nothing. He
would eye the young woman curiously, as she swung so easily at the work,
and he had some of the look of a dog which is going to bite.

Albert, with his nerves on edge, began to find the strain rather severe.
The next Saturday evening, when Joe came in more black-browed than ever,
he watched him, determined to have it out with him.

When the boy went upstairs to bed, the corporal followed him. He closed
the door behind him carefully, sat on the bed and watched the younger man
undressing. And for once he spoke in a natural voice, neither chaffing
nor commanding.

'What's gone wrong, boy?'

Joe stopped a moment as if he had been shot. Then he went on unwinding
his puttees, and did not answer or look up.

'You can hear, can't you?' said Albert, nettled.

'Yes, I can hear,' said Joe, stooping over his puttees till his face was
purple.

'Then why don't you answer?'

Joe sat up. He gave a long, sideways look at the corporal. Then he lifted
his eyes and stared at a crack in the ceiling.

The corporal watched these movements shrewdly.

'And _then_ what?' he asked, ironically.

Again Joe turned and stared him in the face. The corporal smiled very
slightly, but kindly.

'There'll be murder done one of these days,' said Joe, in a quiet,
unimpassioned voice.

'So long as it's by daylight--' replied Albert. Then he went over, sat
down by Joe, put his hand on his shoulder affectionately, and continued,
'What is it, boy? What's gone wrong? You can trust me, can't you?'

Joe turned and looked curiously at the face so near to his.

'It's nothing, that's all,' he said laconically.

Albert frowned.

'Then who's going to be murdered?--and who's going to do the
murdering?--me or you--which is it, boy?' He smiled gently at the stupid
youth, looking straight at him all the while, into his eyes. Gradually
the stupid, hunted, glowering look died out of Joe's eyes. He turned his
head aside, gently, as one rousing from a spell.

'I don't want her,' he said, with fierce resentment.

'Then you needn't have her,' said Albert. 'What do you go for, boy?'

But it wasn't as simple as all that. Joe made no remark.

'She's a smart-looking girl. What's wrong with her, my boy? I should have
thought you were a lucky chap, myself.'

'I don't want 'er,' Joe barked, with ferocity and resentment.

'Then tell her so and have done,' said Albert. He waited awhile. There
was no response. 'Why don't you?' he added.

'Because I don't,' confessed Joe, sulkily.

Albert pondered--rubbed his head.

'You're too soft-hearted, that's where it is, boy. You want your mettle
dipping in cold water, to temper it. You're too soft-hearted--'

He laid his arm affectionately across the shoulders of the younger man.
Joe seemed to yield a little towards him.

'When are you going to see her again?' Albert asked. For a long time
there was no answer.

'When is it, boy?' persisted the softened voice of the corporal.

'Tomorrow,' confessed Joe.

'Then let me go,' said Albert. 'Let me go, will you?'

The morrow was Sunday, a sunny day, but a cold evening. The sky was grey,
the new foliage very green, but the air was chill and depressing. Albert
walked briskly down the white road towards Beeley. He crossed a larch
plantation, and followed a narrow by-road, where blue speedwell flowers
fell from the banks into the dust. He walked swinging his cane, with
mixed sensations. Then having gone a certain length, he turned and began
to walk in the opposite direction.

So he saw a young woman approaching him. She was wearing a wide hat of
grey straw, and a loose, swinging dress of nigger-grey velvet. She walked
with slow inevitability. Albert faltered a little as he approached her.
Then he saluted her, and his roguish, slightly withered skin flushed. She
was staring straight into his face.

He fell in by her side, saying impudently:

'Not so nice for a walk as it was, is it?'

She only stared at him. He looked back at her.

'You've seen me before, you know,' he said, grinning slightly. 'Perhaps
you never noticed me. Oh, I'm quite nice looking, in a quiet way, you
know. What--?'

But Miss Stokes did not speak: she only stared with large, icy blue eyes
at him. He became self-conscious, lifted up his chin, walked with his
nose in the air, and whistled at random. So they went down the quiet,
deserted grey lane. He was whistling the air: 'I'm Gilbert, the filbert,
the colonel of the nuts.'

At last she found her voice:

'Where's Joe?'

'He thought you'd like a change: they say variety's the salt of
life--that's why I'm mostly in pickle.'

'Where is he?'

'Am I my brother's keeper? He's gone his own ways.'

'Where?'

'Nay, how am I to know? Not so far but he'll be back for supper.'

She stopped in the middle of the lane. He stopped facing her.

'Where's Joe?' she asked.

He struck a careless attitude, looked down the road this way and that,
lifted his eyebrows, pushed his khaki cap on one side, and answered:

'He is not conducting the service tonight: he asked me if I'd officiate.'

'Why hasn't he come?'

Bacchus! Ohé! Ohé!

With ivy coronals, bunch and berry, Crown we our heads to worship
thee!

Thou hast bidden us to make merry Day and night with jollity!
Drink then! Bacchus is here!

Drink free, And hand ye the drinking-cup to me!
Bacchus! we all must follow thee!
Bacchus! Bacchus! Ohé! Ohé!

See, I have emptied my horn already:
Stretch hither your beaker to me, I pray:
Are the hills and the lawns where we roam unsteady?

Or is it my brain that reels away?

Let every one run to and fro through the hay, As ye see me run! Ho! after
me!
Bacchus! we all must follow thee!

Bacchus! Bacchus! Ohé! Ohé!

Methinks I am dropping in swoon or slumber:

Am I drunken or sober, yes or no?
What are these weights my feet encumber?
You too are tipsy, well I know!
Let every one do as ye see me do, Let every one drink and quaff
like me!

Bacchus! we all must follow thee!

Bacchus! Bacchus! Ohé! Ohé!

Cry Bacchus! Cry Bacchus! Be blithe and merry, Tossing wine down
your throats away!
Let sleep then come and our gladness bury:

Drink you, and you, and you, while ye may!
Dancing is over for me to-day.

Let every one cry aloud Evohé!

Bacchus! we all must follow thee!

Bacchus! Bacchus! Ohé! Ohé!

Though an English translation can do little toward rendering the
facile graces of Poliziano's style, that 'roseate fluency' for which
it has been praised by his Italian admirers, the main qualities of
the 'Orfeo' as a composition may be traced in this rough copy.

Of dramatic power, of that mastery over the deeper springs of human
nature which distinguished the first effort of the English muse in
Marlowe's plays, there is but little.

A certain adaptation of the language to the characters, as in the
rudeness of Thyrsis when contrasted with the rustic elegance of
Aristæus, a touch of simple feeling in Eurydice's lyrical outcry
of farewell, a discrimination between the tender sympathy of
Proserpine and Pluto's stern relenting, a spirited presentation of
the Bacchanalian _furore_ in the Mænads, an attempt to model the
Satyr Mnesillus as apart from human nature and yet sympathetic to
its anguish, these points constitute the chief dramatic features
of the melodrama.

Orpheus himself is a purely lyrical personage.

Of character, he can scarcely be said to have anything marked; and his
part rises to its height precisely in that passage where the lyrist
has to be displayed.

Before the gates of Hades and the throne of Proserpine he sings,
and his singing is the right outpouring of a poet's soul; each
octave resumes the theme of the last stanza with a swell of utterance,
a crescendo of intonation that recalls the passionate and unpremeditated
descant of a bird upon the boughs alone.

To this true quality of music is added the persuasiveness of pleading.
That the violin melody of his incomparable song is lost, must be reckoned
a great misfortune.

We have good reason to believe that the part of Orpheus was taken by Messer
Baccio Ugolini, singing to the viol. Here too it may be mentioned that
a _tondo_ in monochrome, painted by Signorelli among the arabesques
at Orvieto, shows Orpheus at the throne of Plato, habited as a poet
with the laurel crown and playing on a violin of antique form.

It would be interesting to know whether a rumour of the Mantuan pageant
had reached the ears of the Cortonese painter.

If the whole of the 'Orfeo' had been conceived and executed with
the same artistic feeling as the chief act, it would have been a
really fine poem independently of its historical interest.

But we have only to turn the page and read the lament uttered for
the loss of Eurydice, in order to perceive Poliziano's incapacity
for dealing with his hero in a situation of greater difficulty.

The pathos which might have made us sympathise with Orpheus in his misery,
the passion, approaching to madness, which might have justified his
misogyny, are absent. It is difficult not to feel that in this climax
of his anguish he was a poor creature, and that the Mænads served
him right. Nothing illustrates the defect of real dramatic imagination
better than this failure to dignify the catastrophe. Gifted with a fine
lyrical inspiration, Poliziano seems to have already felt the Bacchic
chorus which forms so brilliant a termination to his play, and to have
forgotten his duty to the unfortunate Orpheus, whose sorrow for Eurydice
is stultified and made unmeaning by the prosaic expression of a base
resolve. It may indeed be said in general that the 'Orfeo' is a good
poem only where the situation is not so much dramatic as lyrical, and
that its finest passage--the scene in Hades--was fortunately for its
author one in which the dramatic motive had to be lyrically expressed. In
this respect, as in many others, the 'Orfeo' combines the faults and merits
of the Italian attempts at melo-tragedy.

They seemed happy, frisky cattle, a
little impudent, and either determined to go back into the warm shed, or
determined not to go back, I could not decide which.

Presently the woman came forward again, her head rather ducked. But she
looked up at me and smiled, with that odd, immediate intimacy, something
witch-like and impossible.

'Sorry to keep you waiting,' she said. 'Shall we stand in this
cart-shed--it will be more out of the wind.'

So we stood among the shafts of the open cart-shed that faced the road.
Then she looked down at the ground, a little sideways, and I noticed a
small black frown on her brows. She seemed to brood for a moment. Then
she looked straight into my eyes, so that I blinked and wanted to turn my
face aside. She was searching me for something and her look was too near.
The frown was still on her keen, sallow brow.

'Can you speak French?' she asked me abruptly.

'More or less,' I replied.

'I was supposed to learn it at school,' she said. 'But I don't know a
word.' She ducked her head and laughed, with a slightly ugly grimace and
a rolling of her black eyes.

'No good keeping your mind full of scraps,' I answered.

But she had turned aside her sallow, long face, and did not hear what I
said. Suddenly again she looked at me. She was searching. And at the same
time she smiled at me, and her eyes looked softly, darkly, with infinite
trustful humility into mine. I was being cajoled.

'Would you mind reading a letter for me, in French,' she said, her face
immediately black and bitter-looking. She glanced at me, frowning.

'Not at all,' I said.

'It's a letter to my husband,' she said, still scrutinizing.

I looked at her, and didn't quite realize. She looked too far into me, my
wits were gone. She glanced round. Then she looked at me shrewdly. She
drew a letter from her pocket, and handed it to me. It was addressed from
France to Lance-Corporal Goyte, at Tible. I took out the letter and began
to read it, as mere words. '_Mon cher Alfred_'--it might have been a bit
of a torn newspaper. So I followed the script: the trite phrases of a
letter from a French-speaking girl to an English soldier. 'I think of you
always, always. Do you think sometimes of me?' And then I vaguely
realized that I was reading a man's private correspondence. And yet, how
could one consider these trivial, facile French phrases private! Nothing
more trite and vulgar in the world, than such a love-letter--no newspaper
more obvious.

Therefore I read with a callous heart the effusions of the Belgian
damsel. But then I gathered my attention. For the letter went on, '_Notre
cher petit bébé_--our dear little baby was born a week ago. Almost I
died, knowing you were far away, and perhaps forgetting the fruit of our
perfect love. But the child comforted me. He has the smiling eyes and
virile air of his English father. I pray to the Mother of Jesus to send
me the dear father of my child, that I may see him with my child in his
arms, and that we may be united in holy family love. Ah, my Alfred, can I
tell you how I miss you, how I weep for you. My thoughts are with you
always, I think of nothing but you, I live for nothing but you and our
dear baby. If you do not come back to me soon, I shall die, and our child
will die. But no, you cannot come back to me. But I can come to you, come
to England with our child. If you do not wish to present me to your good
mother and father, you can meet me in some town, some city, for I shall
be so frightened to be alone in England with my child, and no one to take
care of us. Yet I must come to you, I must bring my child, my little
Alfred to his father, the big, beautiful Alfred that I love so much. Oh,
write and tell me where I shall come. I have some money, I am not a
penniless creature. I have money for myself and my dear baby--'

I read to the end. It was signed: 'Your very happy and still more unhappy
Élise.' I suppose I must have been smiling.

'I can see it makes you laugh,' said Mrs. Goyte, sardonically. I looked
up at her.

'It's a love-letter, I know that,' she said. 'There's too many "Alfreds"
in it.'

'One too many,' I said.

'Oh, yes--And what does she say--Eliza? We know her name's Eliza, that's
another thing.' She grimaced a little, looking up at me with a mocking
laugh.

'Where did you get this letter?' I said.

'Postman gave it me last week.'

'And is your husband at home?'

'I expect him home tonight. He's been wounded, you know, and we've been
applying for him home. He was home about six weeks ago--he's been in
Scotland since then. Oh, he was wounded in the leg. Yes, he's all right,
a great strapping fellow. But he's lame, he limps a bit. He expects he'll
get his discharge--but I don't think he will. We married? We've been
married six years--and he joined up the first day of the war. Oh, he
thought he'd like the life. He'd been through the South African War. No,
he was sick of it, fed up. I'm living with his father and mother--I've no
home of my own now. My people had a big farm--over a thousand acres--in
Oxfordshire. Not like here--no. Oh, they're very good to me, his father
and mother. Oh, yes, they couldn't be better. They think more of me than
of their own daughters. But it's not like being in a place of your own,
is it? You can't _really_ do as you like. No, there's only me and his
father and mother at home. Before the war? Oh, he was anything. He's had
a good education--but he liked the farming better. Then he was a
chauffeur. That's how he knew French. He was driving a gentleman in
France for a long time--'

At this point the peacocks came round the corner on a puff of wind.

'Hello, Joey!' she called, and one of the birds came forward, on delicate
legs. Its grey speckled back was very elegant, it rolled its full,
dark-blue neck as it moved to her. She crouched down. 'Joey, dear,' she
said, in an odd, saturnine caressive voice, 'you're bound to find me,
aren't you?' She put her face forward, and the bird rolled his neck,
almost touching her face with his beak, as if kissing her.

'He loves you,' I said.

She twisted her face up at me with a laugh.

'Yes,' she said, 'he loves me, Joey does,'--then, to the bird--'and I
love Joey, don't I. I _do_ love Joey.' And she smoothed his feathers for
a moment. Then she rose, saying: 'He's an affectionate bird.'

I smiled at the roll of her 'bir-rrd'.

'Oh, yes, he is,' she protested. 'He came with me from my home seven
years ago. Those others are his descendants--but they're not like
Joey--_are they, dee-urr?_' Her voice rose at the end with a witch-like
cry.

Then she forgot the birds in the cart-shed and turned to business again.

'Won't you read that letter?' she said. 'Read it, so that I know what it
says.'

'It's rather behind his back,' I said.

'Oh, never mind him,' she cried. 'He's been behind my back long
enough--all these four years. If he never did no worse things behind my
back than I do behind his, he wouldn't have cause to grumble. You read me
what it says.'

Now I felt a distinct reluctance to do as she bid, and yet I began--'My
dear Alfred.'

'I guessed that much,' she said. 'Eliza's dear Alfred.' She laughed. 'How
do you say it in French? _Eliza?_'

I told her, and she repeated the name with great contempt--_Élise_.

'Go on,' she said. 'You're not reading.'

So I began--'I have been thinking of you sometimes--have you been
thinking of me?'--

'Of several others as well, beside her, I'll wager,' said Mrs. Goyte.

'Probably not,' said I, and continued. 'A dear little baby was born here
a week ago. Ah, can I tell you my feelings when I take my darling little
brother into my arms--'

'I'll bet it's _his_,' cried Mrs. Goyte.

'No,' I said. 'It's her mother's.'

'Don't you believe it,' she cried. 'It's a blind. You mark, it's her own
right enough--and his.'

'No,' I said, 'it's her mother's.' 'He has sweet smiling eyes, but not
like your beautiful English eyes--'

She suddenly struck her hand on her skirt with a wild motion, and bent
down, doubled with laughter. Then she rose and covered her face with her
hand.

'I'm forced to laugh at the beautiful English eyes,' she said.

'Aren't his eyes beautiful?' I asked.

'Oh, yes--_very!_ Go on!--_Joey, dear, dee-urr, Joey!_'--this to the
peacock.

--'Er--We miss you very much. We all miss you. We wish you were here to
see the darling baby. Ah, Alfred, how happy we were when you stayed with
us. We all loved you so much. My mother will call the baby Alfred so that
we shall never forget you--'

'Of course it's his right enough,' cried Mrs. Goyte.

'No,' I said. 'It's the mother's.' Er--'My mother is very well. My father
came home yesterday--on leave. He is delighted with his son, my little
brother, and wishes to have him named after you, because you were so good
to us all in that terrible time, which I shall never forget. I must weep
now when I think of it. Well, you are far away in England, and perhaps I
shall never see you again. How did you find your dear mother and father?
I am so happy that your wound is better, and that you can nearly walk--'

'How did he find his dear _wife!_' cried Mrs. Goyte. 'He never told her
he had one. Think of taking the poor girl in like that!'

'We are so pleased when you write to us. Yet now you are in England you
will forget the family you served so well--'

'A bit too well--eh, _Joey!_' cried the wife.

'If it had not been for you we should not be alive now, to grieve and to
rejoice in this life, that is so hard for us. But we have recovered some
of our losses, and no longer feel the burden of poverty. The little
Alfred is a great comfort to me. I hold him to my breast and think of the
big, good Alfred, and I weep to think that those times of suffering were
perhaps the times of a great happiness that is gone for ever.'

'Oh, but isn't it a shame, to take a poor girl in like that!' cried Mrs.
Goyte. 'Never to let on that he was married, and raise her hopes--I call
it beastly, I do.'

'You don't know,' I said. 'You know how anxious women are to fall in
love, wife or no wife. How could he help it, if she was determined to
fall in love with him?'

'He could have helped it if he'd wanted.'

'Well,' I said, 'we aren't all heroes.'

'Oh, but that's different! The big, good Alfred!--did ever you hear such
tommy-rot in your life! Go on--what does she say at the end?'

'Er--We shall be pleased to hear of your life in England. We all send
many kind regards to your good parents. I wish you all happiness for your
future days. Your very affectionate and ever-grateful Élise.'

There was silence for a moment, during which Mrs. Goyte remained with her
head dropped, sinister and abstracted. Suddenly she lifted her face, and
her eyes flashed.

'Oh, but I call it beastly, I call it mean, to take a girl in like that.'

'Nay,' I said. 'Probably he hasn't taken her in at all. Do you think
those French girls are such poor innocent things? I guess she's a great
deal more downy than he.'

'Oh, he's one of the biggest fools that ever walked,' she cried.

'There you are!' said I.

'But it's his child right enough,' she said.

'I don't think so,' said I.

'I'm sure of it.'

'Oh, well,' I said, 'if you prefer to think that way.'

'What other reason has she for writing like that--'

I went out into the road and looked at the cattle.

'Who is this driving the cows?' I said. She too came out.

'It's the boy from the next farm,' she said.

'Oh, well,' said I, 'those Belgian girls! You never know where their
letters will end. And, after all, it's his affair--you needn't bother.'

'Oh--!' she cried, with rough scorn--'it's not _me_ that bothers. But
it's the nasty meanness of it--me writing him such loving letters'--she
put her hand before her face and laughed malevolently--'and sending him
parcels all the time. You bet he fed that gurrl on my parcels--I know he
did. It's just like him. I'll bet they laughed together over my letters.
I bet anything they did--'

'Nay,' said I. 'He'd burn your letters for fear they'd give him away.'

There was a black look on her yellow face. Suddenly a voice was heard
calling. She poked her head out of the shed, and answered coolly:

'All right!' Then turning to me: 'That's his mother looking after me.'

She laughed into my face, witch-like, and we turned down the road.

When I awoke, the morning after this episode, I found the house darkened
with deep, soft snow, which had blown against the large west windows,
covering them with a screen. I went outside, and saw the valley all white
and ghastly below me, the trees beneath black and thin looking like wire,
the rock-faces dark between the glistening shroud, and the sky above
sombre, heavy, yellowish-dark, much too heavy for this world below of
hollow bluey whiteness figured with black. I felt I was in a valley of
the dead. And I sensed I was a prisoner, for the snow was everywhere
deep, and drifted in places. So all the morning I remained indoors,
looking up the drive at the shrubs so heavily plumed with snow, at the
gateposts raised high with a foot or more of extra whiteness. Or I looked
down into the white-and-black valley that was utterly motionless and
beyond life, a hollow sarcophagus.

Nothing stirred the whole day--no plume fell off the shrubs, the valley
was as abstracted as a grove of death. I looked over at the tiny,
half-buried farms away on the bare uplands beyond the valley hollow, and
I thought of Tible in the snow, of the black witch-like little Mrs.
Goyte. And the snow seemed to lay me bare to influences I wanted to
escape.

In the faint glow of the half-clear light that came about four o'clock in
the afternoon, I was roused to see a motion in the snow away below, near
where the thorn trees stood very black and dwarfed, like a little savage
group, in the dismal white. I watched closely. Yes, there was a flapping
and a struggle--a big bird, it must be, labouring in the snow. I
wondered. Our biggest birds, in the valley, were the large hawks that
often hung flickering opposite my windows, level with me, but high above
some prey on the steep valleyside. This was much too big for a hawk--too
big for any known bird. I searched in my mind for the largest English
wild birds, geese, buzzards.

Still it laboured and strove, then was still, a dark spot, then struggled
again. I went out of the house and down the steep slope, at risk of
breaking my leg between the rocks. I knew the ground so well--and yet I
got well shaken before I drew near the thorn-trees.

Yes, it was a bird. It was Joey. It was the grey-brown peacock with a
blue neck. He was snow-wet and spent.

'Joey--Joey, de-urr!' I said, staggering unevenly towards him. He looked
so pathetic, rowing and struggling in the snow, too spent to rise, his
blue neck stretching out and lying sometimes on the snow, his eye closing
and opening quickly, his crest all battered.

'Joey dee-uur! Dee-urr!' I said caressingly to him. And at last he lay
still, blinking, in the surged and furrowed snow, whilst I came near and
touched him, stroked him, gathered him under my arm. He stretched his
long, wetted neck away from me as I held him, none the less he was quiet
in my arm, too tired, perhaps, to struggle. Minor States, such as the
Republics of Genoa and Siena, the Duchies of Urbino and Ferrara, the
Marquisate of Mantua, the petty tyrannies of Romagna, and the
wealthy city of Bologna, were sufficiently important to affect the
balance of power, and to produce new combinations.

For the present purpose it is, however, enough to consider the five great
Powers.

After the peace of Constance, which freed the Lombard Communes from Imperial
interference in the year 1183, Milan, by her geographical position,
rose rapidly to be the first city of North Italy. Without narrating
the changes by which she lost her freedom as a Commune, it is
enough to state that, earliest of all Italian cities, Milan passed into
the hands of a single family. The Visconti managed to convert this flourishing
commonwealth, with all its dependencies, into their private property,
ruling it exclusively for their own profit, using its municipal
institutions as the machinery of administration, and employing the
taxes which they raised upon its wealth for purely selfish ends.

When the line of the Visconti ended in the year 1447, their tyranny was
continued by Francesco Sforza, the son of a poor soldier of adventure, who
had raised himself by his military genius, and had married Bianca, the
illegitimate daughter of the last Visconti.

On the death of Francesco Sforza in 1466, he left two sons, Galeazzo
Maria and Lodovico, surnamed Il Moro, both of whom were destined to play
a prominent part in history. Galeazzo Maria, dissolute, vicious, and cruel
to the core, was murdered by his injured subjects in the year 1476. His
son, Giovanni Galeazzo, aged eight, would in course of time have
succeeded to the Duchy, had it not been for the ambition of his uncle
Lodovico. Lodovico contrived to name himself as Regent for his nephew,
whom he kept, long after he had come of age, in a kind of honourable
prison. Virtual master in Milan, but without a legal title to the throne,
unrecognised in his authority by the Italian powers, and holding it from
day to day by craft and fraud, Lodovico at last found his situation
untenable; and it was this difficulty of an usurper to maintain himself
in his despotism which, as we shall see, brought the French into
Italy.

Venice, the neighbour and constant foe of Milan, had become a close
oligarchy by a process of gradual constitutional development, which
threw her government into the hands of a few nobles.

She was practically ruled by the hereditary members of the Grand
Council.

Ever since the year 1453, when Constantinople fell beneath the Turk, the
Venetians had been more and more straitened in their Oriental commerce,
and were thrown back upon the policy of territorial aggrandisement in
Italy, from which they had hitherto refrained as alien to the
temperament of the Republic.

At the end of the fifteenth century Venice therefore became an object of
envy and terror to the Italian States.

They envied her because she alone was tranquil, wealthy, powerful, and
free.

They feared her because they had good reason to suspect her of encroachment;
and it was foreseen that if she got the upper hand in Italy, all
Italy would be the property of the families inscribed upon the
Golden Book.

It was thus alone that the Italians comprehended government. The principle
of representation being utterly unknown, and the privileged burghers
in each city being regarded as absolute and lawful owners of the
city and of everything belonging to it, the conquest of a town by
a republic implied the political extinction of that town and the
disfranchisement of its inhabitants in favour of the conquerors.

Florence at this epoch still called itself a Republic; and of all Italian
commonwealths it was by far the most democratic. Its history, unlike
that of Venice, had been the history of continual and brusque changes,
resulting in the destruction of the old nobility, in the equalisation
of the burghers, and in the formation of a new aristocracy of wealth.

Prom this class of _bourgeois_ nobles sprang the Medici, who, by
careful manipulation of the State machinery, by the creation of a
powerful party devoted to their interests, by flattery of the people,
by corruption, by taxation, and by constant scheming, raised
themselves to the first place in the commonwealth, and became its
virtual masters.

In the year 1492 Lorenzo de' Medici, the most remarkable chief of this
despotic family, died, bequeathing his supremacy in the Republic to a son
of marked incompetence.

Since the Pontificate of Nicholas V. the See of Rome had entered upon a
new period of existence. The Popes no longer dreaded to reside in
Rome, but were bent upon making the metropolis of Christendom both splendid
as a seat of art and learning, and also potent as the capital of a secular
kingdom.

Though their fiefs in Romagna and the March were still held but
loosely, though their provinces swarmed with petty despots who
defied the Papal authority, and though the princely Roman houses
of Colonna and Orsini were still strong enough to terrorise the
Holy Father in the Vatican, it was now clear that the Papal See
must in the end get the better of its adversaries, and consolidate
itself into a first-rate Power.

The internal spirit of the Papacy at this time corresponded to its
external policy.

It was thoroughly secularised by a series of worldly and vicious
pontiffs, who had clean forgotten what their title, Vicar of Christ,
implied.

They consistently used their religious prestige to enforce their secular
authority, while by their temporal power they caused their religious
claims to be respected.

Corrupt and shameless, they indulged themselves in every vice, openly
acknowledged their children, and turned Italy upside down in order
to establish favourites and bastards in the principalities they
seized as spoils of war.

The kingdom of Naples differed from any other state of Italy. Subject
continually to foreign rulers since the decay of the Greek Empire,
governed in succession by the Normans, the Hohenstauffens, and the
House of Anjou, it had never enjoyed the real independence, or the
free institutions, of the northern provinces; nor had it been
Italianised in the same sense as the rest of the peninsula.

Despotism, which assumed so many forms in Italy, was here neither
the tyranny of a noble house, nor the masked autocracy of a burgher,
nor yet the forceful sway of a condottiere.

It had a dynastic character, resembling the monarchy of one of the
great European nations, but modified by the peculiar conditions
of Italian statecraft.

Owing to this dynastic and monarchical complexion of the Neapolitan kingdom,
semi-feudal customs flourished in the south far more than in the
north of Italy.

The barons were more powerful; and the destinies of the Regno often
turned upon their feuds and quarrels with the Crown.

At the same time the Neapolitan despots shared the uneasy circumstances
of all Italian potentates, owing to the uncertainty of their tenure,
both as conquerors and aliens, and also as the nominal vassals of the
Holy See. The rights of suzerainty which the Normans had yielded to the
Papacy over their southern conquests, and which the Popes had
arbitrarily exercised in favour of the Angevine princes, proved a
constant source of peril to the rest of Italy by rendering the
succession to the crown of Naples doubtful.

On the extinction of the Angevine line, however, the throne was
occupied by a prince who had no valid title but that of the sword
to its possession.

Alfonso of Aragon conquered Naples in 1442, and neglecting his hereditary
dominion, settled in his Italian capital.

Possessed with the enthusiasm for literature which was then the ruling
passion of the Italians, and very liberal to men of learning, Alfonso won
for himself the surname of Magnanimous.

On his death, in 1458, he bequeathed his Spanish kingdom, together with
Sicily and Sardinia, to his brother, and left the fruits of his Italian
conquest to his bastard, Ferdinand.

This Ferdinand, whose birth was buried in profound obscurity, was the
reigning sovereign in the year 1492.

Of a cruel and sombre temperament, traitorous and tyrannical,
Ferdinand was hated by his subjects as much as Alfonso had been
loved.

He possessed, however, to a remarkable degree, the qualities which at
that epoch constituted a consummate statesman; and though the history
of his reign is the history of plots and conspiracies, of judicial
murders and forcible assassinations, of famines produced by iniquitous
taxation, and of every kind of diabolical tyranny, Ferdinand
contrived to hold his own, in the teeth of a rebellious baronage
or a maddened population.

His political sagacity amounted almost to a prophetic instinct in the last
years of his life, when he became aware that the old order was breaking
up in Italy, and had cause to dread that Charles VIII. of France would
prove his title to the kingdom of Naples by force of arms.[13]
Such were the component parts of the Italian body politic, with the
addition of numerous petty principalities and powers, adhering more or
less consistently to one or other of the greater States. The whole
complex machine was bound together by no sense of common interest,
animated by no common purpose, amenable to no central authority.

Even such community of feeling as one spoken language gives, was lacking.

And yet Italy distinguished herself clearly from the rest of Europe, not
merely as a geographical fact, but also as a people intellectually and
spiritually one.

The rapid rise of humanism had aided in producing this national self-consciousness.
Every State and every city was absorbed in the recovery of culture and in
the development of art and literature. Far in advance of the other
European nations, the Italians regarded the rest of the world as
barbarous, priding themselves the while, in spite of mutual jealousies
and hatreds, on their Italic civilisation. They were enormously wealthy.
The resources of the Papal treasury, the private fortunes of the
Florentine bankers, the riches of the Venetian merchants might
have purchased all that France or Germany possessed of value.

The single Duchy of Milan yielded to its masters 700,000 golden
florins of revenue, according to the computation of De Comines.

In default of a confederative system, the several States were held in
equilibrium by diplomacy. By far the most important people, next to the
despots and the captains of adventure, were ambassadors and orators.
War itself had become a matter of arrangement, bargain, and
diplomacy.

The game of stratagem was played by generals who had been friends
yesterday and might be friends again to-morrow, with troops who felt no
loyalty whatever for the standards under which they listed.

To avoid slaughter and to achieve the ends of warfare by parade and
demonstration was the interest of every one concerned.

Looking back upon Italy of the fifteenth century, taking account
of her religious deadness and moral corruption, estimating the
absence of political vigour in the republics and the noxious tyranny
of the despots, analysing her lack of national spirit, and comparing
her splendid life of cultivated ease with the want of martial energy,
we can see but too plainly that contact with a simpler and stronger
people could not but produce a terrible catastrophe.

The Italians themselves, however, were far from comprehending this.

Centuries of undisturbed internal intrigue had accustomed them to
play the game of forfeits with each other, and nothing warned them
that the time was come at which diplomacy, finesse, and craft would
stand them in ill stead against rapacious conquerors.

The storm which began to gather over Italy in the year 1492 had its
first beginning in the North. Lodovico Sforza's position in the
Duchy of Milan was becoming every day more difficult, when a slight and
to all appearances insignificant incident converted his apprehension
of danger into panic.

It was customary for the States of Italy to congratulate a new Pope on
his election by their ambassadors; and this ceremony had now to be performed
for Roderigo Borgia. Lodovico proposed that his envoys should go to Rome
together with those of Venice, Naples, and Florence; but Piero de'
Medici, whose vanity made him wish to send an embassy in his own name,
contrived that Lodovico's proposal should be rejected both by Florence
and the King of Naples.
So strained was the situation of Italian affairs that Lodovico saw
in this repulse a menace to his own usurped authority.

Feeling himself isolated among the princes of his country, rebuffed
by the Medici, and coldly treated by the King of Naples, he turned
in his anxiety to France, and advised the young king, Charles VIII.,
to make good his claim upon the Regno.

It was a bold move to bring the foreigner thus into Italy; and even Lodovico,
who prided himself upon his sagacity, could not see how things would
end.

He thought his situation so hazardous, however, that any change must be
for the better.

Moreover, a French invasion of Naples would tie the hands of his
natural foe, King Ferdinand, whose granddaughter, Isabella of Aragon,
had married Giovanni Galeazzo Sforza, and was now the rightful
Duchess of Milan.

When the Florentine ambassador at Milan asked him how he had the
courage to expose Italy to such peril, his reply betrayed the egotism
of his policy: 'You talk to me of Italy; but when have I looked
Italy in the face?

No one ever gave a thought to my affairs.

I have, therefore, had to give them such security as I could.'

Charles VIII. was young, light-brained, romantic, and ruled by
_parvenus_, who had an interest in disturbing the old order of the
monarchy.

He lent a willing ear to Lodovico's invitation, backed as this was
by the eloquence and passion of numerous Italian refugees and exiles.

Against the advice of his more prudent counsellors, he taxed all the
resources of his kingdom, and concluded treaties on disadvantageous
terms with England, Germany, and Spain, in order that he might be able
to concentrate all his attention upon the Italian expedition. At the end
of the year 1493, it was known that the invasion was resolved upon.
Gentile Becchi, the Florentine envoy at the Court of France, wrote to
Piero de' Medici: 'If the King succeeds, it is all over with
Italy--_tutta a bordello._' The extraordinary selfishness of the
several Italian States at this critical moment deserves to be
noticed.

The Venetians, as Paolo Antonio Soderini described them to Piero de'
Medici, 'are of opinion that to keep quiet, and to see other
potentates of Italy spending and suffering, cannot but be to their
advantage.

They trust no one, and feel sure they have enough money to be able
at any moment to raise sufficient troops, and so to guide events
according to their inclinations.'

As the invasion was directed against Naples, Ferdinand of Aragon
displayed the acutest sense of the situation.

But whether the two Rockley girls really liked it better, or whether they
only imagined they did, is a question. Certainly their lives were much
more grey and dreary now that the grey clay had ceased to spatter its mud
and silt its dust over the premises. They did not quite realize how they
missed the shrieking, shouting lasses, whom they had known all their
lives and disliked so much.

Matilda and Emmie were already old maids. In a thorough industrial
district, it is not easy for the girls who have expectations above the
common to find husbands. The ugly industrial town was full of men, young
men who were ready to marry. But they were all colliers or pottery-hands,
mere workmen. The Rockley girls would have about ten thousand pounds each
when their father died: ten thousand pounds' worth of profitable
house-property. It was not to be sneezed at: they felt so themselves, and
refrained from sneezing away such a fortune on any mere member of the
proletariat. Consequently, bank-clerks or nonconformist clergymen or even
school-teachers having failed to come forward, Matilda had begun to give
up all idea of ever leaving the Pottery House.

Matilda was a tall, thin, graceful fair girl, with a rather large nose.
She was the Mary to Emmie's Martha: that is, Matilda loved painting and
music, and read a good many novels, whilst Emmie looked after the
house-keeping. Emmie was shorter, plumper than her sister, and she had no
accomplishments. She looked up to Matilda, whose mind was naturally
refined and sensible.

In their quiet, melancholy way, the two girls were happy. Their mother
was dead. Their father was ill also. He was an intelligent man who had
had some education, but preferred to remain as if he were one with the
rest of the working people. He had a passion for music and played the
violin pretty well. But now he was getting old, he was very ill, dying of
a kidney disease. He had been rather a heavy whisky-drinker.

This quiet household, with one servant-maid, lived on year after year in
the Pottery House. Friends came in, the girls went out, the father drank
himself more and more ill. Outside in the street there was a continual
racket of the colliers and their dogs and children. But inside the
pottery wall was a deserted quiet.

In all this ointment there was one little fly. Ted Rockley, the father of
the girls, had had four daughters, and no son. As his girls grew, he felt
angry at finding himself always in a house-hold of women. He went off to
London and adopted a boy out of a Charity Institution. Emmie was fourteen
years old, and Matilda sixteen, when their father arrived home with his
prodigy, the boy of six, Hadrian.

Hadrian was just an ordinary boy from a Charity Home, with ordinary
brownish hair and ordinary bluish eyes and of ordinary rather cockney
speech. The Rockley girls--there were three at home at the time of his
arrival--had resented his being sprung on them. He, with his watchful,
charity-institution instinct, knew this at once. Though he was only six
years old, Hadrian had a subtle, jeering look on his face when he
regarded the three young women. They insisted he should address them as
Cousin: Cousin Flora, Cousin Matilda, Cousin Emmie. He complied, but
there seemed a mockery in his tone.

The girls, however, were kind-hearted by nature. Flora married and left
home. Hadrian did very much as he pleased with Matilda and Emmie, though
they had certain strictnesses. He grew up in the Pottery House and about
the Pottery premises, went to an elementary school, and was invariably
called Hadrian Rockley. He regarded Cousin Matilda and Cousin Emmie with
a certain laconic indifference, was quiet and reticent in his ways. The
girls called him sly, but that was unjust. He was merely cautious, and
without frankness. His Uncle, Ted Rockley, understood him tacitly, their
natures were somewhat akin. Hadrian and the elderly man had a real but
unemotional regard for one another.

When he was thirteen years old the boy was sent to a High School in the
County town. He did not like it. His Cousin Matilda had longed to make a
little gentleman of him, but he refused to be made. He would give a
little contemptuous curve to his lip, and take on a shy, charity-boy
grin, when refinement was thrust upon him. He played truant from the High
School, sold his books, his cap with its badge, even his very scarf and
pocket-handkerchief, to his school-fellows, and went raking off heaven
knows where with the money. So he spent two very unsatisfactory years.

When he was fifteen he announced that he wanted to leave England and go
to the Colonies. He had kept touch with the Home. The Rockleys knew that,
when Hadrian made a declaration, in his quiet, half-jeering manner, it
was worse than useless to oppose him. So at last the boy departed, going
to Canada under the protection of the Institution to which he had
belonged. He said good-bye to the Rockleys without a word of thanks, and
parted, it seemed, without a pang. Matilda and Emmie wept often to think
of how he left them: even on their father's face a queer look came. But
Hadrian wrote fairly regularly from Canada. He had entered some
electricity works near Montreal, and was doing well.

At last, however, the war came. In his turn, Hadrian joined up and came
to Europe. The Rockleys saw nothing of him. They lived on, just the same,
in the Pottery House. Ted Rockley was dying of a sort of dropsy, and in
his heart he wanted to see the boy. When the armistice was signed,
Hadrian had a long leave, and wrote that he was coming home to the
Pottery House.

The girls were terribly fluttered. To tell the truth, they were a little
afraid of Hadrian. Matilda, tall and thin, was frail in her health, both
girls were worn with nursing their father. To have Hadrian, a young man
of twenty-one, in the house with them, after he had left them so coldly
five years before, was a trying circumstance.

They were in a flutter. Emmie persuaded her father to have his bed made
finally in the morning-room downstairs, whilst his room upstairs was
prepared for Hadrian. This was done, and preparations were going on for
the arrival, when, at ten o'clock in the morning the young man suddenly
turned up, quite unexpectedly. Cousin Emmie, with her hair bobbed up in
absurd little bobs round her forehead, was busily polishing the
stair-rods, while Cousin Matilda was in the kitchen washing the
drawing-room ornaments in a lather, her sleeves rolled back on her thin
arms, and her head tied up oddly and coquettishly in a duster.

Cousin Matilda blushed deep with mortification when the self-possessed
young man walked in with his kit-bag, and put his cap on the sewing
machine. He was little and self-confident, with a curious neatness about
him that still suggested the Charity Institution. His face was brown, he
had a small moustache, he was vigorous enough in his smallness.

'_Well_, is it Hadrian!' exclaimed Cousin Matilda, wringing the lather
off her hand. 'We didn't expect you till tomorrow.'

'I got off Monday night,' said Hadrian, glancing round the room.

'Fancy!' said Cousin Matilda. Then, having dried her hands, she went
forward, held out her hand, and said:

'How are you?'

'Quite well, thank you,' said Hadrian.

'You're quite a man,' said Cousin Matilda.

Hadrian glanced at her. She did not look her best: so thin, so
large-nosed, with that pink-and-white checked duster tied round her head.
She felt her disadvantage. But she had had a good deal of suffering and
sorrow, she did not mind any more.

The servant entered--one that did not know Hadrian.

'Come and see my father,' said Cousin Matilda.

In the hall they roused Cousin Emmie like a partridge from cover. She was
on the stairs pushing the bright stair-rods into place. Instinctively her
hand went to the little knobs, her front hair bobbed on her forehead.

'Why!' she exclaimed, crossly. 'What have you come today for?'

'I got off a day earlier,' said Hadrian, and his man's voice so deep and
unexpected was like a blow to Cousin Emmie.

'Well, you've caught us in the midst of it,' she said, with resentment.
Then all three went into the middle room.

Mr. Rockley was dressed--that is, he had on his trousers and socks--but
he was resting on the bed, propped up just under the window, from whence
he could see his beloved and resplendent garden, where tulips and
apple-trees were ablaze. He did not look as ill as he was, for the water
puffed him up, and his face kept its colour. His stomach was much
swollen. He glanced round swiftly, turning his eyes without turning his
head. He was the wreck of a handsome, well-built man.

Seeing Hadrian, a queer, unwilling smile went over his face. The young
man greeted him sheepishly.

'You wouldn't make a life-guardsman,' he said. 'Do you want something to
eat?'

Hadrian looked round--as if for the meal.

'I don't mind,' he said.

'What shall you have--egg and bacon?' asked Emmie shortly.

'Yes, I don't mind,' said Hadrian.

The sisters went down to the kitchen, and sent the servant to finish the
stairs.

'Isn't he _altered_?' said Matilda, _sotto voce_.

'Isn't he!' said Cousin Emmie. '_What_ a little man!'

They both made a grimace, and laughed nervously.

'Get the frying-pan,' said Emmie to Matilda.

'But he's as cocky as ever,' said Matilda, narrowing her eyes and shaking
her head knowingly, as she handed the frying-pan.

'Mannie!' said Emmie sarcastically. Hadrian's new-fledged, cock-sure
manliness evidently found no favour in her eyes.

'Oh, he's not bad,' said Matilda. 'You don't want to be prejudiced
against him.'

I'm not prejudiced against him, I think he's all right for looks,' said
Emmie, 'but there's too much of the little mannie about him.'

'Fancy catching us like this,' said Matilda.

'They've no thought for anything,' said Emmie with contempt. 'You go up
and get dressed, our Matilda. I don't care about him. I can see to
things, and you can talk to him. I shan't.'

'He'll talk to my father,' said Matilda, meaningful.

'_Sly--!_' exclaimed Emmie, with a grimace.

The sisters believed that Hadrian had come hoping to get something out of
their father--hoping for a legacy. And they were not at all sure he would
not get it.

Matilda went upstairs to change. She had thought it all out how she would
receive Hadrian, and impress him. And he had caught her with her head
tied up in a duster, and her thin arms in a basin of lather. But she did
not care. She now dressed herself most scrupulously, carefully folded her
long, beautiful, blonde hair, touched her pallor with a little rouge, and
put her long string of exquisite crystal beads over her soft green dress.
Now she looked elegant, like a heroine in a magazine illustration, and
almost as unreal.

She found Hadrian and her father talking away. The young man was short of
speech as a rule, but he could find his tongue with his 'uncle'. They
were both sipping a glass of brandy, and smoking, and chatting like a
pair of old cronies. Hadrian was telling about Canada. He was going back
there when his leave was up.

'You wouldn't like to stop in England, then?' said Mr. Rockley.

'No, I wouldn't stop in England,' said Hadrian.

'How's that? There's plenty of electricians here,' said Mr. Rockley.

'Yes. But there's too much difference between the men and the employers
over here--too much of that for me,' said Hadrian.

The sick man looked at him narrowly, with oddly smiling eyes.

'That's it, is it?' he replied.

Matilda heard and understood. 'So that's your big idea, is it, my little
man,' she said to herself. She had always said of Hadrian that he had no
proper _respect_ for anybody or anything, that he was sly and _common_.
She went down to the kitchen for a _sotto voce_ confab with Emmie.

'He thinks a rare lot of himself!' she whispered.

'He's somebody, he is!' said Emmie with contempt.

'He thinks there's too much difference between masters and men, over
here,' said Matilda.

'Is it any different in Canada?' asked Emmie.

'Oh, yes--democratic,' replied Matilda, 'He thinks they're all on a level
over there.'

'Ay, well he's over here now,' said Emmie dryly, 'so he can keep his
place.'

As they talked they saw the young man sauntering down the garden, looking
casually at the flowers. He had his hands in his pockets, and his
soldier's cap neatly on his head. He looked quite at his ease, as if in
possession. The two women, fluttered, watched him through the window.

'We know what he's come for,' said Emmie, churlishly. Matilda looked a
long time at the neat khaki figure. It had something of the charity-boy
about it still; but now it was a man's figure, laconic, charged with
plebeian energy. She thought of the derisive passion in his voice as he
had declaimed against the propertied classes, to her father.

'You don't know, Emmie. Perhaps he's not come for that,' she rebuked her
sister. They were both thinking of the money.

They were still watching the young soldier. He stood away at the bottom
of the garden, with his back to them, his hands in his pockets, looking
into the water of the willow pond. Matilda's dark-blue eyes had a
strange, full look in them, the lids, with the faint blue veins showing,
dropped rather low. She carried her head light and high, but she had a
look of pain. The young man at the bottom of the garden turned and looked
up the path. Perhaps he saw them through the window. Matilda moved into
shadow.

That afternoon their father seemed weak and ill. He was easily exhausted.
The doctor came, and told Matilda that the sick man might die suddenly at
any moment--but then he might not. They must be prepared.

So the day passed, and the next. Hadrian made himself at home. He went
about in the morning in his brownish jersey and his khaki trousers,
collarless, his bare neck showing. He explored the pottery premises, as
if he had some secret purpose in so doing, he talked with Mr. Rockley,
when the sick man had strength. The two girls were always angry when the
two men sat talking together like cronies. Yet it was chiefly a kind of
politics they talked.

On the second day after Hadrian's arrival, Matilda sat with her father in
the evening. She was drawing a picture which she wanted to copy. It was
very still, Hadrian was gone out somewhere, no one knew where, and Emmie
was busy. Mr. Rockley reclined on his bed, looking out in silence over
his evening-sunny garden.

'If anything happens to me, Matilda,' he said, 'you won't sell this
house--you'll stop here--'

Matilda's eyes took their slightly haggard look as she stared at her
father.

'Well, we couldn't do anything else,' she said.

'You don't know what you might do,' he said. 'Everything is left to you
and Emmie, equally. You'do as you like with it--only don't sell this
house, don't part with it.'

'No,' she said.

'And give Hadrian my watch and chain, and a hundred pounds out of what's
in the bank--and help him if he ever wants helping. I haven't put his
name in the will.'

'Your watch and chain, and a hundred pounds--yes. But you'll be here when
he goes back to Canada, father.'

'You never know what'll happen,' said her father.

Matilda sat and watched him, with her full, haggard eyes, for a long
time, as if tranced. She saw that he knew he must go soon--she saw like a
clairvoyant.

Later on she told Emmie what her father had said about the watch and
chain and the money.

'What right has _he'--he_--meaning Hadrian--'to my father's watch and
chain--what has it to do with him? Let him have the money, and get off,'
said Emmie. She loved her father.

That night Matilda sat late in her room. Her heart was anxious and
breaking, her mind seemed entranced. She was too much entranced even to
weep, and all the time she thought of her father, only her father. At
last she felt she must go to him.

It was near midnight. She went along the passage and to his room. There
was a faint light from the moon outside. She listened at his door. Then
she softly opened and entered. The room was faintly dark. She heard a
movement on the bed.

'Are you asleep?' she said softly, advancing to the side of the bed.

'Are you asleep?' she repeated gently, as she stood at the side of the
bed. And she reached her hand in the darkness to touch his forehead.
Delicately, her fingers met the nose and the eyebrows, she laid her fine,
delicate hand on his brow. It seemed fresh and smooth--very fresh and
smooth. A sort of surprise stirred her, in her entranced state. But it
could not waken her. Gently, she leaned over the bed and stirred her
fingers over the low-growing hair on his brow.

'Can't you sleep tonight?' she said.

There was a quick stirring in the bed. 'Yes, I can,' a voice answered. It
was Hadrian's voice. She started away. Instantly, she was wakened from
her late-at-night trance. She remembered that her father was downstairs,
that Hadrian had his room. She stood in the darkness as if stung.

'It is you, Hadrian?' she said. 'I thought it was my father.' She was so
startled, so shocked, that she could not move. The young man gave an
uncomfortable laugh, and turned in his bed.

At last she got out of the room. When she was back in her own room, in
the light, and her door was closed, she stood holding up her hand that
had touched him, as if it were hurt. She was almost too shocked, she
could not endure.

'Well,' said her calm and weary mind, 'it was only a mistake, why take
any notice of it.'

But she could not reason her feelings so easily. She suffered, feeling
herself in a false position. Her right hand, which she had laid so gently
on his face, on his fresh skin, ached now, as if it were really injured.
She could not forgive Hadrian for the mistake: it made her dislike him
deeply.

Hadrian too slept badly. He had been awakened by the opening of the door,
and had not realized what the question meant. But the soft, straying
tenderness of her hand on his face startled something out of his soul. He
was a charity boy, aloof and more or less at bay. The fragile
exquisiteness of her caress startled him most, revealed unknown things to
him.

In the morning she could feel the consciousness in his eyes, when
she came downstairs. She tried to bear herself as if nothing at all
had happened, and she succeeded. She had the calm self-control,
self-indifference, of one who has suffered and borne her suffering. She
looked at him from her darkish, almost drugged blue eyes, she met the
spark of consciousness in his eyes, and quenched it. And with her long,
fine hand she put the sugar in his coffee.

But she could not control him as she thought she could. He had a keen
memory stinging his mind, a new set of sensations working in his
consciousness. Something new was alert in him. At the back of his
reticent, guarded mind he kept his secret alive and vivid. She was at his
mercy, for he was unscrupulous, his standard was not her standard.

He looked at her curiously. She was not beautiful, her nose was too
large, her chin was too small, her neck was too thin. But her skin was
clear and fine, she had a high-bred sensitiveness. This queer, brave,
high-bred quality she shared with her father. The charity boy could see
it in her tapering fingers, which were white and ringed. The same glamour
that he knew in the elderly man he now saw in the woman. And he wanted to
possess himself of it, he wanted to make himself master of it. As he went
about through the old pottery-yard, his secretive mind schemed and
worked. To be master of that strange soft delicacy such as he had felt in
her hand upon his face,--this was what he set himself towards. He was
secretly plotting.

He watched Matilda as she went about, and she became aware of his
attention, as of some shadow following her. But her pride made her ignore
it. When he sauntered near her, his hands in his pockets, she received
him with that same commonplace kindliness which mastered him more than
any contempt. Her superior breeding seemed to control him. She made
herself feel towards him exactly as she had always felt: he was a young
boy who lived in the house with them, but was a stranger. Only, she dared
not remember his face under her hand. When she remembered that, she was
bewildered. Her hand had offended her, she wanted to cut it off. And she
wanted, fiercely, to cut off the memory in him. She assumed she had done
so.

One day, when he sat talking with his 'uncle', he looked straight into
the eyes of the sick man, and said:

'But I shouldn't like to live and die here in Rawsley.'

'No--well--you needn't,' said the sick man.

'Do you think Cousin Matilda likes it?'

'I should think so.'

'I don't call it much of a life,' said the youth. 'How much older is she
than me, Uncle?'

The sick man looked at the young soldier.

'A good bit,' he said.

'Over thirty?' said Hadrian.

'Well, not so much. She's thirty-two.'

Hadrian considered a while.

'She doesn't look it,' he said.

Again the sick father looked at him.

'Do you think she'd like to leave here?' said Hadrian.

'Nay, I don't know,' replied the father, restive.

Hadrian sat still, having his own thoughts. Then in a small, quiet voice,
as if he were speaking from inside himself, he said:

'I'd marry her if you wanted me to.'

The sick man raised his eyes suddenly, and stared. He stared for a long
time. The youth looked inscrutably out of the window.

'_You!_' said the sick man, mocking, with some contempt. Hadrian turned
and met his eyes. The two men had an inexplicable understanding.

'If you wasn't against it,' said Hadrian.

'Nay,' said the father, turning aside, 'I don't think I'm against it.
I've never thought of it. But--But Emmie's the youngest.'

He had flushed, and looked suddenly more alive. Secretly he loved the
boy.

'You might ask her,' said Hadrian.

The elder man considered.

'Hadn't you better ask her yourself?' he said.

'She'd take more notice of you,' said Hadrian.

They were both silent. Then Emmie came in.

For two days Mr. Rockley was excited and thoughtful. Hadrian went about
quietly, secretly, unquestioning. At last the father and daughter were
alone together. It was very early morning, the father had been in much
pain. As the pain abated, he lay still, thinking.

'Matilda!' he said suddenly, looking at his daughter.

'Yes, I'm here,' she said.

'Ay! I want you to do something--'

She rose in anticipation.

'Nay, sit still. I want you to marry Hadrian--'

She thought he was raving. She rose, bewildered and frightened.

'Nay, sit you still, sit you still. You hear what I tell you.'

'But you don't know what you're saying, father.'

'Ay, I know well enough. I want you to marry Hadrian, I tell you.'

She was dumbfounded. He was a man of few words.

'You'll do what I tell you,' he said.

She looked at him slowly.

'What put such an idea in your mind?' she said proudly.

'He did.'

Matilda almost looked her father down, her pride was so offended.

'Why, it's disgraceful,' she said.

'Why?'

She watched him slowly.

'What do you ask me for?' she said. 'It's disgusting.'

'The lad's sound enough,' he replied, testily.

'You'd better tell him to clear out,' she said, coldly.

He turned and looked out of the window. She sat flushed and erect for a
long time. At length her father turned to her, looking really malevolent.

'If you won't,' he said, 'you're a fool, and I'll make you pay for your
foolishness, do you see?'

Suddenly a cold fear gripped her. She could not believe her senses. She
was terrified and bewildered. She stared at her father, believing him to
be delirious, or mad, or drunk. What could she do?

'I tell you,' he said. 'I'll send for Whittle tomorrow if you don't. You
shall neither of you have anything of mine.'

Whittle was the solicitor. She understood her father well enough: he
would send for his solicitor, and make a will leaving all his property to
Hadrian: neither she nor Emmie should have anything. It was too much. She
rose and went out of the room, up to her own room, where she locked
herself in.

She did not come out for some hours. At last, late at night, she confided
in Emmie.

'The sliving demon, he wants the money,' said Emmie. 'My father's out of
his mind.'

The thought that Hadrian merely wanted the money was another blow to
Matilda. She did not love the impossible youth--but she had not yet
learned to think of him as a thing of evil. He now became hideous to her
mind.

Emmie had a little scene with her father next day.

'You don't mean what you said to our Matilda yesterday, do you, father?'
she asked aggressively.

'Yes,' he replied.

'What, that you'll alter your will?'

'Yes.'

'You won't,' said his angry daughter.

But he looked at her with a malevolent little smile.

'Annie!' he shouted. 'Annie!'

He had still power to make his voice carry. The servant maid came in from
the kitchen.

'Put your things on, and go down to Whittle's office, and say I want to
see Mr. Whittle as soon as he can, and will he bring a will-form.'

The sick man lay back a little--he could not lie down. His daughter sat
as if she had been struck. Then she left the room.

Hadrian was pottering about in the garden. She went straight down to him.

'Here,' she said. 'You'd better get off. You'd better take your things
and go from here, quick.'

Hadrian looked slowly at the infuriated girl.

'Who says so?' he asked.

'_We_ say so--get off, you've done enough mischief and damage.'

'Does Uncle say so?'

'Yes, he does.'

'I'll go and ask him.'

But like a fury Emmie barred his way.

'No, you needn't. You needn't ask him nothing at all. We don't want you,
so you can go.'

'Uncle's boss here.'

'A man that's dying, and you crawling round and working on him for his
money!--you're not fit to live.'

'Oh!' he said. 'Who says I'm working for his money?'

'I say. But my father told our Matilda, and _she_ knows what you are.
_She_ knows what you're after. So you might as well clear out, for all
you'll get--guttersnipe!'

He turned his back on her, to think. It had not occurred to him that they
would think he was after the money. He _did_ want the money--badly. He
badly wanted to be an employer himself, not one of the employed. But he
knew, in his subtle, calculating way, that it was not for money he wanted
Matilda. He wanted both the money and Matilda. But he told himself the
two desires were separate, not one. He could not do with Matilda,
_without_ the money. But he did not want her _for_ the money.

When he got this clear in his mind, he sought for an opportunity to tell
it her, lurking and watching. But she avoided him. In the evening the
lawyer came. Mr. Rockley seemed to have a new access of strength--a will
was drawn up, making the previous arrangements wholly conditional. The
old will held good, if Matilda would consent to marry Hadrian. If she
refused then at the end of six months the whole property passed to
Hadrian.

Mr. Rockley told this to the young man, with malevolent satisfaction. He
seemed to have a strange desire, quite unreasonable, for revenge upon the
women who had surrounded him for so long, and served him so carefully.

'Tell her in front of me,' said Hadrian.

So Mr. Rockley sent for his daughters.

At last they came, pale, mute, stubborn. Matilda seemed to have retired
far off, Emmie seemed like a fighter ready to fight to the death. The
sick man reclined on the bed, his eyes bright, his puffed hand trembling.
But his face had again some of its old, bright handsomeness. Hadrian sat
quiet, a little aside: the indomitable, dangerous charity boy.

'There's the will,' said their father, pointing them to the paper.

The two women sat mute and immovable, they took no notice.

'Either you marry Hadrian, or he has everything,' said the father with
satisfaction.

'Then let him have everything,' said Matilda boldly.

'He's not! He's not!' cried Emmie fiercely. 'He's not going to have it.
The guttersnipe!'

An amused look came on her father's face.

'You hear that, Hadrian,' he said.

'I didn't offer to marry Cousin Matilda for the money,' said Hadrian,
flushing and moving on his seat.

Matilda looked at him slowly, with her dark-blue, drugged eyes. He seemed
a strange little monster to her.

'Why, you liar, you know you did,' cried Emmie.

The sick man laughed. Matilda continued to gaze strangely at the young
man.

'She knows I didn't,' said Hadrian.

He too had his courage, as a rat has indomitable courage in the end.
Hadrian had some of the neatness, the reserve, the underground quality of
the rat. But he had perhaps the ultimate courage, the most unquenchable
courage of all.

Emmie looked at her sister.

'Oh, well,' she said. 'Matilda--don't bother. Let him have everything, we
can look after ourselves.'

'I know he'll take everything,' said Matilda, abstractedly.

Hadrian did not answer. He knew in fact that if Matilda refused him he
would take everything, and go off with it.

'A clever little mannie--!' said Emmie, with a jeering grimace.

The father laughed noiselessly to himself. But he was tired....

'Go on, then,' he said. 'Go on, let me be quiet.'

Emmie turned and looked at him.

'You deserve what you've got,' she said to her father bluntly.

'Go on,' he answered mildly. 'Go on.'

Another night passed--a night nurse sat up with Mr. Rockley. Another day
came. Hadrian was there as ever, in his woollen jersey and coarse khaki
trousers and bare neck. Matilda went about, frail and distant, Emmie
black-browed in spite of her blondness. They were all quiet, for they did
not intend the mystified servant to learn anything.

Mr. Rockley had very bad attacks of pain, he could not breathe. The end
seemed near. They all went about quiet and stoical, all unyielding.
Hadrian pondered within himself. If he did not marry Matilda he would go
to Canada with twenty thousand pounds. This was itself a very
satisfactory prospect. If Matilda consented he would have nothing--she
would have her own money.

Emmie was the one to act. She went off in search of the solicitor and
brought him with her. There was an interview, and Whittle tried to
frighten the youth into withdrawal--but without avail. The clergyman and
relatives were summoned--but Hadrian stared at them and took no notice.
It made him angry, however.

He wanted to catch Matilda alone. Many days went by, and he was not
successful: she avoided him. At last, lurking, he surprised her one day
as she came to pick gooseberries, and he cut off her retreat. He came to
the point at once.

'You don't want me, then?' he said, in his subtle, insinuating voice.

'I don't want to speak to you,' she said, averting her face.

'You put your hand on me, though,' he said. 'You shouldn't have done
that, and then I should never have thought of it. You shouldn't have
touched me.'

'If you were anything decent, you'd know that was a mistake, and forget
it,' she said.

'I know it was a mistake--but I shan't forget it. If you wake a man up,
he can't go to sleep again because he's told to.'

'If you had any decent feeling in you, you'd have gone away,' she
replied.

'I didn't want to,' he replied.

She looked away into the distance. At last she asked:

'What do you persecute me for, if it isn't for the money. I'm old enough
to be your mother. In a way I've been your mother.'

'Doesn't matter,' he said. 'You've been no mother to me. Let us marry and
go out to Canada--you might as well--you've touched me.'

She was white and trembling. Suddenly she flushed with anger.

'It's so _indecent_,' she said.

'How?' he retorted. 'You touched me.'

But she walked away from him. She felt as if he had trapped her. He was
angry and depressed, he felt again despised.

That same evening she went into her father's room.

'Yes,' she said suddenly. 'I'll marry him.'

Her father looked up at her. He was in pain, and very ill.

'You like him now, do you?' he said, with a faint smile.

She looked down into his face, and saw death not far off. She turned and
went coldly out of the room.

The solicitor was sent for, preparations were hastily made. In all the
interval Matilda did not speak to Hadrian, never answered him if he
addressed her. He approached her in the morning.

'You've come round to it, then?' he said, giving her a pleasant look from
his twinkling, almost kindly eyes. She looked down at him and turned
aside. She looked down on him both literally and figuratively. Still he
persisted, and triumphed.

Emmie raved and wept, the secret flew abroad. But Matilda was silent and
unmoved, Hadrian was quiet and satisfied, and nipped with fear also. But
he held out against his fear. Mr. Rockley was very ill, but unchanged.

On the third day the marriage took place. Matilda and Hadrian drove
straight home from the registrar, and went straight into the room of the
dying man. His face lit up with a clear twinkling smile.

'Hadrian--you've got her?' he said, a little hoarsely.

'Yes,' said Hadrian, who was pale round the gills.

'Ay, my lad, I'm glad you're mine,' replied the dying man. Then he turned
his eyes closely on Matilda.

'Let's look at you, Matilda,' he said. Then his voice went strange and
unrecognizable. 'Kiss me,' he said.

She stooped and kissed him. She had never kissed him before, not since
she was a tiny child. But she was quiet, very still.

'Kiss him,' the dying man said.

Obediently, Matilda put forward her mouth and kissed the young husband.

'That's right! That's right!' murmured the dying man.


_Samson and Delilah_


A man got down from the motor-omnibus that runs from Penzance to
St Just-in-Penwith, and turned northwards, uphill towards the Polestar.
It was only half past six, but already the stars were out, a cold little
wind was blowing from the sea, and the crystalline, three-pulse flash of
the lighthouse below the cliffs beat rhythmically in the first darkness.

The man was alone. He went his way unhesitating, but looked from side to
side with cautious curiosity. Tall, ruined power-houses of tin-mines
loomed in the darkness from time to time, like remnants of some by-gone
civilization. The lights of many miners' cottages scattered on the hilly
darkness twinkled desolate in their disorder, yet twinkled with the
lonely homeliness of the Celtic night.

He tramped steadily on, always watchful with curiosity. He was a tall,
well-built man, apparently in the prime of life. His shoulders were
square and rather stiff, he leaned forwards a little as he went, from the
hips, like a man who must stoop to lower his height. But he did not stoop
his shoulders: he bent his straight back from the hips.

Now and again short, stump, thick-legged figures of Cornish miners passed
him, and he invariably gave them goodnight, as if to insist that he was
on his own ground. He spoke with the west-Cornish intonation. And as he
went along the dreary road, looking now at the lights of the dwellings on
land, now at the lights away to sea, vessels veering round in sight of
the Longships Lighthouse, the whole of the Atlantic Ocean in darkness and
space between him and America, he seemed a little excited and pleased
with himself, watchful, thrilled, veering along in a sense of mastery
and of power in conflict.

The houses began to close on the road, he was entering the straggling,
formless, desolate mining village, that he knew of old. On the left was a
little space set back from the road, and cosy lights of an inn. There it
was. He peered up at the sign: 'The Tinners' Rest'. But he could not make
out the name of the proprietor. He listened. There was excited talking
and laughing, a woman's voice laughing shrilly among the men's.

Stooping a little, he entered the warmly-lit bar. The lamp was burning, a
buxom woman rose from the white-scrubbed deal table where the black and
white and red cards were scattered, and several men, miners, lifted their
faces from the game.

The stranger went to the counter, averting his face. His cap was pulled
down over his brow.

'Good-evening!' said the landlady, in her rather ingratiating voice.

'Good-evening. A glass of ale.'

'A glass of ale,' repeated the landlady suavely. 'Cold night--but
bright.'

'Yes,' the man assented, laconically. Then he added, when nobody expected
him to say any more: 'Seasonable weather.'

'Quite seasonable, quite,' said the landlady. 'Thank you.'

The man lifted his glass straight to his lips, and emptied it. He put it
down again on the zinc counter with a click.

'Let's have another,' he said.

The woman drew the beer, and the man went away with his glass to the
second table, near the fire. The woman, after a moment's hesitation, took
her seat again at the table with the card-players. She had noticed the
man: a big fine fellow, well dressed, a stranger.

But he spoke with that Cornish-Yankee accent she accepted as the natural
twang among the miners.

The stranger put his foot on the fender and looked into the fire. He was
handsome, well coloured, with well-drawn Cornish eyebrows, and the usual
dark, bright, mindless Cornish eyes. He seemed abstracted in thought.
Then he watched the card-party.

The woman was buxom and healthy, with dark hair and small, quick brown
eyes. She was bursting with life and vigour, the energy she threw into
the game of cards excited all the men, they shouted, and laughed, and the
woman held her breast, shrieking with laughter.

'Oh, my, it'll be the death o' me,' she panted. 'Now, come on, Mr.
Trevorrow, play fair. Play fair, I say, or I s'll put the cards down.'

'Play fair! Why who's played unfair?' ejaculated Mr. Trevorrow. 'Do you
mean t'accuse me, as I haven't played fair, Mrs. Nankervis?'

'I do. I say it, and I mean it. Haven't you got the queen of spades? Now,
come on, no dodging round me. I know you've got that queen, as well as I
know my name's Alice.'

'Well--if your name's Alice, you'll have to have it--'

'Ay, now--what did I say? Did you ever see such a man? My word, but your
missus must be easy took in, by the looks of things.'

And off she went into peals of laughter. She was interrupted by the
entrance of four men in khaki, a short, stumpy sergeant of middle age, a
young corporal, and two young privates. The woman leaned back in her
chair.

'Oh, my!' she cried. 'If there isn't the boys back: looking perished, I
believe--'

'Perished, Ma!' exclaimed the sergeant. 'Not yet.'

'Near enough,' said a young private, uncouthly.

The woman got up.

'I'm sure you are, my dears. You'll be wanting your suppers, I'll be
bound.'

'We could do with 'em.'

'Let's have a wet first,' said the sergeant.

The woman bustled about getting the drinks. The soldiers moved to the
fire, spreading out their hands.

'Have your suppers in here, will you?' she said. 'Or in the kitchen?'

'Let's have it here,' said the sergeant. 'More cosier--_if_ you don't
mind.'

'You shall have it where you like, boys, where you like.'

She disappeared. In a minute a girl of about sixteen came in. She was
tall and fresh, with dark, young, expressionless eyes, and well-drawn
brows, and the immature softness and mindlessness of the sensuous Celtic
type.

'Ho, Maryann! Evenin', Maryann! How's Maryann, now?' came the multiple
greeting.

She replied to everybody in a soft voice, a strange, soft _aplomb_ that
was very attractive. And she moved round with rather mechanical,
attractive movements, as if her thoughts were elsewhere. But she had
always this dim far-awayness in her bearing: a sort of modesty. The
strange man by the fire watched her curiously. There was an alert,
inquisitive, mindless curiosity on his well-coloured face.

'I'll have a bit of supper with you, if I might,' he said.

She looked at him, with her clear, unreasoning eyes, just like the eyes
of some non-human creature.

'I'll ask mother,' she said. Her voice was soft-breathing, gently
singsong.

When she came in again:

'Yes,' she said, almost whispering. 'What will you have?'

'What have you got?' he said, looking up into her face.

'There's cold meat--'

'That's for me, then.'

The stranger sat at the end of the table and ate with the tired, quiet
soldiers. Now, the landlady was interested in him. Her brow was knit
rather tense, there was a look of panic in her large, healthy face, but
her small brown eyes were fixed most dangerously. She was a big woman,
but her eyes were small and tense. She drew near the stranger. She wore a
rather loud-patterned flannelette blouse, and a dark skirt.

'What will you have to drink with your supper?' she asked, and there was
a new, dangerous note in her voice.

He moved uneasily.

'Oh, I'll go on with ale.'

She drew him another glass. Then she sat down on the bench at the table
with him and the soldiers, and fixed him with her attention.

'You've come from St Just, have you?' she said.

He looked at her with those clear, dark, inscrutable Cornish eyes, and
answered at length:

'No, from Penzance.'

'Penzance!--but you're not thinking of going back there tonight?'

'No--no.'

He still looked at her with those wide, clear eyes that seemed like very
bright agate. Her anger began to rise. It was seen on her brow. Yet her
voice was still suave and deprecating.

'I _thought_ not--but you're not living in these parts, are you?'

'No--no, I'm not living here.' He was always slow in answering, as if
something intervened between him and any outside question.

'Oh, I see,' she said. 'You've got relations down here.'

Again he looked straight into her eyes, as if looking her into silence.

'Yes,' he said.

He did not say any more. She rose with a flounce. The anger was tight on
her brow. There was no more laughing and card-playing that evening,
though she kept up her motherly, suave, good-humoured way with the men.
But they knew her, they were all afraid of her.

The supper was finished, the table cleared, the stranger did not go. Two
of the young soldiers went off to bed, with their cheery:

'Good-night, Ma. Good-night, Maryann.'

The stranger talked a little to the sergeant about the war, which was in
its first year, about the new army, a fragment of which was quartered in
this district, about America.

The landlady darted looks at him from her small eyes, minute by minute
the electric storm welled in her bosom, as still he did not go. She was
quivering with suppressed, violent passion, something frightening and
abnormal. She could not sit still for a moment. Her heavy form seemed to
flash with sudden, involuntary movements as the minutes passed by, and
still he sat there, and the tension on her heart grew unbearable. 
Correggio has sprinkled them lavishly like living flowers about his
cloudland, because he could not sustain a grave and solemn strain
of music, but was forced by his temperament to overlay the melody
with roulades.

Gazing at these frescoes, the thought came to me that Correggio
was like a man listening to sweetest flute-playing, and translating phrase
after phrase as they passed through his fancy into laughing faces,
breezy tresses, and rolling mists.

Sometimes a grander cadence reached his ear; and then S. Peter with
the keys, or S. Augustine of the mighty brow, or the inspired eyes
of S.

John, took form beneath his pencil.
But the light airs returned, and rose and lily faces bloomed again
for him among the clouds.

It is not therefore in dignity or sublimity that Correggio excels,
but in artless grace and melodious tenderness.

The Madonna della Scala clasping her baby with a caress which the little
child returns, S. Catherine leaning in a rapture of ecstatic love
to wed the infant Christ, S.

Sebastian in the bloom of almost boyish beauty, are the so-called
sacred subjects to which the painter was adequate, and which he
has treated with the voluptuous tenderness we find in his pictures
of Leda and Danae and Io.

Could these saints and martyrs descend from Correggio's canvas, and
take flesh, and breathe, and begin to live; of what high action,
of what grave passion, of what exemplary conduct in any walk of
life would they be capable?

That is the question which they irresistibly suggest; and we are
forced to answer, None!

The moral and religious world did not exist for Correggio. His art
was but a way of seeing carnal beauty in a dream that had no true
relation to reality.

Correggio's sensibility to light and colour was exactly on a par with
his feeling for form.

He belongs to the poets of chiaroscuro and the poets of colouring;
but in both regions he maintains the individuality so strongly
expressed in his choice of purely sensuous beauty.

Tintoretto makes use of light and shade for investing his great compositions
with dramatic intensity.

Rembrandt interprets sombre and fantastic moods of the mind by
golden gloom and silvery irradiation, translating thought into the
language of penumbral mystery.

Lionardo studies the laws of light scientifically, so that the
proper roundness and effect of distance should be accurately rendered,
and all the subtleties of nature's smiles be mimicked.

Correggio is content with fixing on his canvas the [Greek: anêrithmon
gelasma], the many-twinkling laughter of light in motion, rained
down through fleecy clouds or trembling foliage, melting into
half-shadows, bathing and illuminating every object with a soft
caress.

There are no tragic contrasts of splendour sharply defined on blackness,
no mysteries of half-felt and pervasive twilight, no studied
accuracies of noonday clearness in his work.

Light and shadow are woven together on his figures like an impalpable
Coan gauze, aërial and transparent, enhancing the palpitations of
voluptuous movement which he loved.

His colouring, in like manner, has none of the superb and mundane
pomp which the Venetians affected; it does not glow or burn or beat
the fire of gems into our brain; joyous and wanton, it seems to be
exactly such a beauty-bloom as sense requires for its satiety.

There is nothing in his hues to provoke deep passion or to stimulate the
yearnings of the soul: the pure blushes of the dawn and the crimson
pyres of sunset are nowhere in the world that he has painted.

But that chord of jocund colour which may fitly be married to the
smiles of light, the blues which are found in laughing eyes, the
pinks that tinge the cheeks of early youth, and the warm yet silvery
tones of healthy flesh, mingle as in a marvellous pearl-shell on
his pictures.

Both chiaroscuro and colouring have this supreme purpose in art,
to effect the sense like music, and like music to create a mood in
the soul of the spectator.

Now the mood which Correggio stimulates is one of natural and
thoughtless pleasure.

To feel his influence, and at the same moment to be the subject of
strong passion, or fierce lust, or heroic resolve, or profound
contemplation, or pensive melancholy, is impossible.

Wantonness, innocent because unconscious of sin, immoral because incapable
of any serious purpose, is the quality which prevails in all that he has
painted. The pantomimes of a Mohammedan paradise might be put upon the
stage after patterns supplied by this least spiritual of painters.

It follows from this analysis that the Correggiosity of Correggio,
that which sharply distinguished him from all previous artists, was
the faculty of painting a purely voluptuous dream of beautiful
beings in perpetual movement, beneath the laughter of morning light,
in a world of never-failing April hues.

When he attempts to depart from the fairyland of which he was the Prospero,
and to match himself with the masters of sublime thought or earnest
passion, he proves his weakness.

But within his own magic circle he reigns supreme, no other artist having
blended the witcheries of colouring, chiaroscuro,and faunlike loveliness
of form into a harmony so perfect in its sensuous charm.
Bewitched by the strains of the siren, we pardon affectations of
expression, emptiness of meaning, feebleness of composition,
exaggerated and melodramatic attitudes.

There is what Goethe called a demonic influence in the art of
Correggio: 'In poetry,' said Goethe to Eckermann, 'especially in
that which is unconscious, before which reason and understanding
fall short, and which therefore produces effects so far surpassing
all conception, there is always something demonic.'

It is not to be wondered that Correggio, possessed of this demonic power
in the highest degree, and working to a purely sensuous end, should
have exercised a fatal influence over art.

His successors, attracted by an intoxicating loveliness which they could
not analyse, which had nothing in common with the reason or the
understanding, but was like a glamour cast upon the soul in its
most secret sensibilities, threw themselves blindly into the imitation
of Correggio's faults.

His affectation, his want of earnest thought, his neglect of
composition, his sensuous realism, his all-pervading sweetness, his
infantine prettiness, his substitution of thaumaturgical effects
for conscientious labour, admitted only too easy imitation, and
were but too congenial with the spirit of the late Renaissance.

Cupolas through the length and breadth of Italy began to be covered with
clouds and simpering cherubs in the convulsions of artificial ecstasy. The
attenuated elegance of Parmigiano, the attitudinising of Anselmi's
saints and angels, and a general sacrifice of what is solid and
enduring to sentimental gewgaws on the part of all painters who had
submitted to the magic of Correggio, proved how easy it was to go
astray with the great master.

Meanwhile no one could approach him in that which was truly his own--the
delineation of a transient moment in the life of sensuous beauty, the
painting of a smile on Nature's face, when light and colour tremble
in harmony with the movement of joyous living creatures.

Another demonic nature of a far more powerful type contributed his share
to the ruin of art in Italy.

Michelangelo's constrained attitudes and muscular anatomy were
imitated by painters and sculptors, who thought that the grand style
lay in the presentation of theatrical athletes, but who could not
seize the secret whereby the great master made even the bodies of
men and women--colossal trunks and writhen limbs--interpret the
meanings of his deep and melancholy soul.

It is a sad law of progress in art, that when the æsthetic impulse is on
the wane, artists should perforce select to follow the weakness rather
than the vigour, of their predecessors.

While painting was in the ascendant, Raphael could take the best
of Perugino and discard the worst; in its decadence Parmigiano
reproduces the affectations of Correggio, and Bernini carries the
exaggerations of Michelangelo to absurdity.

All arts describe a parabola. The force which produces them causes them
to rise throughout their growth up to a certain point, and then
to descend more gradually in a long and slanting line of regular
declension.

There is no real break of continuity.

The end is the result of simple exhaustion. Thus the last of our
Elizabethan dramatists, Shirley and Crowne and Killigrew, pushed
to its ultimate conclusion the principle inherent in Marlowe, not
attempting to break new ground, nor imitating the excellences so
much as the defects of their forerunners.

Thus too the Pointed style of architecture in England gave birth first to
what is called the Decorated, next to the Perpendicular, and finally
expired in the Tudor. Each step was a step of progress--at first for the
better--at last for the worse--but logical, continuous, necessitated.[11]

It is difficult to leave Correggio without at least posing the
question of the difference between moralised and merely sensual art.

Is all art excellent in itself and good in its effect that is beautiful
and earnest? There is no doubt that Correggio's work is in a way most
beautiful; and it bears unmistakable signs of the master having given
himself with single-hearted devotion to the expression of that phase of
loveliness which he could apprehend.

In so far we must admit that his art is both excellent and solid. Yet
we are unable to conceive that any human being could be made better--stronger
for endurance, more fitted for the uses of the world, more sensitive to
what is noble in nature--by its contemplation. At the best Correggio does
but please us in our lighter moments, and we are apt to feel that the
pleasure he has given is of an enervating kind.

To expect obvious morality of any artist is confessedly absurd.
It is not the artist's province to preach, or even to teach, except
by remote suggestion.

Yet the mind of the artist may be highly moralised, and then he takes
rank not merely with the ministers to refined pleasure, but also
with the educators of the world.

He may, for example, be penetrated with a just sense of humanity
like Shakspere, or with a sublime temperance like Sophocles, instinct
with prophetic intuition like Michelangelo, or with passionate
experience like Beethoven.

The mere sight of the work of Pheidias is like breathing pure
health-giving air.

Milton and Dante were steeped in religious patriotism; Goethe was
pervaded with philosophy, and Balzac with scientific curiosity.

Ariosto, Cervantes, and even Boccaccio are masters in the mysteries
of common life.

In all these cases the tone of the artist's mind is felt throughout
his work:
what he paints, or sings, or writes, conveys a lesson while it
pleases.

On the other hand, depravity in an artist or a poet percolates through
work which has in it nothing positive of evil, and a very miasma of
poisonous influence may rise from the apparently innocuous creations
of a tainted soul.

Now Correggio is moralised in neither way--neither as a good nor as a
bad man, neither as an acute thinker nor as a deliberate voluptuary. He
is simply sensuous. On his own ground he is even very fresh and healthy:
his delineation of youthful maternity, for example, is as true as
it is beautiful; and his sympathy with the gleefulness of children is
devoid of affectation.

We have then only to ask ourselves whether the defect in him of all
thought and feeling which is not at once capable of graceful fleshly
incarnation, be sufficient to lower him in the scale of artists.

This question must of course be answered according to our definition of the
purposes of art. There is no doubt that the most highly organised
art--that which absorbs the most numerous human qualities and
effects a harmony between the most complex elements--is the noblest.

Therefore the artist who combines moral elevation and power of
thought with a due appreciation of sensual beauty, is more elevated
and more beneficial than one whose domain is simply that of carnal
loveliness.

Correggio, if this be so, must take a comparatively low rank.

Just as we welcome the beautiful athlete for the radiant life that is in
him, but bow before the personality of Sophocles, whose perfect
form enshrined a noble and highly educated soul, so we gratefully
accept Correggio for his grace, while we approach the consummate
art of Michelangelo with reverent awe.

It is necessary in æsthetics as elsewhere to recognise a hierarchy of
excellence, the grades of which are determined by the greater or less
comprehensiveness of the artist's nature expressed in his work.

At the same time, the calibre of the artist's genius must be
estimated; for eminent greatness even of a narrow kind will always
command our admiration: and the amount of his originality has also
to be taken into account.

What is unique has, for that reason alone, a claim on our consideration.
Judged in this way, Correggio deserves a place, say, in the sweet planet
Venus, above the moon and above Mercury, among the artists who
have not advanced beyond the contemplations which find their proper
outcome in love.

Yet, even thus, he aids the culture of humanity.

'We should take care,' said Goethe, apropos of Byron, to Eckermann,
'not to be always looking for culture in the decidedly pure and
moral.

Everything that is great promotes cultivation as soon as we are aware
of it.'
* * * * *

_CANOSSA_

Italy is less the land of what is venerable in antiquity, than of
beauty, by divine right young eternally in spite of age.

This is due partly to her history and art and literature, partly to the
temper of the races who have made her what she is, and partly to
her natural advantages.

Her oldest architectural remains, the temples of Paestum and Girgenti,
or the gates of Perugia and Volterra, are so adapted to Italian
landscape and so graceful in their massive strength, that we forget
the centuries which have passed over them.

We leap as by a single bound from the times of Roman greatness to the new
birth of humanity in the fourteenth century, forgetting the many years
during which Italy, like the rest of Europe, was buried in what our
ancestors called Gothic barbarism. The illumination cast upon the classic
period by the literature of Rome and by the memory of her great
men is so vivid, that we feel the days of the Republic and the
Empire to be near us; while the Italian Renaissance is so truly a
revival of that former splendour, a resumption of the music interrupted
for a season, that it is extremely difficult to form any conception
of the five long centuries which elapsed between the Lombard invasion
in 568 and the accession of Hildebrand to the Pontificate in 1073.

So true is it that nothing lives and has reality for us but what is
spiritual, intellectual, self-possessed in personality and consciousness.
When the Egyptian priest said to Solon, 'You Greeks are always
children,' he intended a gentle sarcasm, but he implied a compliment;
for the quality of imperishable youth belonged to the Hellenic
spirit, and has become the heritage of every race which partook of
it.

And this spirit in no common degree has been shared by the Italians of
the earlier and the later classic epoch.

The land is full of monuments pertaining to those two brilliant periods;
and whenever the voice of poet has spoken or the hand of artist has
been at work, that spirit, as distinguished from the spirit of mediaevalism,
has found expression.

Yet it must be remembered that during the five centuries above mentioned
Italy was given over to Lombards, Franks, and Germans.

Feudal institutions, alien to the social and political ideals of the
classic world, took a tolerably firm hold on the country. The Latin element
remained silent, passive, in abeyance, undergoing an important
transformation.

It was in the course of those five hundred years that the Italians as
a modern people, separable from their Roman ancestors, were formed. At
the close of this obscure passage in Italian history, their communes,
the foundation of Italy's future independence, and the source of
her peculiar national development, appeared in all the vigour and
audacity of youth.

At its close the Italian genius presented Europe with its greatest
triumph of constructive ability, the Papacy.

At its close again the series of supreme artistic achievements, starting
with the architecture of churches and public palaces, passing on
to sculpture and painting, and culminating in music, which only
ended with the temporary extinction of national vitality in the
seventeenth century, was simultaneously begun in all the provinces
of the peninsula.

So important were these five centuries of incubation for Italy, and so
little is there left of them to arrest the attention of the student,
dazzled as he is by the ever-living glories of Greece, Rome, and
the Renaissance, that a visit to the ruins of Canossa is almost a
duty.

There, in spite of himself, by the very isolation and forlorn abandonment
of what was once so formidable a seat of feudal despotism and
ecclesiastical tyranny, he is forced to confront the obscure but mighty
spirit of the middle ages. There, if anywhere, the men of those iron-hearted
times anterior to the Crusades will acquire distinctness for his imagination,
when he recalls the three main actors in the drama enacted on the
summit of Canossa's rock in the bitter winter of 1077.

Canossa lies almost due south of Reggio d'Emilia, upon the slopes of the
Apennines. Starting from Reggio, the carriage-road keeps to the plain for
some while in a westerly direction, and then bends away towards the
mountains. As we approach their spurs, the ground begins to rise. The
rich Lombard tilth of maize and vine gives place to English-looking
hedgerows, lined with oaks, and studded with handsome dark tufts
of green hellebore.

The hills descend in melancholy earth-heaps on the plain, crowned
here and there with ruined castles.

''S a cold night, out,' he said, as if to himself.

And he laid his large, yet well-shapen workman's hand on the top of the
stove, that was polished black and smooth as velvet. She would not look
at him, yet she glanced out of the corners of her eyes.

His eyes were fixed brightly on her, the pupils large and electric like
those of a cat.

'I should have picked you out among thousands,' he said. 'Though you're
bigger than I'd have believed. Fine flesh you've made.'

She was silent for some time. Then she turned in her chair upon him.

'What do you think of yourself,' she said, 'coming back on me like this
after over fifteen years? You don't think I've not heard of you, neither,
in Butte City and elsewhere?'

He was watching her with his clear, translucent, unchallenged eyes.

'Yes,' he said. 'Chaps comes an' goes--I've heard tell of you from time
to time.'

She drew herself up.

'And what lies have you heard about _me_?' she demanded superbly.

'I dunno as I've heard any lies at all--'cept as you was getting on very
well, like.'

His voice ran warily and detached. Her anger stirred again in her
violently. But she subdued it, because of the danger there was in him,
and more, perhaps, because of the beauty of his head and his level drawn
brows, which she could not bear to forfeit.

'That's more than I can say of _you_,' she said. 'I've heard more harm
than good about _you_.'

'Ay, I dessay,' he said, looking in the fire. It was a long time since he
had seen the furze burning, he said to himself. There was a silence,
during which she watched his face.

'Do you call yourself a _man_?' she said, more in contemptuous reproach
than in anger. 'Leave a woman as you've left me, you don't care to
what!--and then to turn up in _this_ fashion, without a word to say for
yourself.'

He stirred in his chair, planted his feet apart, and resting his arms on
his knees, looked steadily into the fire, without answering. So near to
her was his head, and the close black hair, she could scarcely refrain
from starting away, as if it would bite her.

'Do you call that the action of a _man_?' she repeated.

'No,' he said, reaching and poking the bits of wood into the fire with
his fingers. 'I didn't call it anything, as I know of. It's no good
calling things by any names whatsoever, as I know of.'

She watched him in his actions. There was a longer and longer pause
between each speech, though neither knew it.

'I _wonder_ what you think of yourself!' she exclaimed, with vexed
emphasis. 'I _wonder_ what sort of a fellow you take yourself to be!' She
was really perplexed as well as angry.

'Well,' he said, lifting his head to look at her, 'I guess I'll answer
for my own faults, if everybody else'll answer for theirs.'

Her heart beat fiery hot as he lifted his face to her. She breathed
heavily, averting her face, almost losing her self-control.

'And what do you take _me_ to be?' she cried, in real helplessness.

His face was lifted watching her, watching her soft, averted face, and
the softly heaving mass of her breasts.

'I take you,' he said, with that laconic truthfulness which exercised
such power over her, 'to be the deuce of a fine woman--darn me if you're
not as fine a built woman as I've seen, handsome with it as well. I
shouldn't have expected you to put on such handsome flesh: 'struth I
shouldn't.'

Her heart beat fiery hot, as he watched her with those bright agate eyes,
fixedly.

'Been very handsome to _you_, for fifteen years, my sakes!' she replied.

He made no answer to this, but sat with his bright, quick eyes upon her.

Then he rose. She started involuntarily. But he only said, in his
laconic, measured way:

'It's warm in here now.'

And he pulled off his overcoat, throwing it on the table. She sat as if
slightly cowed, whilst he did so.

'Them ropes has given my arms something, by Ga-ard,' he drawled, feeling
his arms with his hands.

Still she sat in her chair before him, slightly cowed.

'You was sharp, wasn't you, to catch me like that, eh?' he smiled slowly.
'By Ga-ard, you had me fixed proper, proper you had. Darn me, you fixed
me up proper--proper, you did.'

He leaned forwards in his chair towards her.

'I don't think no worse of you for it, no, darned if I do. Fine pluck in
a woman's what I admire. That I do, indeed.'

She only gazed into the fire.

'We fet from the start, we did. And, my word, you begin again quick the
minute you see me, you did. Darn me, you was too sharp for me. A darn
fine woman, puts up a darn good fight. Darn me if I could find a woman in
all the darn States as could get me down like that. Wonderful fine woman
you be, truth to say, at this minute.'

She only sat glowering into the fire.

'As grand a pluck as a man could wish to find in a woman, true as I'm
here,' he said, reaching forward his hand and tentatively touching her
between her full, warm breasts, quietly.

She started, and seemed to shudder. But his hand insinuated itself
between her breasts, as she continued to gaze in the fire.

'And don't you think I've come back here a-begging,' he said. 'I've more
than _one_ thousand pounds to my name, I have. And a bit of a fight for a
how-de-do pleases me, that it do. But that doesn't mean as you're going
to deny as you're my Missis....'


_The Primrose Path_


A young man came out of the Victoria station, looking undecidedly at
the taxi-cabs, dark-red and black, pressing against the kerb under the
glass-roof. Several men in greatcoats and brass buttons jerked themselves
erect to catch his attention, at the same time keeping an eye on the
other people as they filtered through the open doorways of the station.
Berry, however, was occupied by one of the men, a big, burly fellow whose
blue eyes glared back and whose red-brown moustache bristled in defiance.

'Do you _want_ a cab, sir?' the man asked, in a half-mocking, challenging
voice.

Berry hesitated still.

'Are you Daniel Sutton?' he asked.

'Yes,' replied the other defiantly, with uneasy conscience.

'Then you are my uncle,' said Berry.

They were alike in colouring, and somewhat in features, but the taxi
driver was a powerful, well-fleshed man who glared at the world
aggressively, being really on the defensive against his own heart. His
nephew, of the same height, was thin, well-dressed, quiet and indifferent
in his manner. And yet they were obviously kin.

'And who the devil are you?' asked the taxi driver.

'I'm Daniel Berry,' replied the nephew.

'Well, I'm damned--never saw you since you were a kid.'

Rather awkwardly at this late hour the two shook hands.

'How are you, lad?'

'All right. I thought you were in Australia.'

'Been back three months--bought a couple of these damned things'--he
kicked the tyre of his taxi-cab in affectionate disgust. There was a
moment's silence.

'Oh, but I'm going back out there. I can't stand this cankering,
rotten-hearted hell of a country any more; you want to come out to Sydney
with me, lad. That's the place for you--beautiful place, oh, you could
wish for nothing better. And money in it, too.--How's your mother?'

'She died at Christmas,' said the young man.

'Dead! What!--our Anna!' The big man's eyes stared, and he recoiled in
fear. 'God, lad,' he said, 'that's three of 'em gone!'

The two men looked away at the people passing along the pale grey
pavements, under the wall of Trinity Church.

'Well, strike me lucky!' said the taxi driver at last, out of breath.
'She wor th' best o' th' bunch of 'em. I see nowt nor hear nowt from
any of 'em--they're not worth it, I'll be damned if they are--our
sermon-lapping Adela and Maud,' he looked scornfully at his nephew. 'But
she was the best of 'em, our Anna was, that's a fact.'

He was talking because he was afraid.

'An' after a hard life like she'd had. How old was she, lad?'

'Fifty-five.'

'Fifty-five ...' He hesitated. Then, in a rather hushed voice, he asked
the question that frightened him:

'And what was it, then?'

'Cancer.'

'Cancer again, like Julia! I never knew there was cancer in our family.
Oh, my good God, our poor Anna, after the life she'd had!--What, lad, do
you see any God at the back of that?--I'm damned if I do.'

He was glaring, very blue-eyed and fierce, at his nephew. Berry lifted
his shoulders slightly.

'God?' went on the taxi driver, in a curious intense tone, 'You've only
to look at the folk in the street to know there's nothing keeps it going
but gravitation. Look at 'em. Look at him!'--A mongrel-looking man was
nosing past. 'Wouldn't _he_ murder you for your watch-chain, but that
he's afraid of society. He's got it _in_ him.... Look at 'em.'

Berry watched the towns-people go by, and, sensitively feeling his
uncle's antipathy, it seemed he was watching a sort of _danse macabre_ of
ugly criminals.

'Did you ever see such a God-forsaken crew creeping about! It gives you
the very horrors to look at 'em. I sit in this damned car and watch 'em
till, I can tell you, I feel like running the cab amuck among 'em, and
running myself to kingdom come--'

Berry wondered at this outburst. He knew his uncle was the black-sheep,
the youngest, the darling of his mother's family. He knew him to be at
outs with respectability, mixing with the looser, sporting type, all
betting and drinking and showing dogs and birds, and racing. As a critic
of life, however, he did not know him. But the young man felt curiously
understanding. 'He uses words like I do, he talks nearly as I talk,
except that I shouldn't say those things. But I might feel like that, in
myself, if I went a certain road.'

'I've got to go to Watmore,' he said. 'Can you take me?'

'When d'you want to go?' asked the uncle fiercely.

'Now.'

'Come on, then. What d'yer stand gassin' on th' causeway for?'

The nephew took his seat beside the driver. The cab began to quiver, then
it started forward with a whirr. The uncle, his hands and feet acting
mechanically, kept his blue eyes fixed on the highroad into whose traffic
the car was insinuating its way. Berry felt curiously as if he were
sitting beside an older development of himself. His mind went back to his
mother. She had been twenty years older than this brother of hers whom
she had loved so dearly. 'He was one of the most affectionate little
lads, and such a curly head! I could never have believed he would grow
into the great, coarse bully he is--for he's nothing else. My father made
a god of him--well, it's a good thing his father is dead. He got in with
that sporting gang, that's what did it. Things were made too easy for
him, and so he thought of no one but himself, and this is the result.'

Not that 'Joky' Sutton was so very black a sheep. He had lived idly till
he was eighteen, then had suddenly married a young, beautiful girl with
clear brows and dark grey eyes, a factory girl. Having taken her to live
with his parents he, lover of dogs and pigeons, went on to the staff
of a sporting paper. But his wife was without uplift or warmth. Though
they made money enough, their house was dark and cold and uninviting.
He had two or three dogs, and the whole attic was turned into a great
pigeon-house. He and his wife lived together roughly, with no warmth, no
refinement, no touch of beauty anywhere, except that she was beautiful.
He was a blustering, impetuous man, she was rather cold in her soul, did
not care about anything very much, was rather capable and close with
money. And she had a common accent in her speech. He outdid her a
thousand times in coarse language, and yet that cold twang in her voice
tortured him with shame that he stamped down in bullying and in becoming
more violent in his own speech.

Only his dogs adored him, and to them, and to his pigeons, he talked with
rough, yet curiously tender caresses while they leaped and fluttered for
joy.

After he and his wife had been married for seven years a little girl was
born to them, then later, another. But the husband and wife drew no
nearer together. She had an affection for her children almost like a cool
governess. He had an emotional man's fear of sentiment, which helped to
nip his wife from putting out any shoots. He treated his children
roughly, and pretended to think it a good job when one was adopted by a
well-to-do maternal aunt. But in his soul he hated his wife that she
could give away one of his children. For after her cool fashion, she
loved him. With a chaos of a man such as he, she had no chance of being
anything but cold and hard, poor thing. For she did love him.

In the end he fell absurdly and violently in love with a rather
sentimental young woman who read Browning. He made his wife an allowance
and established a new ménage with the young lady, shortly after
emigrating with her to Australia. Meanwhile his wife had gone to live
with a publican, a widower, with whom she had had one of those curious,
tacit understandings of which quiet women are capable, something like an
arrangement for provision in the future.

This was as much as the nephew knew. He sat beside his uncle, wondering
how things stood at the present. They raced lightly out past the cemetery
and along the boulevard, then turned into the rather grimy country. The
mud flew out on either side, there was a fine mist of rain which blew in
their faces. Berry covered himself up.

In the lanes the high hedges shone black with rain. The silvery grey sky,
faintly dappled, spread wide over the low, green land. The elder man
glanced fiercely up the road, then turned his red face to his nephew.

'And how're you going on, lad?' he said loudly. Berry noticed that his
uncle was slightly uneasy of him. It made him also uncomfortable. The
elder man had evidently something pressing on his soul.

'Who are you living with in town?' asked the nephew. 'Have you gone back
to Aunt Maud?'

'No,' barked the uncle. 'She wouldn't have me. I offered to--I want
to--but she wouldn't.'

'You're alone, then?'

'No, I'm not alone.'

He turned and glared with his fierce blue eyes at his nephew, but said no
more for some time. The car ran on through the mud, under the wet wall of
the park.

'That other devil tried to poison me,' suddenly shouted the elder man.
'The one I went to Australia with.' At which, in spite of himself, the
younger smiled in secret.

'How was that?' he asked.

'Wanted to get rid of me. She got in with another fellow on the
ship.... By Jove, I was bad.'

'Where?--on the ship?'

'No,' bellowed the other. 'No. That was in Wellington, New Zealand. I was
bad, and got lower an' lower--couldn't think what was up. I could hardly
crawl about. As certain as I'm here, she was poisoning me, to get to th'
other chap--I'm certain of it.'

'And what did you do?'

'I cleared out--went to Sydney--'

'And left her?'

'Yes, I thought begod, I'd better clear out if I wanted to live.'

'And you were all right in Sydney?'

'Better in no time--I _know_ she was putting poison in my coffee.'

'Hm!'

There was a glum silence. The driver stared at the road ahead, fixedly,
managing the car as if it were a live thing. The nephew felt that his
uncle was afraid, quite stupefied with fear, fear of life, of death, of
himself.

'You're in rooms, then?' asked the nephew.

'No, I'm in a house of my own,' said the uncle defiantly, 'wi' th' best
little woman in th' Midlands. She's a marvel.--Why don't you come an' see
us?'

'I will. Who is she?'

'Oh, she's a good girl--a beautiful little thing. I was clean gone
on her first time I saw her. An' she was on me. Her mother lives with
us--respectable girl, none o' your....'

'And how old is she?'

'--how old is she?--she's twenty-one.'

'Poor thing.'

'_She's_ right enough.'

'You'd marry her--getting a divorce--?'

'I shall marry her.'

There was a little antagonism between the two men.

'Where's Aunt Maud?' asked the younger.

'She's at the Railway Arms--we passed it, just against Rollin's Mill
Crossing.... They sent me a note this morning to go an' see her when I
can spare time. She's got consumption.'

'Good Lord! Are you going?'

'Yes--'

But again Berry felt that his uncle was afraid.

The young man got through his commission in the village, had a drink with
his uncle at the inn, and the two were returning home. The elder man's
subject of conversation was Australia. As they drew near the town they
grew silent, thinking both of the public-house. At last they saw the
gates of the railway crossing were closed before them.

'Shan't you call?' asked Berry, jerking his head in the direction of the
inn, which stood at the corner between two roads, its sign hanging under
a bare horse-chestnut tree in front.

'I might as well. Come in an' have a drink,' said the uncle.

It had been raining all the morning, so shallow pools of water lay about.
A brewer's wagon, with wet barrels and warm-smelling horses, stood near
the door of the inn. Everywhere seemed silent, but for the rattle of
trains at the crossing. The two men went uneasily up the steps and into
the bar. The place was paddled with wet feet, empty. As the bar-man was
heard approaching, the uncle asked, his usual bluster slightly hushed by
fear:

'What yer goin' ta have, lad? Same as last time?'

A man entered, evidently the proprietor. He was good-looking, with a
long, heavy face and quick, dark eyes. His glance at Sutton was swift, a
start, a recognition, and a withdrawal, into heavy neutrality.

'How are yer, Dan?' he said, scarcely troubling to speak.

'Are yer, George?' replied Sutton, hanging back. 'My nephew, Dan Berry.
Give us Red Seal, George.'

The publican nodded to the younger man, and set the glasses on the bar.
He pushed forward the two glasses, then leaned back in the dark corner
behind the door, his arms folded, evidently preferring to get back from
the watchful eyes of the nephew.

'--'s luck,' said Sutton.

The publican nodded in acknowledgement. Sutton and his nephew drank.

'Why the hell don't you get that road mended in Cinder Hill--,' said
Sutton fiercely, pushing back his driver's cap and showing his short-cut,
bristling hair.

'They can't find it in their hearts to pull it up,' replied the publican,
laconically.

'Find in their hearts! They want settin' in barrows an' runnin' up an'
down it till they cried for mercy.'

Sutton put down his glass. The publican renewed it with a sure hand, at
ease in whatsoever he did. Then he leaned back against the bar. He wore
no coat. He stood with arms folded, his chin on his chest, his long
moustache hanging. His back was round and slack, so that the lower part
of his abdomen stuck forward, though he was not stout. His cheek was
healthy, brown-red, and he was muscular. Yet there was about him this
physical slackness, a reluctance in his slow, sure movements. His eyes
were keen under his dark brows, but reluctant also, as if he were
gloomily apathetic.

There was a halt. The publican evidently would say nothing. Berry looked
at the mahogany bar-counter, slopped with beer, at the whisky-bottles on
the shelves. Sutton, his cap pushed back, showing a white brow above a
weather-reddened face, rubbed his cropped hair uneasily.

The publican glanced round suddenly. It seemed that only his dark eyes
moved.

'Going up?' he asked.

And something, perhaps his eyes, indicated the unseen bed-chamber.

'Ay--that's what I came for,' replied Sutton, shifting nervously from one
foot to the other. 'She's been asking for me?'

'This morning,' replied the publican, neutral.

Then he put up a flap of the bar, and turned away through the dark
doorway behind. Sutton, pulling off his cap, showing a round,
short-cropped head which now was ducked forward, followed after him, the
buttons holding the strap of his great-coat behind glittering for a
moment.

They climbed the dark stairs, the husband placing his feet carefully,
because of his big boots. Then he followed down the passage, trying
vaguely to keep a grip on his bowels, which seemed to be melting away,
and definitely wishing for a neat brandy. The publican opened a door.
Sutton, big and burly in his great-coat, went past him.

The bedroom seemed light and warm after the passage. There was a red
eider-down on the bed. Then, making an effort, Sutton turned his eyes to
see the sick woman. He met her eyes direct, dark, dilated. It was such a
shock he almost started away. For a second he remained in torture, as if
some invisible flame were playing on him to reduce his bones and fuse him
down. Then he saw the sharp white edge of her jaw, and the black hair
beside the hollow cheek. With a start he went towards the bed.

'Hello, Maud!' he said. 'Why, what ye been doin'?'

The publican stood at the window with his back to the bed. The husband,
like one condemned but on the point of starting away, stood by the
bedside staring in horror at his wife, whose dilated grey eyes, nearly
all black now, watched him wearily, as if she were looking at something a
long way off.

Going exceedingly pale, he jerked up his head and stared at the wall over
the pillows. There was a little coloured picture of a bird perched on a
bell, and a nest among ivy leaves beneath. It appealed to him, made him
wonder, roused a feeling of childish magic in him. They were wonderfully
fresh, green ivy leaves, and nobody had seen the nest among them save
him.

Then suddenly he looked down again at the face on the bed, to try and
recognize it. He knew the white brow and the beautiful clear eyebrows.
That was his wife, with whom he had passed his youth, flesh of his flesh,
his, himself. Then those tired eyes, which met his again from a long way
off, disturbed him until he did not know where he was. Only the sunken
cheeks, and the mouth that seemed to protrude now were foreign to him,
and filled him with horror. It seemed he lost his identity. He was the
young husband of the woman with the clear brows; he was the married man
fighting with her whose eyes watched him, a little indifferently, from a
long way off; and he was a child in horror of that protruding mouth.

There came a crackling sound of her voice. He knew she had consumption of
the throat, and braced himself hard to bear the noise.

'What was it, Maud?' he asked in panic.

Then the broken, crackling voice came again. He was too terrified of the
sound of it to hear what was said. There was a pause.

'You'll take Winnie?' the publican's voice interpreted from the window.

'Don't you bother, Maud, I'll take her,' he said, stupefying his mind so
as not to understand.

He looked curiously round the room. It was not a bad bedroom, light and
warm. There were many medicine bottles aggregated in a corner of the
washstand--and a bottle of Three Star brandy, half full. And there were
also photographs of strange people on the chest of drawers. It was not a
bad room.

Again he started as if he were shot. She was speaking. He bent down, but
did not look at her.

'Be good to her,' she whispered.

When he realized her meaning, that he should be good to their child when
the mother was gone, a blade went through his flesh.

'I'll be good to her, Maud, don't you bother,' he said, beginning to feel
shaky.

He looked again at the picture of the bird. It perched cheerfully under a
blue sky, with robust, jolly ivy leaves near. He was gathering his
courage to depart. He looked down, but struggled hard not to take in the
sight of his wife's face.

'I s'll come again, Maud,' he said. 'I hope you'll go on all right. Is
there anything as you want?'

There was an almost imperceptible shake of the head from the sick woman,
making his heart melt swiftly again. Then, dragging his limbs, he got out
of the room and down the stairs.

The landlord came after him.

'I'll let you know if anything happens,' the publican said, still
laconic, but with his eyes dark and swift.

'Ay, a' right,' said Button blindly. He looked round for his cap, which
he had all the time in his hand. Then he got out of doors.

In a moment the uncle and nephew were in the car jolting on the level
crossing. The elder man seemed as if something tight in his brain made
him open his eyes wide, and stare. He held the steering wheel firmly. He
knew he could steer accurately, to a hair's breadth. Glaring fixedly
ahead, he let the car go, till it bounded over the uneven road. There
were three coal-carts in a string. In an instant the car grazed past
them, almost biting the kerb on the other side. Sutton aimed his car like
a projectile, staring ahead. He did not want to know, to think, to
realize, he wanted to be only the driver of that quick taxi.

The town drew near, suddenly. There were allotment-gardens with
dark-purple twiggy fruit-trees and wet alleys between the hedges. Then
suddenly the streets of dwelling-houses whirled close, and the car was
climbing the hill, with an angry whirr,--up--up--till they rode out on to
the crest and could see the tram-cars, dark-red and yellow, threading
their way round the corner below, and all the traffic roaring between the
shops.

'Got anywhere to go?' asked Sutton of his nephew.

'I was going to see one or two people.'

'Come an' have a bit o' dinner with us,' said the other.

Berry knew that his uncle wanted to be distracted, so that he should not
think nor realize. The big man was running hard away from the horror of
realization.

'All right,' Berry agreed.

The car went quickly through the town. It ran up a long street nearly
into the country again. Then it pulled up at a house that stood alone,
below the road.

'I s'll be back in ten minutes,' said the uncle.

The car went on to the garage. Berry stood curiously at the top of the
stone stairs that led from the highroad down to the level of the house,
an old stone place. The garden was dilapidated. Broken fruit-trees
leaned at a sharp angle down the steep bank. Right across the dim
grey atmosphere, in a kind of valley on the edge of the town, new
suburb-patches showed pinkish on the dark earth. It was a kind of
unresolved borderland.

Berry went down the steps. Through the broken black fence of the orchard,
long grass showed yellow. The place seemed deserted. He knocked, then
knocked again. An elderly woman appeared. She looked like a housekeeper.
At first she said suspiciously that Mr. Sutton was not in.

'My uncle just put me down. He'll be in in ten minutes,' replied the
visitor.

'Oh, are you the Mr. Berry who is related to him?' exclaimed the elderly
woman. 'Come in--come in.'

She was at once kindly and a little bit servile. The young man entered.
It was an old house, rather dark, and sparsely furnished. The elderly
woman sat nervously on the edge of one of the chairs in a drawing-room
that looked as if it were furnished from dismal relics of dismal homes,
and there was a little straggling attempt at conversation. Mrs. Greenwell
was evidently a working class woman unused to service or to any
formality.

Presently she gathered up courage to invite her visitor into the
dining-room. There from the table under the window rose a tall, slim girl
with a cat in her arms. She was evidently a little more lady-like than
was habitual to her, but she had a gentle, delicate, small nature. Her
brown hair almost covered her ears, her dark lashes came down in shy
awkwardness over her beautiful blue eyes. She shook hands in a frank way,
yet she was shrinking. Evidently she was not sure how her position would
affect her visitor. And yet she was assured in herself, shrinking and
timid as she was.

'She must be a good deal in love with him,' thought Berry.

Both women glanced shamefacedly at the roughly laid table. Evidently they
ate in a rather rough and ready fashion.

Elaine--she had this poetic name--fingered her cat timidly, not knowing
what to say or to do, unable even to ask her visitor to sit down. He
noticed how her skirt hung almost flat on her hips. She was young, scarce
developed, a long, slender thing. Her colouring was warm and exquisite.

The elder woman bustled out to the kitchen. Berry fondled the terrier
dogs that had come curiously to his heels, and glanced out of the window
at the wet, deserted orchard.

This room, too, was not well furnished, and rather dark. But there was a
big red fire.

'He always has fox terriers,' he said.

'Yes,' she answered, showing her teeth in a smile.

'Do you like them, too?'

'Yes'--she glanced down at the dogs. 'I like Tam better than Sally--'

Her speech always tailed off into an awkward silence.

'We've been to see Aunt Maud,' said the nephew.

Her eyes, blue and scared and shrinking, met his.

'Dan had a letter,' he explained. 'She's very bad.'

'Isn't it horrible!' she exclaimed, her face crumbling up with fear.

The old woman, evidently a hard-used, rather down-trodden workman's wife,
came in with two soup-plates. Here are the henbane, the sow-thistle,
the wild cucumber.

At Avignon, at Orvieto, at Dolce Acqua, at Les Baux, we never missed them.
And they have the dusty courtyards, the massive portals, where
portcullises still threaten, of Fosdinovo to themselves.

Over the gate, and here and there on corbels, are carved the arms
of Malaspina--a barren thorn-tree, gnarled with the geometrical
precision of heraldic irony.

Leaning from the narrow windows of this castle, with the spacious view
to westward, I thought of Dante.

For Dante in this castle was the guest of Moroello Malaspina, what
time he was yet finishing the 'Inferno.' There is a little old neglected
garden, full to south, enclosed upon a rampart which commands the Borgo,
where we found frail canker-roses and yellow amaryllis.

Here, perhaps, he may have sat with ladies--for this was the
Marchesa's pleasaunce; or may have watched through a short summer's
night, until he saw that _tremolar della marina_, portending dawn,
which afterwards he painted in the 'Purgatory.'

From Fosdinovo one can trace the Magra work its way out seaward, not into
the plain where once the _candentia moenia Lunae_ flashed sunrise
from their battlements, but close beside the little hills which
back the southern arm of the Spezzian gulf.

At the extreme end of that promontory, called Del Corvo, stood the
Benedictine convent of S.
Croce; and it was here in 1309, if we may trust to tradition, that
Dante, before his projected journey into France, appeared and left
the first part of his poem with the Prior.

Fra Ilario, such was the good father's name, received commission to
transmit the 'Inferno' to Uguccione della Faggiuola; and he
subsequently recorded the fact of Dante's visit in a letter which,
though its genuineness has been called in question, is far too
interesting to be left without allusion.

The writer says that on occasion of a journey into lands beyond the
Riviera, Dante visited this convent, appearing silent and unknown
among the monks.

To the Prior's question what he wanted, he gazed upon the brotherhood,
and only answered, 'Peace!'

Afterwards, in private conversation, he communicated his name and
spoke about his poem.

A portion of the 'Divine Comedy' composed in the Italian tongue aroused
Ilario's wonder, and led him to inquire why his guest had not followed the
usual course of learned poets by committing his thoughts to Latin.

Dante replied that he had first intended to write in that language,
and that he had gone so far as to begin the poem in Virgilian hexameters.
Reflection upon the altered conditions of society in that age led him,
however, to reconsider the matter; and he was resolved to tune
another lyre, 'suited to the sense of modern men.' 'For,' said he, 'it
is idle to set solid food before the lips of sucklings.'
If we can trust Fra Ilario's letter as a genuine record, which is unhappily
a matter of some doubt, we have in this narration not only a picturesque,
almost a melodramatically picturesque glimpse of the poet's apparition
to those quiet monks in their seagirt house of peace, but also an interesting
record of the destiny which presided over the first great work of
literary art in a distinctly modern language.

IV.--LA SPEZZIA

While we were at Fosdinovo the sky filmed over, and there came a
halo round the sun.

This portended change; and by evening, after we had reached La Spezzia,
earth, sea, and air were conscious of a coming tempest.

At night I went down to the shore, and paced the sea-wall they have
lately built along the Rada.

The moon was up, but overdriven with dry smoky clouds, now thickening
to blackness over the whole bay, now leaving intervals through which
the light poured fitfully and fretfully upon the wrinkled waves;
and ever and anon they shuddered with electric gleams which were
not actual lightning.

Heaven seemed to be descending on the sea; one might have fancied that
some powerful charms were drawing down the moon with influence malign
upon those still resisting billows.

For not as yet the gulf was troubled to its depth, and not as yet the
breakers dashed in foam against the moonlight-smitten promontories.

There was but an uneasy murmuring of wave to wave; a whispering of wind,
that stooped its wing and hissed along the surface, and withdrew into the
mystery of clouds again; a momentary chafing of churned water round
the harbour piers, subsiding into silence petulant and sullen.

I leaned against an iron stanchion and longed for the sea's message. But
nothing came to me, and the drowned secret of Shelley's death those waves
which were his grave revealed not.

Howler and scooper of storms! capricious and dainty sea!

Meanwhile the incantation swelled in shrillness, the electric shudders
deepened. Alone in this elemental overture to tempest I took no note
of time, but felt, through self-abandonment to the symphonic influence,
how sea and air, and clouds akin to both, were dealing with each other
complainingly, and in compliance to some maker of unrest within
them. A touch upon my shoulder broke this trance; I turned and saw a boy
beside me in a coastguard's uniform.

Francesco was on patrol that night; but my English accent soon assured him
that I was no _contrabbandiere_, and he too leaned against the stanchion
and told me his short story. He was in his nineteenth year, and came
from Florence, where his people live in the Borgo Ognissanti. He had
all the brightness of the Tuscan folk, a sort of innocent malice mixed
with _espieglerie_.

It was diverting to see the airs he gave himself on the strength of his
new military dignity, his gun, and uniform, and night duty on the
shore.

I could not help humming to myself _Non più
andrai_; for Francesco was a sort of Tuscan Cherubino. We talked about
picture galleries and libraries in Florence, and I had to hear his
favourite passages from the Italian poets.

And then there came the plots of Jules Verne's stories and marvellous
narrations about _l' uomo cavallo, l' uomo volante, l' uomo pesce_.

The last of these personages turned out to be Paolo Boÿnton (so
pronounced), who had swam the Arno in his diving dress, passing the
several bridges, and when he came to the great weir 'allora tutti
stare con bocca aperta.'

Meanwhile the storm grew serious, and our conversation changed.

Francesco told me about the terrible sun-stricken sand shores of
the Riviera, burning in summer noon, over which the coast-guard has
to tramp, their perils from falling stones in storm, and the trains
that come rushing from those narrow tunnels on the midnight line
of march.

It is a hard life; and the thirst for adventure which drove this boy--'il
più matto di tutta la famiglia'--to adopt it, seems well-nigh
quenched. And still, with a return to Giulio Verne, he talked enthusiastically
of deserting, of getting on board a merchant ship, and working his
way to southern islands where wonders are.

A furious blast swept the whole sky for a moment almost clear. The
moonlight fell, with racing cloud-shadows, upon sea and hills, the lights
of Lerici, the great _fanali_ at the entrance of the gulf, and Francesco's
upturned handsome face.

Then all again was whirled in mist and foam; one breaker smote the sea
wall in a surge of froth, another plunged upon its heels; with inconceivable
swiftness came rain; lightning deluged the expanse of surf, and
showed the windy trees bent landward by the squall.

It was long past midnight now, and the storm was on us for the space
of three days.

V.--PORTO VENERE

For the next three days the wind went worrying on, and a line of
surf leapt on the sea-wall always to the same height.

The hills all around were inky black and weary.

At night the wild libeccio still rose, with floods of rain and
lightning poured upon the waste.

I thought of the Florentine patrol.

Is he out in it, and where?

At last there came a lull. When we rose on the fourth morning, the sky
was sulky, spent and sleepy after storm--the air as soft and tepid as
boiled milk or steaming flannel.

We drove along the shore to Porto Venere, passing the arsenals and dockyards,
which have changed the face of Spezzia since Shelley knew it. This side
of the gulf is not so rich in vegetation as the other, probably because
it lies open to the winds from the Carrara mountains. The chestnuts
come down to the shore in many places, bringing with them the wild
mountain-side.

To make up for this lack of luxuriance, the coast is furrowed with a
succession of tiny harbours, where the fishing-boats rest at anchor.
There are many villages upon the spurs of hills, and on the headlands
naval stations, hospitals, lazzaretti, and prisons. A prickly bindweed
(the _Smilax Sarsaparilla_) forms a feature in the near landscape, with
its creamy odoriferous blossoms, coral berries, and glossy thorned
leaves.

A turn of the road brought Porto Venere in sight, and on its grey walls
flashed a gleam of watery sunlight. The village consists of one long
narrow street, the houses on the left side hanging sheer above the sea.
Their doors at the back open on to cliffs which drop about fifty feet
upon the water. A line of ancient walls, with mediaeval battlements
and shells of chambers suspended midway between earth and sky, runs up
the rock behind the town; and this wall is pierced with a deep
gateway above which the inn is piled.

We had our lunch in a room opening upon the town-gate, adorned with a
deep-cut Pisan arch enclosing images and frescoes--a curious episode in
a place devoted to the jollity of smugglers and seafaring folk. The
whole house was such as Tintoretto loved to paint--huge wooden rafters;
open chimneys with pent-house canopies of stone, where the cauldrons
hung above logs of chestnut; rude low tables spread with coarse linen
embroidered at the edges, and laden with plates of fishes, fruit,
quaint glass, big-bellied jugs of earthenware, and flasks of yellow
wine.

The people of the place were lounging round in lazy attitudes. There were
odd nooks and corners everywhere; unexpected staircases with windows
slanting through the thickness of the town-wall; pictures of saints;
high-zoned serving women, on whose broad shoulders lay big coral beads;
smoke-blackened roofs, and balconies that opened on the sea.
The house was inexhaustible in motives for pictures.

We walked up the street, attended by a rabble rout of boys--_diavoli
scatenati_--clean, grinning, white-teethed, who kept incessantly
shouting, 'Soldo, soldo!' I do not know why these sea-urchins are so far
more irrepressible than their land brethren.

But it is always thus in Italy. They take an imperturbable delight in
noise and mere annoyance. I shall never forget the sea-roar of Porto Venere,
with that shrill obligate, 'Soldo, soldo, soldo!' rattling like a dropping
fire from lungs of brass.

At the end of Porto Venere is a withered and abandoned city, climbing the
cliffs of S. Pietro; and on the headland stands the ruined church, built
by Pisans with alternate rows of white and black marble, upon the site
of an old temple of Venus. This is a modest and pure piece of Gothic
architecture, fair in desolation, refined and dignified, and not unworthy
in its grace of the dead Cyprian goddess.

Through its broken lancets the sea-wind whistles and the vast reaches
of the Tyrrhene gulf are seen.

Samphire sprouts between the blocks of marble, and in sheltered nooks the
caper hangs her beautiful purpureal snowy bloom.

The headland is a bold block of white limestone stained with red. It has
the pitch of Exmoor stooping to the sea near Lynton. To north, as one
looks along the coast, the line is broken by Porto Fino's amethystine
promontory; and in the vaporous distance we could trace the Riviera
mountains, shadowy and blue. The sea came roaring, rolling in with tawny
breakers; but, far out, it sparkled in pure azure, and the cloud-shadows
over it were violet. Where Corsica should have been seen, soared
banks of fleecy, broad-domed alabaster clouds.

This point, once dedicated to Venus, now to Peter--both, be it remembered,
fishers of men--is one of the most singular in Europe.

The island of Palmaria, rich in veined marbles, shelters the port;
so that outside the sea rages, while underneath the town, reached
by a narrow strait, there is a windless calm.

It was not without reason that our Lady of Beauty took this fair
gulf to herself; and now that she has long been dispossessed, her
memory lingers yet in names.

For Porto Venere remembers her, and Lerici is only Eryx.

There is a grotto here, where an inscription tells us that Byron once
'tempted the Ligurian waves.' It is just such a natural sea-cave as might
have inspired Euripides when he described the refuge of Orestes
in 'Iphigenia.'

VI.--LERICI

Libeccio at last had swept the sky clear. The gulf was ridged with foam-fleeced
breakers, and the water churned into green, tawny wastes.
But overhead there flew the softest clouds, all silvery, dispersed
in flocks.

It is the day for pilgrimage to what was Shelley's home.

After following the shore a little way, the road to Lerici breaks into
the low hills which part La Spezzia from Sarzana. The soil is red, and
overgrown with arbutus and pinaster, like the country around Cannes.
Through the scattered trees it winds gently upwards, with frequent views
across the gulf, and then descends into a land rich with olives--a
genuine Riviera landscape, where the mountain-slopes are hoary, and
spikelets of innumerable light-flashing leaves twinkle against a
blue sea, misty-deep.

The walls here are not unfrequently adorned with basreliefs of Carrara
marble--saints and madonnas very delicately wrought, as though
they were love-labours of sculptors who had passed a summer on this
shore.

San Terenzio is soon discovered low upon the sands to the right, nestling
under little cliffs; and then the high-built castle of Lerici comes
in sight, looking across, the bay to Porto Venere--one Aphrodite calling
to the other, with the foam between. The village is piled around its
cove with tall and picturesquely coloured houses; the molo and the
fishing-boats lie just beneath the castle.

There is one point of the descending carriage road where all this
gracefulness is seen, framed by the boughs of olive branches,
swaying, wind-ruffled, laughing the many-twinkling smiles of ocean
back from their grey leaves.

Here _Erycina ridens_ is at home.

And, as we stayed to dwell upon the beauty of the scene, came women
from the bay below--barefooted, straight as willow wands, with
burnished copper bowls upon their heads.

These women have the port of goddesses, deep-bosomed, with the
length of thigh and springing ankles that betoken strength no less
than elasticity and grace.

The hair of some of them was golden, rippling in little curls around
brown brows and glowing eyes.

Pale lilac blent with orange on their dress, and coral beads hung
from their ears.

At Lerici we took a boat and pushed into the rolling breakers.

Christian now felt the movement of the sea for the first time.

This was rather a rude trial, for the grey-maned monsters played,
as it seemed, at will with our cockle-shell, tumbling in dolphin
curves to reach the shore.

Our boatmen knew all about Shelley and the Casa Magni. It is not at Lerici,
but close to San Terenzio, upon the south side of the village.

Looking across the bay from the molo, one could clearly see its square
white mass, tiled roof, and terrace built on rude arcades with a
broad orange awning.

Trelawny's description hardly prepares one for so considerable a
place.

I think the English exiles of that period must have been exacting if the
Casa Magni seemed to them no better than a bathing-house.

We left our boat at the jetty, and walked through some gardens to
the villa.

There we were kindly entertained by the present occupiers, who,
when I asked them whether such visits as ours were not a great
annoyance, gently but feelingly replied: 'It is not so bad now as
it used to be.'

The English gentleman who rents the Casa Magni has known it
uninterruptedly since Shelley's death, and has used it for
_villeggiatura_ during the last thirty years.

We found him in the central sitting-room, which readers of Trelawny's
'Recollections' have so often pictured to themselves.

The large oval table, the settees round the walls, and some of the
pictures are still unchanged.

As we sat talking, I laughed to think of that luncheon party, when Shelley
lost his clothes, and came naked, dripping with sea-water, into the
room, protected by the skirts of the sympathising waiting-maid.

And then I wondered where they found him on the night when he stood
screaming in his sleep, after the vision of his veiled self, with
its question, '_Siete soddisfatto_?'

There were great ilexes behind the house in Shelley's time, which have
been cut down, and near these he is said to have sat and written the
'Triumph of Life.' Some new houses, too, have been built between the
villa and the town; otherwise the place is unaltered.

Only an awning has been added to protect the terrace from the sun. I
walked out on this terrace, where Shelley used to listen to Jane's
singing.

The sea was fretting at its base, just as Mrs.

Shelley says it did when the Don Juan disappeared.

From San Terenzio we walked back to Lerici through olive woods,
attended by a memory which toned the almost overpowering beauty of
the place to sadness.

VII.--VIAREGGIO

The same memory drew us, a few days later, to the spot where Shelley's
body was burned.

Viareggio is fast becoming a fashionable watering-place for the
people of Florence and Lucca, who seek fresher air and simpler
living than Livorno offers.

It has the usual new inns and improvised lodging-houses of such
places, built on the outskirts of a little fishing village, with a
boundless stretch of noble sands.

There is a wooden pier on which we walked, watching the long roll
of waves, foam-flaked, and quivering with moonlight.

The Apennines faded into the grey sky beyond, and the sea-wind was good
to breathe.

There is a feeling of 'immensity, liberty, action' here, which is not
common in Italy.

It reminds us of England; and to-night the Mediterranean had the rough
force of a tidal sea.

Morning revealed beauty enough in Viareggio to surprise even one
who expects from Italy all forms of loveliness.

The sand-dunes stretch for miles between the sea and a low wood of
stone pines, with the Carrara hills descending from their glittering
pinnacles by long lines to the headlands of the Spezzian Gulf.

The immeasurable distance was all painted in sky-blue and amethyst; then
came the golden green of the dwarf firs; and then dry yellow in
the grasses of the dunes; and then the many-tinted sea, with surf
tossed up against the furthest cliffs.

It is a wonderful and tragic view, to which no painter but the Roman
Costa has done justice; and he, it may be said, has made this
landscape of the Carrarese his own.

The space between sand and pine-wood was covered with faint, yellow,
evening primroses.

They flickered like little harmless flames in sun and shadow, and the
spires of the Carrara range were giant flames transformed to marble.

The memory of that day described by Trelawny in a passage of immortal
English prose, when he and Byron and Leigh Hunt stood beside the
funeral pyre, and libations were poured, and the 'Cor Cordium' was
found inviolate among the ashes, turned all my thoughts to flame
beneath the gentle autumn sky.

Still haunted by these memories, we took the carriage road to Pisa,
over which Shelley's friends had hurried to and fro through those
last days.

It passes an immense forest of stone-pines--aisles and avenues;
undergrowth of ilex, laurustinus, gorse, and myrtle; the crowded
cyclamens, the solemn silence of the trees; the winds hushed in
their velvet roof and stationary domes of verdure

.

* * * * *

_PARMA_
Parma is perhaps the brightest _Residenzstadt_ of the second class
in Italy.

Built on a sunny and fertile tract of the Lombard plain, within
view of the Alps, and close beneath the shelter of the Apennines,
it shines like a well-set gem with stately towers and cheerful
squares in the midst of verdure.

The cities of Lombardy are all like large country houses: walking
out of their gates, you seem to be stepping from a door or window
that opens on a trim and beautiful garden, where mulberry-tree is
married to mulberry by festoons of vines, and where the maize and
sunflower stand together in rows between patches of flax and hemp.

But it is not in order to survey the union of well-ordered husbandry
with the civilities of ancient city-life that we break the journey
at Parma between Milan and Bologna.

We are attracted rather by the fame of one great painter, whose
work, though it may be studied piecemeal in many galleries of Europe,
in Parma has a fulness, largeness, and mastery that can nowhere
else be found.

In Parma alone Correggio challenges comparison with Raphael, with Tintoret,
with all the supreme decorative painters who have deigned to make
their art the handmaid of architecture.

Yet even in the cathedral and the church of S. Giovanni, where Correggio's
frescoes cover cupola and chapel wall, we could scarcely comprehend
his greatness now--so cruelly have time and neglect dealt with those
delicate dream-shadows of celestial fairyland--were it not for an
interpreter, who consecrated a lifetime to the task of translating
his master's poetry of fresco into the prose of engraving.

That man was Paolo Toschi--a name to be ever venerated by all lovers of the
arts; since without his guidance we should hardly know what to
seek for in the ruined splendours of the domes of Parma, or even
seeking, how to find the object of our search.

There remained distinct in
his consciousness, like a vision, the memory of her face, lifted from the
tombstone in the churchyard, and looking at him with slow, large,
portentous eyes. It _was_ portentous, her face. It seemed to mesmerize
him. There was a heavy power in her eyes which laid hold of his whole
being, as if he had drunk some powerful drug. He had been feeling weak
and done before. Now the life came back into him, he felt delivered from
his own fretted, daily self.

He finished his duties at the surgery as quickly as might be, hastily
filling up the bottles of the waiting people with cheap drugs. Then, in
perpetual haste, he set off again to visit several cases in another part
of his round, before teatime. At all times he preferred to walk, if he
could, but particularly when he was not well. He fancied the motion
restored him.

The afternoon was falling. It was grey, deadened, and wintry, with a
slow, moist, heavy coldness sinking in and deadening all the faculties.
But why should he think or notice? He hastily climbed the hill and turned
across the dark-green fields, following the black cinder-track. In the
distance, across a shallow dip in the country, the small town was
clustered like smouldering ash, a tower, a spire, a heap of low, raw,
extinct houses. And on the nearest fringe of the town, sloping into the
dip, was Oldmeadow, the Pervins' house. He could see the stables and the
outbuildings distinctly, as they lay towards him on the slope. Well, he
would not go there many more times! Another resource would be lost to
him, another place gone: the only company he cared for in the alien, ugly
little town he was losing. Nothing but work, drudgery, constant hastening
from dwelling to dwelling among the colliers and the iron-workers. It
wore him out, but at the same time he had a craving for it. It was a
stimulant to him to be in the homes of the working people, moving as it
were through the innermost body of their life. His nerves were excited
and gratified. He could come so near, into the very lives of the rough,
inarticulate, powerfully emotional men and women. He grumbled, he said he
hated the hellish hole. But as a matter of fact it excited him, the
contact with the rough, strongly-feeling people was a stimulant applied
direct to his nerves.

Below Oldmeadow, in the green, shallow, soddened hollow of fields, lay a
square, deep pond. Roving across the landscape, the doctor's quick eye
detected a figure in black passing through the gate of the field, down
towards the pond. He looked again. It would be Mabel Pervin. His mind
suddenly became alive and attentive.

Why was she going down there? He pulled up on the path on the slope
above, and stood staring. He could just make sure of the small black
figure moving in the hollow of the failing day. He seemed to see her in
the midst of such obscurity, that he was like a clairvoyant, seeing
rather with the mind's eye than with ordinary sight. Yet he could see her
positively enough, whilst he kept his eye attentive. He felt, if he
looked away from her, in the thick, ugly falling dusk, he would lose her
altogether.

He followed her minutely as she moved, direct and intent, like something
transmitted rather than stirring in voluntary activity, straight down the
field towards the pond. There she stood on the bank for a moment. She
never raised her head. Then she waded slowly into the water.

He stood motionless as the small black figure walked slowly and
deliberately towards the centre of the pond, very slowly, gradually
moving deeper into the motionless water, and still moving forward as the
water got up to her breast. Then he could see her no more in the dusk of
the dead afternoon.

'There!' he exclaimed. 'Would you believe it?'

And he hastened straight down, running over the wet, soddened fields,
pushing through the hedges, down into the depression of callous wintry
obscurity. It took him several minutes to come to the pond. He stood on
the bank, breathing heavily. He could see nothing. His eyes seemed to
penetrate the dead water. Yes, perhaps that was the dark shadow of her
black clothing beneath the surface of the water.

He slowly ventured into the pond. The bottom was deep, soft clay, he sank
in, and the water clasped dead cold round his legs. As he stirred he
could smell the cold, rotten clay that fouled up into the water. It was
objectionable in his lungs. Still, repelled and yet not heeding, he moved
deeper into the pond. The cold water rose over his thighs, over his
loins, upon his abdomen. The lower part of his body was all sunk in the
hideous cold element. And the bottom was so deeply soft and uncertain, he
was afraid of pitching with his mouth underneath. He could not swim, and
was afraid.

He crouched a little, spreading his hands under the water and moving them
round, trying to feel for her. The dead cold pond swayed upon his chest.
He moved again, a little deeper, and again, with his hands underneath, he
felt all around under the water. And he touched her clothing. But it
evaded his fingers. He made a desperate effort to grasp it.

And so doing he lost his balance and went under, horribly, suffocating in
the foul earthy water, struggling madly for a few moments. At last, after
what seemed an eternity, he got his footing, rose again into the air and
looked around. He gasped, and knew he was in the world. Then he looked at
the water. She had risen near him. He grasped her clothing, and drawing
her nearer, turned to take his way to land again.

He went very slowly, carefully, absorbed in the slow progress. He rose
higher, climbing out of the pond. The water was now only about his legs;
he was thankful, full of relief to be out of the clutches of the pond. He
lifted her and staggered on to the bank, out of the horror of wet, grey
clay.

He laid her down on the bank. She was quite unconscious and running with
water. He made the water come from her mouth, he worked to restore her.
He did not have to work very long before he could feel the breathing
begin again in her; she was breathing naturally. He worked a little
longer. He could feel her live beneath his hands; she was coming back. He
wiped her face, wrapped her in his overcoat, looked round into the dim,
dark-grey world, then lifted her and staggered down the bank and across
the fields.

It seemed an unthinkably long way, and his burden so heavy he felt he
would never get to the house. But at last he was in the stable-yard, and
then in the house-yard. He opened the door and went into the house. In
the kitchen he laid her down on the hearthrug, and called. The house was
empty. But the fire was burning in the grate.

Then again he kneeled to attend to her. She was breathing regularly, her
eyes were wide open and as if conscious, but there seemed something
missing in her look. She was conscious in herself, but unconscious of her
surroundings.

He ran upstairs, took blankets from a bed, and put them before the fire
to warm. Then he removed her saturated, earthy-smelling clothing, rubbed
her dry with a towel, and wrapped her naked in the blankets. Then he went
into the dining-room, to look for spirits. There was a little whisky. He
drank a gulp himself, and put some into her mouth.

The effect was instantaneous. She looked full into his face, as if she
had been seeing him for some time, and yet had only just become conscious
of him.

'Dr. Fergusson?' she said.

'What?' he answered.

He was divesting himself of his coat, intending to find some dry clothing
upstairs. He could not bear the smell of the dead, clayey water, and he
was mortally afraid for his own health.

'What did I do?' she asked.

'Walked into the pond,' he replied. He had begun to shudder like one
sick, and could hardly attend to her. Her eyes remained full on him, he
seemed to be going dark in his mind, looking back at her helplessly. The
shuddering became quieter in him, his life came back in him, dark and
unknowing, but strong again.

'Was I out of my mind?' she asked, while her eyes were fixed on him all
the time.

'Maybe, for the moment,' he replied. He felt quiet, because his strength
had come back. The strange fretful strain had left him.

'Am I out of my mind now?' she asked.

'Are you?' he reflected a moment. 'No,' he answered truthfully, 'I don't
see that you are.' He turned his face aside. He was afraid now, because
he felt dazed, and felt dimly that her power was stronger than his, in
this issue. And she continued to look at him fixedly all the time. 'Can
you tell me where I shall find some dry things to put on?' he asked.

'Did you dive into the pond for me?' she asked.

'No,' he answered. 'I walked in. But I went in overhead as well.'

There was silence for a moment. He hesitated. He very much wanted to go
upstairs to get into dry clothing. But there was another desire in him.
And she seemed to hold him. His will seemed to have gone to sleep, and
left him, standing there slack before her. But he felt warm inside
himself. He did not shudder at all, though his clothes were sodden on
him.

'Why did you?' she asked.

'Because I didn't want you to do such a foolish thing,' he said.

'It wasn't foolish,' she said, still gazing at him as she lay on the
floor, with a sofa cushion under her head. 'It was the right thing to do.
_I_ knew best, then.'

'I'll go and shift these wet things,' he said. But still he had not the
power to move out of her presence, until she sent him. It was as if she
had the life of his body in her hands, and he could not extricate
himself. Or perhaps he did not want to.

Suddenly she sat up. Then she became aware of her own immediate
condition. She felt the blankets about her, she knew her own limbs. For a
moment it seemed as if her reason were going. She looked round, with wild
eye, as if seeking something. He stood still with fear. She saw her
clothing lying scattered.

'Who undressed me?' she asked, her eyes resting full and inevitable on
his face.

'I did,' he replied, 'to bring you round.'

For some moments she sat and gazed at him awfully, her lips parted.

'Do you love me then?' she asked.

He only stood and stared at her, fascinated. His soul seemed to melt.

She shuffled forward on her knees, and put her arms round him, round his
legs, as he stood there, pressing her breasts against his knees and
thighs, clutching him with strange, convulsive certainty, pressing his
thighs against her, drawing him to her face, her throat, as she looked up
at him with flaring, humble eyes, of transfiguration, triumphant in first
possession.

'You love me,' she murmured, in strange transport, yearning and
triumphant and confident. 'You love me. I know you love me, I know.'

And she was passionately kissing his knees, through the wet clothing,
passionately and indiscriminately kissing his knees, his legs, as if
unaware of every thing.

He looked down at the tangled wet hair, the wild, bare, animal shoulders.
He was amazed, bewildered, and afraid. He had never thought of loving
her. He had never wanted to love her. When he rescued her and restored
her, he was a doctor, and she was a patient. He had had no single
personal thought of her. Nay, this introduction of the personal element
was very distasteful to him, a violation of his professional honour. It
was horrible to have her there embracing his knees. It was horrible. He
revolted from it, violently. And yet--and yet--he had not the power to
break away.

She looked at him again, with the same supplication of powerful love, and
that same transcendent, frightening light of triumph. In view of the
delicate flame which seemed to come from her face like a light, he was
powerless. And yet he had never intended to love her. He had never
intended. And something stubborn in him could not give way.

'You love me,' she repeated, in a murmur of deep, rhapsodic assurance.
'You love me.'

Her hands were drawing him, drawing him down to her. He was afraid, even
a little horrified. For he had, really, no intention of loving her. Yet
her hands were drawing him towards her. He put out his hand quickly to
steady himself, and grasped her bare shoulder. A flame seemed to burn the
hand that grasped her soft shoulder. He had no intention of loving her:
his whole will was against his yielding. It was horrible. And yet
wonderful was the touch of her shoulders, beautiful the shining of her
face. Was she perhaps mad? He had a horror of yielding to her. Yet
something in him ached also.

He had been staring away at the door, away from her. But his hand
remained on her shoulder. She had gone suddenly very still. He looked
down at her. Her eyes were now wide with fear, with doubt, the light was
dying from her face, a shadow of terrible greyness was returning. He
could not bear the touch of her eyes' question upon him, and the look of
death behind the question.

With an inward groan he gave way, and let his heart yield towards her. A
sudden gentle smile came on his face. And her eyes, which never left his
face, slowly, slowly filled with tears. He watched the strange water rise
in her eyes, like some slow fountain coming up. And his heart seemed to
burn and melt away in his breast.

He could not bear to look at her any more. He dropped on his knees and
caught her head with his arms and pressed her face against his throat.
She was very still. His heart, which seemed to have broken, was burning
with a kind of agony in his breast. And he felt her slow, hot tears
wetting his throat. But he could not move.

He felt the hot tears wet his neck and the hollows of his neck, and he
remained motionless, suspended through one of man's eternities. Only now
it had become indispensable to him to have her face pressed close to him;
he could never let her go again. He could never let her head go away from
the close clutch of his arm. He wanted to remain like that for ever, with
his heart hurting him in a pain that was also life to him. Without
knowing, he was looking down on her damp, soft brown hair.

Then, as it were suddenly, he smelt the horrid stagnant smell of that
water. And at the same moment she drew away from him and looked at him.
Her eyes were wistful and unfathomable. He was afraid of them, and he
fell to kissing her, not knowing what he was doing. He wanted her eyes
not to have that terrible, wistful, unfathomable look.

When she turned her face to him again, a faint delicate flush was
glowing, and there was again dawning that terrible shining of joy in her
eyes, which really terrified him, and yet which he now wanted to see,
because he feared the look of doubt still more.

'You love me?' she said, rather faltering.

'Yes.' The word cost him a painful effort. Not because it wasn't true.
But because it was too newly true, the _saying_ seemed to tear open again
his newly-torn heart. And he hardly wanted it to be true, even now.

She lifted her face to him, and he bent forward and kissed her on the
mouth, gently, with the one kiss that is an eternal pledge. And as he
kissed her his heart strained again in his breast. He never intended to
love her. But now it was over. He had crossed over the gulf to her, and
all that he had left behind had shrivelled and become void.

After the kiss, her eyes again slowly filled with tears. She sat still,
away from him, with her face drooped aside, and her hands folded in her
lap. The tears fell very slowly. There was complete silence. He too sat
there motionless and silent on the hearthrug. The strange pain of his
heart that was broken seemed to consume him. That he should love her?
That this was love! That he should be ripped open in this way!--Him, a
doctor!--How they would all jeer if they knew!--It was agony to him to
think they might know.

In the curious naked pain of the thought he looked again to her. She was
sitting there drooped into a muse. He saw a tear fall, and his heart
flared hot. He saw for the first time that one of her shoulders was quite
uncovered, one arm bare, he could see one of her small breasts; dimly,
because it had become almost dark in the room.

'Why are you crying?' he asked, in an altered voice.

She looked up at him, and behind her tears the consciousness of her
situation for the first time brought a dark look of shame to her eyes.

'I'm not crying, really,' she said, watching him half frightened.

He reached his hand, and softly closed it on her bare arm.

'I love you! I love you!' he said in a soft, low vibrating voice, unlike
himself.

She shrank, and dropped her head. The soft, penetrating grip of his hand
on her arm distressed her. She looked up at him.

'I want to go,' she said. 'I want to go and get you some dry things.'

'Why?' he said. 'I'm all right.'

'But I want to go,' she said. 'And I want you to change your things.'

He released her arm, and she wrapped herself in the blanket, looking at
him rather frightened. And still she did not rise.

'Kiss me,' she said wistfully.

He kissed her, but briefly, half in anger.

Then, after a second, she rose nervously, all mixed up in the blanket. He
watched her in her confusion, as she tried to extricate herself and wrap
herself up so that she could walk. He watched her relentlessly, as she
knew. And as she went, the blanket trailing, and as he saw a glimpse of
her feet and her white leg, he tried to remember her as she was when he
had wrapped her in the blanket. But then he didn't want to remember,
because she had been nothing to him then, and his nature revolted from
remembering her as she was when she was nothing to him.

A tumbling, muffled noise from within the dark house startled him. Then
he heard her voice:--'There are clothes.' He rose and went to the foot of
the stairs, and gathered up the garments she had thrown down. Then he
came back to the fire, to rub himself down and dress. He grinned at his
own appearance when he had finished.

The fire was sinking, so he put on coal. The house was now quite dark,
save for the light of a street-lamp that shone in faintly from beyond the
holly trees. He lit the gas with matches he found on the mantel-piece.
Then he emptied the pockets of his own clothes, and threw all his wet
things in a heap into the scullery. After which he gathered up her sodden
clothes, gently, and put them in a separate heap on the copper-top in the
scullery.

It was six o'clock on the clock. His own watch had stopped. He ought to
go back to the surgery. He waited, and still she did not come down. So he
went to the foot of the stairs and called:

'I shall have to go.'

Almost immediately he heard her coming down. She had on her best dress
of black voile, and her hair was tidy, but still damp. She looked at
him--and in spite of herself, smiled.

'I don't like you in those clothes,' she said.

'Do I look a sight?' he answered.

They were shy of one another.

'I'll make you some tea,' she said.

'No, I must go.'

'Must you?' And she looked at him again with the wide, strained, doubtful
eyes. And again, from the pain of his breast, he knew how he loved her.
He went and bent to kiss her, gently, passionately, with his heart's
painful kiss.

'And my hair smells so horrible,' she murmured in distraction. 'And I'm
so awful, I'm so awful! Oh, no, I'm too awful.' And she broke into
bitter, heart-broken sobbing. 'You can't want to love me, I'm horrible.'

'Don't be silly, don't be silly,' he said, trying to comfort her, kissing
her, holding her in his arms. 'I want you, I want to marry you, we're
going to be married, quickly, quickly--to-morrow if I can.'

But she only sobbed terribly, and cried:

'I feel awful. I feel awful. I feel I'm horrible to you.'

'No, I want you, I want you,' was all he answered, blindly, with that
terrible intonation which frightened her almost more than her horror lest
he should _not_ want her.


_Fanny And Annie_


Flame-lurid his face as he turned among the throng of flame-lit and dark
faces upon the platform. In the light of the furnace she caught sight of
his drifting countenance, like a piece of floating fire. And the
nostalgia, the doom of homecoming went through her veins like a drug. His
eternal face, flame-lit now! The pulse and darkness of red fire from the
furnace towers in the sky, lighting the desultory, industrial crowd on
the wayside station, lit him and went out.

Of course he did not see her. Flame-lit and unseeing! Always the same,
with his meeting eyebrows, his common cap, and his red-and-black scarf
knotted round his throat. Not even a collar to meet her! The flames had
sunk, there was shadow.

She opened the door of her grimy, branch-line carriage, and began to get
down her bags. The porter was nowhere, of course, but there was Harry,
obscure, on the outer edge of the little crowd, missing her, of course.

'Here! Harry!' she called, waving her umbrella in the twilight. He
hurried forward.

'Tha's come, has ter?' he said, in a sort of cheerful welcome. She got
down, rather flustered, and gave him a peck of a kiss.

'Two suit-cases!' she said.

Her soul groaned within her, as he clambered into the carriage after her
bags. Up shot the fire in the twilight sky, from the great furnace behind
the station. She felt the red flame go across her face. She had come
back, she had come back for good. And her spirit groaned dismally. She
doubted if she could bear it.

There, on the sordid little station under the furnaces, she stood, tall
and distinguished, in her well-made coat and skirt and her broad grey
velour hat. She held her umbrella, her bead chatelaine, and a little
leather case in her grey-gloved hands, while Harry staggered out of the
ugly little train with her bags.

'There's a trunk at the back,' she said in her bright voice. But she was
not feeling bright. The twin black cones of the iron foundry blasted
their sky-high fires into the night. The whole scene was lurid. The train
waited cheerfully. It would wait another ten minutes. She knew it. It was
all so deadly familiar.

Let us confess it at once. She was a lady's maid, thirty years old, come
back to marry her first-love, a foundry worker: after having kept him
dangling, off and on, for a dozen years. Why had she come back? Did she
love him? No. She didn't pretend to. She had loved her brilliant and
ambitious cousin, who had jilted her, and who had died. She had had other
affairs which had come to nothing. So here she was, come back suddenly to
marry her first-love, who had waited--or remained single--all these
years.

'Won't a porter carry those?' she said, as Harry strode with his
workman's stride down the platform towards the guard's van.

'I can manage,' he said.

And with her umbrella, her chatelaine, and her little leather case, she
followed him.

The trunk was there.

'We'll get Heather's greengrocer's cart to fetch it up,' he said.

'Isn't there a cab?' said Fanny, knowing dismally enough that there
wasn't.

'I'll just put it aside o' the penny-in-the-slot, and Heather's
greengrocers'll fetch it about half past eight,' he said.

He seized the box by its two handles and staggered with it across the
level-crossing, bumping his legs against it as he waddled. Then he
dropped it by the red sweet-meats machine.

'Will it be safe there?' she said.

'Ay--safe as houses,' he answered. He returned for the two bags. Thus
laden, they started to plod up the hill, under the great long black
building of the foundry. She walked beside him--workman of workmen he
was, trudging with that luggage. The red lights flared over the deepening
darkness. From the foundry came the horrible, slow clang, clang, clang of
iron, a great noise, with an interval just long enough to make it
unendurable.

Compare this with the arrival at Gloucester: the carriage for her
mistress, the dog-cart for herself with the luggage; the drive out past
the river, the pleasant trees of the carriage-approach; and herself
sitting beside Arthur, everybody so polite to her.

She had come home--for good! Her heart nearly stopped beating as she
trudged up that hideous and interminable hill, beside the laden figure.
What a come-down! What a come-down! She could not take it with her usual
bright cheerfulness. She knew it all too well. It is easy to bear up
against the unusual, but the deadly familiarity of an old stale past!

He dumped the bags down under a lamp-post, for a rest. There they stood,
the two of them, in the lamplight. Passers-by stared at her, and gave
good-night to Harry. Her they hardly knew, she had become a stranger.

'They're too heavy for you, let me carry one,' she said.

'They begin to weigh a bit by the time you've gone a mile,' he answered.

'Let me carry the little one,' she insisted.

'Tha can ha'e it for a minute, if ter's a mind,' he said, handing over
the valise.

And thus they arrived in the streets of shops of the little ugly town on
top of the hill. How everybody stared at her; my word, how they stared!
And the cinema was just going in, and the queues were tailing down the
road to the corner. And everybody took full stock of her. 'Night, Harry!'
shouted the fellows, in an interested voice.

However, they arrived at her aunt's--a little sweet-shop in a side
street. They 'pinged' the door-bell, and her aunt came running forward
out of the kitchen.

'There you are, child! Dying for a cup of tea, I'm sure. How are you?'

Fanny's aunt kissed her, and it was all Fanny could do to refrain from
bursting into tears, she felt so low. Perhaps it was her tea she wanted.

'You've had a drag with that luggage,' said Fanny's aunt to Harry.

'Ay--I'm not sorry to put it down,' he said, looking at his hand which
was crushed and cramped by the bag handle.

Then he departed to see about Heather's greengrocery cart.

When Fanny sat at tea, her aunt, a grey-haired, fair-faced little woman,
looked at her with an admiring heart, feeling bitterly sore for her. For
Fanny was beautiful: tall, erect, finely coloured, with her delicately
arched nose, her rich brown hair, her large lustrous grey eyes. A
passionate woman--a woman to be afraid of. So proud, so inwardly violent!
She came of a violent race.

It needed a woman to sympathize with her. Men had not the courage. Poor
Fanny! She was such a lady, and so straight and magnificent. And yet
everything seemed to do her down. Every time she seemed to be doomed to
humiliation and disappointment, this handsome, brilliantly sensitive
woman, with her nervous, overwrought laugh.

'So you've really come back, child?' said her aunt.

'I really have, Aunt,' said Fanny.

'Poor Harry! I'm not sure, you know, Fanny, that you're not taking a bit
of an advantage of him.'

'Oh, Aunt, he's waited so long, he may as well have what he's waited
for.' Fanny laughed grimly.

'Yes, child, he's waited so long, that I'm not sure it isn't a bit hard
on him. You know, I _like_ him, Fanny--though as you know quite well, I
don't think he's good enough for you. And I think he thinks so himself,
poor fellow.'

'Don't you be so sure of that, Aunt. Harry is common, but he's not
humble. He wouldn't think the Queen was any too good for him, if he'd a
mind to her.'

'Well--It's as well if he has a proper opinion of himself.'

'It depends what you call proper,' said Fanny. 'But he's got his good
points--'

'Oh, he's a nice fellow, and I like him, I do like him. Only, as I tell
you, he's not good enough for you.'

'I've made up my mind, Aunt,' said Fanny, grimly.

'Yes,' mused the aunt. 'They say all things come to him who waits--'

'More than he's bargained for, eh, Aunt?' laughed Fanny rather bitterly.

The poor aunt, this bitterness grieved her for her niece.

They were interrupted by the ping of the shop-bell, and Harry's call of
'Right!' But as he did not come in at once, Fanny, feeling solicitous for
him presumably at the moment, rose and went into the shop. She saw a cart
outside, and went to the door.

And the moment she stood in the doorway, she heard a woman's common
vituperative voice crying from the darkness of the opposite side of the
road:

'Tha'rt theer, ar ter? I'll shame thee, Mester. I'll shame thee, see if I
dunna.'

Startled, Fanny stared across the darkness, and saw a woman in a black
bonnet go under one of the lamps up the side street.

Harry and Bill Heather had dragged the trunk off the little dray, and she
retreated before them as they came up the shop step with it.

'Wheer shalt ha'e it?' asked Harry.

'Best take it upstairs,' said Fanny.

She went up first to light the gas.

When Heather had gone, and Harry was sitting down having tea and pork
pie, Fanny asked:

'Who was that woman shouting?'

'Nay, I canna tell thee. To somebody, Is'd think,' replied Harry. Fanny
looked at him, but asked no more.

He was a fair-haired fellow of thirty-two, with a fair moustache. He was
broad in his speech, and looked like a foundry-hand, which he was. But
women always liked him. There was something of a mother's lad about
him--something warm and playful and really sensitive.

He had his attractions even for Fanny. What she rebelled against so
bitterly was that he had no sort of ambition. He was a moulder, but of
very commonplace skill. He was thirty-two years old, and hadn't saved
twenty pounds. She would have to provide the money for the home. He
didn't care. He just didn't care. He had no initiative at all. He had no
vices--no obvious ones. But he was just indifferent, spending as he went,
and not caring. Yet he did not look happy. She remembered his face in the
fire-glow: something haunted, abstracted about it. As he sat there eating
his pork pie, bulging his cheek out, she felt he was like a doom to her.
And she raged against the doom of him. It wasn't that he was gross. His
way was common, almost on purpose. But he himself wasn't really common.
For instance, his food was not particularly important to him, he was not
greedy. He had a charm, too, particularly for women, with his blondness
and his sensitiveness and his way of making a woman feel that she was a
higher being. But Fanny knew him, knew the peculiar obstinate limitedness
of him, that would nearly send her mad.

He stayed till about half past nine. She went to the door with him.

'When are you coming up?' he said, jerking his head in the direction,
presumably, of his own home.

'I'll come tomorrow afternoon,' she said brightly. Between Fanny and Mrs.
Goodall, his mother, there was naturally no love lost.

Again she gave him an awkward little kiss, and said good-night.

'You can't wonder, you know, child, if he doesn't seem so very keen,'
said her aunt. 'It's your own fault.'

'Oh, Aunt, I couldn't stand him when he was keen. I can do with him a lot
better as he is.'

The two women sat and talked far into the night. They understood each
other. The aunt, too, had married as Fanny was marrying: a man who was no
companion to her, a violent man, brother of Fanny's father. He was dead,
Fanny's father was dead.

Poor Aunt Lizzie, she cried woefully over her bright niece, when she had
gone to bed.

Fanny paid the promised visit to his people the next afternoon. Mrs.
Goodall was a large woman with smooth-parted hair, a common, obstinate
woman, who had spoiled her four lads and her one vixen of a married
daughter. She was one of those old-fashioned powerful natures that
couldn't do with looks or education or any form of showing off. She
fairly hated the sound of correct English. She _thee'd_ and _tha'd_ her
prospective daughter-in-law, and said:

'I'm none as ormin' as I look, seest ta.'

Fanny did not think her prospective mother-in-law looked at all orming,
so the speech was unnecessary.

'I towd him mysen,' said Mrs. Goodall, ''Er's held back all this long,
let 'er stop as 'er is. 'E'd none ha' had thee for _my_ tellin'--tha
hears. No, 'e's a fool, an' I know it. I says to him, 'Tha looks a man,
doesn't ter, at thy age, goin' an' openin' to her when ter hears her
scrat' at th' gate, after she's done gallivantin' round wherever she'd a
mind. That looks rare an' soft.' But it's no use o' any talking: he
answered that letter o' thine and made his own bad bargain.'

But in spite of the old woman's anger, she was also flattered at Fanny's
coming back to Harry. For Mrs. Goodall was impressed by Fanny--a woman of
her own match. And more than this, everybody knew that Fanny's Aunt Kate
had left her two hundred pounds: this apart from the girl's savings.

So there was high tea in Princes Street when Harry came home black from
work, and a rather acrid odour of cordiality, the vixen Jinny darting in
to say vulgar things. Of course Jinny lived in a house whose garden end
joined the paternal garden. They were a clan who stuck together, these
Goodalls.

It was arranged that Fanny should come to tea again on the Sunday, and
the wedding was discussed. It should take place in a fortnight's time at
Morley Chapel. Morley was a hamlet on the edge of the real country, and
in its little Congregational Chapel Fanny and Harry had first met.

What a creature of habit he was! He was still in the choir of Morley
Chapel--not very regular. He belonged just because he had a tenor voice,
and enjoyed singing. Indeed his solos were only spoilt to local fame
because when he sang he handled his aitches so hopelessly.

'And I saw 'eaven hopened
And be'old, a wite 'orse-'

This was one of Harry's classics, only surpassed by the fine outburst of
his heaving:

'Hangels--hever bright an' fair-'

It was a pity, but it was inalterable. He had a good voice, and he sang
with a certain lacerating fire, but his pronunciation made it all funny.
And nothing could alter him.

So he was never heard save at cheap concerts and in the little, poorer
chapels. The others scoffed.

Now the month was September, and Sunday was Harvest Festival at Morley
Chapel, and Harry was singing solos. So that Fanny was to go to afternoon
service, and come home to a grand spread of Sunday tea with him. Poor
Fanny! One of the most wonderful afternoons had been a Sunday afternoon
service, with her cousin Luther at her side, Harvest Festival in Morley
Chapel. Harry had sung solos then--ten years ago. She remembered his pale
blue tie, and the purple asters and the great vegetable marrows in which
he was framed, and her cousin Luther at her side, young, clever, come
down from London, where he was getting on well, learning his Latin and
his French and German so brilliantly.

However, once again it was Harvest Festival at Morley Chapel, and once
again, as ten years before, a soft, exquisite September day, with the
last roses pink in the cottage gardens, the last dahlias crimson, the
last sunflowers yellow. And again the little old chapel was a bower, with
its famous sheaves of corn and corn-plaited pillars, its great bunches of
grapes, dangling like tassels from the pulpit corners, its marrows and
potatoes and pears and apples and damsons, its purple asters and yellow
Japanese sunflowers. Just as before, the red dahlias round the pillars
were dropping, weak-headed among the oats. The place was crowded and hot,
the plates of tomatoes seemed balanced perilously on the gallery front,
the Rev. Enderby was weirder than ever to look at, so long and emaciated
and hairless.

The Rev. Enderby, probably forewarned, came and shook hands with her and
welcomed her, in his broad northern, melancholy singsong before he
mounted the pulpit. Fanny was handsome in a gauzy dress and a beautiful
lace hat. Being a little late, she sat in a chair in the side-aisle
wedged in, right in front of the chapel. Harry was in the gallery above,
and she could only see him from the eyes upwards. She noticed again how
his eyebrows met, blond and not very marked, over his nose. He was
attractive too: physically lovable, very. If only--if only her _pride_
had not suffered! She felt he dragged her down.

'Come, ye thankful people come,
Raise the song of harvest-home.
All is safely gathered in
Ere the winter storms begin--'

Even the hymn was a falsehood, as the season had been wet, and half the
crops were still out, and in a poor way.

Poor Fanny! She sang little, and looked beautiful through that
inappropriate hymn. Above her stood Harry--mercifully in a dark suit and
dark tie, looking almost handsome. And his lacerating, pure tenor sounded
well, when the words were drowned in the general commotion. Brilliant she
looked, and brilliant she felt, for she was hot and angrily miserable and
inflamed with a sort of fatal despair. Because there was about him a
physical attraction which she really hated, but which she could not
escape from. He was the first man who had ever kissed her. And his
kisses, even while she rebelled from them, had lived in her blood and
sent roots down into her soul. After all this time she had come back to
them. And her soul groaned, for she felt dragged down, dragged down to
earth, as a bird which some dog has got down in the dust. She knew her
life would be unhappy. She knew that what she was doing was fatal. Yet it
was her doom. She had to come back to him.

He had to sing two solos this afternoon: one before the 'address' from
the pulpit and one after. Fanny looked at him, and wondered he was not
too shy to stand up there in front of all the people. But no, he was not
shy. He had even a kind of assurance on his face as he looked down from
the choir gallery at her: the assurance of a common man deliberately
entrenched in his commonness. Oh, such a rage went through her veins as
she saw the air of triumph, laconic, indifferent triumph which sat so
obstinately and recklessly on his eyelids as he looked down at her. Ah,
she despised him! But there he stood up in that choir gallery like
Balaam's ass in front of her, and she could not get beyond him. A certain
winsomeness also about him. A certain physical winsomeness, and as if his
flesh were new and lovely to touch. The thorn of desire rankled bitterly
in her heart.

He, it goes without saying, sang like a canary this particular afternoon,
with a certain defiant passion which pleasantly crisped the blood of the
congregation. Fanny felt the crisp flames go through her veins as she
listened. Even the curious loud-mouthed vernacular had a certain
fascination. But, oh, also, it was so repugnant. He would triumph over
her, obstinately he would drag her right back into the common people: a
doom, a vulgar doom.

The second performance was an anthem, in which Harry sang the solo parts.
It was clumsy, but beautiful, with lovely words.

'They that sow in tears shall reap in joy,
He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed
Shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him--'

'Shall doubtless come, Shall doubtless come--' softly intoned the
altos--'Bringing his she-e-eaves with him,' the trebles flourished
brightly, and then again began the half-wistful solo:

'They that sow in tears shall reap in joy--'

Yes, it was effective and moving.

But at the moment when Harry's voice sank carelessly down to his close,
and the choir, standing behind him, were opening their mouths for the
final triumphant outburst, a shouting female voice rose up from the body
of the congregation. The organ gave one startled trump, and went silent;
the choir stood transfixed.

'You look well standing there, singing in God's holy house,' came the
loud, angry female shout. Everybody turned electrified. A stoutish,
red-faced woman in a black bonnet was standing up denouncing the soloist.
Almost fainting with shock, the congregation realized it. 'You look well,
don't you, standing there singing solos in God's holy house, you,
Goodall. But I said I'd shame you. You look well, bringing your young
woman here with you, don't you? I'll let her know who she's dealing
with. A scamp as won't take the consequences of what he's done.' The
hard-faced, frenzied woman turned in the direction of Fanny. '_That's_
what Harry Goodall is, if you want to know.'

And she sat down again in her seat. Fanny, startled like all the rest,
had turned to look. She had gone white, and then a burning red, under the
attack. She knew the woman: a Mrs. Nixon, a devil of a woman, who beat
her pathetic, drunken, red-nosed second husband, Bob, and her two lanky
daughters, grown-up as they were. A notorious character. Fanny turned
round again, and sat motionless as eternity in her seat.

There was a minute of perfect silence and suspense. The audience was
open-mouthed and dumb; the choir stood like Lot's wife; and Harry, with
his music-sheet, stood there uplifted, looking down with a dumb sort of
indifference on Mrs. Nixon, his face naïve and faintly mocking. Mrs.
Nixon sat defiant in her seat, braving them all.

Then a rustle, like a wood when the wind suddenly catches the leaves.
And then the tall, weird minister got to his feet, and in his strong,
bell-like, beautiful voice--the only beautiful thing about him--he said
with infinite mournful pathos:

'Let us unite in singing the last hymn on the hymn-sheet; the last hymn
on the hymn-sheet, number eleven.

'Fair waved the golden corn,
In Canaan's pleasant land.'

The organ tuned up promptly. During the hymn the offertory was taken. And
after the hymn, the prayer.

Mr. Enderby came from Northumberland. Like Harry, he had never been able
to conquer his accent, which was very broad. He was a little simple, one
of God's fools, perhaps, an odd bachelor soul, emotional, ugly, but very
gentle.

'And if, O our dear Lord, beloved Jesus, there should fall a shadow of
sin upon our harvest, we leave it to Thee to judge, for Thou art judge.
We lift our spirits and our sorrow, Jesus, to Thee, and our mouths are
dumb. O, Lord, keep us from forward speech, restrain us from foolish
words and thoughts, we pray Thee, Lord Jesus, who knowest all and judgest
all.'

Thus the minister said in his sad, resonant voice, washed his hands
before the Lord. Fanny bent forward open-eyed during the prayer. She
could see the roundish head of Harry, also bent forward. His face was
inscrutable and expressionless. The shock left her bewildered. Anger
perhaps was her dominating emotion.

The audience began to rustle to its feet, to ooze slowly and excitedly
out of the chapel, looking with wildly-interested eyes at Fanny, at Mrs.
Nixon, and at Harry. Mrs. Nixon, shortish, stood defiant in her pew,
facing the aisle, as if announcing that, without rolling her sleeves up,
she was ready for anybody. Fanny sat quite still. Luckily the people did
not have to pass her. And Harry, with red ears, was making his way
sheepishly out of the gallery. The loud noise of the organ covered all
the downstairs commotion of exit.

The minister sat silent and inscrutable in his pulpit, rather like a
death's-head, while the congregation filed out. When the last lingerers
had unwillingly departed, craning their necks to stare at the still
seated Fanny, he rose, stalked in his hooked fashion down the little
country chapel and fastened the door. Then he returned and sat down by
the silent young woman.

'This is most unfortunate, most unfortunate!' he moaned. 'I am so sorry,
I am so sorry, indeed, indeed, ah, indeed!' he sighed himself to a close.

'It's a sudden surprise, that's one thing,' said Fanny brightly.

'Yes--yes--indeed. Yes, a surprise, yes. I don't know the woman, I don't
know her.'

'I know her,' said Fanny. 'She's a bad one.'

'Well! Well!' said the minister. 'I don't know her. I don't understand. I
don't understand at all. But it is to be regretted, it is very much to be
regretted. I am very sorry.'

Fanny was watching the vestry door. The gallery stairs communicated with
the vestry, not with the body of the chapel. She knew the choir members
had been peeping for information.

At last Harry came--rather sheepishly--with his hat in his hand.

'Well!' said Fanny, rising to her feet.

'We've had a bit of an extra,' said Harry.

'I should think so,' said Fanny.

'A most unfortunate circumstance--a most _unfortunate_ circumstance. Do
you understand it, Harry? I don't understand it at all.'

'Ah, I understand it. The daughter's goin' to have a childt, an' 'er lays
it on to me.'

'And has she no occasion to?' asked Fanny, rather censorious.

'It's no more mine than it is some other chap's,' said Harry, looking
aside.

There was a moment of pause.

'Which girl is it?' asked Fanny.

'Annie--the young one--'

There followed another silence.

'I don't think I know them, do I?' asked the minister.

'I shouldn't think so. Their name's Nixon--mother married old Bob for her
second husband. She's a tanger--'s driven the gel to what she is. They
live in Manners Road.'

'Why, what's amiss with the girl?' asked Fanny sharply. 'She was all
right when I knew her.'

'Ay--she's all right. But she's always in an' out o' th' pubs, wi' th'
fellows,' said Harry.

'A nice thing!' said Fanny.

Harry glanced towards the door. He wanted to get out.

'Most distressing, indeed!' The minister slowly shook his head.

'What about tonight, Mr. Enderby?' asked Harry, in rather a small voice.
'Shall you want me?'

Mr. Enderby looked up painedly, and put his hand to his brow. He studied
Harry for some time, vacantly. There was the faintest sort of a
resemblance between the two men.

'Yes,' he said. 'Yes, I think. I think we must take no notice, and cause
as little remark as possible.'

Fanny hesitated. Then she said to Harry.

'But _will_ you come?'

He looked at her.

'Ay, I s'll come,' he said.

Then he turned to Mr. Enderby.

'Well, good-afternoon, Mr. Enderby,' he said.

'Good-afternoon, Harry, good-afternoon,' replied the mournful minister.
Fanny followed Harry to the door, and for some time they walked in
silence through the late afternoon.

'And it's yours as much as anybody else's?' she said.

'Ay,' he answered shortly.

And they went without another word, for the long mile or so, till they
came to the corner of the street where Harry lived. Fanny hesitated.
Should she go on to her aunt's? Should she? It would mean leaving all
this, for ever. Harry stood silent.

Some obstinacy made her turn with him along the road to his own home.
When they entered the house-place, the whole family was there, mother and
father and Jinny, with Jinny's husband and children and Harry's two
brothers.

'You've been having yours ears warmed, they tell me,' said Mrs. Goodall
grimly.

'Who telled thee?' asked Harry shortly.

'Maggie and Luke's both been in.'

'You look well, don't you!' said interfering Jinny.

Harry went and hung his hat up, without replying.

'Come upstairs and take your hat off,' said Mrs. Goodall to Fanny, almost
kindly. It would have annoyed her very much if Fanny had dropped her son
at this moment.

'What's 'er say, then?' asked the father secretly of Harry, jerking his
head in the direction of the stairs whence Fanny had disappeared.

'Nowt yet,' said Harry.

'Serve you right if she chucks you now,' said Jinny. 'I'll bet it's right
about Annie Nixon an' you.'

'Tha bets so much,' said Harry.

'Yi--but you can't deny it,' said Jinny.

'I can if I've a mind.'

His father looked at him inquiringly.

'It's no more mine than it is Bill Bower's, or Ted Slaney's, or six or
seven on 'em,' said Harry to his father.

And the father nodded silently.

'That'll not get you out of it, in court,' said Jinny.

Upstairs Fanny evaded all the thrusts made by his mother, and did not
declare her hand. She tidied her hair, washed her hands, and put the
tiniest bit of powder on her face, for coolness, there in front of Mrs.
Goodall's indignant gaze. It was like a declaration of independence. But
the old woman said nothing.

They came down to Sunday tea, with sardines and tinned salmon and tinned
peaches, besides tarts and cakes. The chatter was general. It concerned
the Nixon family and the scandal.

'Oh, she's a foul-mouthed woman,' said Jinny of Mrs. Nixon. 'She may well
talk about God's holy house, _she_ had. It's first time she's set foot in
it, ever since she dropped off from being converted. She's a devil and
she always was one. Can't you remember how she treated Bob's children,
mother, when we lived down in the Buildings? I can remember when I was a
little girl she used to bathe them in the yard, in the cold, so that
they shouldn't splash the house. She'd half kill them if they made a
mark on the floor, and the language she'd use! And one Saturday I can
remember Garry, that was Bob's own girl, she ran off when her stepmother
was going to bathe her--ran off without a rag of clothes on--can you
remember, mother? And she hid in Smedley's closes--it was the time of
mowing-grass--and nobody could find her. She hid out there all night,
didn't she, mother? Nobody could find her. My word, there was a talk.
They found her on Sunday morning--'

'Fred Coutts threatened to break every bone in the woman's body, if she
touched the children again,' put in the father.

'Anyhow, they frightened her,' said Jinny. 'But she was nearly as bad
with her own two. And anybody can see that she's driven old Bob till he's
gone soft.'

'Ah, soft as mush,' said Jack Goodall. ''E'd never addle a week's wage,
nor yet a day's if th' chaps didn't make it up to him.'

'My word, if he didn't bring her a week's wage, she'd pull his head off,'
said Jinny.

'But a clean woman, and respectable, except for her foul mouth,' said
Mrs. Goodall. 'Keeps to herself like a bull-dog. Never lets anybody come
near the house, and neighbours with nobody.'

'Wanted it thrashed out of her,' said Mr. Goodall, a silent, evasive sort
of man.

'Where Bob gets the money for his drink from is a mystery,' said Jinny.

'Chaps treats him,' said Harry.

'Well, he's got the pair of frightenedest rabbit-eyes you'd wish to see,'
said Jinny.

'Ay, with a drunken man's murder in them, _I_ think,' said Mrs. Goodall.

So the talk went on after tea, till it was practically time to start off
to chapel again.

'You'll have to be getting ready, Fanny,' said Mrs. Goodall.

'I'm not going tonight,' said Fanny abruptly. And there was a sudden halt
in the family. 'I'll stop with _you_ tonight, Mother,' she added.

'Best you had, my gel,' said Mrs. Goodall, flattered and assured.