Produced by Eric Hutton.  HTML version by Al Haines.


MEN OF INVENTION AND INDUSTRY


by

Samuel Smiles


"Men there have been, ignorant of letters; without art, without
eloquence; who yet had the wisdom to devise and the courage to perform
that which they lacked language to explain.  Such men have worked the
deliverance of nations and their own greatness. Their hearts are their
books; events are their tutors; great actions are their
eloquence."--MACAULAY.


Contents.

Preface

CHAPTER I  Phineas Pett:
  Beginnings of English Shipbuilding

CHAPTER II  Francis Pettit Smith:
  Practical Introducer of the Screw Propeller

CHAPTER III  John Harrison:
  Inventor of the Marine Chronometer

CHAPTER IV  John Lombe:
  Introducer of the Silk Industry into England

CHAPTER V  William Murdock:
  His Life and Inventions

CHAPTER VI  Frederick Koenig:
  Inventor of the Steam-printing Machine

CHAPTER VII  The Walters of 'The Times':
  Inventor of the Walter Press

CHAPTER VIII William Clowes:
  Book-printing by Steam

CHAPTER IX  Charles Bianconi:
  A Lesson of Self-Help in Ireland

CHAPTER X  Industry in Ireland:
  Through Connaught and Ulster to Belfast

CHAPTER XI  Shipbuilding in Belfast:
  By Sir E. J. Harland, Engineer and Shipbuilder

CHAPTER XII  Astronomers and students in humble life:
  A new Chapter in the 'Pursuit of Knowledge under Difficulties'


PREFACE

I offer this book as a continuation of the memoirs of men of invention
and industry published some years ago in the 'Lives of Engineers,'
'Industrial Biography,' and 'Self-Help.'

The early chapters relate to the history of a very important branch of
British industry--that of Shipbuilding.  A later chapter, kindly
prepared by Sir Edward J. Harland, of Belfast, relates to the origin
and progress of shipbuilding in Ireland.

Many of the facts set forth in the Life and Inventions of William
Murdock have already been published in my 'Lives of Boulton and Watt;'
but these are now placed in a continuous narrative, and supplemented by
other information, more particularly the correspondence between Watt
and Murdock, communicated to me by the present representative of the
family, Mr. Murdock, C.E., of Gilwern, near Abergavenny.

I have also endeavoured to give as accurate an account as possible of
the Invention of the Steam-printing Press, and its application to the
production of Newspapers and Books,--an invention certainly of great
importance to the spread of knowledge, science, and literature,
throughout the world.

The chapter on the "Industry of Ireland" will speak for itself. It
occurred to me, on passing through Ireland last year, that much
remained to be said on that subject; and, looking to the increasing
means of the country, and the well-known industry of its people, it
seems reasonable to expect, that with peace, security, energy, and
diligent labour of head and hand, there is really a great future before
Ireland.

The last chapter, on "Astronomers in Humble Life," consists for the
most part of a series of Autobiographies.  It may seem, at first sight,
to have little to do with the leading object of the book; but it serves
to show what a number of active, earnest, and able men are
comparatively hidden throughout society, ready to turn their hands and
heads to the improvement of their own characters, if not to the
advancement of the general community of which they form a part.

In conclusion, I say to the reader, as Quarles said in the preface to
his 'Emblems,' "I wish thee as much pleasure in the reading as I had in
the writing."  In fact, the last three chapters were in some measure
the cause of the book being published in its present form.

London, November, 1884.


CHAPTER I.

PHINEAS PETT: BEGINNINGS OF ENGLISH SHIP-BUILDING.

"A speck in the Northern Ocean, with a rocky coast, an ungenial
climate, and a soil scarcely fruitful,--this was the material patrimony
which descended to the English race--an inheritance that would have
been little worth but for the inestimable moral gift that accompanied
it.  Yes; from Celts, Saxons, Danes, Normans--from some or all of
them--have come down with English nationality a talisman that could
command sunshine, and plenty, and empire, and fame.  The 'go' which
they transmitted to us--the national vis--this it is which made the old
Angle-land a glorious heritage.  Of this we have had a portion above
our brethren--good measure, running over.  Through this our
island-mother has stretched out her arms till they enriched the globe
of the earth....Britain, without her energy and enterprise, what would
she be in Europe?"--Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine (1870).

In one of the few records of Sir Isaac Newton's life which he left for
the benefit of others, the following comprehensive thought occurs:

"It is certainly apparent that the inhabitants of this world are of a
short date, seeing that all arts, as letters, ships, printing, the
needle, &c., were discovered within the memory of history."

If this were true in Newton's time, how much truer is it now. Most of
the inventions which are so greatly influencing, as well as advancing,
the civilization of the world at the present time, have been discovered
within the last hundred or hundred and fifty years.  We do not say that
man has become so much wiser during that period; for, though he has
grown in Knowledge, the most fruitful of all things were said by "the
heirs of all the ages" thousands of years ago.

But as regards Physical Science, the progress made during the last
hundred years has been very great.  Its most recent triumphs have been
in connection with the discovery of electric power and electric light.
Perhaps the most important invention, however, was that of the working
steam engine, made by Watt only about a hundred years ago.  The most
recent application of this form of energy has been in the propulsion of
ships, which has already produced so great an effect upon commerce,
navigation, and the spread of population over the world.

Equally important has been the influence of the Railway--now the
principal means of communication in all civilized countries. This
invention has started into full life within our own time. The
locomotive engine had for some years been employed in the haulage of
coals; but it was not until the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester
Railway in 1830, that the importance of the invention came to be
acknowledged.  The locomotive railway has since been everywhere adopted
throughout Europe.  In America, Canada, and the Colonies, it has opened
up the boundless resources of the soil, bringing the country nearer to
the towns, and the towns to the country.  It has enhanced the celerity
of time, and imparted a new series of conditions to every rank of life.

The importance of steam navigation has been still more recently
ascertained.  When it was first proposed, Sir Joseph Banks, President
of the Royal Society, said:  "It is a pretty plan, but there is just
one point overlooked: that the steam-engine requires a firm basis on
which to work."  Symington, the practical mechanic, put this theory to
the test by his successful experiments, first on Dalswinton Lake, and
then on the Forth and Clyde Canal.  Fulton and Bell afterwards showed
the power of steamboats in navigating the rivers of America and Britain.

After various experiments, it was proposed to unite England and America
by steam.  Dr. Lardner, however, delivered a lecture before the Royal
Institution in 1838, "proving" that steamers could never cross the
Atlantic, because they could not carry sufficient coal to raise steam
enough during the voyage.  But this theory was also tested by
experience in the same year, when the Sirius, of London, left Cork for
New York, and made the passage in nineteen days.  Four days after the
departure of the Sirius, the Great Western left Bristol for New York,
and made the passage in thirteen days five hours.[1]  The problem was
solved; and great ocean steamers have ever since passed in continuous
streams between the shores of England and America.

In an age of progress, one invention merely paves the way for another.
The first steamers were impelled by means of paddle wheels; but these
are now almost entirely superseded by the screw.  And this, too, is an
invention almost of yesterday.  It was only in 1840 that the Archimedes
was fitted as a screw yacht.

A few years later, in 1845, the Great Britain, propelled by the screw,
left Liverpool for New York, and made the voyage in fourteen days.  The
screw is now invariably adopted in all long ocean voyages.

It is curious to look back, and observe the small beginnings of
maritime navigation.  As regards this country, though its institutions
are old, modern England is still young.  As respects its mechanical and
scientific achievements, it is the youngest of all countries.  Watt's
steam engine was the beginning of our manufacturing supremacy; and
since its adoption, inventions and discoveries in Art and Science,
within the last hundred years, have succeeded each other with
extraordinary rapidity.  In 1814 there was only one steam vessel in
Scotland; while England possessed none at all.  Now, the British
mercantile steam-ships number about 5000, with about 4 millions of
aggregate tonnage.[2]

In olden times this country possessed the materials for great things,
as well as the men fitted to develope them into great results.  But the
nation was slow to awake and take advantage of its opportunities.
There was no enterprise, no commerce--no "go" in the people.  The roads
were frightfully bad; and there was little communication between one
part of the country and another.

If anything important had to be done, we used to send for foreigners to
come and teach us how to do it.  We sent for them to drain our fens, to
build our piers and harbours, and even to pump our water at London
Bridge.  Though a seafaring population lived round our coasts, we did
not fish our own seas, but left it to the industrious Dutchmen to catch
the fish, and supply our markets.  It was not until the year 1787 that
the Yarmouth people began the deep-sea herring fishery; and yet these
were the most enterprising amongst the English fishermen.

English commerce also had very slender beginnings.  At the commencement
of the fifteenth century, England was of very little account in the
affairs of Europe.  Indeed, the history of modern England is nearly
coincident with the accession of the Tudors to the throne.  With the
exception of Calais and Dunkirk, her dominions on the Continent had
been wrested from her by the French.  The country at home had been made
desolate by the Wars of the Roses.  The population was very small, and
had been kept down by war, pestilence, and famine.[3] The chief staple
was wool, which was exported to Flanders in foreign ships, there to be
manufactured into cloth.  Nearly every article of importance was
brought from abroad; and the little commerce which existed was in the
hands of foreigners.  The seas were swept by privateers, little better
than pirates, who plundered without scruple every vessel, whether
friend or foe, which fell in their way.

The British navy has risen from very low beginnings.  The English fleet
had fallen from its high estate since the reign of Edward III., who won
a battle from the French and Flemings in 1340, with 260 ships; but his
vessels were all of moderate size, being boats, yachts, and caravels,
of very small tonnage.  According to the contemporary chronicles,
Weymouth, Fowey, Sandwich, and Bristol, were then of nearly almost as
much importance as London;[4] which latter city only furnished
twenty-five vessels, with 662 mariners.

The Royal Fleet began in the reign of Henry VII.  Only six or seven
vessels then belonged to the King, the largest being the Grace de Dieu,
of comparatively small tonnage.  The custom then was, to hire ships
from the Venetians, the Genoese, the Hanse towns, and other trading
people; and as soon as the service for which the vessels so hired was
performed, they were dismissed.

When Henry VIII. ascended the throne in 1509, he directed his attention
to the state of the navy.  Although the insular position of England was
calculated to stimulate the art of shipbuilding more than in most
continental countries, our best ships long continued to be built by
foreigners.  Henry invited from abroad, especially from Italy, where
the art of shipbuilding had made the greatest progress, as many skilful
artists and workmen as he could procure, either by the hope of gain, or
the high honours and distinguished countenance which he paid them. "By
incorporating," says Charnock, "these useful persons among his own
subjects, he soon formed a corps sufficient to rival those states which
had rendered themselves most distinguished by their knowledge in this
art; so that the fame of Genoa and Venice, which had long excited the
envy of the greater part of Europe, became suddenly transferred to the
shores of Britain."[5]

In fitting out his fleet, we find Henry disbursing large sums to
foreigners for shipbuilding, for "harness" or armour, and for munitions
of all sorts.  The State Papers[6] particularize the amounts paid to
Lewez de la Fava for "harness;" to William Gurre, "bregandy-maker;" and
to Leonard Friscobald for "almayn ryvetts."

Francis de Errona, a Spaniard, supplied the gunpowder.  Among the
foreign mechanics and artizans employed were Hans Popenruyter,
gunfounder of Mechlin; Robert Sakfeld, Robert Skorer, Fortuno de
Catalenago, and John Cavelcant.  On one occasion 2,797L. 19s. 4 1/2d.
was disbursed for guns and grindstones.  This sum must be multiplied by
about four, to give the proper present value. Popenruyter seems to have
been the great gunfounder of the age; he supplied the principal guns
and gun stores for the English navy, and his name occurs in every
Ordnance account of the series, generally for sums of the largest
amounts.

Henry VIII. was the first to establish Royal dockyards, first at
Woolwich, then at Portsmouth, and thirdly at Deptford, for the erection
and repair of ships.  Before then, England had been principally
dependent upon Dutchmen and Venetians, both for ships of war and
merchantmen.  The sovereign had neither naval arsenals nor dockyards,
nor any regular establishment of civil or naval affairs to provide
ships of war.  Sir Edward Howard, Lord High Admiral of England, at the
accession of Henry VIII., actually entered into a "contract" with that
monarch to fight his enemies.

This singular document is still preserved in the State Paper office.
Even after the establishment of royal dockyards, the sovereign--as late
as the reign of Elizabeth--entered into formal contracts with
shipwrights for the repair and maintenance of ships, as well as for
additions to the fleet.

The King, having made his first effort at establishing a royal navy,
sent the fleet to sea against the ships of France.  The Regent was the
ship royal, with Sir Thomas Knivet, Master of the Horse, and Sir John
Crew of Devonshire, as Captains.  The fleet amounted to twenty-five
well furnished ships.  The French fleet were thirty-nine in number.
They met in Brittany Bay, and had a fierce fight.  The Regent grappled
with a great carack of Brest; the French, on the English boarding their
ship, set fire to the gunpowder, and both ships were blown up, with all
their men.  The French fleet fled, and the English kept the seas.  The
King, hearing of the loss of the Regent, caused a great ship to be
built, the like of which had never before been seen in England, and
called it Harry Grace de Dieu.

This ship was constructed by foreign artizans, principally by Italians,
and was launched in 1515.  She was said to be of a thousand tons
portage--the largest ship in England.  The vessel was four-masted, with
two round tops on each mast, except the shortest mizen.  She had a high
forecastle and poop, from which the crew could shoot down upon the deck
or waist of another vessel.  The object was to have a sort of castle at
each end of the ship.  This style of shipbuilding was doubtless
borrowed from the Venetians, then the greatest naval power in Europe.
The length of the masts, the height of the ship above the water's edge,
and the ornaments and decorations, were better adapted for the
stillness of the Adriatic and Mediterranean Seas, than for the
boisterous ocean of the northern parts of Europe.[7] The story long
prevailed that "the Great Harry swept a dozen flocks of sheep off the
Isle of Man with her bob-stay."  An American gentleman (N.B. Anderson,
LL.D., Boston) informed the present author that this saying is still
proverbial amongst the United States sailors.

The same features were reproduced in merchant ships.  Most of them were
suited for defence, to prevent the attacks of pirates, which swarmed
the seas round the coast at that time. Shipbuilding by the natives in
private shipyards was in a miserable condition.  Mr. Willet, in his
memoir relative to the navy, observes: "It is said, and I believe with
truth, that at this time (the middle of the sixteenth century) there
was not a private builder between London Bridge and Gravesend, who
could lay down a ship in the mould left from a Navy Board's draught,
without applying to a tinker who lived in Knave's Acre."[8]

Another ship of some note built at the instance of Henry VIII. was the
Mary Rose, of the portage of 500 tons.  We find her in the "pond at
Deptford" in 1515.  Seven years later, in the thirtieth year of Henry
VIII.'s reign, she was sent to sea, with five other English ships of
war, to protect such commerce as then existed from the depredations of
the French and Scotch pirates. The Mary Rose was sent many years later
(in 1544) with the English fleet to the coast of France, but returned
with the rest of the fleet to Portsmouth without entering into any
engagement. While laid at anchor, not far from the place where the
Royal George afterwards went down, and the ship was under repair, her
gun-ports being very low when she was laid over, "the shipp turned, the
water entered, and sodainly she sanke."

What was to be done?  There were no English engineers or workmen who
could raise the ship.  Accordingly, Henry VIII. sent to Venice for
assistance, and when the men arrived, Pietro de Andreas was dispatched
with the Venetian marines and carpenters to raise the Mary Rose.  Sixty
English mariners were appointed to attend upon them.  The Venetians
were then the skilled "heads," the English were only the "hands."
Nevertheless they failed with all their efforts; and it was not until
the year 1836 that Mr. Dean, the engineer, succeeded in raising not
only the Royal George, but the Mary Rose, and cleared the roadstead at
Portsmouth of the remains of the sunken ships.

When Elizabeth ascended the throne in 1558, the commerce and navigation
of England were still of very small amount.  The population of the
kingdom amounted to only about five millions--not much more than the
population of London is now. The country had little commerce, and what
it had was still mostly in the hands of foreigners.  The Hanse towns
had their large entrepot for merchandise in Cannon Street, on the site
of the present Cannon Street Station.  The wool was still sent abroad
to Flanders to be fashioned into cloth, and even garden produce was
principally imported from Holland.  Dutch, Germans, Flemings, French,
and Venetians continued to be our principal workmen.  Our iron was
mostly obtained from Spain and Germany.  The best arms and armour came
from France and Italy.  Linen was imported from Flanders and Holland,
though the best came from Rheims.  Even the coarsest dowlas, or
sailcloth, was imported from the Low Countries.

The royal ships continued to be of very small burthen, and the
mercantile ships were still smaller.  The Queen, however, did what she
could to improve the number and burthen of our ships. "Foreigners,"
says Camden, "stiled her the restorer of naval glory and Queen of the
Northern Seas."  In imitation of the Queen, opulent subjects built
ships of force; and in course of time England no longer depended upon
Hamburg, Dantzic, Genoa, and Venice, for her fleet in time of war.

Spain was then the most potent power in Europe, and the Netherlands,
which formed part of the dominions of Spain, was the centre of
commercial prosperity.  Holland possessed above 800 good ships, of from
200 to 700 tons burthen, and above 600 busses for fishing, of from 100
to 200 tons.  Amsterdam and Antwerp were in the heyday of their
prosperity.  Sometimes 500 great ships were to be seen lying together
before Amsterdam;[9] whereas England at that time had not four merchant
ships of 400 tons each!  Antwerp, however, was the most important city
in the Low Countries.  It was no uncommon thing to see as many as 2500
ships in the Scheldt, laden with merchandize.  Sometimes 500 ships
would come and go from Antwerp in one day, bound to or returning from
the distant parts of the world.  The place was immensely rich, and was
frequented by Spaniards, Germans, Danes, English, Italians, and
Portuguese the Spaniards being the most numerous. Camden, in his
history of Queen Elizabeth, relates that our general trade with the
Netherlands in 1564 amounted to twelve millions of ducats, five
millions of which was for English cloth alone.

The religious persecutions of Philip II. of Spain and of Charles IX. of
France shortly supplied England with the population of which she stood
in need--active, industrious, intelligent artizans.  Philip set up the
Inquisition in Flanders, and in a few years more than 50,000 persons
were deliberately murdered. The Duchess of Parma, writing to Philip II.
in 1567, informed him that in a few days above 100,000 men had already
left the country with their money and goods, and that more were
following every day.  They fled to Germany, to Holland, and above all
to England, which they hailed as Asylum Christi.  The emigrants settled
in the decayed cities and towns of Canterbury, Norwich, Sandwich,
Colchester, Maidstone, Southampton, and many other places, where they
carried on their manufactures of woollen, linen, and silk, and
established many new branches of industry.[10]

Five years later, in 1572, the massacre of St. Bartholomew took place
in France, during which the Roman Catholic Bishop Perefixe alleges that
100,000 persons were put to death because of their religions opinions.
All this persecution, carried on so near the English shores, rapidly
increased the number of foreign fugitives into England, which was
followed by the rapid advancement of the industrial arts in this
country.

The asylum which Queen Elizabeth gave to the persecuted foreigners
brought down upon her the hatred of Philip II. and Charles IX.  When
they found that they could not prevent her furnishing them with an
asylum, they proceeded to compass her death.  She was excommunicated by
the Pope, and Vitelli was hired to assassinate her.  Philip also
proceeded to prepare the Sacred Armada for the subjugation of the
English nation, and he was master of the most powerful army and navy in
the world.

Modern England was then in the throes of her birth.  She had not yet
reached the vigour of her youth, though she was full of life and
energy.  She was about to become the England of free thought, commerce,
and manufactures; to plough the ocean with her navies, and to plant her
colonies over the earth.  Up to the accession of Elizabeth, she had
done little, but now she was about to do much.

It was a period of sudden emancipation of thought, and of immense
fertility and originality.  The poets and prose writers of the time
united the freshness of youth with the vigour of manhood. Among these
were Spenser, Shakespeare, Sir Philip Sidney, the Fletchers, Marlowe,
and Ben Jonson.  Among the statesmen of Elizabeth were Burleigh,
Leicester, Walsingham, Howard, and Sir Nicholas Bacon.  But perhaps
greatest of all were the sailors, who, as Clarendon said, "were a
nation by themselves;" and their leaders--Drake, Frobisher, Cavendish,
Hawkins, Howard, Raleigh, Davis, and many more distinguished seamen.

They were the representative men of their time, the creation in a great
measure of the national spirit.  They were the offspring of long
generations of seamen and lovers of the sea.  They could not have been
great but for the nation which gave them birth, and imbued them with
their worth and spirit.  The great sailors, for instance, could not
have originated in a nation of mere landsmen.

They simply took the lead in a country whose coasts were fringed with
sailors.  Their greatness was but the result of an excellence in
seamanship which prevailed widely around them.

The age of English maritime adventure only began in the reign of
Elizabeth.  England had then no colonies--no foreign possessions
whatever.  The first of her extensive colonial possessions was
established in this reign.  "Ships, colonies, and commerce" began to be
the national motto--not that colonies make ships and commerce, but that
ships and commerce make colonies.  Yet what cockle-shells of ships our
pioneer navigators first sailed in!

Although John Cabot or Gabota, of Bristol, originally a citizen of
Venice, had discovered the continent of North America in 1496, in the
reign of Henry VII., he made no settlement there, but returned to
Bristol with his four small ships.  Columbus did not see the continent
of America until two years later, in 1498, his first discoveries being
the islands of the West Indies.

It was not until the year 1553 that an attempt was made to discover a
North-west passage to Cathaya or China.  Sir Hugh Willonghby was put in
command of the expedition, which consisted of three ships,--the Bona
Esperanza, the Bona Ventura (Captain Chancellor), and the Bona
Confidentia (Captain Durforth),--most probably ships built by
Venetians.  Sir Hugh reached 72 degrees of north latitude, and was
compelled by the buffeting of the winds to take refuge with Captain
Durforth's vessel at Arcina Keca, in Russian Lapland, where the two
captains and the crews of these ships, seventy in number, were frozen
to death.  In the following year some Russian fishermen found Sir John
Willonghby sitting dead in his cabin, with his diary and other papers
beside him.

Captain Chancellor was more fortunate.  He reached Archangel in the
White Sea, where no ship had ever been seen before.  He pointed out to
the English the way to the whale fishery at Spitzbergen, and opened up
a trade with the northern parts of Russia.  Two years later, in 1556,
Stephen Burroughs sailed with one small ship, which entered the Kara
Sea; but he was compelled by frost and ice to return to England.  The
strait which he entered is still called "Burrough's Strait."

It was not, however, until the reign of Elizabeth that great maritime
adventures began to be made.  Navigators were not so venturous as they
afterwards became.  Without proper methods of navigation, they were apt
to be carried away to the south, across an ocean without limit.  In
1565 a young captain, Martin Frobisher, came into notice.  At the age
of twenty-five he captured in the South Seas the Flying Spirit, a
Spanish ship laden with a rich cargo of cochineal.  Four years later,
in 1569, he made his first attempt to discover the north-west passage
to the Indies, being assisted by Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick. The
ships of Frobisher were three in number, the Gabriel, of from 15 to 20
tons; the Michael, of from 20 to 25 tons, or half the size of a modern
fishing-boat; and a pinnace, of from 7 to 10 tons!  The aggregate of
the crews of the three ships was only thirty-five, men and boys.  Think
of the daring of these early navigators in attempting to pass by the
North Pole to Cathay through snow, and storm, and ice, in such
miserable little cockboats!  The pinnace was lost; the Michael, under
Owen Griffith, a Welsh-man, deserted; and Martin Frobisher in the
Gabriel went alone into the north-western sea!

He entered the great bay, since called Hudson's Bay, by Frobisher's
Strait.  He returned to England without making the discovery of the
Passage, which long remained the problem of arctic voyagers.  Yet ten
years later, in 1577, he made another voyage, and though he made his
second attempt with one of Queen Elizabeth's own ships, and two barks,
with 140 persons in all, he was as unsuccessful as before.  He brought
home some supposed gold ore; and on the strength of the stones
containing gold, a third expedition went out in the following year.
After losing one of the ships, consuming the provisions, and suffering
greatly from ice and storms, the fleet returned home one by one.  The
supposed gold ore proved to be only glittering sand.

While Frobisher was seeking El-Dorado in the North, Francis Drake was
finding it in the South.  He was a sailor, every inch of him.

"Pains, with patience in his youth," says Fuller, "knit the joints of
his soul, and made them more solid and compact."  At an early age, when
carrying on a coasting trade, his imagination was inflamed by the
exploits of his protector Hawkins in the New World, and he joined him
in his last unfortunate adventure on the Spanish Main.  He was not,
however, discouraged by his first misfortune, but having assembled
about him a number of seamen who believed in him, he made other
adventures to the West Indies, and learnt the navigation of that part
of the ocean.  In 1570, he obtained a regular commission from Queen
Elizabeth, though he sailed his own ships, and made his own ventures.
Every Englishman, who had the means, was at liberty to fit out his own
ships; and with tolerable vouchers, he was able to procure a commission
from the Court, and proceed to sea at his own risk and cost.  Thus, the
naval enterprise and pioneering of new countries under Elizabeth, was
almost altogether a matter of private enterprise and adventure.

In 1572, the butchery of the Hugnenots took place at Paris and
throughout France; while at the same time the murderous power of Philip
II. reigned supreme in the Netherlands.  The sailors knew what they had
to expect from the Spanish king in the event of his obtaining his
threatened revenge upon England; and under their chosen chiefs they
proceeded to make war upon him.  In the year of the massacre of St.
Bartholomew, Drake set sail for the Spanish Main in the Pasha, of
seventy tons, accompanied by the Swan, of twenty-five tons; the united
crews of the vessels amounting to seventy-three men and boys.  With
this insignificant force, Drake made great havoc amongst the Spanish
shipping at Nombre de Dios.  He partially crossed the Isthmus of
Darien, and obtained his first sight of the great Pacific Ocean.  He
returned to England in August 1573, with his frail barks crammed with
treasure.

A few years later, in 1577, he made his ever-memorable expedition.
Charnock says it was "an attempt in its nature so bold and
unprecedented, that we should scarcely know whether to applaud it as a
brave, or condemn it as a rash one, but for its success."  The squadron
with which he sailed for South America consisted of five vessels, the
largest of which, the Pelican, was only of 100 tons burthen; the next,
the Elizabeth, was of 80; the third, the Swan, a fly-boat, was of 50;
the Marygold bark, of 30; and the Christopher, a pinnace, of 15 tons.
The united crews of these vessels amounted to only 164, gentlemen and
sailors.

The gentlemen went with Drake "to learn the art of navigation." After
various adventures along the South American coast, the little fleet
passed through the Straits of Magellan, and entered the Pacific Ocean.
Drake took an immense amount of booty from the Spanish towns along the
coast, and captured the royal galleon, the Cacafuego, laden with
treasure.  After trying in vain to discover a passage home by the
North-eastern ocean, though what is now known as Behring Straits, he
took shelter in Port San Francisco, which he took possession of in the
name of the Queen of England, and called New Albion.  He eventually
crossed the Pacific for the Moluccas and Java, from which he sailed
right across the Indian Ocean, and by the Cape of Good Hope to England,
thus making the circumnavigation of the world. He was absent with his
little fleet for about two years and ten months.

Not less extraordinary was the voyage of Captain Cavendish, who made
the circumnavigation of the globe at his own expense.  He set out from
Plymouth in three small vessels on the 21st July, 1586.  One vessel was
of 120 tons, the second of 60 tons, and the third of 40 tons--not much
bigger than a Thames yacht.  The united crews, of officers, men, and
boys, did not exceed 123! Cavendish sailed along the South American
continent, and made through the Straits of Magellan, reaching the
Pacific Ocean.  He burnt and plundered the Spanish settlements along
the coast, captured some Spanish ships, and took by boarding the
galleon St. Anna, with 122,000 Spanish dollars on board.  He then
sailed across the Pacific to the Ladrone Islands, and returned home
through the Straits of Java and the Indian Archipelago by the Cape of
Good Hope, and reached England after an absence of two years and a
month.

The sacred and invincible Armada was now ready, Philip II. was
determined to put down those English adventurers who had swept the
coasts of Spain and plundered his galleons on the high seas. The
English sailors knew that the sword of Philip was forged in the gold
mines of South America, and that the only way to defend their country
was to intercept the plunder on its voyage home to Spain.  But the
sailors and their captains--Drake, Hawkins, Frobisher, Howard,
Grenville, Raleigh, and the rest--could not altogether interrupt the
enterprise of the King of Spain.  The Armada sailed, and came in sight
of the English coast on the 20th of July, 1588.

The struggle was of an extraordinary character.  On the one side was
the most powerful naval armament that had ever put to sea. It consisted
of six squadrons of sixty fine large ships, the smallest being of 700
tons.  Besides these were four gigantic galleasses, each carrying fifty
guns, four large armed galleys, fifty-six armed merchant ships, and
twenty caravels--in all, 149 vessels.  On board were 8000 sailors,
20,000 soldiers, and a large number of galley-slaves.  The ships
carried provisions enough for six months' consumption; and the supply
of ammunition was enormous.

On the other side was the small English fleet under Hawkins and Drake.
The Royal ships were only thirteen in number.  The rest were
contributed by private enterprize, there being only thirty-eight
vessels of all sorts and sizes, including cutters and pinnaces,
carrying the Queen's flag.  The principal armed merchant ships were
provided by London, Southampton, Bristol, and the other southern ports.
Drake was followed by some privateers; Hawkins had four or five ships,
and Howard of Effingham two.  The fleet was, however, very badly found
in provisions and ammunition.  There was only a week's provisions on
board, and scarcely enough ammunition for one day's hard fighting.  But
the ships, small though they were, were in good condition.  They could
sail, whether in pursuit or in flight, for the men who navigated them
were thorough sailors.

The success of the defence was due to tact, courage, and seamanship.
At the first contact of the fleets, the Spanish towering galleons
wished to close, to grapple with their contemptuous enemies, and crush
them to death.  "Come on!" said Medina Sidonia.  Lord Howard came on
with the Ark and three other ships, and fired with immense rapidity
into the great floating castles.  The Sam Mateo luffed, and wanted them
to board.  "No! not yet!"  The English tacked, returned, fired again,
riddled the Spaniards, and shot away in the eye of the wind.  To the
astonishment of the Spanish Admiral, the English ships approached him
or left him just as they chose.  "The enemy pursue me," wrote the
Spanish Admiral to the Prince of Parma; "they fire upon me most days
from morning till nightfall, but they will not close and grapple,
though I have given them every opportunity."  The Capitana, a galleon
of 1200 tons, dropped behind, struck her flag to Drake, and increased
the store of the English fleet by some tons of gunpowder.  Another
Spanish ship surrendered, and another store of powder and shot was
rescued for the destruction of the Armada.  And so it happened
throughout, until the Spanish fleet was driven to wreck and ruin, and
the remaining ships were scattered by the tempests of the north.  After
all, Philip proved to be, what the sailors called him, only "a Colossus
stuffed with clouts."

The English sailors followed up their advantage.  They went on
"singeing the Ring of Spain's beard."  Private adventurers fitted up a
fleet under the command of Drake, and invaded the mainland of Spain.
They took the lower part of the town of Corunna; sailed to the Tagus,
and captured a fleet of ships laden with wheat and warlike stores for a
new Armada.  They next sacked Vigo, and returned to England with 150
pieces of cannon and a rich booty.  The Earl of Cumberland sailed to
the West Indies on a private adventure, and captured more Spanish
prizes.  In 1590, ten English merchantmen, returning from the Levant,
attacked twelve Spanish galleons, and after six hours' contest, put
them to flight with great loss.  In the following year, three merchant
ships set sail for the East Indies, and in the course of their voyage
took several Portuguese vessels.

A powerful Spanish fleet still kept the seas, and in 1591 they
conquered the noble Sir Richard Grenville at the Azores--fifteen great
Spanish galleons against one Queen's ship, the Revenge.  In 1593, two
of the Queen's ships, accompanied by a number of merchant ships, sailed
for the West Indies, under Burroughs, Frobisher, and Cross, and amongst
their other captures they took the greatest of all the East India
caracks, a vessel of 1600 tons, 700 men, and 36 brass cannon, laden
with a magnificent cargo.  She was taken to Dartmouth, and surprised
all who saw her, being the largest ship that had ever been seen in
England. In 1594, Captain James Lancaster set sail with three ships
upon a voyage of adventure.  He was joined by some Dutch and French
privateers.  The result was, that they captured thirty-nine of the
Spanish ships.  Sir Amias Preston, Sir John Hawkins, and Sir Francis
Drake, also continued their action upon the seas.  Lord Admiral Howard
and the Earl of Essex made their famous attack upon Cadiz for the
purpose of destroying the new Armada; they demolished all the forts;
sank eleven of the King of Spain's best ships, forty-four merchant
ships, and brought home much booty.

Nor was maritime discovery neglected.  The planting of new colonies
began, for the English people had already begun to swarm.  In 1578, Sir
Humphrey Gilbert planted Newfoundland for the Queen.  In 1584, Sir
Waiter Raleigh planted the first settlement in Virginia.  Nor was the
North-west passage neglected; for in 1580, Captain Pett (a name famous
on the Thames) set sail from Harwich in the George, accompanied by
Captain Jackman in the William.  They reached the ice in the North Sea,
but were compelled to return without effecting their purpose! Will it
be believed that the George was only of 40 tons, and that its crew
consisted of nine men and a boy; and that the William was of 20 tons,
with five men and a boy?  The wonder is that these little vessels could
resist the terrible icefields, and return to England again with their
hardy crews.

Then in 1585, another of our adventurous sailors, John Davis, of
Sandridge on the Dart, set sail with two barks, the Sunshine and the
Moonshine, of 50 and 35 tons respectively, and discovered in the far
North-west the Strait which now bears his name.  He was driven back by
the ice; but, undeterred by his failure, he set out on a second, and
then on a third voyage of discovery in the two following years.  But he
never succeeded in discovering the North-west passage.  It all reads
like a mystery--these repeated, determined, and energetic attempts to
discover a new way of reaching the fabled region of Cathay.

In these early times the Dutch were not unworthy rivals of the English.
After they had succeeded in throwing off the Spanish yoke and achieved
their independence, they became one of the most formidable of maritime
powers.  In the course of another century Holland possessed more
colonies, and had a larger share of the carrying trade of the world
than Britain.  It was natural therefore that the Dutch republic should
take an interest in the North-west passage; and the Dutch sailors, by
their enterprise and bravery, were among the first to point the way to
Arctic discovery.  Barents and Behring, above all others, proved the
courage and determination of their heroic ancestors.

The romance of the East India Company begins with an advertisement in
the London Gazette of 1599, towards the end of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth.  As with all other enterprises of the nation, it was
established by private means.  The Company was started with a capital
of 72,000L. in 50L. shares.  The adventurers bought four vessels of an
average burthen of 350 tons.  These were stocked with provisions,
"Norwich stuffs," and other merchandise.  The tiny fleet sailed from
Billingsgate on the 13th February, 1601.  It went by the Cape of Good
Hope to the East Indies, under the command of Captain James Lancaster.
It took no less than sixteen months to reach the Indian Archipelago.

The little fleet reached Acheen in June, 1602.  The king of the
territory received the visitors with courtesy, and exchanged spices
with them freely.  The four vessels sailed homeward, taking possession
of the island of St. Helena on their way back; having been absent
exactly thirty-one months.  The profits of the first voyage proved to
be about one hundred per cent.  Such was the origin of the great East
India Company--now expanded into an empire, and containing about two
hundred millions of people.

To return to the shipping and the mercantile marine of the time of
Queen Elizabeth.  The number of Royal ships was only thirteen, the rest
of the navy consisting of merchant ships, which were hired and
discharged when their purpose was served.[11] According to Wheeler, at
the accession of the Queen, there were not more than four ships
belonging to the river Thames, excepting those of the Royal Navy, which
were over 120 tons in burthen;[12] and after forty years, the whole of
the merchant ships of England, over 100 tons, amounted to 135; only a
few of these being of 500 tons.  In 1588, the number had increased to
150, "of about 150 tons one with another, employed in trading voyages
to all parts and countries." The principal shipping which frequented
the English ports still continued to be foreign--Italian, Flemish, and
German.

Liverpool, now possessing the largest shipping tonnage in the world,
had not yet come into existence.  It was little better than a fishing
village.  The people of the place presented a petition to the Queen,
praying her to remit a subsidy which had been imposed upon them, and
speaking of their native place as "Her Majesty's poor decayed town of
Liverpool."  In 1565, seven years after Queen Elizabeth began to reign,
the number of vessels belonging to Liverpool was only twelve.  The
largest was of forty tons burthen, with twelve men; and the smallest
was a boat of six tons, with three men.[13]

James I., on his accession to the throne of England in 1603, called in
all the ships of war, as well as the numerous privateers which had been
employed during the previous reign in waging war against the commerce
of Spain, and declared himself to be at peace with all the world.
James was as peaceful as a Quaker.  He was not a fighting King;--and,
partly on this account, he was not popular.  He encouraged manufactures
in wool, silk, and tapestry.  He gave every encouragement to the
mercantile and colonizing adventurers to plant and improve the rising
settlements of Virginia, New England, and Newfoundland. He also
promoted the trade to the East Indies.  Attempts continued to be made,
by Hudson, Poole, Button, Hall, Baffin, and other courageous seamen, to
discover the North-West passage, but always without effect.

The shores of England being still much infested by Algerine and other
pirates,[14] King James found it necessary to maintain the ships of war
in order to protect navigation and commerce.  He nearly doubled the
ships of the Royal Navy, and increased the number from thirteen to
twenty-four.  Their size, however, continued small, both Royal and
merchant ships.  Sir William Monson says, that at the accession of
James I. there were not above four merchant ships in England of 400
tons burthen.[15] The East Indian merchants were the first to increase
the size. In 1609, encouraged by their Charter, they built the Trade's
Increase, of 1100 tons burthen, the largest merchant ship that had ever
been built in England.  As it was necessary that, the crew of the ship
should be able to beat off the pirates, she was fully armed.  The
additional ships of war were also of heavier burthen.  In the same
year, the Prince, of 1400 tons burthen, was launched; she carried
sixty-four cannon, and was superior to any ship of the kind hitherto
seen in England.

And now we arrive at the subject of this memoir.  The Petts were the
principal ship-builders of the time.  They had long been known upon the
Thames, and had held posts in the Royal Dockyards since the reign of
Henry VII.  They were gallant sailors, too; one of them, as already
mentioned, having made an adventurous voyage to the Arctic Ocean in his
little bark, the George, of only 40 tons burthen.  Phineas Pett was the
first of the great ship-builders.  His father, Peter Pett, was one of
the Queen's master shipwrights.  Besides being a ship-builder, he was
also a poet, being the author of a poetical piece entitled, "Time's
Journey to seek his daughter Truth,"[16] a very respectable
performance.  Indeed, poetry is by no means incompatible with
ship-building--the late Chief Constructor of the Navy being, perhaps,
as proud of his poetry as of his ships.  Pett's poem was dedicated to
the Lord High Admiral, Howard, Earl of Nottingham; and this may
possibly have been the reason of the singular interest which he
afterwards took in Phineas Pett, the poet shipwright's son.

Phineas Pett was the second son of his father.  He was born at
Deptford, or "Deptford Strond," as the place used to be called, on the
1st of November, 1570.  At nine years old, he was sent to the
free-school at Rochester, and remained there for four years. Not
profiting much by his education there, his father removed him to a
private school at Greenwich, kept by a Mr. Adams.  Here he made so much
progress, that in three years time he was ready for Cambridge.  He was
accordingly sent to that University at Shrovetide, 1586, and was
entered at Emmanuel College, under charge of Mr. Charles Chadwick, the
president.  His father allowed him 20L. per annum, besides books,
apparel, and other necessaries.

Phineas remained at Cambridge for three years.  He was obliged to quit
the University by the death of his "reverend, ever-loving father,"
whose loss, he says, "proved afterwards my utter undoing almost, had
not God been more merciful to me."  His mother married again, "a most
wicked husband," says Pett in his autobiography,[17] "one, Mr. Thomas
Nunn, a minister," but of what denomination he does not state.  His
mother's imprudence wholly deprived him of his maintenance, and having
no hopes of preferment from his friends, he necessarily abandoned his
University career, "presently after Christmas, 1590."

Early in the following year, he was persuaded by his mother to
apprentice himself to Mr. Richard Chapman, of Deptford Strond, one of
the Queen's Master shipwrights, whom his late father had "bred up from
a child to that profession."  He was allowed 2L. 6s. 8d. per annum,
with which he had to provide himself with tools and apparel.  Pett
spent two years in this man's service to very little purpose; Chapman
then died, and the apprentice was dismissed.  Pett applied to his elder
brother Joseph, who would not help him, although he had succeeded to
his father's post in the Royal Dockyard.  He was accordingly
"constrained to ship himself to sea upon a desperate voyage in a
man-of-war."  He accepted the humble place of carpenter's mate on board
the galleon Constance, of London.  Pett's younger brother, Peter, then
living at Wapping, gave him lodging, meat, and drink, until the ship
was ready to sail.  But he had no money to buy clothes. Fortunately one
William King, a yoeman in Essex, taking pity upon the unfortunate young
man, lent him 3L. for that purpose; which Pett afterwards repaid.

The Constance was of only 200 tons burden.  She set sail for the South
a few days before Christmas, 1592.  There is no doubt that she was
bound upon a piratical adventure.  Piracy was not thought dishonourable
in those days.  Four years had elapsed since the Armada had approached
the English coast; and now the English and Dutch ships were scouring
the seas in search of Spanish galleons.

Whoever had the means of furnishing a ship, and could find a plucky
captain to command her, sent her out as a privateer.  Even the
Companies of the City of London clubbed their means together for the
purpose of sending out Sir Waiter Raleigh to capture Spanish ships, and
afterwards to divide the plunder; as any one may see on referring to
the documents of the London Corporation.[18]

The adventure in which Pett was concerned did not prove very fortunate.
He was absent for about twenty months on the coasts of Spain and
Barbary, and in the Levant, enduring much misery for want of victuals
and apparel, and "without taking any purchase of any value."  The
Constance returned to the Irish coast, "extreme poorly."  The vessel
entered Cork harbour, and then Pett, thoroughly disgusted with
privateering life, took leave of both ship and voyage.  With much
difficulty, he made his way across the country to Waterford, from
whence he took ship for London. He arrived there three days before
Christmas, 1594, in a beggarly condition, and made his way to his
brother Peter's house at Wapping, who again kindly entertained him.
The elder brother Joseph received him more coldly, though he lent him
forty shillings to find himself in clothes.  At that time, the fleet
was ordered to be got ready for the last expedition of Drake and
Hawkins to the West Indies.  The Defiance was sent into Woolwich dock
to be sheathed; and as Joseph Pett was in charge of the job, he allowed
his brother to be employed as a carpenter.

In the following year, Phineas succeeded in attracting the notice of
Matthew Baker, who was commissioned to rebuild Her Majesty's Triumph.
Baker employed Pett as an ordinary workman; but he had scarcely begun
the job before Baker was ordered to proceed with the building of a
great new ship at Deptford, called the Repulse.

Phineas wished to follow the progress of the Triumph, but finding his
brother Joseph unwilling to retain him in his employment, he followed
Baker to Deptford, and continued to work at the Repulse until she was
finished, launched, and set sail on her voyage, at the end of April,
1596.  This was the leading ship of the squadron which set sail for
Cadiz, under the command of the Earl of Essex and the Lord Admiral
Howard, and which did so much damage to the forts and shipping of
Philip II. of Spain.

During the winter months, while the work was in progress, Pett spent
the leisure of his evenings in perfecting himself in learning,
especially in drawing, cyphering, and mathematics, for the purpose, as
he says, of attaining the knowledge of his profession.  His master, Mr.
Baker, gave him every encouragement, and from his assistance, he adds,
"I must acknowledge I received my greatest lights."  The Lord Admiral
was often present at Baker's house.  Pett was importuned to set sail
with the ship when finished, but he preferred remaining at home.  The
principal reason, no doubt, that restrained him at this moment from
seeking the patronage of the great, was the care of his two
sisters,[19] who, having fled from the house of their barbarous
stepfather, could find no refuge but in that of their brother Phineas.
Joseph refused to receive them, and Peter of Wapping was perhaps less
able than willing to do so.

In April, 1597, Pett had the advantage of being introduced to Howard,
Earl of Nottingham, then Lord High Admiral of England. This, he says,
was the first beginning of his rising.  Two years later, Howard
recommended him for employment in purveying plank and timber in Norfolk
and Suffolk for shipbuilding purposes. Pett accomplished his business
satisfactorily, though he had some malicious enemies to contend
against.  In his leisure, he began to prepare models of ships, which he
rigged and finished complete.  He also proceeded with the study of
mathematics.  The beginning of the year 1600 found Pett once more out
of employment; and during his enforced idleness, which continued for
six months, he seriously contemplated abandoning his profession and
attempting to gain "an honest and convenient maintenance" by joining a
friend in purchasing a caravel (a small vessel), and navigating it
himself.

He was, however, prevented from undertaking this enterprise by a
message which he received from the Court, then stationed at Greenwich.
The Lord High Admiral desired to see him; and after many civil
compliments, he offered him the post of keeper of the plankyard at
Chatham.  Pett was only too glad to accept this offer, though the
salary was small.  He shipped his furniture on board a hoy of Rainham,
and accompanied it down the Thames to the junction with the Medway.
There he escaped a great danger--one of the sea perils of the time.
The mouths of navigable rivers were still infested with pirates; and as
the hoy containing Pett approached the Nore about three o'clock in the
morning, and while still dark, she came upon a Dunkirk picaroon, full
of men. Fortunately the pirate was at anchor; she weighed and gave
chase, and had not the hoy set full sail, and been impelled up the
Swale by a fresh wind, Pett would have been taken prisoner, with all
his furniture.[20]

Arrived at Chatham, Pett met his brother Joseph, became reconciled to
him, and ever after they lived together as loving brethren.  At his
brother's suggestion, Pett took a lease of the Manor House, and settled
there with his sisters.  He was now in the direct way to preferment.
Early in the following year (March, 1601) he succeeded to the place of
assistant to the principal master shipwright at Chatham, and undertook
the repairs of Her Majesty's ship The Lion's Whelp, and in the next
year he new-built the Moon enlarging her both in length and breadth.

At the accession of James I. in 1603, Pett was commanded by the Lord
High Admiral with all possible speed to build a little vessel for the
young Prince Henry, eldest son of His Majesty.  It was to be a sort of
copy of the Ark Royal, which was the flagship of the Lord High Admiral
when he defeated the Spanish Armada. Pett proceeded to accomplish the
order with all dispatch.  The little ship was in length by the keel 28
feet, in breadth 12 feet, and very curiously garnished within and
without with painting and carving.  After working by torch and candle
light, night and day, the ship was launched, and set sail for the
Thames, with the noise of drums, trumpets, and cannon, at the beginning
of March, 1604.  After passing through a great storm at the Nore, the
vessel reached the Tower, where the King and the young Prince inspected
her with delight.  She was christened Disdain by the Lord High Admiral,
and Pett was appointed captain of the ship.

After his return to Chatham, Pett, at his own charge, built a small
ship at Gillingham, of 300 tons, which he launched in the same year,
and named the Resistance.  The ship was scarcely out of hand, when Pett
was ordered to Woolwich, to prepare the Bear and other vessels for
conveying his patron, the Lord High Admiral, as an Ambassador
Extraordinary to Spain, for the purpose of concluding peace, after a
strife of more than forty years. The Resistance was hired by the
Government as a transport, and Pett was put in command.  He seems to
have been married at this time, as he mentions in his memoir that he
parted with his wife and children at Chatham on the 24th of March,
1605, and that he sailed from Queenborough on Easter Sunday.

During the voyage to Lisbon the Resistance became separated from the
Ambassador's squadron, and took refuge in Corunna.  She then set sail
for Lisbon, which she reached on the 24th of April; and afterwards for
St. Lucar, on the Guadalquiver, near Seville, which she reached on the
11th of May following.  After revisiting Corunna, "according to
instructions," on the homeward voyage, Pett directed his course for
England, and reached Rye on the 26th of June, "amidst much rain,
thunder, and lightning."  In the course of the same year, his brother
Joseph died, and Phineas succeeded to his post as master shipbuilder at
Chatham.  He was permitted, in conjunction with one Henry Farvey and
three others, to receive the usual reward of 5s. per ton for building
five new merchant ships,[21] most probably for East Indian commerce,
now assuming large dimensions.  He was despatched by the Government to
Bearwood, in Hampshire, to make a selection of timber from the estate
of the Earl of Worcester for the use of the navy, and on presenting his
report 3000 tons were purchased.  What with his building of ships, his
attendance on the Lord Admiral to Spain, and his selection of timber
for the Government, his hands seem to have been kept very full during
the whole of 1605.

In July, 1606, Pett received private instructions from the Lord High
Admiral to have all the King's ships "put into comely readiness" for
the reception of the King of Denmark, who was expected on a Royal
visit.  "Wherein," he says, "I strove extraordinarily to express my
service for the honour of the kingdom; but by reason the time limited
was short, and the business great, we laboured night and day to effect
it, which accordingly was done, to the great honour of our sovereign
king and master, and no less admiration of all strangers that were
eye-witnesses to the same."  The reception took place on the 10th of
August, 1606.

Shortly after the departure of His Majesty of Denmark, four of the
Royal ships--the Ark, Victory, Golden Lion, and Swiftsure--were ordered
to be dry-docked; the two last mentioned at Deptford, under charge of
Matthew Baker; and the two former at Woolwich, under that of Pett.  For
greater convenience, Pett removed his family to Woolwich.  After being
elected and sworn Master of the Company of Shipwrights, he refers in
his manuscript, for the first time, to his magnificent and original
design of the Prince Royal.[22]

"After settling at Woolwich," he says, "I began a curious model for the
prince my master, most part whereof I wrought with my own hands."
After finishing the model, he exhibited it to the Lord High Admiral,
and, after receiving his approval and commands, he presented it to the
young prince at Richmond.  "His Majesty (who was present) was
exceedingly delighted with the sight of the model, and passed some time
in questioning the divers material things concerning it, and demanded
whether I could build the great ship in all parts like the same; for I
will, says His Majesty, compare them together when she shall be
finished.  Then the Lord Admiral commanded me to tell His Majesty the
story of the Three Ravens[23] I had seen at Lisbon, in St. Vincent's
Church; which I did as well as I could, with my best expressions,
though somewhat daunted at first at His Majesty's presence, having
never before spoken before any King."

Before, however, he could accomplish his purpose, Pett was overtaken by
misfortunes.  His enemies, very likely seeing with spite the favour
with which he had been received by men in high position, stirred up an
agitation against him.  There may, and there very probably was, a great
deal of jobbery going on in the dockyards.  It was difficult, under the
system which prevailed, to have any proper check upon the expenditure
for the repair and construction of ships.  At all events, a commission
was appointed for the purpose of inquiring into the abuses and
misdemeanors of those in office; and Pett's enemies took care that his
past proceedings should be thoroughly overhauled,--together with those
of Sir Robert Mansell, then Treasurer to the Navy; Sir John Trevor,
surveyor; Sir Henry Palmer, controller; Sir Thomas Bluther, victualler;
and many others.

While the commission was still sitting and holding what Pett calls
their "malicious proceedings," he was able to lay the keel of his new
great ship upon the stocks in the dock at Woolwich on the 20th of
October, 1608.  He had a clear conscience, for his hands were clean.
He went on vigorously with his work, though he knew that the
inquisition against him was at its full height. His enemies reported
that he was "no artist, and that he was altogether insufficient to
perform such a service" as that of building his great ship.
Nevertheless, he persevered, believing in the goodness of his cause.
Eventually, he was enabled to turn the tables upon his accusers, and to
completely justify himself in all his transactions with the king, the
Lord Admiral, and the public officers, who were privy to all his
transactions.  Indeed, the result of the enquiry was not only to cause
a great trouble and expense to all the persons accused, but, as Pett
says in his Memoir, "the Government itself of that royal office was so
shaken and disjoined as brought almost ruin upon the whole Navy, and a
far greater charge to his Majesty in his yearly expense than ever was
known before."[24]

In the midst of his troubles and anxieties, Pett was unexpectedly
cheered with the presence of his "Master" Prince Henry, who specially
travelled out of his way from Essex to visit him at Woolwich, to see
with his own eyes what progress he was making with the great ship.
After viewing the dry dock, which had been constructed by Pett, and was
one of the first, if not the very first in England,--his Highness
partook of a banquet which the shipbuilder had hastily prepared for him
in his temporary lodgings.

One of the circumstances which troubled Pett so much at this time, was
the strenuous opposition of the other shipbuilders to his plans of the
great ship.  There never had been such a frightful innovation.  The
model was all wrong.  The lines were detestable.  The man who planned
the whole thing was a fool, a "cozener" of the king, and the ship,
suppose it to be made, was "unfit for any other use but a dung-boat!"
This attack upon his professional character weighed very heavily upon
his mind.

He determined to put his case in a staightforward manner before the
Lord High Admiral.  He set down in writing in the briefest manner
everything that he had done, and the plots that had been hatched
against him; and beseeched his lordship, for the honour of the State,
and the reputation of his office, to cause the entire matter to be
thoroughly investigated "by judicious and impartial persons."  After a
conference with Pett, and an interview with his Majesty,  the Lord High
Admiral was authorised by the latter to invite the Earls of Worcester
and Suffolk to attend with him at Woolwich, and bring all the accusers
of Pett's design of the great ship before them for the purpose of
examination, and to report to him as to the actual state of affairs.
Meanwhile Pett's enemies had been equally busy.  They obtained a
private warrant from the Earl of Northampton[25] to survey the work;
"which being done," says Pett, "upon return of the insufficiency of the
same under their hands, and confirmation by oath, it was resolved
amongst them I should be turned out, and for ever disgraced."

But the lords appointed by the King now interfered between Pett and his
adversaries.  They first inspected the ship, and made a diligent survey
of the form and manner of the work and the goodness of the materials,
and then called all the accusers before them to hear their allegations.
They were examined separately.  First, Baker the master shipbuilder was
called.  He objected to the size of the ship, to the length, breadth,
depth, draught of water, height of jack, rake before and aft, breadth
of the floor, scantling of the timber, and so on.  Then another of the
objectors was called; and his evidence was so clearly in contradiction
to that which had already been given, that either one or both must be
wrong.  The principal objector, Captain Waymouth, next gave his
evidence; but he was able to say nothing to any purpose, except giving
their lordships "a long, tedious discourse of proportions, measures,
lines, and an infinite rabble of idle and unprofitable speeches, clean
from the matter."

The result was that their lordships reported favourably of the design
of the ship, and the progress which had already been made.

The Earl of Nottingham interposed his influence; and the King himself,
accompanied by the young Prince, went down to Woolwich, and made a
personal examination.[26]  A great many witnesses were again examined,
twenty-four on one side, and twenty-seven on the other.  The King then
carefully examined the ship himself:  "the planks, the tree-nails, the
workmanship, and the cross-grained timber."  "The cross-grain," he
concluded, "was in the men and not in the timber."  After all the
measurements had been made and found correct, "his Majesty," says Pett,
"with a loud voice commanded the measurers to declare publicly the very
truth; which when they had delivered clearly on our side, all the whole
multitude heaved up their hats, and gave a great and loud shout and
acclamation.  And then the Prince, his Highness, called with a high
voice in these words:  'Where be now these perjured fellows that dare
thus abuse his Majesty with these false accusations?  Do they not
worthily deserve hanging?"'

Thus Pett triumphed over all his enemies, and was allowed to finish the
great ship in his own way.  By the middle of September 1610, the vessel
was ready to be "strucken down upon her ways"; and a dozen of the
choice master carpenters of his Majesty's navy came from Chatham to
assist in launching her.  The ship was decorated, gilded, draped, and
garlanded; and on the 24th the King, the Queen, and the Royal family
came from the palace at Theobald's to witness the great sight.
Unfortunately, the day proved very rough; and it was little better than
a neap tide. The ship started very well, but the wind "overblew the
tide"; she caught in the dock-gates, and settled hard upon the ground,
so that there was no possibility of launching her that day.

This was a great disappointment.  The King retired to the palace at
Greenwich, though the Prince lingered behind.  When he left, he
promised to return by midnight, after which it was proposed to make
another effort to set the ship afloat.  When the time arrived, the
Prince again made his appearance, and joined the Lord High Admiral, and
the principal naval officials.  It was bright moonshine.  After
midnight the rain began to fall, and the wind to blow from the
southwest.  But about two o'clock, an hour before high water, the word
was given to set all taut, and the ship went away without any straining
of screws and tackles, till she came clear afloat into the midst of the
Thames.  The Prince was aboard, and amidst the blast of trumpets and
expressions of joy, he performed the ceremony of drinking from the
great standing cup, and throwing the rest of the wine towards the
half-deck, and christening the ship by the name of the Prince Royal.[27]

The dimensions of the ship may be briefly described.  Her keel was 114
feet long, and her cross-beam 44 feet.  She was of 1400 tons burthen,
and carried 64 pieces of great ordnance.  She was the largest ship that
had yet been constructed in England.

The Prince Royal was, at the time she was built, considered one of the
most wonderful efforts of human genius.  Mr. Charnock, in his 'Treatise
on Marine Architecture,' speaks of her as abounding in striking
peculiarities.  Previous to the construction of this ship, vessels were
built in the style of the Venetian galley, which although well adapted
for the quiet Mediterranean, were not suited for the stormy northern
ocean.  The fighting ships also of the time of Henry VIII. and
Elizabeth were too full of "top-hamper" for modern navigation.  They
were oppressed by high forecastles and poops.  Pett struck out entirely
new ideas in the build and lines of his new ship; and the course which
he adopted had its effect upon all future marine structures.  The ship
was more handy, more wieldy, and more convenient.  She was
unquestionably the first effort of English ingenuity in the direction
of manageableness and simplicity.  "The vessel in question," says
Charnock, "may be considered the parent of the class of shipping which
continues in practice even to the present moment."

It is scarcely necessary to pursue in detail the further history of
Phineas Pett.  We may briefly mention the principal points. In 1612,
the Prince Royal was appointed to convey the Princess Elizabeth and her
husband, The Palsgrave, to the Continent.  Pett was on board the ship,
and found that "it wrought exceedingly well, and was so yare of conduct
that a foot of helm would steer her."  While at Flushing, "such a
multitude of people, men, women, and children, came from all places in
Holland to see the ship, that we could scarce have room to go up and
down till very night."

About the 27th of March, 1616, Pett bargained with Sir Waiter Raleigh
to build a vessel of 500 tons,[28] and received 500L. from him on
account.  The King, through the interposition of the Lord Admiral,
allowed Pett to lay her keel on the galley dock at Woolwich.  In the
same year he was commissioned by the Lord Zouche, now Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports, to construct a pinnace of 40 tons, in respect of
which Pett remarks, "towards the whole of the hull of the pinnace, and
all her rigging, I received only 100L. from the Lord Zouche, the rest
Sir Henry Mainwaring (half-brother to Raleigh) cunningly received on my
behalf, without my knowledge, which I never got from him but by
piecemeal, so that by the bargain I was loser 100L. at least."

Pett fared much worse at the hands of Raleigh himself.  His great ship,
the Destiny, was finished and launched in December, 1616. "I delivered
her to him," says Pett, "on float, in good order and fashion; by which
business I lost 700L., and could never get any recompense at all for
it; Sir Walter going to sea and leaving me unsatisfied."[29] Nor was
this the only loss that Pett met with this year.  The King, he states,
"bestowed upon me for the supply of my present relief the making of a
knight-baronet," which authority Pett passed to a recusant, one Francis
Ratcliffe, for 700L.; but that worthy defrauded him, so that he lost
30L. by the bargain.

Next year, Pett was despatched by the Government to the New Forest in
Hampshire, "where," he says, "one Sir Giles Mompesson[30] had made a
vast waste in the spoil of his Majesty's timber, to redress which I was
employed thither, to make choice out of the number of trees he had
felled of all such timber as was useful for shipping, in which business
I spent a great deal of time, and brought myself into a great deal of
trouble."  About this period, poor Pett's wife and two of his children
lay for some time at death's door.  Then more enquiries took place into
the abuses of the dockyards, in which it was sought to implicate Pett.
During the next three years (1618-20) he worked under the immediate
orders of the Commissioners in the New Dock at Chatham.

In 1620, Pett's friend Sir Robert Mansell was appointed General of the
Fleet destined to chastise the Algerine pirates, who still continued
their depredations on the shipping in the Channel, and the King
thereupon commissioned Pett to build with all dispatch two pinnaces, of
120 and 80 tons respectively.  "I was myself," he says, "to serve as
Captain in the voyage"--being glad, no doubt, to escape from his
tormentors.  The two pinnaces were built at Ratcliffe, and were
launched on the 16th and 18th of October, 1620.  On the 30th, Pett
sailed with the fleet, and after driving the pirates out of the
Channel, he returned to port after an absence of eleven months.

His enemies had taken advantage of his absence from England to get an
order for the survey of the Prince Royal, his masterpiece; the result
of which was, he says, that "they maliciously certified the ship to be
unserviceable, and not fit to continue--that what charges should be
bestowed upon her would be lost."  Nevertheless, the Prince Royal was
docked, and fitted for a voyage to Spain.  She was sent thither with
Charles Prince of Wales and the Duke of Buckingham, the former going in
search of a Spanish wife.  Pett, the builder of the ship, was commanded
to accompany the young Prince and the Duke.

The expedition sailed on the 24th of August, 1623, and returned on the
14th of October.  Pett was entertained on board the Prince Royal, and
rendered occasional services to the officers in command, though nothing
of importance occurred during the voyage.

The Prince of Wales presented him with a valuable gold chain as a
reward for his attendance.  In 1625, Pett, after rendering many
important services to the Admiralty, was ordered again to prepare the
Prince Royal for sea.  She was to bring over the Prince of Wales's
bride from France.  While the preparations were making for the voyage,
news reached Chatham of the death of King James. Pett was afterwards
commanded to go forward with the work of preparing the Prince Royal, as
well as the whole fleet, which was intended to escort the French
Princess, or rather the Queen, to England.  The expedition took place
in May, and the young Queen landed at Dover on the 12th of that month.

Pett continued to be employed in building and repairing ships, as well
as in preparing new designs, which he submitted to the King and the
Commissioners of the Navy.  In 1626, he was appointed a joint
commissioner, with the Lord High Admiral, the Lord Treasurer
Marlborough, and others, "to enquire into certain alleged abuses of the
Navy, and to view the state thereof, and also the stores thereof,"
clearly showing that he was regaining his old position.  He was also
engaged in determining the best mode of measuring the tonnage of
ships.[31] Four years later he was again appointed a commissioner for
making "a general survey of the whole navy at Chatham."  For this and
his other services the King promoted Pett to be a principal officer of
the Navy, with a fee of 200L. per annum.  His patent was sealed on the
16th of January, 1631.  In the same year the King visited Woolwich to
witness the launching of the Vanguard, which Pett had built; and his
Majesty honoured the shipwright by participating in a banquet at his
lodgings.

From this period to the year 1637, Pett records nothing of particular
importance in his autobiography.  He was chiefly occupied in aiding his
son Peter--who was rapidly increasing his fame as a shipwright--in
repairing and building first-class ships of war.  As Pett had, on an
early occasion in his life, prepared a miniature ship for Prince Henry,
eldest son of James I., he now proceeded to prepare a similar model for
the Prince of Wales, the King's eldest son, afterwards Charles II.
This model was presented to the Prince at St. James's, "who entertained
it with great joy, being purposely made to disport himself withal."  On
the next visit of his Majesty to Woolwich, he inspected the progress
made with the Leopard, a sloop-of-war built by Peter Pett.  While in
the hold of the vessel, the King called Phineas to one side, and told
him of his resolution to have a great new ship built, and that Phineas
must be the builder.  This great new ship was The Sovereign of the
Seas, afterwards built by Phineas and Peter Pett.  Some say that the
model was prepared by the latter; but Phineas says that it was prepared
by himself, and finished by the 29th of October, 1634.  As a
compensation for his services, his Majesty renewed his pension of 40L.
(which had been previously stopped), with orders for all the arrears
due upon it to be paid.

To provide the necessary timber for the new ship, Phineas and his son
went down into the North to survey the forests.  They went first by
water to Whitby; from thence they proceeded on horseback to Gisborough
and baited; then to Stockton, where they found but poor entertainment,
though they lodged with the Mayor, whose house "was only a mean
thatched cottage!"  Middlesborough and the great iron district of the
North had not yet come into existence.

Newcastle, already of some importance, was the principal scene of their
labours.  The timber for the new ship was found in Chapley Wood and
Bracepeth Park.  The gentry did all they could to facilitate the object
of Pett.  On his journey homewards (July, 1635), he took Cambridge on
his way, where, says he, "I lodged at the Falcon, and visited Emmanuel
College, where I had been a scholar in my youth."

The Sovereign of the Seas was launched on the 12th of October, 1637,
having been about two years in building.  Evelyn in his diary says of
the ship (19th July, 1641):--"We rode to Rochester and Chatham to see
the Soveraigne, a monstrous vessel so called, being for burthen,
defence, and ornament, the richest that ever spread cloth before the
wind.  She carried 100 brass cannon, and was 1600 tons, a rare sailer,
the work of the famous Phineas Pett."  Rear-Admiral Sir William Symonds
says that she was afterwards cut down, and was a safe and fast ship.[32]

The Sovereign continued for nearly sixty years to be the finest ship in
the English service.  Though frequently engaged in the most injurious
occupations, she continued fit for any services which the exigencies of
the State might require.  She fought all through the wars of the
Commonwealth; she was the leading ship of Admiral Blake, and was in all
the great naval engagements with France and Holland.  The Dutch gave
her the name of The Golden Devil.  In the last fight between the
English and French, she encountered the Wonder of the World, and so
warmly plied the French Admiral, that she forced him out of his
three-decked wooden castle, and chasing the Royal Sun, before her,
forced her to fly for shelter among the rocks, where she became a prey
to lesser vessels, and was reduced to ashes.  At last, in the reign of
William III., the Sovereign became leaky and defective with age; she
was laid up at Chatham, and being set on fire by negligence or
accident, she burnt to the water's edge.

To return to the history of Phineas Pett.  As years approached, he
retired from office, and "his loving son," as he always affectionately
designates Peter, succeeded him as principal shipwright, Charles I.
conferring upon him the honour of knighthood.  Phineas lived for ten
years after the Sovereign of the Seas was launched.  In the burial
register of the parish of Chatham it is recorded, "Phineas Pett, Esqe.
and Capt., was buried 21st August, 1647."[33]

Sir Peter Pett was almost as distinguished as his father.  He was the
builder of the first frigate, The Constant Warwick.  Sir William
Symonds says of this vessel:--"She was an incomparable sailer,
remarkable for her sharpness and the fineness of her lines; and many
were built like her."  Pett "introduced convex lines on the immersed
part of the hull, with the studding and sprit sails; and, in short, he
appears to have fully deserved his character of being the best ship
architect of his time."[34] Sir Peter Pett's monument in Deptford Old
Church fully records his services to England's naval power.

The Petts are said to have been connected with shipbuilding in the
Thames for not less than 200 years.  Fuller, in his 'Worthies of
England,' says of them--"I am credibly informed that that mystery of
shipwrights for some descents hath been preserved faithfully in
families, of whom the Petts about Chatham are of singular regard.  Good
success have they with their skill, and carefully keep so precious a
pearl, lest otherwise amongst many friends some foes attain unto it."

The late Peter Bolt, member for Greenwich, took pride in being
descended from the Petts; but so far as we know, the name itself has
died out.  In 1801, when Charnock's 'History of Marine Architecture'
was published, Mr. Pett, of Tovil, near Maidstone, was the sole
representative of the family.


Footnotes for Chapter I.

[1] This was not the first voyage of a steamer between England and
America.  The Savannah made the passage from New York to Liverpool as
early as 1819; but steam was only used occasionally during the voyage,
In 1825, the Enterprise, with engines by Maudslay, made the voyage from
Falmouth to Calcutta in 113 days; and in 1828, the Curacoa made the
voyage between Holland and the Dutch West Indies.  But in all these
cases, steam was used as an auxiliary, and not as the one essential
means of propulsion, as in the case of the Sirius and the Great
Western, which were steam voyages only.

[2] "In 1862 the steam tonnage of the country was 537,000 tons; in
1872, it was 1,537,000 tons; and in 1882, it had reached 3,835,000
tons."--Mr. Chamberlain's speech, House of Commons, 19th May, 1884.

[3] The last visit of the plague was in 1665.

[4] Roll of Edward the Third's Fleet.  Cotton's Library, British Museum.

[5] Charnock's History Of Marine Architecture, ii. 89.

[6] State Papers.  Henry VIII.  Nos. 3496, 3616, 4633.  The principal
kinds of ordnance at that time were these:--The "Apostles," so called
from the head of an Apostle which they bore; "Curtows," or "Courtaulx";
"Culverins" and "Serpents"; "Minions," and "Potguns"; "Nurembergers,"
and "Bombards" or mortars.

[7] The sum of all costs of the Harry Grace de Dieu and three small
galleys, was 7708L. 5s. 3d.  (S.P.O. No. 5228, Henry VIII.)

[8] Charnock, ii. 47 (note).

[9] Macpherson, Annals of Commerce, ii. 126.

[10] The Huguenots: their Settlements, Churches, and Industries, in
England and Ireland, ch. iv.

[11] Macpherson, Annals of Commerce, ii. 156.

[12] Ibid. ii. 85.

[13] Picton's Selections from the Municipal Archives and Records of
Liverpool, p. 90.  About a hundred years later, in 1757, the gross
customs receipts of Liverpool had increased to 198,946L.; whilst those
of Bristol were as much as 351,211L.  In 1883, the amount of tonnage of
Liverpool, inwards and outwards, was 8,527,531 tons, and the total dock
revenue for the year was 1,273,752L.!

[14] There were not only Algerine but English pirates scouring the
seas.  Keutzner, the German, who wrote in Elizabeth's reign, said, "The
English are good sailors and famous pirates (sunt boni nautae et
insignis pyratae)."  Roberts, in his Social History of the Southern
Counties (p. 93), observes, "Elizabeth had employed many English as
privateers against the Spaniard.  After the war, many were loth to lead
an inactive life.  They had their commissions revoked, and were
proclaimed pirates.  The public looked upon them as gallant fellows;
the merchants gave them underhand support; and even the authorities in
maritime towns connived at the sale of their plunder.  In spite of
proclamations, during the first five years after the accession of James
I., there were continual complaints.  This lawless way of life even
became popular.  Many Englishmen furnished themselves with good ships
and scoured the seas, but little careful whom they might plunder."  It
was found very difficult to put down piracy.  According to Oliver's
History of the city of Exeter, not less than "fifteen sail of Turks"
held the English Channel, snapping up merchantmen, in the middle of the
seventeenth century!  The harbours in the south-west were infested by
Moslem pirates, who attacked and plundered the ships, and carried their
crews into captivity.  The loss, even to an inland port like Exeter, in
ships, money, and men, was enormous.

[15] Naval Tracts, p. 294.

[16] This poem is now very rare.  It is not in the British Museum.

[17] There are three copies extant of the autobiography, all of which
are in the British Museum.  In the main, they differ but slightly from
each other.  Not one of them has been published in extenso.  In
December, 1795, and in February, 1796, Dr. Samuel Denne communicated to
the Society of Antiquaries particulars of two of these MSS., and
subsequently published copious extracts from them in their transactions
(Archae. xii. anno 1796), in a very irregular and careless manner.  It
is probable that Dr. Denne never saw the original manuscript, but only
a garbled copy of it.  The above narrative has been taken from the
original, and collated with the documents in the State Paper Office.

[18] See, for instance, the Index to the Journals of Records of the
Corporation of the City of London (No. 2, p. 346, 15901694) under the
head of "Sir Walter Raleigh."  There is a document dated the 15th
November, 1593, in the 35th of Elizabeth, which runs as
follows:--"Committee appointed on behalf of such of the City Companies
as have ventured in the late Fleet set forward by Sir Walter Raleigh,
Knight, and others, to join with such honourable personages as the
Queen hath appointed, to take a perfect view of all such goods, prizes,
spices, jewels, pearls, treasures, &c., lately taken in the Carrack,
and to make sale and division (Jor. 23, p. 156).  Suit to be made to
the Queen and Privy Council for the buying of the goods, &c., lately
taken at sea in the Carrack; a committee appointed to take order
accordingly; the benefit or loss arising thereon to be divided and
borne between the Chamber [of the Corporation of the City] and the
Companies that adventured (157).  The several Companies that adventured
at sea with Sir Waiter Raleigh to accept so much of the goods taken in
the Carrack to the value of 12,000L. according to the Queen's offer.  A
committee appointed to acquaint the Lords of the Council with the
City's acceptance thereof (167).  Committee for sale of the Carrack
goods appointed (174).  Bonds for sale to be sealed (196)....
Committee to audit accounts of a former adventure (224 b.)."

[19] There were three sisters in all, the eldest of whom (Abigail) fell
a victim to the cruelty of Nunn, who struck her across the head with
the fire-tongs, from the effects of which she died in three days.  Nunn
was tried and convicted of manslaughter.  He died shortly after.  Mrs.
Nunn, Phineas's mother, was already dead.

[20] It would seem, from a paper hereafter to be more particularly
referred to, that the government encouraged the owners of ships and
others to clear the seas of these pirates, agreeing to pay them for
their labours.  In 1622, Pett fitted out an expedition against these
pests of navigation, but experienced some difficulty in getting his
expenses repaid.

[21] See grant S.P.O., 29th May, 1605.

[22] An engraving of this remarkable ship is given in Charnock's
History of Marine Architecture, ii. p. 199.

[23] The story of the Three, or rather Two Ravens, is as follows:--The
body of St. Vincent was originally deposited at the Cape, which still
bears his name, on the Portuguese coast; and his tomb, says the legend,
was zealously guarded by a couple of ravens.  When it was determined,
in the 12th century, to transport the relics of the Saint to the
Cathedral of Lisbon, the two ravens accompanied the ship which
contained them, one at its stem and the other at its stern.  The relics
were deposited in the Chapel of St. Vincent, within the Cathedral, and
there the two ravens have ever since remained.  The monks continued to
support two such birds in the cloisters, and till very lately the
officials gravely informed the visitor to the Cathedral that they were
the identical ravens which accompanied the Saint's relics to their
city.  The birds figure in the arms of Lisbon.

[24] The evidence taken by the Commissioners is embodied in a
voluminous report.  State Paper Office, Dom. James I., vol. xli. 1608.

[25] The Earl of Northampton, Privy Seal, was Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports; hence his moving in the matter.  Pett says he was his "most
implacable enemy."  It is probable that the earl was jealous of Pett,
because he had received his commission to build the great ship directly
from the sovereign, without the intervention of his lordship.

[26] This Royal investigation took place at Woolwich on the 8th May,
1609.  The State Paper Office contains a report of the same date, most
probably the one presented to the King, signed by six ship-builders and
Captain Waymouth, and counter signed by Northampton and four others.
The Report is headed "The Prince Royal: imperfections found upon view
of the new work begun at Woolwich."  It would occupy too much space to
give the results here.

[27] Alas! for the uncertainties of life!  This noble young prince--the
hope of England and the joy of his parents, from whom such great things
were anticipated--for he was graceful, frank, brave, active, and a
lover of the sea,--was seized with a serious illness, and died in his
eighteenth year, on the 16th November, 1612.

[28] Pett says she was to be 500 tons, but when he turned her out her
burthen was rated at 700 tons.

[29] This conduct of Raleigh's was the more inexcusable, as there is in
the State Paper Office a warrant dated 16th Nov., 1617, for the payment
to Pett of 700 crowns "for building the new ship, the Destiny of
London, of 700 tons burthen."  The least he could have done was to have
handed over to the builder his royal and usual reward.  In the above
warrant, by the way, the title "our well-beloved subject," the ordinary
prefix to such grants, has either been left blank or erased (it is
difficult to say which), but was very significant of the slippery
footing of Raleigh at Court.

[30] Sir Giles Overreach, in the play of "A new way to pay old debts,"
by Philip Massinger.  It was difficult for the poet, or any other
person, to libel such a personage as Mompesson.

[31] Pett's method is described in a paper contained in the S.P.O.,
dated 21st Oct., 1626.  The Trinity Corporation adopted his method.

[32] Memoirs of the Life and Services of Rear-Admiral Sir William
Symonds, Kt., p. 94.

[33] Pett's dwelling-house at Rochester is thus described in an
anonymous history of that town (p. 337, ed. 1817):--"Beyond the
Victualling Office, on the same side of the High Street, at Rochester,
is an old mansion, now occupied by a Mr. Morson, an attorney, which
formerly belonged to the Petts, the celebrated ship-builders.  The
chimney-piece in the principal room is of wood, curiously carved, the
upper part being divided into compartments by caryatydes.  The central
compartment contains the family arms, viz., Or, on a fesse, gu.,
between three pellets, a lion passant gardant of the field.  On the
back of the grate is a cast of Neptune, standing erect in his car, with
Triton blowing conches, &c., and the date 1650."

[34] Symonds, Memoirs of Life and Services, 94.


CHAPTER II.

FRANCIS PETTIT SMITH: PRACTICAL INTRODUCER OF THE SCREW PROPELLER.

"The spirit of Paley's maxim that 'he alone discovers who proves,' is
applicable to the history of inventions and discoveries; for certainly
he alone invents to any good purpose, who satisfies the world that the
means he may have devised have been found competent to the end
proposed."--Dr. Samuel Brown.

"Too often the real worker and discoverer remains unknown, and an
invention, beautiful but useless in one age or country, can be applied
only in a remote generation, or in a distant land. Mankind hangs
together from generation to generation; easy labour is but inherited
skill; great discoveries and inventions are worked up to by the efforts
of myriads ere the goal is reached."--H. M. Hyndman.

Though a long period elapsed between the times of Phineas Pett and
"Screw" Smith, comparatively little improvement had been effected in
the art of shipbuilding.  The Sovereign of the Seas had not been
excelled by any ship of war built down to the end of last century.[1]
At a comparatively recent date, ships continued to be built of timber
and plank, and impelled by sails and oars, as they had been for
thousands of years before.

But this century has witnessed many marvellous changes.  A new material
of construction has been introduced into shipbuilding, with entirely
new methods of propulsion.  Old things have been displaced by new; and
the magnitude of the results has been extraordinary.  The most
important changes have been in the use of iron and steel instead of
wood, and in the employment of the steam-engine in impelling ships by
the paddle or the screw.

So long as timber was used for the construction of ships, the number of
vessels built annually, especially in so small an island as Britain,
must necessarily have continued very limited. Indeed, so little had the
cultivation of oak in Great Britain been attended to, that all the
royal forests could not have supplied sufficient timber to build one
line-of-battle ship annually; while for the mercantile marine, the
world had to be ransacked for wood, often of a very inferior quality.

Take, for instance, the seventy-eight gun ship, the Hindostan, launched
a few years ago.  It would have required 4200 loads of timber to build
a ship of that description, and the growth of the timber would have
occupied seventy acres of ground during eighty years.[2]  It would have
needed something like 800,000 acres of land on which to grow the timber
for the ships annually built in this country for commercial purposes.
And timber ships are by no means lasting.  The average durability of
ships of war employed in active service, has been calculated to be
about thirteen years, even when built of British oak.

Indeed, years ago, the building of shipping in this country was much
hindered by the want of materials.

The trade was being rapidly transferred to Canada and the United
States.  Some years since, an American captain said to an Englishman,
Captain Hall, when in China, "You will soon have to come to our country
for your ships: your little island cannot grow wood enough for a large
marine."  "Oh!" said the Englishman, "we can build ships of iron!"
"Iron?" replied the American in surprise, "why, iron sinks; only wood
can float!"  "Well! you will find I am right."  The prophecy was
correct.  The Englishman in question has now a fleet of splendid iron
steamers at sea.

The use of iron in shipbuilding had small beginnings, like everything
else.  The established prejudice--that iron must necessarily sink in
water--long continued to prevail against its employment.  The first
iron vessel was built and launched about a hundred years since by John
Wilkinson, of Bradley Forge, in Staffordshire.  In a letter of his,
dated the 14th July, 1787, the original of which we have seen, he
writes:  "Yesterday week my iron boat was launched.  It answers all my
expectations, and has convinced the unbelievers, who were 999 in 1000.
It will be only a nine days' wonder, and afterwards a Columbus's egg."
It was, however, more than a nine days' wonder; for wood long continued
to be thought the only material capable of floating.

Although Wilkinson's iron vessels continued to ply upon the Severn,
more than twenty years elapsed before another shipbuilder ventured to
follow his example.  But in 1810, Onions and Son, of Brosely, built
several iron vessels, also for use upon the Severn.  Then, in 1815, Mr.
Jervons, of Liverpool, built a small iron boat for use on the Mersey.
Six years later, in 1821, Mr. Aaron Manby designed an iron steam
vessel, which was built at the Horsley Company's Works, in
Staffordshire.  She sailed from London to Havre a few years later,
under the command of Captain (afterwards Sir Charles) Napier, RN.  She
was freighted with a cargo of linseed and iron castings, and went up
the Seine to Paris.  It was some time, however, before iron came into
general use.  Ten years later, in 1832, Maudslay and Field built four
iron vessels for the East India Company.  In the course of about twenty
years, the use of iron became general, not only for ships of war, but
for merchant ships plying to all parts of the world.

When ships began to be built of iron, it was found that they could be
increased without limit, so long as coal, iron, machinery, and strong
men full of skill and industry, were procurable.  The trade in
shipbuilding returned to Britain, where iron ships are now made and
exported in large numbers; the mercantile marine of this country
exceeding in amount and tonnage that of all the other countries of the
world put together.  The "wooden walls"[3] of England exist no more,
for iron has superseded wood.  Instead of constructing vessels from the
forest, we are now digging new navies out of the bowels of the earth,
and our "walls," instead of wood, are now of iron and steel.

The attempt to propel ships by other means than sails and oars went on
from century to century, and did not succeed until almost within our
own time.  It is said that the Roman army under Claudius Codex was
transported into Sicily in boats propelled by wheels moved by oxen.
Galleys, propelled by wheels in paddles, were afterwards attempted.
The Harleian MS. contains an Italian book of sketches, attributed to
the 15th century, in which there appears a drawing of a paddle-boat,
evidently intended to be worked by men.  Paddle-boats, worked by
horse-power, were also tried.  Blasco Garay made a supreme effort at
Barcelona in 1543. His vessel was propelled by a paddle-wheel on each
side, worked by forty men.  But nothing came of the experiment.

Many other efforts of a similar kind were made,--by Savery among
others,[4]--until we come down to Patrick Miller, of Dalswinton, who,
in 1787, invented a double-hulled boat, which he caused to be propelled
on the Firth of Forth by men working a capstan which drove the paddles
on each side.  The men soon became exhausted, and on Miller mentioning
the subject to William Symington, who was then exhibiting his road
locomotive in Edinburgh, Symington at once said, "Why don't you employ
steam-power?"

There were many speculations in early times as to the application of
steam-power for propelling vessels through the water.  David Ramsay in
1618, Dr. Grant in 1632, the Marquis of Worcester in 1661, were among
the first in England to publish their views upon the subject.  But it
is probable that Denis Papin, the banished Hugnenot physician, for some
time Curator of the Royal Society, was the first who made a model
steam-boat.  Daring his residence in England, he was elected Professor
of Mathematics in the University of Marburg.  It was while at that city
that he constructed, in 1707, a small steam-engine, which he fitted in
a boat--une petite machine d'un, vaisseau a roues--and despatched it to
England for the purpose of being tried upon the Thames. The little
vessel never reached England.  At Munden, the boatmen on the River
Weser, thinking that, if successful, it would destroy their occupation,
seized the boat, with its machine, and barbarously destroyed it.  Papin
did not repeat his experiment, and died a few years later.

The next inventor was Jonathan Hulls, of Campden, in Gloucestershire.
He patented a steamboat in 1736, and worked the paddle-wheel placed at
the stern of the vessel by means of a Newcomen engine.  He tried his
boat on the River Avon, at Evesham, but it did not succeed, and the
engine was taken on shore again.  A local poet commemorated his failure
in the following lines, which were remembered long after his steamboat
experiment had been forgotten:--

  "Jonathan Hull,
  With his paper skull,
  Tried hard to make a machine
  That should go against wind and tide;
  But he, like an ass,
  Couldn't bring it to pass,
  So at last was ashamed to be seen."

Nothing of importance was done in the direction of a steam-engine able
to drive paddles, until the invention by James Watt, in 1769, of his
double-acting engine--the first step by which steam was rendered
capable of being successfully used to impel a vessel.  But Watt was
indifferent to taking up the subject of steam navigation, as well as of
steam locomotion.  He refused many invitations to make steam-engines
for the propulsion of ships, preferring to confine himself to his
"regular established trade and manufacture," that of making condensing
steam-engines, which had become of great importance towards the close
of his life.

Two records exist of paddle-wheel steamboats having been early tried in
France--one by the Comte d'Auxiron and M. Perrier in 1774, the other by
the Comte de Jouffroy in 1783--but the notices of their experiments are
very vague, and rest on somewhat doubtful authority.

The idea, however, had been born, and was not allowed to die. When Mr.
Miller of Dalswinton had revived the notion of propelling vessels by
means of paddle-wheels, worked, as Savery had before worked them, by
means of a capstan placed in the centre of the vessel, and when he
complained to Symington of the fatigue caused to the men by working the
capstan, and Symington had suggested the use of steam, Mr. Miller was
impressed by the idea, and proceeded to order a steam-engine for the
purpose of trying the experiment.  The boat was built at Edinburgh, and
removed to Dalswinton Lake.  It was there fitted with Symington's
steam-engine, and first tried with success on the 14th of October,
1788, as has been related at length in Mr. Nasmyth's 'Autobiography.'
The experiment was repeated with even greater success in the charlotte
Dundas in 1801, which was used to tow vessels along the Forth and Clyde
Canal, and to bring ships up the Firth of Forth to the canal entrance
at Grangemouth.

The progress of steam navigation was nevertheless very slow.
Symington's experiments were not renewed.  The Charlotte Dundas was
withdrawn from use, because of the supposed injury to the banks of the
Canal, caused by the swell from the wheel.  The steamboat was laid up
in a creek at Bainsford, where it went to ruin, and the inventor
himself died in poverty.  Among those who inspected the vessel while at
work were Fulton, the American artist, and Henry Bell, the Glasgow
engineer.  The former had already occupied himself with model
steamboats, both at Paris and in London; and in 1805 he obtained from
Boulton and Watt, of Birmingham, the steam-engine required for
propelling his paddle steamboat on the Hudson.  The Clermont was first
started in August, 1807, and attained a speed of nearly five miles an
hour. Five years later, Henry Bell constructed and tried his first
steamer on the Clyde.

It was not until 1815 that the first steamboat was seen on the Thames.
This was the Richmond packet, which plied between London and Richmond.
The vessel was fitted with the first marine engine Henry Maudslay ever
made.  During the same year, the Margery, formerly employed on the
Firth of Forth, began plying between Gravesend and London; and the
Thames, formerly the Argyll, came round from the Clyde, encountering
rough seas, and making the voyage of 758 miles in five days and two
hours.  This was thought extraordinarily rapid--though the voyage of
about 3000 miles, from Liverpool to New York, can now be made in only
about two days' more time.

In nearly all seagoing vessels, the Paddle has now almost entirely
given place to the Screw.  It was long before this invention was
perfected and brought into general use.  It was not the production of
one man, but of several generations of mechanical inventors.  A
perfected invention does not burst forth from the brain like a poetic
thought or a fine resolve.  It has to be initiated, laboured over, and
pursued in the face of disappointments, difficulties, and
discouragements.

Sometimes the idea is born in one generation, followed out in the next,
and perhaps perfected in the third.  In an age of progress, one
invention merely paves the way for another.  What was the wonder of
yesterday, becomes the common and unnoticed thing of to-day.

The first idea of the screw was thrown out by James Watt more than a
century ago.  Matthew Boulton, of Birmingham, had proposed to move
canal boats by means of the steam-engine; and Dr. Small, his friend,
was in communication with James Watt, then residing at Glasgow, on the
subject.  In a letter from Watt to Small, dated the 30th September,
1770, the former, after speaking of the condenser, and saying that it
cannot be dispensed with, proceeds: "Have you ever considered a spiral
oar for that purpose [propulsion of canal boats], or are you for two
wheels?"  Watt added a pen-and-ink drawing of his spiral oar, greatly
resembling the form of screw afterwards patented.  Nothing, however,
was actually done, and the idea slept.

It was revived again in 1785, by Joseph Bramah, a wonderful projector
and inventor.[5]  He took out a patent, which included a rotatory
steam-engine, and a mode of propelling vessels by means either of a
paddle-wheel or a "screw propeller."  This propeller was "similar to
the fly of a smoke-jack"; but there is no account of Bramah having
practically tried this method of propulsion.

Austria, also, claims the honour of the invention of the screw steamer.
At Trieste and Vienna are statues erected to Joseph Ressel, on whose
behalf his countrymen lay claim to the invention; and patents for some
sort of a screw date back as far as 1794.

Patents were also taken out in England and America--by W. Lyttleton in
1794; by E. Shorter in 1799; by J. C. Stevens, of New Jersey, in 1804;
by Henry James in 1811--but nothing practical was accomplished.
Richard Trevethick, the anticipator of many things, also took out a
patent in 1815, and in it he describes the screw propeller with
considerable minuteness. Millington, Whytock, Perkins, Marestier, and
Brown followed, with no better results.

The late Dr. Birkbeck, in a letter addressed to the 'Mechanics'
Register,' in the year 1824, claimed that John Swan, of 82, Mansfield
Street, Kingsland Road, London, was the practical inventor of the screw
propeller.  John Swan was a native of Coldingham, Berwickshire.  He had
removed to London, and entered the employment of Messrs. Gordon, of
Deptford.  Swan fitted up a boat with his propeller, and tried it on a
sheet of water in the grounds of Charles Gordon, Esq., of Dulwich Hill.
"The velocity and steadiness of the motion," said Dr. Birkbeck in his
letter, "so far exceeded that of the same model when impelled by
paddle-wheels driven by the same spring, that I could not doubt its
superiority; and the stillness of the water was such as to give the
vessel the appearance of being moved by some magical power."

Then comes another claimant--Mr. Robert Wilson, then of Dunbar (not far
from Coldingham), but afterwards of the Bridgewater Foundry,
Patricroft.  In his pamphlet, published a few years ago, he states that
he had long considered the subject, and in 1827 he made a small model,
fitted with "revolving skulls," which he tried on a sheet of water in
the presence of the Hon. Capt. Anthony Maitland, son of the Earl of
Lauderdale.  The experiment was successful--so successful, that when
the "stern paddles" were in 1828 used at Leith in a boat twenty-five
feet long, with two men to work the machinery, the boat was propelled
at an average speed of about ten miles an hour; and the Society of Arts
afterwards, in October, 1882, awarded Mr. Wilson their silver medal for
the "description, drawing, and models of stern paddles for propelling
steamboats, invented by him."  The subject was, in 1833, brought by Sir
John Sinclair under the consideration of the Board of Admiralty; but
the report of the officials (Oliver Lang, Abethell, Lloyd, and
Kingston) was to the effect that "the plan proposed (independent of
practical difficulties) is objectionable, as it involves a greater loss
of power than the common mode of applying the wheels to the side."  And
here ended the experiment, so far as Mr. Wilson's "stern paddles" were
concerned.

It will be observed, from what has been said, that the idea of a screw
propeller is a very old one.  Watt, Bramah, Trevethick, and many more,
had given descriptions of the screw.  Trevethick schemed a number of
its forms and applications, which have been the subject of many
subsequent patents.  It has been so with many inventions.  It is not
the man who gives the first idea of a machine who is entitled to the
merit of its introduction, or the man who repeats the idea, and
re-repeats it, but the man who is so deeply impressed with the
importance of the discovery, that he insists upon its adoption, will
take no denial, and at the risk of fame and fortune, pushes through all
opposition, and is determined that what he thinks he has discovered
shall not perish for want of a fair trial.  And that this was the case
with the practical introducer of the screw propeller will be obvious
from the following statement.

Francis Pettit Smith was born at Hythe, in the county of Kent, in 1808.
His father was postmaster of the town, and a person of much zeal and
integrity.  The boy was sent to school at Ashford, and there received a
fair amount of education, under the Rev. Alexander Power.  Young Smith
displayed no special characteristic except a passion for constructing
models of boats.  When he reached manhood, he adopted the business of a
grazing farmer on Romney Marsh.  He afterwards removed to Hendon, north
of London, where he had plenty of water on which to try his model
boats. The reservoir of the Old Welsh Harp was close at hand--a place
famous for its water-birds and wild fowl.

Smith made many models of boats, his experiments extending over many
years.  In 1834, he constructed a boat propelled by a wooden screw
driven by a spring, the performance of which was thought extraordinary.
Where he had got his original idea is not known. It was floating about
in many minds, and was no special secret. Smith, however, arrived at
the conclusion that his method of propelling steam vessels by means of
a screw was much superior to paddles--at that time exclusively
employed.  In the following year, 1835, he constructed a superior
model, with which he performed a number of experiments at Hendon.  In
May 1836, he took out a patent for propelling vessels by means of a
screw revolving beneath the water at the stern.  He then openly
exhibited his invention at the Adelaide Gallery in London.  Sir John
Barrow, Secretary to the Admiralty, inspected the model, and was much
impressed by its action.  During the time it was publicly exhibited, an
offer was made to purchase the invention for the Pacha of Egypt; but
the offer was declined.

At this stage of his operations, Smith was joined by Mr. Wright,
banker, and Mr. C. A. Caldwell, who had the penetration to perceive
that the invention was one of much promise, and were desirous of
helping its introduction to general use.  They furnished Smith with the
means of constructing a more complete model.  In the autumn of 1836, a
small steam vessel of 10 tons burthen and six horse-power was built,
further to test the advantages of the invention.  This boat was fitted
with a wooden screw of two whole turns.  On the 1st of November the
vessel was exhibited to the public on the Paddington Canal, as well as
on the Thames, where she continued to ply until the month of September
1837.

During the trips upon the Thames, a happy accident occurred, which
first suggested the advantage of reducing the length of the screw.  The
propeller having struck upon some obstacle in the water, about one-half
of the length of the screw was broken off, and it was found that; the
vessel immediately shot ahead and attained a much greater speed than
before.  In consequence of this discovery, a new screw of a single turn
was fitted to her, after which she was found to work much better.

Having satisfied himself as to the eligibility of the propeller in
smooth water, Mr. Smith then resolved to take his little vessel to the
open sea, and breast the winds and the waves. Accordingly, one Saturday
in the month of September 1837, he proceeded in his miniature boat,
down the river, from Blackwall to Gravesend.  There he took a pilot on
board, and went on to Ramsgate.  He passed through the Downs, and
reached Dover in safety.  A trial of the vessel's performance was made
there in the presence of Mr. Wright, the banker, and Mr. Peake, the
civil engineer.  From Dover the vessel went on to Folkestone and Hythe,
encountering severe weather.  Nevertheless, the boat behaved admirably,
and attained a speed of over seven miles an hour.

Though the weather had become stormy and boisterous, the little vessel
nevertheless set out on her return voyage to London. Crowds of people
assembled to witness her departure, and many nautical men watched her
progress with solicitude as she steamed through the waves under the
steep cliffs of the South Foreland. The courage of the undertaking, and
the unexpected good performance of the little vessel, rendered her an
object of great interest and excitement as she "screwed" her way along
the coast.

The tiny vessel reached her destination in safety.  Surely the
difficulty of a testing trial, although with a model screw, had at
length been overcome.  But no!  The paddle still possessed the
ascendency; and a thousand interests--invested capital, use and wont,
and conservative instincts--all stood in the way.

Some years before--indeed, about the time that Smith took out his
patent--Captain Ericsson, the Swede, invented a screw propeller. Smith
took out his patent in May, 1836; and Ericsson in the following July.
Ericsson was a born inventor.  While a boy in Sweden, he made saw mills
and pumping engines, with tools invented by himself.  He learnt to
draw, and his mechanical career began.  When only twelve years old, he
was appointed a cadet in the Swedish corps of mechanical engineers, and
in the following year he was put in charge of a section of the Gotha
Ship Canal, then under construction.  Arrived at manhood, Ericsson went
over to England, the great centre of mechanical industry.  He was then
twenty-three years old.  He entered into partnership with John
Braithwaite, and with him constructed the Novelty, which took part in
the locomotive competition at Rainhill on the 6th October, 1829.  The
prize was awarded to Stephenson's Rocket on the 14th; but it was
acknowledged by The Times of the day that the Novelty was Stephenson's
sharpest competitor.

Ericsson had a wonderfully inventive brain, a determined purpose, and a
great capacity for work.  When a want was felt, he was immediately
ready with an invention.  The records of the Patent Office show his
incessant activity.  He invented pumping engines, steam engines, fire
engines, and caloric engines.  His first patent for a "reciprocating
propeller" was taken out in October 1834.  To exhibit its action, he
had a small boat constructed of only about two feet long.  It was
propelled by means of a screw; and was shown at work in a circular bath
in London.  It performed its voyage round the basin at the rate of
about three miles an hour.  His patent for a "spiral propeller," was
taken out in July 1836.  This was the invention, to exhibit which he
had a vessel constructed, of about 40 feet long, with two propellers,
each of 5 feet 3 inches diameter.

This boat, the Francis B. Ogden, proved extremely successful. She moved
at a speed of about ten miles an hour.  She was able to tow vessels of
140 tons burthen at the rate of seven miles an hour.  Perceiving the
peculiar and admirable fitness of the screw-propeller for ships of war,
Ericsson invited the Lords of the Admiralty to take an excursion in tow
of his experimental boat.  "My Lords" consented; and the Admiralty
barge contained on this occasion, Sir Charles Adam, senior Lord, Sir
William Symonds, surveyor, Sir Edward Parry, of Polar fame, Captain
Beaufort, hydrographer, and other men of celebrity.  This distinguished
company embarked at Somerset House, and the little steamer, with her
precious charge, proceeded down the river to Limehouse at the rate of
about ten miles an hour.  After visiting the steam-engine manufactory
of Messrs. Seawood, where their Lordships' favourite apparatus, the
Morgan paddle-wheel, was in course of construction, they re-embarked,
and returned in safety to Somerset House.

The experiment was perfectly successful, and yet the result was
disappointment.  A few days later, a letter from Captain Beaufort
informed Mr. Ericsson that their Lordships had certainly been "very
much disappointed with the result of the experiment."  The reason for
the disappointment was altogether inexplicable to the inventor.  It
afterwards appeared, however, that Sir William Symonds, then Surveyor
to the Navy, had expressed the opinion that "even if the propeller had
the power of propelling a vessel, it would be found altogether useless
in practice, because the power being applied at the stern, it would be
absolutely impossible to make the vessel steer!"  It will be remembered
that Francis Pettit Smith's screw vessel went to sea in the course of
the same year; and not only faced the waves, but was made to steer in a
perfectly successful manner.

Although the Lords of the Admiralty would not further encourage the
screw propeller of Ericsson, an officer of the United States Navy,
Capt. R. F. Stockton, was so satisfied of its success, that after
making a single trip in the experimental steamboat from London Bridge
to Greenwich, he ordered the inventor to build for him forthwith two
iron boats for the United States, with steam machinery and a propeller
on the same plan.  One of these vessels--the Robert F.
Stockton--seventy feet in length, was constructed by Laird and Co., of
Birkenhead, in 1838, and left England for America in April 1839.  Capt.
Stockton so fully persuaded Ericsson of his probable success in
America, that the inventor at once abandoned his professional
engagements in England, and set out for the United States.  It is
unnecessary to mention the further important works of this great
engineer.

We may, however, briefly mention that in 1844, Ericsson constructed for
the United States Government the Princeton screw steamer--though he was
never paid for his time, labour, and expenditure.[6]  Undeterred by
their ingratitude, Ericsson nevertheless constructed for the same
government, when in the throes of civil war, the famous Monitor, the
iron-clad cupola vessel, and was similarly rewarded!  He afterwards
invented the torpedo ship--the Destroyer--the use of which has
fortunately not yet been required in sea warfare.  Ericsson still
lives--constantly planning and scheming--in his house in Beach Street,
New York.  He is now over eighty years old having been born in 1803.
He is strong and healthy.  How has he preserved his vigorous
constitution?  The editor of Scribner gives the answer: "The hall
windows of his house are open, winter and summer, and none but open
grate-fires are allowed.  Insomnia never troubles him, for he falls
asleep as soon as his head touches the pillow.  His appetite and
digestion are always good, and he has not lost a meal in ten years.
What an example to the men who imagine it is hard work that is killing
them in this career of unremitting industry!"

To return to "Screw" Smith, after the successful trial of his little
vessel at sea in the autumn of 1837.  He had many difficulties yet to
contend with.  There was, first, the difficulty of a new invention, and
the fact that the paddle-boat had established itself in public
estimation.  The engineering and shipbuilding world were dead against
him.  They regarded the project of propelling a vessel by means of a
screw as visionary and preposterous.  There was also the official
unwillingness to undertake anything novel, untried, and contrary to
routine. There was the usual shaking of the head and the shrugging of
the shoulders, as if the inventor were either a mere dreamer or a
projector eager to lay his hands upon the public purse.  The surveyor
of the navy was opposed to the plan, because of the impossibility of
making a vessel steer which was impelled from the stern.  "Screw" Smith
bided his time; he continued undaunted, and was determined to succeed.
He laboured steadily onward, maintaining his own faith unshaken, and
upholding the faith of the gentlemen who had become associated with him
in the prosecution of the invention.

At the beginning of 1838 the Lords of the Admiralty requested Mr. Smith
to allow his vessel to be tried under their inspection. Two trials were
accordingly made, and they gave so much satisfaction that the adoption
of the propeller for naval purposes was considered as a not improbable
contingency.  Before deciding finally upon its adoption, the Lords of
the Admiralty were anxious to see an experiment made with a vessel of
not less than 200 tons.  Mr. Smith had not the means of accomplishing
this by himself, but with the improved prospects of the invention,
capitalists now came to his aid.  One of the most effective and
energetic of these was Mr. Henry Currie, banker; and, with the
assistance of others, the "Ship Propeller Company" was formed, and
proceeded to erect the test ship proposed by the Admiralty.

The result was the Archimedes, a wooden vessel of 237 tons burthen.
She was designed by Mr. Pasco, laid down by Mr. Wimshurst in the spring
of 1838, was launched on the 18th of October following, and made her
first trip in May 1839.  She was fitted with a screw of one turn placed
in the dead wood, and propelled by a pair of engines of 80-horse power.
The vessel was built under the persuasion that her performance would be
considered satisfactory if a speed was attained of four or five knots
an hour, where as her actual speed was nine and a half knots.  The
Lords of the Admiralty were invited to inspect the ship.  At the second
trial Sir Edward Parry, Sir William Symonds, Captain Basil Hall, and
other distinguished persons were present.

The results were again satisfactory.  The success of the Archimedes
astonished the engineering world.  Even the Surveyor of the Royal Navy
found that the vessel could steer!  The Lords of the Admiralty could no
longer shut their eyes.  But the invention could not at once be
adopted.  It must be tested by the best judges.  The vessel was sent to
Dover to be tried with the best packets between Dover and Calais.  Mr.
Lloyd, the chief engineer of the Navy, conducted the investigation, and
reported most favourably as to the manner of her performance.  Yet
several years elapsed before the screw was introduced into the service.

In 1840 the Archimedes was placed at the disposal of Captain Chappell,
of the Royal Navy, who, accompanied by Mr. Smith, visited every
principal port in Great Britain.  She was thus seen by shipowners,
marine engineers, and shipbuilders in every part of the kingdom.  They
regarded her with wonder and admiration; yet the new mode of navigation
was not speedily adopted.  The paddle-wheel still held its own.  The
sentiment, if not the plant and capital, of the engineering world, were
against the introduction of the screw.  After the vessel had returned
from her circumnavigation of Great Britain, she was sent to Oporto, and
performed the voyage in sixty-eight and a half hours, then held to be
the quickest voyage on record.  She was then sent to the Texel at the
request of the Dutch Government.  She went through the North Holland
Canal, visited Amsterdam, Antwerp, and other ports; and everywhere left
the impression that the screw was an efficient and reliable power in
the propulsion of vessels at sea.

Shipbuilders, however, continued to "fight shy" of the screw. The late
Isambard Kingdon Brunel is entitled to the credit of having first
directed the attention of shipbuilders to this important invention.  He
was himself a man of original views, free from bias, and always ready
to strike out a fresh path in engineering works.  He was building a
large new iron steamer at Bristol, the Great Britain, for passenger
traffic between England and America.  He had intended to construct her
as a paddle steamer; but hearing of the success of the Archimedes, he
inspected the vessel, and was so satisfied with the performance of the
screw that he recommended his directors to adopt this method for
propelling the Great Britain.  His advice was adopted, and the vessel
was altered so as to adapt her for the reception of the screw.  The
vessel was found perfectly successful, and on her first voyage to
London she attained the speed of ten knots an hour, though the wind and
balance of tides were against her.  A few other merchant ships were
built and fitted with the screw; the Princess Royal at Newcastle in
1840, the Margaret and Senator at Hull, and the Great Northern at
Londonderry, in 1841.

The Lords of the Admiralty made slow progress in adapting the screw for
the Royal Navy.  Sir William Symonds, the surveyor and principal
designer of Her Majesty's ships, was opposed to all new projects.  He
hated steam power, and was utterly opposed to iron ships.  He speaks of
them in his journal as "monstrous."[7]  So long as he remained in
office everything was done in a perfunctory way.  A small vessel named
the Bee was built at Chatham in 1841, and fitted with both paddles and
the screw for the purposes of experiment.  In the same year the
Rattier, the first screw vessel built for the navy, was laid down at
Sheerness.  Although of only 888 tons burthen, she was not launched
until the spring of 1843.  She was then fitted with the same kind of
screw as the Archimedes, that is, a double-headed screw of half a
convolution.  Experiments went on for about three years, so as to
determine the best proportions of the screw, and the proportions then
ascertained have since been the principal guides of engineering
practice.

The Rattler was at length tried in a water tournament with the
paddle-steamer Alecto, and signally defeated her.  Francis Pettit
Smith, like Gulliver, may be said to have dragged the whole British
fleet after him.  Were the paddle our only means of propulsion, our
whole naval force would be reduced to a nullity. Hostile gunners would
wing a paddle-steamer as effectually as a sportsman wings a bird, and
all the plating in the world would render such a ship a mere helpless
log on the water.

The Admiralty could no longer defer the use of this important
invention.  Like all good things, it made its way slowly and by
degrees.  The royal naval authorities, who in 1833 backed the side
paddles, have since adopted the screw in most of the ships-of-war.  In
all long sea-going voyages, also, the screw is now the favourite mode
of propulsion.  Screw ships of prodigious size are now built and
launched in all the ship-building ports of Britain, and are sent out to
navigate in every part of the world.

The introduction of iron as the material for shipbuilding has immensely
advanced the interests of steam navigation, as it enables the builders
to construct vessels of great size with the finest lines, so as to
attain the highest rates of speed.

One might have supposed that Francis Pettit Smith would derive some
substantial benefit from his invention, or at least that the Ship
Propeller Company would distribute large dividends among their
proprietors.  Nothing of the kind.  Smith spent his money, his labour,
and his ingenuity in conferring a great public benefit without
receiving any adequate reward; and the company, instead of distributing
dividends, lost about 50,000L. in introducing this great invention;
after which, in 1856, the patent-right expired.  Three hundred and
twenty-seven ships and vessels of all classes in the Royal Navy had
then been fitted with the screw propeller, and a much larger number in
the merchant service; but since that time the number of screw
propellers constructed is to be counted by thousands.

In his comparatively impoverished condition it was found necessary to
do something for the inventor.  The Civil Engineers, with Robert
Stephenson, M.P., in the chair, entertained him at a dinner and
presented him with a handsome salver and claret jug. And that he might
have something to put upon his salver and into his claret jug, a number
of his friends and admirers subscribed over 2000L. as a testimonial.
The Government appointed him Curator of the Patent Museum at South
Kensington; the Queen granted him a pension on the Civil List for 200L.
a year; he was raised to the honour of knighthood in 1871, and three
years later he died.

Francis Pettit Smith was not a great inventor.  He had, like many
others, invented a screw propeller.  But, while those others had given
up the idea of prosecuting it to its completion, Smith stuck to his
invention with determined tenacity, and never let it go until he had
secured for it a complete triumph.  As Mr. Stephenson observed at the
engineer's meeting:  "Mr. Smith had worked from a platform which might
have been raised by others, as Watt had done, and as other great men
had done; but he had made a stride in advance which was almost
tantamount to a new invention. It was impossible to overrate the
advantages which this and other countries had derived from his untiring
and devoted patience in prosecuting the invention to a successful
issue."  Baron Charles Dupin compared the farmer Smith with the barber
Arkwright: "He had the same perseverance and the same indomitable
courage. These two moral qualities enabled him to triumph over every
obstacle."  This was the merit of "Screw" Smith--that he was determined
to realize what his predecessors had dreamt of achieving; and he
eventually accomplished his great purpose.


Footnotes for Chapter II.

[1] In the Transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects for
1860, it was pointed out that the general dimensions and form of bottom
of this ship were very similar to the most famous line-of-battle ships
built down to the end of last century, some of which were then in
existence.

[2] According to the calculation of Mr. Chatfield, of Her Majesty's
dockyard at Plymouth, in a paper read before the British Association in
1841 on shipbuilding.

[3] The phrase "wooden walls" is derived from the Greek.  When the city
of Athens was once in danger of being attacked and destroyed, the
oracle of Delphi was consulted.  The inhabitants were told that there
was no safety for them but in their "wooden walls,"--that is their
shipping.  As they had then a powerful fleet, the oracle gave them
rational advice, which had the effect of saving the Athenian people.

[4] An account of these is given by Bennet Woodcraft in his Sketch of
the Origin and Progress of Steam Navigation, London, 1848.

[5] See Industrial Biography, pp. 183-197,

[6] The story is told in Scribner's Monthly Illustrated Magazine, for
April 1879.  Ericsson's modest bill was only $15,000 for two years'
labour.  He was put off from year to year, and at length the Government
refused to pay the amount.  "The American Government," says the editor
of Scribner, "will not appropriate the money to pay it, and that is
all.  It is said to be the nature of republics to be ungrateful; but
must they also be dishonest?"

[7] Memoirs of the Life and Services of Rear-Admiral Sir William
Symonds, Kt., p. 332.


CHAPTER III.[1]

JOHN HARRISON: INVENTOR OF THE MARINE CHRONOMETER.

"No man knows who invented the mariner's compass, or who first hollowed
out a canoe from a log.  The power to observe accurately the sun, moon,
and planets, so as to fix a vessel's actual position when far out of
sight of land, enabling long voyages to be safely made; the marvellous
improvements in ship-building, which shortened passages by sailing
vessels, and vastly reduced freights even before steam gave an
independent force to the carrier--each and all were done by small
advances, which together contributed to the general movement of
mankind....  Each owes all to the others.  The forgotten inventors live
for ever in the usefulness of the work they have done and the progress
they have striven for."--H. M. Hyndman.

One of the most extraordinary things connected with Applied Science is
the method by which the Navigator is enabled to find the exact spot of
sea on which his ship rides.  There may be nothing but water and sky
within his view; he may be in the midst of the ocean, or gradually
nearing the land; the curvature of the globe baffles the search of his
telescope; but if he have a correct chronometer, and can make an
astronomical observation, he may readily ascertain his longitude, and
know his approximate position--how far he is from home, as well as from
his intended destination.  He is even enabled, at some special place,
to send down his grappling-irons into the sea, and pick up an
electrical cable for examination and repair.

This is the result of a knowledge of Practical Astronomy.  "Place an
astronomer," says Mr. Newcomb, "on board a ship; blindfold him; carry
him by any route to any ocean on the globe, whether under the tropics
or in one of the frigid zones; land him on the wildest rock that can be
found; remove his bandage, and give him a chronometer regulated to
Greenwich or Washington time, a transit instrument with the proper
appliances, and the necessary books and tables, and in a single clear
night he can tell his position within a hundred yards by observations
of the stars. This, from a utilitarian point of view, is one of the
most important operations of Practical Astronomy."[2]

The Marine Chronometer was the outcome of the crying want of the
sixteenth century for an instrument that should assist the navigator to
find his longitude on the pathless ocean.  Spain was then the principal
naval power; she was the most potent monarchy in Europe, and held half
America under her sway.  Philip III. offered 100,000 crowns for any
discovery by means of which the longitude might be determined by a
better method than by the log, which was found very defective.  Holland
next became a great naval power, and followed the example of Spain in
offering 30,000 florins for a similar discovery.  But though some
efforts were made, nothing practical was done, principally through the
defective state of astronomical instruments.  England succeeded Spain
and Holland as a naval power; and when Charles II. established the
Greenwich Observatory, it was made a special point that Flamsteed, the
Astronomer-Royal, should direct his best energies to the perfecting of
a method for finding the longitude by astronomical observations.  But
though Flamsteed, together with Halley and Newton, made some progress,
they were prevented from obtaining ultimate success by the want of
efficient chronometers and the defective nature of astronomical
instruments.

Nothing was done until the reign of Queen Anne, when a petition was
presented to the Legislature on the 25th of May, 1714, by "several
captains of Her Majesty's ships, merchants in London, and commanders of
merchantmen, in behalf of themselves, and of all others concerned in
the navigation of Great Britain," setting forth the importance of the
accurate discovery of the longitude, and the inconvenience and danger
to which ships were subjected from the want of some suitable method of
discovering it.  The petition was referred to a committee, which took
evidence on the subject.  It appears that Sir Isaac Newton, with his
extraordinary sagacity, hit the mark in his report.  "One is," he said,
"by a watch to keep time exactly; but, by reason of the motion of a
ship, and the variation of heat and cold, wet and dry, and the
difference of gravity in different latitudes, such a watch hath not yet
been made."

An Act was however passed in the Session of 1714, offering a very large
public reward to inventors: 10,000L. to any one who should discover a
method of determining the longitude to one degree of a great circle, or
60 geographical miles; 15,000L. if it determined the same to two-thirds
of that distance, or 40 geographical miles; and 20,000L. if it
determined the same to one-half of the same distance, or 30
geographical miles.  Commissioners were appointed by the same Act, who
were instructed that "one moiety or half part of such reward shall be
due and paid when the said commissioners, or the major part of them, do
agree that any such method extends to the security of ships within 80
geographical miles of the shore, which are places of the greatest
danger; and the other moiety or half part when a ship, by the
appointment of the said commissioners, or the major part of them, shall
actually sail over the ocean, from Great Britain to any such port in
the West Indies as those commissioners, or the major part of them,
shall choose or nominate for the experiment, without losing the
longitude beyond the limits before mentioned."

The terms of this offer indicate how great must have been the risk and
inconvenience which it was desired to remedy.  Indeed, it is almost
inconceivable that a reward so great could be held out for a method
which would merely afford security within eighty geographical miles!

This splendid reward for a method of discovering the longitude was
offered to the world--to inventors and scientific men of all
countries--without restriction of race, or nation, or language. As
might naturally be expected, the prospect of obtaining it stimulated
many ingenious men to make suggestions and contrive experiments; but
for many years the successful construction of a marine time-keeper
seemed almost hopeless.  At length, to the surprise of every one, the
prize was won by a village carpenter--a person of no school, or
university, or college whatever.

Even so distinguished an artist and philosopher as Sir Christopher Wren
was engaged, as late in his life as the year 1720, in attempting to
solve this important problem.  As has been observed, in the memoir of
him contained in the 'Biographia Britannica,'[3] "This noble invention,
like some others of the most useful ones to human life, seems to be
reserved for the peculiar glory of an ordinary mechanic, who, by
indefatigable industry, under the guidance of no ordinary sagacity,
hath seemingly at last surmounted all difficulties, and brought it to a
most unexpected degree of perfection."  Where learning and science
failed, natural genius seems to have triumphed.

The truth is, that the great mechanic, like the great poet, is born,
not made; and John Harrison, the winner of the famous prize, was a born
mechanic.  He did not, however, accomplish his object without the
exercise of the greatest skill, patience, and perseverance.  His
efforts were long, laborious, and sometimes apparently hopeless.
Indeed, his life, so far as we can ascertain the facts, affords one of
the finest examples of difficulties encountered and triumphantly
overcome, and of undaunted perseverance eventually crowned by success,
which is to be found in the whole range of biography.

No complete narrative of Harrison's career was ever written. Only a
short notice of him appears in the 'Biographia Britannica,' published
in 1766, during his lifetime'--the facts of which were obtained from
himself.  A few notices of him appear in the 'Annual Register,' also
published during his lifetime. The final notice appeared in the volume
published in 1777, the year after his death.  No Life of him has since
appeared.  Had he been a destructive hero, and fought battles by land
or sea, we should have had biographies of him without end.  But he
pursued a more peaceful and industrious course.  His discovery
conferred an incalculable advantage on navigation, and enabled
innumerable lives to be saved at sea; it also added to the domains of
science by its more exact measurement of time.  But his memory has been
suffered to pass silently away, without any record being left for the
benefit and advantage of those who have succeeded him.  The following
memoir includes nearly all that is known of the life and labours of
John Harrison.

He was born at Foulby, in the parish of Wragby, near Pontefract,
Yorkshire, in March, 1693.  His father, Henry Harrison, was carpenter
and joiner to Sir Rowland Winn, owner of the Nostell Priory estate.
The present house was built by the baronet on the site of the ancient
priory.  Henry Harrison was a sort of retainer of the family, and long
continued in their Service.

Little is known of the boy's education.  It was certainly of a very
inferior description.  Like George Stephenson, Harrison always had a
great difficulty in making himself understood, either by speech or
writing.  Indeed, every board-school boy now receives a better
education than John Harrison did a hundred and eighty years ago.  But
education does not altogether come by reading and writing.  The boy was
possessed of vigorous natural abilities.  He was especially attracted
by every machine that moved upon wheels.  The boy was 'father to the
man.' When six years old, and lying sick of small-pox, a going watch
was placed upon his pillow, which afforded him infinite delight.

When seven years old he was taken by his father to Barrow, near
Barton-on-Humber, where Sir Rowland Winn had another residence and
estate.  Henry Harrison was still acting as the baronet's carpenter and
joiner.  In course of time young Harrison joined his father in the
workshop, and proved of great use to him.  His opportunities for
acquiring knowledge were still very few, but he applied his powers of
observation and his workmanship upon the things which were nearest him.
He worked in wood, and to wood he first turned his attention.

He was still fond of machines going upon wheels.  He had enjoyed the
sight of the big watch going upon brass wheels when he was a boy; but,
now that he was a workman in wood, he proposed to make an eight-day
clock, with wheels of this material.  He made the clock in 1713, when
he was twenty years old,[4] so that he must have made diligent use of
his opportunities.  He had of course difficulties to encounter, and
nothing can be accomplished without them; for it is difficulties that
train the habits of application and perseverance.  But he succeeded in
making an effective clock, which counted the time with regularity.
This clock is still in existence.  It is to be seen at the Museum of
Patents, South Kensington; and when we visited it a few months ago it
was going, and still marking the moments as they passed. It is
contained in a case about six feet high, with a glass front, showing a
pendulum and two weights.  Over the clock is the following inscription:

"This clock was made at Barrow, Lincolnshire, in the year 1715, by John
Harrison, celebrated as the inventor of a nautical timepiece,  or
chronometer, which gained the reward of 20,000L., offered by the Board
of Longitude, A.D. 1767.

"This clock strikes the hour, indicates the day of the month, and with
one exception (the escapement) the wheels are entirely made of wood."

This, however, was only a beginning.  Harrison proceeded to make better
clocks; and then he found it necessary to introduce metal, which was
more lasting.  He made pivots of brass, which moved more conveniently
in sockets of wood with the use of oil.  He also caused the teeth of
his wheels to run against cylindrical rollers of wood, fixed by brass
pins, at a proper distance from the axis of the pinions; and thus to a
considerable extent removed the inconveniences of friction.

In the meantime Harrison eagerly improved every incident from which he
might derive further information.  There was a clergyman who came every
Sunday to the village to officiate in the neighbourhood; and having
heard of the sedulous application of the young carpenter, he lent him a
manuscript copy of Professor Saunderson's discourses.  That blind
professor had prepared several lectures on natural philosophy for the
use of his students, though they were not intended for publication.
Young Harrison now proceeded to copy them out, together with the
diagrams.  Sometimes, indeed, he spent the greater part of the night in
writing or drawing.

As part of his business, he undertook to survey land, and to repair
clocks and watches, besides carrying on his trade of a carpenter.  He
soon obtained a considerable knowledge of what had been done in clocks
and watches, and was able to do not only what the best professional
workers had done, but to strike out entirely new lights in the clock
and watch-making business.  He found out a method of diminishing
friction by adding a joint to the pallets of the pendulum, whereby they
were made to work in the nature of rollers of a large radius, without
any sliding, as usual, upon the teeth of the wheel.  He constructed a
clock on the recoiling principle, which went perfectly, and never lost
a minute within fourteen years.  Sir Edmund Denison Beckett says that
he invented this method in order to save himself the trouble of going
so frequently to oil the escapement of a turret clock, of which he had
charge; though there were other influences at work besides this.

But his most important invention, at this early period of his life, was
his compensation pendulum.  Every one knows that metals expand with
heat and contract by cold.  The pendulum of the clock therefore
expanded in summer and contracted in winter, thereby interfering with
the regular going of the clock.  Huygens had by his cylindrical checks
removed the great irregularity arising from the unequal lengths of the
oscillations; but the pendulum was affected by the tossing of a ship at
sea, and was also subject to a variation in weight, depending on the
parallel of latitude.  Graham, the well-known clock-maker, invented the
mercurial compensation pendulum, consisting of a glass or iron jar
filled with quicksilver and fixed to the end of the pendulum rod.  When
the rod was lengthened by heat, the quicksilver and the jar which
contained it were simultaneously expanded and elevated, and the centre
of oscillation was thus continued at the same distance from the point
of suspension.

But the difficulty, to a certain extent, remained unconquered until
Harrison took the matter in hand.  He observed that all rods of metal
do not alter their lengths equally by heat, or, on the contrary, become
shorter by cold, but some more sensibly than others.  After innumerable
experiments Harrison at length composed a frame somewhat resembling a
gridiron, in which the alternate bars were of steel and of brass, and
so arranged that those which expanded the most were counteracted by
those which expanded the least.  By this means the pendulum contained
the power of equalising its own action, and the centre of oscillation
continued at the same absolute distance from the point of suspension
through all the variations of heat and cold during the year.[5]

Thus by the year 1726, when he was only thirty-three years old,
Harrison had furnished himself with two compensation clocks, in which
all the irregularities to which these machines were subject, were
either removed or so happily balanced, one metal against the other,
that the two clocks kept time together in different parts of his house,
without the variation of more than a single second in the month.  One
of them, indeed, which he kept by him for his own use, and constantly
compared with a fixed star, did not vary so much as one whole minute
during the ten years that he continued in the country after finishing
the machine.[6]

Living, as he did, not far from the sea, Harrison next endeavoured to
arrange his timekeeper for purposes of navigation.

He tried his clock in a vessel belonging to Barton-on-Humber; but his
compensating pendulum could there be of comparatively little use; for
it was liable to be tossed hither or thither by the sudden motions of
the ship.  He found it necessary, therefore, to mount a chronometer, or
portable timekeeper, which might be taken from place to place, and
subjected to the violent and irregular motion of a ship at sea, without
affecting its rate of going.  It was evident to him that the first
mover must be changed from a weight and pendulum to a spring wound up
and a compensating balance.

He now applied his genius in this direction.  After pondering over the
subject, he proceeded to London in 1728, and exhibited his drawings to
Dr. Halley, then Astronomer-Royal.  The Doctor referred him to Mr.
George Graham, the distinguished horologer, inventor of the dead-beat
escapement and the mercurial pendulum. After examining the drawings and
holding some converse with Harrison, Graham perceived him to be a man
of uncommon merit, and gave him every encouragement.  He recommended
him, however, to make his machine before again applying to the Board of
Longitude.

Harrison returned home to Barrow to complete his task, and many years
elapsed before he again appeared in London to present his first
chronometer.

The remarkable success which Harrison had achieved in his compensating
pendulum could not but urge him on to further experiments.  He was no
doubt to a certain extent influenced by the reward of 20,000L. which
the English Government had offered for an instrument that should enable
the longitude to be more accurately determined by navigators at sea
than was then possible; and it was with the object of obtaining
pecuniary assistance to assist him in completing his chronometer that
Harrison had, in 1728, made his first visit to London to exhibit his
drawings.

The Act of Parliament offering this superb reward was passed in 1714,
fourteen years before, but no attempt had been made to claim it.  It
was right that England, then rapidly advancing to the first position as
a commercial nation, should make every effort to render navigation less
hazardous.  Before correct chronometers were invented, or good lunar
tables were prepared,[7] the ship, when fairly at sea, out of sight of
land, and battling with the winds and tides, was in a measure lost.  No
method existed for accurately ascertaining the longitude.  The ship
might be out of its course for one or two hundred miles, for anything
that the navigator knew; and only the wreck of his ship on some unknown
coast told of the mistake that he had made in his reckoning.

It may here be mentioned that it was comparatively easy to determine
the latitude of a ship at sea every day when the sun was visible.  The
latitude--that is, the distance of any spot from the equator and the
pole--might be found by a simple observation with the sextant.  The
altitude of the sun at noon is found, and by a short calculation the
position of the ship can be ascertained.

The sextant, which is the instrument universally used at sea, was
gradually evolved from similar instruments used from the earliest
times.  The object of this instrument has always been to find the
angular distance between two bodies--that is to say, the angle
contained by two straight lines, drawn from those bodies to meet in the
observer's eye.  The simplest instrument of this kind may be well
represented by a pair of compasses.  If the hinge is held to the eye,
one leg pointed to the distant horizon, and the other leg pointed to
the sun, the position of the two legs will show the angular distance of
the sun from the horizon at the moment of observation.

Until the end of the seventeenth century, the instrument used was of
this simple kind.  It was generally a large quadrant, with one or two
bars moving on a hinge,--to all intents and purposes a huge pair of
compasses.  The direction of the sight was fixed by the use of a slit
and a pointer, much as in the ordinary rifle. This instrument was
vastly improved by the use of a telescope, which not only allowed
fainter objects to be seen, but especially enabled the sight to be
accurately directed to the object observed.

The instruments of the pre-telescopic age reached their glory in the
hands of Tycho Brahe.  He used magnificent instruments of the simple
"pair of compasses" kind--circles, quadrants, and sextants.  These were
for the most part ponderous fixed instruments of little or no use for
the purposes of navigation. But Tycho Brahe's sextant proved the
forerunner of the modern instrument.  The general structure is the
same; but the vast improvement of the modern sextant is due, firstly,
to the use of the reflecting mirror, and, secondly, to the use of the
telescope for accurate sighting.  These improvements were due to many
scientific men--to William Gascoigne, who first used the telescope,
about 1640; to Robert Hooke, who, in 1660, proposed to apply it to the
quadrant; to Sir Isaac Newton, who designed a reflecting quadrant;[8]
and to John Hadley, who introduced it. The modern sextant is merely a
modification of Newton's or Badley's quadrant, and its present
construction seems to be perfect.

It therefore became possible accurately to determine the position of a
ship at sea as regarded its latitude.  But it was quite different as
regarded the longitude that is, the distance of any place from a given
meridian, eastward or westward.  In the case of longitude there is no
fixed spot to which reference can be made.  The rotation of the earth
makes the existence of such a spot impossible.  The question of
longitude is purely a question of TIME.  The circuit of the globe, east
and west, is simply represented by twenty-four hours.  Each place has
its own time. It is very easy to determine the local time at any spot
by observations made at that spot.  But, as time is always changing,
the knowledge of the local time gives no idea of the actual position;
and still less of a moving object--say, of a ship at sea.  But if, in
any locality, we know the local time, and also the local time of some
other locality at that moment--say, of the Observatory at Greenwich we
can, by comparing the two local times, determine the difference of
local times, or, what is the same thing, the difference of longitude
between the two places. It was necessary therefore for the navigator to
be in possession of a first-rate watch or chronometer, to enable him to
determine accurately the position of his ship at sea, as respected the
longitude.

Before the middle of the eighteenth century good watches were
comparatively unknown.  The navigator mainly relied, for his
approximate longitude, upon his Dead Reckoning, without any observation
of the heavenly bodies.  He depended upon the accuracy of the course
which he had steered by the compass, and the mensuration of the ship's
velocity by an instrument called the Log, as well as by combining and
rectifying all the allowances for drift, lee-way, and so on, according
to the trim of the ship; but all of these were liable to much
uncertainty, especially when the sea was in a boisterous condition.
There was another and independent course which might have been
adopted--that is, by observation of the moon, which is constantly
moving amongst the stars from west to east.  But until the middle of
the eighteenth century good lunar tables were as much unknown as good
watches.

Hence a method of ascertaining the longitude, with the same degree of
accuracy which is attainable in respect of latitude, had for ages been
the grand desideratum for men "who go down to the sea in ships."  Mr.
Macpherson, in his important work entitled 'The Annals of Commerce,'
observes, "Since the year 1714, when Parliament offered a reward of
20,000L. for the best method of ascertaining the longitude at sea, many
schemes have been devised, but all to little or no purpose, as going
generally upon wrong principles, till that heaven-taught artist Mr.
John Harrison arose;" and by him, as Mr. Macpherson goes on to say, the
difficulty was conquered, having devoted to it "the assiduous studies
of a long life."

The preamble of the Act of Parliament in question runs as follows:
"Whereas it is well known by all that are acquainted with the art of
navigation that nothing is so much wanted and desired at sea as the
discovery of the longitude, for the safety and quickness of voyages,
the preservation of ships and the lives of men," and so on.  The Act
proceeds to constitute certain persons commissioners for the discovery
of the longitude, with power to receive and experiment upon proposals
for that purpose, and to grant sums of money not exceeding 2000L. to
aid in such experiments.  It will be remembered from what has been
above stated, that a reward of 10,000L. was to be given to the person
who should contrive a method of determining the longitude within one
degree of a great circle, or 60 geographical miles; 15,000L. within 40
geographical miles; and 20,000L. within 30 geographical miles.

It will, in these days, be scarcely believed that little more than a
hundred and fifty years ago a prize of not less than ten thousand
pounds should have been offered for a method of determining the
longitude within sixty miles, and that double the amount should have
been offered for a method of determining it within thirty miles!  The
amount of these rewards is sufficient proof of the fearful necessity
for improvement which then existed in the methods of navigation.  And
yet, from the date of the passing of the Act in 1714 until the year
1736, when Harrison finished his first timepiece, nothing had been done
towards ascertaining the longitude more accurately, even within the
wide limits specified by the Act of Parliament.  Although several
schemes had been projected, none of them had proved successful, and the
offered rewards therefore still remained unclaimed.

To return to Harrison.  After reaching his home at Barrow, after his
visit to London in 1728, he began his experiments for the construction
of a marine chronometer.  The task was one of no small difficulty.  It
was necessary to provide against irregularities arising from the motion
of a ship at sea, and to obviate the effect of alternations of
temperature in the machine itself, as well as the oil with which it was
lubricated.  A thousand obstacles presented themselves, but they were
not enough to deter Harrison from grappling with the work he had set
himself to perform.

Every one knows the beautiful machinery of a timepiece, and the perfect
tools required to produce such a machine.  Some of these tools Harrison
procured in London, but the greater number he provided for himself; and
many entirely new adaptations were required for his chronometer.  As
wood could no longer be exclusively employed, as in his first clock, he
had to teach himself to work accurately and minutely in brass and other
metals.  Having been unable to obtain any assistance from the Board of
Longitude, he was under the necessity, while carrying forward his
experiments, of maintaining himself by still working at his trade of a
carpenter and joiner.  This will account for the very long period that
elapsed before he could bring his chronometer to such a state as that
it might be tried with any approach to certainty in its operations.

Harrison, besides his intentness and earnestness, was a cheerful and
hopeful man.  He had a fine taste for music, and organised and led the
choir of the village church, which attained a high degree of
perfection.  He invented a curious monochord, which was not less
accurate than his clocks in the mensuration of time. His ear was
distressed by the ringing of bells out of tune, and he set himself to
remedy them.  At the parish church of Hull, for instance, the bells
were harsh and disagreeable, and by the authority of the vicar and
churchwardens he was allowed to put them into a state of exact tune, so
that they proved entirely melodious.

But the great work of his life was his marine chronometer.  He found it
necessary, in the first place, to alter the first mover of his clock to
a spring wound up, so that the regularity of the motion might be
derived from the vibrations of balances, instead of those of a pendulum
as in a standing clock.  Mr. Folkes, President of the Royal Society,
when presenting the gold medal to Harrison in 1749, thus describes the
arrangement of his new machine.  The details were obtained from
Harrison himself, who was present.  He had made use of two balances
situated in the same plane, but vibrating in contrary directions, so
that the one of these being either way assisted by the tossing of the
ship, the other might constantly be just so much impeded by it at the
same time.  As the equality of the times of the vibrations of the
balance of a pocket-watch is in a great measure owing to the spiral
spring that lies under it, so the same was here performed by the like
elasticity of four cylindrical springs or worms, applied near the upper
and lower extremities of the two balances above described.

Then came in the question of compensation.  Harrison's experience with
the compensation pendulum of his clock now proved of service to him.
He had proceeded to introduce a similar expedient in his proposed
chronometer.  As is well known to those who are acquainted with the
nature of springs moved by balances, the stronger those springs are,
the quicker the vibrations of the balances are performed, and vice
versa; hence it follows that those springs, when braced by cold, or
when relaxed by heat, must of necessity cause the timekeeper to go
either faster or slower, unless some method could be found to remedy
the inconvenience.

The method adopted by Harrison was his compensation balance, doubtless
the backbone of his invention.  His "thermometer kirb," he himself
says, "is composed of two thin plates of brass and steel, riveted
together in several places, which, by the greater expansion of brass
than steel by heat and contraction by cold, becomes convex on the brass
side in hot weather and convex on the steel side in cold weather;
whence, one end being fixed, the other end obtains a motion
corresponding with the changes of heat and cold, and the two pins at
the end, between which the balance spring passes, and which it
alternately touches as the spring bends and unbends itself, will
shorten or lengthen the spring, as the change of heat or cold would
otherwise require to be done by hand in the manner used for regulating
a common watch."  Although the method has since been improved upon by
Leroy, Arnold, and Earnshaw, it was the beginning of all that has since
been done in the perfection of marine chronometers.  Indeed, it is
amazing to think of the number of clever, skilful, and industrious men
who have been engaged for many hundred years in the production of that
exquisite fabric--so useful to everybody, whether scientific or
otherwise, on land or sea the modern watch.

It is unnecessary here to mention in detail the particulars of
Harrison's invention.  These were published by himself in his
'Principles of Mr. Harrison's Timekeeper.' It may, however, be
mentioned that he invented a method by which the chronometer might be
kept going without losing any portion of time.  This was during the
process of winding up, which was done once in a day. While the
mainspring was being wound up, a secondary one preserved the motion of
the wheels and kept the machine going.

After seven years' labour, during which Harrison encountered and
overcame numerous difficulties, he at last completed his first marine
chronometer.  He placed it in a sort of moveable frame, somewhat
resembling what the sailors call a 'compass jumble,' but much more
artificially and curiously made and arranged.  In this state the
chronometer was tried from time to time in a large barge on the river
Humber, in rough as well as in smooth weather, and it was found to go
perfectly, without losing a moment of time.

Such was the condition of Harrison's chronometer when he arrived with
it in London in 1735, in order to apply to the commissioners appointed
for providing a public reward for the discovery of the longitude at
sea.  He first showed it to several members of the Royal Society, who
cordially approved of it.  Five of the most prominent members--Dr.
Bailey, Dr. Smith, Dr. Bradley, Mr. John Machin, and Mr. George
Graham--furnished Harrison with a certificate, stating that the
principles of his machine for measuring time promised a very great and
sufficient degree of exactness.  In consequence of this certificate,
the machine, at the request of the inventor, and at the recommendation
of the Lords of the Admiralty, was placed on board a man-of-war.

Sir Charles Wager, then first Lord of the Admiralty, wrote to the
captain of the Centurion, stating that the instrument had been approved
by mathematicians as the best that had been made for measuring time;
and requesting his kind treatment of Mr. Harrison, who was to accompany
it to Lisbon.  Captain Proctor answered the First Lord from Spithead,
dated May 17th, 1736, promising his attention to Harrison's comfort,
but intimating his fear that he had attempted impossibilities.  It is
always so with a new thing.  The first steam-engine, the first
gaslight, the first locomotive, the first steamboat to America, the
first electric telegraph, were all impossibilities!

This first chronometer behaved very well on the outward voyage in the
Centurion.  It was not affected by the roughest weather, or by the
working of the ship through the rolling waves of the Bay of Biscay.  It
was brought back, with Harrison, in the Orford man-of-war, when its
great utility was proved in a remarkable manner, although, from the
voyage being nearly on a meridian, the risk of losing the longitude was
comparatively small.  Yet the following was the certificate of the
captain of the ship, dated the 24th June, 1737:  "When we made the
land, the said land, according to my reckoning (and others), ought to
have been the Start; but, before we knew what land it was, John
Harrison declared to me and the rest of the ship's company that,
according to his observations with his machine, it ought to be the
Lizard--the which, indeed, it was found to be, his observation showing
the ship to be more west than my reckoning, above one degree and
twenty-six miles,"--that is, nearly ninety miles out of its course!

Six days later--that is, on the 30th June--the Board of Longitude met,
when Harrison was present, and produced the chronometer with which he
had made the voyage to Lisbon and back.  The minute states:  "Mr. John
Harrison produced a new invented machine, in the nature of clockwork,
whereby he proposes to keep time at sea with more exactness than by any
other instrument or method hitherto contrived, in order to the
discovery of the longitude at sea; and proposes to make another machine
of smaller dimensions within the space of two years, whereby he will
endeavour to correct some defects which he hath found in that already
prepared, so as to render the same more perfect; which machine, when
completed, he is desirous of having tried in one of His Majesty's ships
that shall be bound to the West Indies; but at the same time
represented that he should not be able, by reason of his necessitous
circumstances, to go on and finish his said machine without assistance,
and requested that he may be furnished with the sum of 500L., to put
him in a capacity to perform the same, and to make a perfect experiment
thereof."

The result of the meeting was that 500L. was ordered to be paid to
Harrison, one moiety as soon as convenient, and the other when he has
produced a certificate from the captain of one of His Majesty's ships
that he has put the machine on board into the captain's possession.
Mr. George Graham, who was consulted, urged that the Commissioners
should grant Harrison at least 1000L., but they only awarded him half
the sum, and at first only a moiety of the amount voted.  At the
recommendation of Lord Monson, who was present, Harrison accepted the
250L. as a help towards the heavy expenses which he had already
incurred, and was again about to incur, in perfecting the invention.
He was instructed to make his new chronometer of less dimensions, as
the one exhibited was cumbersome and heavy, and occupied too much space
on board.

He accordingly proceeded to make his second chronometer.  It occupied a
space of only about half the size of the first.  He introduced several
improvements.  He lessened the number of the wheels, and thereby
diminished friction.  But the general arrangement remained the same.
This second machine was finished in 1739.  It was more simple in its
arrangement, and less cumbrous in its dimensions.  It answered even
better than the first, and though it was not tried at sea its motions
were sufficiently exact for finding the longitude within the nearest
limits proposed by Act of Parliament.

Not satisfied with his two machines, Harrison proceeded to make a
third.  This was of an improved construction, and occupied still less
space, the whole of the machine and its apparatus standing upon an area
of only four square feet.  It was in such forwardness in January, 1741,
that it was exhibited before the Royal Society, and twelve of the most
prominent members signed a certificate of "its great and excellent use,
as well for determining the longitude at sea as for correcting the
charts of the coasts."  The testimonial concluded:  "We do recommend
Mr. Harrison to the favour of the Commissioners appointed by Act of
Parliament as a person highly deserving of such further encouragement
and assistance as they shall judge proper and sufficient to finish his
third machine."  The Commissioners granted him a further sum of 500L.
Harrison was already reduced to necessitous circumstances by his
continuous application to the improvement of the timekeepers.  He had
also got into debt, and required further assistance to enable him to
proceed with their construction; but the Commissioners would only help
him by driblets.

Although Harrison had promised that the third machine would be ready
for trial on August 1, 1743, it was not finished for some years later.
In June, 1746, we find him again appearing before the Board, asking for
further assistance.  While proceeding with his work he found it
necessary to add a new spring, "having spent much time and thought in
tempering them."  Another 500L. was voted to enable him to pay his
debts, to maintain himself and family, and to complete his chronometer.

Three years later he exhibited his third machine to the Royal Society,
and on the 30th of November, 1749, he was awarded the Gold Medal for
the year.  In presenting it, Mr. Folkes, the President, said to Mr.
Harrison, "I do here, by the authority and in the name of the Royal
Society of London for the improving of natural knowledge, present you
with this small but faithful token of their regard and esteem.  I do,
in their name congratulate you upon the successes you have already had,
and I most sincerely wish that all your future trials may in every way
prove answerable to these beginnings, and that the full accomplishment
of your great undertaking may at last be crowned with all the
reputation and advantage to yourself that your warmest wishes may
suggest, and to which so many years so laudably and so diligently spent
in the improvement of those talents which God Almighty has bestowed
upon you, will so justly entitle your constant and unwearied
perseverance."

Mr. Folkes, in his speech, spoke of Mr. Harrison as "one of the most
modest persons he had ever known.  In speaking," he continued, "of his
own performances, he has assured me that, from the immense number of
diligent and accurate experiments he has made, and from the severe
tests to which he has in many ways put his instrument, he expects he
shall be able with sufficient certainty, through all the greatest
variety of seasons and the most irregular motions of the sea, to keep
time constantly, without the variation of so much as three seconds in a
week,--a degree of exactness that is astonishing and even stupendous,
considering the immense number of difficulties, and those of very
different sorts, which the author of these inventions must have had to
encounter and struggle withal."

Although it is common enough now to make first-rate
chronometers--sufficient to determine the longitude with almost perfect
accuracy in every clime of the world--it was very different at that
time, when Harrison was occupied with his laborious experiments.
Although he considered his third machine to be the ne plus ultra of
scientific mechanism, he nevertheless proceeded to construct a fourth
timepiece, in the form of a pocket watch about five inches in diameter.
He found the principles which he had adopted in his larger machines
applied equally well in the smaller, and the performances of the last
surpassed his utmost expectations.  But in the meantime, as his third
timekeeper was, in his opinion, sufficient to supply the requirements
of the Board of Longitude as respected the highest reward offered, he
applied to the Commissioners for leave to try that instrument on board
a royal ship to some port in the West Indies, as directed by the
statute of Queen Anne.

Though Harrison's third timekeeper was finished about the year 1758, it
was not until March 12, 1761, that he received orders for his son
William to proceed to Portsmouth, and go on board the Dorsetshire
man-of-war, to proceed to Jamaica.  But another tedious delay occurred.
The ship was ordered elsewhere, and William Harrison, after remaining
five months at Portsmouth, returned to London.  By this time, John
Harrison had finished his fourth timepiece--the small one, in the form
of a watch.  At length William Harrison set sail with this timekeeper
from Portsmouth for Jamaica, on November 18th, 1761, in the Deptford
man-of-war.  The Deptford had forty-three ships in convoy, and arrived
at Jamaica on the 19th of January, 1762, three days before the Beaver,
another of His Majesty's ships-of-war, which had sailed from Portsmouth
ten days before the Deptford, but had lost her reckoning and been
deceived in her longitude, having trusted entirely to the log.
Harrison's timepiece had corrected the log of the Deptford to the
extent of three degrees of longitude, whilst several of the ships in
the fleet lost as much as five degrees!  This shows the haphazard way
in which navigation was conducted previous to the invention of the
marine chronometer.

When the Deptford arrived at Port Royal, Jamaica, the timekeeper was
found to be only five and one tenth seconds in error; and during the
voyage of four months, on its return to Portsmouth on March 26th, 1762,
it was found (after allowing for the rate of gain or loss) to have
erred only one minute fifty-four and a half seconds.  In the latitude
of Portsmouth this only amounted to eighteen geographical miles,
whereas the Act had awarded that the prize should be given where the
longitude was determined within the distance of thirty geographical
miles.  One would have thought that Harrison was now clearly entitled
to his reward of 20,000L.

Not at all!  The delays interposed by Government are long and tedious,
and sometimes insufferable.  Harrison had accomplished more than was
needful to obtain the highest reward which the Board of Longitude had
publicly offered.  But they would not certify that he had won the
prize.  On the contrary, they started numerous objections, and
continued for years to subject him to vexatious delays and
disappointments.  They pleaded that the previous determination of the
longitude of Jamaica by astronomical observation was unsatisfactory;
that there was no proof of the chronometer having maintained a uniform
rate during the voyage; and on the 17th of August, 1762, they passed a
resolution, stating that they "were of opinion that the experiments
made of the watch had not been sufficient to determine the longitude at
sea."

It was accordingly necessary for Harrison to petition Parliament on the
subject.  Three reigns had come and gone since the Act of Parliament
offering the reward had been passed.  Anne had died; George I. and
George II. had reigned and died; and now, in the reign of George
III.--thirty-five years after Harrison had begun his labours, and after
he had constructed four several marine chronometers, each of which was
entitled to win the full prize,--an Act of Parliament was passed
enabling the inventor to obtain the sum of 5000L. as part of the
reward.  But the Commissioners still hesitated.  They differed about
the tempering of the springs.  They must have another trial of the
timekeeper, or anything with which to put off a settlement of the
claim. Harrison was ready for any further number of trials; and in the
meantime the Commissioners merely paid him a further sum on account.

Two more dreary years passed.  Nothing was done in 1763 except a
quantity of interminable talk at the Board of Commissioners.  At
length, on the 28th of March, 1764, Harrison's son again departed with
the timekeeper on board the ship Tartar for Barbadoes.  He returned in
about four months, during which time the instrument enabled the
longitude to be ascertained within ten miles, or one-third of the
required geographical distance.  Harrison memorialised the
Commissioners again and again, in order that he might obtain the reward
publicly offered by the Government.

At length the Commissioners could no longer conceal the truth. In
September,1764, they virtually recognised Harrison's claim by paying
him 1000L. on account; and, on the 9th of February,1765, they passed a
resolution setting forth that they were "unanimously of opinion that
the said timekeeper has kept its time with sufficient correctness,
without losing its longitude in the voyage from Portsmouth to Barbadoes
beyond the nearest limit required by the Act 12th of Queen Anne, but
even considerably within the same."  Yet they would not give Harrison
the necessary certificate, though they were of opinion that he was
entitled to be paid the full reward!

It is pleasant to contrast the generous conduct of the King of Sardinia
with the procrastinating and illiberal spirit which Harrison met with
in his own country.  During the same year in which the above resolution
was passed, the Sardinian minister ordered four of Harrison's
timekeepers at the price of 1000L. each, at the special instance of the
King of Sardinia "as an acknowledgement of Mr. Harrison's ingenuity,
and as some recompense for the time spent by him for the general good
of mankind."  This grateful attention was all the more praiseworthy, as
Sardinia could not in any way be regarded as a great maritime power.

Harrison was now becoming old and feeble.  He had attained the age of
seventy-four.  He had spent forty long years in working out his
invention.  He was losing his eyesight, and could not afford to wait
much longer.  Still he had to wait.

  "Full little knowest thou, who hast not tried,
  What hell it is in suing long to bide;
  To lose good days, that might be better spent;
  To waste long nights in pensive discontent;
  To spend to-day, to be put back to-morrow,
  To feed on hope, to pine with fear and sorrow."

But Harrison had not lost his spirit.  On May 30th, 1765, he addressed
another remonstrance to the Board, containing much stronger language
than he had yet used.  "I cannot help thinking," he said, "that I am
extremely ill-used by gentlemen from whom I might have expected a
different treatment; for, if the Act of the 12th of Queen Anne be
deficient, why have I so long been encouraged under it, in order to
bring my invention to perfection?  And, after the completion, why was
my son sent twice to the West Indies?  Had it been said to my son, when
he received the last instruction, 'There will, in case you succeed, be
a new Act on your return, in order to lay you under new restrictions,
which were not thought of in the Act of the 12th of Queen Anne,'--I
say, had this been the case, I might have expected some such treatment
as that I now meet with.

"It must be owned that my case is very hard; but I hope I am the first,
and for my country's sake I hope I shall be the last, to suffer by
pinning my faith upon an English Act of Parliament. Had I received my
just reward--for certainly it may be so called after forty years' close
application of the talent which it has pleased God to give me--then my
invention would have taken the course which all improvements in this
world do; that is, I must have instructed workmen in its principles and
execution, which I should have been glad of an opportunity of doing.
But how widely different this is from what is now proposed, viz., for
me to instruct people that I know nothing of, and such as may know
nothing of mechanics; and, if I do not make them understand to their
satisfaction, I may then have nothing!

"Hard fate indeed to me, but still harder to the world, which may be
deprived of this my invention, which must be the case, except by my
open and free manner in describing all the principles of it to
gentlemen and noblemen who almost at all times have had free recourse
to my instruments.  And if any of these workmen have been so ingenious
as to have got my invention, how far you may please to reward them for
their piracy must be left for you to determine; and I must set myself
down in old age, and thank God I can be more easy in that I have the
conquest, and though I have no reward, than if I had come short of the
matter and by some delusion had the reward!"

The Right Honourable the Earl of Egmont was in the chair of the Board
of Longitude on the day when this letter was read--June 13, 1765.  The
Commissioners were somewhat startled by the tone which the inventor had
taken.  Indeed, they were rather angry.  Mr. Harrison, who was in
waiting, was called in.  After some rather hot speaking, and after a
proposal was made to Harrison which he said he would decline to accede
to "so long as a drop of English blood remained in his body," he left
the room.  Matters were at length arranged.  The Act of Parliament (5
Geo. III. cap. 20) awarded him, upon a full discovery of the principles
of his time-keeper, the payment of such a sum, as with the 2500L. he
had already received, would make one half of the reward; and the
remaining half was to be paid when other chronometers had been made
after his design, and their capabilities fully proved.  He was also
required to assign his four chronometers--one of which was styled a
watch--to the use of the public.

Harrison at once proceeded to give full explanations of the principles
of his chronometer to Dr. Maskelyne, and six other gentlemen, who had
been appointed to receive them.  He took his timekeeper to pieces in
their presence, and deposited in their hands correct drawings of the
same, with the parts, so that other skilful makers might construct
similar chronometers on the same principles.  Indeed, there was no
difficulty in making them; after his explanations and drawings had been
published.  An exact copy of his last watch was made by the ingenious
Mr. Kendal; and was used by Captain Cook in his three years'
circumnavigation of the world, to his perfect satisfaction.

England had already inaugurated that series of scientific expeditions
which were to prove so fruitful of results, and to raise her naval
reputation to so great a height.  In these expeditions, the officers,
the sailors, and the scientific men, were constantly brought face to
face with unforeseen difficulties and dangers, which brought forth
their highest qualities as men. There was, however, some intermixture
of narrowness in the minds of those who sent them forth.  For instance,
while Dr. Priestley was at Leeds, he was asked by Sir Joseph Banks to
join Captain Cook's second expedition to the Southern Seas, as an
astronomer. Priestley gave his assent, and made arrangements to set
out.  But some weeks later, Banks informed him that his appointment had
been cancelled, as the Board of Longitude objected to his theology.
Priestley's otherwise gentle nature was roused.  "What I am, and what
they are, in respect of religion," he wrote to Banks, in December,
1771, "might easily have been known before the thing was proposed to me
at all.  Besides, I thought that this had been a business of
philosophy, and not of divinity.  If, however, this be the case, I
shall hold the Board of Longitude in extreme contempt."

Captain Cook was appointed to the command of the Resolution, and
Captain Wallis to the command of the Adventure, in November, 1771.
They proceeded to equip the ships; and amongst the other instruments
taken on board Captain Cook's ship, were two timekeepers, one made by
Mr. Larcum Kendal, on Mr. Harrison's principles, and the other by Mr.
John Arnold, on his own.  The expedition left Deptford in April, 1772;
and shortly afterwards sailed for the South Seas.  "Mr. Kendal's watch"
is the subject of frequent notices in Captain Cook's account.  At the
Cape of Good Hope, it is said to have "answered beyond all
expectation." Further south, in the neighbourhood of Cape Circumcision,
he says, "the use of the telescope is found difficult at first, but a
little practice will make it familiar.  By the assistance of the watch
we shall be able to discover the greatest error this method of
observing the longitude at sea is liable to."  It was found that
Harrison's watch was more correct than Arnold's, and when near Cape
Palliser in New Zealand, Cook says, "this day at noon, when we attended
the winding-up of the watches, the fusee of Mr. Arnold's would not turn
round, so that after several unsuccessful trials we were obliged to let
it go down."  From this time, complete reliance was placed upon
Harrison's chronometer.  Some time later, Cook says, "I must here take
notice that our longitude can never be erroneous while we have so good
a guide as Mr. Kendal's watch."  It may be observed, that at the
beginning of the voyage, observations were made by the lunar tables;
but these, being found unreliable, were eventually discontinued.

To return to Harrison.  He continued to be worried by official
opposition.  His claims were still unsatisfied.  His watch at home
underwent many more trials.  Dr. Maskelyne, the Royal Astronomer, was
charged with being unfavourable to the success of chronometers, being
deeply interested in finding the longitude by lunar tables; although
this method is now almost entirely superseded by the chronometer.
Harrison accordingly could not get the certificate of what was due to
him under the Act of Parliament.  Years passed before he could obtain
the remaining amount of his reward.  It was not until the year 1773, or
forty-five years after the commencement of his experiments, that he
succeeded in obtaining it.  The following is an entry in the list of
supplies granted by Parliament in that year: "June 14. To John
Harrison, as a further reward and encouragement over and above the sums
already received by him, for his invention of a timekeeper for
ascertaining the longitude at sea, and his discovery of the principles
upon which the same was constructed, 8570 pounds 0s. 0d."

John Harrison did not long survive the settlement of his claims; for he
died on the 24th of March, 1776, at the age of eighty-three.  He was
buried at the south-west corner of Hampstead parish churchyard, where a
tombstone was erected to his memory, and an inscription placed upon it
commemorating his services.  His wife survived him only a year; she
died at seventy-two, and was buried in the same tomb.  His son, William
Harrison, F.R.S., a deputy-lientenant of the counties of Monmouth and
Middlesex, died in 1815, at the ripe age of eighty-eight, and was also
interred there.  The tomb having stood for more than a century, became
somewhat dilapidated; when the Clock-makers' Company of the City of
London took steps in 1879 to reconstruct it, and recut the
inscriptions.  An appropriate ceremony took place at the final
uncovering of the tomb.

But perhaps the most interesting works connected with John Harrison and
the great labour of his life, are the wooden clock at the South
Kensington Museum, and the four chronometers made by him for the
Government, which are still preserved at the Royal Observatory,
Greenwich.  The three early ones are of great weight, and can scarcely
be moved without some bodily labour. But the fourth, the marine
chronometer or watch, is of small dimensions, and is easily handled.
It still possesses the power of going accurately; as does "Mr. Kendal's
watch," which was made exactly after it.  These will always prove the
best memorials of this distinguished workman.

Before concluding this brief notice of the life and labours of John
Harrison, it becomes me to thank most cordially Mr. Christie,
Astronomer-Royal, for his kindness in exhibiting the various
chronometers deposited at the Greenwich Observatory, and for his
permission to inspect the minutes of the Board of Longitude, where the
various interviews between the inventor and the commissioners,
extending over many years, are faithfully but too procrastinatingly
recorded.  It may be finally said of John Harrison, that by his
invention of the chronometer--the ever-sleepless and ever-trusty friend
of the mariner--he conferred an incalculable benefit on science and
navigation, and established his claim to be regarded as one of the
greatest benefactors of mankind.

POstscript.--In addition to the information contained in this chapter,
I have been recently informed by the Rev. Mr. Sankey, vicar of Wragby,
that the family is quite extinct in the parish, except the wife of a
plumber, who claims relationship with Harrison.  The representative of
the Winn family was created Lord St. Oswald in 1885.  Harrison is not
quite forgotten at Foulby. The house in which he was born was a low
thatched cottage, with two rooms, one used as a living room, and the
other as a sleeping room.  The house was pulled down about forty years
ago; but the entrance door, being of strong, hard wood, is still
preserved. The vicar adds that young Harrison would lie out on the
grass all night in summer time, studying the details of his wooden
clock.


Footnotes to Chapter III.

[1] Originally published in Longmam's Magazine, but now rewritten and
enlarged.

[2] Popular Astronomy.  By Simon Newcomb, LL.D., Professor U.S. Naval
Observatory.

[3] Biographia Britannica, vol. vi. part 2, p. 4375.  This volume was
published in 1766, before the final reward had been granted to Harrison.

[4] This clock is in the possession of Abraham Riley, of Bromley, near
Leeds.  He informs us that the clock is made of wood throughout,
excepting the escapement and the dial, which are made of brass.  It
bears the mark of "John Harrison, 1713."

[5] Harrison's compensation pendulum was afterwards improved by Arnold,
Earnshaw, and other English makers.  Dent's prismatic balance is now
considered the best.

[6] See Mr. Folkes's speech to the Royal Soc., 30th Nov., 1749.

[7] No trustworthy lunar tables existed at that time.  It was not until
the year 1753 that Tobias Mayer, a German, published the first lunar
tables which could be relied upon.  For this, the British Government
afterwards awarded to Mayer's widow the sum of 5000L.

[8] Sir Isaac Newton gave his design to Edmund Halley, then
Astronomer-Royal.  Halley laid it on one side, and it was found among
his papers after his death in 1742, twenty-five years after the death
of Newton.  A similar omission was made by Sir G. B. Airy, which led to
the discovery of Neptune being attributed to Leverrier instead of to
Adams.


CHAPTER IV.

JOHN LOMBE: INTRODUCER OF THE SILK INDUSTRY INTO ENGLAND.

"By Commerce are acquired the two things which wise men accompt of all
others the most necessary to the well-being of a Commonwealth: That is
to say, a general Industry of Mind and Hardiness of Body, which never
fail to be accompanyed with Honour and Plenty.  So that, questionless,
when Commerce does not flourish, as well as other Professions, and when
Particular Persons out of a habit of Laziness neglect at once the
noblest way of employing their time and the fairest occasion for
advancing their fortunes, that Kingdom, though otherwise never so
glorious, wants something of being compleatly happy."--A Treatise
touching the East India Trade (1695).

Industry puts an entirely new face upon the productions of nature.  By
labour man has subjugated the world, reduced it to his dominion, and
clothed the earth with a new garment.  The first rude plough that man
thrust into the soil, the first rude axe of stone with which he felled
the pine, the first rude canoe scooped by him from its trunk to cross
the river and reach the greener fields beyond, were each the outcome of
a human faculty which brought within his reach some physical comfort he
had never enjoyed before.

Material things became subject to the influence of labour.  From the
clay of the ground, man manufactured the vessels which were to contain
his food.  Out of the fleecy covering of sheep, he made clothes for
himself of many kinds; from the flax plant he drew its fibres, and made
linen and cambric; from the hemp plant he made ropes and fishing nets;
from the cotton pod he fabricated fustians, dimities, and calicoes.
From the rags of these, or from weed and the shavings of wood, he made
paper on which books and newspapers were printed.  Lead was formed by
him into printer's type, for the communication of knowledge without end.

But the most extraordinary changes of all were made in a heavy stone
containing metal, dug out of the ground.  With this, when smelted by
wood or coal, and manipulated by experienced skill, iron was produced.
From this extraordinary metal, the soul of every manufacture, and the
mainspring perhaps of civilised society--arms, hammers, and axes were
made; then knives, scissors, and needles; then machinery to hold and
control the prodigious force of steam; and eventually railroads and
locomotives, ironclads propelled by the screw, and iron and steel
bridges miles in length.

The silk manufacture, though originating in the secretion of a tiny
caterpillar, is perhaps equally extraordinary.  Hundreds of thousands
of pounds weight of this slender thread, no thicker than the filaments
spun by a spider, give employment to millions of workers throughout the
world.  Silk, and the many textures wrought from this beautiful
material, had long been known in the East; but the period cannot be
fixed when man first divested the chrysalis of its dwelling, and
discovered that the little yellow ball which adhered to the leaf of the
mulberry tree, could be evolved into a slender filament, from which
tissues of endless variety and beauty could be made.  The Chinese were
doubtless among the first who used the thread spun by the silkworm for
the purposes of clothing.  The manufacture went westward from China to
India and Persia, and from thence to Europe.  Alexander the Great
brought home with him a store of rich silks from Persia Aristotle and
Pliny give descriptions of the industrious little worm and its
productions.  Virgil is the first of the Roman writers who alludes to
the production of silk in China; and the terms he employs show how
little was then known about the article.  It was introduced at Rome
about the time of Julius Caesar, who displayed a profusion of silks in
some of his magnificent theatrical spectacles.  Silk was so valuable
that it was then sold for an equal weight of gold.  Indeed, a law was
passed that no man should disgrace himself by wearing a silken garment.
The Emperor Heliogabalus despised the law, and wore a dress composed
wholly of silk.  The example thus set was followed by wealthy citizens.
A demand for silk from the East soon became general.

It was not until about the middle of the sixth century that two Persian
monks, who had long resided in China, and made themselves acquainted
with the mode of rearing the silkworm, succeeded in carrying the eggs
of the insect to Constantinople.  Under their direction they were
hatched and fed.  A sufficient number of butterflies were saved to
propagate the race, and mulberry trees were planted to afford
nourishment to the rising generations of caterpillars.  Thus the
industry was propagated.  It spread into the Italian peninsula; and
eventually manufactures of silk velvet, damask, and satin became
established in Venice, Milan, Florence, Lucca, and other places.

Indeed, for several centuries the manufacture of silk in Europe was for
the most part confined to Italy.  The rearing of silkworms was of great
importance in Modena, and yielded a considerable revenue to the State.
The silk produced there was esteemed the best in Lombardy.  Until the
beginning of the sixteenth century, Bologna was the only city which
possessed proper "throwing" mills, or the machinery requisite for
twisting and preparing silken fibres for the weaver.  Thousands of
people were employed at Florence and Genoa about the same time in the
silk manufacture.  And at Venice it was held in such high esteem, that
the business of a silk factory was considered a noble employment.[1]

It was long before the use of silk became general in England. "Silk,"
said an old writer, "does not immediately come hither from the Worm
that spins and makes it, but passes many a Climate, travels many a
Desert, employs many a Hand, loads many a Camel, and freights many a
Ship before it arrives here; and when at last it comes, it is in return
for other manufactures, or in exchange for our money."[2]  It is said
that the first pair of silk stockings was brought into England from
Spain, and presented to Henry VIII.  He had before worn hose of cloth.
In the third year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, her tiring woman, Mrs.
Montagu, presented her with a pair of black silk stockings as a New
Year's gift; whereupon her Majesty asked if she could have any more, in
which case she would wear no more cloth stockings.  When James VI. of
Scotland received the ambassadors sent to congratulate him upon his
accession to the throne of Great Britain, he asked one of his lords to
lend him his pair of silken hose, that he "might not appear a scrub
before  strangers."  From these circumstances it will be observed how
rare the wearing of silk was in England.

Shortly after becoming king, James I. endeavoured to establish the silk
manufacture in England, as had already been successfully done in
France.  He gave every encouragement to the breeding of silkworms.  He
sent circular letters to all the counties of England, strongly
recommending the inhabitants to plant mulberry trees.  The trees were
planted in many places, but the leaves did not ripen in sufficient time
for the sustenance of the silkworms.

The same attempt was made at Inneshannon, near Bandon, in Ireland, by
the Hugnenot refugees, but proved abortive.  The climate proved too
cold or damp for the rearing of silkworms with advantage.  All that
remains is "The Mulberry Field," which still retains its name.
Nevertheless the Huguenots successfully established the silk
manufacture at London and Dublin, obtaining the spun silk from abroad.

Down to the beginning of last century, the Italians were the principal
producers of organzine or thrown silk; and for a long time they
succeeded in keeping their art a secret.  Although the silk
manufacture, as we have seen, was introduced into this country by the
Huguenot artizans, the price of thrown silk was so great that it
interfered very considerably with its progress. Organzine was
principally made within the dominions of Savoy, by means of a large and
curious engine, the like of which did not exist elsewhere.  The
Italians, by the most severe laws, long preserved the mystery of the
invention.  The punishment prescribed by one of their laws to be
inflicted upon anyone who discovered the secret, or attempted to carry
it out of the Sardinian dominions, was death, with the forfeiture of
all the goods the delinquent possessed; and the culprit was "to be
afterwards painted on the outside of the prison walls, hanging to the
gallows by one foot, with an inscription denoting the name and crime of
the person, there to be continued for a perpetual mark of infamy."[3]

Nevertheless, a bold and ingenious man was found ready to brave all
this danger in the endeavour to discover the secret.  It may be
remembered with what courage and determination the founder of the Foley
family introduced the manufacture of nails into England.  He went into
the Danemora mine district, near Upsala in Sweden, fiddling his way
among the miners; and after making two voyages, he at last wrested from
them the secret of making nails, and introduced the new industry into
the Staffordshire district.[4]  The courage of John Lombe, who
introduced the thrown-silk industry into England, was equally notable.
He was a native of Norwich.  Playfair, in his 'Family Antiquity' (vii.
312), says his name "may have been taken from the French Lolme, or de
Lolme," as there were many persons of French and Flemish origin settled
at Norwich towards the close of the sixteenth century; but there is no
further information as to his special origin.

John Lombe's father, Henry Lombe, was a worsted weaver, and was twice
married.  By his first wife he had two sons, Thomas and Henry; and by
his second, he had also two sons, Benjamin and John.  At his death in
1695, he left his two brothers his "supervisors," or trustees, and
directed them to educate his children in due time to some useful trade.
Thomas, the eldest son, went to London.  He was apprenticed to a trade,
and succeeded in business, as we find him Sheriff of London and
Middlesex in 1727, when in his forty-second year.  He was also knighted
in the same year, most probably on the accession of George II. to the
throne.

John, the youngest son of the family, and half-brother of Thomas, was
put an apprentice to a trade.  In 1702, we find him at Derby, working
as a mechanic with one Mr. Crotchet.  This unfortunate gentleman
started a small silk-mill at Derby, with the object of participating in
the profits derived from the manufacture.

"The wear of silks," says Hutton, in his 'History of Derby,' "was the
taste of the ladies, and the British merchant was obliged to apply to
the Italian with ready money for the article at an exorbitant price."
Crotchet did not succeed in his undertaking. "Three engines were found
necessary for the process:  he had but one.  An untoward trade is a
dreadful sink for money; and an imprudent tradesman is still more
dreadful.  We often see instances where a fortune would last a man much
longer if he lived upon his capital, than if he sent it into trade.
Crotchet soon became insolvent."

John Lombe, who had been a mechanic in Crotchet's silk mill, lost his
situation accordingly.  But he seems to have been possessed by an
intense desire to ascertain the Italian method of silk-throwing.  He
could not learn it in England.  There was no other method but going to
Italy, getting into a silk mill, and learning the secret of the Italian
art.  He was a good mechanic and a clever draughtsman, besides being
intelligent and fearless.

But he had not the necessary money wherewith to proceed to Italy.

His half-brother Thomas, however, was doing well in London, and was
willing to help him with the requisite means.  Accordingly, John set
out for Italy, not long after the failure of Crotchet.

John Lombe succeeded in getting employment in a silk mill in Piedmont,
where the art of silk-throwing was kept a secret.  He was employed as a
mechanic, and had thus an opportunity, in course of time, of becoming
familiar with the operation of the engine.  Hutton says that he bribed
the workmen; but this would have been a dangerous step, and would
probably have led to his expulsion, if not to his execution.  Hutton
had a great detestation of the first silk factory at Derby, where he
was employed when a boy; and everything that he says about it must be
taken cum grano salis.  When the subject of renewing the patent was
before Parliament in 1731, Mr. Perry, who supported the petition of Sir
Thomas Lombe, said that "the art had been kept so secret in Piedmont,
that no other nation could ever yet come at the invention, and that Sir
Thomas and his brother resolved to make an attempt for the bringing of
this invention into their own country.  They knew that there would be
great difficulty and danger in the undertaking, because the king of
Sardinia had made it death for any man to discover this invention, or
attempt to carry it out of his dominions.  The petitioner's brother,
however, resolved to venture his person for the benefit and advantage
of his native country, and Sir Thomas was resolved to venture his
money, and to furnish his brother with whatever sums should be
necessary for executing so bold and so generous a design.  His brother
went accordingly over to Italy; and after a long stay and a great
expense in that country, he found means to see this engine so often,
and to pry into the nature of it so narrowly, that he made himself
master of the whole invention and of all the different parts and
motions belonging to it."

John Lombe was absent from England for several years.  While occupied
with his investigations and making his drawings, it is said that it
began to be rumoured that the Englishman was prying into the secret of
the silk mill, and that he had to fly for his life.  However this may
be, he got on board an English ship, and returned to England in safety.
He brought two Italian workmen with him, accustomed to the secrets of
the silk trade.  He arrived in London in 1716, when, after conferring
with his brother, a specification was prepared and a patent for the
organzining of raw silk was taken out in 1718.  The patent was granted
for fourteen years.

In the meantime, John Lombe arranged with the Corporation of the town
of Derby for taking a lease of the island or swamp on the river
Derwent, at a ground rental of 8L. a year.  The island, which was well
situated for water-power, was 500 feet long and 52 feet wide.
Arrangements were at once made for erecting a silk mill thereon, the
first large factory in England.  It was constructed entirely at the
expense of his brother Thomas.  While the building was in progress,
John Lombe hired various rooms in Derby, and particularly the Town
Hall, where he erected temporary engines turned by hand, and gave
employment to a large number of poor people.

At length, after about three years' labour, the great silk mill was
completed.  It was founded upon huge piles of oak, from 16 to 20 feet
long, driven into the swamp close to each other by an engine made for
the purpose.  The building was five stories high, contained eight large
apartments, and had no fewer than 468 windows.  The Lombes must have
had great confidence in their speculation, as the building and the
great engine for making the organzine silk, together with the other
fittings, cost them about 30,000L.

One effect of the working of the mill was greatly to reduce the price
of the thrown-silk, and to bring it below the cost of the Italian
production.  The King of Sardinia, having heard of the success of the
Lombe's undertaking, prohibited the exportation of Piedmontese raw
silk, which interrupted the course of their prosperity, until means
were taken to find a renewed supply elsewhere.

And now comes the tragic part of the story, for which Mr. Hutton, the
author of the 'History of Derby,' is responsible.  As he worked in the
silk mill when a boy, from 1730 to 1737, he doubtless heard it from the
mill-hands, and there may be some truth in it, though mixed with a
little romance.  It is this:--

Hutton says of John Lombe, that he "had not pursued this lucrative
commerce more than three or four years when the Italians, who felt the
effects from their want of trade, determined his destruction, and hoped
that that of his works would follow.  An artful woman came over in the
character of a friend, associated with the parties, and assisted in the
business.  She attempted to gain both the Italian workmen, and
succeeded with one.  By these two slow poison was supposed, and perhaps
justly, to have been administered to John Lombe, who lingered two or
three years in agony, and departed.  The Italian ran away to his own
country; and Madam was interrogated, but nothing transpired, except
what strengthened suspicion."  A strange story, if true.

Of the funeral, Hutton says:--"John Lombe's was the most superb ever
known in Derby.  A man of peaceable deportment, who had brought a
beneficial manufactory into the place, employed the poor, and at
advanced wages, could not fail meeting with respect, and his melancholy
end with pity.  Exclusive of the gentlemen who attended, all the people
concerned in the works were invited. The procession marched in pairs,
and extended the length of Full Street, the market-place, and
Iron-gate; so that when the corpse entered All Saints, at St. Mary's
Gate, the last couple left the house of the deceased, at the corner of
Silk-mill Lane."

Thus John Lombe died and was buried at the early age of twenty-nine;
and Thomas, the capitalist, continued the owner of the Derby silk mill.
Hutton erroneously states that William succeeded, and that he shot
himself.  The Lombes had no brother of the name of William, and this
part of Hutton's story is a romance.

The affairs of the Derby silk mill went on prosperously.  Enough thrown
silk was manufactured to supply the trade, and the weaving of silk
became a thriving business.  Indeed, English silk began to have a
European reputation.  In olden times it was said that "the stranger
buys of the Englishman the case of the fox for a groat, and sells him
the tail again for a shilling."  But now the matter was reversed, and
the saying was, "The Englishman buys silk of the stranger for twenty
marks, and sells him the same again for one hundred pounds."

But the patent was about to expire.  It had been granted for only
fourteen years; and a long time had elapsed before the engine could be
put in operation, and the organzine manufactured.  It was the only
engine in the kingdom.  Joshua Gee, writing in 1731, says:  "As we have
but one Water Engine in the kingdom for throwing silk, if that should
be destroyed by fire or any other accident, it would make the
continuance of throwing fine silk very precarious; and it is very much
to be doubted whether all the men now living in the kingdom could make
another."  Gee accordingly recommended that three or four more should
be erected at the public expense, "according to the model of that at
Derby."[5]

The patent expired in 1732.  The year before, Sir Thomas Lombe, who had
been by this time knighted, applied to Parliament for a prolongation of
the patent.  The reasons for his appeal were principally these: that
before he could provide for the full supply of other silk proper for
his purpose (the Italians having prohibited the exportation of raw
silk), and before he could alter his engine, train up a sufficient
number of workpeople, and bring the manufacture to perfection, almost
all the fourteen years of his patent right would have expired.
"Therefore," the petition to Parliament concluded, "as he has not
hitherto received the intended benefit of the aforesaid patent, and in
consideration of the extraordinary nature of this undertaking, the very
great expense, hazard, and difficulty he has undergone, as well as the
advantage he has thereby procured to the nation at his own expense, the
said Sir Thomas Lombe humbly hopes that Parliament will grant him a
further term for the sole making and using his engines, or such other
recompense as in their wisdom shall seem meet."[6]

The petition was referred to a Committee.  After consideration, they
recommended the House of Commons to grant a further term of years to
Sir Thomas Lombe.  The advisers of the King, however, thought it better
that the patent should not be renewed, but that the trade in silk
should be thrown free to all.  Accordingly the Chancellor of the
Exchequer acquainted the House (14th March, 1731) that "His Majesty
having been informed of the case of Sir Thomas Lombe, with respect to
his engine for making organzine silk, had commanded him to acquaint
this House, that His Majesty recommended to their consideration the
making such provision for a recompense to Sir Thomas Lombe as they
shall think proper."

The result was, that the sum of 14,000L. was voted and paid to Sir
Thomas Lombe as "a reward for his eminent services done to the nation,
in discovering with the greatest hazard and difficulty the capital
Italian engines, and introducing and bringing the same to full
perfection in this kingdom, at his own great expense."[7]  The trade
was accordingly thrown open.  Silk mills were erected at Stockport and
elsewhere; Hutton says that divers additional mills were erected in
Derby; and a large and thriving trade was established.  In 1850, the
number employed in the silk manufacture exceeded a million persons.
The old mill has recently become disused.  Although supported by strong
wooden supports, it showed signs of falling; and it was replaced by a
larger mill, more suitable to modern requirements.


Footnotes for Chapter IV.

[1] "This was equally the case with two other trades;--those of
glass-maker and druggist, which brought no contamination upon nobility
in Venice.  In a country where wealth was concentrated in the hands of
the powerful, it was no doubt highly judicious thus to encourage its
employment for objects of public advantage. A feeling, more or less
powerful, has always existed in the minds of the high-born, against the
employment of their time and wealth to purposes of commerce or
manufactures.  All trades, save only that of war, seem to have been
held by them as in some sort degrading, and but little comporting with
the dignity of aristocratic blood." Cabinet Cyclopedia--Silk
Manufacture, p. 20.

[2] A Brief State of the Inland or Home Trade. (Pamphlet.) 1730.

[3] A Brief State of the Case relating to the Machine erected at Derby
for making Italian Organzine Silk, which was discovered and brought
into England with the utmost difficulty and hazard, and at the Sole
Expense of Sir Thomas Lombe.  House of Commons Paper, 28th January,
1731.

[4] Self-Help, p. 205.

[5] The Trade and Navigation of Great Britain considered, p. 94.

[6] The petition sets forth the merits of the machine at Derby for
making Italian organzine silk--"a manufacture made out of fine raw
silk, by reducing it to a hard twisted fine and even thread.  This silk
makes the warp, and is absolutely necessary to mix with and cover the
Turkey and other coarser silks thrown here, which are used for
Shute,--so that, without a constant supply of this fine Italian
organzine silk, very little of the said Turkey or other silks could be
used, nor could the silk weaving trade be carried on in England.  This
Italian organzine (or thrown) silk has in all times past been bought
with our money, ready made (or worked) in Italy, for want of the art of
making it here.  Whereas now, by making it ourselves out of fine
Italian raw silk, the nation saves near one-third part; and by what we
make out of fine China raw silk, above one-half of the price we pay for
it ready worked in Italy.  The machine at Derby contains 97,746 wheels,
movements, and individual parts (which work day and night), all which
receive their motion from one large water-wheel, are governed by one
regulator, and it employs about 300 persons to attend and supply it
with work." In Bees Cyclopaedia (art. 'Silk Manufacture') there is a
full description of the Piedmont throwing machine introduced to England
by John Lombe, with a good plate of it.

[7] Sir Thomas Lombe died in 1738.  He had two daughters.  The first,
Hannah, was married to Sir Robert Clifton, of Clifton, co. Notts; the
second, Mary Turner, was married to James, 7th Earl of Lauderdale.  In
his will, he "recommends his wife, at the conclusion of the Darby
concern," to distribute among his "principal servants or managers five
or six hundred pounds."


CHAPTER V.

WILLIAM MURDOCK: HIS LIFE AND INVENTIONS.

"Justice exacts, that those by whom we are most benefited Should be
most admired."--Dr. Johnson.

"The beginning of civilization is the discovery of some useful arts, by
which men acquire property, comforts, or luxuries.  The necessity  or
desire of preserving them leads to laws and social institutions... In
reality, the origin as well as the progress and improvement of civil
society is founded on mechanical and chemical inventions."--Sir Humphry
Davy.

At the middle of last century, Scotland was a very poor country. It
consisted mostly of mountain and moorland; and the little arable land
it contained was badly cultivated.  Agriculture was almost a lost art.
"Except in a few instances," says a writer in the 'Farmers' Magazine'
of 1803, "Scotland was little better than a barren waste."  Cattle
could with difficulty be kept alive; and the people in some parts of
the country were often on the brink of starvation.  The people were
hopeless, miserable, and without spirit, like the Irish in their very
worst times.  After the wreck of the Darien expedition, there seemed to
be neither skill, enterprise, nor money left in the country.  What
resources it contained were altogether undeveloped.  There was little
communication between one place and another, and such roads as existed
were for the greater part of the year simply impassable.

There were various opinions as to the causes of this frightful state of
things.  Some thought it was the Union between England and Scotland;
and Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, "The Patriot," as he was called, urged
its Repeal.  In one of his publications, he endeavoured to show that
about one-sixth of the population of Scotland was in a state of
beggary--two hundred thousand vagabonds begging from door to door, or
robbing and plundering people as poor as themselves.[1] Fletcher was
accordingly as great a repealer as Daniel O'Connell in after times.
But he could not get the people to combine.  There were others who held
a different opinion.  They thought that something might be done by the
people themselves to extricate the country from its miserable condition.

It still possessed some important elements of prosperity.  The
inhabitants of Scotland, though poor, were strong and able to work.
The land, though cold and sterile, was capable of cultivation.

Accordingly, about the middle of last century, some important steps
were taken to improve the general condition of things.  A few
public-spirited landowners led the way, and formed themselves into a
society for carrying out improvements in agriculture. They granted long
leases of farms as a stimulus to the most skilled and industrious, and
found it to their interest to give the farmer a more permanent interest
in his improvements than he had before enjoyed.  Thus stimulated and
encouraged, farming made rapid progress, especially in the Lothians;
and the example spread into other districts.  Banks were established
for the storage of capital.  Roads were improved, and communications
increased between one part of the country and another.  Hence trade and
commerce arose, by reason of the facilities afforded for the
interchange of traffic.  The people, being fairly educated by the
parish schools, were able to take advantage of these improvements.
Sloth and idleness gradually disappeared, before the energy, activity,
and industry which were called into life by the improved communications.

At the same time, active and powerful minds were occupied in extending
the domain of knowledge.  Black and Robison, of Glasgow, were the
precursors of James Watt, whose invention of the condensing
steam-engine was yet to produce a revolution in industrial operations,
the like of which had never before been known.  Watt had hit upon his
great idea while experimenting with an old Newcomen model which
belonged to the University of Glasgow.  He was invited by Mr. Roebuck
of Kinneil to make a working steam-engine for the purpose of pumping
water from the coal-pits at Boroughstoness; but his progress was
stopped by want of capital, as well as by want of experience.  It was
not until the brave and generous Matthew Boulton of Birmingham took up
the machine, and backed Watt with his capital and his spirit, that
Watt's enterprise had the remotest chance of success.  Even after about
twelve years' effort, the condensing steam-engine was only beginning,
though half-heartedly, to be taken up and employed by colliery
proprietors and cotton manufacturers.  In developing its powers, and
extending its uses, the great merits of William Murdock can never be
forgotten.  Watt stands first in its history, as the inventor; Boulton
second, as its promoter and supporter; and Murdock third, as its
developer and improver.

William Murdock was born on the 21st of August, 1754, at Bellow Mill,
in the parish of Auchinleck, Ayrshire.  His father, John, was a miller
and millwright, as well as a farmer.  His mother's maiden name was
Bruce, and she used to boast of being descended from Robert Bruce, the
deliverer of Scotland.  The Murdocks, or Murdochs--for the name was
spelt in either way--were numerous in the neighbourhood, and they were
nearly all related to each other.  They are supposed to have originally
come into the district from Flanders, between which country and
Scotland a considerable intercourse existed in the middle ages.  Some
of the Murdocks took a leading part in the construction of the abbeys
and cathedrals of the North;[2] others were known as mechanics; but the
greater number were farmers.

One of the best known members of the family was John Murdock, the poet
Burns' first teacher.  Burns went to his school at Alloway Mill, when
he was six years old.  There he learnt to read and write.  When Murdock
afterwards set up a school at Ayr, Burns, who was then fifteen, went to
board with him.  In a letter to a correspondent, Murdock said:  "In
1773, Robert Burns came to board and lodge with me, for the purpose of
revising his English grammar, that he might be better qualified to
instruct his brothers and sisters at home.  He was now with me day and
night, in school, at all meals, and in all my walks."  The pupil even
shared the teacher's bed at night.  Murdock lent the boy books, and
helped the cultivation of his mind in many ways.  Burns soon revised
his English grammar, and learnt French, as well as a little Latin.
Some time after, Murdock removed to London, and had the honour of
teaching Talleyrand English during his residence as an emigrant in this
country.  He continued to have the greatest respect for his former
pupil, whose poetry commemorated the beauties of his native district.

It may be mentioned that Bellow Mill is situated on the Bellow Water,
near where it joins the river Lugar.  One of Burns' finest songs
begins:--

   "Behind yon hills where Lugar flows."

That was the scene of William Murdock's boyhood.  When a boy, he herded
his father's cows along the banks of the Bellow; and as there were then
no hedges, it was necessary to have some one to watch the cattle while
grazing.  The spot  is still pointed out where the boy, in the
intervals of his herding, hewed a square compartment out of the rock by
the water side, and there burnt the splint coal found on the top of the
Black Band ironstone. That was one of the undeveloped industries of
Scotland; for the Scotch iron trade did not arrive at any considerable
importance until about a century later.[3]  The little cavern in which
Murdock burnt the splint coal was provided with a fireplace and vent,
all complete.  It is possible that he may have there derived, from his
experiments, the first idea of Gas as an illuminant.

Murdock is also said to have made a wooden horse, worked by mechanical
power, which was the wonder of the district.  On this mechanical horse
he rode to the village of Cumnock, about two miles distant.  His
father's name is, however, associated with his own in the production of
this machine.  Old John Murdock had a reputation for intelligence and
skill of no ordinary kind. When at Carron ironworks, in 1760, he had a
pinton cast after a pattern which he had prepared.  This is said to
have been the first piece of iron-toothed gearing ever used in mill
work.  When I last saw it, the pinton was placed on the lawn in front
of William Murdock's villa at Handsworth.

The young man helped his father in many ways.  He worked in the mill,
worked on the farm, and assisted in the preparation of mill machinery.
In this way he obtained a considerable amount of general technical
knowledge.  He even designed and constructed bridges.  He was employed
to build a bridge over the river Nith, near Dumfries, and it stands
there to this day, a solid and handsome structure.  But he had an
ambition to be something more than a country mason.  He had heard a
great deal about the inventions of James Watt; and he determined to try
whether he could not get "a job" at the famous manufactory at Soho.  He
accordingly left his native place in the year 1777, in the twenty-third
year of his age; and migrated southward.  He left plenty of Murdocks
behind him.  There was a famous staff in the family, originally owned
by William Murdock's grandfather, which bore the following inscription:
"This staff I leave in pedigree to the oldest Murdock after me, in the
parish of Auchenleck, 1745."  This staff was lately held by Jean
Murdock, daughter of the late William Murdock, joiner, cousin of the
subject of this biography.

When William arrived at Soho in 1777 he called at the works to ask for
employment.  Watt was then in Cornwall, looking after his pumping
engines; but he saw Boulton, who was usually accessible to callers of
every rank.  In answer to Murdock's enquiry whether he could have a
job, Boulton replied that work was very slack with them, and that every
place was filled up.  During the brief conversation that took place,
the blate young Scotchman, like most country lads in the presence of
strangers, had some difficulty in knowing what to do with his hands,
and unconsciously kept twirling his hat with them.  Boulton's attention
was attracted to the twirling hat, which seemed to be of a peculiar
make.  It was not a felt hat, nor a cloth hat, nor a glazed hat: but it
seemed to be painted, and composed of some unusual material.  "That
seems to be a curious sort of hat," said Boulton, looking at it more
closely; "what is it made of?" "Timmer, sir," said Murdock, modestly.
"Timmer?  Do you mean to say that it is made of wood?"  "'Deed it is,
sir."  "And pray how was it made?"  "I made it mysel, sir, in a bit
laithey of my own contrivin'."  "Indeed!"

Boulton looked at the young man again.  He had risen a hundred degrees
in his estimation.  William was a good-looking fellow--tall, strong,
and handsome--with an open intelligent countenance.  Besides, he had
been able to turn a hat for himself with a lathe of his own
construction.  This, of itself, was a sufficient proof that he was a
mechanic of no mean skill. "Well!" said Boulton, at last, "I will
enquire at the works, and see if there is anything we can set you to.
Call again, my man."

"Thank you, sir," said Murdock, giving a final twirl to his hat.

Such was the beginning of William Murdock's connection with the firm of
Boulton and Watt.  When he called again he was put upon a trial job,
and then, as he was found satisfactory, he was engaged for two years at
15s. a week when at home, 17s. when in the country, and 18s. when in
London.  Boulton's engagement of Murdock was amply justified by the
result.  Beginning as an ordinary mechanic, he applied himself
diligently and conscientiously to his work, and gradually became
trusted.  More responsible duties were confided to him, and he strove
to perform them to the best of his power.  His industry, skilfulness,
and steady sobriety, soon marked him for promotion, and he rose from
grade to grade until he became Boulton and Watt's most trusted
co-worker and adviser in all their mechanical undertakings of
importance.

Watt himself had little confidence in Scotchmen as mechanics.  He told
Sir Waiter Scott that though many of them sought employment at his
works, he could never get any of them to become first-rate workmen.
They might be valuable as clerks and book-keepers, but they had an
insuperable aversion to toiling long at any point of mechanism, so as
to earn the highest wages paid to the workmen.[4]  The reason no doubt
was, that the working-people of Scotland were then only in course of
education as practical mechanics; and now that they have had a
century's discipline of work and technical training, the result is
altogether different, as the engine-shops and shipbuilding-yards of the
Clyde abundantly prove.  Mechanical power and technical ability are the
result of training, like many other things.

When Boulton engaged Murdock, as we have said, Watt was absent in
Cornwall, looking after the pumping-engines which had been erected at
several of the mines throughout that county.  The partnership had only
been in existence for three years, and Watt was still struggling with
the difficulties which he had to surmount in getting the steam engine
into practical use.  His health was bad, and he was oppressed with
frightful headaches. He was not the man to fight the selfishness of the
Cornish adventurers.  "A little more of this hurrying and vexation," he
said, "will knock me up altogether."  Boulton went to his help
occasionally, and gave him hope and courage.  And at length William
Murdock, after he had acquired sufficient knowledge of the business,
was able to undertake the principal management of the engines in
Cornwall.

We find that in 1779, when he was only twenty-five years old, he was
placed in this important position.  When he went into Cornwall, he gave
himself no rest until he had conquered the defects of the engines, and
put them into thorough working order.

He devoted himself to his duties with a zeal and ability that
completely won Watt's heart.  When he had an important job in hand, he
could scarcely sleep.  One night at his lodgings at Redruth, the people
were disturbed by a strange noise in his room.  Several heavy blows
were heard upon the floor.  They started from their beds, rushed to
Murdock's room, and found him standing in his shirt, heaving at the
bedpost in his sleep, shouting "Now she goes, lads! now she goes!"

Murdock became a most popular man with the mine owners.  He also became
friendly with the Cornish workmen and engineers.  Indeed, he fought his
way to their affections.  One day, some half-dozen of the mining
captains came into his engine-room at Chacewater, and began to bully
him.  This he could not stand.  He stript, selected the biggest, and
put himself into a fighting attitude. They set to, and in a few minutes
Murdock's powerful bones and muscles enabled him to achieve the
victory.  The other men, who had looked on fairly, without interfering,
seeing the temper and vigour of the man they had bullied, made
overtures of reconciliation.  William was quite willing to be friendly.
Accordingly they shook hands all round, and parted the best of friends.
It is also said that Murdock afterwards fought a duel with Captain
Trevethick, because of a quarrel between Watt and the mining engineer,
in which Murdock conceived his master to have been unfairly and harshly
treated.[5]

The uses of Watt's steam-engine began to be recognised as available for
manufacturing purposes.  It was then found necessary to invent some
method by which continuous rotary motion should be secured, so as to
turn round the moving machinery of mills.  With this object Watt had
invented his original wheel-engine.  But no steps were taken to
introduce it into practical use.  At length he prepared a model, in
which he made use of a crank connected with the working beam of the
engine, so as to produce the necessary rotary motion.

There was no originality in this application.  The crank was one of the
most common of mechanical appliances.  It was in daily use in every
spinning wheel, and in every turner's and knife-grinder's foot-lathe.
Watt did not take out a patent for the crank, not believing it to be
patentable.  But another person did so, thereby anticipating Watt in
the application of the crank for producing rotary motion.   He had
therefore to employ some other method, and in the new contrivance he
had the valuable help of William Murdock.  Watt devised five different
methods of securing rotary motion without using the crank, but
eventually he adopted the "Sun-and-planet motion," the invention of
Murdock. This had the singular property of going twice round for every
stroke of the engine, and might be made to go round much oftener
without additional machinery.  The invention was patented in February,
1782, five Years after Murdock had entered the service of Boulton and
Watt.

Murdock continued for many years busily occupied in superintending the
Cornish steam-engines.  We find him described by his employers as
"flying from mine to mine," putting the engines to rights.  If anything
went wrong, he was immediately sent for.  He was active, quick-sighted,
shrewd, sober, and thoroughly trustworthy.  Down to the year 1780, his
wages were only a pound a week; but Boulton made him a present of ten
guineas, to which the owners of the United Mines added another ten, in
acknowledgment of the admirable manner in which he bad erected their
new engine, the chairman of the company declaring that he was "the most
obliging and industrious workman he had ever known."  That he secured
the admiration of the Cornish engineers may be obvious from the fact of
Mr. Boaze having invited him to join in an engineering partnership; but
Murdock remained loyal to the Birmingham firm, and in due time he had
his reward.

He continued to be the "right hand man" of the concern in Cornwall.
Boulton wrote to Watt, towards the end of 1782: "Murdock hath been
indefatigable ever since he began.  He has scarcely been in bed or
taken necessary food.  After slaving night and day on Thursday and
Friday, a letter came from Wheal Virgin that he must go instantly to
set their engine to work, or they would let out the fire.  He went and
set the engine to work; it worked well for the five or six hours he
remained.  He left it, and returned to the Consolidated Mines about
eleven at night, and was employed about the engines till four this
morning, and then went to bed.  I found him at ten this morning in
Poldice Cistern, seeking for pins and castors that had jumped out, when
I insisted on his going home to bed."

On one occasion, when an engine superintended by Murdock stopped
through some accident, the water rose in the mine, and the workmen were
"drowned out."  Upon this occurring, the miners went "roaring at him"
for throwing them out of work, and threatened to tear him to pieces.
Nothing daunted, he went through the midst of the men, repaired the
invalided engine, and started it afresh.

When he came out of the engine-house, the miners cheered him
vociferously and insisted upon carrying him home upon their shoulders
in triumph!

Steam was now asserting its power everywhere.  It was pumping water
from the mines in Cornwall and driving the mills of the manufacturers
in Lancashire.  Speculative mechanics began to consider whether it
might not be employed as a means of land locomotion.  The comprehensive
mind of Sir Isaac Newton had long before, in his 'Explanation of the
Newtonian Philosophy,' thrown out the idea of employing steam for this
purpose; but no practical experiment was made.  Benjamin Franklin,
while agent in London for the United Provinces of America, had a
correspondence with Matthew Boulton, of Birmingham, and Dr. Darwin, of
Lichfield, on the same subject.  Boulton sent a model of a fire-engine
to London for Franklin's inspection; but Franklin was too much occupied
at the time by grave political questions to pursue the subject further.
Erasmus Darwin's speculative mind was inflamed by the idea of a "fiery
chariot," and he urged his friend Boulton to prosecute the contrivance
of the necessary steam machinery.[6]

Other minds were at work.  Watt, when only twenty-three years old, at
the instigation of his friend Robison, made a model locomotive,
provided with two cylinders of tin plate; but the project was laid
aside, and was never again taken up by the inventor.  Yet, in his
patent of 1784, Watt included an arrangement by means of which
steam-power might be employed for the purposes of locomotion.  But no
further model of the contrivance was made.

Meanwhile, Cugnot, of Paris, had already made a road engine worked by
steam power.  It was first tried at the Arsenal in 1769; and, being set
in motion, it ran against a stone wall in its way and threw it down.
The engine was afterwards tried in the streets of Paris.  In one of the
experiments it fell over with a crash, and was thenceforward locked up
in the Arsenal to prevent its doing further mischief.  This first
locomotive is now to be seen at the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers
at Paris.

Murdock had doubtless heard of Watt's original speculations, and
proceeded, while at Redruth, during his leisure hours, to construct a
model locomotive after a design of his own.  This model was of small
dimensions, standing little more than a foot and a half high, though it
was sufficiently large to demonstrate the soundness of the principle on
which it was constructed.  It was supported on three wheels, and
carried a small copper boiler, heated by a spirit lamp, with a flue
passing obliquely through it.  The cylinder, of 3/4 inch diameter and
2-inch stroke, was fixed in the top of the boiler, the piston-rod being
connected with the vibratory beam attached to the connecting-rod which
worked the crank of the driving-wheel.  This little engine worked by
the expansive force of steam only, which was discharged into the
atmosphere after it had done its work of alternately raising and
depressing the piston in the cylinder.

Mr. Murdock's son, while living at Handsworth, informed the present
writer that this model was invented and constructed in 1781; but, after
perusing the correspondence of Boulton and Watt, we infer that it was
not ready for trial until 1784.  The first experiment was made in
Murdock's own house at Redruth, when the little engine successfully
hauled a model waggon round the room,--the single wheel, placed in
front of the engine and working in a swivel frame, enabling it to run
round in a circle.

Another experiment was made out of doors, on which occasion, small
though the engine was, it fairly outran the speed of its inventor.  One
night, after returning from his duties at the mine at Redruth, Murdock
went with his model locomotive to the avenue leading to the church,
about a mile from the town.  The walk was narrow, straight, and level.
Having lit the lamp, the water soon boiled, and off started the engine
with the inventor after it. Shortly after he heard distant shouts of
terror.  It was too dark to perceive objects, but he found, on
following up the machine, that the cries had proceeded from the worthy
vicar, who, while going along the walk, had met the hissing and fiery
little monster, which he declared he took to be the Evil One in propria
persona!

When Watt was informed of Murdock's experiments, he feared that they
might interfere with his regular duties, and advised their
discontinuance.  Should Murdock still resolve to continue them, Watt
urged his partner Boulton, then in Cornwall, that, rather than lose
Murdock's services, they should advance him 100L.; and, if he succeeded
within a year in making an engine capable of drawing a post-chaise
carrying two passengers and the driver, at the rate of four miles an
hour, that a locomotive engine business should be established, with
Murdock as a partner.  The arrangement, however, never proceeded any
further.  Perhaps a different attraction withdrew Murdock from his
locomotive experiments.   He was then paying attention to a young lady,
the daughter of Captain Painter; and in 1785 he married her, and
brought her home to his house in Cross Street, Redruth.

In the following year,--September, 1786--Watt says, in a letter to
Boulton, "I have still the same opinion concerning the steam carriage,
but, to prevent more fruitless argument about it, I have one of some
size under hand.  In the meantime, I wish William could be brought to
do as we do, to mind the business in hand, and let such as Symington
and Sadler throw away their time and money in hunting shadows."  In a
subsequent letter Watt expressed his gratification at finding "that
William applies to his business."  From that time forward, Murdock as
well as Watt, dropped all further speculation on the subject, and left
it to others to work out the problem of the locomotive engine.
Murdock's model remained but a curious toy, which he took pleasure in
exhibiting to his intimate friends; and, though he long continued to
speculate about road locomotion, and was persuaded of its
practicability, he abstained from embodying his ideas of the necessary
engine in any complete working form.

Murdock nevertheless continued inventing, for the man who is given to
invent, and who possesses the gift of insight, cannot rest.  He lived
in the midst of inventors.  Watt and Boulton were constantly suggesting
new things, and Murdock became possessed by the same spirit.  In 1791
he took out his first patent.  It was for a method of preserving ships'
bottoms from foulness by the use of a certain kind of chemical paint.
Mr. Murdock's grandson informs us that it was recently re-patented and
was the cause of a lawsuit, and that Hislop's patent for revivifying
gas-lime would have been an infringement, if it had not expired.

Murdock is still better known by his invention of gas for lighting
purposes.  Several independent inquirers into the constituents of
Newcastle coal had arrived at the conclusion that nearly one-third of
the substance was driven off in vapour by the application of heat, and
that the vapour so driven off was inflammable.  But no suggestion had
been made to apply this vapour for lighting purposes until Murdock took
the matter in hand.  Mr. M. S. Pearse has sent us the following
interesting reminiscence: "Some time since, when in the West of
Cornwall, I was anxious to find out whether any one remembered Murdock.
I discovered one of the most respectable and intelligent men in
Camborne, Mr. William Symons, who not only distinctly remembered
Murdock, but had actually been present on one of the first occasions
when gas was used.  Murdock, he says, was very fond of children, and
not unfrequently took them into his workshop to show them what he was
doing.  Hence it happened that on one occasion this gentleman, then a
boy of seven or eight, was standing outside Murdock's door with some
other boys, trying to catch sight of some special mystery inside, for
Dr. Boaze, the chief doctor of the place, and Murdock had been busy all
the afternoon.  Murdock came out, and asked my informant to run down to
a shop near by for a thimble.  On returning with the thimble, the boy
pretended to have lost it, and, whilst searching in every pocket, he
managed to slip inside the door of the workshop, and then produced the
thimble.  He found Dr. Boaze and Murdock with a kettle filled with
coal.  The gas issuing from it had been burnt in a large metal case,
such as was used for blasting purposes. Now, however, they had applied
a much smaller tube, and at the end of it fastened the thimble, through
the small perforations made in which they burned a continuous jet for
some time."[7]

After numerous experiments, Murdock had his house in Cross Street
fitted up in 1792 for being lit by gas.  The coal was subjected to heat
in an iron retort, and the gas was conveyed in pipes to the offices and
the different rooms of the house, where it was burned at proper
apertures or burners.[8]  Portions of the gas were also confined in
portable vessels of tinned iron, from which it was burned when
required, thus forming a moveable gas-light. Murdock had a gas lantern
in regular use, for the purpose of lighting himself home at night
across the moors, from the mines where he was working, to his home at
Redruth.  This lantern was formed by filling a bladder with gas and
fixing a jet to the mouthpiece at the bottom of a glass lantern, with
the bladder hanging underneath.

Having satisfied himself as to the superior economy of coal gas, as
compared with oils and tallow, for the purposes of artificial
illumination, Murdock mentioned the subject to Mr. James Watt, jun.,
during a brief visit to Soho in 1794, and urged the propriety of taking
out a patent.  Watt was, however, indifferent to taking out any further
patents, being still engaged in contesting with the Cornish mine-owners
his father's rights to the user of the condensing steam-engine.
Nothing definite was done at the time.  Murdock returned to Cornwall
and continued his experiments.  At the end of the same year he
exhibited to Mr. Phillips and others, at the Polgooth mine, his
apparatus for extracting gases from coal and other substances, showed
it in use, lit the gas which issued from the burner, and showed its
"strong and beautiful light."  He afterwards exhibited the same
apparatus to Tregelles and others at the Neath Abbey Company's
ironworks in Glamorganshire.

Murdock returned to Soho in 1798, to take up his permanent residence in
the neighbourhood.  When the mine owners heard of his intention to
leave Cornwall, they combined in offering him a handsome salary
provided he would remain in the county; but his attachment to his
friends at Soho would not allow him to comply with their request.  He
again urged the firm of Boulton and Watt to take out a patent for the
use of gas for lighting purposes. But being still embroiled in their
tedious and costly lawsuit, they were naturally averse to risk
connection with any other patent.  Watt the younger, with whom Murdock
communicated on the subject, was aware that the current of gas obtained
from the distillation of coal in Lord Dundonald's tar-ovens had been
occasionally set fire to, and also that Bishop Watson and others had
burned gas from coal, after conducting it through tubes, or after it
had issued from the retort.  Mr. Watt was, however, quite satisfied
that Murdock was the first person who had suggested its economical
application for public and private uses.

But he was not clear, after the legal difficulties which had been
raised as to his father's patent rights, that it would be safe to risk
a further patent for gas.

Mr. Murdock's suggestion, accordingly, was not acted upon.  But he went
on inventing in other directions.  He thenceforward devoted himself
entirely to mechanical pursuits.  Mr. Buckle has said of him:--"The
rising sun often found him, after a night spent in incessant labour,
still at the anvil or turning-lathe; for with his own hands he would
make such articles as he would not intrust to unskilful ones."  In 1799
he took out a patent (No. 2340), embodying some very important
inventions.  First, it included the endless screw working into a
toothed-wheel, for boring steam-cylinders, which is still in use.
Second, the casting of a steam-jacket in one cylinder, instead of being
made in separate segments bolted together with caulked joints, as was
previously done.  Third, the new double-D slide-valve, by which the
construction and working of the steam-engine was simplified, and the
loss of steam saved, as well as the cylindrical valve for the same
purpose.  And fourth, improved rotary engines.  One of the latter was
set to drive the machines in his private workshop, and continued in
nearly constant work and in perfect use for about thirty years.

In 1801, Murdock sent his two sons William and John to the Ayr Academy,
for the benefit of Scotch education.  In the summer-time they spent
their vacation at Bellow Mill, which their grandfather still continued
to occupy.  They fished in the river, and "caught a good many trout."
The boys corresponded regularly with their father at Birmingham.  In
1804, they seem to have been in a state of great excitement about the
expected landing of the French in Scotland.  The volunteers of Ayr
amounted to 300 men, the cavalry to 150, and the riflemen to 50.  "The
riflemen," says John, "go to the seashore every Saturday to shoot at a
target.  They stand at 70 paces distant, and out of 100 shots they
often put in 60 bullets!"  William says, "Great preparations are still
making for the  reception of the French.  Several thousand of pikes are
carried through the town every week; and all the volunteers and
riflemen have received orders to march at a moment's warning." The
alarm, however, passed away.  At the end of 1804, the two boys received
prizes; William got one in arithmetic and another in the Rector's
composition class; and John also obtained two, one in the mathematical
class, and the other in French.

To return to the application of gas for lighting purposes.  In 1801, a
plan was proposed by a M. Le Blond for lighting a part of the streets
of Paris with gas.  Murdock actively resumed his experiments; and on
the occasion of the Peace of Amiens in March, 1802, he made the first
public exhibition of his invention.  The whole of the works at Soho
were brilliantly illuminated with gas.

The sight was received with immense enthusiasm.  There could now be no
doubt as to the enormous advantages of this method of producing
artificial light, compared with that from oil or tallow.  In the
following year the manufacture of gas-making apparatus was added to the
other branches of Boulton and Watts' business, with which Murdock was
now associated,--and as much as from 4000L. to 5000L. of capital were
invested in the new works. The new method of lighting speedily became
popular amongst manufacturers, from its superior safety, cheapness, and
illuminating power.  The mills of Phillips and Lee of Manchester were
fitted up in 1805; and those of Burley and Kennedy, also of Manchester,
and of Messrs. Gott, of Leeds, in subsequent years.

Though Murdock had made the uses of gas-lighting perfectly clear, it
was some time before it was proposed to light the streets by the new
method.  The idea was ridiculed by Sir Humphry Davy, who asked one of
the projectors if he intended to take the dome of St. Paul's for a
gasometer!  Sir Waiter Scott made many clever jokes about those who
proposed to "send light through the streets in pipes;" and even
Wollaston, a well known man of science, declared that they "might as
well attempt to light London with a slice from the moon."  It has been
so with all new projects--with the steamboat, the locomotive, and the
electric telegraph. As John Wilkinson said of the first vessel of iron
which he introduced, "it will be only a nine days' wonder, and
afterwards a Columbus's egg."

On the 25th of February, 1808, Murdock read a paper before the Royal
Society "On the Application of Gas from Coal to economical purposes."
He gave a history of the origin and progress of his experiments, down
to the time when he had satisfactorily lit up the premises of Phillips
and Lee at Manchester.  The paper was modest and unassuming, like
everything he did.

It concluded:--"I believe I may, without presuming too much, claim both
the first idea of applying, and the first application of this gas to
economical purposes."[9]  The Royal Society awarded Murdock their large
Rumford Gold Medal for his communication.

In the following year a German named Wintzer, or Winsor, appeared as
the promotor of a scheme for obtaining a royal charter with extensive
privileges, and applied for powers to form a joint-stock company to
light part of London and Westminster with gas.  Winsor claimed for his
method of gas manufacture that it was more efficacious and profitable
than any then known or practised.  The profits, indeed, were to be
prodigious.  Winsor made an elaborate calculation in his pamphlet
entitled 'The New Patriotic Imperial and National Light and Heat
Company,' from which it appeared that the net annual profits "agreeable
to the official experiments" would amount to over two hundred and
twenty-nine millions of pounds!--and that, giving over nine-tenths of
that sum towards the redemption of the National Debt, there would still
remain a total profit of 570L. to be paid to the subscribers for every
5L. of deposit!  Winsor took out a patent for the invention, and the
company, of which he was a member, proceeded to Parliament for an Act.
Boulton and Watt petitioned against the Bill, and James Watt, junior,
gave evidence on the subject.  Henry Brougham, who was the counsel for
the petitioners, made great fun of Winsor's absurd speculations,[10]
and the Bill was thrown out.

In the following year the London and Westminster Chartered Gas Light
and Coke Company succeeded in obtaining their Act.  They were not very
successful at first.  Many prejudices existed against the employment of
the new light.  It was popularly supposed that the gas was carried
along the pipes on fire, and that the pipes must necessarily be
intensely hot.  When it was proposed to light the House of Commons with
gas, the architect insisted on the pipes being placed several inches
from the walls, for fear of fire; and, after the pipes had been fixed,
the members might be seen applying their gloved hands to them to
ascertain their temperature, and afterwards expressing the greatest
surprise on finding that they were as cool as the adjoining walls.

The Gas Company was on the point of dissolution when Mr. Samuel Clegg
came to their aid.  Clegg had been a pupil of Murdock's, at Soho.  He
knew all the arrangements which Murdock had invented. He had assisted
in fitting up the gas machinery at the mills of Phillips & Lee,
Manchester, as well as at Lodge's Mill, Sowerby Bridge, near Halifax.
He was afterwards employed to fix the apparatus at the Catholic College
of Stoneyhurst, in Lancashire, at the manufactory of Mr. Harris at
Coventry, and at other places.  In 1813 the London and Westminster Gas
Company secured the services of Mr. Clegg, and from that time forwards
their career was one of prosperity.  In 1814 Westminster Bridge was
first lighted with gas, and shortly after the streets of St.
Margaret's, Westminster.  Crowds of people followed the lamplighter on
his rounds to watch the sudden effect of his flame applied to the
invisible stream of gas which issued from the burner.  The lamplighters
became so disgusted with the new light that they struck work, and Clegg
himself had for a time to act as lamplighter.

The advantages of the new light, however, soon became generally
recognised, and gas companies were established in most of the large
towns.  Glasgow was lit up by gas in 1817, and Liverpool and Dublin in
the following year.  Had Murdock in the first instance taken out a
patent for his invention, it could not fail to have proved exceedingly
remunerative to him; but he derived no advantage from the extended use
of the new system of lighting except the honour of having invented
it.[11] He left the benefits of his invention to the public, and
returned to his labours at Soho, which more than ever completely
engrossed him.

Murdock now became completely identified with the firm of Boulton &
Watt.  He assigned to them his patent for the slide-valve, the rotary
engine, and other inventions "for a good and valuable consideration."
Indeed his able management was almost indispensable to the continued
success of the Soho foundry.  Mr. Nasmyth, when visiting the works
about thirty years after Murdock had taken their complete management in
hand, recalled to mind the valuable services of that truly admirable
yet modest mechanic. He observed the admirable system, which he had
invented, of transmitting power from one central engine to other small
vacuum engines attached to the several machines which they were
employed to work.  "This vacuum method," he says, "of transmitting
power dates from the time of Papin; but it remained a dead contrivance
for about a century until it received the masterly touch of Murdock."

"The sight which I obtained" (Mr. Nasmyth proceeds) "of the vast series
of workshops of that celebrated establishment, fitted with evidences of
the presence and results of such master minds in design and execution,
and the special machine tools which I believe were chiefly to be
ascribed to the admirable inventive power and common-sense genius of
William Murdock, made me feel that I was indeed on classic ground in
regard to everything connected with the construction of steam-engine
machinery.  The interest was in no small degree enhanced by coming
every now and then upon some machine that had every historical claim to
be regarded as the prototype of many of our modern machine tools. All
these had William Murdock's genius stamped upon them, by reason of
their common-sense arrangements, which showed that he was one of those
original thinkers who had the courage to break away from the trammels
of traditional methods, and take short cuts to accomplish his objects
by direct and simple means."

We have another recollection of William Murdock, from one who knew him
when a boy.  This is the venerable Charles Manby, F.R.S., still
honorary secretary of the Institute of Civil Engineers.  He says
(writing to us in September 1883), "I see from the public prints that
you have been presiding at a meeting intended to do honour to the
memory of William Murdock--a most worthy man and an old friend of mine.
When he found me working the first slide valve ever introduced into an
engine-building establishment at Horsley, he patted me on the head, and
said to my father, 'Neighbour Manby, this is not the way to bring up a
good workman--merely turning a handle, without any shoulder work.'  He
evidently did not anticipate any great results from my engineering
education.  But we all know what machine tools are doing now,--and
where should we be without them?"

Watt withdrew from the firm in 1800, on the expiry of his patent for
the condensing steam-engine; but Boulton continued until the year 1809,
when he died full of years and honours.  Watt lived on until 1819.  The
last part of his life was the happiest.  During the time that he was in
the throes of his invention, he was very miserable, weighed down with
dyspepsia and sick headaches.  But after his patent had expired, he was
able to retire with a moderate fortune, and began to enjoy life.
Before, he had "cursed his inventions," now he could bless them.  He
was able to survey them, and find out what was right and what was
wrong.  He used his head and his hands in his private workshop, and
found many means of employing both pleasantly.  Murdock continued to be
his fast friend, and they spent many agreeable hours together. They
made experiments and devised improvements in machines.  Watt wished to
make things more simple.   He said to Murdock, "it is a great thing to
know what to do without.  We must have a book of blots--things to be
scratched out."  One of the most interesting schemes of Watt towards
the end of his life was the contrivance of a sculpture-making machine;
and he proceeded so far with it as to to able to present copies of
busts to his friends as "the productions of a young artist just
entering his eighty-third year."  The machine, however, remained
unfinished at his death, and the remarkable fact is that it was Watt's
only unfinished work.

The principle of the machine was to carry a guide-point at one side
over the bust or alto-relievo to be copied, and at the other side to
carry a corresponding cutting-tool or drill over the alabaster, ivory,
jet, or plaster of Paris to be executed.  The machine worked, as it
were, with two hands, the one feeling the pattern, the other cutting
the material into the required form. Many new alterations were
necessary for carrying out this ingenious apparatus, and Murdock was
always at hand to give his old friend and master his best assistance.
We have seen many original letters from Watt to Murdock, asking for
counsel and help.  In one of these, written in 1808, Watt says: "I have
revived an idea which, if it answers, will supersede the frame and
upright spindle of the reducing machine, but more of this when we meet.
Meanwhile it will be proper to adhere to the frame, etc., at present,
until we see how the other alterations answer."  In another he says: "I
have done a Cicero without any plaits--the different segments meeting
exactly.  The fitting the drills into the spindle by a taper of 1 in 6
will do.  They are perfectly stiff and will not unscrew easily.  Four
guide-pullies answer, but there must be a pair for the other end, and
to work with a single hand, for the returning part is always cut upon
some part or other of the frame."

These letters are written sometimes in the morning, sometimes at noon,
sometimes at night.  There was a great deal of correspondence about
"pullies," which did not seem to answer at first.  "I have made the
tablets," said Watt on one occasion, "slide more easily, and can
counterbalance any part of their weight which may be necessary; but the
first thing to try is the solidity of the machine, which cannot be done
till the pullies are mounted."  Then again: "The bust-making must be
given up until we get a more solid frame.  I have worked two days at
one and spoiled it, principally from the want of steadiness."  For
Watt, it must be remembered, was now a very old man.

He then proceeded to send Murdock the drawing of a "parallel motion for
the machine," to be executed by the workmen at Soho. The truss braces
and the crosses were to be executed of steel, according to the details
he enclosed.  "I have warmed up," he concludes, "an old idea, and can
make a machine in which the pentagraph and the leading screw will all
be contained in the beam, and the pattern and piece to be cut will
remain at rest fixed upon a lath of cast iron or stout steel."  Watt is
very particular in all his details: "I am sorry," he says in one note,
"to trouble you with so many things; but the alterations on this
spindle and socket [he annexes a drawing] may wait your convenience."
In a further note, Watt says.  "The drawing for the parallel lathe is
ready; but I have been sadly puzzled about the application of the
leading screws to the cranes in the other. I think, however, I have now
got the better of the difficulties, and made it more certain, as well
as more simple, than it was.  I have done an excellent head of John
Hunter in hard white in shorter time than usual.  I want to show it you
before I repair it."

At last Watt seems to have become satisfied: "The lathe," he says, "is
very much improved, and you seem to have given the finishing blow to
the roofed frame, which appears perfectly stiff.  I had some hours'
intense thinking upon the machine last night, and have made up my mind
on it at last.  The great difficulty was about the application of the
band, but I have settled it to be much as at present."

Watt's letters to Murdock are most particular in details, especially as
to screws, nuts, and tubes, with strengths and dimensions, always
illustrated with pen-and-ink drawings.  And yet all this was done
merely for mechanical amusement, and not for any personal pecuniary
advantage.  While Watt was making experiments as to the proper
substances to be carved and drilled, he also desired Murdock to make
similar experiments.  "The nitre," he said in one note, "seems to do
harm; the fluor composition seems the best and hardest.  Query, what
would some calcined pipe-clay do?  If you will calcine some fire-clay
by a red heat and pound it,--about a pound,--and send it to me, I shall
try to make you a mould or two in Henning's manner to cast this and the
sulphur acid iron in.  I have made a screwing tool for wood that seems
to answer; also one of a one-tenth diameter for marble, which does very
well."  In another note, Watt says: "I find my drill readily makes 2400
turns per minute, even with the large drill you sent last; if I bear
lightly, a three-quarter ferril would run about 3000, and by an engine
that might be doubled."

The materials to be drilled into medallions also required much
consideration.  "I am much obliged to you," said Watt, "for the balls,
etc., which answer as well as can be expected.  They make great
progress in cutting the crust (Ridgways) or alabaster, and also cut
marble, but the harder sorts soon blunt them.  At any rate, marble does
not do for the medallions, as its grain prevents its being cut smooth,
and its semi-transparence hurts the effect.  I think Bristol lime, or
shell lime, pressed in your manner, would have a good effect.  When you
are at leisure, I shall thank you for a few pieces, and if some of them
are made pink or flesh colour, they will look well.  I used the ball
quite perpendicular, and it cut well, as most of the cutting is
sideways.  I tried a fine whirling point, but it made little progress;
another with a chisel edge did almost as well as the balls, but did not
work so pleasantly.  I find a triangular scraping point the best, and I
think from some trials it should be quite a sharp point.  The wheel
runs easier than it did, but has still too much friction.  I wished to
have had an hour's consultation with you, but have been prevented by
sundry matters among others by that plaguey stove, which is now in your
hands."

Watt was most grateful to Murdock for his unvarying assistance. In
January, 1813, when Watt was in his seventy-seventh year, he wrote to
Murdock, asking him to accept a present of a lathe "I have not heard
from you," he says, "in reply to my letter about the lathe; and,
presuming you are not otherwise provided, I have bought it, and request
your acceptance of it.  At present, an alteration for the better is
making in the oval chuck, and a few additional chucks, rest, etc., are
making to the lathe.  When these are finished, I shall have it at
Billinger's until you return, or as you otherwise direct.  I am going
on with my drawings for a complete machine, and shall be glad to see
you here to judge of them."

The drawings were made, but the machine was never finished.
"Invention," said Watt, "goes on very slowly with me now."  Four years
later, he was still at work; but death put a stop to his
"diminishing-machine." It is a remarkable testimony to the skill and
perseverance of a man who had already accomplished so much, that it is
almost his only unfinished work.  Watt died in 1819, in the
eighty-third year of his age, to the great grief of Murdock, his oldest
and most attached friend and correspondent.

Meanwhile, the firm of Boulton and Watt continued.  The sons of the two
partners carried it on, with Murdock as their Mentor.  He was still
full of work and inventive power.  In 1802, he applied the compressed
air of the Blast Engine employed to blow the cupolas of the Soho
Foundry, for the purpose of driving the lathe in the pattern shop.  It
worked a small engine, with a 12-inch cylinder and 18-inch stroke,
connected with the lathe, the speed being regulated as required by
varying the admission of the blast.  This engine continued in use for
about thirty-five years.

In 1803 Murdock experimented on the power of high-pressure steam in
propelling shot, and contrived a steam-engine with which he made many
trials at Soho, thereby anticipating the apparatus contrived by Mr.
Perkins many years later.

In 1810 Murdock took out a patent for boring steam-pipes for water, and
cutting columns out of solid blocks of stone, by means of a cylindrical
crown saw.  The first machine was used at Soho, and afterwards at Mr.
Rennie's Works in London, and proved quite successful.  Among his other
inventions were a lift worked by compressed air, which raised and
lowered the castings from the boring-mill to the level of the foundry
and the canal bank.  He used the same kind of power to ring the bells
in his house at Sycamore Hill, and the contrivance was afterwards
adopted by Sir Walter Scott in his house at Abbotsford.

Murdock was also the inventor of the well-known cast-iron cement, so
extensively used in engine and machine work.  The manner in which he
was led to this invention affords a striking illustration of his
quickness of observation.  Finding that some iron-borings and
sal-ammoniac had got accidently mixed together in his tool-chest, and
rusted his saw-blade nearly through, he took note of the circumstance,
mixed the articles in various proportions, and at length arrived at the
famous cement, which eventually became an article of extensive
manufacture at the Soho Works.

Murdock's ingenuity was constantly at work, even upon matters which lay
entirely outside his special vocation.  The late Sir William Fairbairn
informed us that he contrived a variety of curious machines for
consolidating peat moss, finely ground and pulverised, under immense
pressure, and which, when consolidated, could be moulded into beautiful
medals, armlets, and necklaces. The material took the most brilliant
polish and had the appearance of the finest jet.

Observing that fish-skins might be used as an economical substitute for
isinglass, he went up to London on one occasion in order to explain to
brewers the best method of preparing and using them.  He occupied
handsome apartments, and, little regarding the splendour of the
drawing-room, he hung the fish-skins up against the walls.  His
landlady caught him one day when he was about to bang up a wet cod's
skin!  He was turned out at once, with all his fish.  While in town on
this errand, it occurred to him that a great deal of power was wasted
in treading the streets of London!  He conceived the idea of using the
streets and roadways as a grand tread-mill, under which the waste power
might be stored up by mechanical methods and turned to account.  He had
also an idea of storing up the power of the tides, and of running
water, in the same way.  The late Charles Babbage, F.R.S., entertained
a similar idea about using springs of Ischia or of the geysers of
Iceland as a power necessary for condensing gases, or perhaps for the
storage of electricity.[12] The latter, when perfected, will probably
be the greatest invention of the next half century.

Another of Murdock's' ingenious schemes, was his proposed method of
transmitting letters and packages through a tube exhausted by an
air-pump.  This project led to the Atmospheric Railway, the success of
which, so far as it went, was due to the practical ability of Murdock's
pupil, Samuel Clegg.  Although the atmospheric railway was eventually
abandoned, it is remarkable that the original idea was afterwards
revived and practised with success by the London Pneumatic Dispatch
Company.

In 1815, while Murdock was engaged in erecting an apparatus of his own
invention for heating the water for the baths at Leamington, a
ponderous cast-iron plate fell upon his leg above his ankle, and
severely injured him.  He remained a long while at Leamington, and when
it was thought safe to remove him, the Birmingham Canal Company kindly
placed their excursion boat at his disposal, and he was conveyed safely
homeward.  So soon as he was able, he was at work again at the Soho
factory.

Although the elder Watt had to a certain extent ignored the uses of
steam as applied to navigation, being too much occupied with developing
the powers of the pumping and rotary engine, the young partners, with
the stout aid of Murdock, took up the question. They supplied Fulton in
1807 with his first engine, by means of which the Clermont made her
first voyage along the Hudson river. They also supplied Fulton and
Livingston with the next two engines for the Car of Neptune and the
Paragon.  From that time forward, Boulton and Watt devoted themselves
to the manufacture of engines for steamboats.  Up to the year 1814,
marine engines had been all applied singly in the vessel; but in this
year Boulton and Watt first applied two condensing engines, connected
by cranks set at right angles on the shaft, to propel a steamer on the
Clyde.  Since then, nearly all steamers are fitted with two engines.
In making this important improvement, the firm were materially aided by
the mechanical genius of William Murdock, and also of Mr. Brown, then
an assistant, but afterwards a member of the firm.

In order to carry on a set of experiments with respect to the most
improved form of marine engine, Boulton and Watt purchased the
Caledonia, a Scotch boat built on the Clyde by James Wood and Co., of
Port Glasgow.  The engines and boilers were taken out. The vessel was
fitted with two side lever engines, and many successive experiments
were made with her down to August, 1817, at an expense of about
10,000L.  This led to a settled plan of construction, by which marine
engines were greatly improved. James Watt, junior, accompanied the
Caledonia to Holland and up the Rhine.  The vessel was eventually sold
to the Danish Government, and used for carrying the mails between Kiel
and Copenhagen.  It is, however, unnecessary here to venture upon the
further history of steam navigation.

In the midst of these repeated inventions and experiments, Murdock was
becoming an old man.  Yet he never ceased to take an interest in the
works at Soho.  At length his faculties experienced a gradual decay,
and he died peacefully at his house at Sycamore Hill, on the 15th of
November,1839, in his eighty-fifth year.  He was buried near the
remains of the great Boulton and Watt; and a bust by Chantrey served to
perpetuate the remembrance of his manly and intelligent countenance.


Footnotes for Chapter V.

[1] Fletcher's Political Works, London, 1737, p. 149,

[2] One of the Murdocks built the cathedral at Glasgow, as well as
others in Scotland.  The famous school of masonry at Antwerp sent out a
number of excellent architects during the 11th, 12th, and 13th
centuries.  One of these, on coming into Scotland, assumed the name of
Murdo.  He was a Frenchman, born in Paris, as we learn from the
inscription left on Melrose Abbey, and he died while building that
noble work: it is as follows:--

"John Murdo sumtyme cait was I And born in Peryse certainly, An' had in
kepyng all mason wark Sanct Andrays, the Hye Kirk o' Glasgo, Melrose
and Paisley, Jedybro and Galowy.  Pray to God and Mary baith, and sweet
Saint John, keep this Holy Kirk frae scaith."

[3] The discovery of the Black Band Ironstone by David Mushet in 1801,
and the invention of the Hot Blast by James Beaumont Neilson in 1828,
will be found related in Industrial Biography, pp. 141-161.

[4] Note to Lockhart's Life of Scott.

[5] This was stated to the present writer some years ago by William
Murdock's son; although there is no other record of the event.

[6] See Lives of Engineers (Boulton and Watt), iv. pp. 182-4. Small
edition, pp. 130-2.

[7] Mr. Pearse's letter is dated 23rd April, 1867, but has not before
been published.  He adds that "others remembered Murdock, one who was
an apprentice with him, and lived with him for some time--a Mr. Vivian,
of the foundry at Luckingmill."

[8] Murdock's house still stands in Cross Street, Redruth; those still
live who saw the gas-pipes conveying gas from the retort in the little
yard to near the ceiling of the room, just over the table; a hole for
the pipe was made in the window frame.  The old window is now replaced
by a new frame."--Life of Richard Trevithick, i. 64.

[9] Philosophical Transactions, 1808, pp. 124-132.

[10] Winsor's family evidently believed in his great powers; for I am
informed by Francis Galton, Esq., F.R.S., that there is a fantastical
monument on the right-hand side of the central avenue of the Kensal
Green Cemetery, about half way between the lodge and the church, which
bears the following inscription:--"Tomb of Frederick Albert Winsor, son
of the late Frederick Albert Winsor, originator of public Gas-lighting,
buried in the Cemetery of Pere la Chaise, Paris.  At evening time it
shall be light."--Zachariah xiv. 7.  "I am come a light into the world,
that whoever believeth in Me shall not abide in darkness."--John xii.
46.

[11] Mr. Parkes, in his well known Chemical Essays (ed. 1841, p. 157),
after referring to the successful lighting up by Murdock of the
manufactory of Messrs. Phillips and Lee at Manchester in 1805, "with
coal gas issuing from nearly a thousand burners," proceeds, "This grand
application of the new principle satisfied the public mind, not only of
the practicability, but also of the economy of the application; and as
a mark of the high opinion they entertained of his genius and
perseverance, and in order to put the question of priority of the
discovery beyond all doubt, the Council of the Royal Society in 1808
awarded to Mr. Murdock the Gold Medal founded by the late Count
Rumford."

[12] "Thus," says Mr. Charles Babbage, "in a future age, power may
become the staple commodity of the Icelanders, and of the inhabitants
of other volcanic districts; and possibly the very process by which
they will procure this article of exchange for the luxuries of happier
climates may, in some measure, tame the tremendous element which
occasionally devastates their provinces."--Economy of Manufactures.


CHAPTER VI.

FREDERICK KOENIG: INVENTOR OF THE STEAM-PRINTING MACHINE.

"The honest projector is he who, having by fair and plain principles of
sense, honesty, and ingenuity, brought any contrivance to a suitable
perfection, makes out what he pretends to, picks nobody's pocket, puts
his project in execution, and contents himself with the real produce as
the profit of his invention."--De Foe.

I published an article in 'Macmillan's Magazine' for December, 1869,
under the above title.  The materials were principally obtained from
William and Frederick Koenig, sons of the inventor.

Since then an elaborate life has been published at Stuttgart, under the
title of "Friederich Koenig und die Erfindung Der Schnellpresse, Ein
Biographisches Denkmal.  Von Theodor Goebel." The author, in sending me
a copy of the volume, refers to the article published in 'Macmillan,'
and says, "I hope you will please to accept it as a small
acknowledgment of the thanks, which every German, and especially the
sons of Koenig, in whose name I send the book as well as in mine, owe
to you for having bravely taken up the cause of the much wronged
inventor, their father--an action all the more praiseworthy, as you had
to write against the prejudices and the interests of your own
countrymen."

I believe it is now generally admitted that Koenig was entitled to the
merit of being the first person practically to apply the power of steam
to indefinitely multiplying the productions of the printing-press; and
that no one now attempts to deny him this honour.  It is true others,
who followed him, greatly improved upon his first idea; but this was
the case with Watt, Symington, Crompton, Maudslay, and many more.  The
true inventor is not merely the man who registers an idea and takes a
patent for it, or who compiles an invention by borrowing the idea of
another, improving upon or adding to his arrangements, but the man who
constructs a machine such as has never before been made, which executes
satisfactorily all the functions it was intended to perform.  And this
is what Koenig's invention did, as will be observed from the following
brief summary of his life and labours.

Frederick Koenig was born on the 17th of April, 1774, at Eisleben, in
Saxony, the birthplace also of a still more famous person, Martin
Luther.  His father was a respectable peasant proprietor, described by
Herr Goebel as Anspanner.  But this word has now gone out of use.  In
feudal times it described the farmer who was obliged to keep draught
cattle to perform service due to the landlord.  The boy received a
solid education at the Gymnasium, or public school of the town.  At a
proper age he was bound apprentice for five years to Breitkopf and
Hartel, of Leipzig, as compositor and printer; but after serving for
four and a quarter years, he was released from his engagement because
of his exceptional skill, which was an unusual occurrence.

During the later years of his apprenticeship, Koenig was permitted to
attend the classes in the University, more especially those of Ernst
Platner, a physician, philosopher, and anthropologist.  After that he
proceeded to the printing-office of his uncle, Anton F. Rose, at
Greifswald, an old seaport town on the Baltic, where he remained a few
years.  He next went to Halle as a journeyman printer,--German workmen
going about from place to place, during their wanderschaft, for the
purpose of learning their business.  After that, he returned to
Breitkopf and Hartel, at Leipzig, where he had first learnt his trade.
During this time, having saved a little money, he enrolled himself for
a year as a regular student at the University of Leipzig.

According to Koenig's own account, he first began to devise ways and
means for improving the art of printing in the year 1802, when he was
twenty-eight years old.  Printing large sheets of paper by hand was a
very slow as well as a very laborious process.  One of the things that
most occupied the young printer's mind was how to get rid of this
"horse-work," for such it was, in the business of printing.  He was
not, however, over-burdened with means, though he devised a machine
with this object.  But to make a little money, he made translations for
the publishers.  In 1803 Koenig returned to his native town of
Eisleben, where he entered into an arrangement with Frederick Riedel,
who furnished the necessary capital for carrying on the business of a
printer and bookseller.  Koenig alleges that his reason for adopting
this step was to raise sufficient money to enable him to carry out his
plans for the improvement of printing.

The business, however, did not succeed, as we find him in the following
year carrying on a printing trade at Mayence.  Having sold this
business, he removed to Suhl in Thuringia.  Here he was occupied with a
stereotyping process, suggested by what he had read about the art as
perfected in England by Earl Stanhope.  He also contrived an improved
press, provided with a moveable carriage, on which the types were
placed, with inking rollers, and a new mechanical method of taking off
the impression by flat pressure.

Koenig brought his new machine under the notice of the leading printers
in Germany, but they would not undertake to use it.  The plan seemed to
them too complicated and costly.  He tried to enlist men of capital in
his scheme, but they all turned a deaf ear to him.  He went from town
to town, but could obtain no encouragement whatever.  Besides,
industrial enterprise in Germany was then in a measure paralysed by the
impending war with France, and men of capital were naturally averse to
risk their money on what seemed a merely speculative undertaking.

Finding no sympathisers or helpers at home, Koenig next turned his
attention abroad.  England was then, as now, the refuge of inventors
who could not find the means of bringing out their schemes elsewhere;
and to England he wistfully turned his eyes. In the meantime, however,
his inventive ability having become known, an offer was made to him by
the Russian Government to proceed to St. Petersburg and organise the
State printing-office there.  The invitation was accepted, and Koenig
proceeded to St. Petersburg in the spring of 1806.  But the official
difficulties thrown in his way were very great, and so disgusted him,
that he decided to throw up his appointment, and try his fortune in
England.  He accordingly took ship for London, and arrived there in the
following November, poor in means, but rich in his great idea, then his
only property.

As Koenig himself said, when giving an account of his
invention:--"There is on the Continent no sort of encouragement for an
enterprise of this description. The system of patents, as it exists in
England, being either unknown, or not adopted in the Continental
States, there is no inducement for industrial enterprise; and
projectors are commonly obliged to offer their discoveries to some
Government, and to so licit their encouragement.  I need hardly add
that scarcely ever is an invention brought to maturity under such
circumstances. The well-known fact, that almost every invention seeks,
as it were, refuge in England, and is there brought to perfection,
though the Government does not afford any other protection to inventors
beyond what is derived from the wisdom of the laws, seems to indicate
that the Continent has yet to learn from her the best manner of
encouraging the mechanical arts.  I had my full share in the ordinary
disappointments of Continental projectors; and after having lost in
Germany and Russia upwards of two years in fruitless applications, I at
last resorted to England."[1]

After arriving in London, Koenig maintained himself with difficulty by
working at his trade, for his comparative ignorance of the English
language stood in his way.  But to work manually at the printer's
"case," was not Koenig's object in coming to England.  His idea of a
printing machine was always uppermost in his mind, and he lost no
opportunity of bringing the subject under the notice of master printers
likely to take it up.  He worked for a time in the printing office of
Richard Taylor, Shoe Lane, Fleet Street, and mentioned the matter to
him.  Taylor would not undertake the invention himself, but he
furnished Koenig with an introduction to Thomas Bensley, the well-known
printer of Bolt Court, Fleet Street.  On the 11th of March, 1807,
Bensley invited Koenig to meet him on the subject of their recent
conversation about "the discovery;" and on the 31st of the same month,
the following agreement was entered into between Koenig and Bensley:--

"Mr. Koenig, having discovered an entire new Method of Printing by
Machinery, agrees to communicate the same to Mr. Bensley under the
following conditions:--that, if Mr. Bensley shall be satisfied the
Invention will answer all the purposes Mr. Koenig has stated in the
Particulars he has delivered to Mr. Bensley, signed with his name, he
shall enter into a legal Engagement to purchase the Secret from Mr.
Koenig, or enter into such other agreement as may be deemed mutually
beneficial to both parties; or, should Mr. Bensley wish to decline
having any concern with the said Invention, then he engages not to make
any use of the Machinery, or to communicate the Secret to any person
whatsoever, until it is proved that the Invention is made use of by any
one without restriction of Patent, or other particular agreement on the
part of Mr. Koenig, under the penalty of Six Thousand Pounds.

  "(Signed) T. Bensley,
  "Friederich Konig.
  "Witness--J. Hunneman."

Koenig now proceeded to put his idea in execution.  He prepared his
plans of the new printing machine.  It seems, however, that the
progress made by him was very slow.  Indeed, three years passed before
a working model could be got ready, to show his idea in actual
practice.  In the meantime, Mr. Walter of The Times had been seen by
Bensley, and consulted on the subject of the invention.  On the 9th of
August, 1809, more than two years after the date of the above
agreement, Bensley writes to Koenig: "I made a point of calling upon
Mr. Walter yesterday, who, I am sorry to say, declines our proposition
altogether, having (as he says) so many engagements as to prevent him
entering into more."

It may be mentioned that Koenig's original plan was confined to an
improved press, in which the operation of laying the ink on the types
was to be performed by an apparatus connected with the motions of the
coffin, in such a manner as that one hand could be saved.  As little
could be gained in expedition by this plan, the idea soon suggested
itself of moving the press by machinery, or to reduce the several
operations to one rotary motion, to which the first mover might be
applied.  Whilst Koenig was in the throes of his invention, he was
joined by his friend Andrew F. Bauer, a native of Stuttgart, who
possessed considerable mechanical power, in which the inventor himself
was probably somewhat deficient.  At all events, these two together
proceeded to work out the idea, and to construct the first actual
working printing machine.

A patent was taken out, dated the 29th of March, 1810, which describes
the details of the invention.  The arrangement was somewhat similar to
that known as the platen machine; the printing being produced by two
flat plates, as in the common hand-press.  It also embodied an
ingenious arrangement for inking the type.  Instead of the
old-fashioned inking balls, which were beaten on the type by hand
labour, several cylinders covered with felt and leather were used, and
formed part of the machine itself.  Two of the cylinders revolved in
opposite directions, so as to spread the ink, which was then
transferred by two other inking cylinders alternately applied to the
"forme" by the action of spiral springs.  The movement of all the parts
of the machine were to be derived from a steam-engine, or other first
mover.

"After many obstructions and delays," says Koenig himself, in
describing the history of his invention, "the first printing machine
was completed exactly upon the plan which I have described in the
specification of my first patent.  It was set to Work in April, 1811.
The sheet (H) of the new Annual Register for 1810, 'Principal
Occurrences,' 3000 copies, was printed with it; and is, I have no
doubt, the first part of a book ever printed with a machine.  The
actual use of it, however, soon suggested new ideas, and led to the
rendering it less complicated and more powerful"[2]

Of course!  No great invention was ever completed at one effort. It
would have been strange if Koenig had been satisfied with his first
attempt.  It was only a beginning, and he naturally proceeded with the
improvement of his machine.  It took Watt more than twenty years to
elaborate his condensing steam-engine; and since his day, owing to the
perfection of self-acting tools, it has been greatly improved.  The
power of the Steamboat and the Locomotive also, as well as of all other
inventions, have been developed by the constantly succeeding
improvements of a nation of mechanical engineers.

Koenig's experiment was only a beginning, and he naturally proceeded
with the improvement of his machine.  Although the platen machine of
Koenig's has since been taken up a new, and perfected, it was not
considered by him sufficiently simple in its arrangements as to be
adapted for common use; and he had scarcely completed it, when he was
already revolving in his mind a plan of a second machine on a new
principle, with the object of ensuring greater speed, economy, and
simplicity.

By this time, other well-known London printers, Messrs. Taylor and
Woodfall, had joined Koenig and Bensley in their partnership for the
manufacture and sale of printing machines.  The idea which now occurred
to Koenig was, to employ a cylinder instead of a flat Platen machine,
for taking the impressions off the type, and to place the sheet round
the cylinder, thereby making it, as it were, part of the periphery.  As
early as the year 1790, one William Nicholson had taken out a patent
for a machine for printing "on paper, linen, cotton, woollen, and other
articles," by means of "blocks, forms, types, plates, and originals,"
which were to be "firmly imposed upon a cylindrical surface in the same
manner as common letter is imposed upon a flat stone."[3]  From the
mention of "colouring cylinder," and "paper-hangings, floor-cloths,
cottons, linens, woollens, leather, skin, and every other flexible
material," mentioned in the specification, it would appear as if
Nicholson's invention were adapted for calico-printing and
paper-hangings, as well as for the printing of books.  But it was never
used for any of these purposes.  It contained merely the register of an
idea, and that was all.  It was left for Adam Parkinson, of Manchester,
to invent and make practical use of the cylinder printing machine for
calico in the year 1805, and this was still further advanced by the
invention of James Thompson, of Clitheroe, in 1813; while it was left
for Frederick Koenig to invent and carry into practical operation the
cylinder printing press for newspapers.

After some promising experiments, the plans for a new machine on the
cylindrical principle were proceeded with.  Koenig admitted throughout
the great benefit he derived from the assistance of his friend Bauer.
"By the judgment and precision," he said, "with which he executed my
plans, he greatly contributed to my success."  A patent was taken out
on October 30th, 1811; and the new machine was completed in December,
1812.  The first sheets ever printed with an entirely cylindrical
press, were sheets G and X of Clarkson's 'Life of Penn.' The papers of
the Protestant Union were also printed with it in February and March,
1813.  Mr. Koenig, in his account of the invention, says that "sheet M
of Acton's 'Hortus Kewensis,' vol. v., will show the progress of
improvement in the use of the invention.  Altogether, there are about
160,000 sheets now in the hands of the public, printed with this
machine, which, with the aid of two hands, takes off 800 impressions in
the hour"[4]

Koenig took out a further patent on July 23rd, 1813, and a fourth (the
last) on the 14th of March, 1814.  The contrivance of these various
arrangements cost the inventor many anxious days and nights of study
and labour.  But he saw before him only the end he wished to compass,
and thought but little of himself and his toils.  It may be mentioned
that the principal feature of the invention was the printing cylinder
in the centre of the machine, by which the impression was taken from
the types, instead of by flat plates as in the first arrangement.  The
forme was fixed in a cast-iron plate which was carried to and fro on a
table, being received at either end by strong spiral springs.  A double
machine, on the same principle,--the forme alternately passing under
and giving an impression at one of two cylinders at either end of the
press,--was also included in the patent of 1811.

How diligently Koenig continued to elaborate the details of his
invention will be obvious from the two last patents which he took out,
in 1813 and 1814.  In the first he introduced an important improvement
in the inking arrangement, and a contrivance for holding and carrying
on the sheet, keeping it close to the printing cylinder by means of
endless tapes; while in the second, he added the following new
expedients: a feeder, consisting of an endless web,--an improved
arrangement of the endless tapes by inner as well as outer
friskets,--an improvement of the register (that is, one page falling
exactly on the back of another), by which greater accuracy of
impression was also secured; and finally, an arrangement by which the
sheet was thrown out of the machine, printed by the revolving cylinder
on both sides.

The partners in Koenig's Patents had established a manufactory in
Whitecross Street for the production of the new machines.  The workmen
employed were sworn to secrecy.  They entered into an agreement by
which they were liable to forfeit 100L. if they communicated to others
the secret of the machines, either by drawings or description, or if
they told by whom or for whom they were constructed.  This was to avoid
the hostility of the pressmen, who, having heard of the new invention,
were up in arms against it, as likely to deprive them of their
employment.  And yet, as stated by Johnson in his 'Typographia,' the
manual labour of the men who worked at the hand press, was so severe
and exhausting, "that the stoutest constitutions fell a sacrifice to it
in a few years." The number of sheets that could be thrown off was also
extremely limited.

With the improved press, perfected by Earl Stanhope, about 250
impressions could be taken, or 125 sheets printed on both sides in an
hour.  Although a greater number was produced in newspaper printing
offices by excessive labour, yet it was necessary to have duplicate
presses, and to set up duplicate forms of type, to carry on such extra
work; and still the production of copies was quite inadequate to
satisfy the rapidly increasing demand for newspapers.  The time was
therefore evidently ripe for the adoption of such a machine as that of
Koenig.  Attempts had been made by many inventors, but every one of
them had failed. Printers generally regarded the steam-press as
altogether chimerical.

Such was the condition of affairs when Koenig finished his improved
printing machine in the manufactory in Whitecross Street.  The partners
in the invention were now in great hopes. When the machine had been got
ready for work, the proprietors of several of the leading London
newspapers were invited to witness its performances.  Amongst them were
Mr. Perry of the Morning chronicle, and Mr. Walter of The Times.  Mr.
Perry would have nothing to do with the machine; he would not even go
to see it, for he regarded it as a gimcrack.[5]  On the contrary, Mr.
Walter, though he had five years before declined to enter into any
arrangement with Bensley, now that he heard the machine was finished,
and at work, decided to go and inspect it.  It was thoroughly
characteristic of the business spirit of the man.  He had been very
anxious to apply increased mechanical power to the printing of his
newspaper.  He had consulted Isambard Brunel--one of the cleverest
inventors of the day--on the subject; but Brunel, after studying the
subject, and labouring over a variety of plans, finally gave it up.  He
had next tried Thomas Martyn, an ingenious young compositor, who had a
scheme for a self-acting machine for working the printing press.  But,
although Mr. Walter supplied him with the necessary funds, his scheme
never came to anything.  Now, therefore, was the chance for Koenig!

After carefully examining the machine at work, Mr. Walter was at once
satisfied as to the great value of the invention.  He saw it turning
out the impressions with unusual speed and great regularity.  This was
the very machine of which he had been in search.  But it turned out the
impressions printed on one side only.  Koenig, however, having briefly
explained the more rapid action of a double machine on the same
principle for the printing of newspapers, Mr. Walter, after a few
minutes' consideration, and before leaving the premises, ordered two
double machines for the printing of The Times newspaper.  Here, at
last, was the opportunity for a triumphant issue out of Koenig's
difficulties.

The construction of the first newspaper machine was still, however, a
work of great difficulty and labour.  It must be remembered that
nothing of the kind had yet been made by any other inventor.  The
single-cylinder machine, which Mr. Walter had seen at work, was
intended for bookwork only.  Now Koenig had to construct a
double-cylinder machine for printing newspapers, in which many of the
arrangements must necessarily be entirely new.  With the assistance of
his leading mechanic, Bauer, aided by the valuable suggestions of Mr.
Walter himself, Koenig at length completed his plans, and proceeded
with the erection of the working machine.  The several parts were
prepared at the workshop in Whitecross Street, and taken from thence,
in as secret a way as possible, to the premises in Printing House
Square, adjoining The Times office, where they were fitted together and
erected into a working machine.  Nearly two years elapsed before the
press was ready for work.  Great as was the secrecy with which the
operations were conducted, the pressmen of The Times office obtained
some inkling of what was going on, and they vowed vengeance to the
foreign inventor who threatened their craft with destruction.  There
was, however, always this consolation: every attempt that had
heretofore been made to print newspapers in any other way than by
manual labour had proved an utter failure!

At length the day arrived when the first newspaper steam-press was
ready for use.  The pressmen were in a state of great excitement, for
they knew by rumour that the machine of which they had so long been
apprehensive was fast approaching completion.  One night they were told
to wait in the press-room, as important news was expected from abroad.
At six o'clock in the morning of the 29th November, 1814, Mr. Walter,
who had been watching the working of the machine all through the night,
suddenly appeared among the pressmen, and announced that "The Times is
already printed by steam!"  Knowing that the pressmen had vowed
vengeance against the inventor and his invention, and that they had
threatened "destruction to him and his traps," he informed them that if
they attempted violence, there was a force ready to suppress it; but
that if they were peaceable, their wages should be continued to every
one of them until they could obtain similar employment.  This proved
satisfactory so far, and he proceeded to distribute several copies of
the newspaper amongst them--the first newspaper printed by steam! That
paper contained the following memorable announcement:--

"Our Journal of this day presents to the Public the practical result of
the greatest improvement connected with printing since the discovery of
the art itself.  The reader of this paragraph now holds in his hand one
of the many thousand impressions of The Times newspaper which were
taken off last night by a mechanical apparatus.  A system of machinery
almost organic has been devised and arranged, which, while it relieves
the human frame of its most laborious' efforts in printing, far exceeds
all human powers in rapidity and dispatch.  That the magnitude of the
invention may be justly appreciated by its effects, we shall inform the
public, that after the letters are placed by the compositors, and
enclosed in what is called the forme, little more remains for man to do
than to attend upon and to watch this unconscious agent in its
operations.  The machine is then merely supplied with paper: itself
places the forme, inks it, adjusts the paper to the forme newly inked,
stamps the sheet, and gives it forth to the hands of the attendant, at
the same time withdrawing the forme for a fresh coat of ink, which
itself again distributes, to meet the ensuing sheet now advancing for
impression; and the whole of these complicated acts is performed with
such a velocity and simultaneousness of movement, that no less than
1100 sheets are impressed in one hour.

"That the completion of an invention of this kind, not the effect of
chance, but the result of mechanical combinations methodically arranged
in the mind of the artist, should be attended with many obstructions
and much delay, may be readily imagined.  Our share in this event has,
indeed, only been the application of the discovery, under an agreement
with the patentees, to our own particular business; yet few can
conceive--even with this limited interest--the various disappointments
and deep anxiety to which we have for a long course of time been
subjected.

"Of the person who made this discovery we have but little to add. Sir
Christopher Wren's noblest monument is to be found in the building
which he erected; so is the best tribute of praise which we are capable
of offering to the inventor of the printing machine, comprised in the
preceding description, which we have feebly sketched, of the powers and
utility of his invention.  It must suffice to say further, that he is a
Saxon by birth; that his name is Koenig; and that the invention has
been executed under the direction of his friend and countryman, Bauer."

The machine continued to work steadily and satisfactorily,
notwithstanding the doubters, the unbelievers, and the threateners of
vengeance.  The leading article of The Times for December 3rd, 1814,
contains the following statement:--

"The machine of which we announced the discovery and our adoption a few
days ago, has been whirling on its course ever since, with improving
order, regularity, and even speed.  The length of the debates on
Thursday, the day when Parliament was adjourned, will have been
observed; on such an occasion the operation of composing and printing
the last page must commence among all the journals at the same moment;
and starting from that moment, we, with our infinitely superior
circulation, were enabled to throw off our whole impression many hours
before the other respectable rival prints.  The accuracy and clearness
of the impression will likewise excite attention.

"We shall make no reflections upon those by whom this wonderful
discovery has been opposed,--the doubters and unbelievers,--however
uncharitable they may have been to us; were it not that the efforts of
genius are always impeded by drivellers of this description, and that
we owe it to such men as Mr. Koenig and his Friend, and all future
promulgators of beneficial inventions, to warn them that they will have
to contend with everything that selfishness and conceited ignorance can
devise or say; and if we cannot clear their way before them, we would
at least give them notice to prepare a panoply against its dirt and
filth.

"There is another class of men from whom we receive dark and anonymous
threats of vengeance if we persevere in the use of this machine.  These
are the Pressmen.  They well know, at least should well know, that such
menace is thrown away upon us.  There is nothing that we will not do to
assist and serve those whom we have discharged.  They themselves can
seethe greater rapidity and precision with which the paper is printed.
What right have they to make us print it slower and worse for their
supposed benefit? A little reflection, indeed, would show them that it
is neither in their power nor in ours to stop a discovery now made, if
it is beneficial to mankind; or to force it down if it is useless. They
had better, therefore, acquiesce in a result which they cannot alter;
more especially as there will still be employment enough for the old
race of pressmen, before the new method obtains general use, and no new
ones need be brought up to the business; but we caution them seriously
against involving themselves and their families in ruin, by becoming
amenable to the laws of their country.  It has always been matter of
great satisfaction to us to reflect, that we encountered and crushed
one conspiracy; and we should be sorry to find our work half done.

"It is proper to undeceive the world in one particular; that is, as to
the number of men discharged.  We in fact employ only eight fewer
workmen than formerly; whereas more than three times that number have
been employed for a year and a half in building the machine."

On the 8th of December following, Mr. Koenig addressed an advertisement
"To the Public" in the columns of The Times, giving an account of the
origin and progress of his invention.  We have already cited several
passages from the statement.  After referring to his two last patents,
he says: "The machines now printing The Times and Mail are upon the
same principle; but they have been contrived for the particular purpose
of a newspaper of extensive circulation, where expedition is the great
object.

"The public are undoubtedly aware, that never, perhaps, was a new
invention put to so severe a trial as the present one, by being used on
its first public introduction for the printing of newspapers, and will,
I trust, be indulgent with respect to the many defects in the
performance, though none of them are inherent in the principle of the
machine; and we hope, that in less than two months, the whole will be
corrected by greater adroitness in the management of it, so far at
least as the hurry of newspaper printing will at all admit.

"It will appear from the foregoing narrative, that it was incorrectly
stated in several newspapers, that I had sold my interest to two other
foreigners; my partners in this enterprise being at present two
Englishmen, Mr. Bensley and Mr. Taylor; and it is gratifying to my
feelings to avail myself of this opportunity to thank those gentlemen
publicly for the confidence which they have reposed in me, for the aid
of their practical skill, and for the persevering support which they
have afforded me in long and very expensive experiments; thus risking
their fortunes in the prosecution of my invention.

"The first introduction of the invention was considered by some as a
difficult and even hazardous step.  The Proprietor of The Times having
made that his task, the public are aware that it is in good hands."

One would think that Koenig would now feel himself in smooth water, and
receive a share of the good fortune which he had so laboriously
prepared for others.  Nothing of the kind!  His merits were disputed;
his rights were denied; his patents were infringed; and he never
received any solid advantages for his invention, until he left the
country and took refuge in Germany. It is true, he remained for a few
years longer, in charge of the manufactory in Whitecross Street, but
they were years to him of trouble and sorrow.

In 1816, Koenig designed and superintended the construction of a single
cylinder registering machine for book-printing.  This was supplied to
Bensley and Son, and turned out 1000 sheets, printed on both sides, in
the hour.  Blumenbach's 'Physiology' was the first entire book printed
by steam, by this new machine.  It was afterwards employed, in 1818, in
working off the Literary Gazette.  A machine of the same kind was
supplied to Mr. Richard Taylor for the purpose of printing the
'Philosophical Magazine,' and books generally.  This was afterwards
altered to a double machine, and employed for printing the Weekly
Dispatch.

But what about Koenig's patents?  They proved of little use to him.
They only proclaimed his methods, and enabled other ingenious mechanics
to borrow his adaptations.  Now that he had succeeded in making
machines that would work, the way was clear for everybody else to
follow his footsteps.  It had taken him more than six years to invent
and construct a successful steam printing press; but any clever
mechanic, by merely studying his specification, and examining his
machine at work, might arrive at the same results in less than a week.

The patents did not protect him.  New specifications, embodying some
modification or alteration in detail, were lodged by other inventors
and new patents taken out.  New printing machines were constructed in
defiance of his supposed legal rights; and he found himself stripped of
the reward that he had been labouring for during so many long and
toilsome years.  He could not go to law, and increase his own vexation
and loss.  He might get into Chancery easy enough; but when would he
get out of it, and in what condition?

It must also be added, that Koenig was unfortunate in his partner
Bensley.  While the inventor was taking steps to push the sale of his
book-printing machines among the London printers, Bensley, who was
himself a book-printer, was hindering him in every way in his
negotiations.  Koenig was of opinion that Bensley wished to retain the
exclusive advantage which the possession of his registering book
machine gave him over the other printers, by enabling him to print more
quickly and correctly than they could, and thus give him an advantage
over them in his printing contracts.

When Koenig, in despair at his position, consulted counsel as to the
infringement of his patent, he was told that he might institute
proceedings with the best prospect of success; but to this end a
perfect agreement by the partners was essential. When, however, Koenig
asked Bensley to concur with him in taking proceedings in defence of
the patent right, the latter positively refused to do so.  Indeed,
Koenig was under the impression that his partner had even entered into
an arrangement with the infringers of the patent to share with them the
proceeds of their piracy.

Under these circumstances, it appeared to Koenig that only two
alternatives remained for him to adopt.  One was to commence an
expensive, and it might be a protracted, suit in Chancery, in defence
of his patent rights, with possibly his partner, Bensley, against him;
and the other, to abandon his invention in England without further
struggle, and settle abroad.  He chose the latter alternative, and left
England finally in August, 1817.

Mr. Richard Taylor, the other partner in the patent, was an honourable
man; but he could not control the proceedings of Bensley.  In a memoir
published by him in the 'Philosophical Magazine,' "On the Invention and
First Introduction of Mr. Koenig's Printing Machine," in which he
honestly attributes to him the sole merit of the invention, he says,
"Mr. Koenig left England, suddenly, in disgust at the treacherous
conduct of Bensley, always shabby and overreaching, and whom he found
to be laying a scheme for defrauding his partners in the patents of all
the advantages to arise from them.  Bensley, however, while he
destroyed the prospects of his partners, outwitted himself, and
grasping at all, lost all, becoming bankrupt in fortune as well as in
character."[6]

Koenig was badly used throughout.  His merits as an inventor were
denied.  On the 3rd of January, 1818, after he had left England,
Bensley published a letter in the Literary Gazette, in which he speaks
of the printing machine as his own, without mentioning a word of
Koenig.  The 'British Encyclopaedia,' in describing the inventors of
the printing machine, omitted the name of Koenig altogether.  The
'Mechanics Magazine,' for September, 1847, attributed the invention to
the Proprietors of The Times, though Mr. Walter himself had said that
his share in the event had been "only the application of the
discovery;" and the late Mr. Bennet Woodcroft, usually a fair man, in
his introductory chapter to 'Patents for Inventions in Printing,'
attributes the merit to William Nicholson's patent (No. 1748), which,
he said, "produced an entire revolution in the mechanism of the art."
In other publications, the claims of Bacon and Donkin were put forward,
while those of the real inventor were ignored.  The memoir of Koenig by
Mr. Richard Taylor, in the 'Philosophical Magazine,' was honest and
satisfactory; and should have set the question at rest.

It may further be mentioned that William Nicholson,--who was a patent
agent, and a great taker out of patents, both in his own name and in
the names of others,--was the person employed by Koenig as his agent to
take the requisite steps for registering his invention.  When Koenig
consulted him on the subject, Nicholson observed that "seventeen years
before he had taken out a patent for machine printing, but he had
abandoned it, thinking that it wouldn't do; and had never taken it up
again."  Indeed, the two machines were on different principles.  Nor
did Nicholson himself ever make any claim to priority of invention,
when the success of Koenig's machine was publicly proclaimed by Mr.
Walter of The Times some seven years later.

When Koenig, now settled abroad, heard of the attempts made in England
to deny his merits as an inventor, he merely observed to his friend
Bauer, "It is really too bad that these people, who have already robbed
me of my invention, should now try to rob me of my reputation."  Had he
made any reply to the charges against him, it might have been comprised
in a very few words:  "When I arrived in England, no steam printing
machine had ever before been seen; when I left it, the only printing
machines in actual work were those which I had constructed."  But
Koenig never took the trouble to defend the originality of his
invention in England, now that he had finally abandoned the field to
others.

There can be no question as to the great improvements introduced in the
printing machine by Mr. Applegath and Mr. Cowper; by Messrs. Hoe and
Sons, of New York; and still later by the present Mr. Walter of The
Times, which have brought the art of machine printing to an
extraordinary degree of perfection and speed.  But the original merits
of an invention are not to be determined by a comparison of the first
machine of the kind ever made with the last, after some sixty years'
experience and skill have been applied in bringing it to perfection.
Were the first condensing engine made at Soho--now to be seen at the
Museum in South Kensington--in like manner to be compared with the last
improved pumping-engine made yesterday, even the great James Watt might
be made out to have been a very poor contriver.  It would be much
fairer to compare Koenig's steam-printing machine with the hand-press
newspaper printing machine which it superseded. Though there were steam
engines before Watt, and steamboats before Fulton, and steam
locomotives before Stephenson, there were no steam printing presses
before Koenig with which to compare them, Koenig's was undoubtedly the
first, and stood unequalled and alone.

The rest of Koenig's life, after he retired to Germany, was spent in
industry, if not in peace and quietness.  He could not fail to be cast
down by the utter failure of his English partnership, and the loss of
the fruits of his ingenious labours.  But instead of brooding over his
troubles, he determined to break away from them, and begin the world
anew.  He was only forty-three when he left England, and he might yet
be able to establish himself prosperously in life.  He had his own head
and hands to help him.

Though England was virtually closed against him, the whole continent of
Europe was open to him, and presented a wide field for the sale of his
printing machines.

While residing in England, Koenig had received many communications from
influential printers in Germany.  Johann Spencer and George Decker
wrote to him in 1815, asking for particulars about his invention; but
finding his machine too expensive,[7] the latter commissioned Koenig to
send him a Stanhope printing press--the first ever introduced into
Germany--the price of which was 95L.  Koenig did this service for his
friend, for although he stood by the superior merits of his own
invention, he was sufficiently liberal to recognise the merits of the
inventions of others.  Now that he was about to settle in Germany, he
was able to supply his friends and patrons on the spot.

The question arose, where was he to settle?  He made enquiries about
sites along the Rhine, the Neckar, and the Main.  At last he was
attracted by a specially interesting spot at Oberzell on the Main, near
Wurzburg.  It was an old disused convent of the Praemonstratensian
monks.  The place was conveniently situated for business, being nearly
in the centre of Germany.  The Bavarian Government, desirous of giving
encouragement to so useful a genius, granted Koenig the use of the
secularised monastery on easy terms; and there accordingly he began his
operations in the course of the following year.  Bauer soon joined him,
with an order from Mr. Walter for an improved Times machine; and the
two men entered into a partnership which lasted for life.

The partners had at first great difficulties to encounter in getting
their establishment to work.  Oberzell was a rural village, containing
only common labourers, from whom they had to select their workmen.
Every person taken into the concern had to be trained and educated to
mechanical work by the partners themselves.  With indescribable
patience they taught these labourers the use of the hammer, the file,
the turning-lathe, and other tools, which the greater number of them
had never before seen, and of whose uses they were entirely ignorant.
The machinery of the workshop was got together with equal difficulty
piece by piece, some of the parts from a great distance,--the
mechanical arts being then at a very low ebb in Germany, which was
still suffering from the effects of the long continental war.

At length the workshop was fitted up, the old barn of the monastery
being converted into an iron foundry.

Orders for printing machines were gradually obtained.  The first came
from Brockhaus, of Leipzig.  By the end of the fourth year two other
single-cylinder machines were completed and sent to Berlin, for use in
the State printing office.  By the end of the eighth year seven
double-cylinder steam presses had been manufactured for the largest
newspaper printers in Germany.  The recognised excellence of Koenig and
Bauer's book-printing machines--their perfect register, and the quality
of the work they turned out--secured for them an increasing demand, and
by the year 1829 the firm had manufactured fifty-one machines for the
leading book printers throughout Germany.  The Oberzell manufactory was
now in full work, and gave regular employment to about 120 men.

A period of considerable depression followed.  As was the case in
England, the introduction of the printing machine in Germany excited
considerable hostility among the pressmen.  In some of the principal
towns they entered into combinations to destroy them, and several
printing machines were broken by violence and irretrievably injured.
But progress could not be stopped; the printing machine had been fairly
born, and must eventually do its work for mankind.  These combinations,
however, had an effect for a time.  They deterred other printers from
giving orders for the machines; and Koenig and Bauer were under the
necessity of suspending their manufacture to a considerable extent.  To
keep their men employed, the partners proceeded to fit up a paper
manufactory, Mr. Cotta, of Stuttgart, joining them in the adventure;
and a mill was fitted up, embodying all the latest improvements in
paper-making.

Koenig, however, did not live to enjoy the fruits or all his study,
labour, toil, and anxiety; for, while this enterprise was still in
progress, and before the machine trade had revived, he was taken ill,
and confined to bed.  He became sleepless; his nerves were unstrung;
and no wonder.  Brain disease carried him off on the 17th of January,
1833; and this good, ingenious, and admirable inventor was removed from
all further care and trouble.

He died at the early age of fifty-eight, respected and beloved by all
who knew him.

His partner Bauer survived to continue the business for twenty years
longer.  It was during this later period that the Oberzell manufactory
enjoyed its greatest prosperity.  The prejudices of the workmen
gradually subsided when they found that machine printing, instead of
abridging employment, as they feared it would do, enormously increased
it; and orders accordingly flowed in from Berlin, Vienna, and all the
leading towns and cities of Germany, Austria, Denmark, Russia, and
Sweden.  The six hundredth machine, turned out in 1847, was capable of
printing 6000 impressions in the hour.  In March, 1865, the thousandth
machine was completed at Oberzell, on the occasion of the celebration
of the fifty years' jubilee of the invention of the steam press by
Koenig.

The sons of Koenig carried on the business; and in the biography by
Goebel, it is stated that the manufactory of Oberzell has now turned
out no fewer than 3000 printing machines.  The greater number have been
supplied to Germany; but 660 were sent to Russia, 61 to Asia, 12 to
England, and 11 to America.  The rest were despatched to Italy,
Switzerland, Sweden, Spain, Holland, and other countries.

It remains to be said that Koenig and Bauer, united in life, were not
divided by death.  Bauer died on February 27, 1860, and the remains of
the partners now lie side by side in the little cemetery at Oberzell,
close to the scene of their labours and the valuable establishment
which they founded.


Footnotes for Chapter VI.

[1] Koenig's letter in The Times, 8th December, 1814

[2] Koenig's letter in The Times, 8th December, 1814.

[3] Date of Patent, 29th April, 1790, No. 1748,

[4] Koenig's letter in The Times, 8th December, 1814.

[5] Mr. Richard Taylor, one of the partners in the patent, says, "Mr.
Perry declined, alleging that he did not consider a newspaper worth so
many years' purchase as would equal the cost of the machine."

[6] Mr. Richard Taylor, F.S.A., memoir in 'Philosophical Magazine' for
October 1847, p. 300.

[7] The price of a single cylinder non-registering machine was
advertised at 900L.; of a double ditto, 1400L.; and of a cylinder
registering machine, 2000L.; added to which was 250L., 350L., and 500L.
per annum for each of these machines so long as the patent lasted, or
an agreed sum to be paid down at once.


CHAPTER VII.

THE WALTERS OF THE TIMES: INVENTION OF THE WALTER PRESS.

"Intellect and industry are never incompatible.  There is  more wisdom,
and will be more benefit, in combining them than scholars like to
believe, or than the common world imagine.  Life has time enough for
both, and its happiness will be increased by the union."--SHARON TURNER.

"I have beheld with most respect the man Who knew himself, and knew the
ways before him, And from among them chose considerately, With a clear
foresight, not a blindfold courage; And, having chosen, with a
steadfast mind Pursued his purpose." HENRY TAYLOR--Philip van Artevelde.

The late John Walter, who adopted Koenig's steam printing press in
printing The Times, was virtually the inventor of the modern newspaper.
The first John Walter, his father, learnt the art of printing in the
office of Dodsley, the proprietor of the 'Annual Register.' He
afterwards pursued the profession of an underwriter, but his fortunes
were literally shipwrecked by the capture of a fleet of merchantmen by
a French squadron. Compelled by this loss to return to his trade, he
succeeded in obtaining the publication of 'Lloyd's List,' as well as
the printing of the Board of Customs.  He also established himself as a
publisher and bookseller at No. 8, Charing Cross.  But his principal
achievement was in founding The Times newspaper.

The Daily Universal Register was started on the 1st of January, 1785,
and was described in the heading as "printed logographically."  The
type had still to be composed, letter by letter, each placed alongside
of its predecessor by human fingers.  Mr. Walter's invention consisted
in using stereotyped words and parts of words instead of separate metal
letters, by which a certain saving of time and labour was effected.
The name of the 'Register' did not suit, there being many other
publications bearing a similar title.  Accordingly, it was re-named The
Times, and the first number was issued from Printing House Square on
the 1st of January, 1788.

The Times was at first a very meagre publication.  It was not much
bigger than a number of the old 'Penny Magazine,' containing a single
short leader on some current topic, without any pretensions to
excellence; some driblets of news spread out in large type; half a
column of foreign intelligence, with a column of facetious paragraphs
under the heading of "The Cuckoo;" while the rest of each number
consisted of advertisements. Notwithstanding the comparative innocence
of the contents of the early numbers of the paper, certain passages
which appeared in it on two occasions subjected the publisher to
imprisonment in Newgate.  The extent of the offence, on one occasion,
consisted in the publication of a short paragraph intimating that their
Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York had "so
demeaned themselves as to incur the just disapprobation of his
Majesty!"  For such slight offences were printers sent to gaol in those
days.

Although the first Mr. Walter was a man of considerable business
ability, his exertions were probably too much divided amongst a variety
of pursuits to enable him to devote that exclusive attention to The
Times which was necessary to ensure its success.

He possibly regarded it, as other publishers of newspapers then did,
mainly as a means of obtaining a profitable business in job-printing.
Hence, in the elder Walter's hands, the paper was not only unprofitable
in itself, but its maintenance became a source of gradually increasing
expenditure; and the proprietor seriously contemplated its
discontinuance.

At this juncture, John Walter, junior, who had been taken into the
business as a partner, entreated his father to entrust him with the
sole conduct of the paper, and to give it "one more trial."  This was
at the beginning of 1803.  The new editor and conductor was then only
twenty-seven years of age.  He had been trained to the manual work of a
printer "at case," and passed through nearly every department in the
office, literary and mechanical.  But in the first place, he had
received a very liberal education, first at Merchant Taylors' School,
and afterwards at Trinity College, Oxford, where he pursued his
classical studies with much success.  He was thus a man of
well-cultured mind; he had been thoroughly disciplined to work; he was,
moreover, a man of tact and energy, full of expedients, and possessed
by a passion for business.  His father, urged by the young man's
entreaties, at length consented, although not without misgivings, to
resign into his hands the entire future control of The Times.

Young Walter proceeded forthwith to remodel the establishment, and to
introduce improvements into every department, as far as the scanty
capital at his command would admit.  Before he assumed the direction,
The Times did not seek to guide opinion or to exercise political
influence.  It was a scanty newspaper--nothing more, Any political
matters referred to were usually introduced in "Letters to the Editor,"
in the form in which Junius's Letters first appeared in the Public
Advertiser.  The comments on political affairs by the Editor were
meagre and brief, and confined to a mere statement of supposed facts.

Mr. Walter, very much to the dismay of his father, struck out an
entirely new course.  He boldly stated his views on public affairs,
bringing his strong and original judgment to bear upon the political
and social topics of the day.  He carefully watched and closely studied
public opinion, and discussed general questions in all their bearings.
He thus invented the modern Leading Article.  The adoption of an
independent line of politics necessarily led him to canvass freely, and
occasionally to condemn, the measures of the Government.  Thus, he had
only been about a year in office as editor, when the Sidmouth
Administration was succeeded by that of Mr. Pitt, under whom Lord
Melville undertook the unfortunate Catamaran expedition.  His
Lordship's malpractices in the Navy Department had also been brought to
light by the Commissioners of Naval Inquiry.  On both these topics Mr.
Walter spoke out freely in terms of reprobation; and the result was,
that the printing for the Customs and the Government advertisements
were at once removed from The Times office.

Two years later Mr. Pitt died, and an Administration succeeded which
contained a portion of the political chiefs whom the editor had
formerly supported on his undertaking the management of the paper.  He
was invited by one of them to state the injustice which had been done
to him by the loss of the Customs printing, and a memorial to the
Treasury was submitted for his signature, with a view to its recovery.
But believing that the reparation of the injury in this manner was
likely to be considered as a favour, entitling those who granted it to
a certain degree of influence over the politics of the journal, Walter
refused to sign it, or to have any concern in presenting the memorial.
He did more; he wrote to those from whom the restoration of the
employment was expected to come, disavowing all connection with the
proceeding.  The matter then dropped, and the Customs printing was
never restored to the office.

This course was so unprecedented, and, as his father thought, was so
very wrong-headed, that young Walter had for some time considerable
difficulty in holding his ground and maintaining the independent
position he had assumed.  But with great tenacity of purpose he held on
his course undismayed.  He was a man who looked far ahead,--not so much
taking into account the results at the end of each day or of each year,
but how the plan he had laid down for conducting the paper would work
out in the long run. And events proved that the high-minded course he
had pursued with so much firmness of purpose was the wisest course
after all.

Another feature in the management which showed clear-sightedness and
business acuteness, was the pains which the Editor took to ensure
greater celerity of information and dispatch in printing. The expense
which he incurred in carrying out these objects excited the serious
displeasure of his father, who regarded them as acts of juvenile folly
and extravagance.  Another circumstance strongly roused the old man's
wrath.  It appears that in those days the insertion of theatrical puffs
formed a considerable source of newspaper income; and yet young Walter
determined at once to abolish them.  It is not a little remarkable that
these earliest acts of Mr. Walter--which so clearly marked his
enterprise and high-mindedness--should have been made the subject of
painful comments in his father's will.

Notwithstanding this serious opposition from within, the power and
influence of the paper visibly and rapidly grew.  The new Editor
concentrated in the columns of his paper a range of information such as
had never before been attempted, or indeed thought possible.  His
vigilant eye was directed to every detail of his business.  He greatly
improved the reporting of public meetings, the money market, and other
intelligence,--aiming at greater fulness and accuracy.  In the
department of criticism his labours were unwearied.  He sought to
elevate the character of the paper, and rendered it more dignified by
insisting that it should be impartial.  He thus conferred the greatest
public service upon literature, the drama, and the fine arts, by
protecting them against the evil influences of venal panegyric on the
one hand, and of prejudiced hostility on the other.

But the most remarkable feature of The Times that which emphatically
commended it to public support and ensured its commercial success--was
its department of foreign intelligence. At the time that Walter
undertook the management of the journal, Europe was a vast theatre of
war; and in the conduct of commercial affairs--not to speak of
political movements--it was of the most vital importance that early
information should be obtained of affairs on the Continent.  The Editor
resolved to become himself the purveyor of foreign intelligence, and at
great expense he despatched his agents in all directions, even in the
track of armies; while others were employed, under various disguises
and by means of sundry pretexts, in many parts of the Continent.  These
agents collected information, and despatched it to London, often at
considerable risks, for publication in The Times, where it usually
appeared long in advance of the government despatches.

The late Mr. Pryme, in his 'Autobiographic Recollections,' mentions a
visit which he paid to Mr. Walter at his seat at Bearwood.  "He
described to me," says Mr. Pryme, "the cause of the large extension in
the circulation of The Times.  He was the first to establish a foreign
correspondent.  This was Henry Crabb Robinson, at a salary of 300L. a
year....  Mr. Walter also established local reporters, instead of
copying from the country papers.  His father doubted the wisdom of such
a large expenditure, but the son prophesied a gradual and certain
success, which has actually been realised."

Mr. Robinson has described in his Diary the manner in which he became
connected with the foreign correspondence.  "In January, 1807," he
says, "I received, through my friend J.D. Collier, a proposal from Mr.
Walter that I should take up my residence at Altona, and become The
Times correspondent.  I was to receive from the editor of the
'Hamburger Correspondenten' all the public documents at his disposal,
and was to have the benefit also of a mass of information, of which the
restraints of the German Press did not permit him to avail himself.
The honorarium I was to receive was ample with my habits of life.  I
gladly accepted the offer, and never repented having done so.  My
acquaintance with Mr. Walter ripened into friendship, and lasted as
long as he lived."[1]

Mr. Robinson was forced to leave Germany by the Battle of Friedland and
the Treaty of Tilsit, which resulted in the naval coalition against
England.  Returning to London, he became foreign editor of The Times
until the following year, when he proceeded to Spain as foreign
correspondent.  Mr. Walter had also an agent in the track of the army
in the unfortunate Walcheren expedition; and The Times announced the
capitulation of Flushing forty-eight hours before the news had arrived
by any other channel.  By this prompt method of communicating public
intelligence, the practice, which had previously existed, of
systematically retarding the publication of foreign news by officials
at the General Post Office, who made gain by selling them to the
Lombard Street brokers, was effectually extinguished.

This circumstance, as well as the independent course which Mr. Walter
adopted in the discussion of foreign politics, explains in some measure
the opposition which he had to encounter in the transmission of his
despatches.  As early as the year 1805, when he had come into collision
with the Government and lost the Customs printing, The Times despatches
were regularly stopped at the outports, whilst those for the
Ministerial journals were allowed to proceed.  This might have crushed
a weaker man, but it did not crush Walter.  Of course he expostulated.
He was informed at the Home Secretary's office that he might be
permitted to receive his foreign papers as a favour.  But as this
implied the expectation of a favour from him in return, the proposal
was rejected; and, determined not to be baffled, he employed special
couriers, at great cost, for the purpose of obtaining the earliest
transmission of foreign intelligence.

These important qualities--enterprise, energy, business tact, and
public spirit--sufficiently account for his remarkable success. To
these, however, must be added another of no small
importance--discernment and knowledge of character.  Though himself the
head and front of his enterprise, it was necessary that he should
secure the services and co-operation of men of first-rate ability; and
in the selection of such men his judgment was almost unerring.  By his
discernment and munificence, he collected round him some of the ablest
writers of the age.  These were frequently revealed to him in the
communications of correspondents--the author of the letters signed
"Vetus" being thus selected to write in the leading columns of the
Paper.  But Walter himself was the soul of The Times.  It was he who
gave the tone to its articles, directed its influence, and
superintended its entire conduct with unremitting vigilance.

Even in conducting the mechanical arrangements of the paper--a business
of no small difficulty--he had often occasion to exercise promptness
and boldness of decision in cases of emergency.  Printers in those days
were a rather refractory class of work men, and not unfrequently took
advantage of their position to impose hard terms on their employers,
especially in the daily press, where everything must be promptly done
within a very limited time.  Thus on one occasion, in 1810, the
pressmen made a sudden demand upon the proprietor for an increase of
wages, and insisted upon a uniform rate being paid to all hands,
whether good or bad.  Walter was at first disposed to make concessions
to the men; but having been privately informed that a combination was
already entered into by the compositors, as well as by the pressmen, to
leave his employment suddenly, under circumstances that would have
stopped the publication of the paper, and inflicted on him the most
serious injury, he determined to run all risks, rather than submit to
what now appeared to him in the light of an extortion.

The strike took place on a Saturday morning, when suddenly, and without
notice, all the hands turned out.  Mr. Walter had only a few hours'
notice of it, but he had already resolved upon his course.  He
collected apprentices from half a dozen different quarters, and a few
inferior workmen, who were glad to obtain employment on any terms.  He
himself stript to his shirt-sleeves, and went to work with the rest;
and for the next six-and-thirty hours he was incessantly employed at
case and at press.  On the Monday morning, the conspirators, who had
assembled to triumph over his ruin, to their inexpressible amazement
saw The Times issue from the publishing office at the usual hour,
affording a memorable example of what one man's resolute energy may
accomplish in a moment of difficulty.

The journal continued to appear with regularity, though the printers
employed at the office lived in a state of daily peril. The
conspirators, finding themselves baffled, resolved upon trying another
game.  They contrived to have two of the men employed by Walter as
compositors apprehended as deserters from the Royal Navy.  The men were
taken before the magistrate; but the charge was only sustained by the
testimony of clumsy, perjured witnesses, and fell to the ground.  The
turn-outs next proceeded to assault the new hands, when Mr. Walter
resolved to throw around them the protection of the law.  By the advice
of counsel, he had twenty-one of the conspirators apprehended and
tried, and nineteen of them were found guilty and condemned to various
periods of imprisonment.  From that moment combination was at an end in
Printing House Square.

Mr. Walter's greatest achievement was his successful application of
steam power to newspaper printing.  Although he had greatly improved
the mechanical arrangements after he took command of the paper, the
rate at which the copies could be printed off remained almost
stationary.  It took a very long time indeed to throw off, by the
hand-labour of pressmen, the three or four thousand copies which then
constituted the ordinary circulation of The Times.  On the occasion of
any event of great public interest being reported in the paper, it was
found almost impossible to meet the demand for copies.  Only about 300
copies could be printed in the hour, with one man to ink the types and
another to work the press, while the labour was very severe.  Thus it
took a long time to get out the daily impression, and very often the
evening papers were out before The Times had half supplied the demand.

Mr. Walter could not brook the tedium of this irksome and laborious
process.  To increase the number of impressions, he resorted to various
expedients.  The type was set up in duplicate, and even in triplicate;
several Stanhope presses were kept constantly at work; and still the
insatiable demands of the newsmen on certain occasions could not be
met.  Thus the question was early forced upon his consideration,
whether he could not devise machinery for the purpose of expediting the
production of newspapers.  Instead of 300 impressions an hour, he
wanted from 1500 to 2000.  Although such a speed as this seemed quite
as chimerical as propelling a ship through the water against wind and
tide at fifteen miles an hour, or running a locomotive on a railway at
fifty, yet Mr. Walter was impressed with the conviction that a much
more rapid printing of newspapers was feasible than by the slow
hand-labour process; and he endeavoured to induce several ingenious
mechanical contrivers to take up and work out his idea.

The principle of producing impressions by means of a cylinder, and of
inking the types by means of a roller, was not new.  We have seen, in
the preceding memoir, that as early as 1790 William Nicholson had
patented such a method, but his scheme had never been brought into
practical operation.  Mr. Walter endeavoured to enlist Marc Isambard
Brunel--one of the cleverest inventors of the day--in his proposed
method of rapid printing by machinery; but after labouring over a
variety of plans for a considerable time, Brunel finally gave up the
printing machine, unable to make anything of it.  Mr. Walter next tried
Thomas Martyn, an ingenious young compositor, who had a scheme for a
self-acting machine for working the printing press.  He was supplied
with the necessary funds to enable him to prosecute his idea; but Mr.
Walter's father was opposed to the scheme, and when the funds became
exhausted, this scheme also fell to the ground.

As years passed on, and the circulation of the paper increased, the
necessity for some more expeditious method of printing became still
more urgent.  Although Mr. Walter had declined to enter into an
arrangement with Bensley in 1809, before Koenig had completed his
invention of printing by cylinders, it was different five years later,
when Koenig's printing machine was actually at work.  In the preceding
memoir, the circumstances connected with the adoption of the invention
by Mr. Walter are fully related; as well as the announcement made in
The Times on the 29th of November, 1814--the day on which the first
newspaper printed by steam was given to the world.

But Koenig's printing machine was but the beginning of a great new
branch of industry.  After he had left this country in disgust, it
remained for others to perfect the invention; although the ingenious
German was entitled to the greatest credit for having made the first
satisfactory beginning.  Great inventions are not brought forth at a
heat.  They are begun by one man, improved by another, and perfected by
a whole host of mechanical inventors.  Numerous patents were taken out
for the mechanical improvement of printing.  Donkin and Bacon contrived
a machine in 1813, in which the types were placed on a revolving prism.
One of them was made for the University of Cambridge, but it was found
too complicated; the inking was defective; and the project was
abandoned.

In 1816, Mr. Cowper obtained a patent (No.3974) entitled, "A Method of
Printing Paper for Paper Hangings, and Other Purposes."

The principal feature of this invention consisted in the curving or
bending of stereotype plates for the purpose of being printed in that
form.  A number of machines for printing in two colours, in exact
register, was made for the Bank of England, and four millions of One
Pound notes were printed before the Bank Directors determined to
abolish their further issue.  The regular mode of producing stereotype
plates, from plaster of Paris moulds, took so much time, that they
could not then be used for newspaper printing.

Two years later, in 1818, Mr. Cowper invented and patented (No. 4194)
his great improvements in printing.  It may be mentioned that he was
then himself a printer, in partnership with Mr. Applegath, his
brother-in-law.  His invention consisted in the perfect distribution of
the ink, by giving end motion to the rollers, so as to get a
distribution crossways, as well as lengthways.  This principle is at
the very foundation of good printing, and has been adopted in every
machine since made.  The very first experiment proved that the
principle was right.  Mr. Cowper was asked by Mr. Walter to alter
Koenig's machine at The Times office, so as to obtain good
distribution.  He adopted two of Nicholson's single cylinders and flat
formes of type.  Two "drums" were placed betwixt the cylinders to
ensure accuracy in the register,--over and under which the sheet was
conveyed in it s progress from one cylinder to the other,--the sheet
being at all times firmly held between two tapes, which bound it to the
cylinders and drums.  This is commonly called, in the trade, a
"perfecting machine;" that is, it printed the paper on both sides
simultaneously, and is still much used for "book-work," whilst single
cylinder machines are often used for provincial newspapers.

After this, Mr. Cowper designed the four cylinder machine for The
Times,--by means of which from 4000 to 5000 sheets could be printed
from one forme in the hour.  In 1823, Mr. Applegath invented an
improvement in the inking apparatus, by placing the distributing
rollers at an angle across the distributing table, instead of forcing
them endways by other means.

Mr. Walter continued to devote the same unremitting attention to his
business as before.  He looked into all the details, was familiar with
every department, and, on an emergency, was willing to lend a hand in
any work requiring more than ordinary despatch.

Thus, it is related of him that, in the spring of 1833, shortly after
his return to Parliament as Member for Berkshire, he was at The Times
office one day, when an express arrived from Paris, bringing the speech
of the King of the French on the opening of the Chambers.  The express
arrived at 10 A.M., after the day's impression of the paper had been
published, and the editors and compositors had left the office.  It was
important that the speech should be published at once; and Mr. Walter
immediately set to work upon it.  He first translated the document;
then, assisted by one compositor, he took his place at the type-case,
and set it up.  To the amazement of one of the staff, who dropped in
about noon, he "found Mr. Walter, M.P. for Berks, working in his
shirt-sleeves!"  The speech was set and printed, and the second edition
was in the City by one o'clock.  Had he not "turned to" as he did, the
whole expense of the express service would have been lost.  And it is
probable that there was not another man in the whole establishment who
could have performed the double work--intellectual and physical--which
he that day executed with his own head and hands.

Such an incident curiously illustrates his eminent success in life.  It
was simply the result of persevering diligence, which shrank from no
effort and neglected no detail; as well as of prudence allied to
boldness, but certainly not "of chance;" and, above all, of highminded
integrity and unimpeachable honesty.  It is perhaps unnecessary to add
more as to the merits of Mr. Walter as a man of enterprise in business,
or as a public man and a Member of Parliament.  The great work of his
life was the development of his journal, the history of which forms the
best monument to his merits and his powers.

The progressive improvement of steam printing machinery was not
affected by Mr. Walter's death, which occurred in 1847.  He had given
it an impulse which it never lost.  In 1846 Mr. Applegath patented
certain important improvements in the steam press.  The general
disposition of his new machine was that of a vertical cylinder 200
inches in circumference, holding on it the type and distributing
surfaces, and surrounded alternately by inking rollers and pressing
cylinders.  Mr. Applegath estimated in his specification that in his
new vertical system the machine, with eight cylinders, would print
about 10,000 sheets per hour.  The new printing press came into use in
1848, and completely justified the anticipations of its projector.

Applegath's machine, though successfully employed at The Times office,
did not come into general use.  It was, to a large extent, superseded
by the invention of Richard M. Hoe, of New York.  Hoe's process
consisted in placing the types upon a horizontal cylinder, against
which the sheets were pressed by exterior and smaller cylinders.  The
types were arranged in segments of a circle, each segment forming a
frame that could be fixed on the cylinder.  These printing machines
were made with from two to ten subsidiary cylinders.  The first presses
sent by Messrs. Hoe & Co. to this country were for Lloyd's Weekly
Newspaper, and were of the six-cylinder size.  These were followed by
two ten-cylinder machines, ordered by the present Mr. Walter, for The
Times.  Other English newspaper proprietors--both in London and the
provinces--were supplied with the machines, as many as thirty-five
having been imported from America between 1856 and 1862.  It may be
mentioned that the two ten-cylinder Hoes made for The Times were driven
at the rate of thirty-two revolutions per minute, which gives a
printing rate of 19,200 per hour, or about 16,000 including stoppages.

Much of the ingenuity exercised both in the Applegath and Hoe Machines
was directed to the "chase," which had to hold securely upon its curved
face the mass of movable type required to form a page.  And now the
enterprise of the proprietor of The Times again came to the front.  The
change effected in the art of newspaper-printing, by the process of
stereotypes, is scarcely inferior to that by which the late Mr. Walter
applied steam-power to the printing press, and certainly equal to that
by which the rotary press superseded the reciprocatory action of the
flat machine.

Stereotyping has a curious history.  Many attempts were made to obtain
solid printing-surfaces by transfer from similar surfaces, composed, in
the first place, of movable types.  The first who really succeeded was
one Ged, an Edinburgh goldsmith, who, after a series of difficult
experiments, arrived at a knowledge of the art of stereotyping.  The
first method employed was to pour liquid stucco, of the consistency of
cream, over the types; and this, when solid, gave a perfect mould.
Into this the molten metal was poured, and a plate was produced,
accurately resembling the page of type.  As long ago as 1730, Ged
obtained a privilege from the University of Cambridge for printing
Bibles and Prayer-books after this method.  But the workmen were dead
against it, as they thought it would destroy their trade.  The
compositors and the pressmen purposely battered the letters in the
absence of their employers.  In consequence of this interference Ged
was ruined, and died in poverty.

The art had, however, been born, and could not be kept down.  It was
revived in France, in Germany, and in America.  Fifty years after the
discovery of Ged, Tilloch and Foulis, of Glasgow, patented a similar
invention, without knowing anything of what Ged had done; and after
great labour and many experiments, they produced plates, the
impressions from which could  not be distinguished from those taken
from the types from which they were cast.  Some years afterwards, Lord
Stanhope, to whom the art of printing is much indebted, greatly
improved the art of stereotyping, though it was still quite
inapplicable to newspaper printing.  The merit of this latter invention
is due to the enterprise of the present proprietor of The Times.

Mr. Walter began his experiments, aided by an ingenious Italian founder
named Dellagana, early in 1856.  It was ascertained that when
papier-mache matrices were rapidly dried and placed in a mould,
separate columns might be cast in them with stereotype metal, type
high, planed flat, and finished with sufficient speed to get up the
duplicate of a forme of four pages fitted for printing.  Steps were
taken to adapt these type-high columns to the Applegath Presses, then
worked with polygonal chases.  When the Hoe machines were introduced,
instead of dealing with the separate columns, the papier-mache matrix
was taken from the whole page at one operation, by roller-presses
constructed for the purpose.  The impression taken off in this manner
is as perfect as if it had been made in the finest wax.  The matrix is
rapidly dried on heating surfaces, and then accurately adjusted in a
casting machine curved to the exact circumference of the main drum of
the printing press, and fitted with a terra-cotta top to secure a
casting of uniform thickness.  On pouring stereotype metal into this
mould, a curved plate was obtained, which, after undergoing a certain
amount of trimming at two machines, could be taken to press and set to
work within twenty-five minutes from the time at which the process
began.

