was prepared by Hanh Vu, capriccio_vn@yahoo.com.  A web page for 
Charlotte M Yonge may be found at http://www.menorot.com/cmyonge.htm.


STRAY PEARLS

MEMOIRS OF MARGARET DE RIBAUMONT

VISCOUNTESS OF BELLAISE


PREFACE


No one can be more aware than the author that the construction of
this tale is defective.  The state of French society, and the strange
scenes of the Fronde, beguiled me into a tale which has become rather
a family record than a novel.

Formerly the Muse of the historical romance was an independent and
arbitrary personage, who could compress time, resuscitate the dead,
give mighty deeds to imaginary heroes, exchange substitutes for
popular martyrs on the scaffold, and make the most stubborn facts
subservient to her purpose.  Indeed, her most favoured son boldly
asserted her right to bend time and place to her purpose, and to make
the interest and effectiveness of her work the paramount object.  But
critics have lashed her out of these erratic ways, and she is now
become the meek hand maid of Clio, creeping obediently in the track
of the greater Muse, and never venturing on more than colouring and
working up the grand outlines that her mistress has left undefined.
Thus, in the present tale, though it would have been far more
convenient not to have spread the story over such a length of time,
and to have made the catastrophe depend upon the heroes and heroines,
instead of keeping them mere ineffective spectators, or only engaged
in imaginary adventures for which a precedent can be found, it has
been necessary to stretch out their narrative, so as to be at least
consistent with the real history, at the entire sacrifice of the
plot.  And it may be feared that thus the story may partake of the
confusion that really reigned over the tangled thread of events.
There is no portion of history better illustrated by memoirs of the
actors therein than is the Fronde; but, perhaps, for that very reason
none so confusing.

Perhaps it may be an assistance to the reader to lay out the bare
historical outline like a map, showing to what incidents the memoirs
of the Sisters of Ribaumont have to conform themselves.

When Henry IV. succeeded in obtaining the throne of France, he found
the feudal nobility depressed by the long civil war, and his
exchequer exhausted.  He and his minister Sully returned to the
policy of Louis XI., by which the nobles were to be kept down and
prevented from threatening the royal power.  This was seldom done by
violence, but by giving them employment in the Army and Court,
attaching them to the person of the King, and giving them offices
with pensions attached to them.

The whole cost of these pensions and all the other expenses of
Government fell on the townspeople and peasantry, since the clergy
and the nobles to all generations were exempt from taxation.  The
trade and all the resources of the country were taking such a spring
of recovery since the country had been at peace, and the persecution
of the Huguenots had ceased, that at first the taxation provoked few
murmurs.  The resources of the Crown were further augmented by
permitting almost all magistrates and persons who held public offices
to secure the succession to their sons on the payment of a tariff
called LA PAULETTE, from the magistrate who invented it.

In the next reign, however, an effort was made to secure greater
equality of burthens.  On the meeting of the States-General--the only
popular assembly possessed by France--Louis XIII., however, after
hearing the complaints, and promising to consider them, shut the
doors against the deputies, made no further answer, and dismissed
them to their houses without the slightest redress.  The Assembly was
never to meet again till the day of reckoning for all, a hundred and
seventy years later.

Under the mighty hand of Cardinal Richelieu the nobles were still
more effectually crushed, and the great course of foreign war begun,
which lasted, with short intervals, for a century.  The great man
died, and so did his feeble master; and his policy, both at home and
abroad, was inherited by his pupil Giulio Mazarini, while the regency
for the child, Louis XIV., devolved on his mother, Anne of Austria--a
pious and well-meaning, but proud and ignorant, Spanish Princess--who
pinned her faith upon Mazarin with helpless and exclusive devotion,
believing him the only pilot who could steer her vessel through
troublous waters.

But what France had ill brooked from the high-handed son of her
ancient nobility was intolerable from a low-born Italian, of graceful
but insinuating manners.  Moreover, the war increased the burthens of
the country, and, in the minority of the King, a stand was made at
last.

The last semblance of popular institutions existed in the Parliaments
of this was the old feudal Council of the Counts of Paris, consisting
of the temporal and spiritual peers of the original county, who had
the right to advise with their chief, and to try the causes
concerning themselves.  The immediate vassals of the King had a right
to sit there, and were called Paris De France, in distinction from
the other nobles who only had seats in the Parliament in whose
province their lands might lie.  To these St. Louis, in his anxiety
to repress lawlessness, had added a certain number of trained lawyers
and magistrates; and these were the working members of these
Parliaments, which were in general merely courts of justice for civil
and criminal causes.  The nobles only attended on occasions of
unusual interest.  Moreover, a law or edict of the King became valid
on being registered by a Parliament.  It was a moot question whether
the Parliament had the power to baffle the King by refusing to
register an edict, and Henry IV. had avoided a refusal from the
Parliament of Paris, by getting his edict of toleration for the
Huguenots registered at Nantes.

The peculiarly oppressive house-tax, with four more imposts proposed
in 1648, gave the Parliament of Paris the opportunity of trying to
make an effectual resistance by refusing the registration.  They were
backed by the municipal government of the city at the Hotel de Ville,
and encouraged by the Coadjutor of the infirm old Archbishop of
Paris, namely, his nephew, Paul de Gondi, titular Bishop of Corinth
in partibus infidelium, a younger son of the Duke of Retz, an Italian
family introduced by Catherince de Medici.  There seemed to be a hope
that the nobility, angered at their own systematic depression, and by
Mazarin's ascendency, might make common cause with the Parliament and
establish some effectual check to the advances of the Crown.  This
was the origin of the party called the Fronde, because the speakers
launched their speeches at one another as boys fling stones from a
sling (fronde) in the streets.

The Queen-Regent was enraged through all her despotic Spanish
haughtiness at such resistance.  She tried to step in by the arrest
of the foremost members of the Opposition, but failed, and only
provoked violent tumults.  The young Prince of Conde, coming home
from Germany flushed with victory, hated Mazarin extremely, but his
pride as a Prince of the Blood, and his private animosities impelled
him to take up the cause of the Queen.  She conveyed her son secretly
from Paris, and the city was in a state of siege for several months.
However, the execution of Charles I. in England alarmed the Queen on
the one hand, and the Parliament on the other as to the consequences
of a rebellion, provisions began to run short, and a vague hollow
peace was made in the March of 1649.

Conde now became intolerably overbearing, insulted every one, and so
much offended the Queen and Mazarin that they caused him, his
brother, and the Duke of Bouillon, to be arrested and imprisoned at
Vincennes.  His wife, though a cruelly-neglected woman whom he had
never loved, did her utmost to deliver him, repaired to Bordeaux, and
gained over the Parliament there, so that she held out four months
against the Queen.  Turenne, brother to Bouillon, and as great a
general as Conde, obtained the aid of Spaniards, and the Coadjutor
prevailed on the King's uncle, Gaston, Duke of Orleans, to represent
that the Queen must give way, release the Princes, part with Mazarin,
and even promise to convoke the States-General.  Anne still, however,
corresponded with the Cardinal, and was directed by him in
everything.  Distrust and dissension soon broke out, Conde and the
Coadjutor quarrelled violently, and the royal promises made to both
Princes and Parliament were eluded by the King, at fourteen, being
declared to have attained his majority, and thus that all engagements
made in his name became void.

Conde went of to Guienne and raised an army; Mazirin returned to the
Queen; Paris shut its gates and declared Mazarin an outlaw.  The
Coadjutor (now become Cardinal de Retz) vainly tried to stir up the
Duke of Orleans to take a manly part and mediate between the parties;
but being much afraid of his own appanage, the city of Orleans, being
occupied by either army, Gaston sent his daughter to take the charge
of it, as she effectually did--but she was far from neutrality, being
deluded by a hope that Conde would divorce his poor faithful wife to
marry her.  Turenne, on his brother's release, had made his peace
with the Court, and commanded the royal army.  War and havoc raged
outside Paris; within the partisans of the Princes stirred the
populace to endeavour to intimidate the Parliament and municipality
into taking their part.  Their chief leader throughout was the Duke
of Beaufort, a younger son of the Duke of Vendome, the child of
Gabrille d'Estrees.  He inherited his grandmother's beauty and his
grandfather's charm of manner; he was the darling of the populace of
Paris, and led them, in an aimless sort of way, whether there was
mischief to be done; and the violence and tumult of this latter
Fronde was far worse than those of the first.

XII. THE lull reflexive verbs. XIII. JOY reflexive verbs (_continuación_).
- _Hacer + _infinitivo_. XIV. SEAL possessive adjectives and pronouns.
- Uses of _tener_ and _haber_. - The irregular verb _traer_. XV. THE
VIEWS OF THE UNCLE The passive participles irregular. - The perfect
guide. XVI. THE COZ The irregular gerund. - The conjunctions.
XVII.

The Chills adverbs. - Indefinite pronouns and adjectives. XVIII.
DUCKS pass the subjunctive after _como si_. - The irregular verb
_dar_. XIX. LA CHICA NIÑA pronouns additions. - _Hacia_ And _hasta_.
XX. LOS TOROS demonstrative adjectives and pronouns. - The relative
pronouns. XXI. SARITA Verbs Prepositions before calling an infinitive.
- _Mismo_. XXII.

The _a_ ALMIRANTE staff. - _Saber And conocer_. XXIII. EL CANARIO
Kill Uses infinitive. - _Dejar, Leave and partir_. XXIV. SUSTO
verbs ending in - _uír_. - Uses of _haber_ in several idioms,
from _haber have que_. XXV. THE GYPSIES _Pedir and preguntar_. XXVI.
THE CROWN OF PARSLEY _Ser just be right, right and bien_. XXVII.
Use of THE MAGI _ser_ and _estar_. - The irregular verb _poner_.
XXVIII. ALBA uses of the subjunctive in adjectival or adverbial
clauses. - The irregular verb _caer_. XXIX.

CARNIVAL disclaimers. - The verb _erguir_. XXX. DEATH The
subjunctive in substantive terms. - The irregular verb _poder_.
XXXI. NOSTALGIA Using infinitive after verbs of perception. - The
irregular verb _oír_. XXXII. Melancholy conditional sentences. - The
irregular verb _ver_.

Vocabulary NOTES [Illustration: Juan Ramón Jiménez] _Platero
Juan Ramón Jiménez and yo_ ... Platero, the borriquito, Juan Ramon,
the poet. Going to read the story of these two likeable characters,
both lived and written by the only one who knew writing. Al presentároslos
I can not say anything new because of borriquito only know him as
the poet tells us, but Juan Ramón can say many things that he has
not put himself or well read. The truth is that if I were to speak
honestly, we mean not a little too happy about borriquito
whose life and death adventures Juan Ramón has painted with so
much love.

His art touches me and intrigued me as they did not ever really
borriquitos.

And if you care for the Spanish guys enjoy it because when we
befriend some ass, donkey or colt of the many in our land there is
and who carry loads on their backs and so are the relief and
consolation of the poor!

Borriquitos of Spain, with your tiny reandáis our short andáis and
dusty roads and burned bringing water from the source, taking clothes
to the river, broom in an oven, the food to the reapers, and the
young men of the ages; submissive beast of old, children and women
who stand haunches, hunger and abuse, on the traveling singing or
sleeping muleteers Gypsies and peasants: borriquitos from Spain,
happy and tragic, well-deserved pay you the good and evil you need
to you do with a bit of love and mercy.

But I do not think we have complained borriquitos of Spain if they
know that the greatest work of art that the spirit has produced
Spanish, one of its kind to Dapple Sancho has immortality won no
less than the same Sancho, Don Quixote and Rocinante.

Now again, three years later, the Spanish poet who knows more of
tenderness, purity and elegance sentimental, has spent her delicate
hand on the back of the poor furry slave beast, and the caress of
his hand and his gaze has emerged Platero to immortal life.

I shall be glad thus to draw closer the bonds between
ourselves and the English kindred, whom I love so heartily, though I
may never hope to see them in this world, far less the dear old home
where I grew up.

For, as perhaps you have forgotten, I am an English woman by birth,
having first seen the light at Walwyn House, in Dorsetshire.  One
brother had preceded me--my dear Eustace--and another brother,
Berenger, and my little sister, Annora, followed me.

Our family had property both in England and in Picardy, and it was
while attending to some business connected with the French estate
that my father had fallen in love with a beautiful young widow,
Madame la Baronne de Solivet (nee Cheverny), and had brought her
home, in spite of the opposition of her relations.  I cannot tell
whether she were warmly welcomed at Walwyn Court by any one but the
dear beautiful grandmother, a Frenchwoman herself, who was delighted
again to hear her mother tongue, although she had suffered much among
the Huguenots in her youth, when her husband was left for dead on the
S. Barthelemi.

He, my grandfather, had long been dead, but I perfectly remember her.
She used to give me a sugar-cake when I said 'Bon soir, bonne maman,'
with the right accent, and no one made sugar-cake like hers. She
always wore at her girdle a string of little yellow shells, which she
desired to have buried with her.  We children were never weary of
hearing how they had been the only traces of her or of her daughter
that her husband could find, when he came to the ruined city.

I could fill this book with her stories, but I must not linger over
them; and indeed I heard no more after I was eight years old.  Until
that time my brother and I were left under her charge in the country,
while my father and mother were at court.  My mother was one of the
Ladies of the Bedchamber of Queen Henrietta Maria, who had been
enchanted to find in her a countrywoman, and of the same faith.  I
was likewise bred up in their Church, my mother having obtained the
consent of my father, during a dangerous illness that followed my
birth, but the other children were all brought up as Protestants.
Indeed, no difference was made between Eustace and me when we were at
Walwyn.  Our grandmother taught us both alike to make the sign of the
cross, and likewise to say our prayers and the catechism; and oh! we
loved her very much.

Eustace once gave two black eyes to our rude cousin, Harry
Merricourt, for laughing when he said no one was as beautiful as the
Grandmother, and though I am an old woman myself, I think he was
right.  It is one of those poets always loved an audience as large
as the number of educated and selected spirits. Not this mean that
Juan Ramón Jiménez and mannerisms is difficult on the contrary,
no one simple and pure.

Meanwhile poet now grown as the artifice of the fund and how, Juan
Ramón Jiménez, as modern as the most, is distinguished by simplicity
and sincerity. To flaunt wealth metrics that characterize the poetry
of the Spanish revolution in the last thirty years, Juan Ramón
Jiménez, though capable of the greatest technical refinements,
responds to the use of new and modern meters simpler traditional
and popular, and nobody as he has managed to revive assonant verses
of the old romances. As Bécquer Góngora and has managed to show
how far the most genuine and traditional Spanish poetry are
susceptible of eternal renewal and how they can find expression
in the sensitivity of all time, and the uniqueness of each individual
poet.

At a time when Spanish poetry has suffered the most complex foreign
influences, mainly French, who are too clear and dominant in other
poets Juan Ramón Jiménez, despite having absorbed all deeply, and
he is always shown as Spanish as always. Spanish - and Spanish
in the south, the melancholic and riente Andalusia, Castilla is a
smoother, more refined, more elegant and mannerisms - the poetry of
Juan Ramón Jiménez: native Andalusian is sadness, joy painful, his
carelessness and neglect, his haughty reconcentramiento, sober gesture
of expression and abundance of its supreme elegance and distinction
unmistakable and inexplicable. And this aristocratic poet who does not
speak any more than the most intimate part of his soul, creating a
poem that contains in its pure form, all personal choice and what
constitutes the charm of Andalusia, where he saw the sun, poetry full
of nuances of color and delicate aromas and intense, and flower
gardens, Rumorosa sources in the mystery of the starry nights,
dreaming of girls and pale, sleepy villages, landscapes mourners,
light and sound of loneliness, of sweet and sad recollection interior.

_Platero and yo_, although written in prose, is a book of pure poetry.
It is written for men and for children. Maybe not all men are able
to understand, because many of them grow to reach the blind
eyes of the soul through which light enters the poem. But all children
have their eyes wide open and see very well what men can not see.
At least for the boys from Spain _Platero and has no darkness or yo_
secrets. Hopefully you American boys and girls, who studied with
enthusiasm the Spanish language, you can also collect in these pages
brief and vibrant charm that something mysterious and distant land
from where came the first white men - a white and brown as atezado
the Juan Ramon - who arrived at the wonderful coasts of America.

But, as my dear brother Eustace led me into the outer
hall, close behind my father and mother, I heard a strange whistle,
and, looking up, I saw over the balustrade of the gallery a droll
monkey face looking out of a mass of black curls, and making
significant grimaces at me.

I knew well enough that it was no other than the Prince of Wales. He
was terribly ugly and fond of teasing, but in a good-natured way,
always leaving off when he saw he was giving real pain, and I liked
him much better than his brother, the Duke of York, who was proud and
sullen.  Yet one could always trust the Duke, and that could not be
said for the Prince.

By the time we had slowly advanced up the grand staircase into the
banqueting-hall, and had made our reverences to the king and queen--
ah, how stately and beautiful they looked together!--the Prince had
stepped in some other way, and stood beside me.

'Well, Meg,' he said, in an undertone--'I beg pardon, Mrs. Margaret--
decked out in all her splendour, a virgin for the sacrifice!'

'What sacrifice, sir?'  I asked, startled.

'Eh!' he said.  'You do not know that le futur is arrived!'

'She knows nothing, your Highness,' said Eustace.

'What, oh, what is there to know?'  I implored the Prince and my
brother in turn to inform me, for I saw that there was some earnest
in the Prince's jests, and I knew that the queen and my mother were
looking out for a good match for me in France.

'Let me show him to you,' presently whispered the Prince, who had
been called off by his father to receive the civilities of an
ambassador.  Then he pointed out a little wizened dried-up old man,
who was hobbling up to kiss Her Majesty's hand, and whose courtly
smile seemed to me to sit most unnaturally on his wrinkled
countenance.  I nearly screamed.  I was forced to bite my lips to
keep back my tears, and I wished myself child enough to be able to
scream and run away, when my mother presently beckoned me forward.  I
hardly had strength to curtsey when I was actually presented to the
old man.  Nothing but terror prevented my sinking on the floor, and I
heard as through falling waters something about M. le Marquis de
Nidemerle and Mrs. Margaret Ribmont, for so we were called in
England.

By and by I found that I was dancing, I scarcely knew how or with
whom, and I durst not look up the whole time, nor did my partner
address a single word to me, though I knew he was near me; I was only
too thankful that he did not try to address me.

To my joy, when we had made our final reverences, he never came near
me again all the evening.  I found myself among some young maidens
who were friends of mine, and in our eager talk together I began to
forget what had passed, or to hope it was only some teasing pastime
of the Prince and Eustace.

When we were seated in the coach on the way to our house my father
began to laugh and marvel which had been the most shy, the gallant or
the lady, telling my mother she need never reproach the English with
bashfulness again after this French specimen.

'How will he and little Meg ever survive to-morrow's meeting!' he
said.

Then I saw it was too true, and cried out in despair to beg them to
let me stay at home, and not send me from them; but my mother bade me
not be a silly wench.  I had always known that I was to be married in
France and the queen and my half-brother, M. de Solivet, had found an
excellent parti for me.  I was not to embarrass matters by any folly,
but I must do her credit, and not make her regret that she had not
sent me to a convent to be educated.

Then I clung to my father.  I could hold him tight in the dark, and
the flambeaux only cast in a fitful flickering light.  'Oh, sir,'
said I, 'you cannot wish to part with your little Meg!'

'You are your mother's child, Meg,' he said sadly.  'I gave you up to
her to dispose of at her will.'

'And you will thank me one of these days for your secure home,' said
my mother.  'If these rogues continue disaffected, who knows what
they may leave us in England!'

'At least we should be together,' I cried, and I remember how I
fondled my father's hand in the dark, and how he returned it.  We
should never have thought of such a thing in the light; he would have
been ashamed to allow such an impertinence, and I to attempt it.

Perhaps it emboldened me to say timidly: 'If he were not so old---'

But my mother declared that she could not believe her ears that a
child of hers should venture on making such objections--so
unmaidenly, so undutiful to a parti selected by the queen and
approved by her parents.

As the coach stopped at our own door I perceived that certain strange
noises that I had heard proceeded from Eustace laughing and chuckling
to himself all the way.  I must say I thought it very unkind and
cruel when we had always loved each other so well.  I would hardly
bid him good-night, but ran up to the room I shared with nurse and
Annora, and wept bitterly through half the night, little comforted by
nurse's assurance that old men were wont to let their wives have
their way far more easily than young ones did.


CHAPTER II.

A LITTLE MUTUAL AVERSION.


I had cried half the night, and when in the morning little Nan wanted
to hear about my ball, I only answered that I hated the thought of
it.  I was going to be married to a hideous old man, and be carried
to France, and should never see any of them again.  I made Nan cry
too, and we both came down to breakfast with such mournful faces that
my mother chid me sharply for making myself such a fright.

Then she took me away to the still-room, and set me for an hour to
make orange cakes, while she gave orders for the great dinner that we
were to give that day, I knew only too well for whose sake; and if I
had only known which orange cake was for my betrothed, would not it
have been a bitter one!  By and by my mother carried me off to be
dressed.  She never trusted the tiring-woman to put the finishing
touches with those clumsy English fingers; and, besides, she bathed
my swollen eyelids with essences, and made me rub my pale cheeks with
a scarlet ribbon, speaking to me so sharply that I should not have
dared to shed another tear.

When I was ready, all in white, and she, most stately in blue velvet
and gold, I followed her down the stairs to the grand parlour, where
stood my father, with my brothers and one or two persons in black,
who I found were a notary and his clerk, and there was a table before
them with papers, parchment, a standish, and pens.  I believe if it
had been a block, and I had had to lay my head on it, like poor Lady
Jane Grey, I could not have been much more frightened.

There was a sound of wheels, and presently the gentleman usher came
forward, announcing the Most Noble the Marquis de Nidemerle, and the
Lord Viscount of Bellaise.  My father and brothers went half-way down
the stairs to meet them, my mother advanced across the room, holding
me in one hand and Annora in the other.  We all curtsied low, and as
the gentlemen advanced, bowing low, and almost sweeping the ground
with the plumes in their hats, we each had to offer them a cheek to
salute after the English fashion.  The old marquis was talking French
so fast that I could not understand him in the least, but somehow a
mist suddenly seemed to clear away from before me, and I found that I
was standing before that alarming table, not with him, but with
something much younger--not much older, indeed, than Eustace.

I began to hear what the notary was reading out, and behold it was--
'Contract of marriage on the part of Philippe Marie Francois de
Bellaise, Marquis de Nidermerle, and Eustace de Ribaumont, Baron
Walwyn of Walwyn, in Dorset, and Baron de Ribaumont in Picardy, on
behoof of Gaspard Henri Philippe, Viscount de Bellaise, nephew of the
Marquis de Nidemerle, and Margaret Henrietta Maria de Ribaumont,
daughter of the Baron de Ribaumont.'

Then I knew that I had been taken in by the Prince's wicked trick,
and that my husband was to be the young viscount, not the old uncle!
I do not think that this was much comfort to me at the moment, for,
all the same, I was going into a strange country, away from every one
I had ever known.

But I did take courage to look up under my eye-lashes at the form I
was to see with very different eyes.  M. de Ballaise was only
nineteen, but although not so tall as my father or brother, he had
already that grand military bearing which is only acquired in the
French service, and no wonder, or he had been three years in the
Regiment de Conde, and had already seen two battles and three sieges
in Savoy, and now had only leave of absence for the winter before
rejoining his regiment in the Low Countries.

Yet he looked as bashful as a maiden.  It was true that, as my father
said, his bashfulness was as great as an Englishman's.  Indeed, he
had been bred up at his great uncle's chateau in Anjou, under a
strict abbe who had gone with him to the war, and from whom he was
only now to be set free upon his marriage.  He had scarcely ever
spoken to any lady but his old aunt--his parents had long been dead--
and he had only two or three times seen his little sister through the
grating of her convent.  So, as he afterwards confessed, nothing but
his military drill and training bore him through the affair.  He
stood upright as a dart, bowed at the right place, and in due time
signed his name to the contract, and I had to do the same.  Then
there ensued a great state dinner, where he and I sat together, but
neither of us spoke to the other; and when, as I was trying to see
the viscount under my eyelashes, I caught his eyes trying to do the
same by me, I remember my cheeks flaming all over, and I think his
must have done the same, for my father burst suddenly out into a
laugh without apparent cause, though he tried to check himself when
he saw my mother's vexation.

When all was over, she highly lauded the young gentleman, declaring
that he was an example of the decorum with which such matters were
conducted in France; and when my father observed that he should
prefer a little more fire and animation, she said: 'Truly, my lord,
one would think you were of mere English extraction, that you should
prefer the rude habits of a farmer or milkmaid to the reserve of a
true noble and lady of quality.'

'Well, dame, I promised that you should have it your own way with the
poor lass,' said my father; 'and I see no harm in the lad, but I own
I should like to know more of him, and Meg would not object either.
It was not the way I took thee, Margaret.'

'I shall never make you understand that a widow is altogether a
different thing,' said my mother.

I suppose they never recollected that I could hear every word they
said, but I was full in view of them, and of course I was listening
most anxiously for all I could gather about my new life.  If I
remember right, it was an envoy-extraordinary with whom the marquis
and his nephew had come, and their stay was therefore very short, so
that we were married after a very few days in the Queen's Chapel, by
her own almoner.

I do not remember much about the wedding, as indeed it was done very
quietly, being intended to be kept altogether a secret; but in some
way, probably through the servants, it became known to the mob in
London, and as we drove home from Whitehall in the great coach with
my father and mother, a huge crowd had assembled, hissing and yelling
and crying out upon Lord Walwyn for giving his daughter to a French
Papist.

The wretches! they even proceeded to throw stones.  My young
bridegroom saw one of these which would have struck me had he not
thrown himself forward, holding up his hat as a shield.  The stone
struck him in the eye, and he dropped forward upon my mother's knee
senseless.

The crowd were shocked then, and fell back, but what good did that do
to him?  He was carried to his chamber, and a surgeon was sent for,
who said that there was no great injury done, for the eye itself had
not been touched, but that he must be kept perfectly quiet until the
last minute, if he was to be able to travel without danger, when the
suite were to set off in two day's time.  They would not let me go
near him.  Perhaps I was relieved, for I should not have known what
to do; yet I feared that he would think me unkind and ungrateful, and
I would have begged my mother and Eustace to thank him and make my
excuses, but I was too shy, and I felt it very hard to be blamed for
indifference and rudeness.

Indeed, we four young ones kept as much together as we could do in
the house and gardens, and played all our dear old games of
shuttlecock, and pig go to market, and proverbs, and all that you, my
children, call very English sports, because we knew only too well
that we should never play at them altogether again.  The more I was
blamed for being childish, the more I was set upon them, till at last
my mother said that she was afraid to let me go, I was so childish
and unfeeling; and my father replied that she should have thought of
that before.  He and I were both more English at heart than French,
and I am sure now that he perceived better than I did myself that my
clinging to my brothers and sister, and even my noisy merriment, were
not the effect of want of feeling.

As to my bridegroom, I have since known that he was dreadfully afraid
of us, more especially of me, and was thankful that the injury kept
him a prisoner.  Nay, he might have come downstairs, if he had been
willing, on the last evening, but he shrank from another presentation
to me before the eyes of all the world, and chose instead to act the
invalid, with no companion save Eustace, with whom he had made
friends.

I will not tell you about the partings, and the promises and
assurances that we should meet again.  My father had always promised
that my mother should see France once more, and he now declared that
they would all visit me.  Alas! we little thought what would be the
accomplishment of that promise.

My father and Eustace rode with us from London to Dover, and all the
time I kept close to them.  M. de Bellaise was well enough to ride
too.  His uncle, the marquis, went in a great old coach with the
ladies, wives of some of his suite, and I should have been there too,
but that I begged so hard to ride with my father that he yielded,
after asking M. le Vicomte whether he had any objection.  M. le
Vicomte opened great eyes, smiled, blushed and bowed, stammering
something.  I do not think that he had a quite realised previously
that I was his wife, and belonged to him.  My father made him ride
with us, and talked to him; and out in the open air, riding with the
wind in our cheeks, and his plume streaming in the breeze, he grew
much less shy, and began to talk about the wolf-hunts and boar-hunts
in the Bocage, and of all the places that my father and I both knew
as well as if we had seen them, from the grandam's stories.

I listened, but we neither of us sought the other; indeed, I believe
it seemed hard to me that when there was so little time with my
father and Eustace, they should waste it on these hunting stories.
Only too soon we were at Dover, and the last, last farewell and
blessing were given.  I looked my last, though I knew it not at that
dear face of my father!


CHAPTER III.

CELADON AND CHLOE


My tears were soon checked by dreadful sea-sickness.  We were no
sooner out of Dover than the cruel wind turned round upon us, and we
had to go beating about with all our sails reefed for a whole day and
night before it was safe to put into Calais.

All that time I was in untold misery, and poor nurse Tryphena was
worse than I was, and only now and then was heard groaning out that
she was a dead woman, and begging me to tell some one to throw her
over board.

But it was that voyage which gave me my husband.  He was not exactly
at his ease, but he kept his feet better than any of the other
gentlemen, and he set himself to supply the place of valet to his
uncle, and of maid to me, going to and fro between our cabins as best
he could, for he fell and rolled whenever he tried to more; sharp
shriek or howl, or a message through the steward, summoned him back
to M. le Marquis, who had utterly forgotten all his politeness and
formality towards the ladies.

However, our sufferings were over at last.  My husband, who was by
this time bruised from head to foot by his falls, though he made no
complaints, came to say we should in a few moments be in port.  He
helped me to dress, for Tryphena thought she was dead, and would not
move; and he dragged me on deck, where the air revived me, and where
one by one the whole party appeared, spectacles of misery.

M. le Marquis did not recover himself till he was on shore, and
caused himself to be assisted to the quay between his nephew and the
valet, leaving me to myself; but the dear viscount returned for me,
and after he had set me ashore, as he saw I was anxious about
Tryphena, he went back and fetched her, as carefully as if she had
been a lady, in spite of the grumblings of his uncle and of her own
refractoriness, for she was horribly frightened, and could not
understand a word he said to her.

Nevertheless, as soon as we had all of us come to ourselves, it
turned out that he had gained her heart.  Indeed, otherwise I should
have had to send her home, for she pined sadly for some time, and
nothing but her love for me and her enthusiastic loyalty to him kept
her up during the first months.

As to my husband and me, that voyage had made us as fond of one
another's company on one side of the Channel as we had been afraid of
it before on the other, but there was no more riding together for us.
I had to travel in the great coach with M. le Marquis, the three
ladies, and all our women, where I was so dull and weary that I
should have felt ready to die, but for watching for my husband's
plume, or now and then getting a glance and a nod from him as he rode
among the other gentlemen, braving all their laughter at his
devotion; for, bashful as he was, he knew how to hold his own.

I knew that the ladies looked on me as an ugly little rustic
foreigner, full of English mauvaise honte.  If they tried to be kind
to me, it was as a mere child; and they went on with their chatter,
which I could hardly follow, for it was about things and people of
which I knew nothing, so that I could not understand their laughter.
Or when they rejoiced in their return from what they called their
exile, and found fault with all they had left in England, my cheeks
burned with indignation.

My happy hours were when we halted for refreshments.  My husband
handed me to my place at table and sat beside me; or he would walk
with me about the villages where we rested.  The ladies were shocked,
and my husband was censured for letting me 'faire l'Anglaise,' but we
were young and full of spirits, and the being thus thrown on each
other had put an end to his timidity towards me. He did indeed blush
up to his curls, and hold himself as upright as a ramrod, when satire
was directed to us as Celadon and Chloe; but he never took any other
notice of it, nor altered his behaviour in consequence.  Indeed, we
felt like children escaping from school when we crept down the stairs
in early morning, and hand-in-hand repaired to the church in time for
the very earliest mass among the peasants, who left their scythes at
the door, and the women with their hottes, or their swaddled babies
at their backs.  We would get a cup of milk and piece of barley-bread
at some cottage, and wander among the orchards, fields, or vineyards
before Mesdames had begun their toiles; and when we appeared at the
dejeuner, the gentlemen would compliment me on my rouge au naturel,
and the ladies would ironically envy my English appetite.

Sometimes we rested in large hostels in cities, and then our walk
began with some old cathedral, which could not but be admired, Gothic
though it were, and continued in the market-place, where the piles of
fruit, vegetables, and flowers were a continual wonder and delight to
me.  My husband would buy bouquets of pinks and roses for me; but in
the coach the ladies always said they incommoded them by their scent,
and obliged me to throw them away.  The first day I could not help
shedding a few tears, for I feared he would think I did not value
them; and then I perceived that they thought the little Englishwoman
a child crying for her flowers.  I longed to ask them whether they
had ever loved their husbands; but I knew how my mother would have
looked at me, and forbore.

Once or twice we were received in state at some chateau, where our
mails had to be opened that we might sup in full toilet; but this was
seldom, for most of the equals of M. le Marquis lived at Paris.
Sometimes our halt was at an abbey, where we ladies were quartered in
a guest-chamber without; and twice we slept at large old convents,
where nobody had lived since the Huguenot times, except a lay brother
put in by M. l'Abbe to look after the estate and make the house a
kind of inn for travelers.  There were fine walled gardens run into
wild confusion, and little neglected and dismantled shrines, and
crosses here and there, with long wreaths of rose and honeysuckle
trailing over them, and birds' nests in curious places. My Viscount
laughed with a new pleasure when I showed him the wren's bright eye
peeping out from her nest, and he could not think how I knew the egg
of a hedge-sparrow from that of a red-breast.  Even he had never been
allowed to be out of sight of his tutor, and he knew none of these
pleasures so freely enjoyed by my brothers; while as to his sister
Cecile, she had been carried from her nurse to a convent, and had
thence been taken at fourteen to be wedded to the grandson and heir
of the Count d'Aubepine, who kept the young couple under their own
eye at their castle in the Bocage.

My husband had absolutely only seen her twice, and then through the
grating, and the marriage had taken place while he was in Savoy last
autumn.  He knew his brother-in-law a little better, having been his
neighbour at Nid de Merle; but he shrugged his shoulders as he spoke
of 'le chevalier,' and said he was very young, adored by his
grandparents, and rather headstrong.

As to growing up together in the unity that had always existed
between an absolute surprise to him to find that my dear brother was
grieved at parting with me.  He said he had lain and heard our shouts
in the passages with wonder as we played those old games of ours.

'As though you were in a den of roaring wild beasts,' I said; for I
ventured on anything with him by that time, voices, I teased him
about his feelings at having to carry off one of these same savage
beasts with him; and then he told me how surprised he had been when,
on the last evening he spent in his chamber in our house, Eustace had
come and implored him to be good to me, telling him--ah, I can see my
dear brother's boyish way!--all my best qualities, ranging from my
always speaking truth to my being able to teach the little dog to
play tricks, and warning him of what vexed or pained me, even
exacting a promise that he would take care of me when I was away from
them all.  I believe that promise was foremost in my husband's mind
when he waited on me at sea.  Nay, he said when remembered the tears
in my brother's eyes, and saw how mine arose at the thought, his
heart smote him when he remembered that his sister's marriage had
scarcely cost him a thought or care, and that she was an utter
stranger to him; and then we agreed that if ever we had children, we
would bring them up to know and love one another, and have precious
recollections in common.  Ah! l'homme propose, mais Dieu dispose.

It was only on that day that it broke upon me that we were to be
separated immediately after our arrival in Paris.  M. de Bellaise was
to go to his regiment, which was at garrison at Nancy, and I was to
be left under the charge of old Madame la Marquise de Nidemerle at
Paris.  I heard of it first from the Marquise himself in the coach,
as he thanked one of the ladies who invited me--with him--to her
salon in Paris, where there was to be a great entertainment in the
summer.  When I replied that M. de Bellaise would have rejoined his
regiment, they began explaining that I should go into society under
Madame de Nidemerle, who would exert herself for my sake.

I said no more.  I knew it was of no use there; but when next I could
speak with my husband--it was under an arbour of vines in the garden
of the inn where we dine--I asked him whether it was true.  He opened
large eyes, and said he knew I could not wish to withdraw him from
his duty to his king and country, even if he could do so with honour.

'Ah! no,' I said; 'I never thought of that.'  But surely the place of
a wife was with her husband, and I had expected to go with him to his
garrison at Nancy, and there wait when he took the field.  He threw
himself at my feet, and pressed my hands with transport at what he
called this unheard-of proof of affection; and then I vexed him by
laughing, for I could not help thinking what my brothers would have
said, could they have seen us thus.

Still he declared that, in spite of his wishes, it was hardly
possible.  His great-uncle and aunt would never consent.  I said they
had no right to interfere between husband and wife, and he replied
that they had brought him up, and taken the place of parents to him;
to which I rejoined that I was far nearer to him.  He said I was a
mutinous Englishwoman; and I rejoined that he should never find me
mutinous to him.

Nay, I made up my mind that if he would not insist on taking me, I
would find means to escape and join him.  What!  Was I to be carried
about in the coach of Madame de Nidemerle to all the hateful salons
of Paris, while my husband, the only person in France whom I could
endure, might be meeting wounds and death in the Low Countries while
I might be dancing!

So again I declined when the ladies in the coach invited me to their
houses in Paris.  Should I go to a convent? they asked; and one began
to recommend the Carmelites, another the Visitation, another Port
Royal, till I was almost distracted; and M. le Marquis began to say
it was a pious and commendable wish, but that devotion had its proper
times and seasons, and that judgment must be exercised as to the
duration of a retreat, etc.

'No, Monsieur,' said I, 'I am not going into a convent.  A wife's
duty is with her husband; I am going into garrison at Nancy.'

Oh, how they cried out!  There was such a noise that the gentlemen
turned their horses' heads to see whether any one was taken ill.
When they heard what was the matter, persecution began for us both.

We used to compare our experiences; the ladies trying to persuade me
now that it was improper, now that I should be terrified to death now
that I should become too ugly to be presentable; while the gentlemen
made game of M. de Bellaise as a foolish young lover, who was so
absurd as to encumber himself with a wife of whom he would soon
weary, and whose presence would interfere with his enjoyment of the
freedom and diversions of military life.  He who was only just free
from his governor, would he saddle himself with a wife?  Bah!

He who had been so shy defended himself with spirit; and on my side I
declared that nothing but his commands, and those of my father,
should induce me to leave him.  At Amiens we met a courier on his way
to England, and by him we dispatched letters to my father.

M. de Nidemerle treated all like absurd childish nonsense,
complimenting me ironically all the while; but I thought he wavered a
little before the journey was over, wishing perhaps that he had never
given his nephew a strange, headstrong, English wife, but thinking
that, as the deed was done, the farther off from himself she was the
better.

At least, he no longer blamed his nephew and threatened him with his
aunt; but declared that Madame de Rambouillet would soon put all such
folly out of our minds.

I asked my husband what Madame de Rambouillet could have to do with
our affairs; and he shrugged his shoulders and answered that the
divine Arthenice was the supreme judge of decorum, whose decisions
no one could gainsay.


CHAPTER IV.

THE SALON BLEU


We arrived at Paris late in the day, entering the city through a
great fortified gateway, and then rolling slowly through the rough
and narrow streets.  You know them too well, my children, to be able
to conceive how strange and new they seemed to me, accustomed as I
was to our smooth broad Thames and the large gardens of the houses in
the Strand lying on its banks.

Our carriage turned in under the porte cochere of this Hotel de
Nidemerle of ours, and entered the courtyard.  My husband, his uncle,
and I know not how many more, were already on the steps.  M. de
Nidemerle solemnly embraced me and bade me welcome, presenting me at
the same time to a gentlemen, in crimson velvet and silver, as my
brother.  My foolish heart bounded for a moment as if it could have
been Eustace; but it was altogether the face of a stranger, except
for a certain fine smile like my mother's.  It was, of course, my
half-brother, M. le Baron de Solivet, who saluted me, and politely
declared himself glad to make the acquaintance of his sister.

The Marquis then led me up the broad stairs, lined with lackeys, to
our own suite of apartments, where I was to arrange my dress before
being presented to Madame de Nidemerle, who begged me to excuse her
not being present to greet me, as she had caught cold, and had a
frightful megrim.

I made my toilet, and they brought me a cup of eau sucree and a few
small cakes, not half enough for my hungry English appetite.

My husband looked me over more anxiously than ever he had done
before; and I wished, for his sake, that I had been prettier and
fitter to make a figure among all these grand French ladies.

My height was a great trouble to me in those unformed days.  I had so
much more length to dispose of than my neighbours, and I knew they
remarked me the more for it; and then my hair never would remain in
curl for half an hour together.  My mother could put it up safely,
but since I had left her it was always coming down, like flax from a
distaff; and though I had in general a tolerably fresh and rosy
complexion, heat outside and agitation within made my whole face,
nose and all, instantly become the colour of a clove gillyflower.  It
had so become every afternoon on the journey, and I knew I was
growing redder and redder every moment, and that I should put him, my
own dear Viscount, to shame before his aunt.

'Oh! my friend,' I sighed, 'pardon me, I cannot help it.'

'Why should I pardon thee?' he answered tenderly. 'Because thou hast
so great and loving a heart?'

'Ah! but what will thine aunt think of me?'

'Let her think,' he said.  'Thou art mine, not Madame's.'

I know not whether those words made me less red, but they gave me
such joyous courage that I could have confronted all the dragoons,
had I been of the colour of a boiled lobster, and when he himself
sprinkled me for the last time with essences, I felt ready to defy
the censure of all the marchionesses in France.

My husband took me by the hand and led me to the great chamber, where
in an alcove stood the state bed, with green damask hangings fringed
with gold, and in the midst of pillows trimmed with point-lace sat up
Madam la Marquis, her little sallow face, like a bit of old
parchment, in the midst of the snowy linen, and not--to my eyes--
wearing a very friendly aspect.

She had perhaps been hearing of my wilfulness and insubordination,
for she was very grand and formal with me, solemnly calling me Madame
la Vicomtesse, and never her niece, and I thought all the time that I
detected a sneer.  If I had wished for my husband's sake to accompany
him, I wished it ten thousand times more when I fully beheld the
alternative.

Ah! I am writing treason.  Had I been a well-trained French young
girl I should have accepted my lot naturally, and no doubt all the
family infinitely regretted that their choice has fallen on one so
impracticable.

I was happier as the supper-table, to which we were soon summoned,
for I had become accustomed to M. de Nidemerle, who was always kind
to me.  Poor old man, I think he had hoped to have something young
and lively in his house; but I never thought of that, and of course
my husband was my only idea.

M. de Solivet set by me, and asked many questions about my mother and
the rest of the family, treating me more as a woman than anyone else
had done.  Nor was it long before I caught slight resemblances both
to my mother and to my brother Berenger, which made me feel as home
with him.  He was a widower, and his two daughters were being
educated in a convent, where he promised to take me to visit them,
that I might describe them to their grandmother.

Poor little things! I thought them very stiff and formal, and pitied
them when I saw them; but I believed they were really full of fun and
folic among their companions.

M. de Solivet was consulted on this wild scheme of mine, and the
Marchioness desired him to show me its absurdity.  He began by
arguing that it was never when to act in the face of custom, and that
he had only known of two ladies who had followed their husbands to
the wars, and both them only belonged to the petite noblesse, and
were no precedent for me!  One of them had actually joined her
husband when wounded and made prisoner, and it was said that her care
had saved his life!

Such a confession on his part rendered me the more determined, and we
reminded M. de Nidemerle of his promise to consult Madame de
Rambouillet, though I would not engage even  then to abide by any
decision except my father's, which I daily expected.  I overheard
people saying how much M. de Bellaise was improved by his marriage,
and how much more manly and less embarrassed he had become, and I
felt that my resolution made him happy, so that I became the more
determined.

Children, you who have laughed at Les Precieuses can have little idea
what the Hotel de Rambouillet was when, three nights after arrival, I
went thither with my husband and his uncle and aunt.

The large salon, hung and draped with blue velvet, divided by lines
of gold, was full of people ranged in a circle, listening eagerly to
the recital of poem by the author, an Abbe, who stood in the midst,
declaiming each couplet with emphasis, and keeping time with his
foot, while he made gestures with his uplifted hand.  Indeed, I
thought at first he was in a furious passion and was going to knock
someone down, till I saw calmly everyone sat; and then again I
fancied we had come to a theatre by mistake; but happily I did not
speak, and, without interrupting the declamation, chairs were given
us, and exchanging a mute salutation with a lady of a noble cast of
beauty, who guided us to seats, we quietly took our places.  She was
Julie d'Argennes, the daughter of Madame de Rambouillet.  A gentlemen
followed her closely, the Duke of Montausier, who adored her, but
whom she could not yet decide on accepting.

I found it difficult to fit from laughing as the gestures of the
Abbe, especially when I thought of my brother and how they would mock
them; but I knew that this would be unpardonable bad taste, and as I
had come in too late to have the clue to the discourse, I amused
myself with looking about me.

Perhaps the most striking figure was that of the hostess, with her
stately figure, and face, not only full of intellect, but of
something that went far beyond it, and came out of some other higher
world, to which she was trying to raise this one.

Next I observed a lady, no longer in her first youth, but still
wonderfully fair and graceful.  She was enthroned in a large arm-
chair, and on a stool beside her sat her daughter, a girl of my own
age, the most lovely creature I had ever seen, with a profusion of
light flaxen hair, and deep blue eyes, and one moment full of grave
thought, at another of merry mischief.  A young sat by, whose cast of
features reminded me of the Prince of Wales, but his nose was more
aquiline, his dark blue eyes far more intensely bright and flashing,
and whereas Prince Charles would have made fun of all the flourishes
of our poet, they seemed to inspire in this youth an ardour he could
barely restrain, and when there was something vehement about Mon epee
et ma patrie he laid his hand on his sword, and his eyes lit up, so
that he reminded me of a young eagle.

This was the Princess of Conde, who in the pride of her youthful
beauty had been the last flame of Henri IV., who had almost begun a
war on her account; this was her lovely daughter, Mademoiselle de
Bourbon, and her sons, the brave Duke of Enghien, with his deformed
brother, the Prince of Conti.

When the recital was over, there was a general outburst of applause,
in which M. de Nidemerle joined heartily.  Madame de Rambouillet gave
her meed of approbation, but her daughter, Mademoiselle d' Argennes,
took exception at the use of the word chevaucher, for to ride, both
as being obsolete, and being formed from the name of a single animal,
instead of regularly derived from a Latin verb.

The Abbe defended his word, and for fully twenty minutes there was an
eager argument, people citing passages and derivations, and defining
shades of meaning with immense animation and brilliant wit, as I now
understand, though then it seemed to me a wearisome imbroglio about a
trifle.  I did not know what real benefit was done by these
discussions in purifying the language from much that was coarse and
unrefined.  Yes, and far more than the language, for Madame de
Rambouillet, using her great gifts as a holy trust for the good of
her neighbour, conferred no small benefit on her generation, nor is
that good even yet entirely vanished.  Ah! If there were more women
like her, France and society would be very different.

When the discussion was subsiding, Mademoiselle d' Argennes came to
take me by the hand, and to present us to the queen of the salon.

'Here, my mother, are our Odoardo and Gildippe,' she said.

You remember, my children, that Odoardo and Gildippe are the names
bestowed by Tasso on the English married pair who went together on
the first crusade, and Gildippe continued to be my name in that
circle, my nom de Parnasse, as it was called--nay, Madame de
Montausieur still gives it to me.

The allusion was a fortunate one; it established a precedent, and,
besides, English people have always been supposed to be eccentric.  I
am, however, doing the noble lady injustice.  Arthenice, as she was
called by an anagram of her baptismal name of Catherine, was no blind
slave to the conventional.  She had originality enough to have been
able to purify the whole sphere in which she moved, and to raise the
commonplace into the ideal.  'Excuse me,' she said to her friends,
and she led my husband apart into a deep window, and there, as he
told me, seemed to look him through and through.  And verily he was
one who needed not to fear such an inspection, any more than the
clearest crystal.

Then, in like manner, she called for me, and made me understand that
I was condemning myself to a life of much isolation, and that I must
be most circumspect in my conduct, whole, after all, I might see very
little of my husband; I must take good care that my presence was a
help and refreshment, not a burden and perplexity to him, or he would
neglect me and repent my coming.  'It may seem strange,' she said,
'but I think my young friend will understand me, that I have always
found that, next of course to those supplied by our holy religion,
the best mode of rendering our life and its inconveniences endurable
is to give them a colouring of romance.'  I did not understand her
then, but I have often since thought of her words, when the
recollection of the poetical aspect of the situation has aided my
courage and my good temper.  Madame de Rambouillet looked into my
eyes as she spoke, then said: 'Pardon an old woman, my dear;' and
kissed my brow, saying: 'You will not do what I have only dreamt of.'

Finally she led us forward to our great-uncle, saying: 'Madame le
Marquis, I have conversed with these children.  They love one
another, and so long as that love lasts they will be better guardians
to one another than ten governors or twenty dames de compagnie.'

In England we should certainly not have done all this in public, and
my husband and I were terribly put to the blush; indeed, I felt my
whole head and neck burning, and caught a glimpse of myself in a
dreadful mirror, my white bridal dress and flaxen hair making my
fiery face look, my brothers would have said, 'as if I had been
skinned.'

And then, to make it all worse, a comical little crooked lady, with a
keen lively face, came hopping up with hands outspread, crying: 'Ah,
let me see her! Where is the fair Gildippe, the true heroine, who is
about to confront the arrows of the Lydians for the sake of the lord
of her heart?'

'My niece,' said the Marquis, evidently gratified by the sensation I
had created, 'Mademoiselle de Scudery does you the honour of
requesting to be presented to you.'

I made a low reverence, terribly abashed, and I fear it would have
reduced my mother to despair, but it was an honour that I
appreciated; for now that I was a married woman, I was permitted to
read romances, and I had just begun on the first volume of the Grand
Curus.  My husband read it to me as I worked at my embroidery, and
you may guess how we enjoyed it.

But I had no power of make compliments--nay, my English heart
recoiled in anger at their making such an outcry, whether of blame or
praise, at what seemed to me the simplest thing in the world.  The
courtesy and consideration were perfect; as soon as these people saw
that I was really abashed and distressed, they turned their attention
from me.  My husband was in the meantime called to be presented to
the Duke of Enghien, and I remained for a little while unmolested, so
that I could recover myself a little.  Presently a soft voice close
to me said 'Madame,' and I looked up into the beautiful countenance
of Anne Genevieve de Bourbon, her blue eyes shining on me with the
sweetest expression.  'Madame,' she said, 'permit me to tell you how
glad I am for you.'

I thanked her most heartily.  I felt this was the real tender
sympathy of a being of my own age and like myself, and there were
something so pathetic in her expression that I felt sorry for her.

'You are good!  You will keep good,' she said.

'I hope so, Mademoiselle,' I said.

'Ah! yes, you will.  They will not make you lose your soul against
your will!' and she clenched her delicate white hand.

'Nobody can do that, Mademoiselle.'

'What!  Not when they drag you to balls and fete away from the
cloister, where alone you can be safe?'

'I hope not there alone,' I said.

'For me it is the only place,' she repeated.  'What is the use of
wearing haircloth when the fire of the Bourbons is in one's blood,
and one has a face that all the world runs after?'

'Mais, Mademoiselle,' I said; 'temptation is only to prove our
strength.'

'You are strong.  You have conquered,' she said, and clasped my hand.
'But then you loved him.'

I suppose I smiled a little with my conscious bliss, for this strange
young princess hastily asked: 'Did you love him?  I mean, before you
were married.'

'Oh no,' I said, glad to disavow what was so shocking in my new
country.

'But he is lovable?  Ah! that is it.  While you are praying to
Heaven, and devoting yourself to a husband whom you love, remember
that if I ruin my soul, it is because they would have it so!'

At that moment there was a pause.  A gentleman, the Marquis de
Feuquieres, had come in, bringing with him a very young lad, in the
plian black gown and white collar of a theological student; and it
was made known that the Marquis had been boasting of the wonderful
facility of a youth was studying at the College of Navarre, and had
declared that he could extemporise with eloquence upon any subject.
Some one had begged that the youth might be fetched and set to preach
on a text proposed to him at the moment, and here he was.

Madame de Rambouillet hesitated a little at the irreverence, but the
Duke of Enghien requested that the sermon might take place, and she
consented, only looking at her watch and saying it was near midnight,
so that the time was short.  M. Voiture, the poet, carried round a
velvet bag, and each was to write a text on a slip of paper to be
drawn out at haphazard.

We two showed each other what we wrote.  My husband's was--'Love is
strong as death;' mine--'Let the wife cleave unto her husband.'  But
neither of them was drawn out.  I saw by the start that Mademoiselle
de Bourbon gave that it was hers, when the first paper was taken out--
'Vanity of vanities, all is vanity!'  a few minutes were offered to
the young Abbe to collect his thoughts, but he declined them, and he
was led to a sort of a dais at the end of the salon, while the chairs
were placed in a half-circle.  Some of the ladies tittered a little,
though Madame de Rambouillet looked grave; but they composed
themselves.  We all stood and repeated the Ave, and then seated
ourselves; while the youth, in a voice already full and sweet, began
solemnly: 'What is life? what is man?'

I can never convey to you how this world and all its fleeting follies
seemed to melt away before us, and how each of us felt our soul alone
in the presence of our Maker, as though nothing mattered, or ever
would matter, but how we stood with Him.  One hardly dared to draw
one's breath.  Mademoiselle de Bourbon was almost stifled with the
sobs she tried to restrain lest her mother should make her retire.
My husband held my hand, and pressed it unseen.  He was a deeper,
more thoughtful man ever after he heard that voice, which seemed to
come, as it were, from the Angel at Bochim who warned the Israelites;
and that night we dedicated ourselves to the God who had not let us
be put asunder.

I wished we could have gone away at once and heard no more, and so
must, I think, the young preacher have felt; but he was surrounded
with compliments. M. Voiture said he had never heard 'so early nor so
late a sermon;' while others thronged up with their compliments.

Madame de Rambouillet herself murmured: 'He might be Daniel hearing
the compliments of Belshazzar on his deciphering the handwriting,' so
impassively did he listen to the suffrages of the assembly, only
replying by a bow.

The Duke of Enghien, boldest of course, pressed up to him and, taking
his hand, begged to know his name.

'Bossuet, Monseigneur,' he answered.

There were one or two who had the bad taste to smile, for Bossuet (I
must tell my English kindred) means a draught-ox; but once more the
lovely sister of the young Duke grasped my hand and said: 'Oh, that I
could hide myself at once!  Why will they not let me give myself to
my God?  Vanity of vanities! why am I doomed?'

I was somewhat frightened, and was glad that a summons of 'my
daughter' from the Princess of Conde interrupted these strange
communications.  I understood them better when we were called upon to
ell the old Marchioness the names of every one whom we had met at the
Hotel de Rambouillet, and on hearing of the presence of Mademoiselle
de Bourbon she said: 'Ah! yes, a marriage is arranged for the young
lady with the Duke of Longueville.'

'But!' exclaimed my husband, 'the Duke is an old man, whose daughter
is older than I.'

'What has that to do with it?' said his aunt.  'There is not much
blood in France with which a Montmorency Bourbon can match.
Moreover, they say the child is devote, and entetee on Madam de Port
Royal, who is more than suspected of being outree in her devotion; so
the sooner she is married the better!'

Poor beautiful girl, how I pitied her then!  Her lovely, wistful,
blue eyes haunted me all night, in the midst of my own gladness; for
a courier had come that evening bringing my father's reply.  He said
my mother deplored my unusual course, but that for his part he liked
his little girl the better for her courage, and that he preferred
that I should make my husband's home happy to my making it at court.
All he asked of me was to remember that I had to guard the honour of
my husband's name and of my country, and he desired that I should
take Tryphena with me wherever I went.


CHAPTER V.

IN GARRISON.


I am almost afraid to dwell on those happiest days of my life that I
spent in garrison.  My eyes, old as they are, fill with tears when I
am about to write of them, and yet they passed without my knowing how
happy they were; for much of my time was spent in solitude, much in
waiting, much in anxiety; but ah! there then always was a possibility
that never, never can return!

Nancy seems to me a paradise when I look back to it, with its broad
clean streets and open squares, and the low houses with balconies,
and yet there I often thought myself miserable, for I began to learn
what it was to be a soldier's wife. Madame de Rambouillet had kindly
written to some of her friends in the duchy of Lorraine respecting
me, and they assisted us in obtaining a lodging and servants.  This
might otherwise have been difficult, for the Duke was I the Spanish
army, while we held his territories, and naturally we were not in
very good odour with the people.

My husband had to leave me, immediately after he had placed me in my
little house at Nancy, to join the army in Germany under Marshal
Guebrian.  I lived through that time by the help of the morning mass,
of needlework, and of the Grand Cyrus, which I read through and then
began again.  My dear husband never failed to send me a courier once
a week with letters that were life to me, and sometimes I heard from
England; but my mother's letters were becoming full of anxiety,
affairs were looking so ill for the king.

After a gallant victory over the Swedes my Viscount returned to me
without a wound, and with distinguished praise from the Marshal.
That was an important winter, for it saw the deaths of the great
Cardinal and of King Louis XIII., moreover of the old Marchioness.
My husband's loving heart sorrowed for her and for his uncle; but
that same week brought thee to my arms, my dear son, my beloved
Gaspard!  Oh! what a fight Tryphena and I had to prevent his being
stifled in swaddling clothes!  And how all the women predicted that
his little limbs would be broken and never be straight.

That winter was only clouded by the knowledge that spring would take
my husband away again.  How good he was to me!  How much pleasure and
amusement he gave up for my sake!  He had outgrown his bashfulness
and embarrassment in this campaign, and could take his place in
company, but re remained at home with me.   Had neither the grace nor
the vivacity that would have enabled me to collect a society around
me, and I seldom saw his brother officers except my brother M. de
Solivet, and his great friend M. de Chamillard, who was quite
fatherly to me.

The Duke of Enghien took the command of the army of Picardy, and
asked for our regiment.  I entreated not to be sent back to Paris,
and prevailed to be allowed to take up my abode at Mezieres, where I
was not so far from the camp but that my dear M. de Bellaise could
sometimes ride over and see me.  He told me of the murmur of the
elder men of the army that the fiery young inexperienced prince was
disregarding all the checks that the old Marshal de l'Hopital put in
his way; but he himself was delighted, and made sure of success.  "Still
and proud!" That sounds almost like "noble simplicity" and "hidden
variable", as Winckelmann, the Greek art has charakterisirt.
[Footnote: Ebendaselbst p. 298-300.] VI. THE THIRD KIND OF BACON-MYTHS:
1. Bacon as the author of the Promus. A Collection of Manuscripts in
the British Museum are kept, there are about 50 pages folio under the
title "Vorrath good design and anmuthiger Redewendungen (_Promus of
formularies and elegancies_)", in groups separately, as there are
forms of greeting , parables, metaphors, proverbs & c.

A portion of this Promus is Speddings view of the whole no significant
Werth ascribes somehow, from Bacon's hand, so it just a few extracts
from it in his Gesammtausgabe of works has begun.

This was already the 1861st [Footnote: _Works_ VII, p. 187-213.]
Several decades later, an English lady, Mrs. Henry Pott, the
Promus fully released (1883) and after an alleged survey of several
thousand books in 1655 Redewendungen want to demonstrate that they
are not vorbaconischen literature, in the simultaneous but only to
Shakespeare, which are said by knowledgeable historical assertion
disputed site and has been refuted. She has in the "Promus" the
germs meant to be discovered, giving both the sonnets, as well as the
dramas of Shakespeare were grown, so this is not a total seal of
Shakespeare, but only came to Bacon. The proof of the Bacon
theory called the first of obvious intrinsic reasons (_internal
evidence_). [Footnote: _The Promus of formularies and elegancies
[being private notes, circ. 1594, Hitherto unpublished] by _Francis
Bacon_, elucidated and illustrated by passages from _Shakespeare_ by
Mrs. Henry Pott with preface by EA Abbot, London 1883._ With
appendix and index the book counts 658 pages, while Speddings
extracts only 13 pages and on Romeo and Juliet related not included.]
2 The Promus as a source of Romeo and Juliet. I will note only those
leaves which the germ, though the raw material and preparing to
"Romeo and Juliet" and therefore should be included by Mrs.

Henry Pott even explain excellently suited their view to prove. With
tense anticipation, I suppose the leaves on hand, with a disappointment,
I do the same without them aside. As is: "good morning", "good evening",
"good night", "Amen," "Forth," "the lark ", a Latin verse, which
admonished the boys, early to rise, but not in vain," _mane_ »not«
_vane_ ", a Latin verse, which sleep a false image of the icy death
called USF These lumps are under the hands of Bacon in transforms
have the sources to which the greatest of all is Liebestragödien
entströmt!

first must Promus "good morning" and "_bon jour_" have confessed before
Mercutio was able to say: "_Signor Romeo, bon jour! _» (II. 4).
First was the Promus notirt: "Good night!" To say to Mercutio: "Good
night, friend, Romeo!" Now Julia could only say: "And a thousand
times good night!" (II. 2). In Promus is "Amen" to the Romeo
equipped and the blessing of brother Lorenzo wish to reaffirm: "Amen!
So be it!" (II. 6). Promus As we read nothing but the word "lark".
That should be the germ from which all love the wonderful
conversations emerged: the words of Juliet: "It was the nightingale
and not the lark!"

Romeos the words: "The lark's, the Tagverkünderin!" The Promus we
read Latin verse, which sleep a false image of the icy death calls.
This verse is the text of Lorenzo's speech, in which he Julien the
torpor of his drowsy effects portrays (IV. 1), the text to the words
of the old Capulets, when he's daughter in the solidification front
is: "Death lies on her, like a frost on Maien climes of the flower
is beautiful!

"Nothing would have been desirable, as if these so abundant leaves
even the name" Romeo "have confessed. True, Mrs. Henry Pott believed
him to be found: it read "_rome_" and considered it an abbreviation
of Romeo. In truth, however, was not "_rome_» there, but "_vane_",
as proposed by side has been informed. [Footnote: Edward Angel, No
480 in the "national newspaper" of 25 August 1894 .-- On the
Promus see Bormann, P. 271-76.] If the memory of the nurse in the
earthquake eleven years before the emergence of poetry to relate, as
Delius meant, then the latter in the fall to 1592 and then emerged
a few years earlier than the Promus, on 5 December 1594 begins 3. The
comparison of the works. Anyway, Mrs. Henry Pott, a new type
Bacon-Mythen on Tapet nutshell: Bacon Vorrathskammern they can
create with words and words fill the persons of his plays in order
to dine.

In her next script: "Did Francis Bacon write Shakespeare?" [Footnote:
_Did Francis Bacon write Shakespeare? The lives of Bacon and
Shakespeare compared with the dates and subject matter of the plays.
By the editor of Bacon's Promus etc. "Look at this picture and
on this." WH Guest a. Co. 1885._--On the storm and Othello, see p. 48,
p. 61-62.] (1885) It has already begun the work of Bacon with the
works of Shakespeare to compare, for example, the natural history
essay on the winch with the comedy "The Tempest" to its internal
consistency and unity to prove it has the way to enter and brought
which the youngest Bacon theory expand on the task set.

For the rest followed their Beweisart exactly those Tact, after which
the march of the Bacon theory is addressed.

Since Promus and "Romeo and Juliet" a number of common words and
words, it is Romeo and Juliet in Promus. VII BACON BIG SECRET
LETTERS: myth or humbug? Whole Bacon theory in a day would be
available, if somewhere a hidden or disguised instrument could detect,
in which Bacon himself has reported: that he was the poet,
William Shakespeare, but his tools and a person from the way we
imagine him Baconianer.

And, since Bacon, as evident from his teaching, dealing with the art
of Chiffrirens and Dechiffrirens busy, so he will probably chiffrirt
this instrument and the subsequent world have failed to find the
key. The large Bacongeheimniß in HIPS! Such an instrument should
be quite properly "the great secret writing" cite _great kryptogramm_.
But where to find them? At the end, it has bacon in its own factories
hidden in those which the great mystery of its contents represent,
in his Shakespearean dramas in its first Gesammtausgabe, mainly in
the two Henry IV Theilen Nowhere is here the name "Stratford" more
often on the other hand, the name "St.

Alban", even more often the name "Francis". "Franz! Franz!" "Right,
sir, the same" - How Falstaff plundering the merchants, he shouts:
"Down with you, you fat eaters (_bacon-knaves_)!" As we have
already "Francis" and "Bacon", meaning "Francis Bacon" ! How easy are
the words of Shake (_shake_) and javelin (_speare_ respectively):
we have Shakespeare. In a scene of "Merry Wives" plays the boy
William's role. So F rancis Acon B and W illi am hakespeare S
would be there, the two main agents that deeply hidden history,
the Bacon-secret mind! Well, it is not difficult to hold, in the folio
edition words and word sounds enough to bring it the whole legend
of Bacon as the author of "Richard II", from "Richard II"
staatsgefährlichen than one piece, of Hayward and the wrath of the
Queen, as the Shakespeare of Stratford and London worthless actor
and director to build and assemble, as the _fable convenue_ the
Baconianer required.

This story should be Bacon himself drafted as a memorandum and the
latter with its dramatic seals and enforce such umwoben have that
in the same thicket of deeply hidden rests. The individual words and
word sounds, what it consists, in the dramas have a different
meaning than in the memorandum.

In this they are CHIFF, backward and forward through spaces, the
arithmetically calculated by accounting and identifiable, or should
be.

The bill contains the key to Dechiffrirung. This is the great secret
writing emerged, which the Americans have discovered Ignatius
Donnelly wants (1888), after 265 years many of the eye of the world
remained hidden.

[Footnote: The works in two volumes has made a lot of luck, it is
immediately sold in 20,000 copies and has been introduced 800000
Mark.

So they say.] He has found, after he invented it before and
after the guidance of the legend, as the Bacon theory requires,
from the words of the dramas to componiren is abgemüht has, he has
a number incohärenter fragments mitgetheilt, the But the key for
himself.

For seven years you wait in vain for the completion and the solution.
Donnelly can not give what he himself does not have. Where no HIPS,
since there is no key!

The whole Scheinenträthselung directed itself by the absurdity
of their results.

This secret writing that portrays William Shakespeare as a person
who, with twenty years in its poaching a shot in the head and gets
an ugly hole in the forehead davonträgt; of the thirteen years
later, disfigured by disease and invalidated, unsafe einherschwankt
Ganges, but strongly , large, wohlbeleibt is unsurpassable and the
Falstaff plays.

Such a man existirt not.

To the industry properly Donnelly marked, as the word "myth" means
we are an expression used by the "Journal des débats" ten years earlier
to the Bacon theory has ever applied. "You allow me," wrote Mr.

Varagnac, "the Bacon theory for nothing else to think than what the
people over there with a characteristic words designate what the
fatherland Barnum as usual, as the thing which it denotes : the
word "humbug". " [Footnote: After the great cryptograph reported a
bookseller from Stratford on the local youth adventure and William
Shakespeare's sins from the year 1584, the Bishop of Worcester, in
whose district lies Stratford, reported on the Staatssecretär Cecil
W.

Shakespeare the actor from 1597 ; but Cecil reported to the Queen
on Bacon and Essex, and on the staatsgefährlichen godless Bacon
plays his cousin, whom he called St.

Alban, although Bacon this title until many years later received.
If Bacon on the poaching of Shakespeare and Handel with the Knights
Thomas Lucy would want to be informed, as he stood next to the road
open, because he and the family of the knight is very good, even
family was known, as from his letters to the younger Thomas Lucy
at Charlecote illuminates the mitgetheilt has Spedding (_Works_ IX ,
p. 369). Donnelly says that the Shakespeare "Hamlet" had not been
able to write because he is aware of the source in the history of
Danish _Saxo Grammaticus_ was closed because he did not understand
Danish! As if his Saxo «_Historia Danica_» d ä nisch written! As if
Danish Bacon understood, because he to King Christian IV of Denmark
Latin written!

(_Works_ XIV, p. 82.) As if it from the Saxo Hamletsage not the French
handling of the Belle Forest where!] VIII THE SUMMIT OF THE BACON-MYTHS:
1. Bacon as a philosophical poet. The Bacon theory has gone a step
too thun, and the summit of their myths is erstiegen: it requires
neither Promus nor the secret of great writing, if it is that the
works of Shakespeare, the 36 plays of the Folio, all the histories,
comedies and tragedies of philosophical works, especially natural
philosophy, as such, not William Shakespeare, but only Francis
Bacon, the first philosopher of the age, the founder of natural
philosophy and empiricism, could have drafted.

This is to prove has the allerjüngste Bacon theory undertaken. Then
Bacon did the main work of his life, the great renewal of Sciences
(_Magna instauratio_), which breaks down into six Theile, not just
partial, but whole and complete: the first half three prose works
(Encyklopädie of the Organon and the natural history), the second
in the 36 plays of the Folio.

Philosophische dramas are allegorical nature and include as allegorical
dramas to mask those games, which one of his essays Bacon has
written, with the explanation begins and ends, that such games
merely Tand (_toys_) were.

[Footnote: _Works VII Ess. XXVIII. Masques and triumphs, pag 467-68_.]

And he should have had the intention, the half of his greatest
works in this form out? We forget the great silence that deliberate
Dupiren!

This essay should serve to himself as a dramatic poet to hide: he
is a secret poet, a mysterious, it's Shakespeare! Eben is yes, the
Bacon-secrets!

[Footnote: Bormann, p. 293] 2 Bacon as the inventor of the parabolic
drama.

After all the recent Bacon Bacon theory should have taught: that the
parabolic or allegorical, philosophical nature, particularly the drama
of the highest class was poetry. This assertion, however, in which
the youngest Bacon theory depends, as the door to the Angel, is a
wrong reason, and I'm surprised, that among the considerable number
of writings about the face to me to have been only a was that this
fundamental deception has noticed.

[Footnote: Ebendaselbst p. 4-7. W. Brandes: About the Shakespeare
mystery. Westermann Illustr. deutsche Monatshefte. October 1894.
P. 123-125.] In reality, Bacon taught that the human spirit within
him depict the world, in virtue of its assets (memory, imagination
and reason) in three kinds: the image of the Thatsachen or events
that the world description or H istory, the causes or laws that
the rational S cience but modern experience (what is now known in
France and England "positive philosophy" is called), the image of
history by means of our imagination, the imaginative or imaginary
image, the proper P oesi e.

This in turn is threefold, since it either in the history of past
events or present recounts acts or eventually as demonstrating
significant operations of the first kind of poetry is epic, the
second dramatic, the third parabolic, as the parables, fables and
myths, illustrating the half and half to the veil of moral and
religious truths serve. It is, incidentally said, very characteristically,
that Bacon poetry only as W eltabbild are allowed to make the lyric
genre, the representation of their own inside the Herzensergießungen
the language of eros, and not exclude them to poetry, but the
rhetoric is expected. Do you really believe that this man could
be a poet that he is the poet of "Romeo and Juliet" that he was
Shakespeare? As we dream of things really, which are only imaginary,
then the poetry of Bacon, This imaginary picture of the world, once
said that they like a dream of science is (_tanquam scientiae
somnium_), he has the poetry in the spirit of the Renaissance as
a kind of science is less than the erudition and scholarly education
(_genus doctrinae_) considers without which neither a poetic works
to make yet to understand.

The consistent theme of all types of poetry is it the G Bacon chichte
(_historia_). If he is of the parabolic poetry as emblematic of a
history (_historia cum typo_) says that the same among the remaining
species excellent (_inter reliquas eminet_), he is not the poetic
Werth, but the r eligi ö sen allegorical nature of the seal stress
want. [Footnote: _EN dignitate et augmentis scientiarum Lib II, cp.
XIII. Works I, p. 520_.]

He has not come to mind, the types of poetry abzustufen or Range to
organize: the epic poetry, the dramatic, but the two parabolic
override it gave him even less in the sense you can come, now the
dramatic and parabolic combination of poetry and the parabolic D
rama for the highest class of poetry to explain.

[Footnote: Bormann, p. 7] Such an arrangement and type of variation
seems to me as if someone in the military soldiers on foot,
on horseback and on Lake Division, then in accordance with the
hobby of his soldiers walk the horses and prefer sea or überordnen
finally the two higher species combination and now the eiterzur R
S ee for the highest class of the military wanted to explain!

Ah! perhaps I did not
pray so much.  I heard of the crossing of the Rhine at Brisach, and
then came rumours of a tremendous battle at Freiburg.  The bells had
only just begun to ring, when Pierre, our groom, galloped into the
town, and sent up at once his packet.  His master, he said, was
wounded, but not badly, and had covered himself with glory.  I tore
open the packet.  There were a few lines by his own dear hand;--

'My heart--I shall be with thee soon to rest in thy care--D.G.  Kiss
your son.  Thy B.'

The rest of the packet was from my half-brother De Solivet, and told
how, in the frightful attack on the vineyard at Freiburg, seven times
renewed, my dear, dear Philippe had received a shot in the knee, just
as he was grasping a Bavarian standard, which he carried off with
him.  He would have returned to the charge, but faintness overpowered
him, and he was supported on horseback from the field to the tent.
The wound had been dressed, and the surgeon saw no occasion for
alarm. M. de Solivet, who had a slight wound himself, and M.
d'Aubepine, who was quite uninjured, though he had done prodigies of
valour, would tend him with all their hearts.  I had better send the
carriage and horses at once to bring him back, as the number of
wounded was frightful, and means of transport were wanting.  Then
followed a message of express command from my husband that I was not
to think of coming with the carriage.  He would not have me at
Freiburg on any account.

I submitted; indeed I saw no cause for fear, and even rejoiced that
for a long time I should have my husband to myself.  I made all ready
for him, and taught my little Gaspard now he would say: 'Soyez le
bienvenu, mon papa.'

So passed a week.  Then one day there was a clanking of spurs on the
stairs; I flew to the door and there stood M. d'Aubepine.

'Is he near?' I cried, and then I saw he was white and trembling.

'Ah! no,' he cried; 'he is at Brisach!  We could bring him no
farther.  Can you come with me, Madame?  He asked incessantly for
you, and it might--it might be that your coming may revive him.'

And then this wild headstrong youth actually sank into a chair, hid
his face on the table, and sobbed as if his heart would break.

I had no time for weeping then.  I sent for the first physician in
Nancy, and offered him any sum in the world to accompany me; I had to
make almost wild efforts to procure a horse, and at last had to force
one from the governor by my importunities.  I collected wine and
cordials, and whatever could be of service, and after his first
outburst my young brother-in-law helped me in a way I can never
forget.  No doubt the pestiferous air caused by the horrible carnage
of Freiburg had poisoned the wound.  As soon as possible my husband
was removed; but the mischief had been already done; the wound was in
a bad state, fever had set in, and though he struggled on stage after
stage, declaring that he should be well when he saw me, the agony had
been such on the last day that they barely got him to Brisach, and he
there became delirious, so that M. de Solivet decided on remaining
with him, while the Count came on to fetch me.  He had ridden ever
since four o'clock in the morning, and yet was ready to set out again
as soon as my preparations were complete.  Oh, I can never overlook
what he was to me on that journey!

Hope kept us up through that dismal country--the path of war, where
instead of harvest on the August day we saw down-trodden, half-burned
wheat fields, where a few wretched creatures were trying to glean a
few ears of wheat.  Each village we passed showed only blackened
walls, save where at intervals a farmhouse had been repaired to serve
as an estafette for couriers from the French army.  The desolation of
the scene seemed to impress itself on my soul, and destroy the hopes
with which I had set forth; but on and on we went, till the walls of
Brisach rose before us.

He was in the governor's quarters, and only at the door, I perceived
the M. d'Aubepine had much doubted whether we should find him alive.
However, that one consolation was mine.  He knew me; he smiled again
on me; he called me by all his fondest names; he said that now he
could rest.  For twenty-four hours we really thought that joy was
working a cure.  Alas! then he grew worse again, and when the pain
left him, mortification had set in, and we could only send for a
priest to administer the last Sacraments.

I am an old woman now, and what was then the cruelest anguish touches
me with pleasure when I think how he called me his guardian angel,
and thanked me for having been his shield from temptation, placing
his son in my sole charge, and commending his sister and his old
uncle to me--his poor little sister whose lot seemed to grieve him so
much.  He talked to the Count, who wept, tore his hair, and made
promises, which he really then intended to execute, and which at
least comforted my Philippe.

The good priest who attended him said, he had never seen anything
more edifying or beautiful, and that he had never heard the
confession of a military man showing a purer heart, more full of holy
love, trust, and penitence.  There was a great peace upon us all, as
his life ebbed away, and even the Count stood silent and awestruck.
They took me away at last.  I remember nothing but the priest telling
me that my husband was in Paradise.

I felt as if it were all a dream, and when presently my brother came
and took my hand, I cried out: 'Oh, wake me! Wake me!'  And when he
burst into tears I asked what he meant.

Looking back now I can see how very kind he was to me, though I made
little return, being altogether bewildered by the sudden strangeness
of my first grief.  Poor M. de Solivet! he must have had a heavy
charge for Armand d'Aubepine was altogether frantic with grief, and
did nothing to help him, while I could not weep, and sat like a
statue, hardly knowing what they said to me.  Nay, when the tidings
came that my father had been killed in the battle of Marston Moor
three weeks before, I was too dull and dead to grieve.  Eustace had
written to my husband in order that he might prepare me; I opened the
letter, and all that I can remember feeling was that I had no one to
shield me.

I had but one wish and sense of duty at that moment, namely, to carry
home those dear remains to the resting-place of his father in Anjou,
where I hope myself to rest.  It was of no use to tell me that all
places would be alike to my Philippe when we should awake on the
Resurrection day.  I was past reason, and was possessed with a
feeling that I would be sacrilege to leave him among the countless
unnamed graves of the wounded who, like him, had struggled as far as
Brisach to die.  I fancied I should not be able to find him, and,
besides, it was an enemy's country!  I believe opposition made me
talk wildly and terrify my brother; at any rate, he swore to me that
the thing should be done, if only I would return to Nancy and to my
child.  I fancied, most unjustly, that this was meant to deceive me,
and get me out of the way while they buried him whom I loved so much,
and I refused to stir without the coffin.

How my brother contrived it, I do not know, but the thing was done,
and though I was but a cart that carried the coffin to Nancy, I was
pacified.

At Nancy he arranged matters more suitably.  Here M. d'Aubepine, in
floods of tears, took leave of me to return to the army, and M. de
Solivet, whose wound disabled him from active service, undertook to
escort me and my precious to Anjou.

It was a long tedious journey, and my heart beats with gratitude to
him when I think what he undertook for me, and how dreary it must
have been for him, while I was too dead and dull to thank him, though
I hope my love and confidence evinced my gratitude in after life.

My dearest went first in a hearse drawn by mules, as was also my
large carriage,--that which we had so joyously bought together,
saying it would be like a kind of tent on our travels.  I traveled in
it with my child and my women, and M. de Solivet rode with our men-
servants.  Our pace was too slow for the fatigue to be too much for
him, and he always preceded me to every place where we halted to eat,
or where we lodged for the night, and had everything ready without a
thought or a word being needful from me.  He always stood ready to
give me his arm to take me to hear mass before we set out each day.
The perfect calm, and the quiet moving on, began to do me good.  I
felt as if the journey had always been going on, and only wished it
were endless, for when it was over I should feel my desolation, and
have no more to do for my Philippe.  But I began to respond to my
poor boy's caresses and playfulness a little more; I was not so short
and maussade with my women or with my good brother, and I tried to
pray at mass.  My brother has since told me that he never felt more
relieved in his life than once when he made little Gaspard bring me
some blue corn-flowers and wheat, which reminded me of my English
home, so that I began to weep so profusely, that he carried away the
poor frightened child, and left me to Tryphena.

One afternoon at a little village there was a look of festival; the
bells were ringing, everybody was hurrying to the church, and when we
stopped at the door of the inn my brother came to the carriage-window
and said he was afraid that we should not find it easy to proceed at
once, for a mission priest was holding a station, and no one seemed
able to attend to anything else.

'He is a true saint! he is just about to preach,' said the landlady,
who had come out with her gayest apron, her whitest cap, and all her
gold chains.  'Ah! the poor lady, it would do her heart good to hear
him preach; and by that time the roast would be ready--an admirable
piece of venison, sent for the occasion.  There he is, the blessed
man!'

And as I had just alighted from the carriage, for our mules had made
a double stage and could not go farther, I saw coming from the
prebytere three or four priests, with the sexton and the serving
boys.  One of them, a spare thin man, with a little bronze crucifix
in his hand, paused as he saw the hearse drawn up, clasped his hands
in prayer, and then lifted them in benediction of him who lay within.
I saw his face, and there was in it an indescribable heavenly
sweetness and pity which made me say to my brother: 'I must go and
hear him.'

My brother was so glad to hear me express any wish, that I believe,
if I had asked to go and dance on the village green, he would almost
have permitted it; and leaving my little one to play in the garden
under Tryphena's care, he gave me his arm, and we went into the
church, crowded--crowded so that we could hardly find room; but my
deep mourning made the good people respectfully make place for us and
give us chairs.

Ah! that sermon!  I cannot tell you it in detail; I only know that it
gave the strongest sense of healing balm to my sore heart, and seemed
in a wonderful way to lift me up into the atmosphere where my
Philippe was gone, making me feel that what kept me so far--far from
him was not death, nor his coffin, but my own thick husk of sin and
worldliness.  Much more there was, which seems now to have grown into
my very soul; and by the time it was over I was weeping tears no
longer bitter, and feeling nothing so much as the need to speak to
that priest.

M. de Solivet promised that I should, but we had long to wait, for
the saintly Abbe de Paul would not postpone the poor to the rich; nor
could my grief claim the precedence, for I was not the only broken-
hearted young widow in France, nor even in that little village.

I cannot be grateful enough to my brother that he put up with all the
inconveniences of sleeping at this little village, that I might carry
out what he though a mere woman's enthusiastic fancy: but in truth it
was everything to me.  After vespers the holy man was able to give me
an hour in the church, and verily it was the opening of new life to
me.  Since my light had been taken from me, all had been utter
desolate darkness before me.  He put a fresh light before me, which
now, after fifty years, I know to have been the dawn of better
sunshine than even that which had brightened my youth--and I thank my
good God, who has never let me entirely lose sight of it.

Very faint, almost disappointing, it seemed to me then.  I came away
from my interview feeling as if it had been vain to think there could
be any balm for a crushed heart, and yet when I awoke the next
morning, and dressed myself to hear mass before resuming my journey,
it was with the sense that there I should meet a friend and
comforter.  And when I looked at my little son, it was not only with
dreary passionate pity for the unconscious orphan, but with a growing
purpose to bring him up as his father's special charge,--nay, as that
from even a greater and nearer than my Philippe.

While, as we journeyed on, I gradually dwelt less on how piteous my
arrival would be for myself, and thought more and more of its sadness
for the poor old Marquis who had loved his nephew so much, till,
instead of merely fearing to reach Nid de Merle, I began to look
forward to it, and consider how to comfort the poor old man; for had
not my husband begged me to be the staff of his old age, and to fill
a daughter's place to him?


CHAPTER VII.

WIDOW AND WIFE


We had avoided Paris, coming through Troyes and Orleans, and thus our
sad strange journey lasted a full month.  Poor old M. de Nidemerle
had, of course, been prepared for our coming, and he came out in his
coach to meet us at the cross-roads.  My brother saw the mourning
liveries approaching, and gave me notice.  I descended from my
carriage, intending to go to him in his, but he anticipated me; and
there, in the middle of the road, the poor old man embraced me,
weeping floods of passionate tears of grief.  He was a small man,
shrunk with age, and I found him clinging to me so like a child that
I felt an almost motherly sense of protection and tenderness towards
his forlorn old age; but my English shyness was at the moment
distressed at the sense of all the servants staring at such a
meeting, and I cried out: 'Oh, sir! you should not have come thus.'
'What can I do, but show all honour to the heroic wife of my dear
child?' sobbed he; and, indeed, I found afterwards that my
persistence in bringing home my dearest to the tombs of his
forefathers had won for me boundless gratitude and honour.  They took
the hearse to the church of the convent at Bellaise, where its
precious burthen was to rest.  The obsequies, requiem, and funeral
mass were to take place the next day, and in the meantime I
accompanied the Marquis to the chateau, and we spent the evening and
great part of the night in talking of him whom we had both loved so
dearly, and in weeping together.

Then came the solemn and mournful day of the funeral.  I was taken
early to the convent, where, among the nuns behind the grille, I
might assist at these last rites.

Thickly veiled, I looked at no one except that I curtsied my thanks
to the Abbess before kneeling down by the grating looking into the
choir.  My grief had always been too deep for tears, and on that day
I was blessed in a certain exaltation of thoughts which bore me
onward amid the sweet chants to follow my Philippe, my brave, pure-
hearted, loving warrior, onto his rest in Paradise, and to think of
the worship that he was sharing there.

So I knelt quite still, but by and by I was sensible of a terrible
paroxysm of weeping from some one close to me.  I could scarcely see
more than a black form when I glanced round, but it seemed to me that
it was sinking; I put out my arm in support, and I found a head on my
shoulder.  I knew who it must be--my husband's poor little sister,
Madame d'Aubepine, and I held my arm round her with an impulse of
affection, as something that was his; but before all was over, I was
sure that she was becoming faint, and at last I only moved just in
time to receive her in my lap and arms, as she sank down nearly, if
not quite, unconscious.

I tore back the heavy veil that was suffocating her, and saw a tiny
thin white face, not half so large as my little Gaspard's round rosy
one.  Numbers of black forms hovered about with water and essences;
and one tall figure bent to lift the poor child from me, apologizing
with a tone of reproof, and declaring that Madame la Comtesse was
ashamed to inconvenience Madame.

'No,' I said; 'one sister could not inconvenience another,' and I
felt the feeble hand stealing round my waist, and saw a sort of smile
on the thin little lips, which brought back one look of my
Philippe's.  I threw off my own veil, and raised her in my arms so as
to kiss her, and in that embrace I did indeed gain a sister.

I did not heed the scolding and the murmuring; I lifted her; she was
very small, and light as a feather; and I was not merely tall, but
very strong, so I carried her easily to a chamber, which one of the
nuns opened for us, and laid her on the bed.  She clung to me, and
when some one brought wine, I made her drink it, and prayed that they
would leave us to ourselves a little while.

I know now that nothing but the privileges of my position on that day
would have prevailed to get that grim and terrible dame de compagnie
out of the room.  However, we were left alone, and the first thing
the poor young thing did when she could speak or move, was to throw
herself into my arms and cry:

'Tell me of him!'

'He sent his love.  He commended you to me,' I began.

'Did he?  Oh, my dear hero!  And how is he looking?'

So it was of her husband, not her brother, that she was thinking.  I
gave me a pang, and yet I could not wonder; and alas, d'Aubepine had
not given me any message at all for her.  However, I told her what I
thought would please her--of his handsome looks, and his favour with
the Duke of Enghien, and her great dark eyes began to shine under
their tear-swollen lids; but before long, that terrible woman knocked
at the door again to say that Madame la Comtesse's carriage was
ready, and that M. le Marquis awaited Madame la Vicomtesse.

We arranged our disordered dress, and went down hand-in-hand.  The
Marquis and the Abbess both embraced the poor little Countess, and I
assured her that we would meet again, and be much together.

'Madame la Comtesse will do herself the honour of paying her respects
to Madame la Vicomtesse,' said the dame de compagnie with the elder
M. d'Aubepine, and had regulated her household of late years.

'I congratulate myself on not belonging to that respectable
household,' said my brother.

M. de Nidemerle laughed, and said the good lady had brought with her
a fair share of Calvinist severity.  In fact, it was reported that
her conversion had been stimulated by the hope that she should be
endowed with her family property, and bestowed in marriage on the
young d'Aubepine, the father of the present youth, and that
disappointment in both these expectations had embittered her life.  I
was filled with pity for my poor little sister-in-law, who evidently
was under her yoke; and all the more when, a day or two later, the
tow ladies came in great state to pay me a visit of ceremony, and I
saw how pale and thin was the little Countess, and how cowed she
seemed by the tall and severe duenna.

Little Gaspard was trotting about.  The Marquis was delighted with
the child, and already loved him passionately; and the little fellow
was very good, and could amuse himself without troubling any one.

He took refuge with me from Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau; but as I
held him to kiss his aunt, her eyes filled with tears; and when I
asked whether her little girl could walk as well as he did, she
faltered so that I was startled, fearing that the child might have
died and I not have heard of it.

'She is out at nurse,' at last she murmured.

'Children are best at farms,' said Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau;
'Madame la Comtesse Douariere is not to be incommoded.'  The old man
held out his arms to my little boy, and said something of his being a
pleasure instead of an inconvenience; but though the lady answered
politely, she looked so severe that my poor child hid his face on my
bosom and began to cry, by way of justifying her.

However, when she was gone, both the gentlemen agreed that the little
fellow was quite right, and showed his sense, and that if they had
been only two years old, they would have cried too.

That was all in my favour when I entreated M. de Nidemerle to let me
have a visit from my sister-in-law,--not a mere call of ceremony, but
a stay at the chateau long enough for me to get acquainted with her.
Not only was she the only sister of my dear Philippe, but the
Marquis, her uncle, was her guardian and only near relative, so that
he had a right to insist, more especially as the old Countess was
imbecile and bedridden.

I think he felt towards me much as he would have done if he had been
shut up in a room with Gaspard, ready to give me anything I begged
for, provided I would not cry.  He was very good to me, and I could
not but be sorry for the poor, bereaved, broken old man, and try to
be a daughter to him; and thus our relations were very different from
what they had been on our journey to Paris together in the coach.  At
any rate, he promised me that I should be gratified, and the day
after my brother left us, he actually went over to Chateau
d'Aubepine, and brought off his niece in the carriage with him,
presenting her to me in the hall like the spoils of war.  She was
frightened, formal, and ceremonious all super time, but I thought she
was beginning to thaw, and was more afraid of the Marquis than of me.
We played at cards all the evening, the Cure being sent for to make
up the set, and now and then I caught her great eyes looking at me
wistfully; indeed, I was obliged to avoid them lest they should make
me weep; for it was almost the look that my Philippe used to cast on
me in those early days when we had not begun to know one another.

At last we went up to bed.  But without taking your lower origin to
your booth and your low poverty to think like you on the highest peaks
of happiness and swing demand nothing less than the daughter of
thy Lord and territories, only to say a word needs to get to spoil,
and to crush. I do not want to mention what concerns yourself, because
you need to do in your inside consider wofern you only halfway good
at understanding are.

I just want to speak of what I am concerned.

How did such a strange idea in his head can come to the Sultan that I
go and request him to do, to you the princess, his daughter, the
wife to give?

Put also, I would have the effrontery, in his sacred person to come
to such an unrhymed Please forward to whom should I contact because,
just vorgelassen to be?

Do thou not that the first, which I anredete, treat me as Närrin and
with ignominy and Schimpf would continue to hunt, as I deserved it?
If we also assume that there would be no difficulty, audience with
the Sultan to get because I know that it is easy to reach him, if
you ask for justice, and that he likes to his subjects when they
question him approach, I also know that he had fun with a grace
granted to the man asks him if he sees that it deserves and is
worthy of her: but because you're in the same case, and do you think
deserves the grace to have I will ask for you?

Are you worthy of her? What did you do for your prince or your
fatherland done and how well did you? If you now have done nothing
to such a high to earn grace, and the rest are not worthy of her,
with what face could I then ask how I could even open his mouth to
the Sultan to make this proposal? His reputation and majestic splendor
of his court would I even shut the mouth, to me, I was shaking in
front of your father, if I consider it just a little thing had to
ask.

Another reason is still there, my son, you did not consider, namely,
that before our Sultans, if you ask for anything they want, may
not appear without a gift in hand.

What gift could you offer to him because? And if you did something to
the attention of such a great monarch in the minimum rail-worth, in
what proportion will allow your gift with a request that you want
to do to him? Go into yourself and remember that you strive for
something that you can not reach. "Alaeddin heard everything
his mother said to him from his plane taking, with great serenity,
and after having their ideas point by point, whereas withdrawn, he
finally took the floor and said, "I confess, my dear mother, that
it is a great boldness of mine is so high up in due time, and at
the same time very ill, that I am of you, with such heat and
nervously ask, you sollst the Sultan for me to stop, without obtaining
the appropriate measures to take to your hearing and a favorable
reception to give.

Forgive me this time. In the heat of passion, which I bemeistert
has, can you not be surprised if I did not at once everything that
I wanted to sleep can give envisaged did. I love the princess Bedrulbudur
far more than you can imagine, yes, I'm all of their senses and
insist firmly on the decision to marry.

I am totally agreed with me and decided. By the way, I thank you for
the opening, you've made me just because I consider it as
the first step towards the fortunate success, which I promise. "You
say to me that it was not custom, without a gift in your hand
in front of the Sultan to appear, and I have nothing worthy of his.
If thou thinkest that I had nothing what it could be over, I believe
that the objects, I knew in the underground cave was brought to the
Sultan certainly would make a lot of fun. I speak from the stones in
the two bags and belts, which we both initially thought to colored
glasses, but now my eyes have risen and I'll tell you, dear mother,
that jewel of inestimable value, the only big kings charge.

In the shops of the jewelers I was convinced of their value and you
can believe me on the floor: all that I have seen these gentlemen,
hold our own with absolutely no comparison, either in relation
to size, nor beauty and yet they sell the same to enormous sums. While
we can, however, the true value is not ours, but which may be how
he wanted so much but I understand that in order to be convinced that
the gift of the Sultan, the greatest joy to do it. You've given a
fairly large Porzellanvase, which just about fits, bring it forth
again, and let us see what effect they have, if we have different
colors according to their order. "Alaeddin mother brought the
vase, and Alaeddin took the jewels from the two bags out and put
them in the best order it. The effect that they got through the
variety of their colors and their radiance in bright daylight, was
so great that mother and son were almost blinded them, and wondered
about the dimensions because they had previously only when the same
lamp considered bogus.

Alaeddin although she had seen on the trees, where it appeared
as fruits, which granted a wonderful sight, alone, he was still child
and had such jewels only regarded as a toy. After the beauty of
the gift had considered a while, took Alaeddin the word again and
said: "Thou hast no more excuses now, dear mother, and you can not
apologize that we do not have matching gift offer. Here is one that
seems like me that you give a fairly friendly reception will provide.
"Although this gift Alaeddin mother, regardless of its beauty and
its splendor, not considered as valuable as her son, so they thought
that it could perhaps be adopted, and saw that, in this relationship
was nothing more to that. By contrast, she always came back to
Alaeddin call back, and this made her much anxiety.

"My son," she said to him, "I understand well that your gift and
grace to do effect in the eyes of the sultan's will, but if I get
your request to be present, so I feel in advance that I will not
force and will remain silent. In this way not only my course in vain,
but also the gift, according to your assertion so extraordinarily
precious is lost, and I will have to deduct with ignominy, to
proclaim to you that you hope in your hast deceived. I've already told
you and you will see that it comes. "[Illustration] [Illustration]"
But, "she added," that even I can do so much violence, according to
your wishes me to add and I would have enough power to request
such a venture as you expect of me, but so is the Sultan certainly
either laugh about me and me as a Närrin to your home, or he is
just being Zorn, whose Victims infallible we both will be.

"Alaeddin mother led several more such reasons to see their son to
other ideas to bring alone the charms of the princess Bedrulbudur had
a strong impression on his heart, when he was that his plane would
have leave off. So Alaeddin insisted on his request, and partly from
affection, partly out of fear that he would like some make a great
spread, overcame his reluctance and her mother finally understood
this, he wants to go. As it is late and the time in the palace to
go before the Sultan to enter on this day was already gone, so was
the case on the following day. "My son," said the mother, "if I am
the Sultan so welcomed as I made love to you hope, when he also
calmly hear the proposal, but then invade it, after your property
and able to ask -- tell me what should I answer him?

"" Dear mother, "replied Alaeddin, 'we do not want to advance
a cause trouble, which perhaps will not happen. We must now wait
to see how the sultan receives, and what you for an answer he gives
you. If he really about what you say, information wants to
have, so I will have to reflect an answer, and I feel confident
that the lamp, which we have been fed for several years, I am in
need will not leave.

"Alaeddin mother knew nothing about this reply, because they thought
that the lamp, which he said, still far greater miracles might
just as their livelihood sources. This calmed her. Alaeddin said
to her: "In any case, dear mother, think the matter secret, of
which depends the whole success fortunate that we can expect."
Then they separated to go to bed alone the fierce love and the
great, immense Fortunately plans, Alaeddin met mind, let him find
no rest. He stood before dawn to wake his mother and immediately
assailed them, they should be quickly dressed up to the gate of
the royal palace and go, and it would be opened simultaneously with
the Großvezier, vezi the child and the other state officials, was
the for the meeting will only push the Divan, which the sultan
always attended in person.

Alaeddin mother did everything her son wished. She took the Porzellanvase
filled with precious stones and wrapped them in double canvas, first
in very fine and pure white, then in less fine, which the latter at
the four Zipfeln band together to make things easier to bear. Finally
she went to the delight Alaeddin continued and took their way to the
palaces of the sultan. The Großvezier along with the rest vezi and
respected gentlemen of the court had already entered, when she
came to the gate. The number of waiting was very large. It opened
and she went with them in the Divan.

This was a moderation of the beautiful, deep and spacious room and
had a big, beautiful entrance, they turned so that they are
just opposite the Sultan, but the Großvezier and the other gentlemen
who were sitting in the rate, right and left had. It urged the
various parties one after the other, in order of how they had filed
their petitions, and their affairs have been presented, negotiated
and decided, until the hour when the Divan was closed as usual.

Then at the Sultan, dismissed the Assembly and went into his room
where he Großvezier followed.

Vezi and the other members of the Council of State went back home, as
well as those which appeared due to private affairs were a happily
that they had won their process, others dissatisfied because they
had been decided, and others in the hope that their cause in another
session will occur.

Alaeddin As a mother saw that the Sultan stood up and fortging,
excluded them from the fact that he is on this day will not reappear,
and went, like all the others, go home. Alaeddin, who with the Sultan
for the particular gift was to come back, initially not knowing what
he by the success of his program think. He feared a terrible message,
and had scarcely strength enough to open the mouth and to ask what
message they bring.

The good woman who never set foot in the palace of the sultan and
no idea of which had what was then the custom, made to the embarrassment
of her son to an end, by working with honesty and sincerity of many
other words to him: "My son, I have seen the sultan, and am firmly
convinced me that he also has seen.

I stood straight before him and no one prevented me to see him, but
he was too busy with those leading to his right and left sat, pity
that I had with him when I take the trouble and patience was what
he heard .

This lasted so long that he is, I think, last got bored, because he
stood up quite unexpectedly and went away quickly without a lot of
other people listen to that still wanted to talk to him. I was very
glad because I really started to lose patience, and was
impressed by the long standing extremely tired. However, nothing
spoiled, I will tomorrow go back to him, the Sultan is perhaps
then not so busy.

"So also the fierce fire of love in Alaeddin bosom burned, so he had
yet satisfied with this excuse, and with patience waffnen . He at
least had the satisfaction to see that his mother has already done the
hardest step, and the sight of the sultan had endured, and so could
he hope that they, like the others, in their presence had spoken with
him, will not be made , its mission is to discard as soon as the
favorable moment to moment.

On the next morning Alaeddin went back as early mother with her
gift after the palace of the Sultan, but they made this course
in vain, because they found the door locked, and the Divan learned
that only every other day and she was sitting on the following days
so come back should be. They now turned around and gave her son the
news, thus making up a new patient had. Even six in a row she went on
certain days in the palace, but always with success, nor, and perhaps
they would still run a hundred times in vain, if not the Sultan, who
at each meeting of the saw to finally draw attention to them would
have become. To this day the Sultan said finally, when he repealed
after meeting in his chambers had returned to his Großvezier: "For
some time I notice a woman who regularly every day, sitting where
I think, and something comes wrapped in canvas in his hand.

They will be closed from the beginning to the end of the session,
and always just me. You know well what is your desire? "The
Großvezier, who knew so little, when the sultan, however, wanted
no answer to stay. "Sir," he said, "it is well known to you that
women are often over minor matters plea lead. This is apparently
because in order for you to complain that perhaps bad flour sold
or otherwise wrongly it has inflicted, which is so little concern.

"The sultan was not satisfied with this answer and said:" If these
woman at the next meeting re-appears, so do not forget to let
them go, that I hear it. "The Großvezier kissed her hand and laid
it on his head, a sign that he was ready to off him to leave if he
did not fulfill this command. Alaeddin's mother was already so much
accustomed to the divan in front of the Sultan to appear that they
will not bother to watch, they only wofern her son was able to
show how much it's matter was, for him everything to do what in
their forces. So she went back to sitting on the palace and stood
as usual at the entrance of the Sultan Divan opposite. Großvezier of
his lecture had not yet begun, as the Sultan Alaeddin mother said.
This long patience with which he viewed himself and touched him.
"That you do not forget," he said to Großvezier, "there is again
the woman, which I recently told you: let them hierhertreten, then
we want to hear it first and her affair to bring clean."

As soon showed the Großvezier the wife of the Supreme bouncer, one of
his commands was prepared, and bade it brought them closer. The
Board of the bouncer came to Alaeddin mother and gave her a sign,
they followed him to the foothills of the royal throne, where he left
to get back to his place beside the Großvezier representative. Alaeddin
mother followed the example of others, they speak with the Sultan
had seen: they threw himself to the ground with her forehead touched
the carpet, which covered steps of the throne, and remained in
that position until the Sultan ordered her to stand up. When she
was up, he said to her: "Good woman, I see you a long time in my Divan
and from beginning to end is at the entrance. Which leads you matter
here? "Alaeddin mother threw herself when she heard these words, for
the second time to the ground, and after it was up, she said: 'loftiest
of all the kings of the world, before I give you the extraordinary
and almost incredible thing tell to me before your high throne and
therefore I ask you to send me the audacity of the endeavor to
forgive, which I will talk to you.

It is so unusual, that I tremble and tears, and large shy wear to
make it my Sultan. "To her full liberty to give the Sultan ordered
all present to get out of the Divan and remove it with the
Großvezier to leave alone; Then he said to her, she could speak without
fear. Alaeddin mother did not with the quality of the Sultan, the
embarrassment of her, before the entire Assembly to be spared had
they wanted to even before his anger ensure she, with such a strange
request had feared. »Great King," she said, again moving the word,
"I dare you to even ask me that, in case you have my application
in at least find offensive or insulting solltest to advance your
forgiveness and mercy zusicherst." -- - "What it may be," replied
the Sultan, "I forgive you now, and it does not give you the slightest
pain zustoßen.

Say no aversion, "Mother Alaeddin After all these precautions were
taken, because the full wrath of the sultan for her bold request
feared she told him all honesty, at which occasion the princess
Alaeddin Bedrulbudur seen the fierce love of him this unfortunate
moment eingeflößt, what statements he made about her and how she
had presented him to him by a passion discourage both for the king
than for his daughter in the highest grade was offensive.

"But," she continued, "take heed to these admonitions, and the insolence
of his desire to see my son insisted unwaveringly performances and
even threatened me if I would refuse to go to you and for him to stop
the princess. Nevertheless, I am overcome great deal, until I
showed him this favor, and I ask you again, great king, that you
not only me but also my son Alaeddin forgive like the daring idea had,
after so high connection to strive. "The Sultan heard the whole
speech with great gentleness and kindness, without in the least anger
and indignation to betray, or even just the thing to mockingly.
Before he answered the good woman, he asked her what they were in
their linen cloth was wrapped.

Immediately she took the porcelain vase, presented them to the foot of
the throne, and after they niedergeworfen, revealed the same and
handed it to the Sultan.

It is impossible, the surprise and astonishment of the Sultan to
describe it as a vase in that so many handsome, precious, perfect and
brilliant gems beheld, and all of a size like he never had seen.
His astonishment was so great that he quite a while sitting
motionless.

Finally, when he again had gathered, he received the gift from the
hands of the woman and cried beside himself with joy: "Oh, how
beautiful, how wonderful!" After all the gems one after the other
in the hand, admires and according to their most outstanding
characteristics was praised, he turned to his Großvezier, showed him
the vase, and said to him: 'Look again and you'll have to admit
that one of the world precious and nothing can be perfect.

"The vezi was also completely charmed. »More now," continued the
Sultan continued, "what do you say of this gift? Is it the
princess, my daughter, not worthy, and I can not at this price the
man give the order to stop it? "These words Großvezier displaced
in the unrest embarrassing. The Sultan had promised him that some
time ago to understand that he is the princess's sons to remember.
But now he was afraid, and not without reason, the Sultan wishes
through this rich and extraordinary gift blinded themselves decide
otherwise.

He therefore approached him and whispered into his ear: "Sir, I must
admit that the gift is worthy of the princess. Solo, I pray thee, me
three months to treat, before you decide. I hope that my son, the
sooner you raise your eyes to deigned even before that time her a
far more precious gift can make this as Alaeddin, you never know.
"As much as now, the Sultan was convinced that the impossible
Großvezier his son in the state could put the princess a gift of
equal value, so he still listened to him and granted him this wish.

But the next day, the Abbe, who had loved his pupil like a son, could
talk of him to me, and it was a comfort I cannot express to my aching
heart to converse with him.  Everything had settled into an ordinary
course.  People fancied me consoled; I had attended to other things,
and I could not obtrude my grief on the Marquis or on Cecile; but on!
My sick yearning for my Philippe only grew the more because I might
not mention him or hear his name.  However, the Abbe only longed to
listen to all I could tell him of the last three years, and in return
to tell me much that I should never otherwise have known of the
boyhood and youth of my dear one.

I felt as if the good man must never leave us, and I entreated M. de
Nidemerle to retain him at once as governor to little Gaspard. The
Marquis laughed at securing a tutor for a child not yet three years
old; but he allowed that the boy could not be in better hands, and,
moreover, he was used to the Abbe, and liked to take his arm and to
have him to make up the party at cards, which he played better than
the cure.

So the Abbe remained as chaplain and as tutor, and, until Gaspard
should be old enough to profit by his instructions, Cecile and I
entreated him to accept us as pupils.  I had begun to feel the need
of some hard and engrossing work to take off my thoughts alike from
my great sorrow and my pressing anxieties about my English home, so
that I wished to return to my Latin studies again, and the Abbe
helped me to read Cicero de Officiis again, and likewise some of the
writings of St. Gregory the Great.  He also read to both of us the
Gospels and  Mezeray's HISTORY OF FRANCE, which I did not know as an
adopted Frenchwoman ought to know it, and Cecile knew not at all;
nay, the nuns had scarcely taught her anything, even about religion,
nor the foundations of the faith.

No, I can never explain what we, both of us, owe to the Abbe
Bonchamp.  You, my eldest grandchild, can just recollect the good old
man as he sat in his chair and blessed us ere he passed to his rest
and the reward of his labours.


CHAPTER IX.

THE FIREBRAND OF THE BOCAGE.


Yes, the life at Nid de Merle was very peaceful.  Just as exquisitely
happy it was in spite of alarms, anxieties, perplexities, and
discomforts, so when I contemplate my three years in Anjou I see that
they were full of peace, though the sunshine of my life was over and
Cecile had never come.

We had our children about us, for we took little Maurice d'Aubepine
home as soon as possible; we followed the course of devotion and
study traced for us by the Abbe; we attended to the wants of the
poor, and taught their children the Catechism; we worked and lived
like sisters, and I thought all that was life to me was over.  I
forgot that at twenty-two there is much life yet to come, and that
one may go through many a vicissitude of feeling even though one's
heart be in a grave.

The old Marquis did not long remain with us.  He caught a severe cold
in the winter, and had no strength to rally.  Tryphena would have it
that he sank from taking nothing but tisanes made of herbs; and that
if she might only have given him a good hot sack posset, he would
have recovered; but he shuddered at the thought, and when a doctor
came from Saumur, he bled the poor old gentleman, faintings came on,
and he died the next day.  I was glad Tryphena's opinion was only
expressed in English.

The poor old man had been very kind to me, and had made me love him
better than I should have supposed to be possible when we crossed
from Dover.  The very last thing he had done was to write to my
mother, placing his hotel at Paris at her disposal in case she and
her son should find it expedient to leave England; and when his will
was opened it proved that he had left me personal guardian and
manager of the estates of his heir, my little Gaspard, now M. de
Nidemerle, joining no one with me in the charge but my half-brother
the Baron de Solivet.

I had helped him, read letters to him, and written them for him, and
overlooked his accounts enough for the work not to be altogether new
and strange to me, and I took it up eagerly.  I had never forgotten
the sermon by the holy Father Vincent, whom the Church has since
acknowledged as a saint, and our excellent Abbe had heightened the
impression that a good work lay prepared for me; but he warned me to
be prudent, and I am afraid I was hot-headed and eager.

Much had grieved me in the six months I had spent in the country, in
the state of the peasantry.  I believe that in the Bocage they are
better off than in many parts of France, but even there they seemed
to me much oppressed and weighed down.  Their huts were wretched--
they had no chimneys, no glass in the windows, no garden, not even
anything comfortable for the old to sit in; and when I wanted to give
a poor rheumatic old man a warm cushion, I found it was carefully
hidden away lest M. l'Intendant should suppose the family too well
off.

Those seigniorial rights then seemed to me terrible.  The poor people
stood in continual fear either of the intendant of the king or of the
Marquis, or of the collector of the dues of the Church.  At harvest
time, a bough was seen sticking in half the sheaves.  In every ten,
one sheaf is marked for the tithe, tow for the seigneur, two for the
king; and the officer of each takes the best, so that only the worst
are left for the peasant.

Nay, the only wonder seemed to me that there were any to be had at
all, for our intendant thought it his duty to call off the men from
their own fields for the days due from them whenever he wanted
anything to be done to our land (or his own, or his son's-in-law),
without the slightest regard to the damage their crops suffered from
neglect.

I was sure these things ought not to be.  I thought infinitely more
good might be done by helping the peasants to make the most of what
they had, and by preventing them from being robbed in my son's name,
than by dealing out gallons of soup and piles of bread at the castle
gates to relieve the misery we had brought on them, or by dressing
the horrible sores that were caused by dirt and bad food.  I told the
Abbe, and he said it was a noble inspiration in itself, but that he
feared that one lady, and she a foreigner, could not change the
customs of centuries, and that innovations were dangerous.  I also
tried to fire with the same zeal for reformation the Abbess of
Bellaise, who was a young and spirited woman, open to conviction; but
she was cloistered, and could not go to investigate matters as I did,
with the Abbe for my escort, and often with my son.  He was enchanted
to present any little gift, and it was delightful that the peasants
should learn to connect all benefits with Monsieur le Marquis, as
they already called the little fellow.

I think they loved me the better when they found that I was the
grandchild of the Madame Eustace who had been hidden in their
cottages.  I found two or three old people who still remembered her
wanderings when she kept the cows and knitted like a peasant girl
among them.  I was even shown the ruinous chamber where my aunt
Thistlewood was born, and the people were enchanted to hear how much
the dear old lady had told me of them, and of their ways, and their
kindness to her.

I encouraged the people to make their cottages clean and not to be
afraid of comforts, promising that our intendant at least should not
interfere with them.  I likewise let him know that I would not have
men forced to leave their fields when it would ruin their crops, and
that it was better that ours should suffer than theirs.  He was
obsequious in manner and then disobeyed me, till one day I sent three
labourers back again to secure their own hay before they touched
ours.  And when the harvest was gathered in the Abbe and I went round
the fields of the poor, and I pointed out the sheaves that might be
marked, and they were not the best.

I taught the girls to knit as they watched their cows, and promised
to buy some of their stockings, so that they might obtain sabots for
themselves with the price.  They distrusted me at first, but before
long, they began to perceive that I was their friend, and I began to
experience a nice kind of happiness.

Alas! even this was too sweet to last, or perhaps, as the good Abbe
warned me, I was pleasing myself too much with success, and with
going my own way.  The first murmur of the storm came thus: I had
been out all the afternoon with the Abbe, Armantine's bonne, and the
two children, looking at the vineyards, which always interested me
much because we have none like them in England.  In one, where they
were already treading the grapes, the good woman begged that M. le
Marquis and Mademoiselle would for once tread the grapes to bring
good luck.  They were frantic with joy; we took off their little
shoes and silk stockings, rolled them up in thick cloths, and let
them get into the trough and dance on the grapes with their little
white feet.  That wine was always called 'the Vintage of le Marquis.'
We could hardly get them away, they were so joyous, and each carried
a great bunch of grapes as a present to the little boy at home and
his mother.

We thought we saw a coachman's head and the top of a carriage passing
through the lanes, and when we came home I was surprised to find my
sister-in-law in tears, thoroughly shaken and agitated.

Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau had been to see her, she said, and had
told her the Count was in Paris, but had not sent for her; and I
thought that enough to account for her state; but when the children
began to tell their eager story, and hold up their grapes to her, she
burst again into tears, and cried: 'Oh, my dear sister, if you would
be warned.  It is making a scandal, indeed it is!  They call you a
plebeian.'

I grew hot and angry, and demanded what could be making a scandal,
and what business Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau had to meddle with me
or my affairs.

'Ah! but she will write to my husband, and he will take me from you,
and that would be dreadful.  Give it up.  Oh, Marguerite, give it up
for MY sake!'

What was I to give up? I demanded.  Running about the country, it
appeared, like a farmer's wife rather than a lady of quality, and
stirring up the poor against their lords.  It was well known that all
the English were seditious.  See what they had done to their king;
and here was I, beginning the same work.  Had not the Count's
intendant at Chateau d'Aubepine thrown in his teeth what Madame de
Bellaise did and permitted?  He was going to write to Monseigneur,
ay, and the king's own intendant would hear of it, so I had better
take care, and Mademoiselle had come out of pure benevolence to
advise Madame la Comtesse to come and take refuse at her husband's
own castle before the thunderbolt should fall upon me, and involve
her in my ruin.

I laughed.  I was sure that I was neither doing nor intending any
harm; I thought the whole a mere ebullition of spite on the duenna's
part to torment and frighten her emancipated victim, and I treated
all as a joke to reassure Cecile, and even laughed at the Abbe for
treating the matter more seriously, and saying it was always perilous
to go out of a beaten track.

'I thought the beaten track and wide road were the dangerous ones,' I
said, with more lightness, perhaps, than suited the subject.

'Ah, Madame,' he returned gravely, 'you have there the truth; but
there may be danger in this world in the narrow path.'

The most effectual consolation that I could invent for Cecile was
that if her husband thought me bad company for her, he could not but
fetch her to her proper home with him, as soon as peace was made.
Did I really think so?  The little thing grew radiant with the hope.

Days went on, we heard nothing, and I was persuaded that the whole
had been, as I told Cecile, a mere figment of Mademoiselle de
Gringrimeau's.

I had written to beg my mother, with my brother and sister, to come
and join us, and I as already beginning to arrange a suite of rooms
for them, my heart bounding as it only can do at the thought of
meeting those nearest and dearest of one's own blood.

I remember that I was busy giving orders that the linen should be
aired, and overlooking the store of sheets, when Gaspard and
Armantine from the window called out: 'Horses, horses, mamma! fine
cavaliers!'

I rushed to the window and recognized the Solivet colours.  No doubt
the baron had come to announce the arrival of my mother and the rest,
and I hastened down to meet him at the door, full of delight, with my
son holding my hand.

My first exclamation after the greeting was to ask where they were,
and how soon they would arrive, and I was terribly disappointed when
I found that he had come alone, and that my mother, with Eustace and
Annora, were at the Hotel de Nidemerle, at Paris, without any
intention of leaving it.  He himself had come down on business, as
indeed was only natural since he was joined with me in the
guardianship of my little Marquis, and he would likewise be in time
to enjoy the chase over the estates.

He said no more of his purpose then, so I was not alarmed; and he
seemed much struck with the growth and improvement of Gaspard.  I had
much to hear of the three who were left to me of my own family.  M.
de Solivet had never seen them before, and could hardly remember his
mother, so he could not compare them with what they were before their
troubles; but I gathered that my mother was well in health, and
little the worse for her troubles, and that my little Nan was as tall
as myself, a true White Ribaumont, with an exquisite complexion, who
would be all the rage if she were not so extremely English, more
English even than I had been when I had arrived.

'And my brother, my Eustace.  Oh, why did he not come with you?' I
asked.

And M. de Solivet gravely answered that our brother was detained by a
suit with the Poligny family respecting the estate of Ribaumont, and,
besides, that the rapidity of the journey would not have agreed with
his state of health.  I only then fully understood the matter, for
our letter had been few, and had to be carefully written and made
short; and though I knew that, at the battle of Naseby, Eustace had
been wounded and made prisoner, he had written to me that his hurt
was not severe, and that he had been kindly treated, through the
intervention of our cousin Harry Merrycourt, who, to our great
regret, was among the rebels, but who had become surety for Eustace
and procured his release.

I now heard that my brother had been kept with the other prisoners in
a miserable damp barn, letting in the weather on al sides, and with
no bedding or other comforts, so that when Harry Merrycourt sought
him out, he had taken a violent chill, and had nearly died, not from
the wound, but from pleurisy.  He had never entirely recovered,
though my mother thought him much stronger and better since he had
been in France, out of sight of all that was so sad and grievous to a
loyal cavalier in England.

'They must come to me,' I cried.  'He will soon be well in this
beautiful air; I will feed him with goat's mild and whey, and
Tryphena shall nurse him well.'

M. de Solivet made no answer to this, but told me how delighted the
Queen of England had to welcome my mother, whom she had at once
appointed as one of her ladies of the bedchamber; and then we spoke
of King Charles, who was at Hampton Court, trying to make terms with
the Parliament, and my brother spoke with regret and alarm of the
like spirit of resistance in our own Parliament of Paris, backed by
the mob.  I remember it was on that evening that I first heard the
name Frondeurs, or Slingers, applied to the speechifiers on either
side who started forward, made their hit, and retreated, like the
little street boys with their slings.  I was to hear a great deal
more of that name.

It was not till after supper that I heard the cause of M. de
Solivet's visit.  Cecile, who always retired early, went away sooner
than usual to leave us together, so did the Abbe, and then the baron
turned to me and said: 'Sister, how soon can you be prepared to come
with me to Paris?'

I was astounded, thinking at first that Eustace's illness must be
more serious than he had led me to suppose, but he smiled and said
notre frere de Volvent, which was the nearest he could get to Walwyn,
had nothing do with it; it was by express command of the Queen
Regent, and that I might thank my mother and the Queen of England
that it was no worse.  'This is better than a letter de catche,' he
added, producing a magnificent looking envelope with a huge seal of
the royal French arms, that made me laugh rather nervously to brave
my dismay, and asked what he called THAT.  He responded gravely that
it was no laughing matter, and I opened it.  It was an official order
that Gaspard Philippe Beranger de Bellaise, Marquis de Nidemerle,
should be brought to the Louvre to be presented to the King.

'Well,' I said, 'I must go to Paris.  Ought I to have brought my boy
before?  I did not know that he ought to pay his homage till he was
older.  Was it really such a breach of respect?'

'You are a child yourself, my sister,' he said, much injuring my
dignity.  'What have you not been doing here?'

Then it came on me.  The intendant of the King had actually written
complaints of me to the Government.  I was sewing disaffection among
the peasants by the favours I granted my own, teaching them for
rebellion like that which raged in England, and bringing up my son in
the same sentiments.  Nay, I was called the Firebrand of the Bocage!
If these had been the days of the great Cardinal de Richelieu, my
brother assured me, I should probably have been by this time in the
Bastille, and my son would have been taken from me for ever!'

However, my half-brother heard of it in time, and my mother had flown
to Queen Henrietta, who took her to the Queen-Regent, and together
they had made such representations of my youth, folly, and
inexperience that the Queen-Mother, who had a fellow-feeling for a
young widow and her son, and at last consented to do nothing worse
than summon me and my child to Paris, where my mother and her Queen
answered for me that I should live quietly, and give no more umbrage
to the authorities; and my brother De Solivet had been sent off to
fetch me!

I am afraid I was much more angry than grateful, and I said such hot
things about tyranny, cruelty, and oppression that Solivet looked
about in alarm, lest walls should have ears, and told me he feared he
had done wrong in answering for me.  He was really a good man, but he
could not in the least understand why I should weep hot tears for my
poor people whom I was just hoping to benefit.  He could not enter
into feeling for Jacques Bonhomme so much as for his horse or his
dog; and I might have argued for years without making him see
anything but childish folly in my wishing for any mode of relief
better than doles of soup, dressing wounds, and dowries for maidens.

However, there was no choice; I was helpless, and resistance would
have done my people no good, but rather harm, and would only have led
to my son being separated from me.  Indeed, I cherished a hope that
when the good Queen Anne heard the facts she might understand better
than my half-brother did, and that I might become an example and
public benefactor.  My brother must have smiled at me in secret, but
he did not contradict me.

My poor mother and the rest would not have been flattered by my
reluctance to come to Paris; but in truth the thought of them was my
drop of comfort, and if Eustace could not come to me I must have gone
to him.  And Cecile--what was to become of Cecile?

To come with me of course.  Here at least Solivet agreed with me, for
he had as great a horror of Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau as I had, and
knew, moreover, that she wrote spiteful letters to the Count
d'Aubepine about his poor little wife, which happily were treated
with the young gentleman's usual insouciance.  Solivet was of my
opinion that the old demoiselle had instigated this attack.  He
thought so all the more when he heard that she was actually
condescending to wed the intendant of Chateau d'Aubepine.  But he
said he had no doubt that my proceedings would have been stopped
sooner or later, and that it was well that it should be done before I
committed myself unpardonably.

Madame d'Aubepine had been placed in my charge by her husband, so
that I was justified in taking her with me.  Her husband had spent
the last winter at Paris, but was now with the army in the Low
Countries, and the compliments Solivet paid me on my dear friend's
improvement in appearance and manner inspired us with strong hopes
that she might not attract her husband; for though still small, pale,
and timid, she was very unlike the frightened sickly child he had
left.

I believe she was the one truly happy person when we left the Chateau
de Nid de Merle.  She was all radiant with hope and joy, and my
brother could not but confess she was almost beautiful, and a
creature whom any man with a heart must love.


CHAPTER X.

OLD THREADS TAKEN UP.


I think M. de Solivet realised a little better what the sacrifice was
to me, or rather how cruel the parting was to my poor people, when we
set forth on our journey.  We had tried to keep the time of our
departure a secret, but it had not been possible to do so, and the
whole court was filled with people weeping and crying out to their
young lord and their good lady, as they called me, not to abandon
them, kissing our dresses as we walked along, and crowding so that we
could hardly pass.

Indeed, a lame man, whom I had taught to make mats, threw himself
before the horses of our carriage, crying out that we might as well
drive over him and kill him at once; and an old woman stood up almost
like a witch or prophetess, crying out: 'Ah! that is the way with you
all.  You are like all the rest! You gave us hope once, and now you
are gone to your pleasure which you squeeze out of our heart's
blood.'

'Ah, good mother,' I said; 'believe me, it is not by my own will that
I leave you; I will never forget you.'

'I trust,' muttered Solivet, 'that no one is here to report all this
to that intendant de Roi,' and he hurried me into the carriage; but
there were tears running down his cheeks, and I believe he emptied
his purse among them, though not without being told by some of the
poor warm-hearted creatures that no money could repay them for the
loss of Madame la Comtesse.

'I did not know how sweet it is to be beloved,' he said to me.  'It
is almost enough to tempt one to play the role de bon seigneur.'

'Ah! brother, if you would.  You are no foreigner, you are wiser and
would not make yourself suspected like me.'

He only laughed and shrugged his shoulders; but he was as good to our
poor as it is possible to be as we live here in France, where we are
often absolutely complelled to live at court, and our expenses there
force us to press heavily on our already hard-driven peasants.  I
sometimes wonder whether a better time will come, when out good Duke
of Burgundy tries to carry out the maxims of Monseigneur the
Archbishop of Cambray; but I shall not live to see that day.
[Footnote: No wonder Madame de Bellaise's descendants dust not
publish these writings while the ancien regime continued!]

In due time we arrived in Paris.  It was pouring with rain, so no one
came to meet us, though I looked out at every turn, feeling that
Eustace must indeed be unwell, or no weather would have kept him from
flying to meet his Meg.  Or had he in these six long years ceased to
care for me, and should I find him a politician and a soldier, with
his heart given to somebody else and no room for me?

My heart beat so fast that I could hardly attend to the cries of
wonder and questions of the two children, and indeed of Cecile, to
whom everything was as new and wonderful as to them, though in the
wet, with our windows splashed all over, the first view of Paris was
not too promising.  However, at last we drove beneath our own porte
cochere, and upon the steps there were all the servants.  And
Eustace, my own dear brother, was at the coach-door to meet us and
hand me out.

I passed from his arms to those of my mother, and then to my
sister's.  Whatever might come and go, I could not but feel that
there was an indefinable bliss and bien-etre in their very presence!
It was home--coming home--more true content and rest than I had felt
since that fatal day at Nancy.

My mother was enchanted with her grandson, and knew how to welcome
Madame d'Aubepine as one of the family, since she was of course to
reside with us.  The Abbe also was most welcome to my mother.

How we all looked at one another, to find the old beings we had
loved, and to learn the new ones we had become!  My mother was of
course the least altered; indeed, to my surprise, she was more
embonpoint than before, instead of having the haggard worn air that I
had expected, and though she wept at first, she was soon again
smiling.

Eustace, Baron Walwyn and Ribaumont, as he now unfortunately had
become, sat by me.  He was much taller than when we had parted, for
had not then reached his full height, and he looked the taller from
being very thin.  His moustache and pointed beard had likewise
changed him, but there was clear bright colour on his cheek, and his
dear brown eyes shone upon me with their old sweetness; so that it
was not till we had been together some little time that I found that
the gay merry lad whom I had left had become not only a man, but a
very grave and thoughtful man.

Annora was a fine creature, well grown, and with the clearest,
freshest complexion, of the most perfect health, yet so pure and
delicate, that one looked at her like a beautiful flower; but it
somehow struck me that she had a discontented and almost defiant
expression.  She seemed to look at me with a sort of distrust, and to
be with difficulty polite to Madame d'Aubepine, while she was almost
rude to the Abbe.  She scarcely uttered a word of French, and made a
little cry and gesture of disgust, when Gaspard replied to her in his
native tongue, poor child.

She was the chief disappointment to me.  I had expected to find, not
indeed my little playfellow, but my own loving sister Nan; and this
young lady was like a stranger.  I thought, too, my mother would have
been less lively, she seemed to me to have forgotten everything in
the satisfaction of being at Paris.  At first I feared she was
looking at me with displeasure, but presently I observed that she had
discarded her widow's veil, and looked annoyed that I still wore
mine.  Otherwise she was agreeable surprised in me, and turned to M.
de Solivet, saying:

'Yes, my son, you are right, she is belle, assez belle; and when she
is dressed and has no more that provincial air, she will do very
well.'

It was Eustace, my brother, who gave me unmixed delight that evening,
unmixed save for his look of delicate health, for that he should be
graver was only suitable to my feelings, and we knew that we were in
perfect sympathy with one another whenever our eyes met, as of old,
while we had hardly exchanged a word.  And then, how gracious and
gentle he was with poor little Madame d'Aubepine, who looked up to
him like a little violet at the food of a poplar tree!

Supper passed in inquires after kinsfolk and old friends.  Alas! of
how many the answer was--slain, missing since such a battle.  In
prison, ruined, and brought to poverty, seemed to be the best I could
hear of any one I inquired after.  That Walwyn was not yet utterly
lost seemed to be owing to Harry Merrycourt.

'He on the wrong side!' I exclaimed.

'He looks on the question as a lawyer,' said my brother; 'holding the
duty of the nation to be rather to the law than to the sovereign.'

'Base!  Unworthy of a gentleman!' cried my mother.  'Who would
believe him the kinsman of the gallant Duc de Mericour?'

'He would be ashamed to count kindred with tat effeminate petit
maitre!' cried Annora.

'I think,' said Eustace, 'that the wrong and persecution that his
Huguenot grandfather suffered at the hands of his French family have
had much power in inspiring him with that which he declares is as
much loyalty as what I call by that honoured name.'

'You can speak of him with patience!' cried my mother.

'In common gratitude he is bound to do so,' said Annora.

For not only had Colonel Merrycourt preserved our brother's life
after Naseby, but he had found a plea of service to the King which
availed at the trial that followed at Westminster.  Harry had managed
to secure part of the estate, as he had likewise done for our other
kindred the Thistlewoods, by getting appointed their guardian when
their father was killed Chalgrove.  But soldiers had been quartered
on both families; there had been a skirmish at Walwyn with Sir Ralph
Hopton, much damage had been done to the house and grounds, and there
was no means of repairing it; all the plate had been melted up, there
was nothing to show for it but a little oval token, with the King's
head on one side, and the Queen's on the other; and as to the chaplet
of pearls---

There was a moment's silence as I inquired for them.  Annora said:

'Gone, of course; more hatefully than all the rest.'

My brother added, with a smile that evidently cost him an effort:

'You are the only pearl of Ribaumont left, Meg, except this one,'
showing me his ring of thin silver with one pearl set in it; 'I kept
back this one in memory of my grandmother.  So Nan will have to go to
her first ball without them.'

And had little Nan never been to a ball?  No; she had never danced
except that Christmas when a troop of cavaliers had been quartered at
Walwyn--a merry young captain and his lieutenant, who had sent for
the fiddles, and made them have a dance in the hall, Berenger, and
Nan, and all.  And not a week after, the young captain, ay, and our
dear Berry, were lying in their blood at Alresford.  Had Nan's heart
been left there? I wondered, when I saw how little she brightened at
the mention of the Court ball where she was to appear next week, and
to which it seemed my mother trusted that I should be invited in
token of my being forgiven.

I tried to say that I had never meant to return to the world, and
that I still kept to my mourning; but my mother said with authority
that I had better be grateful for any token of favour that was
vouchsafed to me.  She took me into her apartment after supper, and
talked to me very seriously; telling me that I must be very careful,
for that I had been so imprudent, that I should certainly have been
deprived of the custody of my son, if not imprisoned, unless my good
godmother, Queen Henrietta, and herself had made themselves
responsible for me.

I told my mother that I had done nothing, absolutely nothing, but
attend to the wants of my son's people, just as I had been used to
see my grandmother, and my aunt Thistlewood, or any English lady, do
at home.

'And to what had that brought England?' cried my mother.  'No, child,
those creatures have no gratitude nor proper feeling.  There is
nothing to do but to keep them down.  See how they are hampering and
impeding the Queen and the Cardinal here, refusing the registry of
the taxes forsooth, as if it were not honour enough to maintain the
King's wars and the splendour of his Court, and enable the nobility
to shine!'

'Surely it is our duty to do something for them in return,' I said;
but I was silenced with assurances that if I wished to preserve the
wardship of my child, I must conform in everything; nay, that my own
liberty was in danger.

Solivet had hinted as much, and the protection of my child was a
powerful engine; but--shall I confess it?--it galled and chafed me
terribly to feel myself taken once more into leading-strings.  I, who
had for three years governed my house as a happy honoured wife, and
for three more had been a chatelaine, complimented by the old uncle,
and after his death, the sole ruler of my son's domain; I was not at
all inclined to return into tutelage, and I could not look on my
mother after these six years, as quite the same conclusive authority
as I thought her when I left her.  The spirit of self-assertion and
self-justification was strong within me, and though I hope I did not
reply with ingratitude or disrespect, I would make no absolute
promise till I had heard what my brother Walwyn said of my position
in its secular aspect, and the Abbe Bonchamps in its religious point
of view.  So I bade my mother good-night, and went to see how Cecile
fared in her new quarters, which, to her grief, were in a wing
separated from mine by a long corridor.

My mother had arranged everything, ruling naturally as if she were
the mistress of the house.  Thus she installed me in the great room
where I had seen the old Marquis, though I would rather she had
retained it, and given me that which I had occupied when I was there
with my husband.  However, I made no objection, for I felt so much
vexed that I was extremely afraid of saying something to show that I
thought she ought to remember that this was my house, and that she
was my guest.  I would not for the world have uttered anything so
ungenerous and unfilial; and all I could do that night was to pray
that she might not drive me to lose my self-command, and that I might
both do right and keep my child.

I was too restless and unhappy to sleep much, for I knew my feelings
were wrong, and yet I was sure I was in the right in my wish to do
good to the poor; and the sense of being bridled, and put into
leading-strings, poisoned the pleasure I had at first felt in my
return to my own family.  I cannot describe the weary tumult of
thought and doubt that tossed me, till, after a brief sleep, I heard
the church-bells.  I rose and dressed for early mass, taking my boy,
who always awoke betimes, leaving the house quietly, and only calling
my trusty lackey Nicolas to take me to the nearest Church, which was
not many steps off.  I do not think I found peace there: there was
too much SELF in me to reach that as yet; but at any rate I found the
resolution to try to bend my will in what might be indifferent, and
to own it to be wholesome for me to learn submission once more.

As I was about to enter our court, I heard a little cough, and
looking round I saw a gentleman and lady coming towards the house.
They were my brother and sister, who had been to the daily prayers at
the house of Sir Richard Browne, the English ambassador.  I was
struck at my first glance with the lightsome free look of Annora's
face but it clouded ad grew constrained in an instant when I spoke to
her.

They said my mother would not be awake nor admit us for an hour or
two, and in the meantime Eustace was ready to come to my apartments,
for indeed we had hardly seen one another.  Annora anxiously reminded
him that he must take his chocolate, and orders were given that this
should be served in my cabinet for us both.

There is no describing what that interview was to us.  we, who had
been one throughout our childhood, but had been parted all through
the change to man and woman, now found ourselves united again,
understanding one another as no other being could do, and almost
without words, entering into full sympathy with one another.  Yes,
without words, for I was as certain as if he had told me that Eustace
had undergone some sorrow deeper than even loss of health, home, and
country.  I felt it in the chastened and sobered tone in which he
talked to me of my cares, as if he likewise had crossed the stream of
tears that divides us from the sunshine of our lives.

He did not think what I had attempted in Anjou foolish and
chimerical--he could look at the matter with the eyes of an English
lord of the manor, accustomed not to view the peasant as a sponge to
be squeezed for the benefit of the master, but to regard the landlord
as accountable for the welfare, bodily and spiritual, of his people.
He thought I had done right, though it might be ignorantly and
imprudently in the present state of things; but his heart had
likewise burned within him at the oppression of the peasantry, and,
loyal cavalier as he was, he declared that he should have doubted on
which side to draw his sword had things thus in England.  He had
striven to make my mother and Queen Henrietta understand the meaning
of what I had been doing, and he said the complaints sent up had
evidently been much exaggerated, and envenomed by spite and distrust
of me as a foreigner.  He could well enter into my grief at the
desertion of my poor people, for how was it with those at Walwyn,
deprived of the family to whom they had been used to look, with many
widows and orphans made by the war, and the Church invaded by a loud-
voiced empty-headed fanatic, who had swept away all that had been
carefully preserved and honoured!  Should he ever see the old home
more?

However, he took thought for my predicament.  I had no choice, he
said, but to give way.  To resist would only make me be treated as a
suspected person, and be relegated to a convent, out of reach of
influencing my son, whom I might bring up to be a real power for
good.

Then my dear brother smiled his sweetest smile, the sweeter for the
sadness that had come into it, and kissed my fingers chivalrously, as
he said that after all he could not but be grateful to the edict that
had brought back to him the greatest delight that was left to him.
'Ah,' I said, 'if it had only been in Anjou!'

'If it had only been in Dorset, let us say at once,' he answered.

Then came the other question whether I might not stay at home with
the children, and give myself to devotion and good works, instead of
throwing off my mourning and following my mother to all the gaieties
of the court.

'My poor mother!' said Eustace.  'You would not wish to make your
example a standing condemnation of her?'

'I cannot understand how she can find pleasure in these things,' I
cried.

'There is much in her that we find it hard to understand,' Eustace
said; 'but you must remember that this is her own country, and that
though she gave it up for my father's sake, England has always been a
land of exile to her, and we cannot wonder at her being glad to
return to the society of her old friends.'

'She has Annora to be with her.  Is not that enough?'

'Ah, Meg, I trusted to you to soothe poor Annora and make her more
comfortable.'

'She seems to have no intention of putting herself under my
influence,' I said, rather hurt.

'She soon will, when she finds out your English heart,' said Eustace.
'The poor child is a most unwilling exile, and is acting like our old
friends the urchins, opposing the prickles to all.  But if my mother
has Annora to watch over, you also have a charge.  A boy of this
little man's rank,' he said, stroking the glossy curls of Gaspard,
who was leaning on my lap, staring up in wonder at the unknown tongue
spoken by his uncle, 'and so near the age of the king, will certainly
be summoned to attend at court, and if you shut yourself up, you will
be unable to follow him and guide him by your counsel.'

That was the chief of what my dear brother said to me on that
morning.  I wrote it down at the moment because, though I trusted his
wisdom and goodness with all my heart, I thought his being a
Protestant might bias his view in some degree, and I wanted to know
whether the Abbe thought me bound by my plans of devotion, which
happily had not been vows.

And he fully thought my brother in the right, and that it was my duty
to remain in the world, so long as my son needed me there; while, as
to any galling from coming under authority again, that was probably
exactly what my character wanted, and it would lessen the danger of
dissipation.  Perhaps I might have been in more real danger in
queening it at Nid de Merle than in submitting at Paris.


CHAPTER XI.

THE TWO QUEENS.


After all, I was put to shame by finding that I had done my poor
mother an injustice in supposing that she intended to assume the
government of the house, for no sooner was I admitted to her room
than she gave me up the keys, and indeed I believe she was not sorry
to resign them, for she had not loved housewifery in her prosperous
days, and there had been a hard struggle with absolute poverty during
the last years in England.

She was delighted likewise that I was quite ready to accompany her to
thank Queen Henrietta for her intercession, and to take her advice
for the future, nor did she object for that day to my mourning
costume, as I was to appear in the character of a suppliant.  When I
caught Annora's almost contemptuous eyes, I was ready to have gone in
diamonds and feathers.

However, forth we set, attended by both my brothers.  Lord Walwyn
indeed held some appointment at the little court, and in due time we
were ushered into the room where Queen Henrietta was seated with a
pretty little girl playing at her feet with a dog, and a youth of
about seventeen leaning over the elbow of her couch telling her
something with great animation, while a few ladies were at work, with
gentlemen scattered among them.  How sociable and friendly it looked,
and how strangely yet pleasantly the English tones fell on my ear!
And I was received most kindly too.  'Madame has brought her--our
little--nay, our great conspirator, the Firebrand of the Bocage.
Come, little Firebrand,' exclaimed the Queen, and as I knelt to kiss
her hand she threw her arms round me in an affectionate embrace, and
the Prince of Wales claimed me as an old acquaintance, saluted me,
and laughed, as he welcomed me to their court of waifs and strays,
cast up one by one by the tide.

His little sister, brought by the faithful Lady Morton in the
disguise of a beggar boy, had been the last thus to arrive.  A very
lovely child she was, and Prince Charles made every one laugh by
taking her on his knee and calling her Piers the beggar boy, when she
pointed to her white frock, called herself 'Pincess, pincess, not
beggar boy,' and when he persisted, went into a little rage and
pulled his black curls.

My poor Queen, whom I had left in the pride and mature bloom of
beauty, was sadly changed; she looked thin and worn, and was
altogether the brown old French-woman; but she was still as lively
and vivacious, and full of arch kindness as ever, a true daughter of
the Grand Monarque, whose spirits no disasters could break.  When the
little one became too noisy, she playfully ordered off both the
children, as she called them, and bade me sit down on the footstool
before her couch, and tell her what I had been doing to put
intendants, cardinals and Queens themselves into commotion.  The
little Lady Henrietta was carried off by one of the attendants, but
the Prince would not go; he resumed his former position, saying that
he was quite sure that Madame de Bellaise was in need of an English
counsel to plead her cause.  He had grown up from a mischievous imp
of a boy to a graceful elegant-looking youth.  His figure, air, and
address were charming, I never saw them equaled; but his face was as
ugly as ever, though with a droll ugliness that was more winning than
most men's beauty, lighted up as it was by the most brilliant of
black eyes and the most engaging of smiles.  You remember that I am
speaking of him as he was when he had lately arrived from Jersey,
before his expedition to Scotland.  He became a very different person
after his return, but he was now a simple-hearted, innocent lad, and
I met him again as an old friend and playfellow, whose sympathy was a
great satisfaction in the story I had to tell, though I was given in
a half-mocking way.  My mother began by saying:

'The poor child, it is as I told your Majesty; she has only been a
little too charitable.'

'Permit me, Madame,' I said, 'I did not give half so much as most
charitable ladies.'

Then the explanation came, and the Queen shook her head and told me
such things would not do here, that my inexperience might be
pardonable, but that the only way to treat such creatures was to feed
them and clothe them for the sake of our own souls.

Here the Prince made his eyes first flash and then wink at me.

'But as to teach them or elevating them, my dear, it is as bad for
them as for ourselves.  You must renounce all such chimeras, and if
you had a passion for charity there is good Father Vincent to teach
you safe methods.'

I brightened up when I heard of Father Vincent, and my mother engaged
for me that I should do all that was right, and appealed to my
brother De Solivet to assure the Queen that there had been much
malignant exaggeration about the presumption of my measures and the
discontent of other people's peasants.

Queen Henrietta was quite satisfied, and declared that she would at
once conduct me to her sister-in-law, the Queen-Regent, at the
Tuileries, since she had of course the 'petites entrees,' take her by
storm as it were, and it was exactly the right hour when the Queen
would be resting after holding council.

She called for a looking-glass, and made one of her women touch up
her dress and bring her a fan, asking whether I had ever been
presented.  No, my first stay in Paris had been too short; besides,
my rank did not make it needful, as my husband was only Viscount by
favour of his uncle, who let him hold the estate.

'Then,' said the Prince, 'you little know what court is!'

'Can you make a curtsey?' asked the Queen anxiously.

I repeated the one I had lately made to her Majesty, and they all
cried out:

'Oh, oh! that was all very well at home.'

'Or here before I married,' added Queen Henrietta. 'Since Spanish
etiquette has come in, we have all been on our good behaviour.'

'Having come from a barbarous isle,' added the Prince.

The Queen therewith made the reverence which you all know, my grand-
daughters, but which seemed to me unnatural, and the Prince's face
twinkled at the incredulity he saw in mine; but at the moment a
private door was opening to give admission to a figure, not in itself
very tall, but looking twice its height from its upright, haughty
bearing.  There was the Bourbon face fully marked, with a good deal
of fair hair in curls round it, and a wonderful air of complete self-
complacency.

This was la grande Mademoiselle, daughter of Gaston Duke of Orleans,
and heiress through her mother of the great old Montpensier family,
who lived at the Palais Royal with her father, but was often at the
Louvre.  She stood aghast, as well she might, thinking how little
dignity her aunt, the Queen of England, had to be acting as mistress
of deportment to a little homely widow.  The Prince turned at once.

'There is my cousin,' said he, 'standing amazed to see how we have
caught a barbarous islander of our own, and are trying to train her
to civilization.  Here--let her represent the Queen-Regent.  Now,
Meg--Madame de Bellaise, I mean--imitate me while my mother presents
me,' he ran on in English, making such a grotesque reverence that
nobody except Mademoiselle could help laughing, and his mother made a
feint of laying her fan about his ears, while she pronounced him a
madcap and begged her niece to excuse him.

'For profaning the outskirts of the majesty of the Most Christian
King,' muttered the Prince, while his mother explained the matter to
her niece, adding that her son could not help availing himself of the
opportunity of paying her his homage.

Mademoiselle was pacified, and was graciously pleased to permit me to
be presented to her, also to criticize the curtsey which I had now to
perform, my good Queen being so kind in training me that I almost
lost the sense of the incongruity of such a lesson at my age and in
my weeds.  In fact, with my mother and my godmother commanding me,
and Eustace and the Prince of Wales looking on, it was like a return
to one's childhood.  At last I satisfied my royal instructress, and
as she agreed with my mother that my mourning befitted the occasion
off we set en grande tenue to cross the court to the Tuileries in a
little procession, the Queen, attended by my mother and Lady Morton
as her ladies, and by Lord Jermyn and Eustace as her gentlemen-in-
waiting.

Mademoiselle also came, out of a sort of good-natured curiosity, but
the Prince of Wales shook his head.

'I have no mind to show Madame the value of a tabouret,' he said.
'Believe me, Meg, I may sit on such an eminence in the august
presence of my mother and my regent aunt, but if my small cousin, the
Most Christian King, should enter, I must be dethroned, and a
succession of bows must ensue before we can either of us be seated.
I always fear that I shall some day break out with the speech of King
Lear's fool: 'Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint stool.''

This passed while I, who came in the rear of the procession, was
waiting to move on, and I believe Queen Henrietta was descanting to
her niece on the blessing that her son's high spirits never failed
him through all their misfortunes.

However, in due time we reached the apartments of the Queen-Regent,
the way lined with guards, servants, and splendid gentlemen, who all
either presented arms or bowed as our English Queen passed along,
with an easy, frank majesty about her that bespoke her a daughter of
the place, and at home there.  But what gave me the most courage was
that as the door of her bedroom was opened to admit Queen Henrietta,
Mademoiselle, my mother, and myself, I saw a black cassock, and a
face I knew again as that of the Holy Father Vincent de Paul, who had
so much impressed me, and had first given me comfort.

It was a magnificent room, and more magnificent bed, and sitting up
among her lace and cambric pillows and coverlets was Queen Anne of
Austria, in a rich white lace cap and bedgown that set off her
smooth, fair, plump beauty, and exquisite hands and arms. Ladies
stood round the bed.  I did not then see who any of them were, for
this was the crisis of my fate, and my heart beat and my eyes swam
with anxiety.  Queen Henrietta made her low reverence, as of course
we did, and some words of sisterly greeting ensued, after which the
English queen said:

'My sister, I have made you this early visit to bring you my little
suppliant.  Allow me to present to your Majesty, Madame la Vicomtesse
de Bellaise, who is sincerely sorry to have offended you.'

(That was true; I was sincerely sorry that what I had done could
offend.)

My kind godmother went on to that I had offended only out of
ignorance of the rights of seigneurs, and from my charitable
impulses, of which she knew that her Majesty would approve, glancing
significantly towards Father Vincent as she did so.  She was sure,
she added, that Her Majesty's tenderness of heart must sympathise
with a young widow, whose husband had fallen in the service of the
King, and who had an only son to bring up.  I felt the Regent's
beautiful blue eyes scanning me, but it was not unkindly, though she
said:

'How is this, Madame? I hear that you have taught the peasants to
complain of the seigniorial rights, and to expect to have the corvee
and all other dues remitted.'

I made answer that in truth all I had done was to remit those claims
here and there which had seemed to me to press hard upon the tenants
of our own estate; and I think the Regent was moved by a look from
Father Vincent to demand an example, so I mentioned that I would not
have the poor forced to carry our crops on the only fine day in a wet
season.

'Ah, bah!' said Queen Anne; 'that was an over-refinement, Madame.  It
does not hurt those creatures to get wet.'

She really had not the least notion that a wetting ruined their
crops; and when I would have answered, my godmother and mother made
me a sign to hold my tongue, while Queen Henrietta spoke:

'Your Majesty sees how it is; my godchild has the enthusiasm of
charity, and you, my sister, with your surroundings, will not blame
her if she has carried it a little into excess.'

'Your Majesty will pardon me for asking if there can be excess?' said
Father Vincent.  'I think I recognize this lady.  Did I not meet
Madame at the little village of St. Felix?'

'Oh yes, my father,' I replied.  'I have ever since blessed the day,
when you comforted me and gave me the key of life.'

'There, father,' said the Regent, 'it is your doing; it is you that
have made her a firebrand.  You must henceforth take the
responsibility.'

'I ask no better of your Majesty,' said the holy man.

'Ah! your Majesty, I can ask no better,' I said fervently; and I
knelt to kiss the beautiful hand which Anne of Austria extended to me
in token of pardon.

'It is understood, then,' said she, in a gracious though languid way,
as if weary of the subject, 'that your Majesty undertakes that Madame
becomes more prudent in the future, and puts her benevolence under
the rule of our good father, who will never let her go beyond what is
wise in the bounds of a young woman's discretion.'

It might be hard to believe that I had been indiscreet, but the grand
stately self-possession of that Spanish lady, and the evident
gratification of my mother and Queen Henrietta, quite overpowered me
into feeling like a criminal received to mercy, and I returned thanks
with all the genuine humility they could desire; after which the
regent overpowered my mother with wonder at her graciousness by
inquiring a day for him to kiss the King's hand in the Tuileries
gardens.

By this time her breakfast was being brought in (it was about one
o'clock), and Queen Henrietta carried us off without waiting for the
ceremony of the breakfast, or of the toilet, which began with the
little King presenting his mother with her chemise, with a tender
kiss.  Mademoiselle remained, and so did Father Vincent, whom the
regent was wont to consult at her breakfast, both on matters of
charity and of Church patronage.

My mother was delighted that I had come off so well; she only
regretted my being put under Father Vincent, who would, she feared,
render me too devout.

The next afternoon, which was Sunday, we went, all except my brother
and sister, who had what my mother called Puritan notions as to
Sunday, to see royalty walk in the Tuileries gardens.  The Queen was
there, slowly pacing along with one of her sons on each side, and
beautiful boys they were, in their rich dresses of blue velvet and
white satin, with rich lace garnishings, their long fair hair on
their shoulders, and their plumed hats less often on their heads than
in their hands, as they gracefully acknowledged the homage that met
them at each step.  Perhaps I thought my Gaspard quite as beautiful,
but every widow's only son is THE king of her heart; and we had so
trained the boy that he did his part to perfection kneeling and
kissing the hand which King Louis extended to him.  Yet it had--to me
who was fresh to such scenes--something of the air of a little
comedy, to see such gestures of respect between the two children so
splendidly dressed, and neither of them yet nine years old.

The little King did his part well, presented M. le Marquis de
Nidemerle to his brother the Duke of Anjou, asked graciously whether
he could ride and what games he loved best, and expressed a courteous
desire that they might often meet.

My sister-in-law was also presented to the Queen, who filled her with
ecstasy by making her some compliment on the services of M. la Comte
d'Aubepine, and thus began our career at court.  We were in favour,
and my mother breathed freely.


CHAPTER XII.

CAVALIERS IN EXILE.


My safety and freedom being thus secure, I was asked, as mistress of
the house, whether I would continue the custom my mother had begun of
receiving on a Monday, chiefly for the sake of our exiled countryfolk
at Paris.

It had been left in doubt, till my fate and my wishes should be
known, whether the reunion should take place on the Monday or not;
but all lived so simply and within so short a distance that it was
very easy to make it known that Lady Walwyn and Madame de Bellaise
would receive as usual.

The rule in ordinary French society was then as now, to offer only
eau-sucree, sherbets, and light cakes as refreshments, but my mother
told me with some disgust that it was necessary to have something
more substantial on the buffet for these great Englishmen.

'Yes,' said Annora, 'I do believe it is often the only meal worth the
name that they get in a week, unless my brother invites them to
supper.'

On learning this Tryphena and I resolved that though pies were the
most substantial dish at present prepared, we would do our best
another time to set before them such a round of salt beef as would
rejoice their appetites; and oh! the trouble we had in accomplishing
it.

Meantime I submitted to be dressed as my mother wished, much indeed
as I am now, except that my hair was put into little curls, and I had
no cap.  The Queen-Regent wore none, so why should I?  Moreover, my
mother said that it would not be good taste to put on any jewels
among the English.

Alas! I could see why, as the salon filled with gentlemen and ladies,
far fewer of the last than the first, for some wives had been left at
home with their children to keep possession of the estates, and send
what supplies they could to their lords in exile.  Some, like brave
Lady Fanshawe, traveled backwards and forwards again and again on
their husbands' affairs; and some who were at Paris could not afford
a servant nor leave their little children, and others had no dress
fit to appear in.  And yet some of the dresses were shabby enough--
frayed satin or faded stained brocade, the singes and the creases
telling of hard service and rough usage.  The gentlemen were not much
better: some had their velvet coats worn woefully at the elbows, and
the lace of their collars darned; indeed those were the best off, for
there were some who had no ladies to take care of them, whose fine
Flanders lace was in terrible holes.

Some gallants indeed there were to ruffle it as sprucely as ever, and
there were a few who had taken service as musketeers or archers of
the guard; but these were at that time few, for the King was still
living, and they did not despair of an accommodation which would soon
bring them home again.  As my mother had predicted, the gentlemen
with the ragged lace tried in vain to affect indifference to the good
things on the buffet, till they had done their devoir by me as their
hostess.  Eustace and Nan were on the watch and soon were caring for
them, and heaping their plates with food, and then it was that my
sister's face began to light up, and I knew her for herself again,
while there was a general sound of full gruff English voices all
round, harsh and cracking my mother called it, but Nan said it was
perfect music to her, and I think she began to forgive me when she
found that to me likewise it had a sound of home.

But my mother was greatly gratified that evening, for there appeared
in our salon the dark bright face of the Prince of Wales, closely
followed by a tall handsome man in the prime of life, whom I had
never seen before.

'Do not derange yourself,' said Prince Charles, bending his black
head, bowing right and left, and signing with his hand to people to
continue their occupations.  'I always escape to places where I can
hear English tongues, and I wanted to congratulate Madame on her
reception yesterday, also to present to her my cousin Prince Rupert,
who arrived this afternoon.'

Prince Rupert and some of the wiser and more politic gentlemen,
Eustace among them, drew apart in consultation, while the Prince of
Wales stood by me.

'They are considering of a descent on the Isle of Wight to carry off
my father from Carisbrooke,' he said.

'And will not your Highness be with them?' I asked.

'Oh yes, I shall be with them, of course, as soon as there is
anything to be done; but as to the ways and means, they may arrange
that as they choose.  Are you to be at Madame de Choisy's ball'

I was quite provoked with him for being able to think of such matters
when his father's rescue was at stake; but he bade me ask his mother
and mine whether it were not an important question, and then told me
that he must make me understand the little comedy in which he was an
actor.

Prince as he was, I could not help saying that I cared more for the
tragedy in which we all might be actors; and he shrugged his
shoulders, and said that life would be insupportable if all were to
be taken in the grand serious way.  However, Prince Rupert appealed
to him, and he was soon absorbed into the consultation.

My brother told us the next morning of the plan.  It was that Prince
Rupert, with the ships which he had in waiting at Harfleur, should
take a trusty band of cavaliers from Paris, surprise Carisbrooke, and
carry off His Sacred Majesty.  Eustace was eager to go with them, and
would listen to no representations from my mother of the danger his
health would incur in such an expedition in the month of November.
She wept and entreated in vain.

'What was his life good for,' he said, 'but to be given for the
King's service?'

Then she appealed to me to persuade him, but he looked at me with his
bright blue eyes and said:

'Meg learned better in Lorraine;' and I went up and kissed him with
tears in my eyes, and said: 'Ah! Madame, we have all had to learn how
loyalty must come before life, and what is better than life.'

And then Annora cried out: 'Well said, Margaret! I do believe that
you are an honest Englishwoman still.'

My brother went his way to consult with some of the other volunteers,
and my mother called for her sedan chair to go and see whether she
could get an order from Queen Henrietta to stop him, while Annora
exclaimed:

'Yes! I know how it is, and mother cannot see it.  Eustace cares
little for his life now, and the only chance of his ever overgetting
it is the having something to do.  How can he forget while he lives
moping here in banishment, with nothing better to do than to stroke
the Queen's spaniels?'

Then of course I asked what he had to get over.  I knew he had had a
boyish admiration for Millicent Wardour, a young lady in Lady
Northumberland's household, but I had never dared inquire after her,
having heard nothing about her since I left England.  My sister,
whose mistrust of me had quite given way, told me all she knew.

Eustace had prevailed on my father to make proposals of marriage for
her though not willingly, for my father did not like the politics of
her father, Sir James Wardour, and my mother did not think the young
gentlewoman a sufficient match for the heir of Walwyn and Ribaumont.
There was much haggling over the dowry and marriage portion, and in
the midst, Sir James himself took, for his second wife, a stern and
sour Puritan dame.  My mother and she were so utterly alien to each
other that they affronted one another on their first introduction,
and Sir James entirely surrendered himself to his new wife; the match
was broken off, and Millicent was carried away into the country,
having returned the ring and all other tokens that Eustace had given
her.

'I never esteemed her much, said Nan.  'She was a poor little white,
spiritless thing, with a skin that they called ivory, and great brown
eyes that looked at one like that young fawn with the broken leg.  If
I had been Eustace, I would have had some one with a little more will
of her own, and then he would not have been served as he was.'  For
the next thing that was heard of her, and that by a mere chance, was
that she was marred to Mynheer van Hunker, 'a rascallion of an old
half-bred Dutchman,' as my hot-tongued sister called him, who had
come over to fatten on our misfortunes by buying up the cavaliers'
plate and jewels, and lending them money on their estates.  He was of
noble birth, too, if a Dutchman could be, and he had an English
mother, so he pretended to be doing people a favour while he was
filling his own coffers; and, worst of all, it was he who had bought
the chaplet of pearls, the King's gift to the bravest of knights.

The tidings were heard in the midst of war and confusion, and so far
as Nan knew, Eustace had made no moan; but some months later, when he
was seeking a friend among the slain at Cropredy Bridge, he came upon
Sir James Wardour mortally wounded, to whom he gave some drink, and
all the succour that was possible.  The dying man looked up and said:
'Mr. Rib'mont, I think.  Ah! sir, you were scurvily used.  My lady
would have her way.  My love to my poor wench; I wish she were in
your keeping, but---'  Then he gave some message for them both, and,
with wandering senses, pained Eustace intensely by forgetting that he
was not indeed Millicent's husband, and talking to him as such,
giving the last greeting; and so he died in my brother's arms.

Eustace wrote all that needed to be said, and sent the letters, with
the purse and tokens that Sir James had given him for them, with a
flag of truce to the enemy's camp.

Then came still darker days--my father's death at Marston Moor, the
year of losses, and Eustace's wound at Naseby, and his illness almost
to death.  When he was recovering, Harry Merrycourt, to whom he had
given his parole, was bound to take him to London for his trial,
riding by easy stages as he could endure it, whilst Harry took as
much care of him as if he had been his brother.  On the Saturday they
were to halt over the Sunday at the castle of my Lord Hartwell, who
had always been a notorious Roundhead, having been one of the first
to take the Covenant.

Being very strong, and the neighbourhood being mostly of the
Roundhead mind, his castle had been used as a place of security by
many of the gentry of the Parliamentary party while the Royal forces
were near, and they had not yet entirely dispersed, so that the place
overflowed with guests; and when Harry and Eustace came down to
supper, they found the hall full of company.  Lord Walwyn was
received as if he were simply a guest.  While he was being presented
to the hostess on coming down to supper, there was a low cry, then a
confusion among the ladies, round some one who had fainted.

'The foolish moppet,' said my unmerciful sister, 'to expose herself
and poor Walwyn in that way!'

I pitied her, and said that she could not help it.

'I would have run my finger through with my bodkin sooner than have
made such a fool of myself,' returned Nan.  'And to make it worse,
what should come rolling to my poor brother's feet but three or four
of our pearls?  The pearls of Ribaumont!  That was the way she kept
them when she had got them, letting the string break, so that they
rolled about the floor anyhow!'

She had heard all this from Harry Merrycourt, and also that my
brother had gathered up the pearls, and, with some other gentlemen,
who had picked them up while the poor lady was carried from the room,
had given them to my Lady Hartwell to be returned to Madame van
Hunker, not of course escaping the remark from some of the stricter
sort that it was a lesson against the being adorned with pearls and
costly array.

Madame van Hunker's swoon had not surprised any one, for she was
known to have been in very delicate health ever since a severe
illness which she had gone through in London.  She had been too weak
to accompany her husband to Holland, and he had left her under the
care of Lady Hartwell, who was a kinswoman of her own.  Harry had
only seen her again at supper time the next day, when he marveled at
the suffering such a pale little insignificant faded being could
cause Eustace, who, though silent and resolute, was, in the eyes of
one who knew him well--evidently enduring a great trial with
difficulty.

I heard the rest from my brother himself.

He was in no condition to attend the service the next day, not being
able to walk to the Church, nor to sit and stand in the draughty
building through the prayer and preaching that were not easily
distinguished from on another.  He was glad of such a dispensation
without offence, for, children, though you suppose all Protestants to
be alike, such members of the English Church as my family, stand as
far apart from the sects that distracted England as we do from the
Huguenots; and it was almost as much against my brother's conscience
to join in their worship, as it would be against our own.  The
English Church claims to be a branch of the true Catholic Church, and
there are those among the Gallicans who are ready to admit her claim.

Harry Merrycourt, who was altogether a political, not a religious
rebel, would gladly have kept Lord Walwyn company; but it was needful
not to expose himself to the suspicion of his hosts, who would have
bestowed numerous strange names on him had he absented himself.

And thus Eustace was left alone in the great hall, lord and lady,
guests and soldiers, men and maids, all going off in procession
across the fields; while he had his choice of the cushions in the
sunny window, or of the large arm-chair by the wood fire on the
hearth.

All alone there he had taken out his Prayer-book, a little black
clasped book with my father's coat-of-arms and one blood-stain on it
--he loved it as we love our Book of the Hours, and indeed, it is much
the very same, for which reason it was then forbidden in England--and
was kneeling in prayer, joining in spirit with the rest of his
Church, when a soft step and a rustle of garments made him look up,
and he beheld the white face and trembling figure of poor Millicent.

'Sir,' she said, as he rose, 'I ask your pardon.  I should not have
interrupted your devotions, but now is your time.  My servant's
riding-dress is in a closet by the buttery hatch, his horse is in the
stable, there is no sentry in the way, for I have looked all about.
No one will return to the house for at least two hours longer; you
will have full time to escape.'

I can see the smile of sadness with which my brother looked into her
face as he thanked her, and told her that he was on his parole of
honour.  At that answer she sank down into a chair, hiding her face
and weeping--weeping with such an agony of self-abandonment and grief
as rent my brother's very heart, while he stood in grievous
perplexity, unable to leave her alone in her sorrow, yet loving her
too well and truly to dare to console her.  One or two broken words
made him think she feared for his life, and he made haste to assure
her that it was in no danger, since Mr. Merrycourt was assured of
bearing him safely through.  She only moaned in answer, and said
presently something about living with such a sort of people as made
her forget what a cavalier's truth and honour were.

He were sorely shaken, but he thought the best and kindest mode of
helping her to recover herself would be to go on where he was in the
morning prayer, and, being just in the midst of their Litany, he told
her so, and read it aloud.  She knelt with her head on the cushions
and presently sobbed out a response, growing calmer as he went on.

When it was ended she had ceased weeping, though Eustace said it was
piteous to see how changed she was, and the startled pleading look in
the dark eyes that used to look at him with such confiding love.

She said she had not heard those prayers since one day in the spring,
when she had stolen out to a house in town where there was a
gathering round one of the persecuted minister, and alas! her
stepdaughters had suspected her, and accused her to their father.  He
pursued her, caused the train-bands to break in on the congregation
and the minister to be carried off to prison.  It was this that had
brought on the sickness of which she declared that she hoped to have
died.

When Eustace would have argued against this wish, it brought out all
that he would fain never have heard nor known.

The poor young thing wished him to understand that she had never been
untrue to him in heart, as indeed was but too plain, and she had only
withdrawn her helpless passive resistance to the marriage with Mr.
van Hunker when Berenger's death had (perhaps willfully) been
reported to her as that of Eustace de Ribaumont.  She had not known
him to be alive till she had seen him the day before.  Deaths in her
own family had made her an heiress sufficiently well endowed to
excite Van Hunker's cupidity, but he had never affected much
tenderness for her.  He was greatly her elder, she was his second
wife, and he had grown-up daughters who made no secret of their
dislike and scorn.  Her timid drooping ways and her Majesty
sympathies offended her husband, shown up before him as they were by
his daughters, and, in short, her life had been utterly miserable.
Probably, as Annora said, she had been wanting in spirit to rise to
her situation, but of course that was not as my brother saw it.  He
only beheld what he would have cherished torn from him only to be
crushed and flung aside at his very feet, yet so that honour and duty
forbade him to do anything for her.

What he said, or what comfort he gave her, I do not fully know, for
when he confided to me what grief it was that lay so heavily on his
heart and spirits, he dwelt more on her sad situation than on
anything else.  The belief in her weakness and inconstancy had evoked
in him a spirit of defiance and resistance; but when she was proved
guiltless and unhappy, the burden, though less bitter, was far
heavier.  I only gathered that he, as the only like-minded adviser
she had seen for so long, had felt it his duty to force himself to
seem almost hard, cold, and pitiless in the counsel he gave her.

I remember his very words as he writhed himself with the pain of
remembrance: 'And then, Meg, I had to treat the poor child as if I
were stone of adamant, and chide her when my very heart was breaking
for her.  One moment's softening, and where should we have been?  And
now I have added to her troubles that fancy that I was obdurate in my
anger and implacability.' I assured him that she would honour and
thank him in her heart for not having been weak, and he began to
repent of what he had left to be inferred, and to assure me of his
having neither said nor done anything that could be censured, with
vehement laudation of her sweetness and modesty.

The interview had been broken up by the sight of the return from
Church. Mrs. Van Hunker had had full time to retire to her room and
Eustace to arrange himself, so that no one guessed at the visitor he
had had.  She came down to supper, and a few words and civilities had
passed between them, but he had never either seen or heard of her
since.

Harry Merrycourt, who had known of the early passages between them,
had never guessed that there was more than the encounter in the hall
to cause the melancholy which he kindly watched and bore with in my
brother, who was seriously ill again after he reached their lodgings
in London, and indeed I thought at the time when he was with me in
Paris, that his decay of health chiefly proceeded from sorrow of
heart.


CHAPTER XIII.

MADEMOISELLE'S TOILETTE.


We were to go to Madame de Choisy's assembly.  She was the wife of
the Chanceller of the Duke of Orleans, and gave a fete every year, to
which all the court went; and, by way of disarming suspicion, all the
cavaliers who were in the great world were to attend to order that
their plans might not be suspected.

Our kind Queen Henrietta insisted on inspecting Nan and me before we
went.  She was delighted with the way in which my mother had dressed
our hair, made her show how it was done, and declared it was exactly
what was suited to her niece, Mademoiselle, none of whose women had
the least notion of hair-dressing.  She was going herself to the
Luxembourg to put the finishing touches, and Nan and I must come with
her.  I privately thought my mother would have been more to the
purpose, but the Queen wanted to show the effect of the handi-work.
However, Nan disliked the notion very much, and showed it so plainly
in her face that the Queen exclaimed: 'You are no courtier,
Mademoiselle de Ribaumont.  Why did you not marry her to her
Roundhead cousin, and leave her in England, Madame?  Come, my god-
daughter, you at least have learnt the art of commanding your looks.'

Poor Annora must have had a sad time of it with my mother when we
were gone.  She was a good girl, but she had grown up in rough times,
and had a proud independent nature that chafed and checked at
trifles, and could not brood being treated like a hairdresser's
block, even by Queens or Princesses.  She was likewise very young,
and she would have been angered instead of amused at the scene which
followed, which makes me laugh whenever I think of it.

The Queen sent messages to know whether the Prince of Wales were
ready, and presently he came down in a black velvet suits slashed
with white and carnation ribbons, and a little enameled jewel on his
gold chain, representing a goose of these three colours.  His mother
turned him all round, smoothed his hair, fresh buckled his plume, and
admonished him with earnest entreaties to do himself credit.

'I will, Madame,' he said.  'I will do my very utmost to be worthy of
my badge.'

'Now, Charles, if you play the fool and lose her, I will never
forgive you.'

I understood it soon.  The Queen was bent on winning for her son the
hand of Mademoiselle, a granddaughter of France, and the greatest
heiress there.  If all were indeed lost in England, he would thus be
far from a landless Prince, and her wealth might become a great
assistance to the royal cause in England.  But Mademoiselle was
several years older than the Prince, and was besides stiff, haughty,
conceited, and not much to his taste, so he answered rather sullenly
that he could not speak French.

'So much the better,' said his mother; 'you would only be uttering
follies.  When I am not there, Rupert must speak for you.'

'Rupert is too High-Dutch to be much of a courtier,' said the Prince.

'Rupert is old enough to know what is for your good, and not
sacrifice all to a jest,' returned his mother.

By this time the carriage had reached the Palais Royal.  We were told
that Mademoiselle was still at her toilette, and up we all went,
through ranks of Swiss and lackeys, to her apartments, to a splendid
dressing-room, where the Princess sat in a carnation dress, richly
ornamented with black and white, all complete except the fastening
the feather in her hair.  The friseur was engaged in this critical
operation, and whole ranks of ladies stood round, one of them reading
aloud one of Plutarch's Lives.  The Queen came forward, with the most
perfect grace, crying: 'Oh, it is ravishing! What a coincidence!' and
pointing to her son, as if the similarity in colours had been a mere
chance instead of a contrivance of hers.

Then, with the most gracious deference in the world, so as not to
hurt the hairdresser's feelings, she showed my head, and begged
permission to touch up her niece's, kissing her as she did so.  Then
she signed to the Prince to hold her little hand-mirror, and he
obeyed, kneeling on one knee before Mademoiselle; while the Queen,
with hands that really were more dexterous than those of any one I
ever saw, excepting my mother, dealt with her niece's hair, paying
compliments in her son's name all the time, and keeping him in check
with her eye.  She contrived to work in some of her own jewels,
rubies and diamonds, to match the scarlet, black and white.  I have
since found the scene mentioned in Mademoiselle's own memoirs, but
she did not see a quarter of the humour of it.  She was serene in the
certainty that her aunt was paying court to her, and the assurance
that her cousin was doing the same, though she explains that, having
hopes of the Emperor, and thinking the Prince a mere landless exile,
she only pitied him.  Little did she guess how he laughed at her, his
mother, and himself, most of all at her airs, while his mother,
scolding him all the time, joined in the laugh, though she always
maintained that Mademoiselle, in spite of her overweening conceit and
vanity, would become an excellent and faithful wife, and make her
husband's interests her own.

'Rather too much so,' said the Prince, shrugging his shoulders; 'we
know what the Margaret of Anjou style of wife can do for a King of
England.'

However, as he always did what any one teased him about, if it were
not too unpleasant, and as he was passionately fond of his mother,
and as amused by playing on the vanity of la grande Mademoiselle, he
acted his part capitally.  It was all in dumb show, for he really
could not speak French at that time, though he could understand what
was said to him.  He, like a good many other Englishmen, held that
the less they assimilated themselves to their French hosts, the more
they showed their hopes of returning home, and it was not till after
his expedition to Scotland that he set himself to learn the language.

Queen Henrietta's skill in the toilette was noted.  She laughingly
said that if everything else failed her she should go into business
as a hairdresser, and she had hardly completed her work, before a
message was brought from Queen Anne to desire to see Mademoiselle in
her full dress.

I do not know what would have become of me, if my good-natured royal
godmother, who never forgot anybody, had not packed me into a
carriage with some of the ladies who were accompanying Mademoiselle.
That lady had a suit of her own, and went about quite independently
of her father and her stepmother, who, though a Princess of Lorraine,
was greatly contemned and slighted by the proud heiress.

I was put au courant with all this by the chatter of the ladies in
the coach.  I did no know them, and in the dark they hardly knew who
was there.  Men with flambeaux ran by the side of the carriage, and
now and then the glare fell across a smiling face, glanced on a satin
dress, or gleamed back from some jewels; and then we had a long halt
in the court of the Tuileries, while Mademoiselle went to the Queen-
Regent to be inspected.  We waited a long time, and I heard a great
deal of gossip before we were again set in motion, and when once off
we soon found ourselves in the court of the Hotel de Choisy, where we
mounted the stairs in the rear of Mademoiselle, pausing on the way
through the anteroom, in order to give a final adjustment to her
head-dress before a large mirror, the Prince of Wales standing
obediently beside her, waiting to hand her into the room, so that the
two black, white, and carnation figures were reflected side by side,
which was, I verily believe, the true reason of her stopping there,
for Queen Henrietta's handiwork was too skilful to require
retouching.  Prince Rupert was close by, to act as interpreter, his
tall, powerful figure towering above them both, and his dark eyes
looking as if his thoughts were far off, yet keeping in control the
young Prince's great inclination to grimace and otherwise make game
of Mademoiselle's magnificent affectations and condescensions.

I was rather at a loss, for the grand salon was one sea of feathers,
bright satins and velvets, and curled heads, and though I tried to
come in with Mademoiselle's suite I did not properly belong to it,
and my own party were entirely lost to me.  I knew hardly any one,
and was quite unaccustomed to the great world, so that, though the
Prince's dame de compagnie was very kind, I seemed to belong to no
one in that great room, where the ladies were sitting in long rows,
and the gentlemen parading before them, paying their court to one
after another, while the space in the middle was left free for some
distinguished pair to dance the menuet de la cour.

The first person I saw, whom I knew, was the Duchess of Longueville,
more beautiful than when I had met her before as Mademoiselle de
Bourbon, perfectly dazzling, indeed, with her majestic bearing and
exquisite complexion, but the face had entirely lost that innocent,
wistful expression that had so much enchanted me before.  Half a
dozen gentlemen were buzzing round her, and though I once caught her
eye she did not know me, and no wonder, for I was much more changed
than she was.  However, there I stood forlorn, in an access of
English shyness, not daring to take a chair near any of the
strangers, and looking in vain for my mother or one of my brothers.

'Will not Madame take a seat beside me?' said a kind voice.  'I think
I have had the honour of making her acquaintance,' she added, as our
eyes met; 'it is the Gildippe of happier times.'

Then I knew her for Mademoiselle d'Argennes, now duchess of
Montausieur, the same who had been so kind to me at the Hotel de
Rambouillet on my first arrival at Paris.  Most gladly did I take my
seat by her as an old friend, and I learned from her that her mother
was not present, and she engaged me to go and see her at the Hotel de
Rambouillet the next morning, telling me that M. de Solivet had
spoken of me, and that Madame de Rambouillet much wished to see me.
Then she kindly told me the names of many of the persons present,
among whom were more gens de la robe than it was usual for us of the
old nobility to meet.  They were indeed ennobled, and thus had no
imposts to pay, but that did not put them on a level with the
children of crusaders.  So said my mother and her friends, but I
could not but be struck with the fine countenance and grave collected
air of the President Matthieu de Mole, who was making his how to the
hostess.

Presently, in the violet robes of a Bishop, for which he looked much
too young, there strolled up a keen-faced man with satirical eyes,
whom Madame de Montausieur presented as 'Monseigneur le Coadjuteur.'
This was the Archbishop of Corinth, Paul de Gondi, Coadjutor to his
uncle, the Archbishop of Paris.  I think he was the most amusing
talker I ever heard, only there was a great spice of malice in all
that he said--or did not say; and Madame de Montausier kept him in
check, as she well knew how to do.

At last, to my great joy, I saw my brother walking with a young man
in the black dress of an advocate.  He came up to me and the Duchess
bade me present him, declaring herself delighted to make the
acquaintance of a brave English cavalier, and at the same time
greeting his companion as Monsieur Darpent.  Eustace presently said
that my mother had sent him in quest of me, and he conducted me
through the salon to another apartment, where the ladies, as before,
sat with their backs to the wall, excepting those who were at card-
tables, a party having been made up for Monsieur.  On my way I was
struck both with the good mien and good sense of the young lawyer,
who still stood conversing with my brother after I had been restored
to my mother.  The cloud cleared up from Annora's face as she
listened, making her look as lovely and as animated as when she was
in English company.  The conversation was not by any means equally
pleasing to my mother, who, on the first opportunity, broke in with
'My son,' and sent my brother off in search of some distinguished
person to whom she wished to speak, and she most expressingly frowned
off his former companion, who would have continued the conversation
with my sister and me, where upon Nan's face, which was always far
too like a window, became once more gloomy.

When we went home, it appeared that my mother was will satisfied that
I should be invited to the Hotel de Rambouillet.  It was a
distinguished thing to have the entree there, though for her part she
thought it very wearisome to have to listen to declamations about she
knew not what; and there was no proper distinction of ranks kept up,
any more than at the Hotel de Choisy, where one expected it.  And,
after all, neither Monsieur nor Madame de Rambouillet were of the old
noblesse.  The Argennes, like the Rambouillets, only dated from the
time of the League, when they had in private confirmed the sentence
of death on the Duke of Guise, which had been carried out by his
assassination.  Strange to look at the beautiful and gentle Julie,
and know her to be sprung from such a stem!

Then my mother censured Eustace for bad taste in talking over his
case with his lawyer in public.  He laughed, and assured her that he
had never even thought of his suit, but had been discussing one of
the pictures on the walls, a fine Veronese--appealing to me if it
were not so; but she was not satisfied; she said he should not have
encouraged the presumption of that little advocate by presenting him
to his sisters.

Eustace never attempted argument with her, but went his own way; and
when Annora broke out with something about Mr. Hyde and other
lawyers, such as Harry Merrycourt, being company for any one in
London, she was instantly silenced or presuming to argue with her
elders.

I had a happy morning with Mesdames de Rambouillet and De Montausier,
who showed the perfect union of mother and daughter.

In the little cabinet where Madame de Rambouillet read and studied so
much in order to be able to fill her eminent position, she drew out
from me all my story and all my perplexities, giving me advice as a
wise woman of my own church alone could do, and showing me how much I
might still do in my life at Paris.  She advised me, as I had been
put under Father Vincent's guidance, to seek him at the Church of St.
Sulpice, where, on certain days of the week, he was accessible to
ladies wishing to undertake pious works.  For the rest, she said that
a little resolution on my part would enable me to reserve the early
part of the day for study and the education of my son; and she fully
approved of my giving the evenings to society, and gave me at once
the entree to her circle.  She insisted that I should remain on that
day and dine with her, and Madame de Montausier indited two charming
billets, which were sent to invite our family to join us there in the
evening.

'It will not be a full circle,' she said; 'but I think your brother
treats as a friend a young man who is there to make his first essai.'

'M. Darpent?' I asked; and I was told that I was right, and that the
young advocate had been writing a discourse upon Cicero which he was
to read aloud to the fair critics and their friends.  Madame de
Montausier added that his father was a counselor in the Parliament,
who had originally been a Huguenot, but had converted himself with
all his family, and had since held several good appointments.  She
thought the young man, Clement Darpent, likely to become a man of
mark, and she did not like him the less for having retained something
of the Huguenot gravity.

The dinner was extremely pleasant; we followed it up by a walk in the
beautifully laid out gardens; and after we had rested, the reception
began, but only in the little green cabinet, as it was merely a
select few who were to be admitted to hear the young aspirant.  I
watched anxiously for the appearance of my family, and presently in
came Eustace and Annora.  My mother had the migraine, and my brother
had taken upon him, without asking leave, to carry off my sister!

I had never seen her look so well as she did, with that little spirit
of mischief upon her, lighting her beautiful eyes and colouring her
cheeks.  Madame de Rambouillet whispered to me that she was a perfect
nymph, with her look of health and freshness.  Then M. Darpent came
in, and his grave face blushed with satisfaction as he saw his
friend, my Lord Walwyn, present.

His was a fine face, though too serious for so young a man.  It was a
complete oval, the hair growing back on the forehead, and the beard
being dark and pointed, the complexion a clear pale brown, the eyes
with something of Italian softness in them, rather than of French
vivacity, the brows almost as if drawn with a pencil, the mouth very
grave and thoughtful except when lighted by a smile of unusual
sweetness.  As a lawyer, his dress was of plain black with a little
white collar fastened by two silken tassels (such as I remember my
Lord Falkland used to wear).  It became him better than the gay coats
of some of our nobles.

The circle being complete by this time, the young orator was placed
in the midst, and began to read aloud his manuscript, or rather to
recite it, for after the fire of his subject began to animate him, he
seldom looked at the paper.

It was altogether grand and eloquent discourse upon the loyalty and
nobility of holding with unswerving faith to the old laws and
constitutions of one's country against all fraud, oppression, and
wrong, tracing how Cicero's weak and vain character grew stronger at
the call of patriotism, and how eagerly and bravely the once timid
man finally held out his throat for the knife.  It might be taken as
the very highest witness to the manner in which he had used his
divine gift of rhetoric, that Fulvia's first thought was to show her
bitter hatred by piercing his eloquent tongue!  'Yes, my friends,' he
concluded, with his eyes glancing round, 'that insult to the dead was
the tribute of tyranny to virtue!'

Annora's hands were clasped, her cheeks were flushed, her eyes
glanced with the dew of admiration, and there were others who were
carried along by the charm of the young orator's voice and
enthusiasm; but there were also anxious glances passing, especially
between the divine Arthenice and her son-in-law, M. de Montausier,
and when there had been time for the compliments the discourse
merited to be freely given, Madame de Rambouillet said: 'My dear
friend, the tribute may be indeed the highest, but it can scarcely be
the most appreciable either by the fortunate individual or his
friends. I therefore entreat that the most eloquent discourse of our
youthful Cicero of admires who have listened to it.'

Everybody bowed assent, but the young man himself began, with some
impetuosity: 'Madame will believe me that I had not the slightest
political intention.  I spoke simply as a matter of history.'

'I am perfectly aware of it, Monsieur,' returned the Marquise; 'but
all the world does not understand as well as I do how one may be
carried away by the fervour of imagination to identify oneself and
one's surroundings with those of which one speaks.'

'Madame is very severe on the absent,' said M. Darpent.

'Monsieur thinks I have inferred more treason than he has spoken,'
said Madame de Rambouillet gaily.  'Well, be it so; I am an old
woman, and you, my friend, have your career yet to come, and I would
have you remember that though the great Cesar be dead, yet the bodkin
was not in his time.'

'I understand, Madame, after the lion comes the fox.  I thank you for
your warning until the time---'

'Come, come, we do not intend to be all undone in the meantime,'
exclaimed Madame de Rambouillet.  'Come, who will give us a
vaudeville or something joyous to put out the grand serious, and send
us home gay. My dear Countess,' and she turned to a bright-looking
young lady, 'relate to us, I entreat of you, one of your charming
fairy tales.'

And the Countess d'Aulnoy, at her request, seated herself in a large
arm-chair, and told us with infinite grace the story I have so often
told you, my grandchildren, of the White Cat and the three princes.


CHAPTER XIV.

COURT APPOINTMENT


The expected descent on the Isle of Wight did not take place, for
though Prince Rupert was High Admiral, so large a portion of the
fleet was disaffected that it was not possible to effect anything.
Before long, he went back to the ships he had at Helvoetsluys, taking
the Prince of Wales with him.  My brother Walwyn yielded to an
earnest entreaty that he would let us take care of him at Paris till
there was some undertaking really in hand.  Besides, he was awaiting
the issue of his cause respecting the Ribaumont property in Picardy,
to which the Count de Poligny set up a claim in right of a grant by
King Henry III. in the time of the League.  It must be confessed that
the suit lingered a good deal, in spite of the zeal of the young
advocate, M. Clement Darpent,--nay, my mother ad my brother De
Solivet sometimes declared, because of his zeal; for the Darpent
family were well known as inclined to the Fronde party.

They had been Huguenots, but had joined the Church some twenty years
before, as it was said, because of the increased disabilities of
Huguenots in the legal profession, and it was averred that much of
the factious Calvinist leaven still hung about them.  At this time I
never saw the parents, but Eustace had contracted a warm friendship
with the son, and often went to their house.  My mother fretted over
this friendship far more, as Annora used to declare, than if he had
been intimate with the wildest of the roistering cavaliers, or the
most dissipated of the petits maitres of Paris.  But Eustace was a
man now, made older than his twenty-five years by what he had
undergone, and though always most respectful to my mother, he could
not but follow his own judgment and form his own friendships.  And my
mother's dislike to having Clement Darpent at the Hotel de Nidemerle
only led to Walwyn's frequenting the Maison Darpent more than he
might have done if he could have seen his friend at home without
vexing her.

I do not think that he much liked the old Counsellor, but he used to
say that Madame Darpent was one of the most saintly beings he had
ever seen.  She had one married daughter, and two more, nuns at Port
Royal, and she was with them in heart, the element of Augustinianism
in the Jansenist teaching having found a responsive chord in her soul
from her Calvinist education.  She spent her whole time, even while
living in the world, in prayers, pious exercises, and works of
charity, and she would fain have induced her son to quit secular life
and become one of those recluses who inhabited the environs of Port
Royal, and gave themselves to labour of mind and of hand, producing
works of devotion and sacred research, and likewise making a paradise
of the dreary unwholesome swamp in which stood Port Royal des Champs.
Clement Darpent had, however, no vocation for such a life, or rather
he was not convinced in his own mind that it was expedient for him.
He was eight or nine years old when the conversion of his family had
taken place, and his mother had taught him carefully her original
faith.  Her conversation had been, no one could doubt, most hearty
and sincere, and her children had gone with her in all simplicity;
but the seeds she had previously sown in her son's mind sprang up as
he grew older, and when Eustace became his friend, he was, though
outwardly conforming, restless and dissatisfied, by no means disposed
to return to Calvinism, and yet with too much of the old leaven in
him to remain contented in the Church.  He was in danger of throwing
off all thought of faith and of Divine things in his perplexity, and
I know many of our advisers would say this was best, provided he died
at last in the bosom of the Catholic Church; but I can never think
so, and, as things stood, Eustace's advice aided him in remaining at
that time where he was, a member of the Church.  My brother himself
was, my mother ardently hoped, likely to join our communion.  The
Abbe Walter Montagu who had himself been a convert, strove hard to
win him over, trying to prove to him that the English Church was
extinct, stifled by her own rebellious heretic children, so soon as
the grace that was left in her began to work so as to bring her back
to Catholic doctrine and practice.  His argument was effectual with
many of our fugitives, but not with my brother.  He continued still
to declare that he believed that his Church was in the course of
being purified, and would raised up again at last; and his heart was
too loyal to desert her, any more than his King, because of her
misfortunes.  No one shall ever make me believe that he was wrong.
As to Annora, I believe she would rather have been a Huguenot
outright than one of us, and she only half trusted me for a long
time.

We had begun to settle down into regular habits; indeed, except for
the evenings, our days were almost more alike than when in the
country.  You have still time to send me your fates to tell if
you're restoring. After the great affliction, I am comforted
that I just you again. "Alaeddin followed the advice of his mother,
slowly and quietly ate and drank well. When he was finished he began
to tell his mother what happened to him since Friday was told in
detail what he on his return paths in the three large rooms, in the
garden and on the terrace, view, and how he was the magic lamp
had fetched.

At the same time he drew it from his bosom and showed it to his
mother with the clear and colored fruits. Also, he gave her two
full bags from which they made but little. However, these fruits
were precious stones, whose sun shine brighter in the glow of the
lamp which lit the room, to their great attention had to be alone
Alaeddin mother understood to like things, like her son, Alaeddin
why they are behind one of the cushions of the sofa pushed on
which he sat. Alaeddin mother had the patience, this wonderful and
strange, but for a mother that her son, despite his mistakes tenderly
loved so painful history listen to without interruption. Only if
the moving bodies, where the vileness of the African magician
in the light of day came, she could not hide their disgust. But now,
as Alaeddin had ended, she let herself in a thousand words of invective
against the fraudsters out, they called him a traitor, a rogue, a
brutes, a assassinator, liar, magician, and ruin an enemy of the
human race.

"Yes, my son," she added, "He is a magician, and magicians are a
veritable plague of mankind, they have means of their magic and
witchcraft with the evil spirits.

God be praised, which has prevented that his horrific end to their
wickedness reached thee. You're him for the grace which he has
done to you, big thank you guilty, your death would have been
inevitable if you do not remind him of his help had angefleht.

"Alaeddin slept the whole night and woke up next morning at first
very late. He stood up, and the first thing he said to his mother,
was that he was hungry, and he is no greater pleasure could, as if
it were a breakfast. "Ah, my dear son," she replied, "I have not
even a single morsel of bread, thou hast yesterday the few stocks
that is still at home were eaten.

But you wait a moment, so I will bring you something soon. I have spun
a little cotton, which I will sell to a lot of bread for lunch and to
purchase. "-" Dear mother, "replied Alaeddin, 'pick your cotton for
another time and give me the lamp which I brought yesterday. I want
to sell, and maybe I do it so much that we breakfast and lunch,
and at the end do something for the evening can deny. "Alaeddin
mother brought the lamp and said to her son:" Since you have them,
they but very dirty.

I want it a little clean, then it will be somewhat longer applicable.
"They took water and fine sand, in order to make it blank, but hardly
had they started to rub the lamp, as a moment in the presence
of her son is a spirit of appalling riesen good shape before her
stood up and with a voice of thunder spoke to her: "What do you want?

I am ready to obey thee as thy slave and slave to all those who
are the lamp in hand, both I, as the other slaves of the lamp. "Alaeddin's
mother was unable to respond. Your eye could the horrible and terrible
form of mind not to tolerate, and she was immediately at his first
words in fear fainted. Alaeddin on the other hand, took the lamp
and quickly replied with his mother instead of a fixed tone, "I'm
hungry, bring me something to eat. "The spirit vanished at the moment
and came back with a large silver basin on his head, in which twelve
concealed from the same metal bowls full of the best dishes along with
six loaves of white flour were most, and two bottles of delicious
wines, along with two silver bowls in their hands.

He presented all together on the couch and disappeared immediately.
Alaeddin mother came back to himself. "Dear Mother," Alaeddin said
to her, "get up and eat: there are things enough to strengthen your
heart and also my great hunger to satisfy. We want these good
foods are not cold, but eating. "The mother was surprised when
she the great basin, the twelve dishes, six loaves, the two bottles
together with the two bowls and saw inhaling the delicious fragrance
that consists of all climbed up the plates.

"My son," she said to Alaeddin, "where we have this abundance and
to whom we have such a rich gift to thank? If perhaps the Sultan of
our poverty, and have our pity? "-" Dear mother, "replied Alaeddin,
'we now want us to sit down and eat, your question I will answer if
we have free time." They sat to tables and dined with a view to a
larger appetite, as both mother and son, never so well on a table
occupied had found.

Alaeddin and his mother, who just a simple breakfast had thought,
were at the hour of lunch yet at the table. Alaeddin As a mother
and removed the meat, which had remained unaffected, had lifted,
she seated herself at her son and said, "Alaeddin, I now expect from
you that you satisfy my curiosity and promised me the information."
Alaeddin told her everything during their powerlessness between
the mind and it was made. Alaeddin mother fell in great surprise at
the story of her son and the appearance of the mind. "But, my son,"
she asked, "so long as I am in the world, I have never heard tell
that someone from all of my friends had seen a ghost. Which is a
coincidence of these nasty spirit come to me? Why has he
turned to me and not you, because you he is already in the treasure
cave was once published? "" Dear mother, "replied Alaeddin, 'the
spirit, which you published, is not the same, which appeared to me.

They have some similarity in relation to its giant size, but on the
face and clothes, they are entirely distinct from one another and are
also different to men. You will remember that the person I saw,
is a slave of the ring was called, which I did at the finger, while
the recently published said he was a slave of the lamp that you
had in your hand. "" What!

" Alaeddin mother cried, "So your lamp is to blame that this cursed
mind has turned to me instead of you? Oh, dear son, I immediately
create it from the eyes and lift it to where you want, I may no longer
touch. Rather, I let them throw away or sell, as that I might be
accused of being in contact the same fear of dying. Follow me and do
the ring. One must not have dealings with ghosts: they are the
devil and our prophet has said. "" With your permission, dear
mother, "replied Alaeddin, 'I will now probably wary of a lamp, which
both of us can be so useful, for sale. Seest thou not what they are
before us only has a few moments gives?

It is now our livelihood and food arrange. You can think that my uncle
nasty wrong is not without reason so many hard and so long and arduous
journey, since he moved to the property sought this magic lamp,
which he principally gold and silver, which he knew in the halls
and that I, as he described it to me, with my own eyes saw was
preferred. He knew the value and characteristics of this wonderful
lamp too good to be from the rest of the rich treasures still something
to be desired. Since the random force us her secret is discovered,
we want the most advantageous use of it, but not to attract
attention so that our neighbors and not be jealous be jealous. I want
them out of the way, like the eyes, and to cancel a place where I
can find them when I need it because you have such great fear of the
ghosts did. Also throw away the ring, I can not decide. Without
this ring thou wouldst have me, never seen again, and without him
I would not either now, or at most a few more moments to live.

You will therefore permit me that I keep him always with great
caution at the finger wear.

Who knows if I do not ever zustößt another danger, which we both can
not foresee, and from which he freed me perhaps? "Then Alaeddin remark
seemed very accurate, so his mother knew nothing more to that. "Dear
son," she said to him, "you can act like you do it well, I for my
part, like with ghosts have nothing to do."

On another day after the dinner was by the splendid food, the spirit
had nothing left; Alaeddin, not so long wanted to wait until the
hunger urged him, therefore, took on the third morning of the silver
dishes under his clothes and went out in order to sell them. He turned
to a Jew, who met him, took him aside, showed him the bowl and asked
if he might really want to have. The Jew, a clever and mischievous
boy, took the dish, examined it, and as he realized that it was real
silver, Alaeddin, he asked what he would ask. Alaeddin, who did
not understand its value and never with such goods traded had told
him only that he would probably know best what the dish was worth,
and he is leaving this entirely on his honesty.

The Jew fell really embarrassed about the openness Alaeddin. Since he
did not know whether Alaeddin the value of his product really knew
it or not, he put a gold piece from his bag, the maximum
zweiundsiebenzigsten the part of the true value of the dish was,
and offered it to him.

Alaeddin took the gold piece with great joyousness, and as soon as
he had in his hand, he ran so fast from the fact that the Jew,
with his huge profit on this purchase is not satisfied, very annoyed
about, Alaeddin total ignorance about the value of the bowl better
not to guess and it is far less necessary to have.

He fell into temptation, the young people according to supply,
whether it is not something of his gold pieces could be out alone
Alaeddin was already so far away that it hardly was sought.

On the way home Alaeddin remained at a bakery store, bought a stock of
bread and paid him with a gold piece, which moved him to the baker.
When he came home, he gave the remaining money his mother, who
went on the market, in order for them both the necessary food for
a few days shopping.

So they lived for a time continued; Alaeddin sold all twelve dishes,
one after the other, and the money in the house was expected, to the
Jews.

The Jew, the first of a gold piece had, dared not, for the remaining
few to offer, and paid all of the same coin, so a good trade is not
omit. As the money from the last bowl was issued, took Alaeddin his
refuge in the pelvis, which alone weighed ten times more than any
bowl.

He wanted to bring an ordinary businessman, but it was him too hard.
So he had to the Jews and advice him to lead his house, which examined
the weight of the pelvis and paid him on the ten gold pieces, which
Alaeddin was satisfied. So long as the gold lasted, they were for the
daily expenditure of the household uses. Alaeddin had, however, though
he was accustomed to Müßiggehen, since his adventure with the African
magician no longer work with the young people his age played. He
brought his days walking to or talked with older people, whose
acquaintance he had made. Often he even stayed in the shops
of the big merchants and listened attentively to the conversations
of noble men, who were staying here or here had ordered: and
these talks gave him some paint gradually aware of the world.

As of the ten gold pieces was nothing left , Alaeddin took refuge on
his lamp. He took them in hand, examined the body, which had touched
his mother, and as he them to the impression of sand realized he
rubbed them, just as it had done.

Soon appeared to him again the same spirit, which had already been
shown, but as Alaeddin gentle rubbed the lamp had when his mother, so
he said this in a milder tone same words: "What do you want? I
am ready to obey thee as thy slave and slave to all those who are the
lamp in hand, both I, as the other slaves of the lamp. "Alaeddin
answered him: 'I am hungry, bring me to eat." The spirit disappeared
and appeared again in a few moments with a similar table stuff, like
the first time, put it down and disappeared again. Alaeddin and his
mother sat down to tables, and after the meals they were still so
much left that they are the two following days could live
comfortably. When Alaeddin saw that neither bread, nor food, nor money
was more at home, he took a silver bowl and looked at the Jews, whom
he knew, in order to sell them. On the way to him, he came to the
loading of a goldsmith passed through his venerable age, while an
honest and honest man.

The goldsmith noticed him and called him, he wants hereintreten. "My
son," he said to him, "I've been several times with the same product
as now pass, those Jews attention and soon returned with empty
hands, come see.

This has led me to put the idea that you can, what you wear, anytime
to sell him. But you might not know that this Jew a fraudster, and a
cheater is annoyed when the other Jews, and that no one who
knows him, with him wants to do. In addition, I tell you this merely
from complacency. If you want to show me what you now in your hand
and you are for sale, so I will give you the true value faithfully
pay off, wofern I may need it, where not, so I want you to show
other traders who try to will not cheat.

"In the hope of more money for his bowl to solve it immediately
drew Alaeddin under his dress, and showed it to the goldsmith. The
old man, at first glance saw that she was of the finest silver, asked
him if he is already similar to the Jews and what he sold it to have
received. Alaeddin candidly confessed that he had already sold those
twelve and the Jew him for any one piece of gold paid. "Ha, the
Spitzbube," cried the goldsmith.

"My son," he added, "what is done is done, and we must no longer remember,
but if I give you now the true value of your bowl discover that the
finest of silver is that only some of us will be processed , you
will realize how much the Jew has cheated you. "The goldsmith took
the Wage, weighed the dish, and after he had set apart Alaeddin, what
a Mark Silver had made him understand that this basin weights their
gold pieces after zweiundsiebenzig worth, which he immediately paid
blank. "Because thou hast," said he, "the true amount of your bowl.
If you still doubt, then you can wish on any other of our goldsmiths
contact, and when one tells you that it was worth more, so I make
myself of being dir twice to pay.

"Alaeddin thanked the goldsmith very much for the good advice in
the result, he sold the other bowls, as well as the pelvis, to him
and received all of the full value, depending on the weights.

Although Alaeddin and his mother a unversiegbare source of their
light had they lived but also moderate, as before, only that some
Alaeddin appealed to the page to appear to be decent and various
conveniences for their small business to purchase.

His mother, on the other hand used on their clothes nothing but
what her cotton spinning revenue. In this austere way of life one can
easily think that the gold, the Alaeddin for his twelve bowls and
basins of the goldsmith who had received long enough. So they
lived for several years because of the good use made by Alaeddin from
time to time made by his lamp.

          During this interim period, Alaeddin,
            which is not omitted, is very busy at the meetings of reputable
people in the shops of the leading merchants, the with gold, silver,
silk fabrics, the finest cloths and jewels veil acted einzufinden
and sometimes even in their parties to participate fully trained
in all manners, and gradually the world of fine people accepted.

In particular, when the gem merchants, he came from by the Irrwahn as
if the transparent fruit, which he in the garden, where the lamp
stood, picked had just colored glass, he learned here that there
were very precious gemstones.

As he daily in these stores all types of gemstones buy and sell
saw them after he learned to know their value and appreciate,
because it is nowhere so beautiful and big remarked how his, so he
understood well that he held the glass a treasure possessed of
immeasurable value.

However, he was wise enough to anyone to say anything, not even his
mother, and without doubt that he owed the high silence of luck
to him in which we will subsequently rise up to see. One day when
he walks in the city went, Alaeddin heard a loud voice with a
command of the Sultan exclaim that everyone and his shop closed its
doors and into the interior of his apartment should pull back until
the princess Bedrulbudur, which means "moon of moons," the daughter
of the sultan who wanted to bathe, passed and would be returned.

This public appeal raised in Alaeddin's desire, the princess
entschleiert to see. He had to deal with this Behuf in the
house of a friend and then go behind a lattice window are alone
so it was not enough, as the Princess, under the Will, on their way
to the bathroom a veil before their faces have had.

In order to satisfy his curiosity, he finally devised a means to
which he was successful.

He imagined that behind the door of the bathroom, which was set up
so that he had seen them infallible.

Alaeddin had not long to wait: the princess appeared and he looked at
them through a Ritz, which was large enough so that he could see
without to be seen.

She came accompanied by a large number of their women and blended,
sometimes beside her, and partly behind her hergingen. Three or
four steps before the door of the bathroom she took the veil, which
covered her face and her very uncomfortable, and in this way they
saw Alaeddin so convenient, because they had stumbled upon him zukam.

Alaeddin had hitherto never been a woman with a history entschleiertem
seen when his mother, who already old and never had been so pretty.
Alaeddin When the princess had seen Bedrulbudur, his heart was the
charming young girl, the highest affection not fail. Really was the
princess, the beautiful brunette who is only in the world can see.

She had big, regular, vivid and fiery eyes, a gentle and modest
view, a shapely nose without any blame, a small mouth, red and rose
through her beautiful lips Ebenmaß truly magical, with one
word, all her facial features were very graceful and regularly .

What wonder that Alaeddin at the sight of such a rare association of
beauties, which were entirely new to him, was blinded and almost beside
himself fell! In addition to these perfections the Princess had a
lush growth and a majestic attitude, the sight of which alone it
due reverence einflößte.

When the princess had gone into the bathroom, Alaeddin stayed quite a
while, confused and delighted, by which he was incessantly charming
picture cried the soul that made him in his innermost heart was taken
and charmed. Finally he came back to the contemplation, and as he
thought that the princess was already passed, and he vainly longer
maintain his position would ask her out when leaving the bath water
again to see him then they turn their backs and masks should be so
he decided to leave the place and hinwegzubegeben. When Alaeddin
came home, he could his confusion and agitation not hide the fact
that his mother had noticed nothing.

She was very surprised to see him against his habit, and so sad to
see thoughtful, and asked him if he encountered something unpleasant
or whether he was unwell find. Alaeddin but gave no answer, but
sat carelessly on the sofa, where he remains in the same position
remained continually busy, the lovely picture of Princess Bedrulbudur
to remember. His mother was preparing dinner and did not continue in
it. He ate much less than usual, had their eyes always reflected
and observed silence so deep that it was impossible for his mother,
he also only one word to elicit so much she even did him in, he
was to her the cause of this extraordinary changes made. After
dinner she wanted to start anew, to ask him why he was so melancholy,
but they could not get out of it, and Alaeddin went to bed without
his mother in at least satisfied to have. "Dear Mother, "He began
the next morning," I will now break my silence. I was not sick, as
you seemed to believe, and am even now not. But so much I can tell
you that what I felt and what I still constantly feel, is something
far worse than a disease. While I do not know quite how to call this
evil, but I have no doubt that you'll recognize from what I say to you
now. "" It is, "Alaeddin drove away," the daughter of the Sultan
yesterday afternoon in the Bad gone. Since I am not far
away from the bathwater, so curiosity led me to provide them with
history entschleiertem to see on the idea, me behind the door of the
bathroom to hide. Really she took before entering the veil and I had
the good fortune to my inexpressible pleasure of this lovely
princess to be seen. I love the princess with a fervor that I do not
describe it, and since my hot passion grows with every moment, so I
probably feel that they are only by the possession can be satisfied,
so also because I am determined, by the Sultan my wife to ask.

"Alaeddin mother had her son's speech to the last words with great
attention belongs, and when she heard that he had in mind to the
hand of the princess Bedrulbudur stop so she could not avoid it
by loud laughter to interrupt.

Alaeddin wanted to continue, but they did not let him to speak
and said to him: "Ei, ei, my son, what falls dir? Have you
become mad, that you can lead such speeches?

"" Dear mother, "Alaeddin replied," I can assure you that I am
not mad, but quite understanding for me. I have thought in advance
that you stupid and silly I will call, this alone will not stop
me, you once again to explain that my decision is established, the
Sultan for the hand of the princess Bedrulbudur to ask. "" Truly, my
son, "replied her mother very seriously," I must tell you that you
completely forget you, and if you have your resolution also wanted
to run, I see not, by whom you could dare your request to be present.
" - "By none other than yourself," replied the son without a second
thought. - "Through me," cried the mother fully astonishment and
surprise, "and referred to the Sultan?

And
there was my little Marquis among the boys, who immediately followed
him in all his bright beauty and grace.

Most glorious was the High Mass that followed.  Officer after officer
marched up and laid standard after standard before the Altar, heavy
with German blazonry, or with the red and gold stripes of Aragon, the
embattled castles of Castille, till they amounted to seventy-three.
It must have been strange to the Spanish Queen to rejoice over these
as they lay piled in a gorgeous heap before the high Altar, here and
there one dim with weather or stained with blood.  The peals of the
Te Deum from a thousand voices were unspeakably magnificent, and yet
through them all it seemed to me that I heard the wail not only of
the multitudes of widowed wives and sonless parents, but of the poor
peasants of all the nation, crying aloud to Heaven for the bread
which they were forbidden to eat, when they had toiled for it in the
sweat of their brow.  Yes, and which I was not permitted to let them
enjoy!

Ah! which did the Almighty listen to?  To the praise, or to the
mourning, lamentation, and woe?  You have often wondered, my
children, that I absented myself from the Te Deums of victory while
we had them.  Now you know the reason.

And then I knew that all this display was only an excuse under which
the Queen hid her real design of crushing all opposition to her will.
She wanted to commit an injustice, and silence all appeals against
it, so that the poor might be more and more ground down!  How strange
in the woman whom I had seen bearing patiently, nay, joyfully, with
the murmurs of the faggot-seller in the hospital!  Truly she knew not
what she did!

As she left the Cathedral, and passed M. de Comminges, a lieutenant
of her Guards, she said: 'Go, and Heaven be with you.'

I was soon at home safely with my boys, to carry an account of our
doings to my dear little M. d'Aubepine, who, unable to bear the
fatigue and the crush of Notre Dame, had taken her little children to
a Mass of thanksgiving celebrated by our good Abbe at the nearest
Church.

We waited long and long for the others to come.  I was not uneasy for
my mother, who was with the Queen; but the servants brought reports
that the canaille had risen, and that the streets were in wild
confusion.  We could see nothing, and only heard wild shouts from
time to time.  What could have become of Eustace and Annora?  My
mother would have been afraid that with their wild English notions
they had rushed into something most unsuitable to a French
demoiselle, and I was afraid for Eustace, if they were involved in
any crowd or confusion, for his strength was far from being equal to
his spirit.  We watched, sure that we heard cries and shouts in the
distance, the roar of the populace, such as I remembered on that
wedding day, but sharper and shriller, as French voices are in a
different key from the English roar and growl.

It passed, however, and there was long silence.  Gaspard and
Armantine stood at the window, and at last, as evening twilight fell,
cried out that a carriage was coming in at the porte cochere.
Presently Annora ran into the room, all in a glow, and Eustace
followed more slowly.

'Have you been frightened?' she cried.  'Oh, we have had such an
adventure!  If they had not screamed and shrieked like peacocks, or
furies, I could have thought myself in England.'

'Alack! that a tumult should seem like home to you, sister,' said
Eustace gravely.

Then they told how at the ambassador's chapel they had heard that
good Lady Fanshawe, whom they had known in England, had arrived sick
and sad, after the loss of a young child.  They determined,
therefore, to steal away from Notre Dame before the ceremony was
over, and go to see whether anything could be done for her.  They
could not, however, get out so quickly as they expected, and they
were in the Rue de Marmousets when they saw surging towards them a
tremendous crowd, shouting, screeching, shrieking, roaring, trying to
stop a carriage which was being urged on with six horses, with the
royal guards trying to force their way. Eustace, afraid of his sister
being swept from him, looked for some escape, but the mob went faster
than they could do; and they might soon have been involved in it and
trampled down.  There seemed no opening in the tall houses, when
suddenly a little door opened close to them, and there was a cry of
surprise; a hand was put out.

'You here!  Nay, pardon me, Mademoiselle; take my arm.'

Clement Darpent was there.  A few steps more, and taking out a small
key, he fitted it into the same little door, and led them into a dark
passage, then up a stair, into a large room, simply furnished, and
one end almost like an oratory.  Here, looking anxiously from the
window, was an old lady in a plain black dress and black silk hood,
with a white apron and keys at her girdle.

'My mother,' said Clement, 'this gentleman and lady, M. le Baron de
Ribaumont and Mademoiselle sa soeur, have become involved in this
crowd.  They will do us the favour of taking shelter here till the
uproar is over.'

Madame Darpent welcomed them kindly, but with anxious inquiries.  Her
son only threw her a word in answer, prayed to be excused, and dashed
off again.

'Ah! there he is.  May he be saved, the good old man,' cried Madame
Darpent.

And they could see a carriage with four horses containing the
Lieutenant Comminges holding a white-haired old man, in a very shabby
dressing-gown; while soldiers, men, women, boys, all struggled,
fought, and shrieked round it, like the furies let loose.  The
carriage passed on, but the noise and struggle continued, and Madame
Darpent was soon intensely anxious about her son.

It seemed that Clement had carried his warnings, and that four or
five of the councillors had taken care to be beyond the walls of
Paris; among them his own father, the Councillor Darpent, who was a
prudent man, and thought it best to be on the right side.  The
President Broussel, a good-humoured, simple, hearty old man, was not
quite well, and though he thanked his young friend, he would not
believe any such harm was intended against him as to make him derange
his course of medicine.

Thus, when Comminges marched into the house to arrest him, he was
sitting at dinner, eating his bouillon, in dressing-gown and
slippers.  His daughter cried out that he was not fit to leave the
house.  At the same time, an old maid-servant put her head out at a
window, screaming that her master was going to be carried off.

He was much beloved, and a host of people ran together, trying to
break the carriage and cut the traces.  Comminges, seeing that no
time was to be lost, forced the poor old lawyer down to the carriage
just as he was, in his dressing-gown and slippers, and drove off.
But the mob thickened every moment, in spite of the guards, and a
very few yards beyond where they had taken refuge at Madame
Darpent's, a large wooden bench had been thrown across the street,
and the uproar redoubled round it--the yells, shrieks, and cries
ringing all down the road.  However, the carriage passed that, and
dashed on, throwing down and crushing people right and left; so that
Madame Darpent was first in terror for her son, and then would fain
have rushed out to help the limping, crying sufferers.

They heard another horrible outcry, but could see no more, except the
fluctuating heads of the throng below them, and loud yells, howls,
and maledictions came to their ears.  By and by, however, Clement
returned, having lost his hat in the crowd; with blood on his collar,
and with one of his lace cuffs torn, though he said he was not hurt.

'They have him!' he said bitterly; 'the tyranny has succeeded!'

'Oh, hush, my son!  Take care!' cried his mother.

'M. le Baron and I understand one another, Madame,' he said, smiling.

He went on to tell that the carriage had been overturned on the Quai
des Orfevres, just opposite the hotel of the First President.
Comminges sprang out, sword in hand, drove back the crowd, who would
have helped out Broussel, and shouted for the soldiers, some of whom
kept back those who would have succoured the prisoner with their
drawn swords.  Clement himself had been slightly touched, but was
forced back in the scuffle; while the good old man called out to him
not to let any one be hurt on his behalf.

Other soldiers were meantime seizing a passing carriage, and taking
out a poor lady who occupied it.  Before it could be brought near,
the raging crowd had brought axes and hacked it to pieces.  Comminges
and his soldiers, well-armed, still dragged their victim along till a
troop of the Queen's guards came up with another carriage, in which
the poor old President was finally carried off.

'And this is what we have to submit to from a Spaniard and an
Italian!' cried Clement Darpent.

He had come back to reassure his mother and his guests, but the
tumult was raging higher than ever.  The crowd had surrounded the
Tuileries, filling the air with shouts of 'Broussel! Broussel!' and
threatening to tear down the doors and break in, overwhelming the
guards.  Eustace and his host went out again, and presently reported
that the Marshal de Meileraye had been half killed, but had been
rescued by the Coadjutor, who was giving the people all manner of
promises.  This was verified by shouts of 'Vive le Roi!'  and by and
by the crowd came past once more, surrounding the carriage, on the
top of which was seated the Coadjutor, in his violet robes, but with
his skull cap away, and his cheek bleeding from the blow of a stone.
He was haranguing, gesticulating, blessing, doing all in his power to
pacify the crowd, and with the hope of the release of the councilors
all was quieting down; and Clement, after reconnoitering, thought it
safe to order the carriage to take home his guests.

'No one can describe,' said my sister, 'how good and sweet Madame
was, though she looked so like a Puritan dame.  Her face was so
wonderfully calm and noble, like some grand old saint in a picture;
and it lighted up so whenever her son came near her, I wanted to ask
her blessing!  And I think she gave it inwardly.  She curtsied, and
would have kissed my hand, as being only bourgeois, while I was
noble; but I told her I would have no such folly, and I made her give
me a good motherly embrace!'

'I hope she gave you something to eat,' I said, laughing.

'Oh, yes; we had an excellent meal.  She made us eat before sending
us home, soup, and ragout, and chocolate--excellent chocolate.  She
had it brought as soon as possible, because Eustace looked so pale
and tired.  Oh, Meg! She is the very best creature I have seen in
France.  Your Rambouillets are nothing to her!  I hope I may see her
often again!'

And while Eustace marveled if this were a passing tumult or the
beginning of a civil war, my most immediate wonder was what my mother
would say to this adventure.


CHAPTER XVI.

THE BARRICADES


My mother did not come home till the evening, when the streets had
become tolerably quiet.  She had a strange account to give, for she
had been at the palace all the time in attendance on Queen Henrietta,
who tried in vain to impress her sister-in-law with a sense that the
matter was serious.  Queen Anne of Austria was too proud to believe
that a parliament and a mob could do any damage to the throne of
France, whatever they might effect in England.

There she sat in her grand cabinet, and with her were the Cardinal,
the Duke of Longueville, and many other gentlemen, especially
Messieurs de Nogent and de Beautru, who were the wits, if not the
buffoons of the Court, and who turned all the reports they heard into
ridicule.  The Queen-Regent smiled in her haughty way, but the Queen
of England laid her hand sadly on my mother's arm and said, 'Alas, my
dear friend, was it not thus that once we laughed?'

Presently in came Marshal de la Meilleraye and the Coadjutor, and
their faces and gestures showed plainly that they were seriously
alarmed; but M. de Beautru, nothing daunted, turned to the Regent,
saying, 'How ill Her Majesty must be, since M. le Coadjutor is come
to bring her extreme unction,' whereupon there was another great
burst of applause and laughter.

The Coadjutor pretended not to hear, and addressing the Queen told
her that he had come to offer his services to her at a moment of
pressing danger.  Anne of Austria only vouchsafed a little nod with
her head, by way at once of thanks, and showing how officious and
superfluous she thought him, while Nogent and Beautru continued to
mimic the dismay of poor Broussel, seized in his dressing-gown and
slippers, and the shrieks of his old housekeeper from the window.
'Did no one silence them for being so unmanly?' cried Annora, as she
heard this.

'Child, thou art foolish!' said my mother with dignity.  'Why should
the resistance of canaille like that be observed at all, save to make
sport?'

For my poor mother, since she had been dipped again into the Court
atmosphere, had learned to look on whatever was not noble, as not of
the same nature with herself.  However, she said that Marshal de la
Meilleraye, a thorough soldier, broke in by assuring the Queen that
the populace were in arms, howling for Broussel, and the Coadjutor
began to describe the fierce tumult through which he had made his
way, but the Cardinal only gave his dainty provoking Italian smile,
and the Queen-Regent proudly affirmed that there neither was nor
could be a revolt.

'We know,' added Mazarin, in his blandest tone of irony, 'that M. le
Coadjuteur is so devoted to the Court, and so solicitous for his
flock, that a little over-anxiety must be pardoned to him!'

This was while shouts of 'BROUSSEL! BROUSSEL!' were echoing through
the palace, and in a few moments came the Lieutenant-Colonel of the
Guards to say that the populace were threatening to overpower the
soldiers at the gates; and next came the Chancellor, nearly
frightened out of his wits, saying that he had seen the people
howling like a pack of wolves, carrying all sorts of strange weapons,
and ready to force their way in.  Then old Monsieur Guitauet, the
Colonel of the Guards, declared 'that the old rogue Broussel must be
surrendered, dead or alive.'

'The former step would not be accordant with the Queen's piety nor
her justice,' broke in the Coadjutor; 'the second might stop the
tumult.'

'I understand you, M. le Coadjuteur,' broke out the Queen.  'You want
me to set Broussel at liberty.  I would rather strangle him with my
own hands, and those who---'

And she held those plump white hands of hers almost close to the
Archbishop's face, as if she were ready to do it, but Cardinal
Mazarin whispered something in her ear which made her less violent,
and the next moment the lieutenant of police came in, with such a
terrific account of the fury of the mob and their numbers, that there
was no more incredulity; it was plain that there was really a most
frightful uproar, and both the Regent and the Cardinal entreated the
Coadjutor to go down and pacify the people by promises.  He tried to
obtain from the Queen some written promise.

'He was right,' said Eustace.

'Right!' cried my mother.  'What! to seek to bind Her Majesty down by
written words, like a base mechanical bourgeois?  I am ashamed of
you, my son!  No, indeed, we all cried out upon him, Archbishop
though he were, and told him that Her Majesty's word was worth ten
thousand bonds.'

'May it be so proved!' muttered Eustace, while my mother went on to
describe how the Coadjutor was pressed, pushed, and almost dragged
down the great stair-case to speak to the infuriated people who were
yelling and shrieking outside the court.  Monsieur de Meilleraye went
before him, backed by all the light horse drawn up in the court, and
mounting his horse, drew his sword crying, 'Vive le Roi!  Liberty for
Broussel!'  he was met by a cry of 'To arms, to arms!' and there was
a rush against him, some trying to pull him off his horse, and one
attacking him with a rusty old sword.  The Marshal fired at him and
he fell, severely wounded, just as the Coadjutor came down, and
seeing him lying in the gutter like one dead, knelt down by him,
heard his confession, and absolved him.

(It was afterwards said that the man was a pick-lock, but we always
suspected that the Coadjutor had made the worst of him by way of
enhancing a good story.)

Just as the absolution was finished, some more of the mob came up,
and one threw a stone which hit the Archbishop on the cheek, and
another pointed a musket at him.  'Unhappy man,' he cried, 'if your
father saw you!'  This seemed to touch the man; he cried: 'Vive le
Coadjuteur!'  And so easily were the people swayed, that they all
began to applaud him to the skies, and he led them off to the market-
place.

'We thought ourselves rid of them,' said my mother, 'we began to
breathe again, and I was coming home, but, bah! No such thing!  They
are all coming back, thirty or forty thousand of them, only without
their weapons.  At least the gentlemen said so, but I am sure they
had them hidden.  Up comes M. Le Coadjuteur again, the Marshal de
Meileraye leading him by the hand up the Queen, and saying: 'Here,
Madame, is one to whom I owe my life, but to whom your Majesty owes
the safety of the State, nay, perhaps of the palace.''

The Queen smiled, seeing through it all, said my mother, and the
Coadjutor broke in: 'The matter is not myself, Madame, it is Paris,
now disarmed and submissive, at your Majesty's feet.'

'It is very guilty, and far from submissive,' said the Queen angrily;
'pray, if it were so furious, how can it have been so rapidly tamed?'
And then M. de Meilleraye must needs break in furiously: 'Madame, an
honest man cannot dissemble the state of things.  If Broussel is not
set at liberty, tomorrow there will not be one stone upon another at
Paris.'

But the Queen was firm, and put them both down, only saying: 'Go and
rest, Monsieur, you have worked hard.'

'Was that all the thanks he had?' exclaimed Annora.

'Of course it was, child.  The Queen and Cardinal knew very well that
the tumult was his work; or at least immensely exaggerated by him,
just to terrify her into releasing that factious old mischief-maker!
Why, he went off I know not where, haranguing them from the top of
his carriage!'

'Ah! that was where we saw him,' said Nan.  'Madame, indeed there was
nothing exaggerated in the tumult.  It was frightful.  They made ten
times the noise our honest folk do in England, and did ten times
less.  If they had been English, M. Broussel would be safe at home
now!'

'No the tumult was not over-painted, that I can testify,' said my
brother.

But when my mother came to hear how he and Annora had witnessed the
scene from the windows of M. Darpent's house, her indignation knew no
bounds.  I never saw her so angry with Eustace as she now was, that
he should have taken his sister into the house of one of these
councillors; a bourgeois house was bad enough, but that it should
have been actually one of the disaffected, and that the Darpent
carriage should have been seen at our door, filled her with horror.
It was enough to ruin us all for ever with the Court.

'What have we to do with the Court?' cried my sister, and this, of
course, only added fuel to the flame, till at last my mother came to
declaring that she should  never trust her daughter with my brother
again, for he was not fit to take care of her.

But we were all surprised by Eustace, when he bade my mother good-
night, quietly bending his dark curled head, ad saying: 'My mother, I
ask your pardon, I am sorry I offended you.'

'My son, my dear son,' she cried, embracing him.  'Never think of it
more, only if we never go home, I cannot have your sister made a mere
bourgeoise'

'How could you, brother!' cried Annora, waiting outside the door.
'Now you have owned yourself in the wrong!'

'I have not said so, Nan,' he answered. 'I have simply said I was
sorry to have offended my mother, and that is true; I could not sleep
under her displeasure.'

'But you do not care about ruining yourself with this perfidious
foreign Court.'

'Not a rush, so long as I do not bring Meg and her son into danger.'

Things were quiet that night, but every one knew that it was only a
lull in the storm.

I set off to morning mass with my son and little Armantine as usual,
thinking all would be quiet so early in our part of the city, but
before the service was over there was the dull roar of the populace
in a fury to be heard in the distance, and Nicole met me at the
church door entreating me to get home as quickly as possible.

To my dismay there was a large heavy chain across the end of the
street, not such as to stop foot passengers, but barring the way
against carriages, and the street was fast filling with shopkeepers,
apprentices, market-women, and all sorts of people.  The children
clung to my hands, half frightened and half eager.  Suddenly we saw a
carriage stopped by the chain, and the people crowding round it.  Out
of it sprang two gentlemen and a lady, and began hurrying forward
like people hunted.  I drew the children back into the church porch,
and was shocked to see that those who were then fleeing in haste and
terror were the Chancellor, M. Seguier, with his brother, the Bishop
of Meaux, and his daughter the beautiful young Duchess de Sully.  I
tried to attract their attention and draw them into the church as a
place of safety, but they were in too much haste and terror to
perceive me, and a man began shouting after them:

'To arms, friends, to arms! There's the enemy.  Kill him! and we
shall have vengeance for all we suffer!'

The mob rushed after, shouting horribly.  Armantine began to cry, and
I took her in my arms, while Nicole held my son.

The whole crowd rushed past us, never heeding us, as we stood above
them, and as we were only thirty yards from home I hoped soon to
reach it, though I hesitated, as the screeches, yells, and howls were
still to be heard lower down the street, and fresh parties of men,
women, and children kept rushing down to join the throng.  If it
should surge back again before we could get home, what would become
of us?

Suddenly Gaspard cried out: 'My uncle!'  And there was indeed my
brother.  'Good heavens!' he cried, 'you there, sister!  They told me
you were gone to church, but I could hardly believe it!  Come home
before the mob comes back.'

I asked anxiously for the Chancellor, and heard he had escaped into
the Hotel de Luynes, which was three doors beyond ours.  He had set
out at six in the morning for the palace, it was believed to take
orders for breaking up the Parliament.  His daughter, thinking there
might be danger, chose to go with him, and so did his brother the
Bishop; but the instant he was known to be entangled in the streets,
the mob rose on him, the chains were put up, he had to leave his
carriage and flee on foot to the Hotel de Luynes, where his brother-
in-law lived.  There the door was open, but no one was up but an old
servant, and, in the utmost terror, the unhappy Chancellor rushed
into a little wainscoted closet, where he shut himself up, confessing
his sins to the Bishop, believing his last moments were come.  In
fact, the mob did search all over the hotel, some meaning to make him
a hostage for Broussel, and others shouting that they would cut him
to pieces to show what fate awaited the instruments of tyranny.  They
did actually beat against the wainscot of his secret chamber, but
hearing nothing, they left the spot, but continued to keep guard
round the house, shouting out execrations against him.

Meantime Eustace had brought us safely home, where the first thing we
did was to hurry up to the balcony, where Annora was already watching
anxiously.

Presently, Marshal de Meilleraye and his light horse came galloping
and clattering down the street, while the mob fled headlong, hither
and thither, before them.  A carriage was brought out, and the
Chancellor with his brother and daughter was put into it, but as they
were driving off the mob rallied again and began to pursue them. A
shot was fired, and a poor woman, under a heavy basket, fell.  There
was another outburst of curses, screams, howls, yells, shots; and
carriage, guards, people, all rushed past us, the coach going at the
full speed of its six horses, amid a shower of stones, and even
bullets, the guards galloping after, sometimes firing or cutting with
their swords, the people keeping up with them at a headlong pace,
pelting them with stones and dirt, and often firing at them, for,
indeed, the poor young Duchess received a wound before they could
reach the palace.  Meanwhile others of the mob began ransacking the
Hotel de Luynes in their rage at the Chancellor's escape, and they
made dreadful havoc of the furniture, although they did not pillage
it.

My mother wept bitterly, declaring that the evil days she had seen in
England were pursuing her to France; and we could not persuade her
that we were in no danger, until the populace, having done their
worst at the Hotel de Luynes, drifted away from our street.  Eustace
could not of course bear to stay shut up and knowing nothing, and he
and the Abbe both went out different ways, leaving us to devour our
anxiety as best we could, knowing nothing but that there was a chain
across each end of our street, with a double row of stakes on either
side, banked up with earth, stones, straw, all sorts of things, and
guarded by men with all manner of queer old weapons that had come
down from the wars of the League.  Since I can not marry without knowing
what benefits they may promise themselves, so register your son,
I will fulfill my promise, once he sent me forty large basins of
elegant gold, from top to bottom with treasures such as thou
ever been in his name have brought, filled by forty black
slaves zuschickt the forty others on the exceptionally beautiful and
majestic white-clad young slaves to be led. These are the conditions
under which I am prepared to tell him the princess, my daughter, to
give. Go now, good woman, and bring me back soon reply. "Alaeddin
mother once threw himself before the throne of the sultan, and had
settled. Pleasure laughed in her heart about her son's foolish
request. "Truly," said she, "where he should so many golden bowls
and such quantity of colored glasses hernehmen in order to fill?
Will he return to the underground vault down, whose entrance is
closed to them from the trees to pluck? and where is it all these
beautiful slaves getting the sultan requires? Now, he is certainly
far removed from his goals, and I do not think he satisfied with my
message will be. "When they are employed with these thoughts came
home, she said:" My son, I advise you not to think a marriage with
the princess Bedrulbudur. The Sultan made me very welcome
Huldreich and I think he was good against thee mind was only
the Großvezier him, if I am not mistaken, to put other ideas. After
I had presented to the Sultan that the three months had expired,
I noticed that he is very quiet for a while with the Großvezier
said, and then he gave me the answer I will tell you now.

"She told her son now in great detail everything that the Sultan had
said it, and gave him the conditions under which it is included
in the connection of the princess, his daughter with him would
agree.

"My son," she said last, "he expected an answer, but told us," she
smiled and continued, "I think he will have to wait long." "Not so
long, dear mother, when you think" Alaeddin replied, "and the Sultan
is vastly mistaken if he thinks through his enormous debts, he
could set me apart was that the princess Bedrulbudur thinking.

I had totally different insurmountable difficulties are expected, or
at least a much higher price for my incomparable princess. But now I
am well pleased, because what it requires is a little against what
I was asking him for their possession could offer. While I think it
will now try to satisfy you arrange a lunch for us and let me
just give. "Once his mother for food was expected, Alaeddin
took the lamp and rubbed it. Immediately the spirit appeared, asked
in the usual expressions, what he had to command, and said
that he was ready to use it.

Alaeddin said to him: "The Sultan gives me the princess his daughter
to wife, but before he asks of me forty large and tasteful vollwichtige
basins of gold, to the edge filled with the fruits of the garden,
where I had fetched the lamp whose slave you are. He also demanded
that these forty golden basins by as many black slaves taken to
be faced forty well-educated, slim and beautifully dressed young white
slave must be reciprocating.
At eleven at night there was a fresh
outcry, but this was of joy, for M. Blancmesnil had actually come
back from Vincennes; but the barricades were not taken down.  There
was to be no laying down of arms till Broussel appeared, and there
were strange noises all night, preventing sleep.

At eight o'clock the next morning Broussel had not appeared; the
people were walking about in a sullen rage, and this was made worse
by a report that there were 10,000 soldiers in the Bois de Boulogne
ready to chastise the people.  We could see from our house-top the
glancing or arms at every barricade where the sun could penetrate,
and in the midst came one of the servants announcing Monsieur Clement
Darpent.

He had a sword by his side, and pistols at his belt, and he said that
he was come to assure the ladies that there would be no danger for
them.  If any one tried to meddle with the house, we might say we
were friends of M. Darpent, and we should be secure.  If the account
of the soldiers outside were true, the people were determined not to
yield to such perfidy; but he did not greatly credit it, only it was
well to be prepared.

'Alas! my friend,' said Eustace, 'this has all too much the air of
rebellion.'

'We stand on our rights and privileges,' said Darpent.  'We uphold
them in the King's name against the treachery of a Spanish woman and
an Italian priest.'

'You have been sorely tried,' said Eustace; 'but I doubt me whether
anything justifies taking arms against the Crown.'

'Ah! I am talking to a Cavalier,' said Clement.  'But I must not
argue the point.  I must to my barricade.'

Nan here came forward, and desired him to carry her commendations and
thanks to Madame sa mere, and he bowed, evidently much gratified.
She durst not go the length of offering her good wishes, and she told
me I ought to have been thankful to her for the forbearance, when,
under a strong sense of duty, I reproved her.  Technically he was
only Maitre Darpent, and his mother only would have been called
Mademoiselle.  Monsieur and Madame were much more jealously limited
to nobility than they are now becoming, and the Darpents would not
purchase a patent of nobility to shelter themselves from taxation.
For, as Eustace said, the bourgeoisie had its own chivalry of ideas.

There was no more fighting.  By ten o'clock Broussel was in the city,
the chains were torn down, the barricades leveled, and he made a
triumphal progress.  He was taken first to Notre Dame, and as he left
the carriage his old dressing-gown was almost torn to pieces, every
one crowding to kiss it, or his feet, calling him their father and
protector, and anxiously inquiring for his health.  A Te Deum was
sung--if not so splendid, much more full of the ring of joy than the
grand one two days before!  Engravings of his portrait were sold
about the streets, bearing the inscription 'Pierre Broussel, father
of his country;' and the good-natured old man seemed quite bewildered
at the honours that had befallen him.

There were a few more alarms that night and the next day, but at last
they subsided, the barricades were taken down, and things returned to
their usual state, at least to all outward appearance.


CHAPTER XVII.

A PATIENT GRISEL


Matters seemed to be getting worse all round us both in France and
England.  King Charles was in the hands of his enemies, and all the
good news that we could hear from England was that the Duke of York
had escaped in a girl's dress, and was on board the fleet at
helvoetsluys, where his brother the Prince of Wales jointed him.

And my own dear brother, Lord Walwyn, declared that he could no
longer remain inactive at Paris, so far from intelligence, but that
he must be with the Princes, ready to assist in case anything should
be attempted on the King's behalf.  We much dreaded the effect of the
Dutch climate on his health.  And while tumultuous assemblies were
constantly taking place in Parliament, and no one could guess what
was coming next, we did not like parting with our protector; but he
said that he was an alien, and could do nothing for us.  The army was
on its way home, and with it our brother de Solivet, and M.
d'Aubepine; and his clear duty was to be ready to engage in the cause
of his own King.  We were in no danger at Paris, our sex was
sufficient protection, and if we were really alarmed, there could be
no reason against our fleeing to Nid de Merle.  Nay, perhaps, if the
Court were made to take home the lesson, we might be allowed to
reside there, and be unmolested in making improvements.  He had
another motive, which he only whispered to me.

'I cannot, and will not, give up my friend Darpent; and it is not
fitting to live in continual resistance to my mother.  It does much
harm to Annora, who is by no means inclined to submit, and if I am
gone there can be no further question of intercourse.'

I thought this was hard upon us all.  Had we not met M. Darpent at
the Hotel Rambouillet, and was he not a fit companion for us?

'Most assuredly,' said Eustace; 'but certain sentiments may arise
from companionship which in her case were better avoided.'

As you may imagine, my grandchildren, I cried out in horror at the
idea that if M. Darpent were capable of such presumption, my sister,
a descendant of the Ribaumonts, could stoop for a moment to favour a
mere bourgeois; but Eustace, Englishman as he was, laughed at my
indignation, and said Annora was more of the Ribmont than the de
Ribaumont, and that he would not be accessory either to the breaking
of hearts or to letting her become rebellious, and so that he should
put temptation out of her way.  I knew far too well what was becoming
to allow myself to suppose for a moment that Eustace thought an
inclination between the two already could exist.  I forgot how things
had been broken up in England.

As to Annora, she thought Eustace's right place was with the Prince,
and she would not stretch out a finger to hold him back, only she
longed earnestly that he would take us with him.  Could he not
persuade our mother that France was becoming dangerous, and that she
would be safe in Holland?  But of course he only laughed at that; and
we all saw that unless the Queen of England chose to follow her sons,
there was no chance of my mother leaving the Court.

'No, my sister,' said Eustace tenderly, 'there is nothing for you to
do but to endure patiently.  It is very hard for you to be both firm
and resolute, and at the same time dutiful; but it is a noble part in
its very difficulty, and my Nan will seek strength for it.'

Then the girl pressed up to him, and told him that one thing he must
promise her, namely, that he would prevent my mother from disposing
of her hand without his consent.

'As long as you are here I am safe,' said she; 'but when you are gone
I do not know what she may attempt.  And here is this Solivet son of
hers coming too!'

'Solivet has no power over you,' said Eustace.  'You may make
yourself easy, Nan.  Nobody can marry you without my consent, for my
father made me your guardian.  And I doubt me if your portion, so
long as I am living, be such as to tempt any man to wed such a little
fury, even were we at home.'

'Thanks for the hint, brother,' said Annora.  'I will take care that
any such suitor SHALL think me a fury.'

'Nay, child, in moderation!  Violence is not strength.  Nay, rather
it exhausts the forces.  Resolution and submission are our
watchwords.'

How noble he looked as he said it, and how sad it was to part with
him! my mother wept most bitterly, and said it was cruel to leave us
to our fate, and that he would kill himself in the Dutch marshes; but
when the actual pain of parting with him was over, I am not sure that
she had not more hope of carrying out her wishes.  She would have
begun by forbidding Annora to go, attended only by the servants, to
prayers at the England ambassador's: but Eustace had foreseen this,
and made arrangements with a good old knight and his lady, Sir
Francis Ommaney, always to call for my sister on their way to church,
and she was always ready for them.  My mother used to say that her
devotion was all perverseness, and now and then, when more than
usually provoked with her, would declare that it was quite plain that
her poor child's religion was only a heresy, since it did not make
her a better daughter.

That used to sting Annora beyond all measure.  Sometimes she would
reply by pouring out a catalogue of all the worst offences of our own
Church, and Heaven knows she could find enough of them!  Or at others
she would appeal to the lives of all the best people she had ever
heard of in England, and especially of Eustace, declaring that she
knew she herself was far from good, but that was not the fault of her
religion, but of herself; and she would really strive to be
submissive and obliging for many days afterwards.

Meantime the Prince of Conde had returned, and had met the Court at
Ruel.  M. d'Aubepine and M. de Solivet both were coming with him, and
my poor little Cecile wrote letter after letter to her husband, quite
correct in grammar and orthography, asking whether she should have
the Hotel d'Aubepine prepared, and hire servants to receive him; but
she never received a line in reply.  She was very anxious to know
whether the concierge had received any orders, and yet she could not
bear to betray her ignorance.

I had been startled by passing in the street a face which I was
almost sure belonged to poor Cecile's former enemy, Mademoiselle
Gringrimeau, now the wife of Croquelebois, the intendant of the
estate; and setting old Nicole to work, I ascertained that this same
agent and his wife were actually at the Hotel d'Aubepine, having come
to meet their master, but that no apartments were made ready for him,
as it was understood that being on the staff he would be lodge in the
Hotel de Conde.

'His duty!' said Cecile; 'he must fulfil his duty, but at least I
shall see him.'

But to hear of the intendant and his wife made me very uneasy.

The happier wives were going out in their carriages to meet their
husbands on the road, but Cecile did not even know when he was
coming, nor by what road.

'So much the better,' said our English Nan.  'If I had a husband, I
would never make him look foolish in the middle of the road with a
woman and a pack of children hanging on him!'

No one save myself understood her English bashfulness, shrinking from
all display of sentiment, and I--ah! I had known such blissful
meetings, when my Philippe had been full of joy to see me come out to
meet him.  Ah! will he meet me thus at the gates of Paradise?  It
cannot be far off now!

I knew I should weep all the way if I set out with my mother to meet
her son; and Cecile was afraid both of the disappointment if she did
not meet her husband, and of his being displeased if he should come.
So she only took with her Annora and M. de Solivet's two daughters,
Gabrielle and Petronille, who were fetched from the Convent of the
Visitation.  There they sat in the carriage, Nan told me, exactly
alike in their pensionnaire's uniform, still and shy on the edge of
the seat, not daring to look to the right or left, and answering
under their breath, so that she longed to shake them.  I found
afterwards that the heretic Mademoiselle de Ribaumont was a fearful
spectacle to them, and that they were expecting her all the time to
break out in the praises of Luther, or of Henry VIII., or of some one
whom they had been taught to execrate; and whenever she opened her
lips they thought she was going to pervert them, and were quite
surprised when she only made a remark, like other people, on the
carriages and horsemen who passed them.

Meanwhile Cecile saw her little girl and boy dressed in their best,
and again rehearsed the curtsey and the bow and the little speeches
with which they were to meet their father.  She was sure, she said,
that whatever he might think of her, he must be enchanted with them;
and truly they had beautiful eyes, and Armantine was a charming
child, though Maurice was small and pale, and neither equaled my
Gaspard, who might have been White Ribaumont for height and
complexion, resembling much his uncle Walwyn, and yet in countenance
like his father.  Then Cecile and I, long before it was reasonable,
took our station near a window overlooking the porte-cochere.  I sat
with my work, while the children watched on the window-seat, and she,
at every exclamation of theirs, leaped up to look out, but only to
see some woodcutter with his pile of faggots, or a washer-woman
carrying home a dress displayed on its pole, or an ell of bread
coming in from the baker's; and she resumed her interrupted
conversation on her security that for the children's sake her husband
would set up his household together with her at the Hotel d'Aubepine.
The question, Lord Hastings, is this: Whether we are with these five
and twenty thousand men that we have, without Northumberland, a company
can dare? Hastings. With him we can's. Bardolph. Okay, so this is the
fact the everything arrives.

If we are without him too weak, it is my Meynung, we should not
too deep in, until we have his Beystand. Bey such a bloody operation
like ours, you can hypothesis, desires, expectations of an uncertain
support, not in the bill market. York. Diss is very true, Lord
Bardolph; the young hot-Spurs case Schrewsbury giebt us Lectiones.
Bardolph . In That, Milord, which caused his case, as that his small
number by the hope versprochner Hülfe double; that he himself with
an imaginary power calculations mistaken, in the small That was when
the smallest of his thoughts, that Schwärmerey it in the imagination
of a erhizten his people led to the death and destruction in its
staggering jumped.

Hastings. It can, regardless of which, with your permission, not harm,
the advantages, on the one with the largest probability can make,
Overnight in the blow to our company. Bardolph. Yes, if our circumstances
are not a augenbliklichen Resolution nöthigten. A mere hope that
würklich angefangne thing like the Trag-buds of an early spring,
from which it has as much reason to hope that they give fruits,
as to fear that frosts spoil it. If we want to build, so we
First, as we want to have, then we fall into the crack of it, and
then we have necessarily the cost of performance calculated.
I asked, as soon as I could, for M. d'Aubepine, and heard that he was
attending the Prince, who would, of course, first have to dress, and
then to present himself to the Queen-Regent, and kiss her hand, after
which he would go to Madame de Longueville's reception of the King.
It was almost a relief to hear that the Count was thus employed, and
I sent my son to tell his aunt that she might be no longer in
suspense.

I asked Solivet whether we might expect the young man on leaving the
Louvre, and he only shrugged his shoulders and said: 'What know I?'
It became plain to me that he would not discuss the matter before his
daughters, now fourteen and fifteen, and we all had to sit down to an
early supper, after which they were to be taken back to their
convent. M. d'Aubepine appeared, and was quite cheerful, for she
figured to herself once more that her husband was only detained by
his duties and his value to his Prince, and was burning every moment
to see his little ones.  She asked questions about him, and became
radiant when she heard of his courage at Lens, and the compliments
that M. le Prince had paid to him.

After supper the little pensionnaires were to be taken back, and as
some lady must escort them, I undertook the charge, finding with
great delight that their father would accompany them likewise.  I
effaced myself as much as I could on the way, and let the father and
daughters talk to one another; and they chattered freely about their
tasks, and works, and playfellows, seeming very happy with him.

But on the way home was my opportunity, and I asked what my half-
brother really thought of M. d'Aubepine.

'He is a fine young man,' he said.

'You have told me that before; but what hopes are there for his
wife?'

'Poor little thing,' returned Solivet.

'Can he help loving her?' I said

'Alas! my sister, he has been in a bad school, and has before him an
example--of courage, it is true, but not precisely of conjugal
affection.'

'Is it true, then,' I asked, 'that the Princess of Conde is kept
utterly in the background in spite of her mother-in-law, and that the
Prince publishes his dislike to her?'

'Perfectly true,' said my brother.  'When a hero, adored by his
officers, actually declares that the only thing he does not wish to
see in France is his wife, what can you expect of them?  Even some
who really love their wives bade them remain at home, and will steal
away to see them with a certain shame; and for Aubepine, he is only
too proud to resemble the Prince in being married against his will to
a little half-deformed child, who is to be avoided.'

I cried out at this, and demanded whether my little sister-in-law
could possibly be thus described.  He owned that she was incredibly
improved, and begged my pardon and hers, saying that he was only
repeating what Aubepine either believed or pretended to believe her
to be.

'If I could only speak with him!' I said.  'For my husband's sake I
used to have some influence with him.  I would give the world to meet
him before he sees the intendant and his wife.  Could we contrive
it?'

In a few moments we had settled it.  Happily we were both in full
dress, in case friends should have dropped in on us.  Both of us had
the entree at Madame de Longueville's, and it would be quite correct
to pay her our compliments on the return of her brother.

I believe Solivet a little questioned whether one so headstrong had
not better be left to himself, but he allowed that no one had ever
done as much with Armand d'Aubepine as my husband and myself, and
when he heard my urgent wish to forestall the intendant, whose wife
was Cecile's old tyrant, Mademoiselle de Gringrimeau, he thought it
worth the venture.  He said I was a warlike Gildippe still, and that
he would stand by me.

So the coachman received his orders; we fell in among the long line
of carriages, and in due time made our way to the salon, where Madame
le Duchesse de Longueville sat enthroned in all the glory of her fair
hair and beautiful complexion, toying with her fan as she conversed
with the Prince of Marsillac, the most favoured at that time of a
whole troop of admirers and devoted slaves.  She was not an
intellectual woman herself, but she had beyond all others who I ever
saw the power of leading captive the very ablest men.

The hero had not yet come from the palace, and having made our
compliments, and received a gracious smile and nod, we stood aside,
waiting and conversing with others, and in some anxiety lest the
Prince should be detained at the Louvre.  However, before long he
came, and his keen eagle face, and the stars on his breast, flashed
on us, as he returned the greetings of one group after another in
his own peculiar manner, haughty, and yet not without a certain
charm.

A troop of officers followed, mingling with the gay crowd of ladies
and gentlemen, and among them Solivet pointed out the Count
d'Aubepine.  I should not otherwise have known him, so much was he
altered in these six years, changing him from youth to manhood.  His
hair was much darker, he had a small pointed beard, and the childish
contour of cheek and chin had passed away, and he was altogether
developed, but there was something that did not reassure me.  He
seemed to have lost, with his boyhood, that individuality which we
had once loved, and to have passed into an ordinary officer, like all
the rest of the gay, dashing, handsome, but often hardened-looking
men, who were enjoying their triumphant return into ladies' society.

Solivet had accosted him.  I saw his eye glance anxiously round, then
he seemed reassured, and came towards me with some eagerness,
greeting me with some compliment, I know not what, on my appearance;
but I cut this as short as I could be saying: 'Know you, Monsieur,
why I am here?  I am come to ask you to bestow a little half-hour on
one who is longing to see you.'

'Madame, I am desolated to refuse you, but, you see, I am in
attendance, and on duty; I am not the master!'

However, my brother observed that he would not be required for at
least two hours, and his movements would be quite free until the
party broke up.  We will continue to make us the nemliche Freyheit
to take, as in the previous Stüke, and we are destomehr hiezu
genöthiget, because the humor and the ridiculous, it's inside, in
very gröstentheils rabble-term Schwänken, Zoten, word games, and a
disgusting nature of counterfeit and schmuzigem Wiz, and we probably
no reader of those Classe will have on the audience belonged, so
we wanted to entertain.)

Falstaff. Holla, you giant! what the Doctor says to my water? Lakay.
He says, Lord, the water on oneself sey a good healthy water, but
what the person RESTREINT from which it brings, which would like more
diseases in themselves, than they imagine . Falstaff. All kinds
of people are what make it a taunt to me. The brain of this clownish
Composition of clods, which means one person is not able to invent
a more ridiculous than I invent, or the substance which I hergebe.
I am not only for myself wizig, but also the reason that
other people are wizig.

I go here before you, like a mother pig, which all of his boys,
except for one, has eaten. If a prince andre cause why he thee into
my service done, had, as to make me look ridiculous, so I do not know
what is right and left. Du H ** Alraune by a son, you were good for
you better that I would in my Müze than behind me that thou shalt
go Dreiner. I've never not Agtstein the servant-man had to
IZT, but I want you neither gold nor silver girt leave to leave
thee, thou shalt in Bley taken me, and I will set thee thy Lord
send back again, so it is a jewel for you contributed kan.

This Juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not even Gauch
has feathers, it should me more of a beard in my hand flat to grow,
anyway he will get in the face, and yet he is impertinent enough and
claims that his face sey a royal face. The sky might make it completely
if he wants, IZT, no hair out auszusezen, he can always
considered it a royal face inne have a barber because his life is not
six Pfenning draw, and yet he always crows, as if he A man has been
sey, like his father, a young fellow was.

He likes his mercy save for themselves, because the mine has
quite lost, which I can assure him.
To have her husband seated
beside her, with his son upon his knee, had been the dream and prayer
of her life for six years, and now that it was gratified the very
intensity of her hopes and fears choked her, made her stammer and
answer at random, when a woman without her depth of affection might
have put out all kinds of arts to win and detain him.

After a time he put the child down, but still held his hand, came up
to the rest of the company and mingled with it.  I could have wished
they had been younger and more fashionable, instead of a poor old
Scottish cavalier and his wife, my mother's old contemporary Madame
de Delincourt, and a couple of officers waiting for Solivet.  Annora
was the only young brilliant creature there, and she had much too low
an opinion of M. d'Aubepine to have a word to say to him, and
continued to converse in English with old Sir Andrew Macniven about
the campaigns of the Marquis of Montrose, both of them hurling out
barbarous names that were enough to drive civilized ears out of the
room.

Our unwilling guest behaved with tolerably good grace, and presently
made his excuse to my mother and me, promising immediately to send
back Solivet to his friends.  His wife went with him into the outer
room, and when in a few minutes Armantine ran back to call me---

'Papa is gone, and mama is crying,' she said.

It was true, but they were tears of joy.  Cecile threw herself on my
bosom perfectly overwhelmed with happiness, poor little thing,
declaring that she owed it all to me, and that though he could not
remain now, he had promised that she should hear from him.  He was
enchanted with his children; indeed, how could he help it?  And she
would have kept me up all night, discussing every hair of his
moustache, every tone in the few words he had spoken to her.  When at
last I parted from her I could not help being very glad.  Was the
victory indeed won, and would my Philippe's sister become a happy
wife?

I trusted that now he had seen her he would be armed against Madame
Croquelebois, who you will remember had been his grandmother's dame
de compagnie, and a sort of governess to him.  She had petted him as
much as she had afterwards tyrannized over his poor little wife, and
might still retain much influence over him, which she was sure to
exert against me.  But at any rate he could not doubt of his wife's
adoration for him.

We waited in hope.  We heard of the Prince in attendance on the
Queen-Regent, and we knew his aide-de-camp could not be spared, and
we went on expecting all the morning and all the evening, assuring
Cecile that military duty was inexorable, all the time that we were
boiling over with indignation.

My mother was quite as angry as we were, and from her age and
position could be more effective.  She met M. d'Aubepine one evening
at the Louvre, and took him to task, demanding when his wife was to
hear from him, and fairly putting him out of countenance in the
presence of the Queen of England.  She came home triumphant at what
she had done, and raised our hopes again, but in fact, though it
impelled him to action, there was now mortified vanity added to
indifference and impatience of the yoke.

There was a letter the next day.  Half an hour after receiving it I
found Cecile sunk down on the floor of her apartment, upon which all
her wardrobe was strewn about as if to be packed up.  She fell into
my arms weeping passionately, and declaring she must leave us.  to
leave us and set up her menage with her husband had always been her
ambition, so it was plain that this was not what she meant; but for a
long time she neither would nor could tell me, or moan out anything
but a 'convent,' 'how could he?' and 'my children.'

At last she let me read the letter, and a cruel one it was, beginning
'Madame,' and giving her the choice of returning to Chateau
d'Aubepine under the supervision of Madame Croquelebois, or of
entering a convent, and sending her son to be bred up at the Chateau
under a tutor and the intendant.  She had quite long enough lived
with Madame de Bellaise, and that young Englishman, her brother, who
was said to be charming.

It was an absolute insult to us all, and as I saw at once was the
work of Madame Croquelebois, accepted by the young Count as a
convenient excuse for avoiding the ennui and expense of setting up a
household with his wife, instead of living a gay bachelor life with
his Prince.  I did not even think it was his handwriting except the
signature, an idea which gave the first ray of comfort to my poor
sister-in-law.  It was quite provoking to find that she had no spirit
to resent, or even to blame; she only wept that any one should be so
cruel, and, quite hopeless of being heard on her own defence, was
ready to obey, and return under the power of her oppressor, if only
she might keep her son.  All the four years she had lived with us had
not taught her self-assertion, and the more cruelly she was wounded,
the meeker she became.

The Abbe said she was earning a blessing; but I felt, like Annora,
much inclined to beat her, when she would persist in loving and
admiring that miserable fellow through all, and calling him 'so
noble.'

We did not take things by any means so quietly.  We were the less
sorry for my brother's absence that such an insinuation almost
demanded a challenge, though in truth I doubt whether they would have
dared to make it had he been at hand.  Annora did wish she could take
sword or pistols in hand and make him choke on his own words, and she
was very angry that our brother de Solivet was much too cool and
prudent to take Eustace's quarrel on himself.

Here, however, it was my mother who was most reasonable, and knew
best how to act.  She said that it was true that as this was my
house, and the charge of M. d'Aubepine had been committed to me, I
had every right to be offended; but as she was the eldest lady in the
house it was suitable for her to act.  She wrote a billet to him
demanding a personal interview with him that he might explain the
insinuations which concerned the honour of herself, her son, and her
daughter.

I believe a duel would have been much more agreeable to him than such
a meeting, but my mother so contrived it that he knew that he could
not fail to meet her without its being known to the whole Court, and
that he could not venture.  So he came, and I never saw anything more
admirably managed than the conference was on my mother's part, for
she chose to have me present as mistress of the house.  She had put
on her richest black velvet suit, and looked a most imposing
chatelaine, and though he came in trying to carry it off with
military bravado and nonchalance, he was evidently ill at ease.

My mother then demanded of him, in her own name, her son's, and mine,
what right or cause he had to make such accusations, as he had
implied, respecting our house.

He laughed uneasily, and tried to make light of it, talking of
reports, and inferences, and so on; but my mother, well assured that
there was no such scandal, drove him up into a corner, and made him
confess that he had heard nothing but from Madame Croquelebois.  My
mother then insisted on that lady being called for, sending her own
sedan chair to bring her.

Now the Baronne de Ribaumont Walwyn was a veritable grande dame, and
Madame Croquelebois, in spite of her sharp nose, and sharper tongue,
was quite cowed by her, and absolutely driven to confess that she had
not heard a word against Madame la Comtesse.  All that she had gone
upon was the fact of their residence in the same house, and that a
servant of hers had heard from a servant of ours that M. le Baron
gave her his hand to go in to dinner every day when there were no
visitors.

It all became plain then.  The intendant's wife, who had never
forgiven me for taking her victim away from her, had suggested this
hint as an excuse for withdrawing the Countess from me, without
obliging the Count to keep house with her, and becoming the attentive
husband, who seemed, to his perverted notions, a despicable being.
Perhaps neither of them had expected the matter to be taken up so
seriously, and an old country-bred Huguenot as Madame Croquelebois
had originally been, thought that as we were at Court, gallantry was
our natural atmosphere.

Having brought them to confession, we divided them.  My mother talked
to the intendante, and made her perceive what a wicked, cruel
injustice and demoralization she was leading her beloved young Count
into committing, injuring herself and his children, till the woman
actually wept, and allowed that she had not thought of it; she wanted
to gratify him, and she felt it hard and ungrateful that she should
not watch over his wife and children as his grandmother had always
intended.

On my side I had M. d'Aubepine, and at last I worked down to the
Armand I had known at Nancy, not indeed the best of subjects, but
still infinitely better than the conceited, reckless man who had
appeared at first.  The one thing that touched him was that I should
think him disrespectful to me, and false to his friendship for my
husband.  He really had never thought his words would hurt me for a
moment.  He actually shed tears at the thought of my Philippe, and
declared that nothing was farther from his intention than any
imputation on any one belonging to me.

But bah! he was absolutely driven to find some excuse!  How could he
play the devoted husband to a little ugly imbecile like that, who
would make him ridiculous every moment they appeared together?  Yes,
he knew I had done the best I could for her, but what was she after
all?  And her affection was worst of all.  Everybody would made game
of him.

There was no getting farther.  The example of the Prince of Conde and
the fear of ridicule had absolutely steeled his heart and blinded his
eyes.  He could not and would not endure the innocent wife who adored
him.

Finally my mother, calling in Solivet, came to the following
arrangement, since it was plain that we must part with our inmates.
Cecile and her children were to be installed in the Hotel d'Aubepine,
to which her husband did not object, since he would be either in
attendance on the Prince, or with his regiment.  This was better than
sending her either to a convent or to the country, since she would
still be within our reach, although to our great vexation we could
not prevail so far as to hinder Madame Croquelebois from being
installed as her duenna, the intendant himself returning to La
Vendee.

To our surprise, Cecile did not seem so much dismayed at returning
under the power of her tyrant as we had expected.  It was doing what
her husband wished, and living where she would have news of him, and
perhaps sometimes see him.

That was all she seemed to think about, except that she would have
her children still with her, and not be quite cut off from us.

And I took this consolation, that she was in better health and a
woman of twenty-two could not be so easily oppressed as a sickly
child of sixteen.

But we were very unhappy about it, and Annora almost frantic, above
all at Cecile's meek submission.  She was sure the poor thing would
be dead in a month, and then we should be sorry.


CHAPTER XVIII.

TWELTH NIGHT, OR WHAT YOU WILL.


My mother declared that M. d'Aubepine would fare the better if we
left her alone and did not excite the jealousy of Madame
Croquelebois, who would be quite capable of carrying her off into the
country if she were interfered with.

Indeed it was not an easy or a pleasant thing to go about Paris just
then, and we were obliged to stay at home.  The town was in a
restless state, mobs went about, hooting or singing political songs,
or assembled in front of the Louvre to abuse the Cardinal, and any
one who was supposed to belong to the Court party might at any time
be mobbed.  Annora and I much missed the explanations that our
brother, Lord Walwyn, used to make to us; and the listening to his
conversations with M. Darpent.  We have not ever seen a Platero and
yet you see and you want, and when this is on our side for a burrito
glad we are the eyes behind him and say: There goes Platero. ¡Platero,
which, as we know, died and was buried, and whose soul is in the sky
Moguer! Neither more nor less than when people said they saw hardly
any lean hack: There goes Rocinante And the fact is that the Platerillo
the story, but has much of a jackass really, it looks more like a
asnillo dreams and fantasy, as if is only an illusion in
which they cast the illusion that children are made of donkeys and
burros that must be made of themselves in their hours of dream.

And a great poet and simple, able to understand children and
donkeys, wrapped vision plated asnillo the melancholy aura of pious
and sensitive soul. But the soul of the poet enters the picture so
real that borriquillo it is difficult to understand that they are two
different people, and seems to Platero is none other than the poet,
the poetic expression of the naive, pure, childish, irrational and
instinctive soul. When Juan Ramon Platerillo us reason to think
that reasoning with himself, and his feelings of coincidence is exactly
the love that are so narrow that no one could believe they Platero
was a brother of Juan Ramon had taken the form of a donkey, as in
stories by art of enchantment. In any case, the twinning of a poet
and an animal, ie between a poet and nature, is not an insult. Just
one man is a poet when he can be spontaneous and of course it is.
Very difficult thing for men. Juan Ramón Jiménez is a true poet,
one of the finest that Spain has had and has. Born in 1881 in Moguer,
near Palos de Moguer, where more than four years ago left the
Spanish caravels that discovered America. Moguer and countryside are
in the pages of _Platero and yo_ with a unique charm and singular.
For them we also know something of how Juan Ramon lived in the
land of small Andalusian, clean, smooth and clear, where he formed
his mind. The high social position of his family spared the harshness
of the struggle for life and enabled him to devote themselves entirely
to her artistic vocation. Although he studied at the University of
Seville, he was not called by God that way, and from a young age found
in the presentation of his poetry exalted and sensitive soul. When it
did not even twenty years, unmistakable timbre of his voice was heard
in Spanish-speaking world as the revelation of a great original
poetic temperament. Since then, Juan Ramón Jiménez has lived only
for his artistry, performing the miracle, rarely achieved by no
artist, the perfect identification between the life and work. I
mean that his work is sincere and faithful expression of his
soul, that no effort was spared to achieve the greatest perfection
and intensity that no consideration is ideal for this art has a
place in the poet's soul, which up, pure and selfless as a saint,
in search of their ideal without any concession to any other
human interest.

Neither money nor the ambition of fame can be dragged to a poet like
this one to yield to the demands of public taste and used, nothing
it moves outside the meeting. It has always been reconcentrado Juan
Ramón Jiménez and lonely. But it has not isolated from men for lack
of love but by excessive sensitivity. His youthful work clearly
demonstrates the wealth of tenderness that surrounded his sick
soul unsatisfied yearning for love, melancholy of disgust for all that
is low in life. The poet, who is still young, when they reach
manhood, with a calm and loving home, surrounded by the friendship
of so many fervent admirers found nearby and distant, seems to
have entered an era of fulfillment and serenity.

It was still much him. However, considering only his passing, we would
come to a poet who has no superior in the Spanish literature of
today and will certainly remain in their history as one of his
greatest lyric of all time.
The Queen-Regent was in the highest spirits.  We had never seen her
dignity so relax into merriment as when she set the little ones to
dance together after the supper was over; but she sent them to bed
early, much earlier than her sons desired.  We heard his real Majesty
saying to Gaspard, 'M. le Marquis, since you are King of the Bean,
command that we should be like all other revelers, and sit up till
morning.'

My boy looked up to me, and read in my face that he must not presume.

'Ah! sire,' said he, 'though we are called kings, these ladies are
the higher powers.'

It was applauded as a grand witticism, although Gaspard meant it in
all simplicity, and had no notion of the meaning attributed to it.
Nay, he thought all the praise was approval of him as a good boy
inducing the King to be obedient.

After the children had gone to bed, including Mademoiselle's three
little half-sisters, dull little girls of whom she spoke
contemptuously but always treated very kindly, she led the way to the
apartment where her father was sitting by a great fire, fretful with
gout, and wanting the amusement which she tried to give him by
describing  the children's diversions.  Some one came and whispered
something to her, and in the tone of  one who has an excellent joke
to rehearse she went up to the Duke of Orleans, exclaiming--

'Monsieur!  Here is news!  We are all to start for St. Germain this
very night!'

Monsieur made no answer, and immediately after bade her good night.
She then went to her stepmother's room, and I remained with some of
the other ladies, who were pretty well convinced that it was a true
report, and that the Queen had been only waiting the arrival of the
troops from the Low Countries to quit Paris and crush the resistance
of the Parliament.  What was to become of us we did not know, whether
we were to stay or go; but as we heard no more, and Mademoiselle came
out and went to bed, we followed her example.

Between three and four we were all awakened by a loud knocking at the
door, and Mademoiselle's shrill voice calling out to her maids to
open it.  Through the anteroom, where the Comtess de Fiesque and I
were sleeping, there came M. de Comminges.  Mademoiselle, in her
laced night-cap, rose on her pillows and asked--

'Are we going?'

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' was the reply.  'The King, the Queen, and
Monsieur, are waiting for you in the court, and here is a letter from
Monsieur.'

She put it aside, saying she did not want Monsieur's orders to make
her obey those of the Queen, but he begged her to read it.  She
glanced at it, and then declared that she would be ready immediately.
M. de Comminges departed, and then began the greatest bustle
imaginable, everybody dressing at once in the greatest confusion,
putting on each other's things by mistake, and Mademoiselle talking--
talking through all.

They were afraid to leave her behind, she said, lest she should have
headed a party.  No doubt M. le Prince dreaded her influence, and so
did the Queen.  They had made her father issue his commands without
warning lest she should disobey.

In fact she had the greatest desire to disobey, only she did not
quite venture, and we her ladies had no notion what we were to do,
whether to stay or go, while I was in great anxiety as to what they
might have done with my boy.

Somehow or other we all found ourselves in the court of the Louvre,
strongly lighted by flambeaux, and by the windows of the building.
There stood a row of carriages; Mademoiselle called for hers, but it
was not forthcoming, and M. de Comminges, bowing low, offered her his
own; but another gentleman came up and handed her into the royal one,
where already were the King and Queen, the two Princesses of Conde,
the Prince of Conti, and a lady.

I heard Mademoiselle asserting her right to one of the best seats,
and then declaring that she yielded 'as the young must give place to
the old,' a little cut at the Princess Dowager of Conde.  She bade M.
de Fiesque follow with her carriage and properties, and we were left
in the most wonderful confusion in that dark court, the carriages
moving away one after another, the mounted servants carrying torches,
and the guards trampling and clinking behind them; servants,
gentlemen, and ladies running about wildly, some of the women crying
and wringing their hands.  Among these was Madame de Fiesque, who was
of a timid nature, and was frightened out of her wits at the notion
of having to follow, whither she did not even know, while I was
equally wild, though I hope I did not make quite so much noise, about
my son.

One of the gentlemen at last came and spoke to us, and told us that
the King and Queen were gone to St. Germain.  It had all been
determined upon for some time past (as soon in fact as the Queen knew
that the Prince of Conde would support her, and that the troops were
near enough to be of use), and this night had been chosen because she
could get off more easily in a time of revelry.  Monsieur had known
it all the evening, but had been afraid to tell his daughter because
of 'her ideas,' which meant that he was by no means sure that she
might choose to obey, unless she were taken by surprise, but might
want to represent the House of Orleans at Paris.  The Queen of
England was not gone; and, as to M. le Marquis de Nidemerle---

That question was answered by a sound of bare, pattering feet, and a
cry of 'Mamma, mamma!' and my little Marquis himself, with nothing on
but his little white shirt and black velvet breeches, his long hair
streaming behind him, came and threw himself on me, followed by two
or three more little fellows in the same state of dishabille.  'Oh,
mamma!' he cried, 'we thought they were all gone, and had left us to
be murdered by the cruel Parliament; and then I saw you from the
window in the court.'  So there they all were, except one little
Count from Burgundy, who slept serenely through the tumult.

By this time we could recollect that it was a January night, and that
we had better retreat into the great hall, where the fire was not
out.  I had a great mind, since we were thus deserted, to return home
with my son, but my poor Princess could not be left without a single
attendant, or any clothes save what had been huddled on in haste, nor
perhaps even a bed, for we knew that St. Germain was dismantled of
furniture, and that no preparations had been made for fear of giving
alarm.

M. de Fiesque declared that she should die if she tried to pass the
streets of Paris, where we began to hear loud cries.  The maids
seemed to have all run away, and she implored me to go, with all that
was most necessary, to Mademoiselle.

'You are English!  You are a very Gildippe.  You have been in the
wars--you fear nothing,' said the poor woman.  'I implore you to go!'

And as I had my son with me, and it seemed to be a duty or even a
charity that no one else would undertake, though it was not likely
that any harm could come to us, I sent Gaspard to dress himself, with
my faithful Nicolas, who had come to light.  The gentlemen undertook
to find us Mademoiselle's coach, and we hurried back to get together
what we could for our mistress.  I laugh now to think of M. de
Fiesque and myself trying with our inexperienced hands to roll up a
mattress and some bedding, and to find the linen and the toilet
requisites, in which we had but small success, for the femmes de
chamber kept everything, and had all either run away or slept too far
off to hear us.  We managed at last to fasten up the mattress with
the other things in it, tied by a long scarf at each end, and
dragging it to the top of the stairs we rolled it down each flight.
At the second it upset at unfortunate lackey, who began to yell,
firmly persuaded that it was a corpse, and that the Frondeurs had got
in and were beginning a general slaughter.

How we recovered from the confusion I do not know, but Gaspard joined
me at the top of the stairs, bringing with him a page of his own age,
the little Chevalier de Mericour, whom he entreated me to take with
us.  Because it is not in German ausdrüken leaves, so goes the whole
lost of fun. In Switzerland, where light and easy beydes Liecht
pronounced, perhaps it went on.) Lakay. He's gone from Schmidt
Field, Eu. Glory of a horse Kauff. Falstaff. I bought him in Paul's,
and he buys me IZT for a horse in Smithfield. If I IZT only one woman
from a B ** l could get so wär 'ich manned, begault and beweibt! Fifth
Scene. (The top judge, Lord and his Serves on the former.) (We must
omit this scene entirely . The biggest fun in them is the idea that
Falstaff has to make as if he does not hear well, and the insolent
answers it, to the privilege of deafness to the top judge, Lord
giebt of him because of his non-healing Lifestyle beschilt.)

Sixth Scene. (Transforms into the palace of the Archbishop of York.)
(The ore Bischoff Hastings, Thomas Mowbray, and Lord Bardolph occur.)
York. You have now the nature of our case heard, and our resources
Kennet . IZT Entdeket us, my noble friends, I beg you all, entdeket
ungescheut what their hopes of our denket. What say you to Lord
Marshal? Mowbray.

I approve entirely the matter of our arms, but I wish more convinced
Seyn, like us with the resources we have such a terrible power as
the king, the forehead can offer. Hastings. Our dermal thickness
is five and twenty thousand men outstanding people to grow, and the
great Northumberland, whose chest from just glows ester revenge,
giebt us the hope of a mighty reliable support. Bardolph.
I really think if the Cardinal had been there they
would have torn him to pieces.  They were trying to drag open the
doors, and would have done so much sooner but for the crowds who were
pushed against them and kept them shut.  At last there seemed to be
some one among them with a more authoritative tone.  The pressure on
the door lessened, and it was to my dismay torn open; but at that
moment my son called out, 'M. Darpent! Oh, M. Darpent, come to my
mother!'  Immediately M. Clement Darpent, unarmed and in his usual
dress, with only a little came in his hand, made his way forward.
Before I saw him I heard his welcome voice calling, 'Madame de
Bellaise here! I am coming, M. le Marquis!  The Queen!  Betise!  I
tell you it is a lady of my acquaintance.'

'The Cardinal!  She is carrying off the Italian rolled up in a
mattress!  Down with the fox!' came another terrible outcry; but by
this time M. Darpent had been hustled up to the door, and put himself
between us and the throng.  He could hear me now when I told him it
was merely Mademoiselle's bedding which we were carrying out to her.
He shouted out this intelligence, and it made a lull; but one horrid
fellow in a fur cap sneered, 'We know better than that, Monsieur!
Away with traitors! And those who would smuggle them away!'

'Oh! show it to them!' I cried; and then I saw a face that I had
known in the hospital, and called him by name.  'Jean Marie, my good
friend, have you your knife to cut these cords and show there is
nothing inside?'

The man's honest face lighted up.  'Hein! The good tall lady who
brought me bouillons!  I warrant there is no harm in her, brothers!
She's a good Frondeuse, and has nothing to do with foreign traitors.'

He ranged himself beside Clement Darpent, offering a big knife,
wherewith in a moment the bands were cut and the mattress help up to
view, with a few clothes inside.

I made my two defenders understand that they were Mademoiselle's
garments, and when this was repeated there was a general shout:
'Vive la bonne dame!  Vive Mademoiselle!  Vive Monsieur!  Vive la
Fronde!'

