SIM. (_aside._) If he at the real marriage {of my son} had taken me
off my guard, what sport he would have made of me. Now it is at his
own risk; I'm sailing in harbor.


SCENE III.

  _Re-enter LESBIA from the house of GLYCERIUM._

LES. (_speaking to ARCHYLIS at the door, and not seeing SIMO and
DAVUS._) As yet, Archylis, all the customary symptoms which ought to
exist toward recovery, I perceive in her. Now, in the first place,
take care and let her bathe;[62] then, after that, what I ordered to
be given her to drink, and as much as I prescribed, do you administer:
presently I will return hither. (_To herself aloud._) By all that's
holy, a fine boy has been born to Pamphilus. I pray the Gods that he
may survive, since {the father} himself is of a good disposition, and
since he has hesitated to do an injustice to this most excellent young
woman. (_Exit._


SCENE IV.

  _SIMO and DAVUS._

SIM. Even this, who is there that knows you that would not believe
that it originated in you?

DAV. Why, what is this?

SIM. She didn't order in their presence what was requisite to be done
for the woman lying in; but after she has come out, she bawls from the
street to those who are in the house. O Davus, am I thus trifled with
by you? Or pray, do I seem to you so very well suited to be thus
openly imposed upon by your tricks? At all events {it should have
been} with precaution; that at least I might have seemed to be feared
if I should detect it.

DAV. (_aside._) Assuredly, upon my faith, it's he that's now
{deceiving} himself, not I.

SIM. I gave you warning, I forbade you with threats to do it. Have you
been awed? What has it availed? Am I to believe you now in this, that
this woman has had a child by Pamphilus?

DAV. (_aside._) I understand where he's mistaken; and I see what I
must do.

SIM. Why are you silent?

DAV. What would you believe? As though word had not been brought you
that thus it would happen.

SIM. Any {word brought} to me?

DAV. Come now, did you of your own accord perceive that this was
counterfeited?

SIM. I am being trifled with.

DAV. Word has been brought you; for {otherwise} how could this
suspicion have occurred to you?

SIM. How? Because I knew you.

DAV. As though you meant to say that this has been done by my
contrivance.

SIM. Why, I'm sure of it, to a certainty.

DAV. Not yet even do you know me sufficiently, Simo, what sort of
person I am.

SIM. I, not {know} you!

DAV. But if I begin to tell {you} any thing, at once you think that
deceit is being practiced upon you in guile; therefore, upon my faith,
I don't dare now {even} to whisper.

SIM. This one thing I am sure of, that no person has been delivered
here. (_Pointing to GLYCERIUM'S house._)

DAV. You have discovered {that}? Still, not a bit the less will they
presently be laying the child[63] here before the door. Of this, then,
I now warn you, master, that it will happen, that you may be aware of
it. Don't you hereafter be saying that this was done through the
advice or artifices of Davus. I wish this suspicion of yours to be
entirely removed from myself.

SIM. How do you know that?

DAV. I've heard so, and I believe it: many things combine for me to
form this conjecture. In the first place then, she declared that she
was pregnant by Pamphilus; that has been proved to be false.[64] Now,
when she sees that preparations are being made for the wedding at our
house, the maid-servant is directly sent to fetch the midwife to her,
and to bring a child at the same time.[65] Unless it is managed for
you to see the child, the marriage will not be at all impeded.

SIM. What do you say {to this}? When you perceived that they were
adopting this plan, why didn't you tell Pamphilus immediately?

DAV. Why, who has induced him to leave her, but myself? For, indeed,
we all know how desperately he loved her. Now he wishes for a wife. In
fine, do you intrust me with that affair; proceed however, as before,
to celebrate these nuptials, just as you are doing, and I trust that
the Gods will prosper this matter.

SIM. Very well; be off in-doors; wait for me there, and get ready
what's necessary to be prepared. (_DAVUS goes into the house._) He
hasn't prevailed upon me {even} now altogether to believe these
things, and I don't know whether what he has said is all true; but I
deem it of little moment; this is of far greater importance to me--
that my son himself has promised me. Now I'll go and find Chremes;
I'll ask him for a wife for my son; if I obtain my request, at what
other time rather than to-day should I prefer these nuptials taking
place? For as my son has promised, I have no doubt but that if he
should prove unwilling, I can fairly compel him. And look! here's
Chremes himself, just at the very time.


SCENE V.

  _Enter CHREMES._

SIM. I greet you, Chremes.

CHREM. O, you are the very person I was looking for.

SIM. And I for you.

CHREM. You meet me at a welcome moment. Some persons have been to me,
to say that they had heard from you, that my daughter was to be
married to your son to-day; I've come to see whether they are out of
their senses or you.

SIM. Listen; in a few words you shall learn both what I want of you,
and what you seek {to know}.

CHREM. I am listening; say what you wish.

SIM. By the Gods, I do entreat you, Chremes, and {by} our friendship,
which, commencing with our infancy, has grown up with our years, and
by your only daughter and by my own son (of preserving whom the entire
power lies with you), that you will assist me in this matter; and
that, just as this marriage was about to be celebrated, it may be
celebrated.

CHREM. O, don't importune me; as though you needed to obtain this of
me by entreaty. Do you suppose I am different now from what I was
formerly, when I promised her? If it is for the advantage of them both
that it should take place, order her to be sent for. But if from this
course there would result more harm than advantage for each, this I do
beg of you, that you will consult for their common good, as though she
were your own {daughter}, and I the father of Pamphilus.

SIM. Nay, so I intend, and so I wish it to be, Chremes; and I would
not ask it of you, did not the occasion itself require it.

CHREM. What is the matter?

SIM. There is a quarrel between Glycerium and my son.

CHREM. (_ironically_) I hear {you}.

SIM. So much so, that I'm in hopes they may be separated.

CHREM. Nonsense!

SIM. It really is so.

CHREM. After this fashion, i'faith, I tell you, "the quarrels of
lovers {are} the renewal of love."

SIM. Well-- this I beg of you, that we may prevent it. While an
opportunity offers, and while his passion is cooled by affronts,
before the wiles of these women and their tears, craftily feigned,
bring back his love-sick mind to compassion, let us give him a wife.
I trust, Chremes, that, when attached by intimacy and a respectable
marriage, he will easily extricate himself from these evils.

CHREM. So it appears to you; but I do not think[66] that either he can
possibly hold to her with constancy, or that I can put up with it if
he does not.

SIM. How then can you be sure of that, unless you make the experiment?

CHREM. But for that experiment to be made upon a daughter is a serious
thing----

SIM. Why look, all the inconvenience in fine amounts to this--
possibly, which may the Gods forfend, a separation may take place. But
if he is reformed, see how many are the advantages: in the first
place, you will have restored a son to your friend; you will obtain a
sure son-in-law[67] for yourself, and a husband for your daughter.

CHREM. What is {one to say} to all this? If you feel persuaded that
this is beneficial, I don't wish that any advantage should be denied
you.

SIM. With good reason, Chremes, have I always considered you a most
valuable friend.

CHREM. But how say you----?

SIM. What?

CHREM. How do you know that they are now at variance?

SIM. Davus himself, who is privy to {all} their plans, has told me so;
and he advises me to expedite the match as fast as I can. Do you think
he would do so, unless he was aware that my son desired it? You
yourself as well shall presently hear what he says. (_Goes to the door
of his house and calls._) Halloo there! Call Davus out here. Look,
here he is; I see him just coming out.


SCENE VI.

  _Enter DAVUS from the house._

DAV. I was coming to you.

SIM. Why, what's the matter?

DAV. Why isn't the bride sent for?[68] It's now growing late in the
day.

SIM. Do you hear me? I've been for some time not a little apprehensive
of you, Davus, lest you should do that which the common class of
servants is in the habit of doing, namely, impose upon me by your
artifices; because my son is engaged in an amour.

DAV. What, I do that?

SIM. I fancied {so}; and therefore, fearing that, I concealed from you
what I shall now mention.

DAV. What?

SIM. You shall know; for now I almost feel confidence in you.

DAV. Have you found out at last what sort of a person I am?

SIM. The marriage was not to have taken place.

DAV. How? Not {to have taken place}?

SIM. But I was making pretense, that I might test you {all}.

DAV. (_affecting surprise._) What is it you tell me?

SIM. Such is the fact.

DAV. {Only} see! I was not able to discover that. Dear me! what a
cunning contrivance!

SIM. Listen to this. Just as I ordered you to go from here into the
house, he (_pointing to CHREMES_) most opportunely met me.

DAV. (_aside._) Ha! Are we undone, then?

SIM. I told him what you just now told me.

DAV. (_aside._) Why, what am I to hear?

SIM. I begged him to give his daughter, and with difficulty I
prevailed upon him.

DAV. (_aside._) Utterly ruined!

SIM. (_overhearing him speaking._) Eh-- What was it you said?

DAV. Extremely well done, I say.

SIM. There's no delay on his part now.

CHREM. I'll go home at once; I'll tell her to make due preparation,
and bring back word here. (_Exit._

SIM. Now I do entreat you, Davus, since you by yourself have brought
about this marriage for me----

DAV. I myself, indeed![69]

SIM. Do your best still to reform my son.

DAV. Troth, I'll do it with all due care.

SIM. Do it now, while his mind is agitated.

DAV. You may be at ease.

SIM. Come then; where is he just now?

DAV. A wonder if he isn't at home.

SIM. I'll go to him; and what I've been telling you, I'll tell him as
well. (_Goes into his house._)


SCENE VII.

  _DAVUS alone._

DAV. (_to himself._) I'm a lost man! What reason is there why I
shouldn't take my departure straightway hence for the mill? There's no
room left for supplicating; I've upset every thing now; I've deceived
my master; I've plunged my master's son into a marriage; I've been the
cause of its taking place this very day, without his hoping for it,
and against the wish of Pamphilus. Here's cleverness {for you}! But,
if I had kept myself quiet, no mischief would have happened.
(_Starting._) But see, I espy him; I'm utterly undone! Would that
there were some spot here for me, from which I might this instant
pitch myself headlong! (_Stands apart._)


SCENE VIII.

  _Enter PAMPHILUS in haste from SIMO'S house._

PAM. Where is he? The villain, who this day-- I'm ruined; and I
confess that this has justly befallen me, for being such a dolt, so
devoid of sense; that I should have intrusted my fortunes to a
frivolous slave![70] I am suffering the reward of my folly; still he
shall never get off from me unpunished for this.

DAV. (_apart._) I'm quite sure that I shall be safe in future, if for
the present I get clear of this mishap.

PAM. But what now am I to say to my father? Am I to deny that I am
ready, who have just promised to marry? With what effrontery could I
presume {to do} that? I know not what to do with myself.

DAV. (_apart._) Nor I with myself, and {yet} I'm giving all due
attention to it. I'll tell him that I will devise something, in order
that I may procure some respite in this dilemma.

PAM. (_Catching sight of him._) Oho!

DAV. (_apart._) I'm seen.

PAM. (_sneeringly._) How now, good sir, what are you about? Do you see
how dreadfully I am hampered by your devices?

DAV. Still, I'll soon extricate you.

PAM. You, extricate {me}?

DAV. Assuredly, Pamphilus.

PAM. As you {have} just {done}, I suppose.

DAV. Why no, better, I trust.

PAM. What, am I to believe you, you scoundrel?[71] You, indeed, make
good a matter that's all embarrassment and ruin! Just see, in whom
I've been placing reliance-- you who this day from a most happy state
have been and plunged me into a marriage. Didn't I say that this would
be the case?

DAV. You did say {so}.

PAM. What do you deserve?[72]

DAV. The cross.[73] But allow me a little time to recover myself; I'll
soon hit upon something.

PAM. Ah me! not to have the leisure to inflict punishment upon you as
I desire! for the present conjuncture warns me to take precautions for
myself, not to be taking vengeance on you. (_Exeunt._


ACT THE FOURTH.


SCENE I.

  _Enter CHARINUS, wringing his hands._

CHAR. (_to himself._) Is this to be believed or spoken of; that malice
so great could be inborn in any one as to exult at misfortunes, and to
derive advantage from the distresses of another! Oh, is this true?
Assuredly, that is the most dangerous class of men, in whom there is
only a slight degree of hesitation at refusing; afterward, when the
time arrives for fulfilling their promises, then, obliged, of
necessity they discover themselves. They are afraid, and yet the
circumstances[74] compel them to refuse. Then, in that case, their
very insolent remark is, "Who are you? What are you to me? What
{should I give up} to you what's my own? Look you, I am the most
concerned in my own interests."[75] But if you inquire where is honor,
they are not ashamed.[76] Here, where there is occasion, they are not
afraid; there, where there is no occasion, they are afraid. But what
am I to do? Ought I not to go to him, and reason with him upon this
outrage, and heap many an invective upon {him}? Yet some one may say,
"you will avail nothing." Nothing? At least I shall have vexed him,
and have given vent to my own feelings.


SCENE II.

  _Enter PAMPHILUS and DAVUS._

PAM. Charinus, unintentionally I have ruined both myself and you,
unless the Gods in some way befriend us.

CHAR. Unintentionally, is it! An excuse has been discovered at last.
You have broken your word.

PAM. How so, pray?

CHAR. Do you expect to deceive me a second time by these speeches?

PAM. What does this mean?

CHAR. Since I told you that I loved her, she has become quite pleasing
to you. Ah wretched me! to have judged of your disposition from my
own.

PAM. You are mistaken.

CHAR. Did this pleasure appear to you not to be quite complete, unless
you tantalized me in my passion, and lured me on by groundless hopes?
--You may take her.

PAM. I, take her? Alas! you know not in what perplexities, to my
sorrow, I am involved, and what vast anxieties this executioner of
mine (_pointing to DAVUS_) has contrived for me by his devices.

CHAR. What is it so wonderful, if he takes example from yourself?

PAM. You would not say that if you understood either myself or my
affection.

CHAR. I'm quite aware (_ironically_); you have just now had a dispute
with your father, and he is now angry with you in consequence, and has
not been able to-day to prevail upon you to marry her.

PAM. No, not at all,-- as you are not acquainted with my sorrows,
these nuptials were not in preparation for me; and no one was thinking
at present of giving {me} a wife.

CHAR. I am aware; you have been influenced by your own inclination.

PAM. Hold; you do not yet know {all}.

CHAR. For my part, I certainly do know that you are about to marry
her.

PAM. Why are you torturing me to death? Listen to this. He (_pointing
to DAVUS_) never ceased to urge me to tell my father that I would
marry her; to advise and persuade me, even until he compelled me.

CHAR. Who was this person?

PAM. Davus.

CHAR. Davus! For what reason?

PAM. I don't know; except that I must have been under the displeasure
of the Gods, for me to have listened to him.

CHAR. Is this the fact, Davus?

DAV. It is the fact.

CHAR. (_starting._) Ha! What do you say, {you} villain? Then may the
Gods send you an end worthy of your deeds. Come now, tell me, if all
his enemies had wished him to be plunged into a marriage, what advice
but this could they have given?

DAV. I have been deceived, but I don't despair.

CHAR. (_ironically._) I'm sure of that.

DAV. This way it has not succeeded; we'll try another. Unless,
perhaps, you think that because it failed at first, this misfortune
can not now possibly be changed for better luck.

PAM. Certainly not; for I quite believe that if you set about it, you
will be making two marriages for me out of one.

DAV. I owe you this, Pamphilus, in respect of my servitude, to strive
with hands {and} feet, night and day; to submit to hazard of my life,
to serve you. It is your part, if any thing has fallen out contrary to
expectation, to forgive me. What I was contriving has not succeeded;
still, I am using all endeavors; or, do you yourself devise something
better, {and} dismiss me.

PAM. I wish to; restore me to the position in which you found me.

DAV. I'll do {so}.

PAM. But it must be done directly.

DAV. But the door of Glycerium's house here makes a noise.[77]

PAM. {That's} nothing to you.

DAV. (_assuming an attitude of meditation._) I'm in search of--

PAM. (_ironically._) Dear me, what, now at last?

DAV. Presently I'll give you what I've hit upon.


SCENE III.

  _Enter MYSIS from the house of GLYCERIUM._

MYS. (_calling at the door to GLYCERIUM within._) Now, wherever he is,
I'll take care that your own Pamphilus shall be found for you, and
brought to you by me; do you only, my life, cease to vex yourself.

PAM. Mysis.

MYS. (_turning round._) Who is it? Why, Pamphilus, you do present
yourself opportunely to me. My mistress charged me to beg of you, if
you love her, to come to her directly; she says she wishes to see you.

PAM. (_aside._) Alas! I am undone; this dilemma grows apace! (_To
DAVUS._) For me and her, unfortunate persons, now to be tortured this
way through your means; for I am sent for, because she has discovered
that my marriage is in preparation.

CHAR. From which, indeed, how easily a respite could have been
obtained, if he (_pointing to DAVUS_) had kept himself quiet.

DAV. (_ironically to CHARINUS._) Do proceed; if he isn't sufficiently
angry of his own accord, do you irritate him.

MYS. (_to PAMPHILUS._) Aye faith, that is the case; and for that
reason, poor thing, she is now in distress.

PAM. Mysis, I swear by all the Gods that I will never forsake her; not
if I were to know that all men would be my enemies in consequence. Her
have I chosen for mine; she has fallen to my lot; our feelings are
congenial; farewell they, who wish for a separation between us;
nothing but Death separates her from me.

MYS. I begin to revive.

PAM. Not the responses of Apollo are more true than this. If it can
possibly be contrived that my father may not believe that this
marriage has been broken off through me, I could wish it. But if that
can not be, I will do that which is easily effected, for him to
believe that through me it has been caused. What do you think of me?

CHAR. That you are as unhappy as myself.

DAV. (_placing his finger on his forehead._) I'm contriving an
expedient.

CHAR. You are a clever hand; if you do set about any thing.

DAV. Assuredly, I'll manage this for you.

PAM. There's need of it now.

DAV. But I've got it now.

CHAR. What is it?

DAV. For him (_pointing to PAMPHILUS_) I've got it, not for you, don't
mistake.

CHAR. I'm {quite} satisfied.

PAM. What will you do? Tell me.

DAV. I'm afraid that this day won't be long enough for me to execute
it, so don't suppose that I've now got leisure for relating it; do you
betake yourself off at once, for you are a hinderance to me.

PAM. I'll go and see her. (_Goes into the house of GLYCERIUM._)

DAV. (_to CHARINUS._) What {are} you {going to do}? Whither are you
going from here?

CHAR. Do you wish me to tell you the truth?

DAV. No, not at all; (_aside_) he's making the beginning of a {long}
story for me.

CHAR. What will become of me?

DAV. Come now, you unreasonable person, are you not satisfied that I
give you a little respite, by putting off his marriage?

CHAR. But yet, Davus--

DAV. What then?

CHAR. That I may marry her--

DAV. Absurd.

CHAR. Be sure to come hither (_pointing in the direction of his
house_) to my house, if you can {effect} any thing.

DAV. Why should I come? I can do nothing {for you}.

CHAR. But still, if any thing--

DAV. Well, well, I'll come.

CHAR. If you can; I shall be at home. (_Exit._


SCENE IV.

  _MYSIS and DAVUS._

DAV. Do you, Mysis, remain here a little while, until I come out.

MYS. For what reason?

DAV. There's a necessity for so doing.

MYS. Make haste.

DAV. I'll be here this moment, I tell you. (_He goes into the house of
GLYCERIUM._)


SCENE V.

  _MYSIS alone._

MYS. (_to herself._) That nothing can be secure to any one! Ye Gods,
by our trust in you! I used to make sure that this Pamphilus was a
supreme blessing for my mistress; a friend, a protector, a husband
secured under every circumstance; yet what anguish is she, poor thing,
now suffering through him? Clearly there's more trouble {for her} now
than {there was} happiness formerly. But Davus is coming out.


SCENE VI.

  _Enter DAVUS from the house of GLYCERIUM with the child._

MYS. My {good} sir, prithee, what is that? Whither are you carrying
the child?

DAV. Mysis, I now stand in need of your cunning being brought into
play in this matter, and of your address.

MYS. Why, what are you going to do?

DAV. (_holding out the child._) Take it from me directly, and lay it
down before our door.

MYS. Prithee, on the ground?

DAV. (_pointing._) Take some sacred herbs[78] from the altar here,[79]
and strew them under it.

MYS. Why don't you do it yourself?

DAV. That if perchance I should have to swear to my master that I did
not place it there, I may be enabled to do so with a clear conscience.

MYS. I understand; have these new scruples only just now occurred to
you, pray?

DAV. Bestir yourself quickly, that you may learn what I'm going to do
next. (_MYSIS lays the child at SIMO'S door._) Oh Jupiter!

MYS. (_starting up._) What's the matter?

DAV. The father of the {intended} bride is coming in the middle of it
{all}. The plan which I had first purposed I {now} give up.[80]

MYS. I don't understand what you are talking about.

DAV. I'll pretend too that I've come in this direction from the right.
Do you take care to help out the conversation by your words, whenever
there's necessity.[81]

MYS. I don't at all comprehend what you are about; but if there's any
thing in which you have need of my assistance, as you understand the
best, I'll stay, that I mayn't in any way impede your success. (_DAVUS
retires out of sight._)


SCENE VII.

  _Enter CHREMES on the other side of the stage, going toward the
  house of SIMO._

