"I really meant what I said," he persisted.  "Something has happened to
prevent Monsieur de Courtois coming here this evening----"

"Not coming!  Then there will be no wedding!"

Her voice was subdued, but she put such distress, such perplexity, into
her words that at any other time Curtis would have marveled at the
gamut of emotion which the feminine temperament was capable of.  Still,
he had to risk even a mild display of hysteria, so he went on quietly:

"You will understand now why I would rather meet some person other than
Miss Grandison."

"But who is there to meet?  She is alone.  I do believe I am the only
living being she knows in New York, except Mr. de Courtois. . . .  Why
can't he come?  What is keeping him?  Has he met with an
accident? . . .  Oh, I can see by your face that he is hurt--or he has
been kidnapped!  Yes, that's it, for sure!  And that dear young lady
will be trapped like a bird in a cage! . . .  Miss Hermione!  Miss
Hermione!  Here is someone come to tell you that Mr. de Courtois has
been spirited away. . . .  Oh dear, to think that this should be the
end of all our planning and contriving!"

During this crescendo of excited and scarcely intelligible utterances
the girl had first backed away from Curtis, and then turned, running to
open, without knocking, a door on the right of the extreme end of a
corridor which divided the suite into two sections.

Curtis did not attempt to stop her.  Whatsoever the outcome, he was
committed now to an undertaking from which there was no retreat.  He
half expected that the maid, whose disjointed outburst betokened, at
least, that she was her mistress's trusted confidante, would reappear
from the room into which she had vanished.  But he was mistaken, doubly
mistaken, since the mental picture he had formed of Hermione Beauregard
Grandison was utterly falsified by the slight, elegant, girlish figure
which presented itself before his astonished eyes.  Somehow, those
superfine Christian names and that aristocratic surname had prepared
him for a rather magnificent person, young, probably, because the dead
man might be of his own age within a year, but decidedly impressive.
He had gone so far as to imagine her an actress, of the sinuous,
well-rounded type, who would address him in a deep contralto, and, if
and when she fainted, would sink gracefully on to a couch correctly
placed for scenic effect.

The reality took his breath away.

He saw a girl, not a day older than twenty, dressed in a simple costume
of brown cloth, and wearing a hat, veil, and gloves of harmonizing
tints.  The veil had been hurriedly lifted above the brim of the hat,
and a pair of what seemed to be intensely dark violet eyes gazed at him
from a small-featured, pallid face from which every vestige of color
had fled.

"Is this thing true?" she said, halting timidly within a few feet of
him.  "Perhaps Marcelle has misunderstood you.  Who sent you?--Monsieur
de Courtois himself, I suppose?"

Her voice, so wistful, so pleading, perfect in cadence yet almost
childlike in its evident anxiety to be reassured, reached uncharted
depths in his soul.  At once he began to ask himself why this mere girl
should be exposed to the impish trick which fate had played on her,
and, in the same breath, he was conscious of a fierce anger against the
ghouls who had contrived it.

"Are you Miss Grandison?" he asked, rather to gain time than because of
any doubt as to her personality.

"Yes.  And you?"

"My name is Curtis--John D. Curtis.  I only landed in New York three
hours ago."

He added the explanatory sentence in order to clear the ground, as it
were, for the strange and horrible story he had to tell, but its effect
was curious in the extreme.  The girl's white face blanched to that wan
hue which personal fear lends to distress.

"Where have you come from?" she gasped.

"From Pekin."

"From Pekin!"

"Yes.  I have been traveling without pause during the past eight weeks."

By this time he had ascertained two certain facts about Hermione
Beauregard Grandison.  In the first place, she was the prettiest and
most graceful creature he had ever met; in the second, she had all the
hall-marks of good breeding and high social caste.  His brain was so
busy over these discoveries that he disregarded the really remarkable
way in which the object of his visit had been shelved for the moment.
It might reasonably be expected that the disconsolate lady would be
concerned mainly as to the fate of the missing bridegroom, but the
mistress evidently shared the maid's disquietude about Curtis himself.

And, precisely as in the case of Marcelle, Miss Grandison's face showed
relief when it became manifest that he was a complete stranger.

"Pray forgive me for questioning you in this manner," she said, with a
rapid reversion to a conventional air that disconcerted her hearer in a
way she little imagined.  "Will you come in here, and be seated? . . .
Now, please tell me just why you have called, Mr. Curtis."

She had preceded him into a prettily furnished dining-room, and the
notion leaped up in his troubled mind that she was not so deeply moved
by the malfortune of Monsieur Jean de Courtois as might be expected
from the man's prospective bride.

Still, he tried bravely to accommodate himself to conditions which left
his brain in a whirl.

"I had better begin by saying that your marriage cannot take
place--to-night----" he added, flinching from the necessity of bringing
that look of dismay into those charming eyes.  "That is why I asked
your maid if there was no other person whom I could take into my
confidence.  You see, it is a terribly hard thing to be compelled to
discuss such a matter with one so closely bound up with--with Monsieur
de Courtois."

"But there is no one else.  Marcelle and I live here quite alone."

More than ever did Curtis feel uncomfortable, but he had deliberately
elected for this miserable job, and he meant to go through with it.

"So I gathered from Mademoiselle Marcelle herself," he said.  "Well,
then, Miss Grandison, I have no option but to inform you, with all the
sympathy any man must feel for a woman in your position, that Monsieur
de Courtois has met with an accident."

"Oh, how terrible!  Is he badly hurt?"

"Yes."

"Yet it may be possible for the ceremony to be performed.  Monsieur de
Courtois has proved himself such a true friend, he has always been so
anxious to help me, that I am sure he would be glad if I brought the
minister to the hospital, or to his apartments in the hotel if he has
been taken there, and the marriage would be solemnized without causing
him the slightest inconvenience or worry, no matter how ill he may be,
so long as he is conscious."

Curtis thought he had never before heard the English language twisted
into such enigmas as these few simple words presented.  It was an
outrage to credit this well-mannered and delightful girl with the
cold-blooded callousness which seemed to reveal itself in every
syllable.  That she was blithely unaware of this element in her excited
utterances was shown by her eager face and animated attitude.  She had
risen from the chair in which she had seated herself when they entered
the room, and obviously expected him to lose no time in conducting her
to the bedside of Jean de Courtois.

"Pray sit down again, Miss Grandison," said Curtis, and his voice
assumed a sterner, more commanding note, though he, too, stood up, and
approached nearer, lest she might collapse in a faint and fall before
he could save her.  "I fear I have blundered woefully in assuming a
role for which I am ill-fitted, but I must make you realize somehow
that your marriage is irrevocably--postponed."

"Why?"

A slight color tinged her cheeks; she was actually becoming annoyed
with him!

"I will tell you when you are seated."

"What nonsense!  One can hear as well standing."

Nevertheless, she obeyed.  People generally did obey when Curtis spoke
in that insistent manner.

Now he was quite near her, and his tone grew gentle again.

"The accident from which Monsieur de Courtois suffered was fatal," he
said.

She looked at him, wide-eyed, alarmed, but assuredly not with the
soul-sickened terror of a woman who loves when she hears that her lover
is dead.

"Do you mean that he has been killed?" she whispered.

"Yes."

"Oh, poor fellow.  I have lost my only friend, and now, indeed, I am
the most wretched girl in all the world."

Flinging her clasped arms on the table, she hid her face in them, and
sobbed as though her heart would break.  Curtis placed a hand on her
shoulder, and strove to calm her with such commonplace phrases as his
dazed brain could dictate, but she wept bitterly, just as a child might
weep if disappointed about the non-fulfillment of some object on which
its heart was set.

"It sounds horrid--I know--" she murmured brokenly, "that I
should--seem to be thinking--only of myself.  But--Monsieur de
Courtois--was the one man--who could save me.  Now--I don't know--what
will become of me.  How cruel is fate!  If only--we could have been
married yesterday--perhaps this dreadful thing would not have happened."

Curtis, who had never been so mystified in his life, followed up those
last disjointed words as a man lost in a forest might cling to a path
in the certainty that it would lead somewhere.  He rejected all else,
since the wild vagaries of events during the past few minutes were
beyond his comprehension.  He waited, therefore, until the vehemence of
her grief had somewhat subsided, and then, with another friendly
pressure on her shoulder, he spoke with as much firmness as he thought
the situation demanded.

"Now, Miss Grandison, you must endeavor to regain self-control," he
said.  "Monsieur de Courtois has been killed, and your--your friendship
for him--no less than the interests of justice--demand that those
responsible for his death should be discovered and punished."

At that, she raised her head, and lifted her swimming eyes to his, and
Curtis saw that they were blue, not violet, and that their hue changed
as the light irradiated their profound depths.

"He met with no accident, then, but was murdered?" she cried.

"Yes."

"And for my sake?"

"I gather from what you have said that that is possible."

"But what have I said?"

"Well, you seemed to hint that your marriage might have prevented this
crime."

"Why?"

No more exasperating monosyllable can fall from a woman's lips than
that one word "why," and Curtis felt its full force then and there.

"That is what I am asking you," he said, a trifle brusquely.

"But how can I tell you?" she cried.

"I am only striving vainly to pierce the fog which seems to envelop us.
Let me begin again.  I, a mere stranger in New York, just three hours
landed from the _Lusitania_, witnessed a murderous attack on a young
man who was alighting from a cab in front of my hotel, the Central, in
West 27th Street.  I saw him stabbed so seriously that he died within a
couple of minutes, and his assailants made off in an automobile, the
very vehicle, in fact, in which he arrived.  I managed to note its
number, and I gathered, from instructions the victim himself had given,
that the chauffeur's Christian name was Anatole.  The two men who
actually committed the murder--though the chauffeur was in league with
them--seemed to me to be Czechs or Hungarians----"

"Ah, I thought so," broke in the girl.

"And now may I ask why you did think so?"

"I may tell you later, perhaps.  Please forgive me.  I am quite
unnerved, and oh, so unhappy.  Why have you come here?"

"That is due to one of those fantastic chances which occur
occasionally.  In the effort to save Monsieur de Courtois, or rather to
seize his slayers, because I was too far away to interfere when the
blow was struck, I dropped the overcoat I was carrying.  A crowd
gathered, and someone gave me a coat which I took as my own.  It was
not until I had quitted the police and doctor, who arrived almost
immediately, and I had gone into Broadway to avoid the clamor in the
hotel, that I discovered I was wearing the dead man's overcoat, and in
one of the pockets I found a marriage license.  Here it is.  By that
means I learnt your address, and I came here quickly, hoping to save
you some of the agony which the appearance of a policeman or detective
would have caused.  Unfortunately, I have proved but a sorry substitute
for an official messenger."

"Oh, no, no, Mr. Curtis.  You have been most kind, most considerate.
If anyone is to blame, it is I."

"Will you pardon me, then, if I remind you that time is pressing?  Even
a half-hour gained to-night by the authorities may be invaluable.  If
you are able to supply any clew, the least hint of motive, the most
shadowy of guesses at a personality behind this beastly crime, you will
be rendering a great service."

"Please, please, give me time to think.  I am not heartless--indeed I
am not. . . .  If I could do anything to save Monsieur de Courtois'
life I would make the sacrifice--you will believe that, won't
you? . . .  But he is dead, you say, and I might blurt out something in
my distress which would cause endless mischief.  Perhaps I have thought
too much of my own troubles.  Now I must begin to endure for the sake
of others.  That is the woman's lot in life, I fear. . . .  Have you a
wife or a sister, Mr. Curtis, or is there some woman whom you love?
For her sake, have pity on me, and do not drag me into the horrible
arena of courts and newspapers."

Her pleading, her attitude, her pathetic gestures, gave extraordinary
force to an appeal which, by contrast with her extreme agitation, was
almost grotesquely inconsequent.  Curtis was at his wits' end to find
the line of reasoning calculated to convince this beautiful creature
that she might, indeed, begin enduring "for the sake of others" by
expressing her determination to give the police all possible assistance.

"There is no urgency for a few minutes," was the best reply he could
frame on the spur of the moment.  "Shall I leave you alone for a little
while?  Perhaps you would like to consult your maid?  Indeed, her
services might meet all the requirements of the case.  The police would
be the first to recognize that a woman who had lost her affianced
husband under such terrible----"

"Ah, but that is the wretched difficulty I am in.  Poor Monsieur de
Courtois was nothing to me."

"Nothing to you!"

Probably Curtis's brain did not reel, but it assuredly felt like
reeling, and it is quite certain that his eyes blazed down on the
half-hysterical girl with an intensity that magnetized her into a
broken excuse.

"It is--quite--true," she stammered, with the diffidence of a child
explaining some lapse which, it was hoped, might not be regarded as a
real fault.  "I never dreamed of marriage--in the sense--that people
mean--when they intend to live happily together. . . .  Monsieur de
Courtois was to be my husband--only in name.  I--I paid him for
that. . . .  I--I gave him a thousand dollars--and--and----  Don't look
at me in that way or I shall scream! . . .  I have done nothing
wrong. . . .  I was trying to protect myself. . . .  Oh, if you are a
man you will want to help me, rather than push me into the living tomb
which threatens to engulf me before to-morrow morning!"

Even in their agitation, they both heard the jar of a bell.  The girl
sprang upright.  There was something splendid in her courage, in the
way she threw back her proud head and clenched her tiny hands.

"Ah me!" she sighed.  "Perhaps it is already too late!"


CHAPTER III

EIGHT-THIRTY

They stood in silence, listening to the footsteps of Marcelle on the
parquet floor of the passage.  The outer door was opened, and a murmur
of voices reached them indistinctly.

"I have had the honor of knowing you not much longer than ten minutes,
Miss Grandison," said Curtis, and the strong, vibrant note in his voice
might well have won any woman's confidence, "but if you feel that you
can trust me, and my help is of value, please command me, that is, if
your enemies are men."

She rewarded him with one swift look of gratitude.

"If it is my father, both you and I are powerless," she whispered.
"And the other would not dare come without him."

A discreet tap on the door heralded Marcelle.  That sprightly young
person, despite her Parisian name, was unquestionably American in every
inch of her self-possessed neatness; she smiled at Curtis while giving
him a message.

"The driver of your taxi has sent up the hall-porter to ask if you wish
him to wait any longer," she said.

Not often, even in comedy, has the mountain heaved and brought forth
such a ridiculous mouse.  Curtis did actually laugh; even his
distraught companion tittered in sheer nervous reaction.

"Please tell him to wait, and not to worry about the fare," said
Curtis.  "I suppose," he added, turning to Miss Grandison, "the man put
me down as a newcomer, and, taught by previous experience, thought it
best to warn me how the register mounts."

The effort to restore their rather strained relations to a sedate level
was well meant, but the girl's downcast eyes and tremulous lips
revealed a state of piteous uncertainty and confusion that was more
distressing to Curtis than anything which had gone before.
Nevertheless, reminding himself that precious time was being wasted, he
determined to seek a full explanation of circumstances which at present
savored of Bedlam.

"Now that the fears of the taxi-driver have been stilled," he said
cheerfully, "suppose you and I sit down and discuss matters like
sensible people.  I am an American, Miss Grandison, and, although long
an exile from my own country, I appreciate the national characteristic
of plain speech.  Let me explain that I am not married, that I have no
ties which prevent free action on my part, and that nothing on earth
will stop me from helping a woman who pins her faith to me.  With that
preamble, as the lawyers say, I purpose taking off this heavy overcoat,
and listening in comfort to anything you may wish to tell.  Or, if you
are afraid of being disturbed, what do you say if we go to some
restaurant, where, perhaps, we may eat, and, at any rate, talk without
fear of interference?"

"I think we had better remain here," said the girl sadly, though it was
plain that Curtis's offer of protection during the alarm created by the
hall-porter's errand had advanced him a long way in her esteem.  "There
are only two persons living who dare pretend to exercise control over
my actions, and if they have arrived in New York this evening I have
good reason to believe that I cannot escape them."

"Are they coming here from Europe?" asked Curtis quickly, for his
active mind was already groping toward certain dimly defined
conclusions.

"Yes."

"Could they have been fellow-passengers of mine on the _Lusitania_?"

"No, they are on board the _Switzerland_."

He smiled, and discarded that fateful overcoat.

"Then set your mind at rest," he said, with the nonchalance of a man
who has shelved a major difficulty.  "The _Switzerland_ has broken
down.  We passed her early to-day.  She is staggering into port with
engines partly disabled and she cannot possibly reach New York before
to-morrow morning."

"Are you quite sure?" came the eager demand.

"Well, there is nothing so uncertain as the sea but a young friend of
mine said that those facts were signaled by wireless, and, to some
extent, they governed his own movements.  I myself can assure you that
the _Switzerland_ was limping along like a lame duck at 8 A.M. to-day."

"Ah, thank Heaven for that small mercy!" murmured the girl.  For a few
seconds she busied herself with gloves, veil, and hat-pins, and Curtis
happened to glance at the overcoat, which he had placed over the back
of a chair.  To his dismay, he noticed that one of the sleeves, the
left, was bespattered with blood, but he contrived to refold the
garment so as to conceal this grewsome record of a tragedy before his
hostess had divested herself of hat and gloves.

Then they seemed to survey each other with a new interest, for Curtis
was a good figure of a man in evening dress, and Hermione Grandison
became, if possible, more attractive to the male eye because of the
wealth of brown hair which crowned her smooth forehead, almost hid her
tiny ears, and clustered low at the back of her slender, well-shaped
neck.  Where the rays of light caught the coiled tresses they had the
sheen of burnished gold.  In the shadow they commingled those
voluptuous tints by which the magic of Rubens has immortalized one fair
woman, Isabella Brant, in every gallery of note throughout the world.

Hermione it was, now, who first broke the silence which had reigned in
the room for a minute or more.  Seating herself on the opposite side of
a square table, and resting her elbows thereon, she propped her pretty
chin on her small, clenched fists, and gazed fearlessly at Curtis.

"You must think me a very extraordinary person," she began.

"Let that pass," said he, with a smile, wise in the knowledge that the
present was no hour for compliments.

"But I am, and I know it, not because I differ so greatly from other
girls of my own age, but owing to the misery which has been my portion.
The one man in the world who should wish to secure my happiness has
become my persecutor.  I am here to-night because I have run away from
my father, and I have used every lawful means to get married--under
conditions framed by myself, of course--in order to escape from a
hateful marriage which he has planned."

She hesitated, for a reflective frown was deepening on Curtis's face.

"Now you recognize my name!" she cried.  "Have you seen anything about
me in the newspapers?"

"You are Lady Hermione Grandison?" he said, meeting her watchful eyes
frankly.

"Yes."

"Daughter of the Earl of Valletort?"

"Yes."

"And about a month ago you were reported missing from some apartment in
the Rue de Rivoli, on the eve of your marriage with--with some
Hungarian prince?"

"Yes, Count Ladislas Vassilan."

"So you came here--with Monsieur Jean de Courtois?"

"I brought him here, and paid him for his services.  I have no desire
to minimize his friendly aid, but I was buying the security of his name
as my husband, and he had given me his guarantee that, when it suited
my purposes, he would help me to dissolve the marriage."

Curtis disregarded a perceptible coldness in her tone.  He was too busy
sweeping away the mists.

"What sort of guarantee?" he asked.

"His promise, his word of honor."

"Was he--a gentleman?"

"Not socially, but in every other sense.  He was my music-master in
Paris."

Curtis put his next question hurriedly.  He was anxious to avoid the
least suspicion on the girl's part that he might be crediting Jean de
Courtois with motives which would not pass muster before a jury of
cool-headed men so readily as they seemed to have satisfied an
impetuous and frightened girl.

"How did your father ascertain that you were in New York?" he said.

"Oh, it seems that a certain period of residence was necessary before a
marriage license could be obtained, and it was unavoidable that my name
should be found out by those whom he hired to track me."

"But why were you not married under an assumed name?"

"Monsieur de Courtois assured me that such a thing would render the
marriage invalid."

"He was wrong," said Curtis dryly.  "It subjected you to some small
legal penalty, but you would be just as effectually married if you
called yourself Jane Smith."

"I really think you are mistaken.  Monsieur de Courtois made the most
exhaustive inquiries."

"Were you not leaving the ceremony to the latest possible hour?" went
on Curtis, divided now between the fear of shocking her and the
paramount importance of learning the truth about the curiously
scrupulous Jean de Courtois.

"We were to have been married two days ago, but the license was stolen."

"So it is rather by accident than otherwise that Lord Valletort and
Count Vassilan, who, I take it, is with your father on board the
_Switzerland_, have not arrived in time to prevent the marriage--that
is, if they were able to prevent it?"

"No, I think not.  Poor Monsieur de Courtois was here this afternoon,
and he was jubilant because we had plenty of time, provided we were
married this evening."

"Where was the ceremony to take place?"

"I--I don't know.  I left everything in the hands of Monsieur de
Courtois."

A very real and active doubt of the Frenchman's good faith was
beginning to peep up in Curtis's mind.  Rather to account for the
thoughtful lines on his forehead than for any reason connected with the
license, he took that document from the table, where it had lain since
he produced it, and affected to examine it judiciously.  Therefore, he
was really surprised when he found an endorsement on the back which
read;--"Issued in duplicate.  This license is not available if the
original has been used."

"Oh!" he said, and the monosyllable might mean much or little.

"What have you discovered there?" said the girl, rising and coming
nearer, to stoop over the table and scrutinize the paper with him.

"The original license certainly seems to have disappeared," said
Curtis, who had suddenly become aware that the propinquity of a
charming woman was one of the subtle joys of life.

"Ah me!" sighed Lady Hermione, straightening her supple form, and
turning slightly aside.

There was a little pause.  Curtis, whose enunciation was usually
distinguished by its ease and clearness, found some slight difficulty
in resuming the conversation.  He resolved firmly that, in future, he
would eschew liqueurs after champagne.

"I hate to act the role of inquisitor, Lady Hermione," he said, rather
huskily as to the first few words, "but would you mind telling me why
you are so opposed to Count Ladislas Vassilan as a husband?"

"First, because I do not want to marry any man; secondly, because Count
Vassilan is a vile person, both in appearance and repute; and thirdly,
because my father is only urging this match to serve his own ends.  Our
unhappy history is so widely known that there is no harm in telling you
that my mother and he were separated during many years, and when mamma
died three years ago she left all her money to me, absolutely under my
control.  I was young, only seventeen, but I managed to retain it,
though goodness only knows how, and this horrid Hungarian prince wants
it--to help him to regain a throne, he says--but I don't believe him."

"You could not be forced into matrimony," said Curtis, with a slow
gravity that was lost on his dejected hearer.

"You cannot have lived in France, or you would not say that," was the
bitter answer.  "Everyone, everything, was opposed to me.  I was a
minor, and one against many.  The laws seemed to conspire with my
relatives to force me into the power of a beast. . . .  Yes, it sounds
horrid on my lips, but the man is really a beast," and she stamped an
emphatic foot on the floor; Curtis could see the white circles over the
tiny knuckles as her hands clenched in protest.  They were such pretty
hands, too.  He had often smiled at the notion of a man kissing a
woman's hand, but it did not strike him now as a specially foolish act.

"Let us forget him," he agreed.

"But how can I forget him?  He will be here to-morrow.  Once my father
and he have found me, what am I to do?  Die, I suppose! . . .  I would
rather die than marry Count Vassilan, and again I would rather die than
figure in a vulgar brawl, such as the newspapers would take a delight
in.  My father is well aware of that, and will play on my
weakness. . . .  B-but--I may--be able--to defeat them--in another way."

Curtis stood up.  The sound of her grief maddened him, and he threw
prudence to the winds.

"The first reason you gave was the most convincing one, so far as you
personally are concerned, Lady Hermione," he said, making the effort of
his life to speak calmly.  "You said you did not want to marry any man."

"Y-yes, it is true.  I d-don't."

"Still, there is only one way out of your trouble.  You must marry
me--to-night."

The girl whirled round on him; her eyes were glistening with tears, but
her face was radiant.

"Do you really mean that?" she cried.

"I do."

"Then never let anyone tell me that the age of chivalry has passed."

"I fancy it has just begun," he said, though the jest nearly choked him.

"But why should you do this kind and gracious thing for a girl you have
been acquainted with only a brief half-hour?  You see, I understand
that you are a gentleman--I realize that, although I have plenty of
money, I cannot offer to recompense you as I did that poor Jean de
Courtois."

"No," he agreed grimly.

"Don't you grasp what this one-sided bargain implies?  You are merely
to pose as my husband until Count Vassilan leaves me in peace?"

"Yes."

"And then we are to obtain a divorce?"

"You are, not I."

"Isn't that a distinction without a difference?"

"Perhaps.  The fact remains that I shall agree to all your terms save
one--you, of course, can divorce me at your own pleasure.  The
procedure is simple in some States of the Union."

For no obvious reason, Lady Hermione blushed.  For an instant, indeed,
she was somewhat disconcerted, and the vivacity fled from her mobile
face.

"Perhaps, Mr. Curtis, I have no right to let you make this sacrifice,"
she said, a trifle coldly.  "It would be different if I could repay you
in some way.  Surely, although you may be a wealthy man, there will be
expenses--you will, at least, lose a good deal of time, which you could
occupy to better purpose?"

"I have given myself twelve months' respite from railway construction
in China.  I really don't see how I could pass a part of my holiday
better than as your husband."

"In idle make-believe?"

"Every decent man has the heart of a child, and make-believe is reality
to some children."

"But, even though in my need I take you at your word, how can a
marriage become possible?"

"Here is the license.  For the purposes of the ceremony I become Jean
de Courtois.  By singular chance, the change of name is not such a
wrench as it might be if I didn't happen to be called John D. Curtis."

Still she hesitated.  Somehow, becoming Mrs. John D. Curtis impressed
her as a far more serious undertaking than purchasing the right to pose
as Madame de Courtois.

"We don't even know where to get married," she faltered.

"Given a license and a comparatively small sum of money, New York
abounds with facilities."

"Are you sure the ceremony will be legal if you appear under a false
name?"

"Quite positive."

"Can you be punished if it is found out?"

"I'll run the risk."

After a fateful pause, which would have been considerably curtailed had
Lady Hermione Grandison been vouchsafed the least premonition of events
in which the night was still rich, she held out her hand.

"I can only thank you from the depths of my heart, Mr. Curtis," she
said.  "I must trust someone, and I do trust you most implicitly."

"You will never regret it, Lady Hermione," he said reverently.  He
wondered whether or not this was an occasion on which hand-kissing was
permissible, but contented himself with returning the friendly pressure
of the girl's fingers--retaining them, in fact, for a second or two.

"I have your word of honor that you will regard the ceremony as a
formal compact between us two?" she murmured, unaccountably shy, and
seemingly half-afraid that he meant to clasp her in his arms then and
there.

"You have," he said, relinquishing her hand.  Perhaps, at that instant,
Puck sighed, and wondered what would have happened had this husband
only in name strained to his heart the bride whom he had vowed not to
embrace.  But Curtis did nothing of the sort.  His tone became
intensely practical and businesslike, and he glanced at his watch.

"It is half-past eight," he said.  "How soon will you be ready to come
with me and hunt up a minister?"

"Now--I am ready now.  Marcelle and I were waiting for--for that
unhappy Monsieur de Courtois when you arrived.  It sounds rather
dreadful, Mr. Curtis, to talk of marriage, even as a mere means of
cheating the law, at a moment when a man is already lying dead for my
sake.  Please don't consider me, but draw back, if you want to, before
it is too late."

"My grandfather commanded the Fifth Cavalry during the Civil War, Lady
Hermione."

"Pray, how does that interesting fact affect us?"

"It is well-known that the Fifth never retreat, and the habit has
become a family tradition."

He pocketed the license, and picked up the overcoat, meaning to put it
on in the hall while her ladyship was rearranging her hat.  But
Marcelle was waiting there, hatted, and gloved.

"Have you fixed things?" she whispered breathlessly.

"We have," said Curtis.

"Goodness me!  But I guessed it.  Nobody can resist her, can they?"

"I didn't try," said Curtis, wriggling into the coat sideways.

"Poor _dear_.  She has had a time.  What a piece of luck I met her the
day she landed."

Curtis had no opportunity to inquire just what Marcelle meant, for Lady
Hermione had joined them.  Sedulously keeping that tell-tale sleeve out
of sight, Curtis took the lead, and opened the door, which Marcelle
closed and locked.

While they were waiting for the elevator, Curtis fathomed Marcelle's
stock of information as to the addresses of neighboring ministers of
the Protestant Episcopal Church.  It was nil.  He appealed to the
attendant when the elevator came up, but that worthy thoughtfully
tickled his scalp under his cap, and suggested a consultation with the
taxi-driver.  Indeed, to further the quest, he went with them to the
door, and, while Lady Hermione and Marcelle seated themselves in the
cab, the three men discussed the religious problem on the sidewalk.

"Ministers don't use taxis much in N' York, sir," commented the driver.
"Fact is, they mostly can't afford 'em, but I do happen to know where
one old gentleman lives, an' he's sure to be home, because he's
crippled something cruel with the rheumatiz."

"Is it far?" demanded Curtis.

"Three blocks away, in 56th Street, near Seventh Avenue.  Lives next
door to the church, he does."

"Take us there," and Curtis entered the vehicle, which whirled out of
sight in the peculiarly downright fashion of the automobile.

The elevator man looked after it, and tickled another section of his
scalp.

"I'd a notion she was going to marry that Frenchman," he said to
himself.  "Of course, it's her business, an' not mine, but of the two
I'd take a chance with this new fellar.  An' it's odd, too, that they
shouldn't know where to go, unless they mean to pick up Froggy on the
road.  Well, wimmen is queer creetures, they are, sure, an' the English
ones are just as queer as the Americans.  Not that Miss Grandison ain't
a peach wherever she comes from, an' I hope she'll be happy, night an'
day till the time comes when she don't care if it snows."

He glanced up at the sky, rolled a cigarette, and, before returning
indoors, sniffed a keen wind which was rustling the last crisp leaves
in Central Park.  The street was quiet, and no one was stirring in the
mansion.

"I'm not likely to be wanted for another minnit or two," he said, "so
I'll just give the furnace a shake-out.  Unless I'm mistaken, there's a
frost coming."

Had he prophesied a hurricane he would not have been far wrong, but it
was entirely in keeping with the other remarkable developments of a
night already noteworthy for its strange happenings that the elevator
attendant at No. 1000 59th Street should have chosen the next few
minutes to attend to the steam-heating arrangements in the basement.

There is little to be gained, however, from speculation as to the
probable outcome of conditions which did not obtain, and the trivial
space of time which was demanded for the shaking-out and re-coaling of
a furnace was largely responsible for John D. Curtis and Hermione
Beauregard Grandison being made man and wife.

Curiously enough, the tying of this particular knot was facilitated by
the fact that the clergyman was hale mentally but decrepit physically,
and, as might be expected, resented the conclusion, long ago arrived at
by his friends, that he was unfitted for work.  He burgeoned with
delight when a servant announced that two young people wanting to get
married were waiting in the vestibule; he hobbled out of the library,
where he was poring over an essay on the Sixtine text of the
Septuagint, and ushered them into a parlor.  The room was not
well-lighted, because of some defect in the electric installation, but
the old gentleman--"Rev. Thomas J. Hughes" was the legend on the
door-plate--bustled about in the liveliest way, and talked most
cheerfully.

"Ah, young folk--as usual, leaving things to the last moment, and then
in a desperate hurry," he chirped.  "Got the license--yes?  Complied
with all the formalities?  Of course, of course.  Where's the ring?
You've _not_ forgotten the ring?"

Curtis and Hermione looked at each other in blank dismay; even
Marcelle's aplomb yielded under this unforeseen strain, and her
agitation showed itself in a gasping murmur:

"Oh dear!  What shall we do now?"

Mr. Hughes positively chortled over their discomfiture.  He limped to a
secretaire, and opened a drawer.

"See what it is to have a long experience in these affairs," he cried.
"Do you fancy you are the first couple who failed to provide a ring?
Ah me!  When I was quite a boy in the cloth I learnt the necessity of
keeping rings in stock, so a jeweler friend of mind replenishes my
store, and, when I sell one, I apply a small profit to a favorite
charity of mine.  The wearing of a wedding ring has no legal
significance, but it is a fine old custom, and should be preserved.
Among the Romans the ring was a pledge, _pignus_, that the betrothal
contract would be fulfilled.  Pliny tells us that the ring, or circle,
was of iron, but the ladies speedily determined that it should be of
gold, and the Church went a step farther in recognizing it as a symbol
of matrimony.  Hence, perhaps, the Episcopal ring, and even the Ring of
the Fisherman itself, though some authorities hold that signets--Ah,
yes," for Curtis had intimated politely that the hour was growing late,
"if the lady will say which of these rings fits; they are fifteen
dollars each--cheaper, I believe, than you can buy them in Fifth
Avenue. . . .  Ah, _that_ one?  Very well.  Now, as to the form of
service?"

"The full marriage rite," said Curtis.

"Precisely, just what I would have suggested.  I adhere to the
time-honored formula.  Now, let me examine the license--my eyes fail me
a little, but I take the utmost pains to be accurate, because accuracy
is of the greatest importance. . . .  Yes, yes, State of New York--what
are the names?"

"John D. Curtis and Hermione Beauregard Grandison," said Curtis.  His
tone was so calm and self-confident that even the prospective bride was
deaf for a moment to the vital significance of the words.  Then she
whispered tremulously:

"Are you not making some mistake?"

"No," he replied, looking her straight in the eyes.

The minister, whose ears partook of the defects in his other faculties,
caught the word "mistake."

"This is no place for mistakes, my dear young lady," he said, "A nice
young couple like you should only require to be married once in your
lives.  Take my advice, and stick to one another in sunshine and in
storm, and you shall be blessed even unto the fourth generation. . . .
Now, all is in order. . . .  Is this your witness?" and he nodded
affably toward Marcelle.  "Shall we have one other?  William Jenkins,
my factotum, has been privileged to assist on many such
occasions. . . .  Wil-li-am!"

He raised his voice, and a wizened little man appeared suddenly, having
evidently waited outside the door until he was summoned.

Then, with due ritual, John Delancy Curtis and Hermione Beauregard
Grandison were joined in the bonds of wedlock, and, by the time Mr.
Hughes had completed the ceremony, he had pronounced their names so
often, and was so accustomed to their form and sound, that when he
filled in the certificate annexed to the license, "John D. Curtis"
appeared therein in place of "Jean de Courtois."

Hermione was in a pitiable state of suppressed excitement before the
ordeal was concluded.  The solemnity and impressiveness of the vows she
was taking disturbed the serenity with which she had schooled herself
to regard the marriage as "make-believe."  She was frightened at her
own daring.  A dread that the tie she was so lightly assuming might be
harder to undo than she had contemplated was fluttering her heart and
almost paralyzing her limbs.  But Curtis was unemotional as an icicle;
or, at any rate, he looked it, which was all that the half-hysterical
girl by his side could ascertain by an occasional timid glance.  The
fact lent her a sort of courage to persevere to the end, and she signed
her maiden name for the last time with a numb confidence in the man
whom she had, so to speak, bargained for as a husband in an emergency.

Curtis did not fail to note that the aged clergyman's handwriting was
crabbed and palsied as his bent frame.  None could tell, for certain,
whether he wrote "Jean" or "John," "Courtois" or "Curtis," though,
indeed, the balance of probability inclined to the latter of the two
names, Christian and surname, since those were indubitably what he
meant to write.

Then, having stated his fee, and been paid for the ring, he handed
Hermione a copy of the certificate.

"Treasure that during all your days, Mrs. Curtis," he said.  "May it be
a charter of lasting happiness and content!"

Mrs. Curtis!  Another shock!  Hermione felt that she would scream if
there were many more such.  And the pressure of the little gold ring on
the third finger of her left hand was becoming intolerable.  Iron, it
used to be, said the minister, and a band of iron it seemed to have
become since this man whom she had taken, so completely on trust had
placed it there.

On the way out, Curtis tipped Jenkins, tipped him so lavishly that a
queer little voice squeaked from a queer little face:

"Thank you, sir.  Fair weather to both you and your wife, and a safe
berth when you drop anchor!"

So Jenkins had been a sailor, for none but a shell-back would put his
good wishes in such nautical lingo.

"I have just finished one long voyage, but seem to have begun another,"
said Curtis to his "wife."  He accompanied the words with a laugh, and
was really talking for the sake of breaking an awkward silence.  They
were descending a few steps from the door, and he noticed that a
private automobile was speeding down the street from the same direction
as the taxi had taken.  It swung close to the curb, and was pulled up
barely a yard short of the waiting cab, whose engine the driver was
starting with the crank.

A shout came from the interior, and a man leaped out.  The street was
rather dark in that part, but Hermione recognized the stranger
instantly.

"Count Vassilan!" she cried, and the fear in her voice thrilled Curtis
to the core.

Almost as quickly, the man now running along the sidewalk knew that a
long chase had ended, or he fancied that it had ended, which is not
always the same thing.

"Here we are, Valletort!" he shouted.  "Got 'em, by ----!  You see
after Hermione!  I'll attend to this d--d Frenchman!"

Curtis gently disengaged the clasp of a tiny hand on his arm, a clasp
which was eloquent of a woman's sore need and complete trust.  He
stepped forward to meet the Count, a stoutly built, heavy man, who had
reckoned on closing with an undersized Frenchman.  There was no time to
rectify mistakes.  Curtis met his rival's onset with a beautiful
half-arm jab on the nose.  Scientifically, it was perfect, since the
blow was delivered at the back of the Count's head with complete
disregard of intervening tissues, and its recipient went down like one
of those pins which succumbed so regularly to the ball bowled by a
colossal fist in the Broadway electric sign.  The only difference was
that the pin fell noiselessly, whereas Count Vassilan roared like a
bull in anguish.

In the next instant Curtis, who, for a mild-mannered person, appeared
to possess a singularly close acquaintance with the ethics of a street
row, sprang at the automobile, pushed back a man who was getting out,
slammed the door, seized the speed levers, and bent them hopelessly
with a violent tug.

A swearing chauffeur fumbled in the seat, but was in no real hurry to
alight, because he had noted the Count's _débâcle_, and Curtis ran to
the two cowering women.

"In with you!" he said cheerily, adding, with a grin at the driver:

"Fifty for you if we win clear.  Now, be a sport!"

Of course, the driver of a taxi would be a sport.  In five minutes he
pulled up somewhere in Madison Avenue, and, leaning back and twisting
his neck, bawled:

"Where to _now_, sir?"


CHAPTER IV

AN INTERLUDE

The appearance on the scene of the Earl of Valletort and Count Ladislas
Vassilan at a moment which, though undeniably critical, might be
described as either opportune or inopportune--the choice of an
adjective depending solely on the varying points of view of the one who
gave and the one who received that powerful thump on the nose--was due
to no feat of skill on the part of the engine-room staff of the
_Switzerland_, but to a judicious combination of wireless telegraphy,
money, and influence.

When it became evident, very early in the morning, that the vessel
might, with luck, crawl up to the quarantine station about midnight,
urgent messages were sent to two consulates and the Port Authorities of
New York.  In the result, a fast steam-yacht drew up alongside the
vessel when she took the pilot on board, and the two magnates and their
baggage were transferred from the disabled liner to the deck of the
trim yacht.

She made praiseworthy efforts to reach a quay and a batch of Customs
officers before eight o'clock, but failed by five minutes.
Consequently, some slight delay was experienced, and, with the best of
good will on the part of the officials, the two fuming passengers could
not fling themselves into a waiting automobile until nearly twenty
minutes past the hour.

Then, however, they made up for lost time.  Intrusting their belongings
to a porter and a taxi, with instructions to proceed to the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, they bade the chauffeur travel at top speed to
No. 1000 59th Street.  Many times were they sworn at en route by
endangered pedestrians and enraged drivers of horsed vehicles; the
growing torrent of ill wishes thus engendered may have exercised some
unrecognized form of telepathy at No. 1000, because a regulating valve
in the steam-heat apparatus, which had never proved intractable before,
suddenly took it into its metallic head to go wrong.  Thus, the
elevator man was not aware of a good deal of ringing of electric bells
and hammering on the locked door of flat Number 10.

Ultimately, the valve resumed its normal functions, for no cause that a
hot and oily human being could perceive other than the occasional
"cussedness" which inanimate objects can be capable of; while surveying
it wrathfully, he awoke to the racket in the upper regions.

Behold him, then, angry and perspiring, vowing by all his gods that he
had other duties to perform than eternally watching the comings and
goings of the mansion's occupants; being a free-born American of Irish
ancestry, name of Rafferty, he would certainly have bandied contumely
with Count Ladislas Vassilan had not the Earl intervened.  The
Hungarian had addressed Rafferty as though he were a dog: the
Englishman, more certain of his social predominance, treated him as a
person endowed with reason.

"Now, listen to me, my good man," he said, calmly but emphatically, "I
am the Earl of Valletort, and the lady you know as Miss Grandison is
the Lady Hermione Grandison, my daughter.  She has come to New York in
order to marry a wretched little French adventurer named Jean de
Courtois, and it is absolutely essential, for her own welfare, not to
mention other considerations, that the wedding, which is to take place
to-night, shall be prevented.  Two European consuls and several
important men in your own city have helped me to land this evening from
a vessel which will not disembark her passengers till the morning.
Therefore, it is fairly obvious that you run several sorts of risk by
refusing to help me in finding my daughter, and I can hardly believe
that you know nothing about her movements. . . .  Come, my man, don't
be both a fool and a knave, but speak!"

Rafferty, who had calmed down during this impressive harangue, took
thought, and did speak.

"If yer friend had said half as much, my lord, I'd have made him wise
straight away," he answered.  "Miss Grandison went off at 8.30 in a
taxi with her maid, Marcelle Leroux, and a strange gentleman who
certainly wasn't Mr. de Courtois, my lord.  They wanted to find out
where a clergyman lived, an' I couldn't tell them--not about the
Protestant Episcopal, I mean, my lord--but the driver of the taxi
remembered that there was a minister of that persuasion living in 56th
Street, near 7th Avenue, an' next door to a church.  So they made a
bee-line that-a-way, my lord, an' I went to see to the furnace, an'
that's all there is to it, my lord."

"You say the man was not de Courtois?" queried the Earl impatiently.

"I'm sure he wasn't the man who has passed under that name hereabouts
nearly every day for a month, my lord," said Rafferty.

"Oh, some fellow of his own kidney he has hired to assist him," put in
Vassilan, who held fast to that theory, in part, even after he had been
painfully disillusioned as to other parts of it.  "Come quickly now,
you, and tell our chauffeur where to take us."

If Rafferty had dared, he would have given the chauffeur directions
likely to lead to further bickering, but the presence of the Earl
restrained him, for Valletort, though thin and hawk-nosed, was an
aristocrat in every inch, whereas Count Ladislas Vassilan wore the
stage aspect of a successful pork-butcher.  So he explained matters to
the chauffeur, yet smiled grimly when the automobile wheeled away
almost in the very tracks of Curtis's taxi.

"Who sez there's no such thing as luck?" he chuckled.  "That valve knew
what it was about when it stuck, an' my name ain't what it is if that
wedding isn't over and done with by this time.  An' I gev him 'my lord'
for it, too!  Played the high-tone society act for all it was worth,
eh, what?"

The next scene in the drama began for the Hungarian when he sat upon
the sidewalk in 56th Street, and tried to pacify certain outraged
blood-vessels in the nasal region.  Of course, the curtain had been up
some time, but, so far as he was concerned, the incidents which
followed his precipitate descent from the automobile were merely
catastrophic.  He had seen a vivid, violet-colored star close to his
eyes, had felt a crushing blow, had heard his own voice vaguely; and
then he awoke to a singular sense of personal dis-ease, and to the fact
that the noble Earl had nearly lost his temper.

"It was entirely your fault, Vassilan," his lordship was saying.  "You
gain nothing but lose everything by your bullying tactics.  Dash it
all, the fellow downed you like a prize-fighter.  Who was he?  Not Jean
de Courtois, I'll swear, so where has de Courtois gone?  Can't you
stand up?  It's damn silly to sit there, nursing your nose.  Our
motor-car is out of action.  We had better interview this clergyman,
and learn exactly what has happened."

Vassilan rose.  He was neither a coward nor a weakling, but he felt
sore in mind as in body.

"What's wrog with the car?" he demanded.  "Ad cad you led me ad
hadkerchief?"

"That rascal who was with Hermione nearly pulled the gear levers out by
the roots," said the Earl testily.  "He pushed me back into the
limousine--with some degree of force, too, confound him!  Who can he
be?"

"Suppose we idquire," growled Vassilan, and, mopping his nose with the
Earl's handkerchief, he tugged viciously at the old-fashioned bell-pull
which served the needs of visitors to the Rev. Thomas J. Hughes.

The maid-servant who took the names of the two men was surprised, and
showed it, but her democratic respect for titles yielded to suspicion
when she observed Count Vassilan's villainous guise.

"Wil-li-am!" But our eyes do not rest even upon the present. In the
nineteenth century men thought they were at the end of a process, and
their evolutionary creed was often only a polite method of saying
what fine fellows they were.

Now we look forward. The future seems to us longer than the past and more
important than the present; and we ourselves seem to be at the
beginning rather than at the end of time.

A knowledge of the past has made it impossible to believe that growth has
stopped, and we understand how different the future may be, in
part at least, by perceiving how different even this grimy and blood-stained
present is from the still more inhuman past.

Among the recorded changes the Economists write of an increasing
interchange of goods, and we can see as well an increasing interchange
of ideas across the frontiers of States.

Music, painting, literature, and science have all been influenced;
and ideas concerning political, economic, and social facts have been
affected by that interchange which has developed our philosophy,
our science, and our art.

No one nation has originated all; and each nation has depended on hints
and hypotheses which have arisen in others.

But the interchange of ideas on social life has led to an increase
of ideals, which are plans of action emotionally appreciated and
therefore motive forces.

Some of these are the Utopias of individual thinkers; but we
shall consider here only those more powerful ideals which are
shared, however vaguely, by many.

In this case also, as in the purely intellectual sphere, the fire spreads
from group to group, from nation to nation; and as the interchange
of ideas increases knowledge, so the exchange of enthusiasm makes
action more powerful.

A really effective ideal, however, cannot arise except from the perception
of definite evil. Vague discontents may cause such revolution as
leads to reaction; but the clear sight of evil is the only source
of reform. We may take it for granted, then, that although an ideal
is nerveless if it is not passionate, it is futile unless it is based
on knowledge.

Therefore a hint must be given of the evils from the knowledge of which
ideals of social reform now rise. That all is not well in the relations
of man to man or of group to group must be fairly obvious to any one
with imagination enough for sympathy.

General dissatisfaction and universal cures for society are childish;
but the perception of this and that evil gives rise to different plans
for reform which all originate in the enthusiasm which is an ideal.

We may put aside the long history of the growth of this shared
enthusiasm for better relations between men, whatever their ability,
their rank, their race, or their government.

The common ideals of the present are the result of a gradual
development, but we shall consider them here as attempts to deal
with existing evils and plans for a better future

.

* * * * *
Some social evils of the present are perhaps as old as any settled
civilization. Such are disease and personal violence. Some are due to
forces which have come into existence recently, owing to increased
communication and accumulated wealth.

Such are extreme poverty and the dehumanizing of social relations.
With both kinds of evil we are moved to deal, and we are not
deterred from the attempt to reform even long-established evil; for
we feel that we do not know what is possible.

Nothing is inevitable. This is not the place to give in detail the
description of those evils which are being dealt with. It is enough
if we recognize that it is no abstract or airy theory of equality
or human nature which moves us to action. All real theories are intensely
personal: and no theory has ever yet moved men unless they saw
through it to the crude facts.

However it may be phrased in a theory of society, we recognize it as
evil that disease, leading to premature death, should be as common
as it is. As a social evil it may be said to disturb seriously the
relations between men. We see also that it is a social evil that men
should use fraud or violence in compelling labour or in the
pursuit of riches. Of the newer social evils there is the physical
and spiritual deterioration which seems to result from the massing
of men in great cities.

There is also the dehumanizing of the relations between master and man.
And this is like in kind to the dehumanizing of all functions in the
vast institutions of modern times.

The director of a company comes to regard himself as part of a
machine; and so does the shareholder.

So eventually does the agent of the State. Until at last we reach the
immense evil that human action is done for which no moral responsibility
is felt. How then shall we act? What has been done and what is still
hoped for? The answer to such questions will be a statement of ideals.

One may speak of ideals of social reform from two different points
of view; either with respect to (1) the changing sentiment which
produces movements for reform or with respect to (2) the institutional
change which embodies that sentiment.

The two are complementary parts of one historical movement: and it
is difficult to divide them as cause and effect.

For sentiment, becoming enthusiasm, certainly causes institutional
change, and yet the reformed institution invariably creates a new
sentiment.

The province of law and of social custom is to lead as well as to
register--a dynamic as well as a static influence, to increase order
and to incite to liberty.

In actual life, therefore, it is often impossible to separate the
sentiment from its embodiment in measures of social reform.

For purposes of study, however, one may divide.

We may put aside the moving sentiments--the passions, however faint, which
urge men to wish for a better future--and we may consider first the
particular instances of reform.

* * * * *
One definite and in some sense new departure in the results of the
shared enthusiasms of nations has been the industrial legislation
of recent years.

That has been already dealt with. But, although in an economic age
such as ours industrial reform may seem the most striking, it is not
the only effect of our shared enthusiasm and later ages may not
think it the most important. There has been reform of social evils
owing to the interchange between nations of ideas on education,
religious toleration, medicine, and sanitation, the treatment of
criminals, the suppression of slavery and many other subjects. All these
and many more reforms are, as it were, registered in institutional
(legal or administrative) change.

Perhaps it is better to begin with a definite instance of the working of
an ideal, lest it may seem that we are speaking only of an
empty aspiration. We may take as an example the reforms connected with
medicine and sanitation, and those only in so far as they have been
officially established by the joint action of states. This is a very
restricted embodiment of a social ideal, since of course we may
find the same use of common labour between men of different races
in the private contest with disease or in the municipal preventive
medicine which in every great city owes much to investigators and
practitioners of other nations.

But it is better to take the most tangible effect in purely governmental
action.

The French Government proposed an international conference, which met in
1851, to deal with infectious disease; and a second conference met in
1856. In 1865 the outburst of cholera in the East led to a third
congress at Constantinople.

Great Britain opposed treaties for regulating quarantine, &c., because
of the delay which might be caused to the pursuit of shipping interests.
But at last a treaty was made in 1892 at Venice for protection
against cholera.

Further and more effective treaties were agreed to by civilized
states in 1897 and 1903.

A bureau of information concerning infectious disease was established
at Paris, and commissions to supervise were established in Turkey
and Egypt. With regard to sleeping sickness Great Britain took the
initiative; and a conference met in 1907, in London, at which six
countries were represented.

So much with respect to disease; we may now turn to examples of the
joint action of states as regards crime.

The African slave traffic has been dealt with since 1885 (Berlin
Conference) by the European States acting together on certain
general principles. And what is known as the White Slave traffic was
the subject of arrangement between fifteen states in the conference at
Paris in 1902.

Again, the reform of prisons and penitentiaries has been much assisted
by international congresses since 1846. The last was held in 1910 in
America, at which twenty-eight states were represented. A secretariat
has been established at Berne for the exchange of expert opinion
and for making suggestions to governments.

These are examples of a very numerous class of reforms undertaken by the
_joint action_ of governments. They are all comparatively recent and
most of the twenty-eight unions between governments for concerted action
have been established during the years of European peace between 1871
and 1914. In these instances the States of Europe have put their precious
sovereignties into their pockets; although the lawyers and
diplomatists explain the situation in the old terms.

With respect to all these movements for social reform three points
must be noticed: first, the initiative in most reform has come
from private enterprise and not from diplomacy or governments. Secondly,
this private interest has spread from the few of one nation to
the few of another before any effective result was attained. Thirdly,
the states have not acted together because of any general theory
of international action, but simply because certain social evils could
not be dealt with at all by any state acting separately. Whatever
hampers common action, then, also hinders effective reform in dealing
with disease or crime. I need not elaborate the conclusion.

* * * * *
There are also instances of governmental action being _directly
influenced_ by the practice of other states, even when there has been
no common action. The two most striking reforms of recent years have
been in education and religious toleration.

Of education enough has already been said. The interest from our
point of view here is chiefly in the effect of education on social
structure.

It is increasingly evident that of all forces for transforming a
nation, education is the most powerful; but no one nation can
transform its education effectively without respect to the mistakes
and successes of its neighbours.

This has been perceived and acted upon. The influence, for example,
of Germany on England is sufficiently well known.

German precedents were quoted in the House of Commons in the early
days of state education for England: and the Education Acts of 1870 and
1876 were largely due to the impression made in England by the
success of state education in Prussia.

Coleridge, Carlyle, and Matthew Arnold definitely acknowledged a
debt to Germany.

But Germany owed something to England in the perception of the value of
surroundings and corporate life in schools.

France also was affected by English education; and, in fact, French
educators had to come to England to find the thing for which the French
gave us the name--_Esprit de Corps_.

The United States have been very definitely influenced in their
University education both by Germany and England; and their
Government has in primary education certainly established for all
states the transforming possibilities of a school system.

It must be remembered that the crudity of civilization and its apparent
corruption in the United States are European not American.

It is because Europe has neglected its duty, enslaved and brutalized
its peoples, that social and political evil enters with the
immigrants; and all this mass of European incompetence, the result
of neglect or evil-doing in Ireland, Poland, the Slavonic Countries
and Italy, the Government of the United States exorcises with
education: and the effect is spreading beyond the frontiers of the
States.

A further effect of influence passing from nation to nation has been the
change with regard to the relations of State and Church.

In England it is some years since the State persecuted in the supposed
interest of religion; but we remember that the abolition of tests against
Roman Catholics was as late as 1830 and as against Jews as late
as 1850.

Even the most backward of European countries have been affected by the
general feeling.

In 1874 Austria for the first time allowed any creed, not dangerous
to morals, to be preached; and ecclesiastical power is not any
longer to be used against any but members of the particular Church
which is offended.

In Spain there are still some obstacles to public manifestations
of any religious belief but that which is most prevalent; free
worship in private, however, is at last allowed.

Thus, the general tendency, spreading from the nations which are
most intricately divided in religion, has been towards what is
called toleration.

Connected with this has been the gradual recognition of civil
marriage; in which the old privilege of the most powerful Church
is no longer recognized by the modern State.

Law and custom have both changed.

Perhaps the general attitude has not really changed.

We persecute more for political than for religious unorthodoxy; or
it may be that in our more economic age we forbear to burn heretics
only because we cannot afford the faggots.

But in any case the relations between men in society are more justly
arranged, even where religion is concerned

.

* * * * *
We have thus examples of (1) joint governmental action and (2)
separate actions of governments influenced directly by foreign
governments.

There are also certain results of the interchange of ideals between
nations which are not yet, or only in part, registered in legal or
political institutions.

Such for example is the changed position given to women.

A change has occurred quite outside the political or even the economic
sphere, both in the habits of western humanity and in their guiding
conceptions.

The change is affecting the meaning of marriage, since we are
becoming inclined to suppose that man and woman are not simply male
and female.

Human individuality is given a new value; and there is no telling
yet what the new attitude may involve in lessening the friction due
to primitive and obsolete tradition or in making society more
reasonable and civilized.

The source of the change is undoubtedly an enthusiasm which has
been influenced by men and women of all nations.

Ibsen has a place in the history of social transformation. And besides,
the contact between nations has made it possible for the freer position
of women in one group to affect the domestic slavery of another.

In the position of children, also, an immense change is proceeding.

We cannot fail to call it social reform, that the child should be given
so much more definite a place in the social organism.

Aristotle thought woman was a mistake of nature's in the attempt
to make man; and nearly all philosophers have treated children as
if they ought to be rather ashamed of themselves for not being grown
up.

I speak of philosophers in the wide sense of the term, for I do not
think the metaphysicians knew that there was such a thing as a child
in the universe.

However that may be, we can hardly believe that as late as the
nineteenth century parents really imagined that they knew what was
good for their children.

In our more sceptical age, children have generally to be careful not to
allow their parents to read certain books, and in every well brought
up family, it is thought that parents should be seen and not heard.

A social change has occurred in the comparative importance we assign
to childhood and age.

Thirdly, there is gradually coming about a transformation of social castes.
One must speak carefully; for in the West we are supposed not to have
castes. There is, however, an uncomfortable feeling that society is
not one, that the two cities which Plato said would divide and destroy
the true city of men are now established--the rich and the poor.

I do not mean those with £3,000 a year, and those with £160 a year. It
is not a question for the Exchequer. I mean that great numbers in all
'civilized' nations are ill-fed and ill-clothed from birth, and die
prematurely. To perceive it is to desire action which perhaps
no state can perform. But that we perceive it is something. Read the
complacent rhymes of Lord Tennyson about 'freedom slowly broadening
down' and then turn to contemporary literature, to Jean Richepin or John
Galsworthy, and you will acknowledge that a common ideal of social
reform has come into existence. We are at least restless in face of a
social organization which wastes humanity during long years of peace
almost as completely, though not so recklessly, as during a few months
of war.

Something has been already done--English writers and English experience
have given a motive power to Hungarian, Russian, Finnish, Turkish,
Persian, and Indian democracy. Groups of men have claimed, for example
in South America, their right to free development. And everywhere
during the period of European peace the contact between nations
was teaching every nation the force of its own character, while the
new complexities of society were weakening the old dividing lines
of caste between individuals.

In all these matters we seem to be moved by a desire for a freer social
atmosphere. Whether law or administration changes or not, it is clear
that most European nations have undergone in the years of peace
from 1871 to 1914 considerable social changes.

How far they are effective in all nations and in all classes it is very
difficult for a contemporary to judge. It may be that the social
structure of the decorative upper fringe or of the bedraggled hem of
society is much the same as it was before communication was easy and
transit rapid. But the central body of European society is certainly
changed; and, after all, between the scum and the dregs is the
good soup

.

* * * * *
Such are the changes which have been introduced into social life
owing to the interdependence of nations. But we should not understand
what has happened if we accepted the mere record of achievements. The
future is built not only upon what we have done, but upon what we hope
to do.

Reforms accomplished do not make us more satisfied to endure evil not
yet reformed--for always working in the achieved present is the
ideal which transformed the past into what we now see.

We may turn, then, to consider some general features of the force
working in social reform which is not yet achieved.

And for that purpose we put aside established law and custom to
consider the implied attitude.

Now that political privilege and inequality before the law are more
or less removed, there is a greater concentration upon the underlying
social injustice.

We all accept it as good that the activities of government should
not be for the benefit of the few, or that the money should not be
drawn from one class.

We suppose at least that there should be one law for rich and poor.

To any one with a knowledge of history this seems an immense step since
small classes in every nation held political privilege, made law
for others, and forced tribute from the majority.

Not that all is justice and liberty. The law still, with noble impartiality,
forbids both the millionaire and the pauper to steal bread.

Of course it is not directed against the poor. The law never forbids
the poor man to cheat the state out of more than £3,000 a year. Again,
political power still depends on the social position of your cousins
and your aunts.

But something has been done.

We hear much more nowadays about social than about political or legal
reform. That, in itself, is a sign of a change of attitude. In the
revolution of 1381 the crowds came marching to London swearing,
in the words of the old chronicle, that there would be no peace in the
land till each and every lawyer was slain.

In the revolutions of 1830 and 1848 it was 'death to the politicians'.

Now--it may be that we despair of lawyers or politicians, dead or
alive.

In any case the attention of those in every state who are moved by
enthusiasm for a better society is concentrated less upon votes and
laws than upon the distribution of well-being.

Secondly, there has been a transference of enthusiasm of the religious
or poetic kind from the sphere of contemplation or aloofness to
that of earthly and even material action.

Ideals of social reform do not any longer involve a neglect of food
and clothing: we are all more and more convinced that it is idle
to preach culture to a starving man, or to talk of liberty to one
whose whole life is a bestial struggle for bare food and covering.

I speak of normal times. In England, France, and Germany, social
betterment means giving to a greater number security of bare life,
upon which alone the good life can be built.

It will be seen that I imply a disagreement with the Tolstoian conception
of reform; in so far as that involves a neglect of food and clothing
and generally of what are called material goods.

That conception is not perhaps powerful among those who deal with
what is usually called social reform.

It is not 'modern', and it is also dependent upon a mistaken argument
in ethical theory.

An unfortunate confusion made by what is called Eastern, Stoic, or
Mediaeval asceticism led to the idea that because the mind is more
important than the body, the body has no importance at all.

But we need not deal with this theory in detail, especially as the
general attitude of to-day is opposed to it. There is undoubtedly a
concentration upon the bare necessities of human life with a view to
discovering how these can be shared more generally.

"I am certain of that, at any rate," laughed Curtis.  "He impressed me
as weighing a hundred and ninety pounds or thereabouts, and, if it will
afford you the slightest gratification, I'll take the first opportunity
to work out the approximate force required to drive back a moving body
of that weight while traveling forward, say, fifteen miles an hour.
There are angles of resistance to be calculated, too, so it offers a
decent problem.  Meanwhile, the vital question is--where are we going?"

Hermione was easily chaffed out of her bellicose mood.  He could
picture the droop in the corners of her mouth as she said forlornly:

"I do not know."

"It is evident," he went on, "that they procured the minister's address
from the elevator man at your dwelling."

"Ah, that Rafferty!  Wait till I see him," broke in Marcelle.

"Please do not scarify Rafferty, if that is his name.  I am much more
to be blamed than he, because I assured your mistress that the Earl and
Count Vassilan were safe on board the _Switzerland_ till the morning.
I see now that they telegraphed for a tug, and it is best to assume
that they have been kept informed by wireless of nearly every move in
the game. . . .  You agree with me, I suppose, Lady Hermione, that your
return to 1000 59th Street is out of the question?"

"It is, if this mock marriage is to serve any real purpose," she said.

"But pray remember that it is not a mock marriage.  You and I are as
firmly bound together by the law as if--well, as if we meant it."

She leaned forward a little; her face was etched in Rembrandt lights by
the glare from some shop windows.

"Mr. Curtis," she said earnestly, "it is neither just nor reasonable
that you should plunge yourself into difficulties for the sake of a
girl whom you met to-night for the first time.  Why not go out of my
life now--this instant? . . .  Marcelle and I can find refuge
somewhere.  The hour is early. . . .  Why should you take all the risk?"

He was ready for some such appeal on her part.

"I was taught in school if I did a thing at all to do it thoroughly,"
he said, "and my experience of life has given the adage a halo.  It
would be worse than useless to desert you now, Lady Hermione.  Whatever
penalties I may have incurred in the eyes of the law are committed
beyond hope of redemption.  If I am sought for, the police know exactly
where to lay hands on me, and my crime would become monstrous if it
were proved that I ran away from my wife on the night of our marriage.
No; we must face the music boldly, and together.  We must go to some
well-known hotel, register openly, secure rooms, and conduct ourselves
on the orthodox lines of all runaway couples, who are presumably head
over heels in love with each other.  Moreover, in the morning, or
whenever we are run to earth, you should allow me to face your father
and play the part of the indignant husband.  It is essential that your
marriage should appear real, or you go back to bondage and I to prison."

"To prison!"  The girl's horrified accents showed that she had hardly
given a thought to the bald consequences of her escapade.

"Yes.  I am not trying to frighten you; but what sort of mercy would a
judge show to the craven who absconded before the battle began?  If, on
the other hand, I am, so to speak, torn from your arms--if a plausible
lawyer can depict you tearful and inconsolable--if----"

"You make out a fairly strong case, Mr. Curtis.  I have told you that I
trust you, and I can only repeat my words of gratitude. . . .
Marcelle, you will not leave me?"

"Never, miss, ma'am--that is, your ladyship."

Thus it befell that Curtis was ready with the name of a prominent hotel
in Fifth Avenue when the driver halted in Madison Avenue.  He made his
choice almost at random, but selected one of the newest uptown
caravanserais, merely because it lay a considerable distance from 27th
Street.  Otherwise, his object in picking a large hotel being to avoid
notice among a fashionable throng, he might easily have taken his
"wife" to the Waldorf-Astoria, in which event certain complications
even then hot in the making would not have followed their intricate
course, while Hermione's future must have been affected most powerfully.

"I suppose you are prepared to submit to certain conditions which
govern this new venture?" said Curtis, when the cab was once more
speeding onward to a definite goal.

"What are they?"

It would be scarcely fair to describe Hermione's tone as suspicious,
for she was a loyal soul, and was wondering in her heart of hearts what
manner of man this knight errant could be; but his very self-possession
fluttered her; she had been so accustomed to think and act in her own
defense that she experienced a subtle fear of this calm, cool-headed,
masterful person whom she must learn to regard as her husband.

"Well,"--Curtis's speech was so unemotional that he might have been
describing one of his Manchurian railway schemes--"we must treat each
other with a certain familiarity--even use little endearments--in
public--and address each other by pet names--mine is Chow."

Despite her troubles, the girl laughed, and Curtis recalled the tinkle
of silver bells in a temple at evening on the banks of the far-away
Wei-ho.

"But that is the name of a dog!" she tittered.

"Yes.  In my case, it denoted some unpleasant personal characteristics
when a stupid mandarin put obstacles in my way.  I never gave any
warning, but rushed in and bit him, not actually, of course, but in his
illicit commissions, which annoyed him more than a real bite."

"I don't like Chow," she said.  "Your name is John.  Won't Jack do?"

"Fine."  It was lucky she could not see the smile that flitted across
his face.  "And yours?"

"Mamma always used my full name, and I have never had anyone else to
give me a pet name, unless it was 'Tatters' at school."

"We might bracket Tatters with Chow, and dismiss both," he said
lightly.  "And I like the sound of Hermione so well that it is pat on
my lips already. . . .  Now, you, Marcelle--remember that her ladyship
has become Lady Hermione Curtis."

"Oh, not Mrs. Curtis?"

"No.  An earl's daughter retains her courtesy title after marriage."

"All right, sir.  I shan't forget."  Indeed, Marcelle was jubilant.
She had been "dying" to use her mistress's title, once she became aware
of it, but it was taboo at 59th Street.

Curtis had covered a good deal of ground during that brief discussion
in the cab, but Hermione was not quite prepared for its logical sequel
in the hotel.

Naturally, they attracted no unusual attention when they entered the
hotel.  Other people merely noticed the passing of a distinguished
looking young man in evening dress--for Curtis had promptly whipped off
that ominous overcoat--and a slender, veiled lady, of elegant carriage,
who walked up to the bureau, followed by a smartly dressed girl who
gazed about her with bright, all-seeing eyes.

[Illustration: Scenes from the photo-drama.]

"My wife and I have been detained in New York this evening
unexpectedly," explained Curtis to the hotel clerk.  "We want a suite
of rooms, a sitting-room, three bedrooms with baths--you would like
Marcelle's room to communicate with yours, wouldn't you, dear?" and he
turned suddenly to Hermione.

"Y-yes," she faltered, for the attack took her unaware.

"What floor, sir?  We have a nice suite on the tenth."

"Not so high, please," said Hermione.  Then she sprung a mine on her
own account.  "I know it is stupid, Jack, darling, but I am so afraid
of fire."

"This hotel is absolutely fireproof, madam," put in the clerk, stating
a fact implicitly believed by every hotel proprietor in New York in so
far as his own building is concerned, "but we can accommodate you on
the second floor, Suite F., fifty dollars a day."

"Thank you.  That will be just right," said Curtis quickly, for he
meant to live like a prince during one night at least, let the morrow
bring its own cares.  "Now, you understand that we are here without
baggage, though my wife's maid will procure some necessaries while we
eat, and I mean to get some clothes later, but, if you would like a
deposit of, say, a hundred dollars----?"

He felt for his pocketbook, but, to the credit of the clerk be it said,
the suggestion was negatived with a smile.

"No need at all for any deposit, sir," was the answer.  "I wouldn't be
on to my job it I didn't know how and when to discriminate in matters
of that sort.  Will you register?"

Curtis took a pen and wrote:

"Mr. and Lady Hermione Curtis, and maid."  Some imp of adventure moved
him to inscribe "Pekin" in the column for visitors' home addresses.
But the clerk was obviously impressed by Hermione's title, no less than
the singularly remote locality the couple hailed from.  He leant back,
and took a key from its hook.

"Page!" he said.  "Show Mr. Curtis and her ladyship to Suite F."  Then
he added, as an afterthought: "Would you like dinner served in your
sitting-room, sir?"

"I think so," said Curtis, "but my wife shall decide a little later."

Hermione kept silent until they were safely behind the closed door of a
well-furnished and delightfully spacious apartment.

"Of course, I bear all expenses," she said firmly.

"What--are we quarreling already?" he asked.

"No, but----"

"You think I am being wildly extravagant.  Why, bless your ladyship's
dear little heart, this hotel doesn't begin to know how to charge like
a taxi.  Now, no argument till to-morrow.  An American millionaire can
really be quite a decent sort of fellow at times, and, if we may assume
that this is one of the times, please let me play at being a
millionaire--for once."

She raised her veil, and looked at him, straight in the eyes.

"Why are you so different from other men?  Why have I never before
spoken to a man like you?" she asked.

"But I am not different, and there are plenty of men like me; the other
poor chaps haven't had my glorious chance of serving you--that is all.
Now, won't you go and see if your room is comfortable, and whether or
not Marcelle's quarters are just right?  Then come back here, and we'll
discuss menus, for which purpose I shall ring for a waiter _ek dum_."

"Is that Chinese?"

"No, Hindustani.  It means 'at once,' but every hotel-wala east of Suez
understands it."

Still she lingered.

"Have you any sisters--a mother living?" she said.

"No.  I'm the sole survivor of my own family.  But I mean to give
myself the pleasure of a full introduction while we dine, or sup.  Do
say you are hungry."

"I have not eaten a morsel since luncheon," she confessed.

"Oh, joy!  I must interview the head waiter.  No common serf will
suffice.  Please hurry."

She left him, not without an impulsive movement as though she meant to
utter some further words of thanks, but checked her intent on the very
threshold of speech.  As the lock of the bedroom door clicked, and he
was alone, he essayed a review of the amazing sequence of events which
had befallen since he strolled out of the dining-room of the Central
Hotel.  He stood there, motionless, with hands plunged deep in his
pockets, but, at the outset of a reverie in which judgment and prudence
might have helped in the council, he happened to catch sight of himself
in an oblong mirror over the mantelpiece, for the apartment, redolent
of New York's later architecture, contained an open grate, and was
furnished with the chaste beauty of the Chippendale period.  In his
present position the reflection in the mirror was oddly reminiscent of
a half-length portrait of his grandfather, the warrior who rode at the
head of the Fifth Cavalry in '61.

Then Curtis laughed, with the pleasant conviction of a man whose mind
has been made up for him by circumstances beyond his control.

"It's bred in the bone--a clear case of Mendelism," he murmured softly,
because he had just remembered how Colonel Curtis, before ever the war
was ended and its bitterness assuaged, had decided a Southern girl's
conflict between love and duty by galloping fifty miles across
Confederate South Carolina and carrying off the lady.

Grandfather and grandson alike were men of action.  Curtis seldom used
a gesture, and never cried over spilt milk.  Now he merely turned,
peered into his own bedroom, assured himself that Hermione would find
its prototype to her fancy, and then summoned a waiter.

Behind the closed door of the other room a girl was similarly engaged
in taking stock of the situation; but she had feminine assistance, so
there was bound to be talk.

"Oh, your ladyship, isn't this just the dandiest bit out of a novel you
ever read?" cried Marcelle when she entered her mistress's room through
a communicating door.

"It might be more thrilling if it were not a page out of my own life,"
said Hermione sadly.  She, too, was gazing in a mirror, though, being a
woman, the oppressive thought bobbed up through a sea of troubles that
her hair must be untidy, and she owned neither comb nor brush.

"But, what luck, miss, your ladyship, to have found a gentleman like
Mr. Curtis at the right moment.  Talk about life buoys for drowning men
and rich uncles from California in plays--who ever heard of anyone
wanting a nice husband and getting him in such a way!"

Marcelle's eyes were positively glistening.  And these two now were not
mistress and maid, but a pair of highly strung women, and young ones at
that.

"You have lost your wits in this night's excitement, Marcelle," said
Hermione.  "Don't you realize that I am only married under mere
pretense.  Mr. Curtis is nothing to me, nor I to him.  He has been kind
and gallant, and I am under an obligation which I can never
discharge--but that is not marriage."

"It's awful like it, your ladyship."

"No, no.  Drive such nonsense from your head.  When you marry, don't
you hope to love the man of your choice, and will you not feel sure
that he loves you?"

"Oh, yes, miladi."

"Then how is it possible for any relationship of that sort to exist
between Mr. Curtis and me?"

"You've gone a long way already, ma'am," giggled Marcelle.

"Please don't call me ma'am.  It--it irritates me."

"Sorry, miladi, but you will admit, at least, a marriage being
necessary, that you were fortunate in finding Mr. Curtis?"

"Yes, doubly fortunate--it is that fact which makes things hard for me."

"Makes what things hard, your ladyship?"

"Oh, I don't know.  I scarce recognize my own voice.  Marcelle, if I
seem distraught and unreasonable, promise me you will pay no heed.  For
pity's sake, don't leave me!"

Hermione's eyes filled with tears, and Marcelle was on the verge of
hysteria.

"I--can't imagine--what there is--to cry about," she murmured brokenly.
"Nothing on earth would induce me to go away now--but I do hope--and
pray--you will be happy--even though--you only met your husband--little
more than an hour ago! . . .  And I believe in my heart, Lady Hermione,
that you will soon see how fortunate you were in escaping that mincing
little Frenchman----"

"Marcelle, the poor man is dead."

"Then it is the best turn he has done you, miladi.  I never fancied
him.  There was something underhanded and mean about him.  I have seen
his face when you were not looking, and I'm sure he was a hypocrite."

"Marcelle, you will drive me crazy.  Don't you understand that I have
never intended to marry anybody--really?"

A knock at the door opening into the sitting-room came to Hermione's
relief.

"Yes?" she said.

"If you can spare Marcelle, I would recommend that she should go to
your flat for any clothes you may need," said Curtis's voice.

Hermione threw open the door.

"A little while ago you told me that it was impossible to think of
returning there," she said.

"For you, yes, but not for your maid.  Who is to hinder?  That man,
Rafferty, looked a decent sort of fellow."

"I can manage Rafferty all right," put in Marcelle.

"Of course you can," smiled Curtis.  "Just pack a trunk or a couple of
bags with Lady Hermione's belongings--you know what to bring--and get
Rafferty to call a taxi without attracting too much notice.  If you
think you are being followed, put your pursuers off the scent.  But my
own view is that 1000 59th Street is the last place anyone will think
of watching to-night."

"Shall I go at once, your ladyship?" said Marcelle, and Hermione said
"Yes," with a meekness that was admirable in a wife.

Curtis looked at his pretty bride's hat.

"I have ordered a meal," he said.  "It will be served in a few minutes."

"I shall be ready," she replied, beginning nervously to take off her
gloves.  The wedding ring was inclined to accompany the left hand
glove, but, after a second's hesitation, she replaced it.  When she
appeared in the sitting-room she had discarded her jacket, a
close-fitting one of a style that fastened _à la militaire_, high in
the neck.  Beneath it she had been wearing a white silk blouse, and the
delicate pink of her arms and throat was revealed now through its
diaphanous sheen.  A string of pearls supported a diamond cross on her
breast, and on her left wrist was a watch set in small diamonds and
turquoises and carried by a bracelet of gold filigree.  She wore only
one ring--_the_ ring--and even the slight glance which Curtis gave it
brought a vivid blush to her cheeks.

"I am not a past master in the art of ordering banquets," he said
cheerily, turning at once to draw her attention to the table, "but the
head-waiter here is a gourmet.  He suggested caviare, a white soup, a
king-fish, a tourne-dos, and a grouse--does that appeal?"

"You take my breath away," she said, with valorous effort to seem at
ease.

"Now--as to wine?"

"I seldom touch wine."

"To-night it will make you sleep.  What do you say to a glass of Clos
Vosgeot?"

"Is that a claret?"

"Yes."

"Well, as it happens, that is the one wine I take."

The dinner proceeded most pleasantly.  To his own astonishment, Curtis
worked up sufficient appetite to enjoy the meal, though he would have
stuffed himself remorselessly to save his charming _vis-à-vis_ from the
slightest embarrassment.  But he only sipped the wine, for a sixth
sense warned him that he must keep a clear head that night.

By inference rather than plain statement, for a deft waiter was
constantly coming in and out, he supplied Hermione with glimpses of his
own career, and ascertained from her that she had secured Marcelle's
services through the good offices of a lady who was a fellow-passenger
on the ship.

"She comes from New Orleans, but, notwithstanding her name, she does
not speak French," said Hermione.  "I think that rather accounts
for----"

She stopped, and Curtis did not press for an explanation, but she
continued, after a second's pause:

"Marcelle did not like Monsieur de Courtois.  I imagined she was
annoyed because he always conversed with me in a language she did not
understand."

"Then I shall avoid Chinese," he laughed.

"Marcelle----"

Again she hesitated.  She was positively dismayed by consciousness of
the imminent disclosure, yet too well-bred even to appear to be
withholding confidences.

"You have won Marcelle's golden opinion already," she said.  "But let
us talk of something else."

For the moment they were alone, and she glanced at the watch on her
wrist.

"Have you made any plans?" she inquired, and her voice was low, yet
sufficiently composed.

"For the future?"

"Yes."

"When Marcelle arrives, I am going to my hotel for some baggage.  You,
I suggest, are going to bed."

"You will return?"

"Within the hour--if I am alive."

"And to-morrow?"

"To-morrow, may it please your ladyship, we breakfast together at nine
o'clock."

"Your plan, then, is mainly composed of eating and sleeping?"

"What else--our policy is one of drifting."

"You are extraordinarily good to me, Mr. Curtis."

"It is 'Jack' in the compact."

She sighed.

"Alas, this compact reads only one way.  It means that you give and I
receive.  Will you--will you believe, in the future, that despair alone
could have driven me to the course I have pursued?"

"No," he said sturdily.

"No?  That is the only unkind thing you have said."

"I refuse to vilify happy chance in the name of black despair.
But--here is Marcelle, and slaves bearing packages.  I hear thuds in
the next room."

And, indeed, the waiter entering just then with coffee, Marcelle's
voice reached them sharply from the corridor:

"Now, you boy, be careful with that hat-box!  Do you think you are an
express man, or what?"


CHAPTER VI

NINE-THIRTY

Chance is often a skilled stage manager, and chance had arranged a
really effective scene in the hall of the Central Hotel.  The Earl of
Valletort seemed to be somewhat unwilling to take up any of the
gauntlets so readily thrown down by Devar and the Curtis family, and,
for a few seconds, the ring of reporters was held spellbound by a
situation which promised most excellently with regard to the
all-important question of "copy."

Then the police captain, after waiting for Steingall to take the lead,
nudged his silent colleague, and said gruffly:

"This thing cannot be gone into here.  Those who can bring forward
testimony of any value ought to come with Mr. Steingall and myself to
the precinct station-house."

"Why lose time which cannot be overtaken later?" urged the Earl,
appealing to Steingall, since it was the detective who had spoken to
him in the first instance.

"We appear to be at cross purposes," said Steingall.  "How did you two
gentlemen get to know that a murder had been committed?"

"Murder!" gasped Count Vassilan.

"We are not talking of a murder, but of a most scandalous abduction,
which will provide only one of a number of most serious charges against
this person, Curtis," cried the Earl.

Vassilan seized him by the arm excitedly.

"Don't you understand, dear friend," he muttered in French.  "The
rascal must have killed de Courtois in order to gain possession of the
marriage certificate."

"It will save trouble, sir, if you speak English here," said Steingall.
Then he turned to the hotel clerk.

"Place a room at our disposal at once.  Lord Valletort is quite right.
We have not a second to waste."

A murmur of protest arose from the pressmen, though it was obvious that
the police could not conduct the inquiry in the midst of an
ever-growing crowd of residents and servants.

"Say, Steingall," whispered the reporter who had spoken for the others
earlier, "can't you let us into this?  We'll suppress anything you
wish--I'll guarantee that, absolutely without reservation."

"_I_ have no objection, but these high-toned strangers may not like
it," said the detective quietly.

The Earl, when the point was referred to him, made no difficulty
whatsoever about the presence of the journalists--in fact, he rather
welcomed publicity.

"It is better that the truth should appear than a garbled and
misleading version," he said affably.  "I want your help, gentlemen.  I
know enough of newspaper ways to feel sure that a story of some sort
will be star-headed in every news sheet in New York to-morrow, so my
friend, Count Vassilan, and I are more than willing that you should be
well informed."

Now, that phase of the problem was precisely what Count Ladislas
Vassilan seemed to be exceedingly disconcerted about.  He was
singularly ill at ease.  His florid face had paled to a dusky wanness
when he heard the ugly word "Murder," and each passing moment served
only to increase his agitation.  Steingall, to all intents and purposes
paying less heed to the man than to any other person present, had not
missed one labored breath, one twitch of an eyelid, one nervous
gesture.  His phenomenal instinct in the detection of crime had
fastened unerringly on a singular coincidence.  Curtis had hazarded a
guess that the real malefactors were Hungarians, and here was a
Hungarian Count denouncing Curtis.  Certainly that question of
nationality promised remarkable developments.

When the whole party, consisting of some fifteen persons, had gathered
behind the closed door of the hotel's private office, Steingall took
the lead in directing the proceedings.

"It will help straighten out a tangle if I say exactly what has taken
place here to-night--that is, to the best of our knowledge," he said.
"There is every reason to believe that Mr. John D. Curtis arrived in
New York this afternoon from Europe----"

"Right," broke in Devar.  "I traveled with him on the _Lusitania_."

"Yes, his presence on board was announced in most of the papers," added
a journalist.

"Please don't interrupt," said the detective.  "You will be heard in
your turn.  Now, this Mr. Curtis was allotted room No. 605, and there
is evidence to prove that he behaved like any ordinary individual who
had just come from shipboard.  He superintended the unpacking of his
clothes, gave out a quantity of linen for the laundry, changed into
evening dress, and dined alone.  Thus far, there is ample corroboration
of his own story, because his movements can be checked by the
observation of half-a-dozen hotel employés.  He says, by the way, that
while buying some stamps at the cigar counter before going to the
restaurant, he was jostled by a rough-looking foreigner, who apologized
in broken French, and whom he took to be a Czech or Hungarian.  No one
seems to have witnessed this incident, but I have not questioned the
man who sold him the stamps.  Anyhow, after dinner, at twenty minutes
of eight to be exact, he came into the lobby, intending to inform the
clerk that he had closed the bedroom door and left his key in the room.
We have ascertained that this statement is true; the door had to be
forced, because a bag of golf clubs had fallen and become wedged
between the door and the side of a steel trunk.  Curtis never did speak
to the clerk about the key; at that instant, he says, his attention was
drawn to the queer behavior of the foreigner who had pushed against
him, and who had been joined in the meantime by another man of similar
type.  They seemed to be very excited, and were apparently expecting
someone to turn up, either in the street or from the hotel--Curtis
fancied that they were on the look-out for interruption, or news, from
both quarters.  The porter on duty at the door, who is not quite
intelligible to-night, remembers asking these men if they wanted a
taxi, but they gave no heed to him.  Then, according to Curtis's
version of the affair, an automobile dashed up outside, and a young man
in evening dress, carrying an overcoat, stepped out, and told the
chauffeur to keep the engine going, as he would not be detained more
than a minute.  At that instant the two foreigners--Hungarians
according to Curtis--sprang at the newcomer, and endeavored to force
him back into the auto.  Failing in this, one of them drew a knife, and
stabbed him so severely that he died within a few minutes, and without
uttering an intelligible word.  Curtis ran to help, but was too far
away to prevent the crime, and was further balked in an attempt to
seize either of the wretches by having the dying man's body flung in
his way.  He endeavored to hinder the escape of the scoundrels in the
automobile, but failed, because the chauffeur was evidently in league
with them, and, when he came back to the crowd which had collected
around the prostrate man, it would appear that someone gave him, by
mistake, the victim's overcoat in place of his own.  This error was not
discovered until the police came to search the dead man's clothing,
when various documents showed beyond question that the overcoat
believed to be his was really Curtis's.  Curtis told his story in a
clear and straightforward way, and I, for one, have not seen any reason
to doubt it.  It is odd that he should have disappeared so completely
since a few minutes after the crime, but that may be capable of a
simple explanation, while it is possible that he has not as yet
discovered the change of overcoats, or he must surely have returned and
informed us of the mistake.  I am assuming, of course, that he would
act as one would expect of any reasonable minded citizen who had
witnessed a serious crime. . . .  Now, Lord Valletort, what have you to
say about Mr. Curtis?"

A guttural exclamation from Count Vassilan drew all eyes to him.  He
seemed to be on the verge of collapse, and was positively livid with
fright.  In other conditions than those obtaining at the moment, such a
display of terror on the part of a truculent looking, strongly built
man would have been almost ludicrous; but Steingall found no humor in
the spectacle.  He was gazing at the Hungarian with a curious
concentration, and the police captain, who had begun by thinking his
colleague was saying far too much, and who was inclined to disagree
with some of his conclusions, now thought he could discern method in
his madness.

Again did Vassilan murmur something to the Earl in a strange tongue,
and Valletort, with difficulty repressing his annoyance, explained that
his friend was feeling the effects of a blow received earlier in the
evening, and wished to retire at once to his room in the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

"By all means," said Steingall suavely.  "I gather that Count Vassilan
has no connection with the inquiry--in fact, he is not interested in
it."

"He is, in a sense----" began the Earl, but Vassilan grasped his arm,
and evidently besought him to come away without another word.  Though
Valletort was in a towering rage, he obviously thought fit to fall in
with his companion's views.

"You see how it is," he said, with a nonchalant gesture that was belied
by his grating tone.  "I am afraid I must postpone my branch of this
inquiry till a later hour--probably until the morning."

"Do you withdraw all charges against John D. Curtis?" demanded Devar,
and his clear, incisive voice was distinctly hostile in its icy
precision.

"No, sir.  I do not," was the angry retort.

"Well, I guess you know best why you and the Hungarian potentate have
developed this sudden attack of cold feet, but----"

"I'll thank you not to interfere, Mr. Devar," said Steingall
determinedly.  "If Lord Valletort thinks his business can wait till
Count Vassilan has recovered from an indisposition, that is his affair
only."

"I think nothing of the sort," snapped the Earl.  "You all see that the
Count is ill, and common humanity impels me to attend to him first.  It
may serve to curb this young gentleman's tongue if I say----"

But Vassilan would not permit him to say anything.  Though he was the
ailing man, he literally dragged Valletort out of the room and into the
street.

Steingall looked at the police captain, who quitted the apartment
instantly.  Then the detective gazed around at the others with a placid
smile which seemed to show that he, for one, was well content with the
unusual turn taken by events.

"I suppose you boys have verbatim notes of all that was said," he
inquired, tossing the remark collectively to the group of pressmen.

"Every word," came the assurance.

"Well, now, I want you to keep all that out of the papers."

"If we do that, Steingall, what is there left?" said one of them
good-humoredly.

"The biggest thing you have dropped on to this year; unless I am
greatly mistaken, the scoop of scoops for those who happen to be
present.  I'm not going to pretend that any of you are blind or deaf,
and it will assist the police materially if no comment is made on what
you have heard and seen.  I don't like to put it otherwise than as a
friendly hint; but I may want the whole bunch as witnesses before this
thing is through, so your mouths should be closed effectually with
regard to incidents in this room."

A half-hearted laugh went around, and someone asked:

"We must put up a readable story of some kind--if we cut out certain
details, surely we can use others?"

"I said 'incidents in this room,'" repeated the detective.

"Then we can mention the arrival of the Earl and the Count on the
scene?"

"Why not?"

"One minute, sir," put in Mr. Horace P. Curtis.  "If these gentlemen
take you at your word, the charge made against my nephew will be
published throughout the length and breadth of the United States
to-morrow."

"I don't see how something of the sort is to be avoided," said
Steingall.

"Then, in common fairness, the newspapers ought to state that my wife
and I, as well as Mr. Devar, as good as told the Earl that he was
lying."

"I imagine you can leave the matter safely in the very capable hands of
the reporters present," said Steingall.

"Remember, please, that no charge was actually named against Curtis,"
said Devar.  "The Earl of Valletort demanded that he should be found
and arrested, and described him as a dangerous adventurer, but gave no
shred of proof of his wild-cat statement that Curtis had been engaged
in a scandalous abduction, and, when asked for it, discovered that he
had urgent business elsewhere."

Steingall held up a hand in quiet reproof.

"My own view is that it would be best, at this stage, to say merely
that the two noblemen came here inquiring for Curtis, and leave it at
that.  I am not trying to deprive the press of a sensation.  Surely
there is enough in Chapter One for to-night, and those reporters who
have had the luck to be present will be able to fill in gaps in
Chapters Two and Three when they come along to-morrow or next day."

"Right," said the journalist who, by tacit agreement, seemed to
represent his confrères.  "There are one or two items we want you to
clear up, if you don't mind.  First, did Curtis, or anybody else, note
the number of the automobile?"

"Yes," said Steingall instantly.  "The number is X24-305, and Curtis
heard the man who was murdered address the chauffeur as 'Anatole.'  He
spoke French to the man, too."

"You omitted both of those interesting facts from your summary,"
commented the reporter with a smile.

"Did I?  That was a piece of sheer forgetfulness on my part."

"You didn't forget to rope us all in here as witnesses when the
Hungarian prince came on the boards.  I knew you had something up your
sleeve the moment you began to fill in details.  But, as to the crime
itself--have you found out the name of the man who was killed?"

"No.  There were no papers in his clothes, but that may be accounted
for by the singular accident of the exchange of overcoats.  His linen
was marked 'H. R. H.'"

"'H. R. H.,'" cried a bespectacled journalist who had been a silent
listener hitherto.  "That's rather odd.  Those are the initials of
Henry R. Hunter, a member of our staff.  The news editor wanted him to
take hold in the first instance when the fact that a murder had been
committed was 'phoned to the office, but he could not be found
anywhere, so I am here in his stead."

"I don't recall anyone of that name," said Steingall sharply.

"No, you wouldn't.  He was in our Chicago office till the beginning of
September.  He did one or two bright things there that caught the
chief's eye, so he was brought to New York. . . .  By Jove, Hunter is a
good French scholar.  It was on that account he got on the track of a
gang of Chicago anarchists."

A curious stillness fell on the gathering.  It was as though a spirit
of evil had suddenly made its presence felt; even the electric lamps
seemed to have grown dimmer.

"Describe Hunter."

Steingall's voice rang out incisively; the reporter took off his
spectacles, and began to burnish them, for his face was glistening with
perspiration.

"He is about five feet ten inches in height, and weighs somewhere in
the neighborhood of 150 pounds.  He is straight and well-built, and his
face is finely molded, with big, luminous eyes, deeply recessed,
and----"

"Has he a white scar across the left eyebrow?"

"Yes."

For some reason, the journalist carried his description of Hunter's
personal appearance no farther.  It was unnecessary.  Before Steingall
uttered another word everyone in the room had a foreboding that they
were on the threshold of a discovery which lifted this tragedy into a
prominence far beyond aught they had yet dreamed of.

Except for that momentary touch of amazement in the detective's tone
they could gather nothing from his manner.  But his invariable habit
was to speak to the point, and without the least suggestion of
ambiguity in his words.

"I am very much afraid, gentlemen, that the murdered man is Mr. Henry
B. Hunter," he said.  "I must trouble you to come with me, and place
the question of identity beyond doubt.  I hope that you, Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis, and you, Mr. Devar, will make it convenient to await my return.
There are matters on which you can give me valuable information."

In a few seconds the three found themselves alone.  The clerk had
business to attend to, but he courteously invited them to remain in the
office until the detective came back.

"Did you ever hear such nonsense as this talk about Curtis being mixed
up in an abduction?" began Devar, eager to dispossess his friend's
relatives of any false impressions they might have formed.  "Why, he
didn't know a soul in the States--except yourselves," he added
tactfully.

The uncle, who had been polishing his domed forehead with a large
handkerchief at intervals during the past quarter of an hour, cleared
his throat as a preliminary to some important announcement, but his
better half had only kept silent because of a real fear that her nephew
had been engaged in the commission of serious crime from the instant he
set foot in New York, and she entered the fray vigorously now.

"We don't know much about him, and that's the truth, Mr. Devar," she
cried.  "There was some family disagreement years ago, and the brothers
lost track of each other, but Horace here never forgets a name, and why
should he, seeing that John was his father's name, and Delancy his
mother's, and our nephew has both, so the minute we saw that paragraph
in the Chicago papers about the eminent American engineer who had been
building railways in China being on board the _Lusitania_, I says to
Horace: 'Horace, it would be shame on us if we allowed your brother's
son and your own nephew to arrive in New York without some of his kith
and kin to bid him welcome,' and with that we hustled to catch the next
train east, but the steamer did the trip quicker'n we counted on, and
we just missed being at the docks, so if it hadn't been for our good
luck in finding the man who helped John with his baggage, and who
remembered the name of the hotel he gave the taxi-driver, we might have
been searching New York all this blessed night without dreaming of
coming to such a place as this, because the newspapers spoke so highly
of John that we made sure he would be stopping in one of the Fifth
Avenue hotels like the Waldorf-Astoria or Hoffman House, or perhaps
higher uptown, in the Ritz-Carlton or the Plaza."

Mrs. Curtis was stout, so she yielded perforce to lack of breath, and
Devar was able to explain smilingly that he, and none other, was
responsible for the item in the newspapers.

"The fact is that I took a great liking to John D.," he said.  "He is
such a real good fellow, and so sublimely unconscious of his own
merits, that I wanted to surprise him by starting a modest boom in the
press, so I sent a wireless message about him to a journalistic friend
in New York.  I wondered why the reporters did not get hold of him when
they came aboard at the quarantine station, but I remember now that, by
some curious trick of fate, he and I stowed ourselves away in a part of
the ship where no one was likely to find us, and I clean forgot to put
them on his track when I went below."

"I guess my nephew has attended to the booming proposition on his own
account," said Horace, getting under way at last.

Devar laughed, but Mrs. Curtis was shocked.

"Horace!" she cried indignantly, "that's the only unkind thing I've
heard you say in years.  Oh, yes,"--for her husband had spread his
hands in mild protest--"I know you didn't mean it, but barbed shafts of
humor often fall in places where they hurt, and it is terrible to think
of your nephew being mixed up in a murder, and an abduction, and----"

She broke off in mid-career, and fixed a stern eye on Devar.

"Are you quite sure he didn't get flirting with some giddy young thing
on board?" she demanded.  "I've heard and read of some strange
goings-on among people crossing the Atlantic.  I could tell you of two
marriages and no less than five divorces which----"

Devar was a polite young man, but he thought the situation called for
firmness.

"To the best of my belief, your nephew never so much as spoke to any
lady on the ship," he vowed.  "He read a good deal, and played cards
occasionally, and walked the decks with me when the weather permitted,
but he did not even mention a woman's name except your own, madam."

"The marvel is that he mentioned us at all," said Horace.

Devar thought in his own mind, that the elder Curtis might be ponderous
in body and speech but he certainly revealed horse sense when he opened
his mouth.

"And whose fault was that, I should like to know?" cried Mrs. Curtis.
"Didn't your own brother quarrel with you because you said he ought to
have married a woman of some stability of character, and not a pretty,
feather-headed girl who spent her days reading poetry and her nights in
attending lectures, and who didn't begin to understand the A.B.C. of a
wife's domestic duties?"

"Maybe I was wrong and he was right," said her husband.

"Horace!"

Mrs. Curtis was marshaling her forces for a mighty effort when the door
opened, and Steingall entered, accompanied by a tall, well set-up man
in evening dress, and wearing an open overcoat and green Homburg hat.

"Well," cried Devar, springing forward with outstretched hand, "I'm
mighty glad to see you, John D.!"

The newcomer's face lit with pleasure, but before he could utter a
responsive word Mrs. Curtis gurgled:

"John D.! . . .  Are you John Delancy Curtis? . . .  Horace, is this
your nephew?"

"Judging from his looks, Louisa, he ought to be," said the stout man,
gazing at the stranger with wide-eyed astonishment.

The Christian names of the couple acted like a galvanic battery on
Curtis.  At first, he could hardly believe his ears, but some
resemblance in the portly Curtis to his own father warned him that this
night of nights had not yet exhausted its store of stupefying surprises.

"Why!" he exclaimed, smiling cheerfully, "you must be my uncle and aunt
from Bloomington, Indiana!"

"If you're John Delancy Curtis, that's our correct description," said
Horace.

"Of course he is," chortled Mrs. Curtis.  "He's as like you the day I
married you as two peas in a pod, and if our little Horace had been
spared he would have been his living image.  Nephew, I'm proud to meet
you," and Mrs. Curtis folded her relation in an ample embrace.

Curtis carried off a difficult situation with ease.  He kissed his
aunt, shook hands with his uncle, and was about to answer the lady's
torrent of questions with regard to himself and his own people when
Steingall interfered.

"Sorry to interrupt you," he said, "but the turn taken by to-night's
crime demands your immediate attention, Mr. Curtis.  Do you know you
are wearing the dead man's overcoat?"

"Yes.  I discovered that fact some time ago."

Curtis's prompt admission was more favorable to his cause than he could
possibly realize then, though he had seen that the detective's
extraordinarily brilliant eyes were fixed on the garment's
blood-stained sleeve.

"And have you learnt the owner's name?" went on Steingall quietly.

"Yes, that is, I believe so, owing to a document I found in one of the
pockets."

"Ah, what was that?"

"It concerned another person, but I am prepared to tell you its nature
if it is absolutely essential."

"Believe me, there must be no concealment--now."

Something in the detective's tone conveyed a hint of peril, of
suspicion, to the ears of one so accustomed to dealing with his
fellow-men as was Curtis.  But he shook off the premonition of ill, and
decided, once and for all, to be candor itself where the authorities
were concerned.

"It was a marriage license," he said.

"And the names on it?"

"They were those of a Frenchman, Jean de Courtois, and of an English
lady, Hermione Beauregard Grandison."

"So you have imagined that the man who was killed was this Monsieur
Jean de Courtois?"

For the life of him, Curtis could not prevent the tumultuous pumping of
his heart from drawing some of the color from his face.

"Who else?" he inquired, never flinching from Steingall's searching
gaze.

"No matter who owned the coat, or whom the license was intended for,
the murdered man was no Frenchman, but a New York journalist named
Henry R. Hunter," said Steingall.

Then Curtis yielded to the swift conviction that he had unwittingly
trapped Lady Hermione into a marriage on grounds that were inadequate
and false.

"Good God!" he muttered, and, for the moment, it was impossible for his
hearers to resist the dreadful inference that, in some shape or form,
he was implicated in the outrage which bulked so large in their minds.
Mrs. Curtis wanted to scream aloud, but she dared not.  Even Devar was
staggered by his friend's unaccountable attitude.  The only outwardly
unmoved individual present was Horace P. Curtis.  He turned and pressed
an electric bell; Steingall glared at him, so he explained his action.

"I feel like a highball," he said blandly.  "I guess Mrs. Curtis could
do with one also.  In fact, five highballs would be a bully good
notion."


CHAPTER VII

TEN O'CLOCK

Curtis had seized the opportunity while Hermione was in her room before
dinner to rub the blood-stained sleeve of the overcoat with a wet
cloth.  He had not, of course, been able to eradicate the ghastly dye
wholly from the thick material, but the garment was now wearable, at
any rate by night, and he had little fear of attracting attention as he
crossed the brilliantly lighted foyer of the hotel.

Passing out by the Fifth Avenue exit, he began the second cigar of the
evening, and stood in the porch for a moment to collect his faculties.
The time was five minutes of ten, and he had been married about an hour
and a half.  He had just finished his second dinner, and for the
guerdon of companionship with the charming and gracious girl whom fate
had figuratively thrown into his arms he would cheerfully have tackled
a third meal without any personal qualms as to subsequent indigestion.

But, joking apart, he was married.  That was the overwhelming feature
of life, a feature which dwarfed every other circumstance much as
grimly gigantic Windsor Castle dominates the puny town beneath its
walls.  The mere tying of the matrimonial knot had not troubled him.
He was heart whole and fancy free then--or, not to strain the metaphor,
he could have boasted those attributes a little earlier in the
evening--and he recked nothing of the really serious legal disabilities
incurred by the adventure.  But, like every other young man, his
thoughts had turned sometimes to a young woman--not any special young
woman, but that nebulous entity which is necessarily bound up with the
notion that some day, somewhere, somehow, a man will encounter the maid
in whose limpid eyes lurks his destiny.  He had pictured the desirable
one in day-dreams, and, merely because of his violent antipathy towards
the Eurasian element in the Far East, the dulcissima had appeared
invariably as a tall, slender creature, with the lightest of flaxen
hair and the grayest of gray eyes.  Now, some alchemy devised by the
magician spirit of New York had fashioned his ideal, though slender,
not so tall, and she owned a wealth of brown hair, hair that shone and
glistened in every changing light, while her eyes were either blue or
violet, just as one happened to catch the glint of them.  And she had
fascinating ways, too, which the lady of his fantasy could never have
displayed, or he would not have abandoned the vision so readily.  When
she smiled, it was with lips and eyes in unison.  When she spoke he
heard harmonies not framed in mere words, whereas the other fair dame
was unquestionably a deaf mute.

Indeed, while his glance was dwelling, to all outward semblance, on the
passing traffic of one of New York's busiest thoroughfares, he was
admitting to himself that he was deeply, irrevocably, in love, and the
knowledge was almost stupefying.  To one of Curtis's temperament it
seemed to be a wildly fanciful thing that he should have yielded so
swiftly.  Two hours ago he had not seen Hermione, did not even know her
name, whereas now he breathed it with devout reverence, though, with a
perverseness seldom attached to such circumstances, the amazing fact
that she was his wife formed a stubborn barrier against which the flood
of new-born desire must rage in vain.  For, above all else, he held
dear his plighted word.  He knew now that the marriage offered an
almost insuperable obstacle to any effort on his part to win the girl's
affections.  In her despair she had trusted him, and he awoke with a
guilty start to consciousness of that winsome face being wrung with a
new terror if for one instant she had reason to suspect him of other
than the altruistic motives he had professed in giving her the
protection of his name.

Perhaps, in time--well, he was done now with moon-madness, and he
stepped briskly down the avenue, firm set in purpose to risk everything
for his wife's sake, and let the future rest in the lap of the gods.

This, be it noted, was his first stroll in New York.  The night was
fine and clear, for Rafferty's diagnosis of "a touch of frost in the
air" was becoming justified, and no thoroughfare in the world could
lend itself more completely to the romance of that walk than the
wonderful promenade which leads from Central Park to Madison Square.
With few exceptions, the nineteenth century plutocrat has been ousted
from that section of Fifth Avenue; a giant democracy has reared its own
palaces in the shape of hotels and office buildings which pierce the
skies, stores which rival the proudest mansions of Venice in its heyday
and Florence under Lorenzo Medici.  Never in after life did Curtis
forget that intimate glimpse of the grandeur and wealth of his native
place.  Coming up the harbor by daylight he had been overwhelmed by New
York's proud defiance of the limits imposed by nature, but now, partly
veiled by the mystery of night, the city displayed a feminine beauty at
once entrancing and elusive.

At a cross street he paused for a moment to admire a gem of
architecture wrenched bodily from its Cinque Cento setting by
Brunelleschi, and transplanted to this new land to serve the opulent
need of a vendor of precious stones and metals.  In the strip of dark
blue firmament visible above the admirably proportioned cornice he
caught sight of two planets flaming high in the west, and in close
juxtaposition.  Necessity had made him somewhat of an astronomer, and
he had studied Chinese astrology as a pastime.  He recognized these
lamps of the empyrean as Mars and Venus, and, up-to-date American
though he was, drew comfort from that favoring augury.  Then, in
stepping from the roadway to the sidewalk, he stumbled over a heavy
curb, and laughed at the reminder that star-gazing did not reveal
pitfalls before unwary feet.

The incident knocked some of the poetry out of him, and it was a quite
normal and level-headed young man who walked into the Central Hotel
soon after ten o'clock, and found Detective Steingall's gaze resting on
him contemplatively from the neighborhood of the cigar counter.

Before rejoining the waiting trio in the office, Steingall was
interviewing the youth in charge of the tobacco and current literature
department.

Such story as the boy had to tell was hardly in favor of Curtis.

"The gentleman came here to buy some stamps, and he and a man who was
reading in the café said something to each other in a foreign lingo,"
ran the recital.  "No, I don't think I would recognize French if I
heard it--American is good enough for me--but there was no argument,
nothing in the shape of a quarrel.  The Englishman spoke twice, and the
other fellar three times."

"Mr. Curtis is an American," Steingall explained.

"Well, he doesn't talk like one, anyhow," pronounced young New York--in
this instance, of a pronounced Jewish type--which is perhaps the most
dogmatic juvenility extant.

Then Curtis entered.  He glanced around, and seemed to be gratified by
the discovery that the hotel had lost its inquisitive crowd.  He did
not realize that every newspaper office in New York was alive with
conjecture of which he was the chief figure, and that telegraph and
telephone were carrying his name and fame across the length and breadth
of the country.

"Hello!" he said, hailing Steingall affably, "you here still?  Has
anything turned up with regard to those scoundrels and their
automobile?"

"Not a word--about them," said the detective.

The purveyor of cigars and news was positively awe-stricken.  He was
aware of Steingall's repute as the "man with the microscopic eye," and
he fully expected that the "sleuth's" penetrating organ had already
discerned the word "murderer" branded on Curtis's shirt front.

"What time will you want me in the morning?" went on Curtis, looking in
the direction of the office.  He was really thinking about the mislaid
key; not for an instant did he imagine that by that simple gesture he
had almost eradicated from Steingall's mind the germ of doubt which
events had certainly conspired to plant there.

"I want you now," came the somewhat startling answer.

"Eh, why?"

"Some friends of yours are anxious to see you.  They are in the private
office over there," and Steingall thrust out his chin in the indicative
manner which the Romans used to call _annuens_.

"Oh, Howard Devar, I suppose.  But who else?"

"Come along, Mr. Curtis.  You can stand a pleasant surprise, I am
sure," and, with that, the detective led the way across the hall,
leaving the youthful Jew in a maze of conflicting emotions, for,
according to all the rules of the game as played in the dime novel, the
tec' should have sprung on his prey like a tiger.  Another person whose
nervous system received a shock was the super-clerk.  He, like the boy,
knew of the network of suspicion which had closed on Curtis during the
past two hours, and he had watched the cordial meeting between the two
men with something akin to stupefaction.

But neither of these onlookers had grasped the really essential fact
that Steingall did not say one word as to the hue and cry which
resulted from Curtis's strange disappearance.  The detective was a
master of the art of restraint.  In his own way, he applied to his
profession the maxim of Horace--_Ars est celare artem_.

And he had his reward in that cry of dismay, almost of horror, which
burst from Curtis's lips when he heard the true name of the murdered
man.

Uncle Horace's seemingly maladroit interruption (it raised him to a
pinnacle of esteem in Devar's mind from which he was never dislodged
subsequently) prevented any striking development until a glad-eyed
waiter had entered and taken an order for four highballs.  Even Mrs.
Curtis admitted the need of a stimulant, but Curtis steadily refused
any intoxicant, even the mildest.  Steingall endured the delay
stoically.  He actually held back a sufficient time to allow Horace P.
Curtis to empty his glass with one well-sustained effort.  Then he came
to close quarters with Napoleonic directness.

"I take it you assumed that the dead man was the Jean de Courtois
mentioned in the marriage license?" he said.

He gave that question pride of place in pursuance of a queer thought
which had leaped into his brain during the enforced interval.  But, if
he had been thinking hard, so had Curtis, and the latter had outlined a
plan of action which was fated to disrupt Steingall's, much as a
harmless looking percussion cap may interfere with the smug torpor of a
powder magazine.

"Yes," said Curtis, with the judicial nod of a man who states a
comparatively obvious fact.

"Have you that license?"

"No."

"Where is it?"

"Reposing in the writing-desk of the Rev. Thomas J. Hughes, a minister
of the Protestant Episcopal Church, who lives in 56th Street, near
Seventh Avenue."

"And what is it doing there, pray?"

"I used it.  I have married Lady Hermione Grandison."

Steingall permitted himself the rare luxury of a semi-hysterical break
in his voice.

"What!" he cried.  "Is she the daughter of the Earl of Valletort?"

"Precisely, though you astonish me by the ease with which you connect
two such widely different names.  Such knowledge usually implies a
close acquaintance with the amiable foibles of the British aristocracy."

Certainly it was well that Mrs. Horace P. Curtis had partaken of a
tonic in the shape of a highball.

"Well!" she gasped.

For once she was practically speechless, but she gave the astounded
Devar a pitiless glance which said plainly:

"Wait till I get my breath, young man, and I'll take some of the
cocksureness out of you!"

Steingall soon gathered his scattered wits.

"Are you really speaking seriously, Mr. Curtis?" he asked.

"Quite seriously."

"Was this marriage an arranged affair?"

"Oh, yes.  The marriage itself was prearranged."

"Candidly, I don't understand you."

"No?  I am not surprised.  But I do not wish you to remain under any
misapprehension as to the true state of affairs.  Lady Hermione
Grandison meant to marry a French music-master named Jean de Courtois.
I thought, thought honestly but mistakenly, that the man was dead, and,
as it was of vital importance that her ladyship should get married
to-night, I offered my services as Jean de Courtois' substitute, and
they were accepted."

"Am I to take that statement as literally true?"

"Absolutely."

"You were not acquainted with the lady earlier?"

"No."

"Never seen or heard of her?"

"No."

"How did you come to engage in this--this freak marriage, then?"

Curtis measured Steingall with a contemplative eye.

"You are called on to assimilate a novel idea, and, in consequence, are
choosing your words badly," he said.  "It was not a freak marriage.
Although I may have broken the laws of the State of New York by using a
license issued to some other person, Lady Hermione and I are legally
husband and wife, and no power on earth can dissolve the union without
the expressed consent of one or both of us."

"Do you mean me to accept the bald theory that you first learnt the
lady's name and address from a document discovered in another man's
overcoat, that you went to her house, told her the man was dead, and
suggested that you should become the bridegroom in his stead?"

"As an adjective, 'bald' is--well, bald.  But you've got the affair
sized up accurately otherwise."

"Oh, the shameless hussy!" broke in Mrs. Horace vehemently.

Steingall turned on her with a certain heat of manner.

"Do not interrupt, madam, I beg," he exclaimed.

"Better reserve judgment, aunt, until you have met my wife," said
Curtis.  He spoke gently enough.  He had appraised his relatives almost
at a glance, and was sufficiently broad-minded to allow for the natural
distress of a respectable middle-aged lady who had been whirled, as it
were, out of her wonted environment, and rapt into the realms of
necromancy and Arabian Nights.

Steingall swept aside this intermission with the emphatic hand of a
cross-examining lawyer.

"You say it was 'of vital importance that the lady should be married
to-night.'  What does that imply?"

"Do you wish me to put it in different language?"

"I want to know what the vitally important reason was.  I presume she
furnished one?"

"Ah, but how does that concern the New York police, Mr. Steingall?"

"Every element in this business concerns us.  The license was in
Hunter's possession--was he bringing it to someone named de Courtois?
Or was he masquerading under an alias?"

"Answering your second question, I imagine not.  I have the best of
reasons for believing that Jean de Courtois exists.  I wish now I
hadn't.  Don't you see, Steingall, I am in a deuce of a fix?  I married
the lady under a misapprehension.  She might have really preferred this
fellow, de Courtois."

Steingall liked a joke as well as any man in New York, and was not at
all averse from chaffing some of his less gifted colleagues when their
obtuseness or faithful adherence to the letter of instructions
permitted a criminal to befool them; but he resented the levity of
Curtis's tone now, though, deep in his heart, he felt that he liked the
man.

"You don't seem to realize the peculiarly awkward position in which you
stand," he said, with due official gravity.

"On the contrary, I feel it acutely.  What am I to say to my wife----?"

"I am not wrung with agony over the lady's sensitiveness," broke in the
detective dryly.  "A good many people believe that you were concerned
in this murder.  There are not lacking circumstantial details which
warrant that view.  I am not saying too much when I tell you that some
men, in my shoes, would arrest you forthwith."

Curtis looked at Steingall quizzically, and even laughed with a
whole-hearted appreciation of the jest.

"Lucky for me I have fallen into the hands of a sensible person," he
said.

"Allow me to remark," put in Uncle Horace solemnly, "that Mr. Steingall
has won my unstinted admiration by the way in which he has conducted
this inquiry."

Devar was beginning to enjoy himself.  He alone was able to estimate
Curtis at his true worth; even that astounding marriage was losing some
of its bizarre attributes since Curtis had begun to talk about it.

"Good for you, Mr. Curtis, senior," he crowed delightedly.  "If Indiana
knew what it really wanted it would run you for Governor."

Steingall nearly became angry.  Indeed, it is probable that he would
have expressed his sentiments in strong language were it not for the
presence of Mrs. Curtis.

"Now, sir," he said, with a perceptible stiffening of manner, "let us
have done with pretense.  You strike me as being sane, yet you ask me
to believe that you have acted like a lunatic.  Well, let it go at
that.  Who is this Jean de Courtois, whom Lady Hermione Grandison was
to have married to-night?"

"My wife tells me that he is a French music-master whom she hired to
marry her in order that she might escape from a pestiferous person
named Count Ladislas Vassilan," replied Curtis with cool directness.
"She brought the obliging individual with her from Paris for the
purpose, and paid him a thousand dollars as a sort of retaining fee.
From what little I have seen of her, she impresses me as a charming
girl wholly without experience of a world which, though not altogether
wicked, is nevertheless callous and self-seeking.  Among other
drawbacks, she embarked on a fantastic project with a most disingenuous
belief in the good faith of a Frenchman.  Now, I admire France as a
nation, but where women are concerned, I distrust Frenchmen as a race,
and I suspect--mind you, I am merely guessing--but I repeat that I
suspect the honesty of Monsieur Jean de Courtois in this matter.  There
was no earthly reason why he should not have married Lady Hermione some
weeks ago, but it is clear that he has used every artifice to delay the
ceremony until to-night--and, it may be found when we learn the facts,
was prepared to put it off once more till to-morrow or next day.  Why?
In my opinion, the reason is not far to seek.  The Earl of Valletort
and Count Ladislas Vassilan were crossing the Atlantic hot in pursuit
of the unwilling bride.  They arrived in New York to-night, and were so
well posted in events, both past and prospective, that they headed
straight for the flat in which Lady Hermione was living with her maid.
Naturally, I am keenly interested in the causes which led up to a
peculiarly brutal and uncalled-for murder, and, as my wife's husband, I
have the further incentive of hoping to bring to justice certain of her
persecutors whom I cannot help connecting indirectly with the crime of
which I was, I suppose, one of the most credible and intelligent
witnesses.  Now, before I was aware that such a winsome creature
existed as the present Lady Hermione Curtis, I had estimated the
murderers as Hungarians, two of them at any rate, since I am hardly
prepared to vouch for the chauffeur.  Count Ladislas Vassilan is a
Hungarian.  The poor fellow who was killed, though his name is American
enough, spoke French with a pure accent.  One of the Hungarians spoke
French, fluently but vilely.  Jean de Courtois is admittedly a
Frenchman.  I am not a detective, Mr. Steingall, but as a plain man of
affairs I am forced to the conclusion that there has seldom been a
similarly mysterious crime in which certain lines of inquiry thrust
themselves more pertinently on the imagination.  To sum up, I advise
you to find Jean de Courtois--unless, indeed, he, too, has been
killed--and you will be in close touch with the origin of the whole
ugly business."

"Good egg!" cried the irresistible Devar.  "It's a pity you were not
with us on the _Lusitania_, Mr. Steingall, or you would realize that
when John D. rears up on his hind legs, and talks like that, there is
nothing more to be said."

"Is Lady Hermione a pretty girl?" demanded Mrs. Curtis eagerly.  Her
democratic soul was rejoicing in the discovery that her nephew's wife
did not lose her title because of the marriage.  Of course, no one ever
before heard of such folly as this matrimonial leap in the dark, but,
once taken, there was satisfaction in the thought that the bride was an
earl's daughter.  Moreover, she had read of such queer goings on among
the British Aristocracy that a wedding at sight was a comparatively
venial offense.

Curtis assured his aunt that Hermione was the most beautiful and
fascinating person he had ever met, and Steingall listened to the
eulogy with a grinning rictus of jaw.  In the whole course of his
professional experience he had never encountered anything on a par with
this capricious blend of comedy and tragedy.

Of course, it did not escape his acute brain that Curtis was right in
assuming that the _clou_ of the situation lay with Jean de Courtois.
Dead or alive, the Frenchman must be found, and found quickly.  The
extraordinary story told by Curtis, if true--and the detective was
persuaded that this curiously constituted young man was not trying to
hoodwink him in any particular--pointed a ready way toward
investigation.  The unfortunate journalist, Hunter, was about to enter
the Central Hotel when he was attacked so mercilessly.  As a
consequence, some knowledge of de Courtois was probably awaiting the
first questioner at the inquiry counter.  What a whimsical incongruity
it would be if he were told that the French music-master around whom
the inquiry pivoted was within arm's length all the time!  He had
actually turned to the door in order to summon the hotel clerk when
that worthy himself knocked and entered.

"The Earl of Valletort is here, and wishes to have a word with you, Mr.
Steingall," he said.

The detective's present grim conceit ran somewhat to the effect that if
he remained long enough in the Central Hotel he would accumulate
sufficient evidence to electrocute three criminals, at least, and send
others to the penitentiary, but he merely nodded and said:

"Show his lordship right in."

He was conscious of a dramatic pause in the conversation which had
broken out between the others.  Once again had Mrs. Curtis been
rendered dumb by the shock of an unforeseen development.  Devar, who
was having the night of his life, leaned back against the wainscot,
Uncle Horace peered hopelessly into an empty tumbler, but dared not
suggest a second highball, while Curtis, after one sharp glance at the
detective, whom he credited with having arranged this surprise in some
inexplicable way, thrust his hands into his trousers' pockets and
awaited the advent of Hermione's father with a calmness that he himself
could hardly account for.  Hitherto, his adventurous life had been made
up of strenuous effort tempered by the Anglo-Saxon phlegm which
disregards dangers and difficulties.  Prolonged strain of an emotional
nature was new to him.  He understood, but did not apply the knowledge,
that when the human vessel is full to the brim with excitement, the
earth may rock and the heavens roll together in fury without the power
to add one more drop of gall or distress to the completed measure.  At
that instant, if the Earl of Valletort had been accompanied by the
embodied ghosts of his ancestors, Curtis would have viewed the
procession with unconcern.

The Earl, a handsome slightly built, erect man of fifty, hawk-nosed,
keen-eyed, with drooping mustache and carefully arranged thin gray
hair, glanced at Curtis as he might have regarded any other stranger.

"I have disposed of my friend," he said to Steingall, "and I hurried
back here on off-chance that you might still be engaged in----"

"Before your lordship enters into details, allow me to introduce Mr.
John D. Curtis," said Steingall, silently thanking the fates which had
brought about a meeting so opportune to his own task if embarrassing to
its chief actors.

"Mr. John D. Curtis, the--the person who conspired with my daughter to
contract an illegal marriage!" barked the Earl, instantly dropping the
repose of Vere de Vere.

"John Delancy Curtis, at any rate," said Curtis gravely.  "As your
son-in-law, may I remark that a few minutes' conversation with a lawyer
will enable you to correct two misstatements in the rest of your
description?  There was no conspiracy, and the ceremony was
unquestionably legal."

The Earl gave him one searching and envenomed look, and appealed
forthwith to the detective.

"I charge that man with abduction and personation," he cried, and his
voice grew husky with wrath.  "There can be no gainsaying the facts.
My daughter, it is true, had arranged a marriage with a Monsieur Jean
de Courtois.  It was provisionally fixed to take place this evening at
eight o'clock, but, by some means not known to me, the marriage license
came into the hands of this admitted law-breaker, and he evidently
persuaded a foolish and impetuous girl to accept him instead of de
Courtois.  I am not an authority on the laws of the State of New York,
but I stake my reputation on the belief that a flagrant offense has
been committed against the social ordinances of any well regulated
community.  I now call on you to arrest him, or, if official process is
needed, to direct me to the proper authority."

"Have you any proof of the charge?" said Steingall, who had not failed
to observe Curtis's air of unconcern under the Earl's fiery
denunciation.

"Proof in plenty," came the snarling answer.  "I have seen the license
and the signed register, and Monsieur de Courtois is known to me
personally.  Besides, have you not this rascal's own admission?"

"Why omit the equally damning evidence of conspiracy?" demanded Curtis.

"What do you mean, you, you----"

"Interloper.  How will that serve?  It was you who spoke of conspiring,
though I grant you seem to have dropped that item of the indictment.
But Mr. Steingall, as representing the law, should hear the full tale
of villainy.  If your lordship will produce de Courtois's letters,
cablegrams, and wireless messages to yourself and your confederate,
Count Ladislas Vassilan, he will begin to appreciate the true bearing
of a rather intricate inquiry."

It was a chance shot, but it went home.  Curtis had not spent ten years
in counteracting Manchu scheming and duplicity without arriving at
certain basic principles in laying bare the methods of double-dealing,
and the Earl of Valletort was manifestly disturbed by this cold
analysis of facts which he imagined were known to an exceedingly
limited circle in New York.

But he had the presence of mind to waive aside Curtis's allegations as
unworthy of discussion.

"I address myself to you," he said to Steingall.  "Have I made my
request clear, or shall I repeat it?"

"Have you any objection to answering a few questions, my lord?" said
the detective.

"None whatsoever."

"When did you and Count Vassilan arrive in New York?"

"At twenty minutes after eight to-night."

"How did you ascertain what was happening with regard to your daughter?"

"By inquiry."

"Of course, but from whom?"

"From the minister who performed an unauthorized ceremony."

"How did you know where to go so promptly to secure information?"

"I was kept informed of my daughter's movements by agents."

"Who were they?"

"Their names will be given at the right time."

"The right time is now."

"You are not a magistrate.  I take it you are a police officer."

"Your lordship may feel well assured on that point.  It is exactly
because I am a police officer that I press for a reply.  Your grievance
against Mr. John D. Curtis is much more of a matter for a civil than a
criminal court.  I guess he has broken the law, but the machinery for
putting it in motion is not under my control.  I am investigating a
murder, and every word you have said confirms my belief that your
daughter's contemplated marriage was the indirect but none the less
certain cause of the crime.  Now, Lord Valletort, who were your inquiry
agents?"

"Ha!" muttered Uncle Horace.

It was a simple enough ejaculation, but it served to drive home the
nail which the detective's outspoken declaration had hammered into the
Earl's startled consciousness.  Here, in truth, was a new and
disturbing phase of the matrimonial problem contrived by Hermione,
aided and abetted by that mischievous scoundrel, Curtis.  Still, he was
not one to be driven easily into a corner.

"You practically refer me to a lawyer for advice; I take you at your
word," he said, with a quick return to the self-controlled attitude of
an experienced man of the world.

"You decline, then, to answer the only vitally important question I
have put to you?" said Steingall.

"I decline to answer that question until I have consulted someone
better able--or shall I say, more willing?--to instruct me as to the
speediest means of punishing a malefactor."

"The noble lord is disqualified," broke in Devar.  "This is the second
time since the flag fell that he has refused his fences."

"If you interrupt again I shall turn you out of the room, Mr. Devar,"
cried Steingall vexedly.

"But, dash it all, Steingall, somebody must see that John D. has fair
play.  He only swerved once, and then for a single stride, while he----"

"I shall not warn you a second time," and Devar knew that the detective
meant what he said, and kept quiet.

"May I ask where the police headquarters are situated?" said the Earl
in the frostiest tone he could command at the moment.

"At the corner of Center Street and Grand," said Steingall
indifferently.  He was about to add the unpleasing fact--unpleasing to
Lord Valletort, that is--that the man on duty at the Detective Bureau
would certainly refer an inquirer to him, Steingall, when the clerk
reappeared.

"A patrolman has brought a note for you," he said, handing Steingall a
sealed letter, which the detective opened instantly after glancing at
the superscription.  It was from the police captain, and ran:


"Count Vassilan has just left the Waldorf-Astoria in a taxi.  Clancy is
driving."


Steingall's face betrayed no more expression than that of the Sphinx,
though inwardly he was consumed with laughter; he himself was chief of
the Bureau, and Clancy was his most trusted assistant!  Certainly, the
gods were contriving a spicy dish for the news-loving inhabitants of
New York.


CHAPTER VIII

TEN-THIRTY

The Earl of Valletort turned on his heel, and went out abruptly.
Therefore, he missed Steingall's first words to the hotel clerk, which
would have given him furiously to think, while it is reasonable to
suppose that he would have paid quite a large sum of money to have
heard the clerk's answer.

For the detective said:

"Do you happen to know anything about a Frenchman, name of Jean de
Courtois?"

And the clerk replied:

"Why, yes.  He's in his room now, I believe."

"In his room--where?"

"Here, of course.  He came in about 6.30, took his key and a
Marconigram, and has not showed up since."

Uncle Horace could withstand the strain no longer.

"Would you mind sending the waiter again?" he gasped.  "If I don't get
a pick-me-up of some sort quickly, I'll collapse."

Aunt Louisa would dearly have loved to put in a word, but she knew not
what to say.  Life at Bloomington supplied no parallel to the rapidity
of existence in New York that evening.  She was aware of statements
being made in language which rang familiarly in her ears, but they had
no more coherence in her clogged understanding than the gabble of
dementia.

Steingall was the least surprised of the five people who listened to
the clerk's words.  The notion that de Courtois might be close at hand
had dawned on him already; still, he was not prepared to hear that the
man was actually a resident in the hotel.

"Has Monsieur de Courtois lived here some time?" he asked, not without
a sharp glance at Curtis to see how the suspect was taking this new
phase in his adventure.

"About a month," said the clerk.

"Has he received many visitors?"

"A few, mostly foreigners.  A Mr. Hunter called here occasionally, and
they dined together last evening.  I believe Mr. Hunter is connected
with the press."

The clerk wondered why he was being catechized about the Frenchman.  He
had no more notion that de Courtois and Hunter were connected with the
tragedy than the man in the moon.

"Take me to Monsieur de Courtois's room," Said Steingall, after a
momentary pause.

"May I come with you?" inquired Curtis.

"Why?"

"I am deeply interested in de Courtois, and I may be able to help you
in questioning him.  I speak French well."

"So do I," said Steingall.  "But, come if you like."

If he loved glory like the true artist that he was, "he never tired
himself in its pursuit."

Perhaps he had an instinctive feeling that it would come to him some
day unsought.

He might, in this regard, be reproached for the tardiness of his
successes; he himself made difficulties and obstacles which might
be considered as the effects of extreme pride.

Halévy once suggested his singing at the Tuilleries before King Louis
Philippe and his family.

"I only sing to my friends," replied the artist.

"That is strange," said the author of "The Jewess," "Lablache and
Duprez go whenever they are asked."

"Delsarte does not."
"But consider!

This is to be a party given by the Crown Prince to his father."
This last consideration touched the obstinate heart.

"Well!

I will go," he said, "but it is only on three conditions: I must be the
only singer; I am to have the chorus from the Opera to accompany me;
and I am not to be paid."

"You will establish a dangerous precedent."
"Those are my irrevocable terms."

All were granted.

From his youth up Delsarte manifested this, perhaps excessive,
contempt for money.

On one occasion it was quite justifiable. Father Bambini had taken him
to a party where he was to sing on very advantageous terms.
The scholar was treated with deference; but the teacher who had
neither a fine face nor the claims of youth to shield him against
aristocratic prejudice, was received much as a servant would
have been who had made a mistake in the door.

The young singer felt the blood mantle his brow, and his heart
rebelled.

"Take your hat and let us go!" he said to his old master.

"But why?" replied the good man. He had heeded nothing but his pupil's
success.

Delsarte dragged him away in spite of his protests, and lost by his
abrupt departure the profits of the evening.

Chapter XI.

Delsarte's Family.

Delsarte married, in 1833, Miss Rosina Andrien.

The young husband felt a high esteem for his father-in-law (primo
basso cantante at the Opera); but we must not suppose that this
consideration influenced his choice.

He made a love marriage such as one makes at the age of twenty-two,
with such a nature as his.

Moreover, reason was never in closer accord with love.

Miss Andrien was remarkably beautiful. She was fifteen; her talent as
a pianist had already won her a first prize at the Conservatory.
She was just the companion, wise and devoted, to counterbalance the
flights of imagination and the momentary transports inherent in
the temperament of many artists.

I pause, fearing to wound a modesty which I know to be very
sensitive:
the living cannot bear praise with the indifference of the dead;
but I must be allowed to insist upon the valuable assistance which
the young wife lent her husband in his professional duties; this
is a special part of my subject.

Mme.

Delsarte started with a genuine talent. The situation in which she
was placed, soon made her a perfect accompanist. Never was there more
perfect harmony between singer and player. Amid the incessant interruptions
necessary to a lesson, the piano never lagged a second either in
stopping or in going on again. The note fell promptly, identical
with the first note of the piece under study. To attain to this obedient
precision, one must possess indomitable patience, must be willing
to be utterly effaced.

Delsarte appreciated this self-denial in proportion to the merit
of her who practiced it.

In everything that concerned him, he relied especially upon the opinion
of his accompanist; he felt her to be an abler and more serious judge
than the most of those around him.

But--with the shy reserve of merit unacknowledged even to itself,--the
young woman shrank from expressing her impressions.

If I may judge by the anecdote which follows, the artist was at
times distressed by this.

One day Delsarte, granting one of those favors of which he was never
lavish, consented to sing a composition of which he was particularly
fond, to a few friends.

It was the air from Méhul's "Joseph:" "Vainly doth Pharaoh ..."
Mme. Delsarte, always ready at the first call, took her seat at the
piano.

The master was in the mood--that is, in full possession of all his
powers.

His pathos was heartrending.

"You won a great triumph," I said to him; "I saw tears in Mme.

Delsarte's eyes."

"My wife's eyes," he cried as if struck by surprise, "are you
quite sure?"
"Perfectly," I replied.

He seemed greatly pleased.

Putting aside all other feeling, it was no slight triumph to move to
such a point one who assisted at and sat through his daily lessons
for hours at a time.

A few years sufficed to form a family around this very young couple.

It was soon a charming accessory to see children fluttering about
the house; slipping in among the scholars; showing a furtive head--dark
or light--at one of the doors of the lecture-room. Let me recall their
names: The eldest were Henri, Gustave, Adrien, Xavier, Marie; then
came after a long interval, André and Madeleine.

Delsarte loved them madly; for their future he dreamed all the dreams
of the Arabian Nights. Meantime, he played with them so happily that
he seemed to take a personal delight in it.

He gave them all the joys of this life that were within his reach, and
it was well that he did so! Alas!

of the dreams of glory cherished for these beloved beings, some few
were realized, but many faded promptly with the existence of those
who called them forth.

But we must not anticipate. At the time of which I speak the children
were growing and developing, each according to its nature, in full
freedom.

Those who felt a vocation seized on the wing--rather than they received
from irregular lessons--some fragments of that great art which was
taught in the school.

Marie learned while very young to reproduce with marvelous skill
what were called _the attitudes_ and the physiognomic changes.

Madeleine delighted in making caricatures which showed great talent.
The features of certain pupils and frequenters of the lectures were
plainly recognizable in these sketches made by a childish hand.

Gustave was a child of an open face and broad shoulders. One incident
will show his originality.

A strange lady came to the master's house one day either to ask a
hearing or offer a pupil.

She met this charming boy.

"M. Delsarte?" she asked.

"I am he, madam!" replied Gustave without flinching.

"Very good," said his questioner, laughing, "but I wish to speak to
your father."
This same Gustave who, to a certain degree, followed in his
father's footsteps, was struck down a few years after him, at the age
of forty-two.

What a striking application of Victor Hugo's lines:

"And both are dead.... Oh Lord, all powerful is thy right hand!"
Gustave's career seemed to open readily and smoothly. Not that
he could approach his father from a dramatic point of view; he had
not his absolute synthesis of talents, and his figure was not suited
to the theatre; as a singer, his voice was weak, but what a charm
and what a style he had!

Although his voice was not adapted to every part, although he had not
that range of the vocal scale which permits one to attack any and
every composition, still, its sympathetic, tender and penetrating quality
did ample justice to all that is most exquisite in romance.

When you had once heard that voice, guided by the force of his father's
grand method, you never forgot its sincerity and melancholy; it
haunted you and left you impatient to hear it again.

As a concert-singer and teacher, Gustave Delsarte might have won
high rank.

An ill-assorted marriage and his misanthropic character prevented.
As a composer, he left some few songs, masses and religious fragments
which are not without merit. When he was to produce any of his sacred
works, the composer-singer never took a part; but he would lead
the orchestra.

If he came to a rehearsal and the performers appeared weak, a
holy wrath would seize upon Gustave. Then he flung a firm, incisive,
accentuated note into the midst of the choir, vivid as a spark
bursting from a fire covered with ashes. He would accompany it with
a glance which seemed to flash from his father's eye; at such moments,
he resembled him; but this transformation never lasted more than a
second; the fictitious power disappeared as all which was Gustave
Delsarte was doomed to disappear.

At least, his father did not live to mourn his loss.

And yet he knew that worst of heart-suffering: the loss of a beloved
child. Alas! In that radiant family, whose mirth, fresh faces and
luxuriant health seemed to defy death, the implacable foe had already
twice swept his scythe.

The first to go was André, one of the latest born. He was at the age when
the child leaves no lasting memories behind; but we know the grace
of innocence, the privilege of impeccability by which infancy atones
for the lack of acquirements.

Then these little creatures have the mysterious entrancing smiles, which
mothers understand and adore--and Delsarte loved his children with
a mother's heart.

Time lessens such pangs; but when a fresh sorrow re-opened the era
of calamity, it seems as if the sad events trod upon each other's
heels and the interval between seems to have been but one unmitigated
agony.

The loss undergone in 1863 was even greater. Xavier Delsarte was
a tall, handsome young man.

The master was content with the profit which his son had derived
from his tuition. He was successful as a singer and elocutionist.
He was attacked by cholera during an epidemic. The night before he
had taken several glasses of iced orgeat in the open air.

Xavier lived in the Rue des Batailles with his family, but not in the
same apartment. This fact was fatal.

Instead of calling help in the first stages--unwilling to disturb his
relatives--the invalid wandered down stairs during the night, and
into the court-yard. There he drank water from the pump. I can still
recall the unhappy father's story of that cruel moment.

"It was scarcely day. I was waked by that unexpected, fatal ringing of
the bell, which, at such an hour, always bodes misfortune. The maid
heard it also, and opened the door. She uttered a cry of alarm. Almost
instantly, my poor boy stood at my chamber door. He leaned against
the frame of the door, his strength not allowing him to advance. From
the change in his features, I understood all--he was hopelessly lost!"

Delsarte was sensitive and of a very loving nature; but he was endowed
with great strength. Much absorbed, moreover, in his profession, his
studies, his innovations, he often found in them a counterpoise
to these rude blows of fate.

So when the thoughts of his friends recur to these disasters, they
feel that their greatest sympathy and commiseration are due to the
mother who three times underwent this supreme martyrdom.

Two names remain to be mentioned in this family where artistic
callings seemed a matter of course.

The concerts of Madame Thérèsa Wartel--sister of Madame Delsarte--brought
together the _élite_ of Parisian virtuosi, and the brilliant pianist
took her part in the quatuors in which Sauzay, Allard, Franchomme
and other celebrities of the period figured.

George Bizet--author of the opera of "Carmen"--prematurely snatched
from the arts, was the nephew of François Delsarte.

This young man taught himself Sanscrit unaided; he inspired the
greatest hopes.

Wartel, who gave Christine Nilsson her musical education, was not
of the same blood, but we find certain points in his method which
recall the processes of Delsarte's school.

Chapter XII.

Delsarte's Religion.

I now confront an important and very interesting subject; but one
which is more difficult to handle than the most prickly briers.

There has been a confusion, in regard to Delsarte, of two very distinct
things: his practical devotion and his philosophy of art, which does
indeed assume a religious character. He himself helped on this confusion.
I am desirous of doing my best to put an end to it. I hope that,
truth and sincerity aiding, I shall not find the task too great
for me.

I must first grapple with those ill-informed persons who have denied the
master his high intellectual faculties, and even his scientific
discoveries, for the sole reason of the mystical side of his beliefs.

I must also expose the error of those who supposed that to this
mysticism were attributable the miracles accomplished by Delsarte
in his career as artist and scholar.

I was the better able to understand these two opposing
elements--religiousness and strength of understanding--because, if
I gave in my entire adhesion to the innovator in the arts, he did
not find me equally docile in what concerned the theosophic part
of his doctrine.

Hence, discussions which illustrated the subject. I speak in presence
of his memory as I did before him, with perfect frankness and simplicity
of heart; taking care not to offend the objects of his veneration,
but examining without regard to his memory, as without prejudice,
the influence which his convictions exerted upon his intellectual
conceptions, his ideas, his character, his talent--in a word, his
life, in so far as it may concern a sketch which lays no claim to
be a complete biography.

Now, it is from the point of view of art itself that I ask the
following questions: Was Delsarte a devout Catholic?

Was he orthodox?

Devout? He gloried in it, he insisted on it; I will not say that
he _affected_ minute daily acts of devotion, for that word would not
accord with the spontaneity of his nature; but he accented his
demonstrations, he spoke constantly of his religion.

Without any intention to wrong the serious side of his religious
feelings, it seemed to be a bravado put on for the incredulous, a
toy which he converted into a weapon.

Orthodox? He made it his boast, and he certainly intended to be so;
he loved, in many circumstances, to show his humility of heart. His
faith, he used to say, "was the charcoal-burner's faith."

And yet, the charcoal-burner would have been strangely puzzled if
he had had to sustain the ceaseless contests which the artist
accepted or provoked from philosophers and free-thinkers; and,
perhaps, no less frequently, from his fellow-religionists, and the
priests themselves.

With the former, it was a mere question of dogmatic forms or of the
necessity for some form of religion; with the latter, he entered upon
a more peculiarly theological order of ideas, such as the attributes
proper to each of the three divine persons, and other mystical
subjects.

Here, as elsewhere, Delsarte brought to bear his personality, his stamp,
his breadth of comprehension.

I once asked him what some called _Dominations_ might represent, in
the celestial classification? He replied: "If any one or anything
forces itself upon our mind, takes active possession of our soul,
do we not feel that we are under a certain domination?"
He gave me several other explanations touching the angelic hierarchy.
I considered them very poetic, very ingenious--but were they also orthodox?
I am not competent to judge.

It was impossible to say at the first glance, how the influence of this
theosophy made itself felt in this sensitive character, full as
it was of surprises.

Delsarte was born good, generous, above the petty tendencies which
deform and degrade the human type.

On these diverse points, religious faith could scarcely show its effect;
but he also declared himself to be irritable and violent--he confessed
to a dangerous fickleness--still, he would readily have slandered himself
in the interests of his faith.

Whatever the cause of this acquired serenity, Delsarte did not
always refuse to satisfy his native impulses.

I have already alluded to cases in which these returns to impetuous
vivacity occurred, and how he rose above these relapses.

Whether his peaceful spirit arose from religious feeling, or whether it
was the result of moral strength, it breathed the spirit of the
gospel; but it must also be confessed that our artist mingled with
it much worldly grace.

What matters it? Uncertainty has no inconveniences in such a matter.

It was particularly on the occasion of those sudden fits of passion
to which the human conscience does not always attach due weight,
that Delsarte laid great stress upon supernatural intervention.

Oh!

what would he have done without that powerful aid, with his lively
sensibilities--with his too loving heart?

I have no opinion to offer in regard to the shield which efficacious
grace and the palladium of the faith may form for dangerous tendencies;
for Catholics, that is a matter for the casuist or the confessor
to decide; but, as far as Delsarte is concerned, had he beaten down
Satan in a way to rouse the jealousy of St.

Michael, had he made the heathen Socrates give precedence to
him in patience, wisdom and firmness, I should regard that victory
as the triumph of the sacred principles of the eternal morality, of
that which sums up, in a single group, all the supreme precepts
of all religions and all philosophies, rather than as a result of
external practices.

It is by placing myself at this culminating point, that I have
succeeded in explaining to my own satisfaction the true stimulus
of the artist-thinker, in spite of all appearances and all
contradictions; and everything leads me to believe that the elevation
of his mind and the inspiration of the art which he taught and
practiced, would have sufficed, in equal proportion with his faith,
"to deliver him from evil."

How could a man glide into the lower walks of life, whose mission it
was to set forth the types of moral beauty by opposing them, to
use his phrase, "to the hideousnesses of vice?"

Now, talent and faith meet face to face. We are to consider to what
extent the one was dependent upon the other; and whether, in reality,
the artist whom so many voices proclaimed "incomparable" owed his vast
superiority to acts of religious devotion, to his adhesion to the dogmas
of the church.

It is not arbitrarily that a transcendent intellect pointed out a
difference between _religion_ and _religions_: every mind devoted
to philosophy must needs reach this distinction.

I shall keep strictly within the limits of that which concerns art, in
a question so vast and of such great importance.

_Religion_ is that need which all generations of men have felt for
establishing a relationship between man and the supreme power or powers
whence man supposes he proceeded. To some it is an outburst of gratitude
and homage; to others, an instinct of terror which makes them fall
prostrate before an unknown being upon whom they feel themselves
dependent, although they cannot know him, still less define him.

_Religions_ are all which men have established in answer to those
aspirations of the conscience, to satisfy that intuition which forces
itself upon our mind so long as sophistry has not warped it.
It follows from this, that religions vary, are changed, and may be
falsified until the primitive meaning is lost. But whatever may be
the faith and the rites of religions--whether fanaticism disfigure
them or fetichism make a caricature of them, whether politicians
use them as an ally, or the traces of the apostolate fade beneath
the materialism of speculation,--there will always remain at the
bottom, _religion_: that is, the thought which keeps such or such
a society alive for a variable time, and which, in periods of
transition, seeks refuge in human consciences awaiting a fresh
social upward flight.

Well! it was not the external part of his belief which inspired
Delsarte, when--to use the expression of the poet Reboul--"he
showed himself like unto a god!"

It was not the long rosary with its large beads which often dangled at
his side, that gave him the secret of heart-tortures and
soul-aspirations!

The _charcoal-burner's faith_ would never have taught him that captivating
grace, that supreme elegance of gesture and attitude, which made
him matchless. Nor did theology and dogma teach him the moving effects
which made people declare that he performed miracles, and led several
writers (Henry de Riancey, Hervet) to say: "That man is not an
artist, he is art itself!"

And Fiorentino, a critic usually severe and exacting, wrote: "This
master's sentiment is so true, his style so lofty, his passion so
profound, that there is nothing in art so beautiful or so perfect!"
_Profound passion, lofty style, art itself_, these are not learned
from any catechism. That chosen organism bore within its own breast
the fountains of beauty.

An artist, he derived thence an inward illumination, and, as it were,
a clear vision of the Ideal. If religion was blended with it, it was
that which speaks directly to the heart of all beings endowed with
poetry, to those who are capable of vowing their love to the
worship of sublime things.

What I have just said will become more comprehensible if I apply
to Delsarte those more especially Christian words: _The spirit and
the letter_.

Yes, in him there was the spiritual man and the literal man; and if
either compromised the other, it was not in the eyes of persons who
attended, regularly enough to understand them, the lectures and lessons
of the brilliant professor.

This I have already said, and I shall dwell upon this point, hoping to
establish some harmony between those who taxed Delsarte with madness
on account of his _positivism_ in the matter of faith, and those who
strove to connect with his devotional habits everything exceptional
which that great figure realized in his passage through this world.

In fact, it is only by separating the Delsarte of _the spirit_ from
him of _the letter_, that we can form any true idea of him.

And the letter, once again--was it not art and poetry that made worship
so dear to him?

The shadowy light of the churches, the stern majesty of the vaulted
roof, contrasting with the radiant circle of light within which
reposed the sacred wafer,--all this pomp, of heathen origin, warmed
for him the severe simplicity and cold austerity of Christian
sentiment; the chants and prayers uttered in common also stimulated
the fervid impulses of his heart.

He only meant to spare her the dismay which could
hardly fail to manifest itself when she heard that de Courtois was
alive, and that additional complications must now arise with reference
to the wrongful use of the marriage license; in reality, he was doing
himself a bitter injustice.

But, having elected for a definite course, he was not a man who would
deviate from it by a hair's breadth.  When the junta in the vestibule
of the Plaza Hotel had promised to remain mute on the topic of de
Courtois, he dismissed the matter from his mind as having no further
influence on the night's doings.

"Is there any means of recovering my overcoat?" he asked Steingall,
remembering the change of garments when a waiter asked if the gentlemen
cared to deposit their hats and coats in the cloak-room.

"Yes," said the detective.  "Just empty the pockets of the coat you are
wearing, and I'll send a messenger to the police station-house with a
note.  You won't mind if I retain your documents till after the
inquest?  One never knows what questions will be asked, and you must
remember that an attempt may be made to fasten the crime upon you."

Curtis laughed at the absurdity of any such notion, but, for the first
time, he examined the contents of the dead man's coat pockets
methodically.  The pocket in which the license had reposed was empty.
Its fellow contained a notebook and pencil.  There were also some
newspaper cuttings--items of current interest in New York, but devoid
of bearing on the crime or its cognate developments.

An elastic band caused the book to open at a definite page, and
Steingall, who knew a little of everything, and a great deal of all
matters appertaining to his profession, deciphered some shorthand
characters which promised enlightenment.  He passed no comment,
however, but pocketed the book, scribbled a few lines on a sheet of
paper bearing the name of the hotel, and intrusted coat and letter to
an attendant.

Uncle Horace, after a momentary qualm, gave instructions to the
head-waiter in the approved manner of a trust magnate.

"We're up against it now, Louisa," he whispered confidentially to his
wife, "so let's have one wonderful night if we never have another."

Mrs. Curtis nodded her complete agreement.  She would have sanctioned a
mortgage on her home rather than forego any material part of an
experience which would command the breathless attention of many a
future gathering of matrons and maids in faraway Bloomington.

Lady Hermione received her visitors with a shy cordiality which won
their prompt approval.  Aunt Louisa had been perplexed by indecision as
to what she was to say or how she was to act when she met the bride,
but one glance of her keen, motherly eyes at the blushing and timid
girl resolved any doubts on both scores.

"God bless you, my dear!" she said, throwing her arms around Hermione's
neck and kissing her heartily.  "Perhaps everything is for the best,
and, anyway, you've married into a family of honest men and true women."

"Ma'am," said Uncle Horace, when his turn came to be introduced,
"strange as it may sound, I know less about my nephew than you
yourself, but if he resembles his father in character as he does in
appearance, you've chosen well, and let me add, ma'am, that _he_ seems
to have made a first-rate selection at sight."

Of course, such congratulations were woefully misplaced, but Hermione
was too well-bred to reveal any cause for disquietude other than the
normal embarrassment any young woman would display in like conditions.

Curtis, too, put in a quiet word which threw light on the situation.

"As I told you a few minutes since, I was not aware that my uncle and
aunt were in New York," he said.  "I cannot even guess how they came to
find me so opportunely, and we have hardly been able to say a word to
each other yet, because they were in the thick of the police inquiry
when I met them in my hotel."

"Why, that's the easiest thing," declared Aunt Louisa, rejoicing in a
long-looked-for opportunity to hear her own voice in full volume.
"This young gentleman here," and she nodded at the dismayed Devar,
"told us that he cottoned to your husband, my dear, something
remarkable on board the steamer, so he sent a message by wireless to
the editor of a New York paper, asking him to let America know that one
of her citizens who had won distinction in China was homeward bound,
and the editor circulated a real nice paragraph about it.  It quite
took my breath away when Mrs. Harvey, our mayor's wife--such a charming
woman, my dear, and I do hope I may have the pleasure of bringing you
to one of her delightful tea-and-bridge afternoons--said to me on
Monday: 'Surely, Mrs. Curtis, this John Delancy Curtis who is on board
the _Lusitania_ must be a son of that brother of your husband who died
in China some years ago?' and I said: 'What in the world are you
talking about, Mrs. Harvey?' so she showed me the newspaper, and I was
that taken aback that I revoked in the next hand, and the only mean
player we have in the club claimed three tricks 'without,' and went
game, being a woman herself who hasn't chick nor child, but devotes far
too much time and money to toy dogs; anyhow, I couldn't give my mind to
cards any more that day, so off I rushed home and 'phoned Horace, and
here we are, after such a flurry as you never would imagine, what
between packing in a hurry for the trip east, and missing the steamer's
arrival by nearly an hour, and turning up in the Central Hotel just in
time to hear----"  Then Aunt Louisa, assuredly at no loss for words,
but remembering in a hazy way the compact made in the vestibule, found
it incumbent on her to break away from the main trend of the narrative,
so she concluded: "Just in time to hear things being said about our
nephew which we felt bound to deny, both for his sake and our own."

Curtis had favored Devar with a questioning scowl when he learnt how
his advent had been heralded in the press, but Devar merely vouchsafed
a brazen wink, and in the next breath Hermione herself became his
unconscious and most persuasive advocate.

"I have been bothering my brains to discover when or where I had seen
Mr. Curtis's name before--before we met to-night," she said, smiling at
the ridiculous vagueness of her own phrase.  "Now I remember.  I used
to read the newspaper reports about every ship that arrived, and I
noticed that identical paragraph."

"Thank you, Lady Hermione," cried Devar, crowing inwardly over his
friend's discomfiture.  "John D. will begin to believe soon what I have
been telling him during the last half-hour--that I am the real _Deus ex
machinâ_ of the whole business.  Why, if it hadn't been for me you two
would never have got married, and this merry party couldn't have
happened!"

A knock at the door caused Hermione to turn with a startled look.  Try
as she might, she dreaded every such incident as the preliminary to a
stormy interview with her father.

"Unless I am greatly mistaken, ma'am," interposed Uncle Horace blandly,
"this will be a waiter coming to tell us that supper is ready."

As usual, he said the correct thing, and Steingall drew Hermione aside
while the table was being spread for the feast.  He lost no time in
coming to the point.  His first demand showed that he took nothing for
granted.

"I am bound to speak plainly, your ladyship," he said.  "Is the
remarkable story told by Mr. John D. Curtis true?"

"Regarding the marriage?" said Hermione promptly.

"Yes."

"Well, as I do not know what he may have said, you can decide that
matter for yourself after you have heard my version.  I am a fugitive
from Paris, where my father was endeavoring to force me into a
detestable union: I am practically a complete stranger in New York: I
had arranged with Monsieur de Courtois to become my husband, under a
clear agreement for money paid that the marriage should serve only as a
shield against my pursuers; he was prevented by some dreadful men from
keeping to-night's appointment, and Mr. Curtis came to me, intending to
break the news somewhat more gently than one might look for otherwise.
He heard my sad little explanation, and was sorry for me.  As it
happened, he appreciated the real nature of my predicament, and, having
no ties to prevent such a daring step, offered me the protection of his
name until such time as I become my own mistress and am free to secure
a dissolution of the marriage."

"Will you tell me exactly what you mean?" said the detective.  His
voice was kindly, and his expression gravely sympathetic, and Hermione
could not read the amused tolerance lurking behind the mask of those
keen eyes.

"I mean that I am yet what lawyers call an infant.  In six months I
shall be twenty-one, and the coercion which has been used to force me
into marrying Count Ladislas Vassilan will be no longer possible."

"Do you forfeit an inheritance by refusing to obey Lord Valletort's
wishes?"

"No, unless with respect to my father's estate.  My mother was wealthy,
and her money is settled on me most securely."

"In trust?"

"Yes, I have trustees, an English banker and a clergyman."

"But, if they are men of good standing, they ought to have protected
you from undue interference."

"An earl is of good standing, too, in my country, and Count Vassilan
claims royal rank in Hungary.  I loathe the man, yet every one of my
friends and relatives urged me to accept him."

"Why?"

"Because he has a chance of obtaining a throne when the
Austro-Hungarian Empire breaks up, and my wealth will help his cause
materially."

Steingall allowed himself to appear surprised.

"Is your income so large, then?" he said.

"Yes, I suppose so.  My trustees tell me that I am worth nearly a
hundred thousand a year."

"Dollars?"

"No--pounds sterling."

They were conversing in subdued tones, yet the detective behaved like a
commonplace mortal in giving a rabbit-peep sideways to ascertain if the
girl's astounding statement had been overheard by the others.  But the
members of the Curtis family of honest men and true women had withdrawn
purposely to the far side of the room, and Devar was laboring to
convince his friend that he had acted wisely in placarding his name and
fame throughout the United States.

"To your knowledge, Lady Hermione, is any other person in New York
aware that you are several times a millionaire?"

"I think not.  Poor Jean de Courtois may have had some notion of the
fact, but I lived so unostentatiously in Paris that he would
necessarily be inclined to minimize the amount of my fortune.  Tell me,
Mr. Steingall, do you really think he----"

The detective shook his head, and laughed with official dryness.

"Forgive me, Lady Hermione," he said, "but I must not advance any
theories, at present.  Now, as to Count Vassilan--how long have you
known him?"

"About a year."

"Has he been your suitor practically all that time?"

"Yes.  The first day we met I was told by my father that I ought to be
proud if he chose me as his wife.  So I hated him from the very
beginning."

"You took a dislike to him, I suppose?"

"Yes, an instant and violent dislike.  But that is not all.  There are
things I cannot mention, though they are the common property of anyone
who has mixed in Parisian society during the past twelve months.
Surely you will be able to find men and women in this great city who
can supply enough of Paris gossip to show you clearly what manner of
man this Hungarian prince really is!"

Hermione's face showed the distress she felt, and Steingall's
disposition was far too generous to permit of any further probing in
this direction when the inquiry gave pain to a young and
innocent-minded girl.

"To-morrow," he said grimly, "I may read several chapters of Count
Vassilan's life.  But so much depends on this night's work.  At any
minute--certainly within an hour--I shall have news which may be
affected most markedly by some chance hint supplied by you.  I want you
to understand, Lady Hermione, that Mr. Curtis's share in the queer
tangle of the past few hours is not so simple or unimportant as you
seem to imagine.  I believe he has been actuated by the best of
motives----"

"Oh, yes, I am sure of it," she broke in eagerly.  "If I am fated never
to see him again after to-night I shall always remember him as a true
friend and gallant gentleman."

Steingall bit back the words which rose unbidden to his lips.  He had
certainly been wallowing in romance since the telephone called him to
the Central Hotel, but even in the pages of fiction he had never found
a more wildly improbable theory than the likelihood of John Delancy
Curtis allowing any consideration short of death to separate him from
such a bride as Lady Hermione within the short space of time she
apparently regarded as the possible span of her married life.

"Ah," he murmured, "if he is wise he will call you to give evidence in
his behalf.  Judges exercise a good deal of latitude in these matters."

"But will he be arrested for marrying me?  If any wrong has been done
with respect to the marriage license, I am equally to blame," she said
loyally.

Steingall frowned judicially.  Their conversation was approaching
perilously near the forbidden topic of de Courtois.

"In law, as in most affairs of life, it does no good to meet trouble
half way, your ladyship," he said.  "Now, reverting to the Hungarian
prince--do you remember the names of any persons, of either sex, whom
he associated with in Paris?  Of course, such a man would be widely
known in what is called society, but I want you to try and recall some
of his intimate friends."

"I believe you would find his boon companions in certain cafés on the
Grand Boulevard and in the vaudeville theaters on Montmartre; but would
it not help you a little if I told you of his enemies?"

"Most certainly."

"Well, I do happen to know that he is hated most cordially by the
Countess Marie Zapolya, who lives in the Hotel Ritz."

"In Paris?"

"Yes.  She advised me to shun him as I would the plague."

"Did she give any reason?"

"It may sound strange, but I really believe she wants him to marry her
daughter."

"Ah, that is interesting.  Pray go on."

"I never understood the thing rightly, but I heard once, through a
servant, that Count Vassilan was expected to wed Elizabetta
Zapolya--the succession to the Hungarian monarchy, if ever it were
revived, was involved--but Count Vassilan spurned the lady.  The
Countess is furious because her daughter was slighted, yet wishes to
compel him to fulfill his obligations."

"In that event, she would be anxious to see you safely married to some
other person?"

"Oh, she was.  She visited me, several times, and advised me not to
risk a life-long unhappiness by becoming mixed up in the maze of
Mid-Europe politics.  And--there is something else.  Poor Elizabetta
Zapolya, who is somewhat older than me, is in love with an attaché at
the Austro-Hungarian Embassy in Paris."

"Have you his name?"

"Yes.  Captain Eugene de Karely."

"How does he stand with regard to Count Vassilan?"

"I am told that he has challenged him repeatedly to a duel, but Count
Vassilan cannot meet him because they are not equals in the grades of
Hungarian aristocracy.  I am glad that Mr. Curtis did not wait to
consult the Almanach de Gotha when _he_ encountered the wretch.  Has he
told you that he hit him?"

"I have seen the Count," said Steingall.

"Where?"

The detective was not deaf to the note of alarm in her voice, but the
matter must be broached some time, and why not now?

"At the Central Hotel, about an hour ago," he said.

"Was my father with him?"

"Yes.  The Earl has also had the pleasure of a few minutes' talk with
Mr. Curtis."

Hermione was open-eyed with surprise.

"Mr. Curtis has not said a word of this to me," she cried, and her
louder tone traveled across the room.

"Said a word about what?" inquired Curtis, being not unwilling to break
in on the conversation, which he thought had lasted quite long enough.

"That my father and Count Vassilan had met you at your hotel."

"No, not Count Vassilan," explained the detective.  "He had gone before
Mr. Curtis came, but Lord Valletort returned."

"Did he ask you where I was?" demanded the girl breathlessly,
addressing Curtis.

"No.  He tried to have me arrested, and failed.  I think he looked on
me as an unlikely subject to yield unnecessary information."

"Supper is served, sir," said a maître d'hôtel to Uncle Horace, and
further discussion of Count Vassilan's tangled matrimonial schemes
became difficult for the moment.

Steingall was pressed to join the party--without prejudice to any
official duties he might be called on to perform next day, as Curtis
put it pleasantly--and consented.  Once again had his instinct been
justified, for he was sure that Lady Hermione's Parisian reminiscences
would prove important in some way not yet determinable.  Moreover, his
colleagues knew he was at the Plaza Hotel, and he was content to remain
there while his trusted aide, Clancy, was acting as chauffeur during
Count Vassilan's belated excursion.

The police captain was keeping an eye on the Waldorf-Astoria, a
detective was searching the apartment rented by the murdered
journalist, and other men of the Bureau were hunting the record of the
automobile, though Steingall was convinced that this branch of the
inquiry would end in a blind alley, because the car had undoubtedly
been stolen, and its lawful owner would only be able to identify it,
and declare that, to the best of his belief, it was locked in a garage
at the time it was being used for the commission of a crime.  Steingall
assumed that the unfortunate Hunter--or it might have been de
Courtois--was led to hire this particular vehicle by adroit
misrepresentation on the part of some unknown scoundrels who were aware
of the contemplated marriage.  The shorthand notes in Hunter's book
bore out this theory, because they were obviously data supplied by de
Courtois which would have enabled the journalist to write a thoroughly
sensational story next day.  He was convinced, when the truth was
known, it would be discovered that Hunter made the Frenchman's
acquaintance owing to his habit of mixing with the strange underworld
from the Continent of Europe which has its lost legion in New York.  De
Courtois was just the sort of vainglorious little man who would welcome
the notoriety of such an adventure as the prevented marriage ceremony,
wherein his name would figure with those of distinguished people, and
the last thing he counted on was the murder of the scribe who had
promised him columns of descriptive matter in the press.  The pert
musician was not the first, nor would he be the last, to find that the
role of cat's-paw is apt to prove more exacting than was anticipated.
To his chagrin, he saw himself changed suddenly from a trusted agent
into a dupe, and his utter collapse on hearing of the murder fitted in
exactly with the theory taking shape in the detective's mind--that
there were two implacable forces at war in New York that night, that
Lady Hermione's marriage to Count Vassilan or the Frenchman provided
the immediate bone of contention, and that the struggle had been
complicated by a too literal interpretation of instructions carried out
by bitter partisans.

In the midst of a lively conversation, the telephone jangled its
imperative message from a wall bracket in the room.  Devar was nearest
the instrument, and he answered the call.

"It's for you, Mr. Steingall," he said.

The detective would have preferred greater privacy, but he rose at once
and answered.

"And who is Mr. Krantz?" he demanded.  Then, after a pause: "Oh,
yes. . . .  Is he? . . .  You needn't trouble at all about that.  The
police surgeon, at my request, has dosed him with sufficient bromide to
keep him quiet till to-morrow morning. . . .  Yes, I understand.  Tell
them it can't be done, and refer them to the Centre-street
Bureau. . . .  What? . . .  No, so far as I can guess, the engineer
won't be wanted again to-night."

He hung up the receiver, and returned to his seat, though he had just
been informed that the Earl of Valletort and another person, having
ascertained by some means that de Courtois still lived, were raising a
commotion at the Central Hotel and demanding access to the Frenchman's
room.

[Illustration: Scenes from the photo-drama.]

"Please, am I mixed up with Mr. Krantz?" inquired Hermione, smiling,
for it was a bizarre experience to find herself interested in all sorts
and conditions of people whom she had never heard of.

"Mr. Krantz is the reception clerk at the Central Hotel," was the
answer, which conveyed fuller information to other ears than the
girl's.  Then Steingall glanced at his watch.

"I think some of you people must be tired after a strenuous day," he
said.  "I expect to be called away soon, and it is possible that I may
want to disturb you, Mr. Curtis, before you retire for the night.  Do
you intend to remain here?"

"Yes."

For an instant, an appreciable constraint manifested its presence, and
Uncle Horace did not display his wonted tact when he accentuated it by
a dry chuckle, _à propos_ of nothing in particular.  Curtis relieved
the situation after a slight hesitation.

"Lady Hermione, I take it, will now go to bed," he said coolly, "and,
if she is wise, will refuse to unlock her door again till her maid
comes in the morning.  I purpose changing my clothes, in case I may
have to accompany you on some midnight expedition.  My uncle and aunt
will tell us where they are staying, and arrange to meet us here at
lunch to-morrow.  You, Devar, being an approved night hawk, will join
me in a cigar.  How is that for a reasonable disposal of the company,
Mr. Steingall?"

As though in reply, the telephone rang again, and the detective lifted
the receiver from its hook.

"Hello!  That you, Clancy?" he said.  "Right.  I'll come along by the
subway from 59th Street--that will be quicker than a taxi . . .
yes . . . yes."

He turned, and the five people in the room saw that his face was
glowing with the fire of action.

"You can defer that change of suits, Mr. Curtis.  We must be off at
once. . . .  Mr. Devar, have you an automobile?  Can you get hold of it
now?  Well, 'phone your chauffeur to be at Centre-street headquarters
in as much under half-an-hour as he can manage.  Taxi-drivers gossip
among themselves, so a private car is better. . . .  Excuse the rush,
Lady Hermione, and you, too, Mrs. Curtis.  I haven't another minute to
spare."

Luckily, Curtis found his overcoat awaiting him in the cloak room, or
he might have been in a difficulty, for New York in November is not a
city which encourages midnight journeys in evening dress.

Uncle Horace and Aunt Louisa were hurried into a taxi, and as they were
being whisked off to the quiet hotel to which their baggage had been
consigned, the stout man began polishing his domed forehead once more.

"Lou," he said, "I can't make head nor tail of this business.  Can you?"

"Not yet, Horace," was the hopeful response.

"But--what sort of marriage is this, anyway?"

"Oh, that's all right.  Those two haven't begun courting yet.  But it
won't be long before they start.  Did you notice----"

And details observed by Aunt Louisa endured till the taxi stopped.


CHAPTER X

MIDNIGHT

After a quick journey by New York's unrivaled system of rapid transit,
the three men alighted at Spring Street, and a couple of minutes' brisk
walk brought them to a large, white-fronted building of severe
architecture.  Above the main entrance two green lamps stared solemnly
into the night, and their monitory gleam seemed to bid evildoers
"Beware!"; nor was there aught far-fetched in the notion, because from
this imposing center New York's guardians kept watch and ward over the
city.

"Clancy still waiting?" demanded Steingall of a policeman in uniform
who was on duty in an inquiry office.

"Yes, sir.  He asked me to be on the lookout in case you turned up
unexpectedly, as he didn't want to miss you."

The Chief Inspector led his companions straight to the Detective
Bureau, taking good care to avoid the room in which the "covering"
reporters were gathered, because the Police Headquarters of New York,
unlike any similar department outside the bounds of the United States,
makes the press welcome, and gives details of all arrests, fires,
accidents and other occurrences of a noteworthy nature as soon as the
facts are telegraphed or telephoned from outlying districts.

Passing through the general office, Steingall entered his own sanctum.
A small, slightly built man was bent over a table and scrutinizing a
Rogues' Gallery of photographs in a large album.  He turned as the door
opened, straightened himself, and revealed a wizened face, somewhat of
the actor type, its prominent features being an expressive mouth, a
thin, hooked nose, and a pair of singularly piercing and deeply sunken
eyes.

"Hello, Bob," he said to Steingall.  Then, without a moment's
hesitation, he added: "Good-evening, Mr. Curtis--glad to see you, Mr.
Devar."

"Good-evening, Mr. Clancy," said Curtis, not to be outdone in this
exchange of compliments, though he could not imagine how a person who
had never seen him should not only know his name but apply it so
confidently.

"May we smoke here?" asked Devar, who had lighted a cigar on emerging
from the subway station.

"Oh, yes," said Steingall.  "Make yourselves at home in that respect.
I am a hard smoker.  Let me offer you a good American cigar, Mr.
Curtis."

"Thank you.  Perhaps you will try one of mine.  I bought them in
London, but they are of a fair brand.  You, too, Mr. Clancy?"

"I'll take one, with pleasure, though I don't smoke," said the little
man.  Seeing the question on the faces of both visitors, he cackled, in
a queer, high-pitched voice:

"I refuse to poison my gastric juices with nicotine, but I like the
smell of tobacco.  Poor old Steingall there has pretty fair eyesight,
but his nose wouldn't sniff brimstone in a volcano, all because he
insists on smoking."

"Gastric juice!" laughed Steingall.  "You don't possess the article.
Skin, bones, and tongue are your chief constituents.  I'm not surprised
you make an occasional hit as a detective, because the average crook
would never suspect a funny little gazook like you of being that
celebrated sleuth, Eugene Clancy."

Clancy's long, nervous fingers had cracked the wrapper of the cigar
given him by Curtis, and he was now passing it to and fro beneath his
nostrils.

"You will observe the difference, gentlemen, between beef and brains,"
he said, nodding derisively at the bulky Chief Inspector.  "He rubbers
along because he looks like a prize-fighter, and can drive his fist
through a three-quarter inch pine plank.  But we hunt well together,
being a unique combination of science and brute force. . . .  By the
way, that reminds me.  If I have got the story right, Count Ladislas
Vassilan only landed in New York to-night.  Did he drive straight to a
boxing contest, or what?"

"Wait a second, Clancy," interrupted Steingall.  "Is there anything
doing?  How much time have we?"

"Exactly twenty minutes.  At twelve-thirty I must be in East Broadway."

"Good.  Now, Mr. Curtis, tell Clancy exactly what happened since you
put on poor Hunter's overcoat at the corner of Broadway and 27th
Street."

Curtis obeyed, though he fancied he had never encountered a more
unofficial official than Clancy.  Shrewd judge of character as he was,
he could hardly be expected to guess, after such a momentary glimpse of
a man of extraordinary genius in unraveling crime, that Clancy was
never more discursive, never more prone to chaff and sneer at his
special friend, Steingall, than when hot on the trail of some
particularly acute and daring malefactor.  The Chief of the Bureau, of
course, knew by these signs that his trusted _aide_ had obtained
information of a really startling nature, but neither Curtis nor Devar
was aware of Clancy's idiosyncrasies, and some few minutes elapsed
before they began to suspect that he had a good deal more up his sleeve
than they gave him credit for at first.

From the outset he took an original view of Curtis's marriage.

"The girl is young and good-looking, you say?" was his opening question.

"Not yet twenty-one, and remarkably attractive," said Curtis, though
hardly prepared for the detective's interest in this direction.

"Well educated and lady-like, I suppose?"

"Yes, as befits her position."

"Cut out her position, which doesn't amount to a row of beans where
intellect is concerned. . . .  Well, a man never knows much about a
woman anyway, and what little he learns is acquired by a process of
rejection after marriage."

"May I ask what you mean?"

"Judging from your history and apparent age, Mr. Curtis, I take it you
have not had time to go fooling about after girls?"

"You are certainly right in that respect."

"Naturally, or you wouldn't be so ignorant concerning the dear
creatures.  You are to be congratulated, 'pon my soul.  You will have
the rare experience of constructing a divinity out of a wife, whereas
the average man begins by choosing a divinity and finds he has only
secured a wife."

Curtis laughed, but met the detective's penetrating gaze frankly.

"Your bitter philosophy may be sound, Mr. Clancy," he said, "but it is
built on a false premiss.  My marriage is only a matter of form.  It
may be legal--indeed, I believe it is--but there can be no dispute as
to the nature of the bond between Lady Hermione and myself.  She
regards me as a husband in name only, and will dissolve the tie at her
own convenience."

"You'll place no obstacles in her way?"

"None."

"Quite sure?"

"Absolutely."

Clancy giggled, as though he were a comedian who had scored a point
with his audience.

"Then you're married for keeps," he announced, with the grin of a man
who has solved a humorous riddle.  "By refusing to thwart the lady you
throw away your last slender chance of freedom, and you will find her
waiting at the gate of the State Penitentiary when you come out.  By
Jove, you've been pretty rapid, though.  No wonder people say the East
is waking up.  Are there many more like you in China?"

Curtis was not altogether pleased by this banter, nor did he trouble to
conceal his opinion that the New York Detective Bureau was treating a
grave crime with scandalous levity.

"Whether Lady Hermione married me or Jean de Courtois is a rather
immaterial side issue," he said, somewhat emphatically.  "From what
little I can grasp of a curiously involved affair, it seems to me that
there are weightier interests than ours at stake.  And, if I may
venture to differ from you, a lot of things may happen before I see the
inside of a prison."

"After your meteoric career during the past few hours I am inclined to
agree with that last remark," and Clancy's tone became so serious that
Devar laughed outright.  "Don't misunderstand me, Mr. Curtis.  I am
lost in admiration of your nerve, but you have told me just what I
wanted to make sure of."

"I have expressed no opinions.  I confined myself to actual facts."

"And isn't it a highly significant fact that you are over head and ears
in love with your wife?  _Nom d'un pipe_!  Doesn't that complicate the
thing worse than a Chinese puzzle?"

"I really don't see----" began Curtis, yielding to a feeling of
annoyance which was not altogether unwarrantable, but Clancy jerked out
his hands as though they were attached to arms moved by the strings of
a marionette.

"Of course, you don't!" he cried.  "You're in love!  You're gorged with
the amococcus microbe!  It's the worst case I've ever heard of.  I once
knew a man who met a girl for the first time at the Park Row end of
Brooklyn Bridge and proposed to her before they had crossed the East
River, but you've set up a record that will never be beaten.  You find
a marriage license in the pockets of a murdered man, rush off in a taxi
to the address of the lady named therein, marry her, punch a frantic
rival on the nose, take the fair one to a hotel, flout her father, a
British peer, and hold a banquet at which the Chief of the New York
Detective Bureau is an honored guest; and then you have the hardihood
to tell me that your actions constitute an immaterial side issue in the
biggest sensation New York has produced this year.  Young man, wait
till the interviewers get hold of you to-morrow!  Wait till the sob
sisters begin gushing over your bride--a pretty one--with a title!
Name of good little gray man!  They'll whoop your side issues into a
scare-head front page!  Before you know where you are they'll have you
bleating about the color of her eyes, the exquisite curve of her
Cupid's Bow lips, and the way her hair shone when the electric light
fell on it, while she, on her part, will be confiding, with a
suspicious break in her voice, what a perfectly darling specimen of the
American man at his best you are.  Mr. Curtis, you're married good and
hard, and if you want to cinch the job you ought to go to jail for a
while."

Unquestionably, the two civilians present thought that Clancy was
slightly mad, so Steingall intervened.

"Hop off your perch, Eugene," he said, "and tell us how you came to
drive Count Vassilan's taxi, and where you took him."

"It was a case of intelligent anticipation of forthcoming events," said
Clancy, whose excitability disappeared instantly, leaving him calm and
extremely lucid of speech.  "When Evans (the police captain) gave me
the bearings of the affair--though, of course, being a creature of
handcuffs and bludgeons, he thought our friend Curtis was the real
scoundrel--I realized at once that Vassilan's indisposition was a bad
attack of blue funk.  Such a man could no more remain quietly in his
room at the hotel than a fox terrier could pass a dog fight without
taking hold.  As soon as I saw the Earl go out alone, and heard him
direct the taxi to the Central Hotel in 27th Street, I decided that my
best place was at the driving wheel of another taxi.  I picked out a
man on the rank who was about my size, and might be mistaken for me in
a half-light, and got him to lend me his coat and cap.  He took mine,
and a word to the door-porter fixed things so that I was whistled up
quite naturally when his countship appeared.  He had changed his
clothes and linen, but one glance at his nose showed that I had marked
my bird, even if the porter hadn't given me the mystic sign at the
right moment.  I received my orders, and off we went, a second cab
following, with the driver of my taxi as a fare.  Evidently, the Count
was not well posted in New York distances, because he grew restive, and
wondered where I was taking him.  He tried to be artful, too, and when
we reached East Broadway he pulled me up at the corner of Market
Street, told me to wait, and lodged a five-dollar bill as security,
saying I would have annozzaire when we got back to the hotel.  Didn't
that make things easy?  He plunged into the crowd--you know what a
bunch of Russians, Hungarians, and Polish Jews get together in East
Broadway about ten-thirty--so I rushed to the second cab, swapped coats
and hats again, gave the taxi-man the five-spot, and put him in charge
of his own cab.  In less than a minute I overtook the Count, just as he
was crossing the street, and saw him enter a house, after saying
something to a second-hand clothes man who was bawling out his goods
from the open store on the ground floor.  By the time I had bought two
silk handkerchiefs and a pair of boots, and was haggling like mad over
a collection of linen collars, size 16--a present for you,
Steingall--his nobility came downstairs, but not alone; there was a
girl with him.  Luckily, she was no Hungarian, but Italian, and they
talked in broken English.  'They no come-a here-a now-a-time,
Excellenza,' she said, 'but you-a fin' dem at Morris Siegelman's
restaurant at 'alf-a-pass twelve.'  He said something choice--in pure
Magyar, I guess--and headed for the taxi.  That is all, or practically
all.  I tried to go back on my bargains with the Israelite in the
store, but he made such a row that I paid him, and when I reached the
second cab the driver told me that my man nodded as he passed, showing
that Vassilan was returning to the hotel.  So I came here, and 'phoned
you."

Steingall glanced at a clock on the mantel-piece.  He rose, threw open
a door, and switched on a light.

"Mr. Curtis," he said, "we must risk something, but I think I can make
you up sufficiently to escape recognition, not so much by the Count as
by others who may attend that supper party.  You come, too, Mr. Devar.
There is safety in numbers."

With a deftness that was worthy of a theatrical costumier, the
detectives converted themselves and the two young men into ship's
firemen.  No more effective or simpler disguise could have been devised
on the spur of the moment, nor one that might be assumed more readily.
Boots offered the main difficulty, but Clancy's purchase fitted Devar,
and Curtis made the best of a pair of canvas shoes, while a mixture of
grease and coffee extract applied to face and hands changed four
respectable looking persons into a gang which would certainly attract
the attention of the police anywhere outside the bounds of just such a
locality as they were bound for.

In case the exigencies of the chase separated them, Steingall gave some
instructions to the man in the inquiry office, and Devar tested the
realism of his appearance by disregarding the chauffeur of the
splendidly appointed automobile waiting at the exit.  Walking up to the
car, he opened the door and said gruffly:

"Jump in, boys!"

The chauffeur wriggled out of his seat instantly, and leaped to the
pavement.

"Here, what the----" he began, whereupon Devar laughed.

"It's all right, Arthur," he said.

"What's all right?  This car is here for Mr. Howard Devar," cried the
man angrily.

"Well, you cuckoo, and who am I?"

Something familiar in the voice caused the chauffeur to look closely at
the speaker, whom he had not seen for a considerable time except for a
fleeting glimpse on the arrival of the _Lusitania_ at New York that
afternoon.  He was perplexed, but was evidently not devoid of humor.

"It's either you or your ghost, sir," he said, "and if it's your ghost
you must have been badly treated in the next world."

A roundsman was entering headquarters at the moment, and gave the
quartette a sharp glance.

"Here, Parker," said Steingall, "tell this man my name."

The policeman came up, looked at the detective, and laughed.

"This is Mr. Steingall, chief of the Detective Bureau," he said to the
bewildered driver, who resumed charge of the car without further ado,
but nevertheless remained uneasy in his mind.  And not without cause.
He, poor fellow, all unconsciously, was now gathered into the net which
had spread its meshes so wide in New York that night.  He could not
understand why his employer's son should be gallivanting around the
city in company with such questionable looking characters, even though
one of them might be the famous "man with the microscopic eye," but he
was far from realizing that he and his car would help to make history
before morning.

In obedience to orders, he ran along Grand Street, and halted the car
on the south side of W. H. Seward Park.

"Remain here, if we do not return earlier, till one o'clock," Steingall
told him, "and then run slowly along East Broadway to the corner of
Montgomery Street.  We are going to Morris Siegelman's restaurant,
which is a few doors higher up, on the north side.  If we stroll past
you, pay no heed, but follow at a little distance.  Have you got that
right?"

"Yes, sir."

Devar was hugely delighted by the man's discomfited tone.

"Cheer up, Arthur," he said.  "You'll be tickled to death to-morrow
when you read the newspapers, and discover the part you played in a big
news item."

"Now, don't forget to lurch about the sidewalk," was Steingall's next
injunction to the amateurs.  "Think of all the bad language you ever
heard, and use it.  We're toughs, and must behave as such.  Can either
of you sing?"

"I can," admitted Curtis.

"That will help some.  Strike up any sort of sailor's chanty when we're
in the restaurant."

Late as the hour, East Broadway was full to repletion with a
cosmopolitan crowd.  It was a Thursday evening, and the Hebrew Sabbath
began at sunset on the following day, so the poor Jews of the quarter
were out in their thousands, either buying provisions for the coming
holiday or attracted by the light and bustle.  Heavy looking Russians,
olive-skinned Italians, placid Germans, wild-eyed and pallid Czechs,
lounged along the thoroughfare, chatting with compatriots, or gathering
in amused groups to hear the strange patter of some voluble merchant
retailing goods from a barrow.  From the interiors of tiny shops and
cellars came eldritch voices crying the nature and remarkable qualities
of the wares within.  Every hand-cart carried a flaring naphtha-lamp,
and the glare of these innumerable torches created strong lights and
flickering shadows which would have gladdened the heart of Rembrandt
were his artistic wraith permitted to roam the by-ways of a city which,
perhaps, he never heard of, even in its early Dutch guise as New
Amsterdam.

The lofty tenement houses seemed to be crowded as the streets.  Within
a square mile of that section of New York a quarter of a million people
find habitation, food, and employment.  They supply each other's needs,
speak their own weird tongues, and by slow degrees become absorbed by
the great continent which harbors them, and then only when a second or
third generation becomes Americanized.

In such a motley throng four prowling stokers, ashore for a night's
spree, attracted scant attention, and Morris Siegelman's hospitable
door was reached without incident.  A taxi-cab was standing by the
curb, and the driver, gazing at the living panorama of the street,
little guessed that he had changed garments with one of the
half-drunken firemen two hours earlier.

"Here y'are, mattes!" cried Steingall, joyously surveying a printed
legend displayed among the bottles of a dingy bar running along the
side of an apartment which had once been the parlor of a pretentious
house, "this is the right sort o' dope--vodka--same as is supplied to
the Czar of all the Roossias.  Get a pint of vodka into yer gizzards
an' you'll think you've swallowed a lump of red-hot clinker."

Clancy hopped on to a high stool, and curled himself up on the rounded
seat in the accepted posture of Buddha, while Devar, who was by way of
being a gymnast, stood on his hands and beat a tattoo with his feet
against the edge of the counter.  Not to be outdone, Curtis began to
sing.  He had a good baritone voice, and entered with zest into the mad
spirit of the frolic.  The song he chose was redolent of the sea.  It
related a tar's escapades among witches, cruisers, and girls.  Three of
the latter claimed him at one and the same time--so "What was a
sailor-boy to do?  Yeo-ho, Yeo-ho, Yeo-ho!"  The chorus decided the
point:

  "Why, we went strolling down by the rolling,
     Down by the rolling sea.
  We walk with them the streets of Rome.
    We watch the connoisseurs gazing into the curiosity shops and
fingering the bronzes or the silver statuettes; the naughty boys
jeering the solemn Stoic as he walks along, staid, superior, absent;
the good boys coming home from school with well-thumbed lesson
books; the lovers in the cookshops or restaurants shooting apple
pips from between finger and thumb, rejoicing in the good omen if
they strike the ceiling; the stores of Sulpicius the wine merchant
and of Sosius the bookseller; the great white Latian ox, exactly
such as you see to-day, driven towards the market, with a bunch of
hay upon his horns to warn pedestrians that he is dangerous; the
coarse drawings in chalk or colours on the wall advertising some
famous gladiator; at dusk the whispering lovers in the Campus, or
the romping hide-and-seek of lads and lasses at the corners of the
streets or squares, just as you may watch them to-day on spring or
winter evenings amongst the lower arches of the Colosseum;--it is
a microcosm, a cameo, of that old-world life.

Horace knew, and feared not to say, that in his poems, in his Odes
especially, he bequeathed a deathless legacy to mankind, while setting
up a lasting monument to himself. One thing he could not know, that
when near two thousand years had passed, a race of which he had
barely heard by name as dwelling "quite beyond the confines of
the world," would cherish his name and read his writings with a grateful
appreciation even surpassing that of his contemporary Romans.

A few Odes remain, too casual to be classified; rejoicings over the
vanishing of winter and the return of spring (I, iv); praises of the
Tibur streams, of Tarentum (II, vi) which he loved only less
than Tibur, of the Lucretilis Groves (I, xvii) which overhung his Sabine
valley, of the Bandusian spring beside which he played in boyhood. We
have the Pindaric or historic Odes, with tales of Troy, of the
Danaid brides, of Regulus, of Europa (III, iii, v, xi, xvii); the
dramatic address to Archytas (I, xxviii), which soothed the last
moments of Mark Pattison; the fine epilogue which ends the book,
composed in the serenity of gained renown;
And now 'tis done: more durable than brass My monument shall be,
and raise its head O'er royal pyramids: it shall not dread Corroding
rain or angry Boreas, Nor the long lapse of immemorial time.

I shall not wholly die; large residue Shall 'scape the Queen of
funerals. Ever new My after fame shall grow, while pontiffs climb With
silent maids the Capitolian height.
"Born," men will say, "where Aufidus is loved, Where Danaus scant
of streams beneath him bowed The rustic tribes, from dimness he
waxed bright, First of his race to wed the Aeolian lay To notes of
Italy."

Put glory on, My own Melpomene, by genius won, And crown me of thy
grace with Delphic bay.

SWAN SONG

When a well-graced actor has left the stage amid trumpeted farewells
from an admiring but regretful audience, we somewhat resent his
occasional later reappearance.

So, when a poet's last word has been spoken, and spoken emotionally,
an Afterword is apt to offend: and we may wish that the fine poem
just quoted had been reserved as finish to the volume yet to come,
which lacks a closing note, or even that the volume itself had not
been published.

The fourth Book of the Odes was written nearly ten years after the
other three, and Horace wrote it not as Poet but as Laureate.

His Secular Hymn appeared in B.C. 17, when he was forty-eight years old;
and after it Augustus pressed him to celebrate the victories of his two
stepsons, Drusus and Tiberius, over the tribes of the Eastern Alps.
If he wrote unwillingly, his hand had not lost its cunning. The
sentiment is paler and more artificial, but the old condensation
and felicity remain.

He begins with rather sad reluctance. He is old; the one woman
whom he loved is dead; his lyric raptures and his love campaignings
are at an end; he is tired of flattering hopes, of noisy revels, of
flower garlands fresh with dew.
Or are they war songs, not love songs, that are wanted?

There he is more helpless still.

It needs a Pindar worthily to extol a Caesar: he is no Pindar; and so
we have an ode in honour of the Theban bard.

And yet, as chosen lyrist of the Roman race, he cannot altogether refuse
the call. Melpomene, who from his cradle marked him for her own, can
still shed on him if she will the power to charm, can inspire in him
"music of the swan."

So, slowly, the wasting lyric fire revives; we get the martial
odes to conquering Drusus and to Lollius, the panegyrics on Augustus
and Tiberius, all breathing proud consciousness that "the Muse opens
the good man's grave and lifts him to the gods"; that immortality
can be won only by the poet's pen, and that it is in his own power
to confer it.

[Illustration: _Becchetti photo._
THE FORUM RESTORED AS IN A.D. 80.

(Reproduced by special permission.)]

The remaining poems are in the old spirit, but are somewhat mournful
echoes of the past.

They remind us of the robin's winter song--"Hark to him weeping," say the
country folk, as they listen to the music which retains the sweetness
but has lost what Wordsworth calls the gushes of the summer strains.
There is still an ode to Venus; its prayer not now "come to bless thy
worshipper"; but "leave an old heart made callous by fifty years,
and seek some younger votary." There is an ode to Spring.
Spring brought down from heaven his earliest Muse; it came to him
charged with youthful ardours, expectations, joys; now its only message
is that change and death attend all human hopes and cares. Like an
army defeated, the snow has retreated; the Graces and the Nymphs can
dance unclad in the soft warm air. But summer will thrust out spring,
autumn summer, then dull winter will come again; will come to the year,
will come to you and me. Not birth nor eloquence nor virtue can
save from Minos' judgement seat; like Aeneas, Tullus, Ancus, like
all the great ones of the earth, we shall soon be nameless shades and
a poor pinch of dust. More of the old buoyant glee comes back in a
festal invitation to one Virgilius, not the poet. There is a ring of
Tom Moore in Sir Theodore Martin's rendering of it.

* * * * *
On the young grass reclined, near the murmur of fountains, The shepherds
are piping the song of the plains, And the god who loves Arcady's
purple-hued mountains, The god of the flocks, is entranced by their
strains.

* * * * *

To the winds with base lucre and pale melancholy!
In the flames of the pyre these, alas! will be vain; Mix your sage
ruminations with glimpses of folly, 'Tis delightful at times to be
somewhat insane!

There follows a savage assault on one Lyce, an ancient beauty who
had lost her youthful charms, but kept up her youthful airs:
Where now that beauty?

where those movements? where That colour? what of her, of her
is left, Who, breathing Love's own air, Me of myself bereft!
Poor Lyce! spared to raven's length of days; That youth may
see, with laughter and disgust, A firebrand, once ablaze, Now
smouldering in grey dust.

Poor Lyce indeed! what had she done to be so scourged? One address
we miss: there is no ode in this book to Maecenas, who was out of favour
with Augustus, and had lost all political influence. But the
friend is not sunk in the courtier. The Ides or 13th of April is
his old patron's birthday--a nativity, says Horace, dearer to him almost
than his own, and he keeps it always as a feast. With a somewhat
ghostly resurrection of voluptuousness dead and gone he bids Phyllis
come and keep it with him.

All things are ready, a cask of Alban nine years old is broached, the
servants are in a stir, the altar wreathed for sacrifice, the
flames curling up the kitchen chimney, ivy and parsley gathered
to make a wreath for Phyllis' hair.

Come then, sweet girl, last of my loves; for never again shall this
heart take fire at a woman's face--come, and learn of me a tune to
sing with that dear voice, and drive away dull care.

I am told that every man in making love assures the charmer that
no woman shall ever succeed her in his regards; but this is probably
a veritable amorous swan-song.

He was older than are most men at fifty-two. Years as they pass, he sadly
says, bereave us one by one of all our precious things; of mirth, of
loves, of banquets; at last the Muse herself spreads wings to
follow them. "You have sported long enough," she says, "with
Amaryllis in the shade, you have eaten and drunk your fill, it is time
for you to quit the scene." And so the curtain falls

.

* * * * *

To our great loss there is no contemporary portrait of Horace.

He tells us himself (Ep. II, ii, 214; I, xx, 29) that he was short of
stature, his hair black but early tinged with grey; that he loved to
bask in sunshine, that his temper was irascible but easily
appeased.
In advanced life he became fat; Augustus jests with him rather
coarsely on his protuberant figure.

The portrait prefixed to this volume is from a Contorniate, or
bronze medallion of the time of Constantine, representing the poet's
likeness as traditionally preserved amongst his countrymen three
hundred years after his death.

The oldest extant manuscript of his works is probably that in the
public library of Berne, and dates from the ninth century. The earliest
printed edition, bearing neither date nor printer's name, is supposed
to have been published at Milan in 1470. Editions were also printed
at Florence and at Venice in 1482, and a third at Venice in 1492.
An illustrated edition on vellum was brought out by Aldus in 1501,
and reissued in 1509, 1514, 1519. The Florence Press of the Giunti
produced splendid specimens in 1503, 1514, 1519.

Between this date and the end of the century seven more came forth from
famous presses. Of modern editions we may notice the vellum Bodoni
folio of 1791, and the matchless Didot of 1799 with its exquisite
copperplate vignettes.

Fortunate is the collector who possesses the genuine first edition
of Pine's "Horace," 1733.

It is known by an error in the text, corrected in the subsequent
and less bibliographically valuable impression of the same year.

A beautifully pictorial book is Dean Milman's; the student will
prefer Orelli, Macleane, Yonge, Munro and King, or Dean Wickham's
scholarly volumes

.

* * * * *
In composing this modest little book I have had in view principally
readers altogether ignorant of Latin, but wishing to know something
of a writer lauded enthusiastically by all classical scholars: they
will observe that I have not introduced into its pages a single
Latin word.

I have nourished also the hope that it might be serviceable to those
who have forgotten, but would like to recover, the Horace which
they learned at school; and to them I would venture to recommend
the little copy of the Latin text with Conington's version attached,
in "Bell's Pocket Classics."

Latinless readers of course must read him in English or not at all.

No translation can quite convey the cryptic charm of any original,
whether poetry or prose.

"Only a bishop," said Lord Chesterfield, "is improved by translation."
But prose is far easier to render faithfully than verse; and I have
said that either Conington's or Dean Wickham's version of the
Satires and Epistles, which are both virtually in prose, will tell
them what Horace said, and sometimes very nearly how he said it.

On the Odes a host of English writers have experimented. Milton
tried his hand on one, with a result reflecting neither Milton nor
Horace.

Dryden has shown what he could have done but would not do in his
tantalising fragment of the Ode to Fortune.

Pope transformed the later Ode to Venus into a purely English poem, with
a gracefully artificial mechanism quite unlike the natural flow
of the original.

Marvell's noble "Horatian Ode," with its superb stanzas on the death
of Charles I, shows what he might have achieved, but did not attempt.
Francis' rendering of 1765 is generally respectable, and in default
of a better was universally read and quoted by his contemporaries:
once, in the Ode to Pyrrhus (III, xx) he attains singular grace of
phrase and metre.

Cowper translated two Odes and imitated two more, not without happy
touches, but with insertions and omissions that lower poetry into
commonplace.

Of Calverley's few attempts three are notably good; a resounding line
in his "Leuconoe" (I, xi):

Which flings now the flagging sea-wave on the obstinate sandstone reef,

is at once Horatian and Tennysonian; and his "Oh! where is all thy
loveliness?" in the later Ode to Lyce has caught marvellously the minor
key of tender memory which relieves the brutality of that ruthless
flagellation. Mr. Goldwin Smith's more numerous "Bay Leaves" are
fashioned all in goodly measure; and his "Blest man who far from
care and strife" well transfers to English the breathlessness of
Horace's sham pastoral ecstasy.

Of more ambitious translators Bulwer Lytton catches now and then the
careless rapture of his original; Sir Theodore Martin is always
musical and flowing, sometimes miraculously fortunate in his metres,
but intentionally unliteral and free.

Conington is rigidly faithful, oftentimes tersely forcible; but misses
lyrical sweetness. Perhaps, if Marvell, Herrick, Cowley, Prior, the
now forgotten William Spencer, Tom Moore, Thackeray, could be
alchemized into one, they might combine to yield an English Horace.

Until eclectic nature, emulating the Grecian sculptor, shall fashion
an archetype from these seven models, the vernacular student, with
his Martin and his Conington, sipping from each alternately, like
Horace's Matine bee (IV, ii, 27), the terseness of the professor
and the sweetness of the poet, may find in them some echo from the
ever-shifting tonality of the Odes, something of their verbal
felicity, something of their thrilling wistfulness; may strive not
quite unsuccessfully, in the words of Tennyson's "Timbuctoo," to
attain by shadowing forth the unattainable.

ON THE "WINES" OF HORACE'S POETRY

The wines whose historic names sparkle through the pages of Horace
have become classical commonplaces in English literature. "Well,
my young friend, we must for once prefer the Falernian to the _vile
Sabinum?

_" says Monkbarns to Lovel when the landlord of the Hawes Inn at
Queensferry brings them claret instead of port.

It may be well that we should know somewhat of them.

The choicest of the Italian wines was _Caecuban_, from the poplar-trained
vines grown amongst the swamps of Amyclae in Campania.
It was a heady, generous wine, and required long keeping; so we find
Horace speaking of it as ranged in the farthest cellar end, or
"stored still in our grandsire's binns"(III, xxviii, 2, 3; I, xxxvii,
6); it was reserved for great banquets, kept carefully under lock
and key: "your heir shall drain the Caecuban you hoarded under a
hundred padlocks" (II, xiv, 25).

It was beyond Horace's means, and only rich men could afford to drink
it; we hear of it at Maecenas' table and on board his galley (I, xx, 9);
and it appeared at the costly banquet of Nasidienus (page 27). With
the Caecuban he couples the _Formian_ (I, xx, 11), and _Falernian_
(I, xx, 10), grown on the southern slopes of the hills dividing
Campania from Latium.

"In grassy nook your spirit cheer with old Falernian vintage,"
he says to his friend Dellius (II, iii, 6).
He calls it fierce, rough, fiery; recommends mixing it with Chian wine,
or with wine from Surrentum (Sat. II, iv, 55), or sweetening and diluting
it with honey from Mount Hymettus (Sat.
"Well?" he inquired, and, surfeited though he might be with New York
sensations, the others were conscious of just a hint of excitement in
his voice.

"That is Anatole, I am nearly sure," said Curtis.

"Why not jump out and grab him now?" suggested Devar.

"Do you gentlemen mind following him for a time?" asked the policeman.

"No, I'm game for anything.  And you, Curtis?"

"Oh, I feel ready to start the night all over again."

The street-cars went on, and the gray automobile darted through the
first possible opening.

"You see, it is this way," explained the official.  "I am prepared to
arrest the man on Mr. Curtis's evidence, because I couldn't have better
testimony than that of the chief witness.  But I've been chewing on
this thing for the past few minutes, and it strikes me that we gain
nothing by acting in a hurry.  You may be sure that this fellow, even
if he is the person we want, will deny it, and a day or two may be lost
in proving his identity, or collecting facts which would support the
theory that he was the chauffeur connected with the crime.  Now, if we
let him go on, we shall certainly have a better hold over him.  We'll
find out his destination--perhaps secure a very useful address, or,
with real luck, discover that he is keeping a fixture with some other
individual."

"In a word, we must watch and pray," said Devar.

"Well, we can wait and see, anyhow," said the practical minded
McCulloch.

His counsel sounded good, and the others agreed with him, thereby
letting themselves and the patient Brodie in for some remarkable
developments in a pursuit which began by a simple coincidence and was
destined to end in a manner which none of them dreamed of.

Devar opened the window again.

"Arthur," he said, "did you happen to notice whether or not that fellow
is carrying a reflector?"

"Yes, sir.  He has one.  I saw him looking into it when I drew
alongside."

"Ah, that puts a different complexion on the affair, as the young man
said when he kissed his best girl and tasted Somebody's Beauty Powder.
Don't press, Arthur.  Just keep him in sight till I consult the law."

As the outcome of a hurried discussion, Brodie received a fresh
mandate.  During the straightaway run he was not to approach the gray
car nearer than sixty yards or thereabouts--in effect, remaining within
the same block if possible, but, if the gray car stopped in front of
any dwelling, he was to slacken speed and pass it, taking the middle of
the road, and holding himself in instant readiness to halt or turn as
directed.

"By the way, how are you fixed for petrol?" added Devar.

"I filled the tanks, sir, before leaving the garage.  We're good for
the trip to Albany and back."

Brodie's tone was quite cheerful.  He, too, had been reviewing the
situation, and the presence of a uniformed policeman had dispelled the
last shred of suspicion that some stupid joke had been worked off
outside the Police Headquarters when a fearsome looking tough was
introduced to him as the Chief of the New York Detective Bureau.

Devar was about to congratulate the roundsman on the prospect of an
all-night journey if Brodie's chance phrase were fated to come true,
when he glanced at Curtis, and elected to remain silent.  They were
passing the Plaza Hotel, and his friend was peering up at its square
white bulk.  Obviously, he was striving to locate Hermione's room.
Most probably he failed, for it is no easy matter to pick out the
windows of any particular set of rooms in a huge building while rushing
along at twenty-five or more miles an hour.  Further, it was now past
one o'clock in the morning, and most respectable people were in bed, so
the solemn mass of the hotel was enlivened by very few rectangles of
light.

But Curtis fancied, as did Devar also, that the illuminated blinds of
three windows on the second floor might possibly be those of Suite F.,
and each wondered, if the surmise were correct, why her ladyship was
remaining up so late.

Devar resolved to say nothing, but Curtis felt that he must talk, if
only for the sake of hearing his own voice.  Usually a man of taciturn
habit, the outcome of long vigils among an alien and often hostile race
in a semi-civilized land, he had gone through so much during the five
and a half hours which had unfolded their marvels since he quitted the
dining-room of the Central Hotel, that he ached for human sympathy,
even in a trivial matter of this sort.

"I thought I saw a light in my wife's rooms," he said.

"As you mention it, so did I," agreed Devar.

"I hope she is not awaiting my return?"

"Perhaps she is anxious about you?"

"But why?"

"Women are given that way.  She knows you went out with Steingall, and
he is a dangerous character."

"Is Mrs. Curtis staying in the Plaza?" asked the puzzled McCulloch.

"Yes."

"But I thought you occupied a room at the Central Hotel in 27th Street?"

"I did, but I got married at half-past eight, and we went to the Plaza."

"Married at half-past eight--just after the murder!"  The policeman's
words formed a crescendo of sheer surprise.  For some indefinable
reason this curious conjunction of a crime and a wedding went beyond
his comprehension.

"Yes, it happened so.  It might have been avoided, yet, looking back
now over the whole of the circumstances, it would appear that I have
followed a beaten track inevitable as death."

Of course, the roundsman could not grasp the somber thought underlying
Curtis's words, but a species of indeterminate suspicion prompted his
next question.

"You came from the Plaza with Mr. Steingall, I believe, sir?"

"Yes.  We were having supper there, with Mr. Devar and my uncle and
aunt, when Mr. Clancy rang him up on the telephone, and he invited us
to accompany him to the Police Headquarters.  The rest you know."

Certainly, the explanation sounded quite satisfactory.  The attitude of
these two young men and their chauffeur was perfectly correct, and the
policeman's views had been strengthened materially by the tell-tale
tokens he had noted on the gray car, which, however, he had not thought
fit to mention.  If Steingall had attended the supper in the Plaza he
must have convinced himself that there was nothing unusual, or, at any
rate, doubtful, about the queer fact that a man who was mixed up in a
remarkable murder should have gone straight from the scene of the
tragedy and got married.

Just to dispel a little of the mist that befogged his brain, he waited
a while and then said:

"Which side of the car was opposite the doorway when those two men
attacked Mr. Hunter?"

"The left.  The car had entered the street from Broadway."

"Why do you ask?" inquired Devar, instantly alive to the queerness of
this alteration of topics.

"My mind went back to the job we have in hand," said the roundsman
readily.  "I was wondering just what sort of glimpse Mr. Curtis
obtained of the chauffeur.  Of course, I see now that he was looking at
the man exactly under similar conditions when we made that stop at 42nd
Street."

Thus, unknown to either of the parties to the alliance, a minor crisis
was averted, because it may safely be conceded that the hard-headed
policeman would have refused then and there to accept any sort of
statement from such a lunatic as John Delancy Curtis, if he were given
a full, true, and particular account of the night's proceedings while
being whirled up Fifth Avenue in a fast moving automobile.

Romance, if it is to be accepted without question, requires the setting
of a comfortable armchair or tree-shaded nook in a summer garden.
There, forgetting and forgotten by the world, man or maid may indeed be
carried far on the Magic Carpet of Tangu, but, when served out by two
strangers to a prosaic policeman seated in a humming car, and bound
Heaven knew whither long after midnight, it is apt to savor of the moon
and witchcraft.

Away up the straight vista of Fifth Avenue sped the two cars.  On the
left lay the black solitude of Central Park, on the right the varied
architecture of New York's millionaire dwellings.

Devar and the policeman talked cheerfully enough, but Curtis was
wrapped in his own musings till the rear lamp of the gray car suddenly
curved to the left and vanished.

"He has turned into the Parkway at 110th Street," said McCulloch, and
Curtis awoke with a start to a sense of his surroundings.

"I suppose he's making for St. Nicholas Avenue," went on the roundsman.

"Why?" demanded Curtis, whose recollections of map-study would have
reminded him, in other conditions, that the avenue named by McCulloch
is one of the few which slant across the city's rectangles.

"Well, sir, it's only a guess, but St. Nicholas Avenue is a short cut
to Washington Heights, and cars often follow that route.  Yes, there he
goes!"

For an instant they caught a fleeting glimpse of Lenox Avenue, which
runs parallel with Fifth, and then they were bowling along St. Nicholas
Avenue.  After a half-mile or less, they crossed Eighth Avenue at an
acute angle, but the gray car kept steadily on, and soon was skirting
St. Nicholas Park.

Thenceforth another mile and a half counted as little until the flying
automobile gained the Harlem River Speedway.  Here the pace improved.
There was practically no traffic to interfere with progress now, and
Brodie had to maintain an equable rate of forty miles an hour in order
to keep within sight of his quarry.

At last, by way of Nagle and Amsterdam Avenues, they regained Broadway
itself, at the point where its many sinuosities end at the bridges over
the Harlem River and Spuyten Creek.

By this time, McCulloch was undeniably anxious.  Many a mile separated
him from the busy activities of Madison Square and its surroundings,
and the main roads of the State of New York were opening up their
possibilities.  Still, he was of Scotch-Irish stock, and even the most
ardent Nationalist would be slow to maintain that the men from beyond
the Boyne are what is popularly and tersely described as "quitters."

"I'd be better pleased if I had any sort of notion where that joker was
heading for," he said, with a grim smile.  "I didn't count on taking a
joy-ride at this hour of the morning."

That was his sole concession to outraged official decorum.  He accepted
a cigar, and forthwith resigned himself to the exigencies of the chase,
which lay not with him but with the dark and devious purposes of the
sinister Anatole.

The end, however, was nearer than any of them was now inclined to
imagine.  A rapid run along the main road through Yonkers brought them
to Hastings and the bank of the Hudson River.  The comparatively level
grades of New York were replaced by hilly ground, and if they would
avoid courting observation beyond any doubt of error it was essential
that the gray car should be allowed greater latitude.  In fact, it was
almost demonstrable that an alert criminal like the man they were
pursuing--if he really were the ally of Hunter's slayers--could hardly
have failed to realize much earlier that he was being followed.
Moreover, being an expert motorist, he would know that the car in the
rear could not only hold him in the race but close up with him whenever
its occupants were so minded.  He would not be lulled into false
security by the present widening of the gap, because that was an
obvious maneuver due to altered circumstances.  In a word, there was
now no hope or prospect of running him to earth at a rendezvous, but,
giving him credit for the possession and use of a criminal's brains, it
became an urgent matter to overtake him and compel a halt by
deliberately blocking the way.

They debated the point fully, and Devar was about to tell Brodie to act
when the gray car disappeared.

Not wishing to interfere at a critical moment, Devar drew back from the
window.  Brodie spurted down a hill and along a short level lined with
suburban villas; he slowed to take a sharp corner, and the car ran
along a winding lane which could lead nowhere but to the water's edge.
It was pitch dark, and a mist from the Hudson filled the valley.
Common sense urged a careful pace, because it had never been possible
to stop and adjust the powerful headlights, while the luminous haze of
an occasional street lamp served only to reveal the narrowness of the
road and the presence of shacks and warehouses.

The descent was fairly steep, so Brodie shut off the engine, and the
big car crept on with a stealthy and noiseless rapidity which seemed to
betoken an actual sense of danger.

Suddenly they heard a loud splash, accompanied by a muffled explosion,
and McCulloch relieved his feelings by a few words, the use of which is
expressly forbidden by the police manual.  But their purport was
ridiculously clear; the gray car had plunged into the Hudson, and who
could tell whether or not Anatole had gone with it?  Curtis was the
first to adopt a definite line of reasoning: he assumed command now
with the confidence of one accustomed to be in tight places and to
depend on his own wits for extrication.

"Go forward slowly until the buildings stop, Brodie," he said, for the
two front windows were lowered, and the three men were crowded at them.
"That fellow knew exactly where he was going.  When you pull up, light
the acetylene lamps, and we will take the other pair and search the
wharf from which that car was shot into the stream."

Within a few yards the brakes went on with a jerk, and a tall crane
loomed up vaguely in front.  All four men sprang to the ground, and
while the chauffeur busied himself with the big lamps Curtis and Devar
disconnected the smaller ones.

They found themselves standing on a wooden quay, evidently used for the
trans-shipment of building materials, and a quick scrutiny showed that
the lane supplied the only practicable means of egress.  Some gaunt
sheds blocked one end of the wharf and piles of dressed stone cumbered
the other.  The tiny wavelets of the river murmured and gurgled amid
the heavy piles which shored up the landing-place, and Devar's sharp
eyes soon detected a corner of the gray-colored limousine round which a
ripple had formed.  In all probability the heated cylinders had burst
when the water rushed in, and the explosion had tilted the chassis,
else the river, necessarily deep by the side of the quay, would have
concealed the wreckage completely.

From out of the mist came a white glare.  Brodie had set the lamps
going, and now the square section of the submerged car became
distinctly visible.  A little to one side a barge was moored, and the
policeman, who had produced a serviceable looking revolver, determined
to search it.

A plank spanned the foot or so of interstice between the quay and the
rough deck, and, in the flurry of the moment, the three men crossed
without warning the chauffeur as to their movements.  The squat craft
had an open well amidships, but there were two covered-in ends, and
McCulloch, taking one of the lamps, peered down into the nearest
hatchway.

"If anyone is below there, speak," he said, "or I give you warning that
I shall shoot at sight."

There was no answer; he knelt down, lowered the lamp, and peered inside.

"Empty!" he announced.  "Now for the other one."

He repeated the same tactics, but the cavity revealed no lurking form
within.  Naturally, his companions were absorbed in McCulloch's
actions, because they knew that any instant a blinding sheet of flame
might leap out of the darkness and a bullet send him prostrate and
writhing.  Of the three, Curtis was most inured to an environment that
was unusual and weird, and he it was who first noticed that the barge
was altering its position with regard to the white discs of light which
the lamps of the automobile formed in the mist, and a splash caused by
the falling plank confirmed his frenzied doubt.

One glance showed what had happened.  Already they were ten or twelve
feet from the quay, which stood fully two feet above the deck of the
barge.  Even while the fantastic notion flashed through his mind, a
shoreward jump barely achievable by a first-rate athlete became a sheer
impossibility.

"Good Lord!" he cried, almost laughing with vexation.  "The barge has
been cast off from her moorings!"

Devar and McCulloch greeted the discovery with appropriate remarks, but
the situation called for deeds rather than words.  The cumbrous craft
was swinging gayly out into the stream, displaying a light-hearted
energy and ease of motion which would certainly not have been
forthcoming had it been the object of her unwilling crew to get her
under way.

The whereabouts of Brodie and the automobile were still vaguely
discernible by two fast converging luminous circles now some twenty
yards distant, and the fact was painfully borne in on them that in
another few seconds this landmark would be swallowed in a sea of mist
and swirling waters.

Curtis, accustomed to the vagaries of Chinese junks in the swift
currents of the Yang-tse-Kiang, adopted the only measures which
promised any degree of success.  He ran to the helm, which had been
lashed on the starboard side to keep it from fouling any submerged
piles near the bank.  Casting it loose, he put it hard a-port, and
shouted to the policeman and Devar to bring a couple of boards from the
floor of the well, and use them to sheer in the hulk to the bank.

The night was pitch dark, the mist fell on them like an impenetrable
veil, and the wooded heights which dominated both banks of the river
prevented any ray of light from coming to their assistance.  Still,
they had two lamps, which at least enabled them to see each other, and
Curtis could judge with reasonable accuracy of the direction they were
taking by the set of the stream.  They seemed to have been toiling a
weary time before the helmsman fancied he could see something looming
out of the void.  He believed that, however slowly, they were surely
forging inshore again, and was about to ask Devar to abandon his
valiant efforts to convert a long plank into a paddle and go forward in
order to keep a lookout, when the barge crashed heavily into the stern
of a ship of some sort, and simultaneously bumped into a wharf.  The
noise was terrific, coming so unexpectedly out of the silence, and
their argosy careened dangerously under some obstruction forward.

No orders were needed now.  They scrambled ashore, abandoning one of
the lamps in their desperate hurry, and the policeman instantly
extinguished the light of the other by pressing the glass closely to
his breast when a rumble of curses heralded the coming on deck of two
men who had been aroused from sleep on board the vessel by the
thunderous onset of the colliding barge.


CHAPTER XII

TWO-THIRTY A. M.

Few men or women of sympathetic nature, and gifted with ordinary powers
of observation, can go through life without learning, at some time or
other in the course of their careers, that circumstances wholly beyond
human control can display on occasion a fiendish faculty of converting
patent honesty into apparent dishonesty--and that which is true of
motive holds equally good in the case of conduct.

The three men standing breathless and unmoved on some unknown wharf on
the left bank of the Hudson might fairly be described as superlatively
honest persons, nor had they done any act which could be construed as
wrongful by the most captious critic; yet McCulloch's concealment of
the lamp suggested something thievish and illicit, and, though he alone
could give a valid reason for exercising extreme discretion, because he
realized, better than the others, what a choice morsel this adventure
would supply to the press if ever it became known, both Curtis and
Devar listened like himself with bated breath to the oaths and
ejaculations which came from the after part of the moored vessel.

"Howly war!" cried one of the startled crew.  "See what's butted into
us--the divvle's own battherin'-ram av a scow, an' wid an ilegant
lanthern shtuck on her mangy hide, if ye plaze."

A ship's lamp bobbed up and down in the gloom, and another voice said
gruffly:

"Mighty good job we had those fenders out, or she would have knocked a
hole in us.  She seems to be wedged in good and hard under our mooring
rope; but shin over, Pat, an' make her fast.  Somebody owns the brute,
an' there'll be damages to pay for this, an' p'raps salvage as well."

The Irishman dropped down into the barge.  The silent trio on the quay
heard him walking to the lamp, and saw its dull orb of radiance lifted
from the deck.

"Begob, but this is a bit of a fairy tale," came the comment.  "Here is
none o' yer tin-cint Standard Ile prapositions, but a rale dandy uv a
lamp, fit for a lady's cabin on Vandherbilt's yacht.  An', for the luv
o' Hiven, look at the make uv it, wid a handle where the bottom ought
to be, an' all polished up like the pewther in Casey's saloon."

"Oh, get a move on, Pat, an' tie her up," said the other voice.  "It's
the Lord knows what o'clock, an' we've a long day before us to-morrow."

The lamp moved astern, and the Irishman investigated matters further.

"There's bin black wur-rk here, George," he shouted.  "The moorin' rope
nivver bruk.  It was cut."

A sharp hiss of breath between McCulloch's teeth betrayed the stress of
his emotions.  To think that he, a smart roundsman of the Broadway
squad, should have been bested so thoroughly by a miserable alien
chauffeur!  The man had merely slipped over the edge of the quay, and
clung like a limpet to the rough baulks of timber which faced it; when
his pursuers were safely disposed of on board the barge, one cut of a
sharp knife had sent them adrift by the stern, while the forward rope,
released of any strain, had probably uncoiled itself from a stanchion
with the diabolical ingenuity which inanimate objects can display at
unlooked-for moments.

"Fling a coil uv line here," continued the speaker.  "This fag ind is
no good, at all at all."

The thud of a falling rope, and various grunts and comments from the
Irishman, showed that the barge was being secured.  Still the three
waited.  The primary display of secrecy, the instinct to remain unseen,
had passed, but there was nothing to be gained by entering into a long
and difficult explanation with the ship's hands, while it would be a
simple matter to recoup the owner of the barge for any charge which
might be levied on him for injury to the vessel, provided the liability
rested with him and not with others.

Swearing and grumbling, Pat stumbled along the quay, carrying the lamp.
He passed within a few feet of the motionless group, and soon they
heard him and his mate descending the companionway to their bunks.

"Now for a light," said the policeman, "and let's get out of this!"

Taking heed not to turn the lamp toward the ship, lest their movements
should be overheard and a head pop up out of the hatch, he led the way
quietly to the rear of the wharf.  A rough road climbed the hill to the
left, and, as this direction offered the only probable means of
regaining the car, they took it.

After a long climb they reached a better road, which ultimately brought
them into a main thoroughfare.  Then Curtis bethought him of looking at
his watch, and was astonished to find that the hour was half-past two
o'clock.

"By Jove!" he cried.  "We must have consumed fully half an hour over
that trip.  I wonder whether your man has waited, Devar; or would he
give us up as lost, and go home?"

"What!  Arthur return alone, and tell my aunt that the last he saw of
me I was adrift on the Hudson River in a barge with a policeman and a
swashbuckler from Pekin?  Not much!"

"I hope you are right, sir," said McCulloch.  "Even when we reach New
York I must trouble you two gentlemen to come to the station-house and
report the whole affair, as I was due there an hour ago, and the entire
precinct will have been scoured for news of me by this time."

Devar laughed loudly.

"I don't want to alarm you, McCulloch--not that you are of the neurotic
habit, judging by the way you took a chance of having a hole bored
through you while searching that blessed barge--but if you believe you
can frame a cut-and-dried programme during the time you have retained
John D. Curtis's services as guide, philosopher, and friend, you are
hugging a delusion.  I started out from a happy home last evening
intending to pick up a friendless stranger and show him the orthodox
sights of New York.  Gee whizz!  Look at me now!  I missed John D. by a
few minutes, but found myself gaping with the crowd at the scene of a
murder in which he had figured heavily.  Since then I have helped to
break open hotel doors, discovered a villain tied and gagged by other
villains, stood on my head in Morris Siegelman's joint, started a riot
in East Broadway, helped a detective to commit a larceny, cheeked a
British lord, and scoffed at a Hungarian prince, to say nothing of the
present racket.  So don't you go making plans for the night yet a
while, McCulloch, because John D. will keep you busy without any call
for you exercising your brain cells in that respect."

The roundsman did not try to grasp the inner significance of this
rigmarole.  He was unfeignedly glad to have escaped from an awkward
predicament.

"Anyhow," he said briefly, "if it comes to the worst I can ring up my
captain from the nearest station-house, and at least he will know where
I am."

"Don't be too sure of that, either.  Suppose you had 'phoned your
captain before you went on board the barge, would he be any the wiser
now?  Just to prove the exceeding wisdom of my remarks, do you know
where you are at the present moment?  Because _I_ don't."

The policeman stopped short, and gazed ahead with a new anxiety.  The
mist was thinner here, and pin-points of light from a row of lamps
showed in a straight line for a considerable distance.  For an instant
there was an embarrassed pause, because all three failed to remember
covering any similar stretch of level road after descending the hill
and turning into the lane leading to the Hudson.

"Did you notice a few minutes since that a low wall bounded the road on
both sides?" said Curtis, breaking a somewhat strained silence.

Yes, each had seen it.

"Well, I am inclined to believe," he went on, "that that wall formed
part of an accommodation bridge, under which the car passed in the dark
without our being aware of it.  Indeed, I feel confident that if we
turn back along this main road, we shall meet our lane on the right,
and about three hundred yards from this very point."

They agreed to make the experiment, and Devar grinned broadly when the
lane presented itself exactly as Curtis had predicted.

"What did I tell you?" he cackled to the roundsman.  "John D. is a
Chinese necromancer.  I'm getting used to his tricks, and you will
catch the habit in another hour or two.  By four o'clock you won't be
the least bit surprised if you find yourself flying across the New
Jersey flats in an aeroplane, or having a cup of hot coffee on board
the pilot steamer off Sandy Hook."

"I'll risk either of those unlikely things, sir, if we find your car
where we left it," They stepped out briskly.  When all was said and
done, none of the three wished to be stranded in some unknown byway of
Westchester County at that ungodly hour, and their relief was great
when the stark outline of the crane became visible in an otherwise
impenetrable wall of darkness.

"By Jove!  The car is here all right," crowed Devar joyously.

In the next few strides the automobile came in sight, the blaze of its
headlights casting a cheerful glow over the wharf.  Brodie was standing
where the barge had been moored, and gazing blankly at the river; he
turned when he heard their footsteps, and ran quickly to the car.

"It's O. K., Arthur," cried Devar, realizing that the chauffeur might
be dreading an attack from the rear, "little Willie has returned, and
won't go boating again in a derelict barge at two o'clock in the
morning if he can help it."

"Oh, it's you, sir!" came the answer in a tone of vast relief.  "My,
but I'm glad to see you!  I didn't know what to do.  I thought you were
safe enough, because I heard your voices as you drifted away, and I
fancied you might make the shore again lower down, but it seemed to be
a hopeless job to go in search of you, so, after things had calmed down
a bit, I decided to stop right here."

After the first gasp of excitement, there had crept into the placid
Brodie's voice a note of quiet jubilation which hinted at developments.

"Did anything happen after we sailed away?" asked Devar.

"Did you see anyone?" demanded the policeman.

"Things were quiet as the grave for quite a time after you gentlemen
disappeared," said Brodie, speaking with the unctuous slowness of a man
who has been vouchsafed the opportunity of his life and has grabbed it
with both hands.

"Something _did_ occur, then?" put in Devar impatiently.

"Nothing to speak of, sir--at first," came the irritating answer.  "I
watched you go on board the barge, and I noticed her edging out into
the river, and it was easy enough to know that none of you had cast her
off, because what you said showed that you were even more surprised
than I was.  So, sez I to meself, 'Arthur, me boy, barges don't untie
themselves from wharves in that casual sort of way, and at just the
right minute, too, for anyone who wanted to dispose of a cop,' begging
your pardon, Mr. Policeman, but that was the line of argument I had
with meself."

"Try the accelerator, Arthur," groaned Devar.

"If ever I meet with a bit of an accident, sir, I always pull up and
plan the wheel-marks; I carry a tape for the purpose, and it saves a
lot of hard swearing in court afterwards."  Brodie spoke seriously, and
Devar vowed that he would interrupt no more, since he merely succeeded
in stimulating the man's torpid wits.

Even now, the chauffeur waited to allow his philosophy to sink into
minds which might prove unreceptive.  Finding that there was no
likelihood of debate, he went on:

"It struck me, too, that a feller who didn't hesitate about shoving a
good car into a river must be a rank tough, the kind of character who
would jump at the chance of plugging me with a bullet, or two, for that
matter, and hiking off with the car, without anybody being the wiser,
so I nipped out from behind the wheel, and, taking care to keep away
from the light, crept in behind that pile of rock there," and he nodded
to the mass of dressed stone which filled one end of the wharf.

He waited, as though to make sure that they appreciated his
generalship.  Devar's teeth grated, and McCulloch stirred uneasily, but
no one spoke.

"You'll notice that it is only a few feet away," he said, measuring the
distance with a thoughtful eye, "but, to make sure of reaching anybody
who might try to monkey with the car, I groped around until I had found
two half bricks.  Then I waited.  By that time, which was really less
than it takes me to tell you about it, there wasn't a sound to be heard
but the lapping of the river.  The last thing I heard you say, Mr.
Howard, was----"

"I used language which no self-respecting chauffeur could possibly
repeat," broke in Devar despairingly.

"That's as may be, sir.  Circumstances alter cases, as you will see
before I've done.  Well, I listened to the river, which resembled
nothing in all the world so much as the sobbing of a child, but no one
stirred for such a time that I began to feel stiff, and I was thinking
that I might be acting like a fool for my pains when a head popped up
over the edge of the wharf."

Obviously, this sentence demanded a dramatic pause, and Brodie knew his
business.  Perhaps he expected cries of horror from his audience, but
none was forthcoming, so, with a sigh, he continued:

"That cured the stiffness, gentlemen, I can assure you.  I balanced one
of the half bricks in my left hand--I'm a left-handed man in many
things--and watched the head, while it was easy to see that the head
watched the car.  'Now,' sez I to meself, 'that's the whelp who
mistreated a car which had served him well, and he's reckoning in his
own mind that my car would suit his needs just as well as the one he
has lost.'  I do believe I read that man's mind correctly.  He might
have said out loud: 'That party of sports were muts.  They're all
aboard the Hudson River liner, chauffeur and all.'  I beg your pardon,
gentlemen, if I have put it awkwardly, but I am sort of feeling my way
towards the feller's sentiments, groping in the dark, as you might say."

Notwithstanding his effort at self-restraint, Devar felt that he must
speak or explode.

"Go right ahead, Arthur," he said.  "Explain the position thoroughly.
The fog is lifting, and we have heaps of time before sunrise."

"The whole affair is a mighty queer business, sir," said Brodie
seriously.  "The roundsman here will tell you how careful one has to be
in such matters.  I have had a law-case or two in my time, and them
lawyers turn you inside out if you begin romancing.  For instance, what
I've just told you isn't evidence.  The man said nothing; neither did
I.  We played a fine game of cat and mouse, only it happened that I was
the cat. . . .  Well, it is getting late, so I'll get on with the
story.  The head didn't budge for quite a while, but at last it made a
move, and soon the identical chauffeur who hit up the pace from 23rd
Street climbed on to the wharf and dodged in behind the crane.  He had
something in his right hand, too, that I didn't like the look of, so I
gripped my chunk of brick mighty hard.  This time he didn't wait so
long, but crept forward like a stage murderer, peeping this way and
that, but making for the car.  Once he looked straight at where I was
crouching, and I was scared stiff, because a brick ain't any fair match
for one of them new-fangled pistols at six yards or so; but I guess he
was a bit nervy himself, and he didn't make out anything unusual in my
direction.  Then he dodged right round the car to the back, and
returned on the side nearest to me.  I suppose he reckoned all was safe
by that time, so he took hold of the crank and began to start the
engine.  'Now or never!' says I to meself, so up I gets, and my knee
joints cracked like--well, they cracked so loud that only the turning
of the crank stopped him from hearing them.  With that, I let drive
with the half brick, and caught him square in the small of the back.
Down he went with a yell, and me on top of him.  I had the second half
brick ready to batter his skull in if he showed fight, but the first
one had laid him out sufficient for my purpose, which was to get hold
of this."

Brodie's hand dived into a pocket, and he produced a particularly
vicious looking automatic pistol.

Then McCulloch said imperatively:

"You've got him.  Where is he?"

Brodie was really an artist.  Some men would have smirked with triumph,
but he merely jerked a thumb casually toward the automobile:

"In there!" he said.

The policeman ran to a door and wrenched it open.  He turned the rays
of the lamp which he still held in his hand on to a figure, lying
kneeling on the floor in an extraordinary attitude.  From a white face
a pair of gleaming eyes met his in a glance of hate and fear, but no
words came from the thin lips set in a line, and a moment's scrutiny
showed that the captive was bound hand and foot.  Indeed, hands and
feet were fastened together with a stout cord, which had been passed
around the man's neck subsequently, so that he was in some danger of
suffocation if he endeavored to wriggle loose, or even straighten his
back, which was bent over his heels.

"He's all right," said Brodie, who had strolled leisurely after the
others.  "I told him I was taking no chances, and was compelled to make
him uncomfortable, but that he wouldn't choke if he kept quiet.  Of
course, he has had a rather trying wait, but I couldn't help that,
could I?"

"We give you best," growled McCulloch.  "Did you stiffen him with the
half brick, then, that you were able to hunt around for a rope?"

"That helped some, but I also remarked that, if he moved, this toy of
his would surely go off by accident, and he seemed to think it might
hurt."

McCulloch held the lamp close to the livid, twisted face.

"Is this Anatole?" he said suddenly.

"Yes," said Curtis, with instant appreciation of his adroitness.

They were rewarded by the scowl which convulsed the mask-like face, and
terror set its unmistakable seal there.  A harsh metallic voice came
from the huddled-up form.

"Cut this d--d rope, and let me stand on my feet!"

"There's no special hurry," said the policeman coolly.  "We won't
object to making things more pleasant for you if you promise to take us
straight to your Hungarian friends."

Again that wave of dread which betokens the quailing heart of the
detected felon swept over the man's features, but he only swore again,
and protested that they had no right to torture him.

McCulloch saw that he had to deal with a hardened criminal, from whom
no conscience stricken confession would be forthcoming.  He gave the
lamp to Curtis, stooped, and lifted the prisoner out on to the ground.
Untying the rope, except at the man's ankles, he brought the listless
hands in front, and placed a pair of handcuffs on the wrists.

"Now," he said, "if you have any sense left, you'll keep quiet and
enjoy the ride back to New York."

"Why am I arrested?  I have a right to know?"  The words were yelped at
him rather than spoken.

"All in good time, Anatole.  You'll have everything explained to you
fair and square."

"That is not my name.  That's a Frenchman's name."

"It fitted you all right in 27th Street a few hours ago."

"I was not there.  I can prove it."

"Of course you can.  You'd be a poor sort of crook if you couldn't.
But what's this?" the roundsman had found some letters and a pocketbook
in an inner pocket of the chauffeur's closely buttoned jacket--"M.
Anatole Labergerie, care of Morris Siegelman, saloon-keeper, East
Broadway, N. Y.," he said.  "You know someone named Anatole, anyhow, so
we are warm, as the kids say," he went on sarcastically.

"I say nothing.  I admit nothing.  I demand the presence of a lawyer,"
was the defiant reply.

"You'll see a heap of lawyers before the State of New York has no
further use for you.  Now, I'll take you to a nice, quiet hotel for the
night.  In with you. . . .  Mind the step.  Let me give you a friendly
hand. . . .  No, that seat, if you please, close up in the corner.
I'll go next.  Mr. Curtis, you don't object to being squeezed a little,
I'm sure, though the three of us will crowd the back seat, and if the
gentleman who says nothing and admits nothing will only change his
mind, and tell us exactly how he has spent a rather exciting evening,
the story will help pass the journey quite pleasantly."

But Anatole Labergerie, whose accent was that of a Frenchman with a
very complete knowledge of English, had evidently determined on a
policy of silence, and no word crossed his lips during the greater part
of the long run to the police station-house in 30th Street, in which
precinct, the 23rd, the murder had occurred, and to which McCulloch was
attached.

His presence in the car acted as an effectual damper on conversation in
so far as Curtis and Devar were concerned.  If their suspicions were
justified, he was a principal in an atrocious crime, and mere
propinquity with such a wretch induced a feeling of loathing comparable
only with that shrinking from physical contact to which mankind yields
when confronted with leprosy in its final forbidding form.

But McCulloch was jubilant.  He regarded his prisoner with the almost
friendly interest taken in his quarry by the slayer of wild beasts to
whose rifle has fallen some peculiarly rare and dangerous "specimen."
He enlivened the road with anecdotes of famous criminals, and each
story invariably concluded with a facetious reference to the "chair" or
a "lifer."  Once or twice he gave details of the breaking up of some
notorious gang owing to information extracted from one of its minor
members, who, in consequence, either escaped punishment or received a
light sentence; but the captive remained mute and apparently
indifferent, whereupon Curtis, who had been revolving in his mind
certain elements in a singularly complex mystery, broke fresh ground by
saying:

"The strangest feature of this affair is probably unknown to you, Mr.
McCulloch.  To all intents and purposes, the men who killed the
journalist were acting in concert with a Frenchman named Jean de
Courtois, and their common object was to prevent a marriage arranged
for last night.  Yet this same de Courtois was found gagged and bound
in his room at the Central Hotel shortly before midnight.  Someone had
maltreated him badly, and the wonder is he was not killed outright."

Now, the roundsman, wedged close against the prisoner, felt the man
give an almost unconscious and quite involuntary start when de Courtois
was mentioned, and there could be no question that he was straining his
ears to catch each syllable Curtis uttered.

Nudging the latter, McCulloch said:

"So it was a near thing that two weddings were not interfered with last
night, sir?"

"No, not two, only one.  I married the lady."

"You did!"

The policeman's undoubted bewilderment was convincingly genuine, but,
despite his surprise, he was alert to catch the slightest move or sign
of emotion on the part of the captive.

"Yes," said Curtis.  "I married her before half-past eight."

"Then you must have possessed some knowledge of the parties mixed up in
this business?"

"No, not in the sense you have in mind.  I cannot supply full
particulars now, but you will learn them in due course.  The point I
wish to emphasize is this--poor Mr. Hunter's death was absolutely
needless.  I imagine he only came into connection with the intrigue by
exercising the journalistic instinct to obtain exclusive details of a
sensational news item which involved several distinguished people.  The
miserable tools employed by men who wished to gain their own ends were
not even true to each other, and they undoubtedly attacked Hunter by
error."

"Did they mean to kill you, then?"

"Oh, no.  They had never heard of me.  I dropped from the skies, or the
nearest thing to it, since I was on the Atlantic at this hour
yesterday."

McCulloch was aware that the Frenchman had been profoundly disturbed by
Curtis's statements, and kept the ball rolling.  That name, de
Courtois, seemed to supply the clew to the man's agitation, so he
harped on it.

"Has Mr. Steingall seen de Courtois?" he asked.

"Yes.  Mr. Devar and I accompanied him to de Courtois's room, and set
the rascal free."

"That settles it," said the roundsman emphatically.  "If the man with
the camera eye has looked de Courtois over it is all up with the whole
bunch.  Are you listening, Anatole?  This should be real lively hearing
for you."

"Monsieur de Courtois is a friend of mine," came the sullen response.

"Oh, is he?  Then you do know something about events in 27th Street,
eh?"

"I tell you nothing, but why should I deny that I know Monsieur de
Courtois?"

"Or that you are a Frenchman," put in Curtis quietly.  "One of the few
words in the French language which no foreigner can ever pronounce is
that word 'Monsieur,' especially when it is followed by a 'de.'  I
speak French well enough to realize my limitations."

"Now, Anatole, cough it up," said McCulloch jocularly.  "You've no more
chance of winning through than a chunk of ice in hell's flames."

"Let me alone, I'm tired," said the other, relapsing into a stony
inattention which did not end even when Brodie brought the car to a
stand outside the police station-house in West 30th Street.

The advent of the roundsman with a prisoner and escort created some
commotion among his colleagues.  The police captain was the same
official who had harbored suspicion against Curtis not so many hours
ago, and his opinion was not entirely changed, only modified.

He glanced darkly at Curtis and Devar, but was manifestly cheered by
sight of McCulloch with a chauffeur in custody.

"Hello!" he cried, "and where in Hades have _you_ been?"

"A long way from home, Mr. Evans," said the roundsman.  "But it was
worth while.  This is Anatole, whose other name is Labergerie, the man
wanted for the murder in 27th Street."

"The deuce it is!  Where did you get him?"

"Away up beyond Yonkers."

"Hold on a minute."

He swung round quickly to a telephone, and called up Headquarters.

"Hello, there," he said, when an answer came.  "Mr. Steingall or Mr.
Clancy in?  Both?  Well, put me through. . . .  That you, Mr.
Steingall?  I'm Evans, 23rd precinct. . . .  Sergeant McCulloch has
just arrived with a prisoner, the chauffeur, Anatole; and Mr. Curtis is
here, too. . . .  Anatole Labergerie is the full name."

Some conversation followed.  The others could hear the peculiar rasping
sound of a voice otherwise undistinguishable, but it was evident that
the police captain was greatly puzzled.  At last he beckoned to Curtis.

"You're wanted," he said laconically.

Curtis went to the instrument, and Steingall's rather amused tone was
soon explicable.

"There's a screw loose, somewhere," he said.  "Anatole Labergerie is a
respectable garage-keeper.  I know him well.  Half an hour ago I called
him out of bed, chiefly on account of his front name, and he told me
that Mr. Hunter hired a car from him last evening, but never showed up
at the appointed place and time, and the chauffeur brought the car back
to the garage to wait further orders."

"I have no wish to traduce Anatole Labergerie," said Curtis, "but I am
quite sure that the man under arrest is the driver of the car in which
the Hungarians made off.  He has admitted, too, that Jean de Courtois
is his friend."

A low whistle revealed Steingall's revised view of the situation.

"Don't go away," he said.  "Clancy and I will be with you in less than
quarter of an hour."

Curtis hung up the receiver, and announced the new development.  The
Frenchman did not betray any cognizance of it.  He had collapsed into a
chair, and looked the degenerate that he was.

But Devar slapped McCulloch's broad shoulders.

"Didn't I tell you?" he cried.  "There's a whole lot of night ahead of
us yet.  Gee whizz!  I'll write a book before I'm through with this!"


CHAPTER XIII

WHEREIN LADY HERMIONE "ACTS FOR THE BEST"

A dejected and disheveled super-clerk was called on to face a new
crisis soon after he had apparently got rid of most of the persons
concerned in the pandemonium which had raged for hours around that
refuge of middle-class decorum and respectability, the Central Hotel in
27th Street.

As he was wont to explain in later days of blessed peacefulness:

"The queerest part of the whole business was that I never had the
slightest notion as to what was going to happen next.  Everything
occurred like a flash of lightning, and imitated lightning by never
striking twice in the same place."

It was not to be expected that a man of the Earl of Valletort's social
standing and experience would allow himself to be brow-beaten by a
police official and an uncertain miscellany of people like Devar and
the members of the Curtis family.  When the cool night air had tempered
his indignation, and he was removed from the electrical atmosphere
created by his son-in-law's positive disdain and Steingall's negative
indifference, he began to survey the situation.  Though not wholly a
stranger in New York, he was far from being versed in the
technicalities of legal and police methods, so he bethought him of
securing skilled advice.  The hour was late, but the fact merely
presented a difficulty which was not insuperable to a person of even
average intelligence.  He turned into an imposing looking hotel on
Broadway, produced his card, and asked for the manager.

An affable clerk hurried forward, thinking that his house was about to
earn new laurels; if somewhat surprised by the Earl's explanation that
he was in need of a lawyer of repute, and had applied to the proprietor
of an important hotel as one most likely to further the quest, he
responded with prompt civility.

"There are several lawyers guests in the hotel at this moment, my
lord," he said.  "Each is a notable man in one branch of practice or
another.  May I ask if you want advice in a matter of real estate, or
some commercial claim, or a criminal charge?"

"The latter, in a sense," said the Earl.  "A relative of mine has
contracted a marriage under conditions which are illegal, or, at any
rate, most irregular."

The clerk stroked his chin.

"Mr. Otto Schmidt has just concluded a remarkable nullity of marriage
suit," he pondered.

"Just the man for my purpose.  Is he in?"

Within five minutes the Earl was closeted with Mr. Otto Schmidt in the
latter's private sitting-room.  The lawyer was a short man, who bore a
remarkable physical resemblance to an egg.  Head, rotund body, and
immensely fat legs tapering to very small feet, formed a complete oval,
while his ivory-tinted skin, and a curious crease running round
forehead and ears beneath a scalp wholly devoid of hair, suggested that
the egg had been boiled, and the top cut off and replaced.

But he showed presently that the ovum was sound in quality.  He
listened in absolute silence until his lordship had told his story.
All things considered, the recital was essentially true.

There were suppressions of fact, such as the lack of any mention of
collusion between the distraught father and Count Ladislas Vassilan on
the one hand and Jean de Courtois on the other, and there were wholly
unwarrantable imputations against Curtis's character and attributes,
but, on the whole, Mr. Schmidt was able, in his own phrase, "to size up
the position" with fair accuracy.

Like every other man of common sense who became acquainted with the
night's doings in a connected narrative, he began by expressing his
astonishment.

"I have had some singular cases to handle during a long and varied
professional career," he said, and eyelids almost devoid of lashes
dropped for an instant over a pair of dark and curiously piercing eyes,
"but I have never heard of anything quite like this.  You say the name
of the detective who gave you the account of the murder, and of the
connection of this John Delancy Curtis with it, is Steingall?"

"Yes."

Again the eyelids fell, and, as Mr. Schmidt's face was also devoid of
eyebrows, and was colorless in its pallor, and as his lips met in a
thin seam above a chin which merged in folds of soft flesh where his
neck ought to be, his features at such a moment assumed the
disagreeable aspect of a death mask, though this impression vanished
when those brilliant eyes peered forth from their bulbous sockets.

"But I know Steingall," he said.  "He is at the head of the New York
Detective Bureau, a man of the highest reputation, and one who commands
confidence in the courts, not to speak of his department."

"He struck me as an able man, but I am quite sure he has failed to
appreciate the share this fellow, Curtis, has borne in the affair,"
said the Earl testily.

"It seems to me that your daughter, Lady Hermione, could not possibly
have been what is commonly described as 'in love' with de Courtois?
Stupid as the comment may appear, I must search for a motive."

"My good sir, the notion is preposterous.  I--I have reason to believe
that she intended this marriage to serve as a shield, or cloak, for her
own purposes, which were, I regret to say, largely inspired by a
stubborn resolve not to marry a man who is suitable as a husband in
every way--by birth, social position, and distinguished prospects."

"Her own purposes.  What does that mean exactly?"

"It means that she was contracting a marriage as a matter of form.
Don't you see that this consideration, and this alone, made it possible
for an impertinent outsider like Curtis to offer his services as de
Courtois's substitute, while my misguided daughter was equally prepared
to accept them?"

"Ah!"

The eyelids shut tightly once more, and the Earl, feeling rather
irritated and disturbed by this unpleasing habit, shifted his chair
noisily.  He found, however, that Mr. Schmidt merely kept the shutters
down for a rather longer period than before, and, as the lawyer
impressed him with a sense of power and ability, he resolved to put up
with a peculiarity which was certainly disconcerting.

"May I ask if your daughter is what is popularly known as a pretty
girl, my lord?" demanded Schmidt suddenly.

"Yes.  She is remarkably good-looking, but----"

"Motive, my lord, motive.  I was wondering why Curtis should behave
like a thundering idiot.  Now, apart from your natural dislike to the
man, how would you describe him?"

"He looks a gentleman, and, under ordinary conditions, I would regard
him as a social equal," admitted the Earl.

"So, unfortunate as the circumstances may be, he is a more desirable
_parti_ than the French music-master?"

Then the noble lord flared into heat.

"Dash it all!" he cried.  "You are almost as bad as that detective
person.  I am not bothering my brains as to Curtis's desirableness or
otherwise, or comparing him with a worm like de Courtois.  I want this
marriage annulled.  I want him arrested.  I want the aid of the law to
extricate my daughter from the consequences of her own folly.  Surely,
such a marriage cannot be legal!"

Schmidt weighed the point from behind the veil, and an unemotional
reply soothed his fiery client.

"The idea is, perhaps, untenable--almost repulsive," he said, "but the
law on the matter is governed by so many differing decisions that I
cannot express a reasoned opinion offhand.  You see, the question of
consideration intervenes.  And--and--where is the lady now?"

"I don't know."

"You left Curtis at the Central Hotel!"

"Yes."

"In company with Steingall, and two elderly Curtises, and young Devar?"

"Yes."

"Why didn't you demand your daughter's present address?"

"I--I was so stunned by what I regarded as official sanction of an
outrage that I came away in a fury."

Mr. Otto Schmidt rose, or rather, raised his oblong shape from a slight
incline on a chair to a horizontal position.

"Let us go to the hotel," he said.  "And there must be no more fury.
Leave the inquiry in my hands, my lord, and it will be strange if I do
not succeed in elucidating points which are now baffling us--in fact, I
may say, inducing mental disturbance."

Thus, it came to pass that Krantz, the reception clerk at the Central
Hotel, had just seen the doctor sent to dose de Courtois with bromide
leaving the building when the Earl and Mr. Schmidt entered.

As it happened, the lawyer was known to him, Schmidt having had legal
charge of the corporation which reconstructed the hotel, so it was
impossible for an employé to be reticent with him about the matters
which were discussed forthwith.

"Mr. Steingall gone?" inquired Schmidt affably.

"Yes, sir.  He left here nearly half an hour ago," said the clerk,
outwardly self-possessed, but wondering inwardly what new bomb would be
exploded in his weary brain.

"This murder, and its attendant circumstances, constitute a very
extraordinary affair," said the lawyer.

"Yes, sir."

Krantz was not deceived.  He had answered some such remark a hundred
times that evening, but he would surely be put on the rack in a moment
by some fantastic disclosure which none save a lunatic would dream of.

"Now, about this Mr. John Delancy Curtis," purred Schmidt, "has it been
ascertained beyond all doubt that he arrived in New York from Europe
this evening?"

"I think so, sir," was the jaded answer.  "The police are satisfied on
that point, I believe, and he himself gave his last address as Pekin."

"Pekin!"

"Yes, sir."

Everybody was invariably astonished when they heard of Pekin.  Had
Curtis described his recent residence as "the Moon" it would have been
regarded as only a degree more recondite.

"Then," said Schmidt, closing his eyes, "assuming he is the stranger he
represents himself as being, he could have no personal connection with
the murder of Monsieur Jean de Courtois?"

There!  Another comet had fallen in 27th Street.  Krantz winced, as if
the lawyer had struck him.

"Mr. de Courtois!" he gasped.  "Who says he was murdered?  He is--not
very well, it is true, but for all that I can tell, he is sound asleep
in bed at this minute."

"Sound asleep!" roared the Earl, who had been most positive in his
opinion that Curtis must have brought about the Frenchman's death for
his own fell purpose.

Otto Schmidt laid a restraining hand on his lordship's shoulder.

"Steady now," he murmured.  "Remember my instructions.  The inquiry is
committed to me for the time."

"But, confound it, man----"

"Yes, this is startling, this changes the whole aspect of the case.
But you see the value of calm and judicious method."

The egg-shaped man was certainly entitled to take credit for the
disclosure, and seldom failed to do so in many subsequent expositions
to admiring friends of a singular case, but he never realized how
thoroughly self-deluded the Earl had been by the original blunder.

"But, sir," protested the clerk, "it was never supposed that Mr. de
Courtois had been killed.  No one knew who the poor gentleman was at
first, because Mr. Curtis's overcoat and his had been accidently
exchanged in the flurry and excitement after the crime was committed.
The police found the initials H. R. H. on his clothing, and that fact
led to his being recognized as Mr. Henry R. Hunter, a well-known New
York journalist.  Had I seen him myself, I would have settled that
point in a moment, because he often came here to visit Mr. de Courtois."

"Indeed!  That is very interesting, most decidedly interesting."

"Are you quite certain that what you are saying is correct?  Mr.
Hunter, the murdered man, was acquainted with Monsieur de Courtois?"

The question came from the Earl of Valletort, whose angry bewilderment
had suddenly given place to a gravity of demeanor that was significant
of the serious complications involved in the clerk's statement.

Poor Krantz could have bitten his tongue for its too free wagging.  He
was thoroughly tired, and had intended to go to his room at the
earliest moment and repair damages by a long night's rest.  Now, to all
appearance, he had unwittingly reopened the whole wretched imbroglio.
But there was no help for it.  Having put his hand to the plow he was
obliged to turn the furrow.

"Yes, my lord, positive," he said between his teeth.

"Ah!"  Schmidt was beginning to think that the amazing marriage
promised to develop into a _cause célèbre_.  "In that event, it becomes
essential, indeed, I may say imperative, that his lordship and I should
interview Monsieur de Courtois without delay."

"Sorry, sir," said the clerk, desperately availing himself of the
detective's instructions, "but Mr. Steingall left orders that no one
should be permitted to visit Mr. de Courtois to-night."

"Left orders?  Is the man in this hotel?"

"Oh, yes, I was aware of that all the time," put in the Earl.  "He
lived here--don't you see, that accounts for the mistake I made in
assuming that----"

"Forgive me."  The lawyer's monitory hand rose again, and he turned to
the clerk.  "You can hardly expect me, Mr. Krantz, to regard Mr.
Steingall's 'orders' as in any way controlling my actions.  Kindly show
his lordship and me to Monsieur de Courtois's room at once."

There was nothing for it but to obey.  Krantz understood exactly how he
would be jumped on and pulverized in the morning by irate stockholders
in the hotel if any action of his should be adversely reported on by
the great Otto Schmidt.

But the visit to de Courtois fizzled out unexpectedly.  The Frenchman,
still attired in evening dress, for that is the conventional wedding
attire of his race, was lying on the bed sleeping the sleep of utter
exhaustion supplemented by bromide.  The two negro attendants, who were
hoping for some more exciting experience, were squatted on the floor
playing pinochle, and the strenuous efforts of Lord Valletort to arouse
the slumberer were quite useless.  But--and that was a vital thing--he
had seen de Courtois, and knew beyond doubt that he was alive, and
seemingly in good health, or, at any rate, physically uninjured.

"The man has been drugged," said the lawyer, watching the Earl's
unavailing attempt to awaken the Frenchman.  "Is, by any chance, Mr.
Curtis's room situated near this one?"

"It is just overhead," said the clerk.

"Dear me!"

Schmidt looked up at the ceiling as though his eyes might discern a
trap-door.  "Is Mr. Curtis there now?"

"No, sir."

"Where is he?"

"He went out with a Mr. Devar."

"Oh!  Do you know where he went to?"

Krantz was tempted to prevaricate, but Schmidt was a power in the
Central Hotel.

"I believe, sir, he is at the Plaza."

"A large hotel, near Central Park, is it not?" demanded the Earl
eagerly.

"My lord, pardon me."  If we look to the development of slavery the
past thirty years, we shall see that the ideas of Calhoun respecting
State Sovereignty have had a mighty influence in gradually preparing
the slave States for the course which they have taken.

Slavery, in its political power, has steadily become more aggressive
in its demands. A morbid jealousy of Northern enterprise and
thrift, with the contrast more vivid from year to year, of the immeasurable
superiority of free labor, has brought about a growing aversion, in
the South, to the free States, until with every opportunity presented
for pro-slavery extension, there has resulted the present organized
combination of slave States that have seceded from the Union.

When the mind goes back to the early formation of our Government
and the adoption of the Constitution, it will be found that an entire
revolution of opinion and feeling has taken place upon the subject of
slavery.

From being regarded, as formerly, an evil by the South, it is now proclaimed
a blessing; from being viewed as opposed to the whole spirit and teachings
of the Bible, it is now thought to be of divine sanction; from being
regarded as opposed to political liberty, and the elevation of the
masses, the popular doctrine now is, that slavery is the corner-stone
of republican institutions, and essential for a manly development
of character upon the part of the white population. Formerly slavery
was looked upon as peculiarly pernicious to the diffusion of wealth
and the progress of national greatness; now the South is intoxicated
with ideas of the profitableness of slave labor, and the power of
King Cotton in controlling the exchanges of the world.

And the same change has taken place in relation to the African
slave-trade.
While the laws of the land brand as piracy the capture of negroes
upon their native soil, and the transportation of them over the
ocean, it is nevertheless true that a mighty change in Southern opinion
has taken place in respect to the character of this business. It is
not looked upon with the same horror as formerly. It is apologized
for, and in some places openly defended as a measure indispensable to
the prosperity of the cotton States. As a natural inference from the
theory of those who hold to the views of Calhoun upon State
sovereignty, the doctrine of coercion in any form by the Federal
Union is denounced, and to attempt to put it in practice even so
far as the protection of national property is concerned, is construed
into a war upon the South.

Thus, while it is perfectly proper for the slave States to steal, and
plunder the nation of its property, to leave the Union at their
pleasure, and to do every thing in their power to destroy the
unity of the National Government, it is made out that to attempt
to recover the property of the Federal Union is unjustifiable
aggression upon the slave States.

Thus we see eleven States in a confederate capacity openly making
war upon the Federal Government, and compelling it either into a
disgraceful surrender of its rights as guaranteed by the Constitution,
or war for self-defense.

Fort Sumter was not allowed to be provisioned, nor was there
any disposition manifested to permit its possession in any manner
honorable to the Government, although its exclusive property.

It must be surrendered unconditionally, or be attacked.

The worst feature connected with the secession movement is the hot
haste with which the most important questions connected with the
interests of the people are hurried through.

The ordinance of secession is not fairly submitted to the people,
but a mere oligarchy of desperate men themselves assume to declare
war, and exercise all the prerogatives of an independent and sovereign
government.

And yet the terms submitted in the Crittenden Resolutions as a
peace-offering to the seceding States to win them back by concessions
from the North, present a spectacle quite as mournful for the cause of
national unity and dignity as the open rebellion of the seceding
States.

The professed aim of these States is either a reconstruction of the
Constitution in a way that shall nationalize slavery and give it
supreme control, or a forcible disruption of the Union.

What are the terms proposed that alone appear to satisfy the South?
They may be briefly comprehended in a short extract from a speech
delivered by Senator Wilson, of Massachusetts, February 21,
1861:
'But the Senator from Kentucky asks us of the North by irrepealable
constitutional amendments to recognize and protect slavery in the
Territories now existing, or hereafter acquired south of thirty-six
degrees, thirty minutes; to deny power to the Federal Government
to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia, in the forts,
arsenals, navy-yards, and places under the exclusive jurisdiction
of Congress; to deny the National Government all power to hinder
the transit of slaves through one State to another; to take from
persons of the African race the elective franchise, and to purchase
territory in South-America, or Africa, and send there, at the expense
of the Treasury of the United States, such free negroes as the
States may desire removed from their limits.

And what does the Senator propose to concede to us of the North? The
prohibition of slavery in Territories north of thirty-six degrees
and thirty minutes, where no one asks for its inhibition, where it has
been made impossible by the victory of Freedom in Kansas, and the
equalization of the fees of the slave Commissioners.'

Here we have the true position in which the free States are placed
toward the slaveholding States. Seven States openly throw off all
allegiance to the Federal Union, do not even profess to be willing to
come back upon any terms, and then such conditions are proposed by the
other slaveholding States as leads to the repudiation of the Constitution
in its whole spirit and import upon the subject of slavery.

The alternative, in reality, is either civil war or the surrender of the
Constitution into the hands of pro-slavery men to be molded just as it
may suit their convenience. The price they ask for peace is simply the
liberty to have their own way, and that the majority should be
willing to submit to the minority.

They aim for a reconstruction of the Union that shall incorporate the
Dred Scott decision into the whole policy of the Government and make
slavery the supreme power of the country, and all other interests
subservient to it.

The North has its choice of two evils--unconditional and unqualified
submission to the demands of slavery, or civil war. It is expected,
since the country has yielded step by step to the exactions of slavery
ever since the Government was instituted, that the free States
will keep on yielding until the South has nothing more to ask for,
and the North has nothing more to give.
With such a servile compliance, the free States are assured that they
will have no difficulty in keeping the peace. But the question to
be decided is: Is such a kind of peace worth the price demanded
for it?

May it not be true that great as is the evil of civil war, it is
less an evil than an unresisting acquiescence to the exactions of
slavery, and the admission that any State that pleases can leave
the Union?

The theory of secession involves, if admitted, a greater disaster
to the Federal Union than even the slow eating at its vitals of the
cancer of slavery.

National unity, one country, the sovereignty of the Constitution,
are all sacrificed by secession.

It involves in it either the worst anarchy or the worst despotism.
United, the States can stand, and command the respect of the
world, but secession is an enemy to the country, the most cruel. Rev.
Dr. Breckinridge, of Kentucky, most forcibly says:

'Every man who has any remaining loyalty to the nation, or any hope and
desire for the restoration of the seceding States to the Confederacy,
must see that what is meant by the outcry against coërcion is in
the interest, of secession, and that what is meant is, in effect,
that the Federal Government must be terrified or seduced into
complete coöperation with the revolution which it was its most
binding duty to have used all its power and influence to prevent.'

Jefferson Davis, in his late message, says: 'Let us alone, let us
go, and the sword drops from our hands.'

But what does this involve? The admission of the right of secession,
which, as has been proved, is fatal to all national unity and
preservation.

Even if this arrogant demand was complied with, would peace be thus
possible? Would not the breaking up of the Union involve the people
in calamities that no patience, or wisdom upon the part of the
North could avert?

Remember a long border in an open country, stretching from the Atlantic,
possibly even to the Pacific, is to be defended.

Will the bordering people sink down from war, and all its exasperations,
and become as peaceful as lambs?
Constituted as human nature now is, will the dissolution of the
Union create with the great North and South the experience of
millennium prediction, 'The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young
lion and fatling together; and a little child shall lead them'?

Here is a line crossed by great rivers; we are to shut up the mouth
of the Chesapeake bay, on Ohio and Western Virginia; we are to ask
the Western States to give up the mouth of the Mississippi to a
foreign power.

Is it reasonable to suppose that no provocation will occur on this
long frontier? Will no slaves run away? What is to be gained by a
dissolution of the Union? Not peace; for if, when united, there
exists such cause of dissension, the evil will be tenfold greater when
separated.

Not national aggrandizement, for division brings weakness, imbecility,
and a loss of self-respect; it invites aggressions from foreign powers,
and compels to submission to insults that otherwise would not be
given. Not general competence, for the South is quite as dependent
upon the North as the North upon the South.

Disunion is a violent disruption of great material interests that
now are wedded together. The dream of separate State sovereignty, our
great Union split into two or more confederacies, prosperous and
peaceable, is Utopian. So far from the secession doctrine carried out
leading to peace and prosperity, it can only lead to perpetual war and
adversity. The request to be 'let alone,' is simply a request that
the nation should consent to see the Constitution and Union overthrown,
slavery triumphant, and the great problem that a free people can not
choose its own rulers against the will of a minority prove a disgraceful
failure.
It is a request that a nation should purchase a temporary peace at the
price of all that is dear to its liberty and self-respect.

The arrogance of the demand '_to be let alone_,' is only equaled
by the iniquity of the means resorted to, to break up the best
Government under the sun.

The question of disunion, of separate State sovereignty, was fully
discussed by our fathers. Thus Hamilton, whose foresight history has
proved to be prophetic, says:

'If these States should be either wholly disunited, or only united
in partial Confederacies, a man must be far gone in Utopian
speculations, who can seriously doubt that the subdivisions into
which they might be thrown would have frequent and violent contests
with each other.

To presume a want of motives for such contests, as an argument
against their existence, would be to forget that men are ambitious,
vindictive, and rapacious.

To look for a continuation of harmony between a number of independent,
unconnected sovereignties, situated in the same neighborhood, would
be to disregard the uniform course of human events, and to set at
defiance the accumulated experience of ages.'

From a consideration of the true import of the Constitution, in relation
to slavery and the fallacy and wickedness of the doctrine of Secession,
we are now prepared to deduce, from what has been said, the
following reflections: First, the war in which the nation is now
plunged should have strictly for its great end, the restoration of
the Constitution and the Union to its original integrity; all side
issues, all mere party questions should be now merged in one mighty
effort, one persevering and self-sacrificing aim to maintain the
Constitution and the Union.

As essential for this purpose, it is indispensable that all the rights
guaranteed to loyal citizens in the slave States should be
respected.

The reason is two-fold. First, this war, upon the part of the North,
is for the maintenance of the Constitution as our fathers gave it
to us.

Its object is not a crusade against slavery. What may be the results
of the war in relation to slavery is one thing; what should be the
simple purpose of the North is another.

That this war, however it may turn, will be disastrous to slavery,
is evident from a great variety of considerations.

But that we should pretend to fight for the Constitution and the Union,
and yet against its express provisions, in respect to those held
in bondage by loyal citizens, is simply to act a part subversive
of the true intent of the Constitution.

To violate its provisions, in relation to loyal citizens South, is in the
highest degree impolitic and suicidal.

It is the constant aim of the enemies now in armed rebellion against
the Union, to misrepresent the North upon this very point. By
systematic lying, they have induced thousands South to believe that the
election of Lincoln was designed as an act of war upon slave
institutions, and to subvert the Constitution that protects them in
all that they call their property.

There is nothing that the rebels South are more anxious to see than the
Government adopting a policy that will give them a plausible pretense
for continuing in rebellion.

The Constitution places the local institution of slavery under the
exclusive control of those States where it exists. Its language,
faithfully interpreted, is simply this: Your own domestic affairs
you have a right to manage as you please, so long as you do not
trespass upon the Union, or seek its ruin.

All loyal citizens should be encouraged to stand by the Union in
every Southern State, with the unequivocal declaration that all
their rights will be respected, and that their true safety, even
as noblest interests, must lie in upholding the North in the effort
made to put down the vilest rebellion under the sun.

My second reflection is, that those South, who are in armed rebellion
against the Constitution and the Union, must make up their minds
to take what the fortune of war gives them.

This rebellion should be bandied without gloves. The North should
permit nothing to stand in the way of a complete and permanent
triumph. As Northern property is all confiscated South; as Union men
there are treated with the utmost barbarity; as nothing held by the
lovers of the Union is respected, the greatest injury in the end
to the Constitution and the Union is, an unwise clemency to armed
rebellion.

In this death-struggle to test the vital question, whether the majority
shall rule, let there be no holding back of money or men. Dear as war
may be, a dishonorable peace will prove much dearer. Great as may
be the sufferings of the camp and the battle-field, yet the prolonged
tortures of a murdered Union, a violated Constitution, and
Secession rampant over the country, will be found to be greater.

My third reflection is, that the main cause of our civil war is slavery.
It has now assumed gigantic proportions of mischief, and with its
hand upon the very throat of the Constitution and the Union, it
seeks its death.

The worst feature connected with it has ever been, that it is satisfied
with no concession, and the more it has, the more it asks. By the very
admission of the chiefs of this rebellion, it is confessedly got up
for the sake of slavery, and to make it the corner-stone of the
new Confederacy of States.

The real issue involved by the rebellion is, complete independence
of the North, the dissolution of the Union, and exclusive possession
of all the territories south of Mason and Dixon's line; or
reconstruction upon such conditions as would result in the repudiation
of the old Constitution, the nationalization of slavery, and giving
complete political control to a slaveholding minority of the country.

This rebellion has placed the North where it must conquer, for its own
best interests, and dignity, and the salvation of free institutions. It
must conquer, to command future friendship and that respect
without which Union itself is a mockery. Let the South see that the North
can not be beaten, and the universal consciousness of this fact
will command an esteem, and the useful fear of committing offense,
that will do more to keep the peace than all the abject professions
or humble submissions in the world.

Having found out that the North not only is conscious of its rights,
but has the willingness and the ability to defend them, it is certain
that the country will yet have as much peace, general thrift, and
noble enterprise with the onward march of virtue and intelligence,
as may be reasonably expected of any community upon the face of the
earth.

BONE ORNAMENTS.

Silent the lady sat alone:
In her ears were rings of dead men's bone; The brooch on her breast
shone white and fine, 'Twas the polished joint of a Yankee's spine; And
the well-carved handle of her fan, Was the finger-bone of a Lincoln
man.
She turned aside a flower to cull, From a vase which was made
of a human skull; For to make her forget the loss of her slaves,
Her lovers had rifled dead men's graves.

Do you think I'm describing a witch or ghoul?
There are no such things--and I'm not a fool; Nor did she reside in
Ashantee; No--the lady fair was an F.F.V.

THE MOLLY O'MOLLY PAPERS.

V.

'Hearts are trumps,' is a gambler's cant phrase. That depends on the
game you are playing. In many of the games of life the true trump
cards are Diamonds; which, according to the fortune-teller's
lore, stand for wealth. Indeed, Hearts are by many considered so valueless
that they are thrown away at the very outset; whereas they should,
like trumps, only be played as a last resort. No trick that can be
won with any other card, should be taken with a heart--the card will
be gone and nothing to show for it.

If you wish wealth, win it if you can--honestly, of course--but don't
throw in the heart. Are you ambitious--would you win honor? Very
well, if for political honor you can endure it to be spit upon by the
crowd, to have all manner of abuse heaped on you and your _forbears_
to the remotest generation--a ceremony that in Africa follows the
election, but is 'preliminary to the crowning,' but in this
country is preliminary to the election--but if you can make up your mind
to pass through this ordeal, well and good--but don't throw in the
heart....

Yet in games on which is staked all that is worth playing for, 'hearts
_are_ trumps;' and he who holds the lowest card, stands a better
chance of winning than he who has none, though in his hand may be
all the aces of the others, diamonds included.

But, lest I go too far beyond the analogy--as I might ignorantly do,
being unskilled in the many games of cards--I will drop the
figurative....

Keep your heart for faith, love, friendship, for God, your country,
and truth. And where the heart is given, it should be unreservedly.
Its allegiance is too often withheld where it is due, yet this is better
than a half-way loyalty; there should be no _if_, followed by
self-interest.... The seal of confederate nobles, opposed to some
measures of Peter IV. of Aragon, 'represents the king sitting on his
throne, with the confederates kneeling in a suppliant attitude,
around, to denote their loyalty and unwillingness to offend. But in
the back-ground, tents and lines of spears are discovered, as
a hint of their ability and resolution to defend themselves.' ...
This kind of allegiance no true heart will ever give.

I take it for granted that you have a heart--not merely anatomically
speaking, an organ to circulate the blood, but a something that
prompts you to love, to self-sacrifice, to scorn of meanness, and,
it may be, to good, honest hatred.

All metals can be separated from their ores; but meanness is
inseparable from some natures, so it is impossible to hate the sin
without hating the sinner; we can't, indeed, conceive of it in the
abstract.

I don't mean hate in a malignant sense--here I may as well express my
scorn of that sly hatred that is too cowardly to knock a man down, but
quietly trips him up.

It is well enough for those who think that 'life is a jest,' (and a
bitter, sarcastic one it must be to them,) to mock at all nobler
feelings and sentiments of the heart.

None do they more contemn than friendship. I would not 'sit in the seat'
of these 'scornful,' however they may have found false friends.

Yet every man capable of a genuine friendship himself, will in this
world find at least one true friend.

Oxygen, which comprises one fifth of the atmosphere, is said to
be highly magnetic; and any ordinary, healthy soul can extract magnetism
enough from the very air he breathes to draw at least one other
soul.

Some people have an amazing power of absorption and retention of
this magnetism.

You feel irresistibly drawn toward them--and it is all right, for they
are noble, true souls.

There is a great difference between their attractive force and that
kind of 'power of charming' innocence that villainy often has--just
as I once saw a cat charm a bird, which circled nearer and nearer
till it almost brushed the cat's whiskers--and had he not been
chased away, he would have that day daintily lunched--and there
would have been one songster less to join in that evening's vespers.

False----s there are--I will not call them false _friends_--this noun
should never follow that adjective. To what shall I liken them--to the
young gorilla, that even while its master is feeding it, looks
trustingly in his face and thrusts forth its paw to tear him?

Who blames the gorilla? Torn from its dam, caged or chained, it owes its
captor a grudge. To the serpent? The story of the warming of the serpent
in the man's bosom, is a mere fable. No man was ever fool enough to
warm a serpent in his bosom. And the serpent never crosses the path of
man if he can help it. The most deadly is that which is too sluggish
to get out of his way--therefore bites in self-defense. And the serpent
generally gives some warning hiss, or a rattle.

Indeed, almost every animal gives warning of its foul intent. The
shark turns over before seizing its prey.

But the false friend (I am obliged to couple these words) takes you in
without changing his side....

In truth, a man, if he has a vice, be it treachery or any other, goes
a little beyond the other animals, even those of which it is
characteristic.

We say, for instance, of a treacherous man, _He is a serpent_; but it
would be hyperbole to call a serpent _a treacherous man_.

But these false friends, who deceive you out of pure malignity, who
would rather injure you than not, who, perhaps, have an old, by you
long-forgotten, grudge, and become your apparent friends to pay
you back--these are few.
Martiny was
nearest to me, and I am sure he never used a knife, so it must have
been Rossi.  Is that correct?"

"I believe so, absolutely.  What next?"

"Martiny said 'Vite, allez!' so I shoved in the clutch and made off at
top speed.  In Fifth Avenue I glanced over my shoulder to look at Mr.
Hunter, and see whether or not he was struggling, but my friends alone
were visible in the back seat, so I believed they had put him on the
floor, and did not stop or look at them again until I reached De
Silva's house in Market Street.  Then, to my annoyance, when I got down
to help carry in Mr. Hunter, I found blood on the step and the panel,
and the idiots told me what they had done.  It is only fair to say that
De Silva is innocent of any part in the affair.  He didn't even know
that we were bringing anyone to Rossi's room, and we took care that he
should be out at the time we counted on arriving at Market Street."

"You didn't attack Mr. Hunter sooner because your orders were to wait
until the last possible moment?"

"That is so."

[Illustration: Scenes from the photo-drama.]

Devar was unaware of any change in the manner of either of the
detectives, because he was watching Lamotte's livid face with a species
of fascinated horror, but Curtis, who had often been compelled to hold
similar inquiries into cold-blooded crimes committed by Chinese
coolies, found greater interest in observing Clancy.  A subtle
exultation had suddenly danced into the diminutive Franco-Irishman's
expressive features when Market Street was first mentioned, and his
coal-black eyes blazed in their slits at the sound of that name, De
Silva.

A queer thought flitted through Curtis's mind, but he put it aside,
because Steingall was speaking again.

"Well, you got rid of your friends.  Then what did you do?"

"The rest was simple.  I cleaned the car in a hurry with a bit of oily
waste, took it to a yard which I have used at times, at an address
which I beg you to permit me to forget, changed the number plate, and,
at an hour which I deemed discreet, drove uptown in order to dispose of
the car by leaving it deserted near the garage from which it came.  The
owner's house is on Riverside Drive.  His name is Morris; he is absent
in Chicago on business, while I learnt that his chauffeur was ill."

A gasp of uncontrollable excitement from Devar drew all eyes to him.

"Great Jerusalem!" he cried.  "Next house to my aunt's!"

"There's a mistake somewhere," broke in Brodie.  "I know Mr. Morris's
car, and that isn't it."

Lamotte was positively annoyed that his word should appear to be
doubted.

"Messieurs," he said grandiloquently, "I assure you on my honor that I
am not misleading you."

Nor was he.  The discrepancy was cleared up next day.  The Morris
automobile was undergoing repairs, and the motor manufacturers had
supplied the gray car for use in the interim.

Steingall swept the matter aside impatiently.

"Go on," he said to the Frenchman.  "You're taking a note of this?" he
added, glancing at police captain Evans.

"Got it," was the laconic reply.

"There is nothing else," said Lamotte.  "I noticed that I was being
followed, and soon discovered that I could not shake off a more
powerful car.  I was armed, but did not want to get into trouble on my
own account, and I knew that I would have to deal with three men.  So I
decided to throw the car in the river, and trust to my wits for a means
of escape.  I would have succeeded, too, had I been aware that there
was a fourth man in the party.  From where I lay hidden beneath the
wharf I could only count the number of people who crossed to the barge.
I was unable to see them, so I included the chauffeur among the three.
I was wrong.  Perhaps it is as well, because I meant to get away, and
would have fought. . . .  That is all. . . .  Will one of you give me a
cigarette?"

Devar produced a case, and in response to Steingall's nod, offered its
contents to the prisoner, who took two cigarettes; nor could he be
prevailed on to accept more.  Despite his hang-dog looks he had an
undoubted air of refinement.  Degeneracy had claimed him as its own,
yet some streak of a nobler heredity had struggled to exert its
influence, only to fail.

Steingall put no more questions, and Lamotte relapsed into silence,
smoking nonchalantly while the police captain's pen was scratching a
transcript of the shorthand notes.

Curtis caught Steingall's eye, and drew him aside.

"That fellow told the truth about the actual murder, I think" he said.
"My story coincides with his in every detail."

"I'm sure you are right," agreed the detective.  "The odd thing is that
Clancy should have spotted him from your description telephoned to
headquarters.  You remember Clancy was looking at a book of photographs
when I brought you to the Bureau?"

"Yes."

"He had found him then.  Some time since, during the anarchist troubles
in Chicago, the French police sent us a lot of pictures, and this
fellow's was among them."

"Why didn't he ask me if I recognized him?"

"That is not pretty Fanny's way.  Clancy never does what any other man
would do.  He hates to have anyone verify an opinion he has once
formed.  Had you said the photograph resembled the man you saw outside
the hotel Clancy would actually have begun to believe that he might be
mistaken."

"At any rate," said Curtis, smiling, "you two seem to have made
marvelous progress with the inquiry since a set of drunken stokers
broke up a harmonious gathering at Morris Siegelman's."

"We have done pretty well, but this"--and Steingall glanced at
Lamotte--"this goes far beyond anything we hoped for to-night, or this
morning, for the new day is growing old."

Curtis was puzzled.  He realized that the capture of the chauffeur was
important, but it shrank into insignificance beside the connected
history of events which the detective seemed to have at his fingers'
ends.

"I suppose I must not ask questions," he said with a quizzical look
into the extraordinary eyes which had earned the chief of the Detective
Bureau the picturesque description coined by an enthusiastic reporter.

"No need," said Steingall.  "Unless you are fed up with excitement, I
purpose taking you and Mr. Devar down town again, just as soon as Evans
has stopped slinging ink.  Then you will appreciate the importance of
the things said here."

Curtis remembered that fleeting impression he had garnered while
watching Clancy during the Frenchman's statement, which, however,
appeared only to confirm the ample history already in Steingall's
possession.  But again his thoughts were diverted from the matter by
Steingall's next words.

"I take it you have not called at the Plaza Hotel since we came away
together?" he said.  "You certainly could not stop there during the
rush after the missing chauffeur, and I suppose McCulloch brought you
straight here after the arrest?"

"Yes.  We passed the hotel on the outward journey, and I thought I saw
a light in--in my wife's suite, but we returned by a different route."

He fancied that the detective was about to explain a somewhat peculiar
question, but at that instant the police captain summoned Lamotte to
his desk.

"I'll read what I have written," he said, "and, if it is correct, you
will sign it.  You need not sign unless you wish, but the statement
will be given in court, and, if you attest it now, may count in your
favor."

He recited an exact record of the Frenchman's words, and Lamotte took
the pen and scrawled his name.  Then, at a nod from Evans, the
roundsman took the prisoner to a cell.

"By Jove!  George, or perhaps I ought to say 'By George, Jove!' you did
that well," exclaimed Clancy, speaking for the first time since he had
entered the station-house, and addressing Steingall.

"I thought I was going to fail, but I stuck to my guns, and it came
off," was the modest if rather cryptic reply.

"We, too, have fought with beasts at Ephegus, so let us into this,"
cried Devar.  "What came off, and where was the risk of failure?  To my
mind, you had Lamotte in a double Nelson grip all the time."

"That's where you are in error, young man," said Steingall cheerfully.
"Sometimes it pays to pretend a knowledge you don't possess, and this
was one of the occasions.  Mr. Clancy and I knew that somewhere in New
York were two Hungarians named Gregor Martiny and Ferdinand Rossi.  We
knew that they were the men who killed Mr. Hunter, but we had no more
notion where they were hiding, or how to lay hands on them, than the
man in the moon."

"Great Scott.  Haven't you arrested them?"

"No, sir.  That is a pleasure deferred."

"Do you mean that you wanged that address out of the Frenchman?"

"That's about the size of it.  I might have searched for a week for
Martiny and Rossi, but no one in East Broadway would have owned up to
seeing or even hearing of them."

"Still, you had their names pat?"

"Yes," said the detective, cutting the end off a cigar, "we had their
names, and we ascertained why they killed Hunter, or would have killed
any other person who tried to balk their scheme, but our information
stopped there."

Steingall, usually so communicative, evidently meant to keep to himself
the source of his inspiration, and, in a few minutes, Brodie was
driving the four men to the Police Headquarters.

They went to the Detective Bureau, and Steingall telephoned the Clinton
Street police station-house.

"You know De Silva's place in Market Street?" he said.  "Well, within
ten minutes have half-a-dozen men gather quietly near the door. . . .
Two others should watch the back, and stop anyone making a bolt that
way. . . .  Yes, of course, there may be shooting.  I'll turn up in a
private auto, and stop off at the corner of East Broadway. . . .  Leave
the rest to Clancy and myself. . . .  No, only two, but they're hot
stuff."

He unlocked a drawer in a desk, and took out a pair of revolvers.
After examining them to make sure they were fully loaded, he handed one
to Clancy.

"I hope we shall not require them, Eugene, but there's no telling," he
said.

"I suppose I'm not allowed to shoot anybody, so you might lend me a
stick," suggested Devar.

"You and Mr. Curtis are remaining right here," said the detective.

"Oh, be a man, Steingall!" cried Devar disgustedly.  "Don't play dog
when there's a chance of a real row.  Look how I swung things your way
in Morris Siegelman's!"

"You might let us peep round the corner, at any rate," smiled Curtis.

Steingall meant to be obdurate, but yielded, and it was well that he
allowed his sympathies to sway his judgment, or there might have been
an early vacancy in the chief inspectorship.

At that middle hour of the night even New York's prowlers of the dark
had retired to their foul rookeries.  The streets were almost deserted,
and the glare of gas and naphtha had vanished.  The houses of the
Hungarian quarter were stark and gloomy now, many woe-begone in their
semi-dismantled aspect, and all sinister.  When the automobile drew up
noiselessly at the corner of Market Street, a broad enough
thoroughfare, but broken and battered in appearance, the only visible
forms were those of three or four patrolmen, who were sauntering
aimlessly along the sidewalk.  But there were eyes watching through
unknown chinks in shutters, or peering through soiled curtains behind
dirt-stained windows, and the quiet concentration of the police in one
special quarter evidently did not pass unnoticed.

When the battle began, it partook of the vagaries of real warfare by
opening unexpectedly.

It was ascertained afterwards that two men darted like shadows out of a
passage in Market Street, and separated instantly.  One came toward
East Broadway, where the detectives and their companions had just
alighted from the car, and the other, breaking into a run, dived into
Henry Street, with two patrolmen after him.  He it was who opened the
fray, and the peace of the night was suddenly disrupted by the loud
bark of an automatic pistol.  Three shots were fired with a quick
irregularity, and then came the deeper report of a service revolver.

Steingall and Clancy ran forward, and the fugitive coming their way had
actually passed them, with two more patrolmen in pursuit, when
Steingall saw him and turned instantly.

"Stop!" he shouted.

The man only increased his pace, and the detective, astonishingly
active for one of his bulk, raced along at top speed.

"Stop or I shoot!" he cried again.

By that time the self-confessed outlaw was nearly opposite the car.  He
checked his pace, half turned, luckily not to the side where Curtis and
the others were standing, and leveled a Browning pistol at the
detective.  He even hesitated an instant to take aim, but before his
finger had pressed the trigger, Curtis had sprung at him.  There was no
time for a blow, but a well placed kick spun the would-be murderer off
his feet, and the crash of the shot came an infinitesimal part of a
second too late.  As it was, the bullet struck a lamp higher up the
street, and a line taken subsequently showed that it must have missed
Steingall by only a few inches.

The miscreant reeled, and lost his balance.  Then Curtis closed with
him, caught his right wrist, and threw him heavily, but, such was the
man's frenzied resolve not to be arrested, that he fired twice again
before the deadly weapon fell from his grasp.  He did no damage, but
the uproar brought a motley crowd from the neighboring dwellings.
Market Street, which had seemed asleep or dead, proved itself very much
alive and awake, but the sight of uniformed police hurrying up from
several directions restrained any undue curiosity on the part of its
denizens.

The desperado on the ground was handcuffed at once, and, while a
policeman was searching his pockets rapidly to ascertain if he carried
another pistol, Steingall gripped Curtis by the shoulder.

"I owe you something for that," he said quietly.  "I rather fancy he
would have dropped me if it hadn't been for you. . . .  Oh, I know what
I am saying.  I shall not forget. . . .  Show a light here," he added
to a patrolman who had run from East Broadway on hearing the shooting.
"Now, Mr. Curtis, do you recognize him?"

"Yes," said Curtis---whose experiences in New York were revealing an
unsuspected side of his character, for in 56th Street, in Morris
Siegelman's, and now again in Market Street, he had proved himself what
Allen Breck would have termed "a bonnie fighter"--"yes, that is the man
who spoke to me in the Central Hotel.  I imagine he is Martiny."

"Good!  Put him in the car!"

The detective rushed off, but soon returned.

"Sorry to trouble you, but will you come this way a minute?" he said.

Curtis went with him.  In Henry Street a small group was gathered in
the roadway.  A policeman had proved himself a better shot than Rossi,
and Hunter's murder was already avenged in part.

The dead man was left to the district police, to be carried to the
mortuary in an ambulance.  Steingall, with his prisoner, returned to
headquarters, while Clancy made a thorough search of the room the pair
had occupied in De Silva's house.

The Hungarian did not deny his name nor his share in the earlier crime.

"It is fate," he said doggedly in his broken French.  "When they tell
me we have killed the man I know the police get us."

He would say no more.  His words seemed to imply that neither he nor
Rossi meant to do other than maim the journalist whom they regarded as
de Courtois's dangerous helper; but he did not urge the plea.  Perhaps
he felt that when a Hungarian uses a knife, a trifling error in the
matter of direction is pardonable.

"I shall not go home now," said Steingall, bidding farewell to his
allies when Martiny had been formally identified and charged.  "I must
get this thing thoroughly straightened out before morning, though the
inquest and police court proceedings will be mere adjournments.
Good-night, Mr. Devar.  Good-night, Mr. Curtis.  Once more, thank you.
And, by the way, if all is not well at the Plaza, 'phone me at once.
Remember, won't you?  Good-night!"


CHAPTER XV

WHEREIN THE PACE SLACKENS--BUT ONLY FOR A FEW HOURS

"Say, old man," muttered Devar, gazing fixedly at Brodie's broad
shoulders as Broadway unrolled its even width before the car on the
uptown journey, "are we the same couple of blighters who met in a
bathroom gangway, 'B' Deck, near staterooms 51 and 52, on board the
Cunard steamship _Lusitania_, about twenty-one hours since; or have we
become dematerialized?"

Curtis knew that the boy was quivering with excitement, but it was
useless to advise a slackening of the tension, so he merely said:

"Do you feel like a Mahatma?"

"If a Mahatma is a fellow with a head like a balloon, not in size, but
in contents, yes.  Have you ever had a real jag on you, not the big
dinner, big bottle, big cigar sort of imitation, but the wild-eyed,
imp-seeing, genuine rip-snorter?"

"No.  Neither have you."

"I should have denied the charge before to-night.  But I know now what
it means.  It is a brain-storm induced by rum.  There are many other
varieties, at least fifty-seven, and I've sampled fifty-six different
sorts in nine hours.  Do you realize that it is just nine hours since I
walked into the Central Hotel, and the orchestra struck up?  Good Lord!
Nine hours!  And do you remember, Curtis, I said as we came up the
harbor that you would have a hell of a good time in New York?  Ha, ha!
likewise ho, ho!  A good time!  Eating, fighting, marrying, plunging
neck and crop out of one frantic revel into another.  Talk about
delirium tremens, and its little green devils with little pink
eyes--why, it's commonplace, that's what it is--a poor sort of
pipe-dream compared with the reality of life in New York as seen in
company with John Delancy Curtis, of Pekin."

Devar was not by any means the first person in the city who had
associated the name of the capital of China with some bizarre and
elusive element of fantasy in connection with the man who gave "Pekin"
as his address.  There was no explaining the conceit; it was just one
of those whimsies which are alike plausible yet enigmatical.  Had
Curtis described himself as being of London, or Paris, or even of
Yokohama, no sense of mystery would have attached itself to his
personality.  But, to the world at large, Pekin represents the unknown,
and therefore the incongruous.  It is the Forbidden City, the inner
shrine of the East, the symbolic rallying-point of a race which
occupies no common ground with the peoples of Europe or America.  Had
Curtis written that he hailed from Lhassa, his legal domicile would
have lost its occult extravagance save to the discriminating few.

The mere mention of Pekin now brought back to Curtis's mind the last
time he had written the word, and, by association of ideas, the queer
way in which Steingall had twice alluded to the Plaza Hotel.  He said
nothing of this to Devar.  He thought, and with good reason, that the
sooner that young man was in bed and asleep the better it would be for
his health, because a mercurial temperament was levying heavy draughts
on physical powers, so he gave no hint of the nebulous doubt induced by
the detective's words.

"The order of the day is bed for each of us," he said, bidding his
friend farewell at the door of the hotel.  "Therefore, I shall not
offer you any sort of hospitality at this hour, except the kindest one
of saying good-by speedily.  You are coming to lunch, I think?"

"Lunch!"  Devar's head wagged solemnly.  Feverishly wakeful, he was
really half asleep.  "Don't talk to me of lunch.  You haven't had
breakfast yet, John D.  New York will keep you busy yet awhile, or I
don't size her up right. . . .  Good old New York!  Isn't she a peach?
Well, so long!  If you want me, 'phone.  I'll pull a couch under the
instrument and sleep with my clothes on.  If I shove my head beneath a
tap I'll be as right as rain.  Home, Arthur."

Then Curtis entered the hotel, and a night-porter took him up in the
elevator.  When he opened the door of Suite F. its tiny lobby was in
darkness, but the lights in the sitting-room were switched on.
Evidently, then, neither he nor Devar was mistaken in identifying those
illuminated windows when the chase led them past the hotel.  But he was
struck instantly by the fact that the door leading to Hermione's room
was wide open, and, before he could assimilate this singular fact, he
saw a note lying on a small table just where it must catch his eye on
entering his own bedroom.

Curtis was no soothsayer, but he was endowed with a penetrating and
usually accurate judgment, and he knew at once that Hermione had left
him.  Although he had only seen her handwriting when she signed the
register at the clergyman's house he recognized the same free,
well-formed characters in the "John Delancy Curtis, Esq." on the
envelope.  He paled, perhaps, and a pang of a pain crueller than bodily
ill may have wrung his heart, but he hesitated not a second about
opening the letter.

Then he read:


"DEAR MR. CURTIS:--My father has been here, and with him a Mr. Otto
Schmidt, a lawyer.  They told me that Jean de Courtois is alive, and
that you know it, and have known it throughout.  Gladly would I have
refused to believe them, but, sometimes, there are statements which
cannot be lies--which partake of truth in their very essence--which
sear their way into one's consciousness as white-hot iron scorches the
flesh.  Still, owing to my trust in you, I clung to the frail hope that
there might be some mistake, so, when they had gone, I telephoned the
Central Hotel, and a clerk there assured me that Monsieur de Courtois
was in bed and asleep.

"What am I to say?  Perhaps, silence is best.  Marcelle and I are
returning to my apartments in 59th Street.  Please do not come there.
I feel now that I have been selfish and misguided.  I fear it will hurt
you if I ask to be permitted to bear the heavy expense you must incur
with regard to the wretched affair into which I have dragged you,
though involuntarily, or, shall I put it? with the blind striving for
succor of one sinking in deep waters.  Yet, do me one last kindness,
and let me reimburse you.  That would be a small concession to my
pride, because, in some respects, sorely as I am wounded, I shall
regard myself as ever in your debt.

"Sincerely yours,
  HERMIONE.

"P.S.  This person, Schmidt, seems to be reliable.  You might arrange
matters with him."


Now, above and beyond every other characteristic, Curtis was
fair-minded.  He read the girl's letter once in order to learn what had
happened and why she had gone: then he reread it critically, word for
word, trying to distil from its disjointed phrases "that essence of
truth" which Hermione had spoken of.  Evidently, she had determined to
keep her words within the bare walls of necessity.  The note had a
jerkiness of style that was certainly absent from her speech, and the
fact argued that she was compelling herself to write with restraint.
She was brimming over with reproach, grief-stricken, and miserable, and
unquestionably shocked beyond measure, but she had forced the
reflection: "I have no real claim on this man, nor wrong to lay at his
door, and, although he has deceived me, I am under heavy obligation to
him, so I must neither condemn nor reproach, but say nothing that goes
beyond a temperate explanation of my action."

The signature itself was eloquent of the conflict which raged in her
troubled brain while the pen was framing those formal sentences.
Well-bred young ladies do not sign themselves by their Christian names,
_tout court_, in notes written to young gentlemen of an evening's
acquaintance.  Yet, what was she to do?  "Hermione Beauregard
Grandison" had gone beyond recovery with the marriage ceremony, but
"Hermione Curtis" was almost ludicrous, considering the text of this,
the first note she had written to her "husband."

It was only one side of Curtis's self-reliant nature which analyzed,
and criticised, and weighed matters with such judicial calm.  There was
another which brought a hard glint into his eyes, and caused a hand
which gripped the molded back of a lightly-built chair to exert a force
of which he was unconscious until the mahogany rail snapped.

Then he remembered Steingall, and his enigmatical inquiries, and turned
to the telephone.

At sound of his voice, the detective cleared away any doubt as to the
reason which inspired those vague questions.

"Lady Hermione has gone, has she?" he said sympathetically.  "I thought
as much.  There was no use in worrying you about it sooner, but I was
told that the Earl and Schmidt had visited her, and that she and the
maid had left the hotel in a taxi a few minutes after the departure of
the visitors.  Will you take my advice?"

"What is it?"

"You ought to have said 'Yes' at once.  Go to bed, and force yourself
to sleep.  Give no instructions to be called, but get up when you
waken, and start a new day with a clear head.  You'll need it."

"I'm not going to disturb the peace of Lady Hermione's apartments in
59th Street, if that is what you mean."

"Not quite.  In fact, not at all.  You are not that kind of a man.  Did
she leave any message?"

"Yes, a letter.  Would you care to hear it?"

"If you have no objection."

Curtis read the note instantly, and, so delicate is the perceptiveness
of the ear, he could almost follow the trend of the detective's
unspoken thought by a hiss of breath or a muttered "Hum," as a name was
mentioned or a reason given for some particular action.

"Like the majority of women, she conveys the most important fact in a
postscript," was Steingall's dry comment when Curtis had reached the
end.

"Where shall I find this man, Schmidt?" inquired Curtis.

"Are you in a hurry, then, to begin the suit for dissolution?"

"That does not account for my anxiety to meet Schmidt."

"He is a stoutly-built individual, with a large, soft neck, and eyes
which would protrude most satisfactorily under pressure.  Is that what
you mean?"

"I want to make his acquaintance, and soon--that is all."

"Now, Mr. Curtis, don't destroy the good opinion I have formed of you.
Let well enough alone.  Schmidt has done you a splendid turn, and it
would be foolish on your part to requite a benefactor by trying to
strangle him."

"Mr. Steingall, I am tired, and very, very uncertain of myself----"

"So you don't want even to pretend that there is any humor in the
situation.  Yet, unless I err greatly, before many hours have passed
you will agree with me that nothing more directly fortunate in your
behalf could have occurred than Schmidt's interference as Lord
Valletort's legal adviser.  I know Schmidt, and Schmidt knows me.  In
this affair you would be a baby in his hands, just as he would resemble
a bladder of lard in yours.  My difficulty is that I really cannot give
reasons, but you will appreciate the position when I say that, for the
moment, the murder of Mr. Hunter has become an affair of state, and all
information regarding recent developments will be withheld from the
press.  Do you follow?"

"Yes."

"I take it, too, that if Lady Hermione were restored to you, and it was
left to the pair of you to determine whether or not the marriage
entered into under such extraordinary conditions should become a real
union, you would be satisfied?"

"I don't see how----"

"You can at least take my word for it, Mr. Curtis, that the chance of
such an outcome will be greatly forwarded if you go straight to bed,
whereas any design you may have formed as to assaulting and battering
Otto Schmidt would, if put into execution, probably defeat the more
important object, or, at any rate, cripple its prospects of success."

"Do you really mean that?"

"I am almost sure of it.  There is only one thing of which I am more
certain at the moment."

"And that is?"

"That if it were not for your quickness of eye and hand--and foot, for
that matter--I would now be laid out in a mortuary or on an hospital
table.  I appreciate those qualities when exercised on a person like
Martiny, whose main argument is centered in an automatic pistol, but
they would be singularly out of place if tested on Otto Schmidt, when
backed by the laws of the United States, which, strange as it may seem,
I also represent."

"If you put it that way, Steingall----"

"I do, most emphatically.  Let me be more precise.  Promise me now that
you will not stir out of the Plaza Hotel until I come to you."

"Is that really essential?"

"I would not ask you if it were not."

"What time may I expect you?"

"Let me see. . . .  It is now nearly five o'clock.  I hope to sleep
till eight.  I give you till nine.  Bath and breakfast brings you to
ten.  Say eleven."

"I owe you a good deal, so I shall await you till noon.  After that
hour I reserve my freedom of action."

The detective laughed.

"Good-by," he said, and, as though in keeping with the other fantasies
of the night, Curtis was sound asleep in quarter of an hour.  He had
acquired the faculty of sleeping under any conditions of mental or
physical stress, short of illness or severe bodily pain, and he could
awake at any hour previously determined on, so, a few minutes before
nine o'clock he was in his bath.  At a quarter-past nine he rang for a
waiter and ordered breakfast.

"For one, sir?" said the man, who had not been on duty the previous
evening, but had taken care to ascertain the names of the guests on his
section of the floor.

"Yes, for one," said Curtis.  "My wife and her maid are not
breakfasting in the hotel.  Will you kindly send up a batch of morning
newspapers?"

It was only to be expected that the keen and bright intelligence of New
York journalism should have fastened on to the murder in 27th Street as
something out of the ordinary.  But its methods were new to the man
whose adult years had been passed far from his native city, and he was
astounded now to find how the descriptive reporter, aided by the
photographer, had depicted and dissected nearly every feature of the
crime.  On one point the press was silent--as yet.  There was no
mention of Lady Hermione, and, with a reticence which spoke volumes for
the close relations existing between police and reporters, the Earl of
Valletort and Count Vassilan were represented as merely "enquiring for"
John Delancy Curtis, "the man from Pekin."

Curtis had spread the newspapers on the table, and, when a tap on the
door of the sitting-room seemed to indicate the re-appearance of the
waiter, he swept them up in a heap, meaning to go through them at
leisure after breakfast.

"Come in," he said, turning casually.

The door opened, and Hermione entered.

It was what dramatists term "a psychological moment," and, according to
Berkeley, one of the axioms of psychology is that it never transcends
the limits of the individual.  Most certainly, at that moment, the
truth of this dictum was demonstrated in a manner which would have
surprised even the doughty philosopher himself.

Curtis saw nothing, knew nothing, thought of nothing not strictly
bounded by the fact that Hermione, and none other, stood there.  He
gazed at her spell-bound for a second or two.  He neither moved nor
spoke, but remained stock-still, with the newspapers gathered in his
hands, while his eyes blazed into hers without any pretense of
restraint.

She was rosy red, partly because of the wine-like morning air through
which she had walked swiftly, but more, perhaps, because of a very real
embarrassment and contriteness of spirit.

"I came," she faltered--"I am here--that is--will you ever forgive
me!----"

Down went the papers, and round Hermione went Curtis's strong arms.  He
was a man of thew and sinew, against whom a slender girl's strength
might not hope to prevail.  The last thing she looked for was to be
embraced at sight.  It is the last thing any woman expects, and the one
thing to which she is most apt to yield.  And really, despite her
fluttered cry of protest, there was something very comforting and
dependable about that masculine hug.  Hermione had never before been
clasped in a man's arms.  She was a highly kissable person, and women
would embrace her readily, but the total absence of any milk-and-water
convention about Curtis's method of showing delight at meeting her was
at once bewildering and stupefying.

There must be a great deal, too, which does not leap promptly to the
eye in the study of such a dry-as-dust subject as psychology, because
three of its fixed principles are: "Experience is the process of
becoming expert by experiment," "One finds a measure of truth in the
naïve realism of Common Sense;" and "Action and Reaction are strictly
correlative."

Applying these tests to the remarkable rapidity of decision and fixity
of purpose displayed by Curtis in squeezing the breath out of Hermione,
and gazing into her eyes until her proud head bent and sought refuge
for a glowing face by hiding it on his breast, it will be noted first,
that, for a man who had no experience in love-making, Curtis was
quickly becoming expert; secondly, that Common Sense teaches that if
one would win a wife one must also woo her; and thirdly, that a
wonderfully effective way to obtain a satisfactory response from
Hermione was to reveal the educational value of a hug.

At last, then--though not before Hermione's arms had gone around his
neck of their own accord, and her lips had met his with a sigh of sheer
content--he permitted her to speak.  And of all things in the world she
said that which it thrilled him to hear.

"John, dear," she murmured, "we have become husband and wife in a
strange, mad way, but, perhaps it is for the best, and I shall try
never to give you cause for regret."

By this time one hand was firmly braced around her waist, but the other
was free to lift her chin until her swimming eyes met his.

"Hermione," he said, "I vowed last night that not all the men and laws
in America would tear you from me.  If we parted, it was you, and you
alone, who could send me away, and I am glad, oh, so glad, that you
have come back to me."

"Dearest, it sounds like a dream," she said brokenly.  "Can a man and a
woman truly love each other who have only met as you and I have met?"

"I think we have solved that problem for all time," he said, tilting
her hat with the joyous abandon of a lover jealous even of the flowers
and plaited straw which should hide any of the sweet perfections of his
mistress.

"But you have plunged me into a sort of trance," she whispered.  "I
came here to explain----"

An ominous rattle of a laden tray at the outer door drove them apart as
though a thunderbolt had fallen between them.  Hermione rushed to her
own room, there to consult a mirror, and readjust her hat and veil and
disordered hair, but Curtis met a hurrying waiter.

"Sorry to bother you," he said, "but my wife has come in unexpectedly,
and we shall want breakfast for two."  He raised his voice:

"Coffee for you, Hermione, or would you prefer tea?"

"Coffee, of course," was the answer, in so calm and collected a tone
that the waiter thought he must have been mistaken in his first
impression.

"No trouble at all, sir," he said, with the ready civility of his
class.  "Unless you wish to wait, sir, I'll bring another cup and some
hot plates, and order a further supply from the kitchen."

"You're a man of resource," cried Curtis cheerfully.  "I leave the
arrangements to you with confidence. . . .  Come along, Hermione.
Don't say you have breakfasted already."

"I won't, because I haven't," she said, reappearing with a smiling
nonchalance which removed the last shred of doubt from the waiter's
mind.  But, for all that, she electrified Curtis with a timidly
grateful glance, for she appreciated his thoughtfulness in giving her
an opportunity to collect her scattered wits.  There was need of some
such respite; she had much to relate, she thought, before he could
possibly understand the motives which led to her flight.

Barely half an hour ago Mr. Steingall had put in an appearance at her
apartment.  He had told her, with convincing brevity, exactly why
Curtis refrained from adding to her perplexities by announcing the
comparative well-being of Jean de Courtois.

The sole author of the four readers first issued as the Eclectic Readers
was William Holmes McGuffey. He was responsible for the marked qualities
in these books which met with such astonishing popular approval in all
these years. What these qualities are is well known to those who have
used the books and the users are numbered by millions.

[The Rhetorical Guide]
The Rhetorical Guide was prepared by Mr. A.H. McGuffey, and his name
alone was on the early editions. In 1844 the book was revised by the
author and Dr. Pinneo, and was given the alternate title "or Fifth
Reader of the Eclectic Series."

The work of revision occupied two years.
The title page carried the name of its author until, for reasons
of his own, he asked to have it removed.

As usual when revisions of schoolbooks are made, the older edition was
continued in publication so long as a distinct demand for it
existed.

But the issuance of a revised edition always suggests the question of
change, which competing publishers promptly seek to bring about. The
publishers of the "Newly Revised McGuffey Readers," therefore, sought
to replace the older edition wherever it was in use and to displace
competing books wherever possible. The edition of 1843 acquired large
sales over a very wide territory in the central West and South.
It is the edition generally known by the grandfathers of the school
boys of the present day.

It may be interesting to name some of the selections in this
Rhetorical Guide issued in 1844 since in modified form the work has
been the highest reader of the series.

[Selections of Value]

As a guide toward rhetorical reading the book contained a carefully
prepared collection of rules and directions with examples for practice
in Articulation. Inflection, Accent and Emphasis, Reading Verse,
for the Management of the Voice and Gesture.

These pages were intended for drill work, and in those days the teachers
were not content with the dull monotonous utterance of the words or
with mere mastery of thought, to be tested by multitudinous questioning.
If the pupil obtained from the printed page the very thought the author
intended to convey, the pupil was expected to read orally so as
to express that thought to all hearers. If the correct thought was thus
heard, no questions were needed. The test of reading orally is the
communication of thought by the reader to the intelligent and
attentive hearer, and the words of the author carry this message
more accurately than can any other words the pupil may select.

[Noted Selections]

The selections in the Rhetorical Guide were made, first of all, to
teach the art of reading.

There was therefore great variety.

Second, to inculcate a love for literature. Therefore the selections
were taken from the great writers,--poets, orators, essayists,
historians, and preachers. The extracts are wonderfully complete in
themselves,--one does not need to read the whole of Byron's Don Juan to
appreciate the six stanzas that describe the thunder-storm on the
Alps. Of the poetical extracts all the users of this book will remember
Southey's "Cataract of Lodore" with its exacting drill on the ending,--"ing,"
Longfellow's "Village Blacksmith" and the "Reaper and the Flowers;"
Bryant's "Thanatopsis" and "Song of the Stars;" Wolfe's "Burial
of Sir John Moore;" Gray's "Elegy;" Mrs.

Hemans's "Landing of the Pilgrim Fathers;" Cowper's "My Mother's
Picture;" Jones's "What Constitutes a State;" Scott's "Lochinvar;"
Halleck's "Marco Bozzaris;" Drake's "American Flag;" and Mrs.

"Will you jump in, or shall I prowl with you down Fifth Avenue?" asked
Devar, blithely ignoring Steingall's somewhat strained welcome.

"We are keeping an appointment," said Curtis.  "I, for one, shall be
more than pleased if the combination which proved so effective last
night may remain intact this morning."

"Steingall daren't cut adrift from me," said Devar.  "If you knew the
truth about him, you'd find that he is deeply superstitious, and I'm a
real mascot for bringing good luck.  Perhaps he is not aware, John D.,
that I was the impresario who 'presented' you to an admiring public.
Tell him that, and see if he has the nerve to say I'm not wanted."

"Come along, Mr. Devar," said the detective, apparently yielding to a
sudden resolve.  "I think I can make use of you--justify your presence,
that is.  Tell your chauffeur to wait for us at 42d Street."

Off went Brodie, jubilant at the prospect of his services being in
requisition again.  He had not yet learnt the application to all things
mundane of Disraeli's quip that it is the unexpected which happens.

"Now, I want you two gentlemen to attend closely to what I have to
say," said Steingall seriously, placing himself between them, so that
his words might not reach other ears than those for which they were
intended.  "Mr. Hunter's murder has passed long ago out of the common
class of crimes.  It will be inquired into thoroughly, of course, and
punishment will be dealt out impartially to those responsible for its
commission.  But--and this is the point I want to emphasize--neither of
you know, nor am I at liberty to inform you--just what bounds the
authorities may reach, or stop at.  Have I made my meaning clear?"

"Yes," said Curtis.

"We're to be good little boys, and sit still, and say nothing, and do
as we're told," said Devar.

"I'm not asking impossibilities," said Steingall, who had a dry humor,
and seldom missed a chance of gratifying it.  "I have merely laid down
a proviso which must be observed, not for a day, or a week, but as long
as any of us is alive.  State affairs are not the property of
individuals.  They come first, all the time.  If they don't suit our
convenience, we must simply adjust ourselves to the new conditions."

"You alarm me, Steingall," cried Devar.  "Have we been drawn into an
international squabble?  Don't tell me that Devar's canned salmon is
really a deadly sort of bomb."

"I've heard more improbable things.  But you would not be your father's
son, Mr. Devar, if you can't keep a tight lip when statements are made
in your presence which may astonish you.  Mr. Curtis and you are now
about to meet a very clever man, Otto Schmidt, the lawyer, and I fancy
your name will help in the argument.  Is your father in New York?"

"He arrives here from Chicago to-night."

"He has never met Mr. Curtis?"

"No, but he jolly soon will."

"But, if it were possible to get hold of him by telephone or telegraph
to-day, he would say he had never heard of him?"

