This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>


[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]


CLEOPATRA

By Georg Ebers

Volume 7.


CHAPTER XV.

Charmain went towards her own apartments.  How often she had had a
similar experience!  In the midst of the warmest admiration for this rare
woman's depth of feeling, masculine strength of intellect, tireless
industry, watchful care for her native land, steadfast loyalty, and
maternal devotion, she had been sobered in the most pitiable way.

She had been forced to see Cleopatra, for the sake of realizing a
childish dream, and impressing her lover, squander vast sums, which
diminished the prosperity of her subjects; place great and important
matters below the vain, punctilious care of her own person; forget, in
petty jealousy, the justice and kindness which were marked traits in her
character; and, though the most kindly and womanly of sovereigns, suffer
herself to be urged by angry excitement to inflict outrage on a subject
whose acts had awakened her displeasure.  The lofty ambition which had
inspired her noblest and most praiseworthy deeds had more than once been
the source of acts which she herself regretted.  When a child, she could
not endure to be surpassed in difficult tasks, and still deemed it a
necessity to be first and peerless.  Hence the unfortunate circumstance
that Antony had given Barine the counterpart of an armlet which she
herself wore as a gift from her lover, was perhaps the principal cause of
her bitter resentment against the hapless woman.

Charmian had seen Cleopatra forgive freely and generously many a wrong,
nay, many an affront, inflicted upon her; but to see herself placed by
her husband on the same plane as a Barine, even in the most trivial
matter, might easily seem to her an unbearable insult; and the mishap
which had befallen Caesarion, in consequence of his foolish passion for
the young beauty, gave her a right to punish her rival.

Deeply anxious concerning the fate of the woman in her care--greatly
agitated, moreover, and exhausted physically and mentally--Charmian
sought her own apartments.

Here she hoped to find solace in Barine's cheerful and equable nature;
here the helpful hands of her dark-skinned maid and confidante awaited
her.

The sun was low in the western horizon when she entered the anteroom.
The members of the body-guard who were on duty told her that nothing
unusual had occurred, and with a sigh of relief she passed into the
sitting-room.

But the Ethiopian, who usually came to meet her with words of welcome,
took her veil and wraps, and removed her shoes, was absent.  Today no one
greeted her.  Not until she entered the second room, which she had
assigned to her guest, did she find Barine, who was weeping bitterly.

During Charmian's absence the latter had received a letter from Alexas,
in which he informed her that he was ordered by the Queen to subject her
to an examination the next morning.  Her cause looked dark but, if she
did not render his duty harder by the harshness which had formerly caused
him much pain, he would do his utmost to protect her from imprisonment,
forced labour in the mines, or even worse misfortunes.  The imprudent
game which she had played with King Caesarion had unfortunately roused
the people against her.  The depth of their indignation was shown by the
fury with which they had assailed the house of her grandfather, Didymus.
Nothing could save Dion, who had audaciously attacked the illustrious son
of their beloved Queen, from the rage of the populace.  He, Alexas, knew
that in this Dion she would lose a friend and protector, but he would be
disposed to take his place if her conduct did not render it impossible
for him to unite mercy with justice.

This shameful letter, which promised Barine clemency in return for her
favour without unmasking him in his character of judge, explained to
Charmian the agitation in which she found her friend's daughter.

It was doubtless a little relief to Barine to express her loathing and
abhorrence of Alexas as eagerly as her gentle nature would permit, but
fear, grief, and indignation continued to struggle for the mastery in her
oppressed soul.

It would have been expected that the keen-witted woman would have eagerly
inquired what Charmian had accomplished with the Queen and Archibius,
and what new events had happened to affect Cleopatra, the state, and the
city; but she questioned her with far deeper interest concerning the
welfare of her lover, desiring information in regard to many things of
which her friend could give no tidings.  In her brief visit to Dion's
couch she had not learned how he bore his own misfortunes and Barine's,
what view he took of the future, or what he expected from the woman he
loved.

Charmian's ignorance and silence in regard to these very matters
increased the anxiety of the endangered woman, who saw not only her own
life, but those dearest to her, seriously threatened.  So she entreated
her hostess to relieve her from the uncertainty which was harder to
endure than the most terrible reality; but the latter either could not or
would not give her any further details of Cleopatra's intentions, or the
fate and present abode of her grandparents and Helena.  This increased
her anxiety, for if Alexas's information was correct, her family must be
homeless.  When Charmian at last admitted that she had seen Dion only a
few minutes, the tortured Barine's power of quiet endurance gave way.

She, whose nature was so hopeful that, when the glow of the sunset faded,
she already anticipated with delight the rosy dawn of the next day, now
beheld in Cleopatra's hand the reed which was to sign the death-sentence
of Dion and herself.  Her mental vision conjured up her relatives wounded
by the falling house or bleeding under the stones hurled by the raging
populace.  She heard Alexas command the executioner to subject her to the
rack, and fancied that Anukis had not returned because she had failed to
find Dion.  The Queen's soldiers had probably carried him to prison,
loaded with chains, if Philostratus had not already instigated the mob to
drag him through the streets.

With feverish impetuosity, which alarmed Charmian the more because it was
so unlike her old friend's daughter, Barine described all the spectres
with which her imagination--agitated by terror, longing, love, and
loathing--terrified her; but the former exerted all the power of
eloquence she possessed, by turns reproving her and loading her with
caresses, in order to soothe her and rouse her from her despair.  But
nothing availed.  At last she succeeded in persuading the unhappy woman
to go with her to the window, which afforded a most beautiful view.
Westward, beyond the Heptastadium, the sun was sinking below the forests
of masts in the harbour of the Eunostus; and Charmian, who had learned
from her intercourse with the royal children how to soothe a troubled
young heart, to divert Barine's thoughts, directed her attention to the
crimson glow in the western sky, and told her how her father, the artist,
had showed her the superb brilliancy which colours gained at this hour of
the day, even when the west was less radiant than now.  But Barine, who
usually could never gaze her fill at such a spectacle, did not thank her,
for this sunset reminded her of another which she had lately watched at
Dion's side, and she again broke into convulsive sobs.

Charmian, not knowing what to do, passed her arm around her.  Just at
that moment the door was hurriedly thrown open, and Anukis, the Nubian,
entered.

Her mistress knew that something unusual must have happened to detain her
so long from her post at Barine's side, and her appearance showed that
she had been attending to important matters which had severely taxed her
strength.  Her shining dark skin looked ashen grey, her high forehead,
surrounded by tangled woolly locks, was dripping with perspiration, and
her thick lips were pale.  Although she must have undergone great
fatigue, she did not seem in need of rest; for, after greeting the
ladies, apologizing for her long absence, and telling Barine that this
time Dion had seemed to her half on the way to recovery, a rapid side
glance at her mistress conveyed an entreaty that she would follow her
into the next room.

But the language of the Nubian's eyes had not escaped the suspicious
watchfulness of the anxious Barine and, overwhelmed with fresh terror,
she begged that she might hear all.

Charmian ordered her maid to speak openly; but Anukis, ere she began,
assured them that she had received the news she brought from a most
trustworthy source--only it would make a heavy demand upon the resolution
and courage of Barine, whom she had hoped to find in a very different
mood.  There was no time to lose.  She was expected at the appointed
place an hour after sunset.

Here Charmian interrupted the maid with the exclamation "Impossible!"
and reminded her of the guards which Alexas, aided by Iras, who was
thoroughly familiar with the palace, had stationed the day before in the
anteroom, at all the doors--nay, even beneath the windows.

The Nubian replied that everything had been considered; but, to gain
time, she must beg Barine to let her colour her skin and curl her hair
while she was talking.

The surprise visible in the young beauty's face caused her to exclaim:
"Only act with entire confidence.  You shall learn everything directly.
There is so much to tell!  On the way here I had planned how to relate
the whole story in regular order, but it can't be done now.  No, no!
Whoever wants to save a flock of sheep from a burning shed must lead out
the bell-wether first--the main thing, I mean--so I will begin with that,
though it really comes last.  The explanation of how all this--"

Here, like a cry of joy, Barine's exclamation interrupted her:

"I am to fly, and Dion knows it and will follow me!  I see it in your
face."

In fact, every feature of the dusky maid-servant's ugly face betrayed
that pleasant thoughts were agitating her mind.  Her black eyes flashed
with fearless daring, and a smile beautified her big mouth and thick lips
as she replied:

"A loving heart like yours understands the art of prophecy better than
the chief priest of the great Serapis.  Yes, my young mistress, he of
whom you speak must disappear from this wicked city where so much evil
threatens you both.  He will certainly escape and, if the immortals aid
us and we are wise and brave, you also.  Whence the help comes can be
told later.  Now, the first thing is to transform you--don't be
reluctant--into the ugliest woman in the world--black Anukis.  You must
escape from the palace in this disguise.--Now you know the whole plan,
and while I get what is necessary from my chest of clothes, I beg you,
mistress, to consider how we are to obtain the black stains for that
ivory skin and golden hair."

With these words she left the room, but Barine flung herself into her
friend's arms, exclaiming, amid tears and laughter: "Though I should be
forced to remain forever as black and crooked as faithful Aisopion, if he
did not withdraw his love, though I were obliged to go through fire and
water--I would  O Charmian! what changes so quickly as joy and sorrow?
I would fain show some kindness to every one in the world, even to your
Queen, who has brought all these troubles upon me."

The new-born hope had transformed the despairing woman into a happy one,
and Charmian perceived it with grateful joy, secretly wishing that
Cleopatra had listened to her appeal.

While examining the hair-dyes used by the Queen she saw, lurking in the
background of what was still unexplained, and therefore confused her
mind, fresh and serious perils.  Barine, on the contrary, gazed across
them to the anticipated meeting with her lover, and was full of the
gayest expectation until the maid-servant's return.

The work of disfigurement began without delay.  Anukis moved her lips as
busily as her hands, and described in regular order all that had befallen
her during the eventful day.

Barine listened with rising excitement, and her joy increased as she
beheld the path which had been smoothed for her by the care and wisdom of
her friends.  Charmian, on the contrary, became graver and more quiet the
more distinctly she perceived the danger her favourite must encounter.
Yet she could not help admitting that it would be a sin against Barine's
safety, perhaps her very life, to withhold her from this well-considered
plan of escape.

That it must be tried was certain; but as the moment which was to
endanger the woman she loved drew nearer, and she could not help saying
to herself that she was aiding an enterprise in opposition to the express
command of the Queen and helping to execute a plan which threatened to
rouse the indignation, perhaps the fury, of Cleopatra, a feeling of
sorrow overpowered her.  She feared nothing for herself.  Not for a
single instant did she think of the unpleasant consequences which
Barine's escape might draw upon her.  The burden on her soul was due only
to the consciousness of having, for the first time, opposed the will of
the sovereign, to fulfil whose desires and to promote whose aims had been
the beloved duty of her life.  Doubtless the thought crossed her mind
that, by aiding Barine's escape, she was guarding Cleopatra from future
repentance; probably she felt sure that it was her duty to help rescue
this beautiful young life, whose bloom had been so cruelly assailed by
tempest and hoar-frost, and which now had a prospect of the purest
happiness; yet, though in itself commendable, the deed brought her into
sharp conflict with the loftiest aims and aspirations of her life.  And
how much nearer than the other was the woman--she shrank from the word--
whom she was about to betray, how much greater was Cleopatra's claim
to her love and gratitude!  Could she have any other emotion than
thankfulness if the plan of escape succeeded?  Yet she was reluctant to
perform the task of making Barine's beautiful, symmetrical figure
resemble the hunch-backed Nubian's, or to dip her fingers into the pomade
intended for Cleopatra; and it grieved her to mar the beauty of Barine's
luxuriant tresses by cutting off part of her thick fair braids.

True, these things could not be avoided, if the flight was to succeed,
and the further Anukis advanced in her story, the fewer became her
mistress's objections to the plan.

The conversation between Iras and Alexas, which had been overheard by the
maid, already made it appear necessary to withdraw Barine and her lover
from the power of such foes.  The faithful man whom Anukis had found with
Dion, whose name she did not mention and of whose home she said only that
no safer hiding-place could be found, even by the mole which burrowed in
the earth, really seemed to have been sent with Gorgias to Dion's couch
by Fate itself.  The control of the subterranean chambers in the Temple
of Isis which had been bestowed on the architect, also appeared like a
miracle.

Upon a small tablet, which the wise Aisopion had intentionally delayed
handing to her mistress until now, were the lines:  "Archibius greets his
sister Charmian.  If I know your heart, it will be as hard for you as for
me to share this plot, yet it must be done for the sake of her father, to
save the life and happiness of his child.  So it must fall to your lot to
bring Barine to the Temple of Isis at the Corner of the Muses.  She will
find her lover there and, if possible, be wedded to him.  As the
sanctuary is so near, you need leave the palace only a short time.  Do
not tell Barine what we have planned.  The disappointment would be too
great if it should prove impracticable."

This letter and the arrangement it proposed transformed the serious
scruples which shadowed Charmian's good-will into a joyous, nay,
enthusiastic desire to render assistance.  Barine's marriage to the man
who possessed her heart was close at hand, and she was the daughter of
Leonax, who had once been dear to her.  Fear and doubt vanished as if
scattered to the four winds, and when Aisopion's work of transformation
was completed and Barine stood before her as the high-shouldered, dark-
visaged, wrinkled maid, she could not help admitting that it would be
easy to escape from the palace in that disguise.

She now told Barine that she intended to accompany her herself; and
though the former's stained face forced her to refrain from kissing her
friend, she plainly expressed to her and the faithful freedwoman the
overflowing gratitude which filled her heart.

Anukis was left alone.  After carefully removing all the traces of her
occupation, as habit dictated, she raised her arms in prayer, beseeching
the gods of her native land to protect the beautiful woman to whom she
had loaned her own misshapen form, which had now been of genuine service,
and who had gone forth to meet so many dangers, but also a happiness
whose very hope had been denied to her.

Charmian had told her maid that if the Queen should inquire for her
before Iras returned from the Choma to say that she had been obliged to
leave the palace, and to supply her place.  During their absence, when
Charmian had been attacked by sickness, Cleopatra had often entrusted the
care of her toilet to Aisopion, and had praised her skill.

The Queen's confidential attendant was followed as usual when she went
out by a dark-skinned maid.  Lanterns and lamps had already been lighted
in the corridors of the spacious palace, and the court-yards were ablaze
with torches and pitch-pans; but, brilliantly as they burned in many
places, and numerous as were the guards, officers, eunuchs, clerks,
soldiers, cooks, attendants, slaves, door-keepers, and messengers whom
they passed, not one gave them more than a careless glance.

So they reached the last court-yard, and then came a moment when the
hearts of both women seemed to stop beating--for the man whom they had
most cause to dread, Alexas the Syrian, approached.

And he did not pass the fugitives, but stopped Charmian, and courteously,
even obsequiously, informed her that he wished to get rid of the
troublesome affair of her favourite, which had been assigned to him
against his will, and therefore had determined to bring Barine to trial
early the following morning.

The Syrian's body-servant attended his master, and while the former was
talking with Charmian the latter turned to the supposed Nubian, tapped
her lightly on the shoulder, and whispered: "Come this evening, as you
did yesterday.  You haven't finished the story of Prince Setnau."

The fugitive felt as if she had grown dumb and could never more regain
the power of speech.  Yet she managed to nod, and directly after the
favourite bowed a farewell to Charmian.  The Ligurian was obliged to
follow his master, while Charmian and Barine passed through the gateway
between the last pylons into the open air.

Here the sea-breeze seemed to waft her a joyous greeting from the realm
of liberty and happiness, and the timid woman, amid all the perils which
surrounded her, regained sufficient presence of mind to tell her friend
what Alexas's slave had whispered--that Aisopion might remind him of it
the same evening, and thus strengthen his belief that the Nubian had
accompanied the Queen's confidante.

The way to the Temple of Isis was short.  The stars showed that they
would reach their destination in time; but a second delay unexpectedly
occurred.  From the steps leading to the cella of the sanctuary a
procession, whose length seemed endless, came towards them.  At the head
of the train marched eight pastophori, bearing the image of Isis.  Then
came the basket-bearers of the goddess with several other priestesses,
followed by the reader with an open book-roll.  Behind him appeared the
quaternary number of prophets, whose head, the chief priest, moved with
stately dignity beneath a canopy.  The rest of the priestly train bore in
their hands manuscripts, sacred vessels, standards, and wreaths.  The
priestesses--some of whom, with garlands on their flowing hair, were
already shaking the sistrum of Isis--mingled with the line of priests,
their high voices blending with the deep notes of the men.  Neokori, or
temple servants, and a large number of worshippers of Isis, closed the
procession, all wearing wreaths and carrying flowers.  Torch and lantern
bearers lighted the way, and the perfume of the incense rising from the
little pan of charcoal in the hand of a bronze arm, which the pastophori
waved to and fro, surrounded and floated after the procession.

The two women waiting for the train to pass saw it turn towards Lochias,
and the conversation of the bystanders informed them that its object was
to convey to "the new Isis," the Queen, the greeting of the goddess, and
assure the sovereign of the divinity's remembrance of her in the hour of
peril.

Cleopatra could not help accepting this friendly homage, and it was
incumbent upon her to receive it wearing on her head the crown of Upper
and Lower Egypt, and robed in all the ecclesiastical vestments which only
her two most trusted attendants knew how to put on with the attention to
details that custom required.  This had never been entrusted to maids of
inferior position like the Nubian; so Cleopatra would miss Charmian.

The thought filled her with fresh uneasiness and, when the steps were at
last free, she asked herself anxiously how all this would end.

It seemed as if the fugitive and her companion had exposed themselves to
this great peril in vain; for some of the temple servants were forcing
back those who wished to enter the sanctuary, shouting that it would be
closed until the return of the procession.  Barine gazed timidly into
Charmian's face; but, ere she could express her opinion, the tall figure
of a man appeared on the temple steps.  It was Archibius, who with grave
composure bade them follow him, and silently led them around the
sanctuary to a side door, through which, a short time before, a litter
had passed, accompanied by several attendants.

Ascending a flight of steps within the long building, they reached the
dimly lighted cella.

As in the Temple of Osiris at Abydos seven corridors, here three led to
the same number of apartments, the holy place of the sanctuary.  The
central one was dedicated to Isis, that on the left to her husband
Osiris, and that on the right to Horus, the son of the great goddess.
Before it, scarcely visible in the dim light, stood the altars, loaded
with sacrifices by Archibius.

Beside that of Horus was the litter which had been borne into the temple
before the arrival of the women.  From it, supported by two friends,
descended a slender young man.

A hollow sound echoed through the pillared hall.  The iron door at the
main entrance of the temple had been closed.  The shrill rattle that
followed proceeded from the metal bolts which an old servant of the
sanctuary had shot into the sockets.

Barine started, but neither inquired the cause of the noise nor perceived
the wealth of objects here presented to the senses; for the man who,
leaning on another's arm, approached the altar, was Dion, the lover who
had perilled his life for her sake.  Her eyes rested intently on his
figure, her whole heart yearned towards him and, unable to control
herself,--she called his name aloud.

Charmian gazed anxiously around the group, but soon uttered a sigh of
relief; for the tall man whose arm supported Dion was Gorgias, the worthy
architect, his best friend, and the other, still taller and stronger, her
own brother Archibius.  Yonder figure, emerging from the disguise of
wraps, was Berenike, Barine's mother.  All trustworthy confidants!  The
only person whom she did not know was the handsome young man standing at
her brother's side.

Barine, whose arm she still held, had struggled to escape to rush to her
mother and lover; but Archibius had approached, and in a whisper warned
her to be patient and to refrain from any greeting or question,
"supposing," he added, "that you are willing to be married at this altar
to Dion, the son of Eumenes."

Charmian felt Barine's arm tremble in hers at this suggestion, but the
young beauty obeyed her friend's directions.  She did not know what had
be fallen her, or whether, in the excess of happiness which overwhelmed
her, to shout aloud in her exultant joy, or melt into silent tears of
gratitude and emotion.

No one spoke.  Archibius took a roll of manuscript from Dion's hand,
presented himself before the assembled company as the bride's kyrios, or
guardian, and asked Barine whether she so recognized him.  Then he
returned to Dion the marriage contract, whose contents he knew and
approved, and informed those present that, in the marriage about to be
solemnized, they must consider him the paranymphos, or best man, and
Berenike as the bridesmaid, and they instantly lighted a torch at the
fires burning on one of the altars.  Archibius, as kyrios, joined the
lovers' hands in the Egyptian--Barine's mother, as bridesmaid, in the
Greek-manner, and Dion gave his bride a plain iron ring.  It was the same
one which his father had bestowed at his own wedding, and he whispered:
"My mother valued it; now it is your turn to honour the ancient
treasure."

After stating that the necessary sacrifices had been offered to Isis and
Serapis, Zeus, Hera, and Artemis, and that the marriage between Dion, son
of Eumenes, and Barine, daughter of Leonax, was concluded, Archibius
shook hands with both.

Haste seemed necessary, for he permitted Berenike and his sister only
time for a brief embrace, and Gorgias to clasp her hand and Dion's.  Then
he beckoned, and the newly made bride's mother followed him in tears,
Charmian bewildered and almost stupefied.  She did not fully realize the
meaning of the event she had just witnessed until an old neokori had
guided her and the others into the open air.

Barine felt as if every moment might rouse her from a blissful dream,
and yet she gladly told herself that she was awake, for the man walking
before her, leaning on the arm of a friend, was Dion.  True, she saw,
even in the faint light of the dim temple corridor, that he was
suffering.  Walking appeared to be so difficult that she rejoiced when,
yielding to Gorgias's entreaties, he entered the litter.

But where were the bearers?

She was soon to learn; for, even while she looked for them, the architect
and the youth, in whom she had long since recognized Philotas, her
grandfather's assistant, seized the poles.

"Follow us," said Gorgias, under his breath, and she obeyed, keeping
close behind the litter, which was borne first down a broad and then a
narrow staircase, and finally along a passage.  Here a door stopped the
fugitives; but the architect opened it and helped his friend out of the
litter, which before proceeding farther he placed in a room filled with
various articles discovered during his investigation of the subterranean
temple chambers.

Hitherto not a word had been spoken.  Now Gorgias called to Barine: "This
passage is low--you must stoop.  Cover your head, and don't be afraid if
you meet bats.  They have long been undisturbed.  We might have taken you
from the temple to the sea, and waited there, but it would probably have
attracted attention and been dangerous.  Courage, young wife of Dion!
The corridor is long, and walking through it is difficult; but compared
with the road to the mines, it is as smooth and easy as the Street of the
King.  If you think of your destination, the bats will seem like the
swallows which announce the approach of spring."

Barine nodded gratefully to him; but she kissed the hand of Dion, who was
moving forward painfully, leaning on the arm of his friend.  The light of
the torch carried by Gorgias's faithful foreman, who led the way, had
fallen on her blackened arm, and when the little party advanced she kept
behind the others.  She thought it might be unpleasant for her lover to
see her thus disfigured, and spared him, though she would gladly have
remained nearer.  As soon as the passage grew lower, the wounded man's
friends took him in their arms, and their task was a hard one, for they
were not only obliged to move onward bending low under the heavy burden,
but also to beat off the bats which, frightened by the foreman's torch,
flew up in hosts.

Barine's hair was covered, it is true, but at any other time the hideous
creatures, which often brushed against her head and arms, would have
filled her with horror and loathing.  Now she scarcely heeded them; her
eyes were fixed on the recumbent figure in the bearers' arms, the man to
whom she belonged, body and soul, and whose patient suffering pierced her
inmost heart.  His head rested on the breast of Gorgias, who walked
directly in front of her; the architect's stooping posture concealed his
face, but his feet were visible and, whenever they twitched, she fancied
he was in pain.  Then she longed to press forward to his side, wipe the
perspiration from his brow in the hot, low corridor, and whisper words of
love and encouragement.

This she was sometimes permitted to do when the friends put down their
heavy burden.  True, they allowed themselves only brief intervals of
rest, but they were long enough to show her how the sufferer's strength
was failing.  When they at last reached their destination, Philotas was
forced to exert all his strength to support the exhausted man, while
Gorgias cautiously opened the door.  By the by, to-morrow is, I think,
Derby Day; which I remember chiefly for its marking the time when Hampton
Court Chestnuts were usually in full flower.

You may guess that we in the Country here have been gaping for rain to
bring on our Crops, and Flowers; very tantalising have been many promising
Clouds, which just dropped a few drops by way of Compliment, and then
passed on. But last night, when Dombey was being read to me we heard a
good splash of rain, and Dombey was shut up that we might hear, and see,
and feel it. {187} I never could make out who wrote two lines which I
never could forget, wherever I found them:--
'Abroad, the rushing Tempest overwhelms Nature pitch dark, and rides
the thundering elms.'

Very like Glorious John Dryden; but many others of his time wrote such
lines, as no one does now--not even Messrs. Swinburne and Browning.

And I am always your old Friend, with the new name of
LITTLEGRANGE.

LXXVII.

WOODBRIDGE: _June_ 23, [1880.]
MY DEAR MRS. KEMBLE,
You smile at my 'Lunacies' as you call my writing periods; I take the Moon
as a signal not to tax you too often for your inevitable answer.

I have now let her pass her Full: and June is drawing short: and you
were to be but for June at Leamington: so--I must have your answer,
to tell me about your own health (which was not so good when last you
wrote) and that of your Family; and when, and where, you go from
Leamington. I shall be sorry if you cannot go to Switzerland.

I have been as far as--Norfolk--on a week's visit (the only visit of the
sort I now make) to George Crabbe, my Poet's Grandson, and his two
Granddaughters. It was a very pleasant visit indeed; the people all so
sensible, and friendly, talking of old days; the Country flat indeed, but
green, well-wooded, and well-cultivated: the weather well enough. {188a}

I carried there two volumes of my Sevigne: and even talked of going over
to Brittany, only to see her Rochers, as once I went to Edinburgh only
to see Abbotsford.

But (beside that I probably should not have gone further than
talking in any case) a French Guide Book informed me that the present
Proprietor of the place will not let it be shown to Strangers who pester
him for a view of it, on the strength of those 'paperasses,' as he calls
her Letters. {188b} So this is rather a comfort to me. Had I
gone, I should also have visited my dear old Frederick Tennyson at
Jersey. But now I think we shall never see one another again.

Spedding keeps on writing Shakespeare Notes in answer to sundry
Theories broached by others: he takes off copies of his MS. by some
process he has learned; and, as I always insist on some Copy of all
he writes, he has sent me these, which I read by instalments, as
Eyesight permits.

I believe I am not a fair Judge between him and his adversaries; first,
because I have but little, if any, faculty of critical Analysis; and
secondly, because I am prejudiced with the notion that old Jem is
Shakespeare's Prophet, and must be right. But, whether right or wrong,
the way in which he conducts, and pleads, his Case is always Music to
me.

So it was even with Bacon, with whom I could not be reconciled: I could
not like Dr. Fell: much more so with 'the Divine Williams,' who is a
Doctor that I do like.

It has turned so dark here in the last two days that I scarce see
to write at my desk by a window which has a hood over it, meant to
exclude--the Sun!

I have increased my Family by two broods of Ducks, who compete for
the possession of a Pond about four feet in diameter: and but an
hour ago I saw my old Seneschal escorting home a stray lot of Chickens.
My two elder Nieces are with me at present, but I do not think will be
long here, if a Sister comes to them from Italy.

Pray let me hear how you are. I am pretty well myself:--though not quite
up to the mark of my dear Sevigne, who writes from her Rochers when
close on sixty--'Pour moi, je suis d'une si parfaite sante, que je ne
comprends point ce que Dieu veut faire de moi.' {190}
But yours always and a Day, LITTLEGRANGE.

LXXVIII.

[WOODBRIDGE, _July_ 24, 1880.]
'Il sera le mois de Juillet tant qu'il plaira a Dieu' writes my friend
Sevigne--only a week more of it now, however. I should have written to my
friend Mrs. Kemble before this--in defiance of the Moon--had I not been
waiting for her Address from Mowbray Donne, to whom I wrote more than a
fortnight ago. I hope no ill-health in himself, or his Family, keeps him
from answering my Letter, if it ever reached him. But I will wait no
longer for his reply: for I want to know concerning you and your health:
and so I must trouble Coutts to fill up the Address which you will not
instruct me in.

Here (Woodbridge) have I been since last I wrote--some Irish Cousins coming
down as soon as English Nieces had left. Only that in the week's interval
I went to our neighbouring Aldeburgh on the Sea--where I first saw, and
felt, the Sea some sixty-five years ago; a dreary place enough in spite
of some Cockney improvements: my old Crabbe's Borough, as you may
remember.

I think one goes back to the old haunts as one grows old:
as the Chancellor l'Hopital said when he returned to his native Bourdeaux,
I think: 'Me voici, Messieurs,' returned to die, as the Hare does, in
her ancient 'gite.' {191} I shall soon be going to Lowestoft, where one
of my Nieces, who is married to an Italian, and whom I have not seen
for many years, is come, with her Boy, to stay with her Sisters.

Whither are you going after you leave Hampshire? You spoke in your last
letter of Scarboro': but I still think you will get over to
Switzerland.

One of my old Friends--and Flames--Mary Lynn (pretty name) who is of our
age, and played with me when we both were Children--at that very same
Aldeburgh--is gone over to those Mountains which you are so fond
of:
having the same passion for them as you have. I had asked her to meet me
at that Aldeburgh--'Aldbro''--that we might ramble together along that
beach where once we played; but she was gone.

If you should come to Lowestoft instead of Scarbro', we, if you please,
will ramble together too. But I do not recommend the place--very ugly--on
a dirty Dutch Sea--and I do not suppose you would care for any of
my People; unless it were my little Niece Annie, who is a delightful
Creature.

I see by the Athenaeum that Tom Taylor is dead {192a}--the 'cleverest
Man in London' Tennyson called him forty years ago. Professor Goodwin,
of the Boston Cambridge, is in England, and made a very kind proposal
to give me a look on his travels. But I could not let him come out of
his way (as it would have been) for any such a purpose. {192b}
He wrote that Mrs.

Lowell was in better health: residing at Southampton, which you knew well
near fifty years ago, as your Book tells. Mr. Lowell does not write
to me now; nor is there reason that he should.

Please to make my remembrances to Mr. Sartoris, who scarcely remembers me,
but whose London House was very politely opened to me so many years ago.
Anyhow, pray let me hear of yourself: and believe me always yours
sincerely
THE LAIRD OF LITTLEGRANGE.

LXXIX.

WOODBRIDGE: _Friday_, [30 _July_, 1880.]
MY DEAR LADY,
I send you Mowbray's reply to my letter of nearly three weeks ago. No
good news of his Father--still less of our Army (news to me told
to-day) altogether a sorry budget to greet you on your return to
London.

But the public news you knew already, I doubt not: and I thought as
well to tell you of our Donne at once.

I suppose one should hardly talk of anything except this Indian Calamity:

{193} but I am selfish enough to ignore, as much as I can, such Evils as I
cannot help.

I think that Tennyson in calling Tom Taylor the 'cleverest man,' etc.,
meant pretty much as you do. I believe he said it in reply to something
I may have said that was less laudatory. At one time Tennyson almost lived
with him and the Wigans whom I did not know.

Taylor always seemed to me as 'clever' as any one: was always very civil
to me: but one of those toward whom I felt no attraction. He was too
clever, I think.

As to Art, he knew nothing of it then, nor (as he admits) up to 1852 or
thereabout, when he published his very good Memoir of Haydon. I think
he was too 'clever' for Art also.

Why will you write of 'If you _bid_ me come to Lowestoft in
October,' etc., which, you must know, is just what I should not ask
you to do:
knowing that, after what you say, you would come, if asked, were--(a Bull
begins here)--were it ever so unlikely for you. I am going thither next
week, to hear much (I dare say) of a Brother in Ireland who may be called
to India; and am
Ever yours sincerely, LITTLEGRANGE.

Why won't you write to me from Switzerland to say where a Letter may
find you? If not, the Harvest Moon will pass!

LXXX.

IVY HOUSE, LOWESTOFT:
_Septr._ 20, {194} [1880.]
MY DEAR MRS. KEMBLE,
Here is a second Full Moon since last I wrote--(Harvest Moon, I think).
I knew not where to direct to you before, and, as you remain determined
not to apprize me yourself, so I have refused to send through Coutts. You
do not lose much.

Here have been for nearly two months Five English Nieces clustered
round a Sister who married an Italian, and has not been in England these
dozen years. She has brought her Boy of six, who seems to us wonderfully
clever as compared to English Children of his Age, but who, she tells
us, is counted rather behind his Fellows in Italy. Our meeting has
been what is called a 'Success'--which will not be repeated, I think.
She will go back to her adopted Country in about a month, I suppose.
Do you know of any one likely to be going that way about that time?

Some days ago, when I was sitting on the Pier, rather sad at the
Departure [of] a little Niece--an abridgment of all that is
pleasant--and good--in Woman--Charles Merivale accosted me--he and
his good, unaffected, sensible, wife, and Daughter to match.

He was looking well, and we have since had a daily stroll together. We
talked of you, for he said (among the first things he did say)
that he had been reading your Records again: so I need not tell you
his opinion of them.

He saw your Uncle in Cato when he was about four years old; and
believes that he (J.

P.

K.) had a bit of red waistcoat looking out of his toga, by way of
Blood.

I tell him he should call on you and clear up that, and talk on many
other points.

Mowbray Donne wrote me from Wales a month ago that his Father was
going on pretty well.

I asked for further from Mowbray when he should have returned from
Wales: but he has not yet written.

Merivale, who is one of Donne's greatest Friends, has not heard of
him more lately than I.

Now, my dear Mrs.

Kemble, I want to hear of you from yourself: and I have told you why
it is that I have not asked you before. I fancy that you will not be
back in England when this Letter reaches Westminster: but I fancy
that it will not be long before you find it waiting on your table
for you.

And now I am going to look for the Dean, who, I hope, has been at
Church this morning: and though I have not done that, I am not the
less sincerely yours 
E.

F.G.

LXXXI.

WOODBRIDGE: _Octr._ 20, 1880.

MY DEAR MRS. KEMBLE,
I was to have gone to London on Monday with my Italian Niece on her way
homeward. But she feared saying 'Farewell' and desired me to let her set
off alone, to avoid doing so.

Thus I delay my visit to you till November--perhaps toward the middle of
it: when I hope to find you, with your blue and crimson Cushions {197}
in Queen Anne's Mansions, as a year ago. Mrs. Edwards is always in
town:
not at all forgetful of her husband; and there will be our Donne also
of whom I hear nothing, and so conclude there is nothing to be
told, and with him my Visits will be summed up.

Now, lose not a Day in providing yourself with Charles Tennyson Turner's
Sonnets, published by Kegan Paul. There is a Book for you to keep on
your table, at your elbow. Very many of the Sonnets I do not care
for:
mostly because of the Subject: but there is pretty sure to be some
beautiful line or expression in all; and all pure, tender, noble,
and--original.

Old Spedding supplies a beautiful Prose Overture to this delightful Volume:
never was Critic more one with his Subject--or, Object, is it? Frederick
Tennyson, my old friend, ought to have done something to live along with
his Brothers: all who _will_ live, I believe, of their Generation: and
he perhaps would, if he could, have confined himself to limits not
quite so narrow as the Sonnet. But he is a Poet, and cannot be
harnessed.

I have still a few flowers surviving in my Garden; and I certainly
never remember the foliage of trees so little changed in October's third
week.
A little flight of Snow however: whose first flight used to quicken my old
Crabbe's fancy: Sir Eustace Grey written under such circumstances.
{198}
And I am always yours LITTLEGRANGE
(not 'Markethill' as you persist in addressing me.)

LXXXII.

WOODBRIDGE, _Novr._ 17/80.

MY DEAR LADY,
Here is the Moon very near her Full: so I send you a Letter. I
have it in my head you are not in London: and may not be when I go up
there for a few days next week--for this reason I think so: viz.,
that you have not acknowledged a Copy of Charles Tennyson's Sonnets,
which I desired Kegan Paul to send you, as from me--with my illustrious
Initials on the Fly Leaf: and, he or one of his men, wrote that so
it should be, or had been done.

It may nevertheless not have been: or, if in part done, the illustrious
Initials forgotten.

But I rather think the Book was sent:
and that you would have guessed at the Sender, Initials or not. And as I
know you are even over-scrupulous in acknowledging any such things, I
gather that the Book came when you had left London--for Leamington,
very likely: and that there you are now. The Book, and your Acknowledgment
of it, will very well wait: but I wish to hear about yourself--as also
about yours--if you should be among them.

I talk of 'next week,' because one of my few Visitors, Archdeacon Groome,
is coming the week after that, I believe, for a day or two to my house:
and, as he has not been here for two years, I do not wish to be out
of the way.

A Letter about a fortnight ago from Mowbray Donne told me that his Father
was fairly well: and a Post Card from Mowbray two days ago informed [me]
that Valentia was to be in London this present week. But I have wanted
to be here at home all this time: I would rather see Donne when he is
alone: and I would rather go to London when there is more likelihood of
seeing you there than now seems to me. Of course you will not in the
slightest way hasten your return to London (if now away from it) for
my poor little Visits: but pray let me hear from you, and believe me
always the same
E. F.G.

LXXXIII.

WOODBRIDGE: _Decr._ 6, [1880.]

MY DEAR LADY,

I was surprised to see a Letter in your MS. which could not be in
answer to any of mine. But the Photos account for it. Thank you: I keep
that which I like best, and herewith return the other.

Why will you take into your head that I could suppose you wanting
in Hospitality, or any other sort of Generosity!

That, at least, is not a Kemble failing. Why, I believe you would give
me--and a dozen others--1000 pounds if you fancied one wanted it--even
without being asked. The Law of Mede and Persian is that you _will_
take up--a perverse notion--now and then. There! It's out.

As to the Tea--'pure and simple'--with Bread and Butter--it is the
only meal I do care to join in:--and this is why I did not see
Mowbray Donne, who has not his Dinner till an hour and a half after
my last meal is done.

I should very gladly have 'crushed a Cup of Tea' with you that last
Evening, coming prepared so to do. But you had Friends coming; and so
(as Mrs. Edwards was in the same plight) I went to the Pit of my dear
old Haymarket Opera: {200} remembering the very corner of the Stage where
Pasta stood when Jason's People came to tell her of his new Marriage;
and (with one hand in her Girdle--a movement (Mrs.

Frere said) borrowed from Grassini) she interrupted them with her
"Cessate--intesi!"--also when Rubini, feathered hat in hand, began
that "Ah te, oh Cara"--and Taglioni hovered over the Stage.

There was the old Omnibus Box too where D'Orsay flourished in ample white
Waistcoat and Wristbands: and Lady Blessington's: and Lady Jersey's on
the Pit tier: and my own Mother's, among the lesser Stars, on the
third.

In place of all which I dimly saw a small Company of less distinction in
all respects; and heard an Opera (_Carmen_) on the Wagner model:
very beautiful Accompaniments to no Melody: and all very badly sung
except by Trebelli, who, excellent.

I ran out in the middle to the dear Little Haymarket opposite--where
Vestris and Liston once were: and found the Theatre itself spoilt
by being cut up into compartments which marred the beautiful
Horse-shoe shape, once set off by the flowing pattern of Gold which
used to run round the house.

Enough of these Old Man's fancies--But--Right for all that!

I would not send you Spedding's fine Article {201a} till you had
returned from your Visit, and also had received Mrs.

Leigh at Queen Anne's. You can send it back to me quite at your
leisure, without thinking it necessary to write about it.

It is so mild here that the Thrush sings a little, and my Anemones
seem preparing to put forth a blossom as well as a leaf. Yesterday I was
sitting on a stile by our River side.

You will doubtless see Tennyson's new Volume, {201b} which is
to my thinking far preferable to his later things, though far inferior
to those of near forty years ago: and so, I think, scarce wanted.

There is a bit of Translation from an old War Song which shows what
a Poet can do when he condescends to such work: and I have always
said that 'tis for the old Poets to do some such service for their
Predecessors.

I hope this long letter is tolerably legible: and I am in very truth

Sincerely yours THE LAIRD OF LITTLEGRANGE.

LXXXIV.

WOODBRIDGE, _Christmas Day_, [1880.]
MY DEAR LADY:

You are at Leamington for this day, I expect: but, as I am not sure of
your address there, I direct to Queen Anne as usual. This very morning
I had a letter from my dear George Crabbe, telling me that he has met
your friend Mr. H. Aide at Lord Walsingham's, the Lord of G. C.'s parish:
and that Mr. Aide had asked him (G. C.) for his copy of my Crabbe. I
should have been very glad to give him one had he, or you, mentioned
to me that he had any wish for the book: I am only somewhat
disappointed that so few do care to ask for it.

I am here all alone for my Christmas: which is not quite my own fault.
A Nephew, and a young London clerk, were to have come, but prevented;
even my little Reader is gone to London for his Holyday, and left
me with Eyes more out of _Kelter_ {202} than usual to entertain
myself with.

'These are my troubles, Mr. Wesley,' as a rich man complained to him when
his Servant put too many Coals on the fire. {203a} On Friday, Aldis
Wright comes for two days, on his road to his old home Beccles: and
I shall leave him to himself with Books and a Cigar most part of
the Day, and make him read Shakespeare of a night.

He is now editing Henry V. for what they call the Clarendon Press. He
still knows nothing of Mr.

Furness, who, he thinks, must be home in America long ago.

Spedding writes me that Carlyle is now so feeble as to be carried up
and down stairs. But very 'quiet,' which is considered a bad sign; but,
as Spedding says, surely much better than the other alternative, into which
one of Carlyle's temperament might so probably have fallen. Nay, were
it not better for all of us? Mr. Froude is most constantly with
him.

If this Letter is forwarded you, I know that it will not be long before
I hear from you. And you know that I wish to hear that all is well with
you, and that I am always yours
E. F.G.

How is Mr. Sartoris? And I see a Book of _hers_ advertised. {203b}

LXXXV.

WOODBRIDGE: _Jan._ 17, [1881.]
DEAR MRS. KEMBLE,
The Moon has passed her Full: but my Eyes have become so troubled since
Christmas that I have not written before. All Christmas I was alone:
Aldis Wright came to me on New Year's Day, and read to me, among
many other things, 'Winter's Tale' which we could not take much
delight in.

No Play more undoubtedly, nor altogether, Shakespeare's, but seeming to
me written off for some 'occasion' theatrical, and then, I suppose that
Mrs.
Siddons made much of the Statue Scene.
I cannot write much, and I fancy that you will not care to read
much, if you are indeed about to leave Queen Anne. That is a very
vexatious business. You will probably be less inclined to write an
answer to my letter, than to read it: but answer it you will: and
you need trouble yourself to say no more than how you are, and
where, and when, you are going, if indeed you leave where you are.
And do not cross your letter, pray: and believe me always your
sincere old friend 
E. F.G.

LXXXVI.

[_Feb._, 1881.]
MY DEAR LADY:
I expected to send you a piece of Print as well as a Letter this
Full Moon. {205} But the Print is not come from the Printer's: and
perhaps that is as well: for now you can thank me for it beforehand
when you reply (as I know you will) to this Letter--and no more
needs to be said.
For I do [not] need your Advice as to Publication in this case; no
such Design is in my head: on the contrary, not even a Friend will
know of it except yourself, Mr. Norton, and Aldis Wright: the latter
of whom would not be of the party but that he happened to be here
when I was too purblind to correct the few Proofs, and very kindly
did so for me. As for Mr. Norton (America), he it was for whom it
was printed at all--at his wish, he knowing the MS. had been lying
by me unfinisht for years. It is a Version of the two OEdipus Plays
of Sophocles united as two Parts of one Drama. I should not send
it to you but that I feel sure that, if you are in fair health and
spirits, you will be considerably interested in it, and probably
give me more credit for my share in it than I deserve.
As I make sure of this you see there will be no need to say anything
more about it. The Chorus part is not mine, as you will see; but
probably quite as good. Quite enough on that score.
I really want to know how you like your new Quarters in dear _old_
London: how you are; and whether relieved from Anxiety concerning
Mr.
Leigh. It was a Gale indeed, such as the oldest hereabout say they
do not remember: but it was all from the East: and I do not see why
it should have travelled over the Atlantic.
If you are easy on that account, and otherwise pretty well in mind
and Body, tell me if you have been to see the Lyceum 'Cup' {206a}
and what you make of it. Somebody sent me a Macmillan {206b} with
an Article about it by Lady Pollock; the extracts she gave seemed
to me a somewhat lame imitation of Shakespeare.
I venture to think--and what is more daring--to write, that my Eyes
are better, after six weeks' rest and Blue Glasses. But I say so
with due regard to my old Friend Nemesis.
I have heard nothing about my dear Donne since you wrote: and you
only said that you had not _heard_ a good account of him. Since
then you have, I doubt not, seen as well as heard. But, now that I
see better (Absit Invidia!) I will ask Mowbray.
It is well, I think, that Carlyle desired to rest (as I am told he
did) where he was born--at Ecclefechan, from which I have, or had,
several Letters dated by him. His Niece, who had not replied to my
note of Enquiry, of two months ago, wrote to me after his Death.
Now I have written enough for you as well as for myself: and am
yours always the same 
LITTLEGRANGE. *
* 'What foppery is this, sir?'--_Dr. Johnson_.

LXXXVII.
[_Feb._, 1881.] 
MY DEAR MRS. KEMBLE:--
As you generally return a Salute so directly, I began to be alarmed
at not hearing from you sooner--either that you were ill, or your
Daughter, or some ill news about Mr. Leigh. I had asked one who
reads the Newspapers, and was told there had been much anxiety as
to the Cunard Ship, which indeed was only just saved from total
Wreck. But all is well so far as you and yours are concerned; and
I will sing 'Gratias' along with you.
Mowbray Donne wrote to tell me that he and his had provided for
some man to accompany our dear old Friend in his walks; and, as he
seems himself to like it, all is so far well in that quarter also.In other respects--I shall follow my own path."


CHAPTER XVII.

Cleopatra had sought the venerable Anubis, who now, as the priest of
Alexander, at the age of eighty, ruled the whole hierarchy of the
country.  It was difficult for him to leave his arm-chair, but he had
been carried to the observatory to examine the adverse result of the
observation made by the Queen herself.  The position of the stars,
however, had been so unfavourable that the more deeply Cleopatra entered
into these matters, the less easy he found it to urge the mitigating
influences of distant planets, which he had at first pointed out.

In his reception-hall, however, the chief priest had assured her that the
independence of Egypt and the safety of her own person lay in her hands;
only--the planets showed this--a terrible sacrifice was required--a
sacrifice of which his dignity, his eighty years, and his love for her
alike forbade him to speak.  Cleopatra was accustomed to hear these
mysterious sayings from his lips, and interpreted them in her own way.
Many motives had induced her to seek the venerable prelate at this late
hour.  In difficult situations he had often aided her with good counsel;
but this time she was not led to him by the magic cup of Nektanebus,
which the eight pastophori who accompanied it had that day restored to
the temple, for since the battle of Actium the superb vessel had been a
source of constant anxiety to her.

Cleopatra had now asked the teacher of her childhood the direct question
whether the cup--a wide, shallow vessel, with a flat, polished bottom
could really have induced Antony to leave the battle and follow her ere
the victory was decided.  She had used it just before the conflict
between the galleys, and this circumstance led Anubis to answer
positively in the affirmative.

Long ago the marvellous chalice had been exhibited to her among the
temple treasures, and she was told that every one who induced another
person to be reflected from its shining surface obtained the mastery over
his will.  Her wish to possess it, however, was not gratified, and she
did not ask for it again until the limitless devotion and ardent love of
Antony had seemed less fervent than of yore.  From that time she had
never ceased to urge her aged friend to place the wondrous cup in her
keeping.  At first he had absolutely refused, predicting that its use
would bring misfortune upon her; but when her request was followed by an
imperative command, and the goblet was entrusted to her, Anubis himself
believed that this one vessel did possess the magic power attributed to
it.  He deemed that the drinking-cup afforded the strongest proof of the
magic art, far transcending human ability, of the great goddess by whose
aid King Nektanebus--who, according to tradition, was the father of
Alexander the Great--was said to have made the vessel in the Isis island
of Philoe.

Anubis had intended to remind Cleopatra of his refusal, and show her the
great danger incurred by mortals who strove to use powers beyond their
sphere.  It had been his purpose to bid her remember Phaeton, who had
almost kindled a conflagration in the world, when he attempted, in the
chariot of his father, Phoebus Apollo, to guide the horses of the sun.
But this was unnecessary, for he had scarcely assented to the question
ere, with passionate vehemence, she ordered him to destroy before her
eyes the cup which had brought so much misfortune.

The priest feigned that her desire harmonized with a resolution which he
had himself formed.  In fact, before her arrival, he had feared that the
goblet might be used in some fatal manner if Octavianus should take
possession of the city and country, and the wonder-working vessel should
fall into his hands.  Nektanebus had made the cup for Egypt.  To wrest it
from the foreign ruler was acting in the spirit of the last king in whose
veins had flowed the blood of the Pharaohs, and who had toiled with
enthusiastic devotion for the independence and liberty of his people.
To destroy this man's marvellous work rather than deliver it to the Roman
conqueror seemed to the chief priest, after the Queen's command, a sacred
duty, and as such he represented it to be when he commanded the smelting
furnace to be fired and the cup transformed into a shapeless mass before
the eyes of Cleopatra.

While the metal was melting he eagerly told the Queen how easily she
could dispense with the vessel which owed its magic power to the mighty
Isis.

The spell of woman's charms was also a gift of the goddess.  It would
suffice to render Antony's heart soft and yielding as the fire melted the
gold.  Perhaps the Imperator had forfeited, with the Queen's respect, her
love--the most priceless of blessings.  He, Anubis, would regard this as
a great boon of the Deity; "for," he concluded, "Mark Antony is the
cliff which will shatter every effort to secure to my royal mistress
undiminished the heritage which has come to her and her children from
their ancestors, and preserve the independence and prosperity of this
beloved land.  This cup was a costly treasure.  The throne and prosperity
of Egypt are worthy of greater sacrifices.  But I know that there is none
harder for a woman to make than her love."

The meaning of the old man's words Cleopatra learned the following
morning, when she granted the first interview to Timagenes, Octavianus's
envoy.

The keen-witted, brilliant man, who had been one of her best teachers
and with whom, when a pupil, she had had many an argument, was kindly
received, and fulfilled his commission with consummate skill.

The Queen listened attentively to his representations, showed him that
her own intellect had not lost in flexibility, though it had gained
power; and when she dismissed him, with rich gifts and gracious words,
she knew that she could preserve the independence of her beloved native
land and retain the throne for herself and her children if she would
surrender Antony to the conqueror or to him, as "the person acting,"
or--these were Timagenes's own words--"remove him forever from the play
whose end she had the power to render either brilliant or fateful."

When she was again alone her heart throbbed so passionately and her soul
was in such a tumult of agitation that she felt unable to attend the
appointed meeting of the Council of the crown.  She deferred the session
until the following day, and resolved to go out upon the sea, to
endeavour to regain her composure.

Antony had refused to see her.  This wounded her.  The thought of the
goblet and its evil influences had by no means passed from her memory
with the destruction of the vessel caused by one of those outbursts of
passion to which, in these days of disaster, she yielded more frequently
than usual.  On the contrary, she felt the necessity of being alone, to
collect her thoughts and strive to dispel the clouds from her troubled
soul.

The beaker had been one of the treasures of Isis, and the memory of it
recalled hours during which, in former days, she had often found
composure in the temple of the goddess.  She wished to seek the sanctuary
unnoticed and, accompanied only by Iras and the chief Introducer, went,
closely veiled, to the neighbouring temple at the Corner of the Muses.

But she failed to find the object of her pilgrimage.  The throng which
filled it to pray and offer sacrifices, and the fear of being recognized,
destroyed her calmness.

She was in the act of retiring, when Gorgias, the architect, followed by
an assistant carrying surveying instruments, advanced towards her.  She
instantly called him to her side, and he informed her how wonderfully
Fate itself seemed to favour her plan of building.  The mob had destroyed
the house of the old philosopher Didymus, and the grey-haired sage, to
whom he had offered the shelter of his home, was now ready to transfer
the property inherited from his ancestors, if her Majesty would assure
him and his family of her protection.

Then she asked to see the architect's plan for joining the museum to
the sanctuary, and became absorbed in the first sketch, to which he had
devoted part of the night and morning.  He showed it, and with eager
urgency Cleopatra commanded him to begin the building as soon as possible
and pursue the work night and day.  What usually required months must be
completed in weeks.

Iras and the "Introducer," clad in plain garments, had waited for her
in the temple court and, joined by the architect, accompanied her to the
unpretending litter standing at one of the side gates but, instead of
entering it, she ordered Gorgias to attend her to the garden.

The inspection proved that the architect was right and, even if the
mausoleum occupied a portion of it, and the street which separated it
from the Temple of Isis were continued along the shore of the sea, the
remainder would still be twice as large as the one belonging to the
palace at Lochias.

Cleopatra's thorough examination showed Gorgias that she had some
definite purpose in view.  Her inquiry whether it would be possible to
connect it with the promontory of Lochias indicated what she had in mind,
and the architect answered in the affirmative.  It was only necessary to
tear down some small buildings belonging to the Crown and a little temple
of Berenike at the southern part of the royal harbour.  The arm of the
Agathodaemon Canal which entered here had been bridged long ago.

The new scene which would result from this change had been conjured
before the Queen's mental vision with marvellous celerity, and she
described it in brief, vivid language to the architect.  The garden
should remain, but must be enlarged from the Lochias to the bridge.
Thence a covered colonnade would lead to the palace.  After Gorgias had
assured her that all this could easily be arranged, she gazed
thoughtfully at the ground for a time, and then gave orders that the work
should be commenced at once, and requested him to spare neither means nor
men.

Gorgias foresaw a period of feverish toil, but it did not daunt him.
With such a master builder he was ready to roof the whole city.  Besides,
the commission delighted him because it proved that the woman whose
mausoleum was to rise from the earth so swiftly still thought of
enhancing the pleasures of existence; for, though she wished the garden
to remain unchanged, she desired to see the colonnade and the remainder
of the work constructed of costly materials and in beautiful forms.  When
she bade him farewell, Gorgias kissed her robe with ardent enthusiasm.

What a woman!  True, she had not even raised her veil, and was attired in
plain dark clothing, but every gesture revealed the most perfect grace.

The arm and hand with which she pointed now here, now there, again seemed
to him fairly instinct with life; and he, who deemed perfection of form
of so much value, found it difficult to avert his eyes from her
marvellous symmetry.  And her whole figure!  What lines, what genuine
aristocratic elegance, and warm, throbbing life!

That morning when Helena, now an inmate of his own home, greeted him,
he had essayed to compare her, mentally, with Cleopatra, but speedily
desisted.  The man to whom Hebe proffers nectar does not ask for even
the best wine of Byblus.  A feeling of grateful, cheerful satisfaction,
difficult to describe, stole over him when the reserved, quiet Helena
addressed him so warmly and cordially; but the image of Cleopatra
constantly thrust itself between them, and it was difficult for him to
understand himself.  He had loved many women in succession, and now his
heart throbbed for two at once, and the Queen was the brighter of the two
stars whose light entranced him.  Therefore his honest soul would have
considered it a crime to woo Helena now.

Cleopatra knew what an ardent admirer she had won in the able architect,
and the knowledge pleased her.  She had used no goblet to gain him.
Doubtless he would begin to build the mausoleum the next morning.  The
vault must have space for several coffins.  Antony had more than once
expressed the desire to be buried beside her, wherever he might die, and
this had occurred ere she possessed the beaker.  She must in any case
grant him the same favour, no matter in what place or by whose hand he
met death, and the bedimmed light of his existence was but too evidently
nearing extinction.  If she spared him, Octavianus would strike him from
the ranks of the living, and she----Again she was overpowered by the
terrible, feverish restlessness which had induced her to command the
destruction of the goblet, and had brought her to the temple.  She could
not return in this mood to meet her councillors, receive visitors, greet
her children.  This was the birthday of the twins; Charmian had reminded
her of it and undertaken to provide the gifts.  How could she have found
time and thought for such affairs?  She had returned from the chief
priest late in the evening, yet had asked for a minute description of the
condition in which they found Mark Antony.  The report made by Iras
harmonized with the state in which she had herself seen him during and
after the battle.  Ay, his brooding gloom seemed to have deepened.
Charmian had helped her dress in the morning, and had been on the point
of making her difficult confession, and owning that she had aided Barine
to escape the punishment of her royal mistress; but ere she could begin,
Timagenes was announced, for Cleopatra had not risen from her couch until
a late hour.

The object for which the Queen had sought the temple had not been gained;
but the consultation with Gorgias had diverted her mind, and the emotions
which the thought of her last resting-place had evoked now drowned
everything else, as the roar of the surf dominates the twittering of the
swallows on the rocky shore.

Ay, she needed calmness!  She must weigh and ponder over many things in
absolute quietude, and this she could not obtain at Lochias.  Then her
glance rested upon the little sanctuary of Berenike, which she had
ordered removed to make room for a garden near at hand, where the
children could indulge their love of creative work.  It was empty.  She
need fear no interruption there.  The interior contained only a single,
quiet, pleasant chamber, with the image of Berenike.  The "Introducer"
commanded the guard to admit no other visitors, and soon the little white
marble, circular room with its vaulted roof received the Queen.  She sank
down on one of the bronze benches opposite to the statue.  All was still;
in this cool silence her mind, trained to thought, could find that for
which it longed--clearness of vision, a plain understanding of her own
feelings and position in the presence of the impending decision.

At first her thoughts wandered to and fro like a dove ere it chooses the
direction of its flight; but after the question why she was having a tomb
built so hurriedly, when she would be permitted to live, her mind found
the right track.  Among the Scythian guards, the Mauritanians, and
Blemmyes in the army there were plenty of savage fellows whom a word from
her lips and a handful of gold would have set upon the vanquished Antony,
as the huntsman's "Seize him!" urges the hounds.  A hint, and among the
wretched magicians and Magians in the Rhakotis, the Egyptian quarter of
the city, twenty men would have assassinated him by poison or wily
snares; one command to the Macedonians in the guard of the Mellakes or
youths, and he would be a captive that very day, and to-morrow, if she
so ordered, on the way to Asia, whither Octavianus, as Timagenes told
her, had gone.

What prevented her from grasping the gold, giving the hint, issuing the
command?

Doubtless she thought of the magic goblet, now melted, which had
constrained him to cast aside honour, fame, and power, as worthless
rubbish, in order to obey her behest not to leave her; but though this
remembrance burdened her soul, it had no decisive influence.  It was no
one thing which prisoned her hand and lips, but every fibre of her being,
every pulsation of her heart, every glance back into the past to the
confines of childhood.

Yet she listened to other thoughts also.  They reminded her of her
children, the elation of power, love for the land of her ancestors,
and the peril which menaced it without her, the bliss of seeing the
light, and the darkness, the silence, the dull rigidity of death, the
destruction of the body and the mind cherished and developed with so much
care and toil, the horrible torture which might be associated with the
transition from life to death--the act of dying.  And what lay before her
in the existence which lasted an eternity?  When she no longer breathed
beneath the sun, even if the death hour was deferred, and she found that
not Epicurus, who believed that with death all things ended, had been
right, but the ancient teachings of the Egyptians, what would await her
in that world beyond the grave if she purchased a few more years of life
by the murder or betrayal of her lover, her husband?

Yet perhaps the punishments inflicted upon the condemned were but
bugbears invented by the priesthood, which guarded the regulation of the
state in order to curb the unruly conduct of the populace and terrify the
turbulent transgressors of the law.  And, whispered the daring Greek
spirit, in the abode of the condemned, not in the Garden of Aalu, the
Elysian Fields of the Egyptians, she would meet her father and mother and
all her wicked ancestors down to Euergetes I., who was succeeded by the
infamous Philopater.  Thus the thought of the other world became an
antecedent so uncertain as to permit no definite inference, and might
therefore be left out of the account.  How would--this must be the form
of the question--the years purchased by the murder or betrayal of one
whom she loved shape themselves for her?

During the night the image of the murdered man would drive sleep from her
couch, and the Furies, the Dirx, as the Roman Antony called them, who
pursue murderers with the serpent scourge, were no idle creations of
poetic fancy, but fully symbolized the restlessness of the criminal,
driven to and fro by the pangs of conscience.  The chief good, the
painless happiness of the Epicureans, was forever lost to those burdened
by such guilt.

And during the hours of the day and evening?  Ay, then she would be free
to heap pleasure on pleasure.  But for whom were the festivals to be
celebrated; with whom could she share them?  For many a long year no
banquet, no entertainment had given her enjoyment without Mark Antony.
For whom did she adorn herself or strive to stay the vanishing charm?
And how soon would anguish of soul utterly destroy the spell, which was
slowly, slowly, yet steadily diminishing, and, when the mirror revealed
wrinkles which the skill of no Olympus could efface, when she----No,
she was not created to grow old!  Did the few years of life which must
contain so much misery really possess a value great enough to surrender
the right of being called by present and future generations the
bewitching Cleopatra, the most irresistible of women?

And the children?

Yes, it would have been delightful to see them grow up and occupy the
throne, but serious, decisive doubts soon blended even with an idea so
rich in joy.

How glorious to greet Caesarion as sovereign of the world in Octavianus's
place!  But how could the dreamer, whose first love affair had caused the
total sacrifice of dignity and violation of the law, and who now seemed
to have once more relapsed into the old state of torpor, attain the
position?

The other children inspired fair hopes, and how beautiful it appeared to
the mother's heart to see Antonius Helios as King of Egypt; Cleopatra
Selene with her first child in her arms; and little Alexander a noble
statesman and hero, rich in virtue and talents!  Yet, what would they,
Antony's children, whose education she hoped Archibius would direct,
feel for the mother who had been their father's murderess?

She shuddered at the thought, remembering the hours when her childish
heart had shed tears of blood over the infamous mother whom her father
had execrated.  And Queen Tryphoena, whom history recorded as a monster,
had not killed her husband, but merely thrust him from the throne.

Arsinoe's execrations of her mother and sister came back to her memory,
and the thought that the rosy lips of the twins and her darling Alexander
could ever open to curse her,--the idea that the children would ever
raise their beloved hands to point at her, the wicked murderess of their
father, with horror and scorn--No, no, and again no!  She would not
purchase a few more years of valueless life at the cost of this
humiliation and shame.

Purchase of whom?

Of that Octavianus who had robbed her son of the heritage of his father,
Caesar, and whose mention in the will was like an imputation on her
fidelity--the cold-hearted, calculating upstart, whose nature from their
first meeting in Rome had repelled, rebuffed, chilled her; of the man by
whose cajolery and power her husband--for in her own eyes and those of
the Egyptians Antony held this position--had been induced to wed his
sister, Octavia, and thereby stamp her, Cleopatra, as merely his love,
cast a doubt upon the legitimate birth of her children; of the false
friend of the trusting Antony who, before the battle of Actium, had most
deeply humiliated and insulted both!

On the contrary, her royal pride rebelled against obeying the command of
such a man to commit the most atrocious deed; and from childhood this
pride had been as much a part of her nature as her breath and the
pulsation of her heart.  And yet, for her children's sake, she might
perhaps have incurred this disgrace, had it not been at the same time the
grave of the best and noblest things which she desired to implant in the
young souls of the twins and Alexander.

While thinking of the children's curses she had risen from her seat.
Why should she reflect and consider longer?  She had found the clear
perception she sought.  Let Gorgias hasten the building of the tomb.
Should Fate demand her life, she would not resist if she were permitted
to preserve it only at the cost of murder or base treachery.  Her lover's
was already forfeited.  At his side she had enjoyed a radiant, glowing,
peerless bliss, of which the world still talked with envious amazement.
At his side, when all was over, she would rest in the grave, and compel
the world to remember with respectful sympathy the royal lovers, Antony
and Cleopatra.  Her children should be able to think of her with
untroubled hearts, and not even the shadow of a bitter feeling, a warning
thought, should deter them from adorning their parents' grave with
flowers, weeping at its foot, invoking and offering sacrifices to their
spirits.

Then she glanced at the statue of Berenike, who had also once worn on her
brow the double crown of Egypt.  She, too, had early died a violent
death; she, too, had known how to love.  The vow to sacrifice her
beautiful hair to Aphrodite if her husband returned uninjured from the
Syrian war had rendered her name illustrious.  "Berenike's Hair" was
still to be seen as a constellation in the night heavens.

Though this woman had sinned often and heavily, one act of loyal love
had made her an honoured, worshipped princess.  She--Cleopatra would do
something still greater.  The sacrifice which she intended to impose upon
herself would weigh far more heavily in the balance than a handful of
beautiful tresses, and would comprise sovereignty and life.

With head erect and a sense of proud self-reliance she gazed at the noble
marble countenance of the Cyrenian queen.  Ere entering the sanctuary she
had imagined that she knew how the criminals whom she had sentenced to
death must feel.  Now that she herself had done with life, she felt as if
she were relieved from a heavy burden, and yet her heart ached, and--
especially when she thought of her children--she was overwhelmed with the
emotion which is the most painful of all forms of compassion--pity for
herself.


CHAPTER XVIII.

When Cleopatra left the temple, Iras marvelled at the change in her
appearance.  The severe tension which had given her beautiful face a
shade of harshness had yielded to an expression of gentle sadness that
enhanced its charm, yet her features quickly brightened as her attendant
pointed to the procession which was just entering the forecourt of the
palace.

In Alexandria and throughout Egypt birthdays were celebrated as far as
possible.  Therefore, to do honour to the twins, the children of the city
had been sent to offer their congratulations, and at the same time to
assure their royal mother of the love and devotion of the citizens.

The return to the palace occupied only a few minutes, and as Cleopatra,
hastily donning festal garments, gazed down at the bands of children, it
seemed as if Fate by this fair spectacle had given her a sign of approval
of her design.

She was soon standing hand in hand with the twins upon the balcony before
which the procession had halted.  Hundreds of boys and girls of the same
age as the prince and princess had flocked thither, the former bearing
bouquets, the latter small baskets filled with lilies and roses.  Every
head was crowned with a wreath, and many of the girls wore garlands of
flowers.  A chorus of youths and maidens sang a festal hymn, beseeching
the gods to grant the royal mother and children every happiness; the
leader of the chorus of girls made a short address in the name of the
city, and during this speech the children formed in ranks, the tallest in
the rear, the smallest in the front, and the others between according to
their height.  The scene resembled a living garden, in which rosy faces
were the beautiful flowers.

Cleopatra thanked the citizens for the charming greeting sent to her by
those whom they held dearest, and assured them that she returned their
love.  Her eyes grew dim with tears as she went with her three children
to the throng who offered their congratulations, and an unusually pretty
little girl whom she kissed threw her arms around her as tenderly as if
she were her own mother.  And how beautiful was the scene when the girls
strewed the contents of their little baskets on the ground before her,
and the boys, with many a ringing shout and loving wish, offered the
bouquets to her and the twins!

Charmian had not forgotten to provide the gifts; and when the
chamberlains and waiting-women led the children into a large hall to
offer them refreshments, the Queen's eyes sparkled so brightly that the
companion of her childhood ventured to make her difficult confession.

And, as so often happens, the event we most dread shows, when it actually
occurs, a friendly or indifferent aspect; this was the case now.  Nothing
in life is either great or small--the one may be transformed to the
other, according to the things with which it is compared.  The tallest
man becomes a dwarf beside a rocky giant of the mountain chain, the
smallest is a Titan to the swarming ants in the forest.  The beggar
seizes as a treasure what the rich man scornfully casts aside.  That
which the day before yesterday seemed to Cleopatra unendurable, roused
her keenest anxiety, robbed her of part of her night's repose, and
induced her to adopt strenuous measures, now appeared trivial and
scarcely worthy of consideration.

Yesterday and to-day had brought events and called up questions which
forced Barine's disappearance into the realm of unimportant matters.

Charmian's confession was preceded by the statement that she longed for
rest yet, nevertheless, was ready to remain with her royal friend, in
every situation, until she no longer desired her services and sent her
away.  But she feared that this moment had come.

Cleopatra interrupted her with the assurance that she was speaking of
something utterly impossible; and when Charmian disclosed Barine's
escape, and admitted that it was she who had aided the flight of the
innocent and sorely threatened granddaughter of Didymus, the Queen
started up angrily and frowned, but it was only for a moment.  Then, with
a smile, she shook her finger at her friend, embraced her, and gravely
but kindly assured her that, of all vices, ingratitude was most alien to
her nature.  The companion of her childhood had bestowed so many proofs
of faithfulness, love, self-sacrifice, and laborious service in her
behalf that they could not be long outweighed by a single act of wilful
disobedience.  An abundant supply would still remain, by virtue of which
she might continue to sin without fearing that Cleopatra would ever part
from her Charmian.

The latter again perceived that nothing on earth could be hostile or
sharp enough to sever the bond which united her to this woman.  When her
lips overflowed with the gratitude which filled her heart, Cleopatra
admitted that it seemed as if, in aiding Barine's escape, she had
rendered her a service.  The caution with which Charmian had concealed
Barine's refuge had not escaped her notice, and she did not ask to learn
it.  It was enough for her that the dangerous beauty was out of
Caesarion's reach.  As for Antony, a wall now separated him from the
world, and consequently from the woman who, spite of Alexas's
accusations, had probably never stood closer to his heart.

Charmian now eagerly strove to show the Queen what had induced the Syrian
to pursue Barine so vindictively.  It was evident--and scarcely needed
proof--that Mark Antony's whole acquaintanceship with the old scholar's
granddaughter had been far from leading to any tender relation.  But
Cleopatra gave only partial attention.  The man whom she had loved with
every pulsation of her heart already seemed to her only a dear memory.
She did not forget the happiness enjoyed with and through him, or the
wrong she had done by the use of the magic goblet; yet with the wall on
the Choma, which divided him from her and the rest of the world, and her
command to have the mausoleum built, she imagined that the season of love
was over.  Any new additions to this chapter of the life of her heart
were but the close.  Even the jealousy which had clouded the happiness of
her love like a fleeting, rapidly changing shadow, she believed she had
now renounced forever.

While Charmian protested that no one save Dion had ever been heard with
favour by Barine, and related many incidents of her former life,
Cleopatra's thoughts were with Antony.  Like the image of the beloved
dead, the towering figure of the Roman hero rose before her mind, but she
recalled him only as he was prior to the battle of Actium.  She desired
and expected nothing more from the broken-spirited man, whose condition
was perhaps her own fault.  But she had resolved to atone for her guilt,
and would do so at the cost of throne and life.  This settled the
account.  Whatever her remaining span of existence might add or subtract,
was part of the bargain.

The entrance of Alexas interrupted her.  With fiery passion he expressed
his regret that he had been defrauded by base intrigues of the right
bestowed upon him to pass sentence upon a guilty woman.  This was the
more difficult to bear because he was deprived of the possibility of
providing for the pursuit of the fugitive.  Antony had honoured him with
the commission to win Herod back to his cause.  He was to leave
Alexandria that very night.  As nothing could be expected in this matter
from the misanthropic Imperator, he hoped that the Queen would avenge
such an offence to her dignity, and adopt severe measures towards the
singer and her last lover, Dion, who with sacrilegious hands had wounded
the son of Caesar.

But Cleopatra, with royal dignity, kept him within the limits of his
position, commanded him not to mention the affair to her again, and then,
with a sorrowful smile, wished him success with Herod, in whose return to
the lost cause of Antony, however, much as she prized the skill of the
mediator, she did not believe.

When he had retired, she exclaimed to Charmian: "Was I blind?  This man
is a traitor!  We shall discover it.  Wherever Dion has taken his young
wife, let her be carefully concealed, not from me, but from this Syrian.
It is easier to defend one's self against the lion than the scorpion.
You, my friend, will see that Archibius seeks me this very day.  I must
talk with him, and--you no longer have any thought of a parting?  Another
will come soon enough, which will forever forbid these lips from kissing
your dear face."

As she spoke, she again clasped the companion of her childhood in her
arms, and when Iras entered to request an audience for Lucilius, Antony's
most faithful friend, Cleopatra, who had noticed the younger woman's
envious glance at the embrace, said: "Was I mistaken in fancying that you
imagined yourself slighted for Charmian, who is an older friend?  That
would be wrong; for I love and need you both.  You are her niece, and
indebted to her for much kindness from your earliest childhood.  So,
even though you will lose the joy of revenge upon a hated enemy, forget
what has happened, as I did, and maintain your former affectionate
companionship.  I will reward you for it with the only thing that the
daughter of the wealthy Krates cannot purchase, yet which she probably
rates at no low value--the love of her royal friend."

With these words she clasped Iras also in a close embrace, and when the
latter left the room to summon Lucilius, she thought: "No woman has ever
won so much love; perhaps that is why she possesses so great a treasure
of it, and can afford such unspeakable happiness by its bestowal.  Or is
she so much beloved because she entered the world full of its wealth, and
dispenses it as the sun diffuses light?  Surely that must be the case.
I have reason to believe it, for whom did I ever love save the Queen?
No one, not even myself, and I know no one in whose love for me I can
believe.  But why did Dion, whom I loved so fervently, disdain me?  Fool!
Why did Mark Antony prefer Cleopatra to Octavia, who was not less fair,
whose heart was his, and whose hand held the sovereignty of half the
world?"

Passing on as she spoke, she soon returned, ushering the Roman Lucilius
into the presence of the Queen.  A gallant deed had bound this man to
Antony.  After the battle of Philippi, when the army of the republicans
fled, Brutus had been on the point of being seized by the enemy's
horsemen; but Lucilius, at the risk of being cut down, had personated
him, and thereby, though but for a short time, rescued him.  This had
seemed to Antony unusual and noble and, in his generous manner, he had
not only forgiven him, but bestowed his favour upon him.  Lucilius was
grateful, and gave him the same fidelity he had showed to Brutus.  At
Actium he had risked Antony's favour to prevent his deserting Cleopatra
after the battle, and then accompanied him in his flight.  Now he was
bearing him company in his seclusion on the Choma.

The grey-haired man who, but a short time before, had retained all the
vigour of youth, approached the Queen with bowed head and saddened heart.
His face, so regular in its contours, had undergone a marked change
within the past few weeks.  The cheeks were sunken, the features had
grown sharper, and there was a sorrowful expression in the eyes, which,
when informing Cleopatra of his friend's condition, glittered with tears.

Before the hapless battle he was one of Cleopatra's most enthusiastic
admirers; but since he had been forced to see his friend and benefactor
risk fame, happiness, and honour to follow the Queen, he had cherished a
feeling of bitter resentment towards her.  He would certainly have spared
himself this mission, had he not been sure that she who had brought her
lover to ruin was the only person who could rouse him from spiritless
languor to fresh energy and interest in life.

From motives of friendship, urged by no one, he came unbidden to the
woman whom he had formerly so sincerely admired, to entreat her to cheer
the unfortunate man, rouse him, and remind him of his duty.  He had
little news to impart; for on the voyage she had herself witnessed long
enough the pitiable condition of her husband.  Now Antony was beginning
to be content in it, and this was what most sorely troubled the faithful
friend.

The Imperator had called the little palace which he occupied on the Choma
his Timonium, because he compared himself with the famous Athenian
misanthrope who, after fortune abandoned him, had also been betrayed by
many of his former friends.  Even at Taenarum he had thought of returning
to the Choma, and by means of a wall, which would separate it from the
mainland, rendering it as inaccessible as--according to rumour--the grave
of Timon at Halae near Athens.  Gorgias had erected it, and whoever
wished to visit the hermit was forced to go by sea and request
admittance, which was granted to few.

Cleopatra listened to Lucilius with sympathy, and then asked whether
there was no way of cheering or comforting the wretched man.

"No, your Majesty," he replied.  "His favourite occupation is to recall
what he once possessed, but only to show the uselessness of these
memories.  'What joys has life not offered me?' he asks, and then adds:
'But they were repeated again and again, and after being enjoyed for the
tenth time they became monotonous and lost their charm.  Then they caused
satiety to the verge of loathing.'  Only necessary things, such as bread
and water, he says, possess real value; but he desires neither, because
he has even less taste for them than for the dainties which spoil a man's
morrow.  Yesterday in a specially gloomy hour, he spoke of gold.  This
was perhaps most worthy of desire.  The mere sight of it awakened
pleasant hopes, because it might afford so many gratifications.  Then he
laughed bitterly, exclaiming that those joys were the very ones which
produced the most disagreeable satiety.  Even gold was not worth the
trouble of stretching out one's hand.

"He is fond of enlarging upon such fancies, and finds images to make his
meaning clear.

"'In the snow upon the highest mountain-peak the feet grow cold,' he
said.  'In the mire they are warm, but the dark mud is ugly and clings to
them.'

"Then I remarked that between the morass and the mountain-snows lie sunny
valleys where life would be pleasant; but he flew into a rage, vehemently
protesting that he would never be content with the pitiable middle course
of Horace.  Then he exclaimed: 'Ay, I am vanquished.  Octavianus and his
Agrippa are the conquerors; but if a rock mutilates or an elephant's
clumsy foot crushes me, I am nevertheless of a higher quality than
either.'"

"There spoke the old Mark Antony!"  cried Cleopatra; but again Lucilius's
loyal heart throbbed with resentment against the woman who had fostered
the recklessness which had brought his powerful friend to ruin, and he
continued:

"But he often sees himself in a different light.  'No writer could invent
a more unworthy life than mine,' he exclaimed recently.  'A farce ending
in a tragedy.'"

Lucilius might have added still harsher sayings, but the sorrowful
expression in the tearful eyes of the afflicted Queen silenced them upon
his lips.

Yet Cleopatra's name blended with most of the words uttered by the
broken-spirited man.  Sometimes it was associated with the most furious
reproaches, but more frequently with expressions of boundless delight and
wild outbursts of fervent longing, and this was what inspired Lucilius
with the hope that the Queen's influence would be effectual with his
friend.  Therefore he repeated some especially ardent words, to which
Cleopatra listened with grateful joy.

Yet, when Lucilius paused, she remarked that doubtless the misanthropist
had spoken of her, and probably of Octavia also, in quite a different
way.  She was prepared for the worst, for she was one of the rocks
against which his greatness had been shattered.

This reminded Lucilius of the comment Antony had made upon the three
women whom he had wedded, and he answered reluctantly: "Fulvia, the wife
of his youth--I knew the bold, hot-blooded woman, the former wife of
Clodius--he called the tempest which swelled his sails."

"Yes, Yes!" cried Cleopatra.  'So she did.  He owes her much; but I, too,
am indebted to the dead Fulvia.  She taught him to recognize and yield to
woman's power."

"Not always to his advantage," retorted Lucilius, whose resentment was
revived by the last sentence and, without heeding the faint flush on the
Queen's cheek, he added: "Of Octavia he said that she was the straight
path which leads to happiness, and those who are content to walk in it
are acceptable to gods and men."

"Then why did he not suffer it to content him?"  cried Cleopatra
wrathfully.

"Fulvia's school," replied the Roman, "was probably the last where he
would learn the moderation which--as you know--is so alien to his nature.
His opinion of the quiet valleys and middle course you have just heard."

"But I, what have I been to him?" urged the Queen.

Lucilius bent his gaze for a short time on the floor, then answered
hesitatingly:

"You asked to hear, and the Queen's command must be obeyed.  He compared
your Majesty to a delicious banquet given to celebrate a victory, at
which the guests, crowned with garlands, revel before the battle--"

"Which is lost," said the Queen hurriedly, in a muffled voice.  "The
comparison is apt.  Now, after the defeat, it would be absurd to prepare
another feast.  The tragedy is closing, so the play (doubtless he said
so) which preceded it would be but a wearisome repetition if performed a
second time.  One thing, it is true, seems desirable--a closing act of
reconciliation.  If you think it is in my power to recall my husband to
active life, rely upon me.  The banquet of which he spoke occupied long
years.  The dessert will consume little time, but I am ready to serve it.
When I asked permission to visit him he refused.  What plan of meeting
have you arranged?"

"That I will leave to your feminine delicacy of feeling," replied
Lucilius.  "Yet I have come with a request whose fulfilment will perhaps
contain the answer.  Eros, Mark Antony's faithful body-slave, humbly
petitions your Majesty to grant him a few minutes' audience.  You know
the worthy fellow.  He would die for you and his master, and he--I once
heard from your lips the remark of King Antiochus, that no man was great
to his body-slave--thus Eros sees his master's weaknesses and lofty
qualities from a nearer point of view than we, and he is shrewd.  Antony
gave him his freedom long ago, and if your Majesty does not object to
receiving a man so low in station--"

"Let him  come," replied  Cleopatra.  "Your demand upon me is just.
Unhappily, I am but too well aware of the atonement due your friend.
Before you came, I was engaged in making preparations for the fulfilment
of one of his warmest wishes."

With these words she dismissed the Roman.  Her feelings as she watched
his departure were of very mingled character.  The yearning for the
happiness of which she had been so long deprived had again awaked, while
the unkind words which he had applied to her still rankled in her heart.
But the door had scarcely closed behind Lucilius when the usher announced
a deputation of the members of the museum.

The learned gentlemen came to complain of the wrong which had been done
to their colleague, Didymus, and also to express their loyalty during
these trying times.  Cleopatra assured them of her favour, and said that
she had already offered ample compensation to the old philosopher.  In a
certain sense she was one of themselves.  They all knew that, from early
youth, she had honoured and shared their labours.  In proof of this, she
would present to the library of the museum the two hundred thousand
volumes from Pergamus, one of the most valuable gifts Mark Antony had
ever bestowed upon her, and which she had hitherto regarded merely as a
loan.  This she hoped would repay Didymus for the injury which, to her
deep regret, had been inflicted upon him, and at least partially repair
the loss sustained by the former library of the museum during the
conflagration in the Bruchium.

The sages, eagerly assuring her of their gratitude and devotion, retired.
Most of them were personally known to Cleopatra who, to their mutual
pleasure and advantage, had measured her intellectual powers with the
most brilliant minds of their body.

The sun had already set, when a procession of the priests of Serapis, the
chief god of the city, whose coming had been announced the day before,
appeared at Lochias.  Accompanied by torch and lantern bearers, it moved
forward with slow and solemn majesty.  In harmony with the nature of
Serapis, there were many reminders of death.

The meaning of every image, every standard, every shrine, every
peculiarity of the music and singing, was familiar to the Queen.  Even
the changing colours of the lights referred to the course of growth and
decay in the universe and in human life, and the magnificent close of the
chant of homage which represented the reception of the royal soul into
the essence of the deity, the apotheosis of the sovereign, was well
suited to stir the heart; for a sea of light unexpectedly flooded the
whole procession and, while its glow irradiated the huge pile of the
palace, the sea with its forest of ships and masts, and the shore with
its temples, pylons, obelisks, and superb buildings, all the choruses,
accompanied by the music of sackbuts, cymbals, and lutes, blended in a
mighty hymn, whose waves of sound rose to the star-strewn sky and reached
the open sea beyond the Pharos.

Many a symbolical image suggested death and the resurrection, defeat and
a victory following it by the aid of great Serapis; and when the torches
retired, vanishing in the darkness, with the last, notes of the chanting
of the priests, Cleopatra, raised her head, feeling as if the vow she had
made during the gloomy singing of the aged men and the extinguishing of
the torches had received the approval of the deity brought by her
forefathers to Alexandria and enthroned there to unite in his own person
the nature of the Greek and the Egyptian gods.

Her tomb was to be built and, if destiny was fulfilled, to receive her
lover and herself.  She had perceived from Antony's bitter words, as well
as the looks and tones of Lucilius, that he, as well as the man to whom
her heart still clung with indissoluble bonds, held her responsible for
Actium and the fall of his greatness.

The world, she knew, would imitate them, but it should learn that if love
had robbed the greatest man of his day of fame and sovereignty, that love
had been worthy of the highest price.

The belief which had just been symbolically represented to her--that it
was allotted to the vanishing light to rise again in new and radiant
splendour--she would maintain for the present, though the best success
could scarcely lead to anything more than merely fanning the glimmering
spark and deferring its extinction.

For herself there was no longer any great victory to win which would be
worth the conflict.  Yet the weapons must not rest until the end.  Antony
must not perish, growling, like a second Timon, or a wild beast caught in
a snare.  She would rekindle, though but for the last blaze, the fire of
his hero-nature, which blind love for her and the magic spell that had
enabled her to bind his will had covered for a time with ashes.

While listening to the resurrection hymn of the priests of Serapis, she
had asked herself if it might not be possible to give Antony, when he had
been roused to fresh energy, the son of Caesar as a companion in arms.
True, she had found the boy in a mood far different from the one for
which she had hoped.  If he had once been carried on to a bold deed, it
seemed to have exhausted his energy; for he remained absorbed in the most
pitiable love-sickness.  Yet he had not recovered from his illness.  When
he was better he would surely wake to active interest in the events which
threatened to exert so great an influence on his own existence and,
like the humblest slave, lament the defeat of Actium.  Hitherto he had
listened to the tidings of battle which had reached his ears with an
indifference that seemed intelligible and pardonable only when attributed
to his wound.

His tutor Rhodon had just requested a leave of absence, remarking that
Caesarion would not lack companions, since he was expecting Antyllus and
other youths of his own age.  A flood of light streamed from the windows
of the reception hall of the "King of kings."  There was still time to
seek him and make him understand what was at stake.  Ah! if she could but
succeed in awaking his father's spirit!  If that culpable attack should
prove the harbinger of future deeds of manly daring!

No interview with him as yet had encouraged this expectation, but a
mother's heart easily sees, even in disappointment, a step which leads to
a new hope.  When Charmian entered to announce Antony's body-slave, she
sent word to him to wait, and requested her friend to accompany her to
her son.

Who would not gladly recover this "old rhyme?"--I can say for myself, that
if these lines should ever meet the eye of the writer of the passage
I have quoted, I trust he will be induced to communicate, in however
fragmentary a shape, this curious addition to our present scanty stories
of mythological information.

While on the subject of _Charms and Spells_, I would ask those who
are more familiar than myself with the Manuscript treasures of the
British Museum, and of our University Libraries, whether they have
ever met with (except in MSS. of Chaucer) the remarkable "Night Spell"
which the Father of English Poetry has preserved in the following
passage of his _Miller's Tale_. I quote from Mr.
Wright's edition, printed for the Percy Society:--
"'What Nicholas, what how man, loke adoun:
Awake and think on Cristes passioun I crowche the from Elves and from
Wightes.' There with the night-spel seyde he anon rightes On the foure
halves of the hous aboute And on the threissh-fold of the dore withoute.

"'Lord Jhesu Crist and seynte Benedight, Blesse this hous from every wikkede
wight Fro nightes verray, the white Paternoster When wonestow now, seynte
Petres soster.'"

This charm has long occupied my attention, and as I hope shortly to submit
to the Fellows of the Society of Antiquaries an attempt to illustrate
some parts of it which are at present certainly involved in very great
obscurity, I shall be glad to be informed whether any other early version
of it is to be found in MS., and if so, where; and also whether
any other version, corrupted or not, is still preserved, if not in use,
at least in memory. I should also be especially glad of references of
any other allusion to the "white Paternoster" or "seynte Petres soster,"
or for any information as to sources for ascertaining the history, whether
authentic or legendary, of the personage supposed to be alluded to in the
closing words of this remarkable spell.

WILLIAM J. THOMS.

* * * * *

ALLUSIONS IN THE HOMILIES.

_"A Good Wife," &c._, and _"God speed the Plough!"_--I should hold
myself deeply indebted to any of your correspondents who would inform
me where the two following quotations are to be found.

I have been anxiously looking for them for some years.

I have taken some pains myself--{230} "I have poached in Suidas for
unlicensed Greek"--have applied to my various antiquarian friends
(many of whose names I was delighted to recognise among the brilliant
galaxy that enlightened your first number)--but hitherto all in
vain; and I am reduced to acknowledge the truth of the old proberb,
"A ---- may ask more questions in an hour than a wise man can answer
in seven years:"-- 
I.

"For thus will most truly be verified the _saying of the poet_, 'A
good wife, by obeying her husband, shall bear the rule, so that he
shall have a delight and a gladness the sooner at all times to
return home to her.' But, on the contrary part, 'when the wives be
stubborn, froward, and malapert, their husbands are compelled thereby
to abhor and flee from their own houses, even as they should have
battle with their enemies.'"--_Homily on Matrimony_, p. 450. ed.
Oxford, 1840.Caesar's
son will not be exhibited to the Quirites in the triumphal procession.
Rhodon says that there would be an insurrection if I appeared in the
Forum.  If I go there again, it certainly will not be in Octavianus's
train.  I am not suited for that kind of ignominy.  It would stifle me
and, ere I would grant any man the pleasure of dragging the son of Caesar
behind him to increase his own renown, I would put an end--ten, nay, a
hundred times over, in the good old Roman fashion, to my life, which is
by no means especially attractive.  What is sweeter than sound sleep, and
who will disturb and rouse me when Death has lowered his torch before me?
But now I think I shall be spared this extreme.  Whatever else they may
inflict upon me will scarcely exceed my powers of endurance.  If any one
has learned contentment it is I.  The King of kings and Co-Regent of the
Great Queen has been trained persistently, and with excellent success,
to be content.  What should I be, and what am I?  Yet I do not complain,
and wish to accuse no one.  We need not summon Octavianus, and when he is
here let him take what he will if he only spares the lives of my mother,
the twins, and little Alexander, whom I love, and bestows on me the
estate--the main thing is that it must be full of fishponds--of which I
spoke.  The private citizen Caesarion, who devotes his time to fishing
and the books he likes to read, will gladly be allowed to choose a wife
to suit his own taste.  The more humble her origin, the more easily I
shall win the consent of the Roman guardian."

"Do you know, Caesarion," interrupted Antony's unruly son, leaning back
on the cushions and stretching his feet farther in front of him, "if you
were not the King of kings I should be inclined to call you a base, mean-
natured fellow!  One who has the good fortune to be the son of Julius
Caesar ought not to forget it so disgracefully.  My gall overflows at
your whimpering.  By the dog!  It was one of my most senseless pranks to
take you to the singer.  I should think there would be other things to
occupy the mind of the King of kings.  Besides, Barine cares no more
for you than the last fish you caught.  She showed that plainly enough.
I say once more, if Derketaeus's men succeed in capturing the beauty who
has robbed you of your senses, she won't go with you to your miserable
estate to cook the fish you catch, for if we have her again, and my
father holds out his hand to her, all your labour will be in vain.  He
saw the fair enchantress only twice, and had no time to become better
acquainted, but she captured his fancy and, if I remind him of her, who
knows what will happen?"

Here Cleopatra beckoned to her companion and returned to her apartments
with drooping head.  On reaching them, she broke the silence, saying:
"Listening, Charmian, is unworthy of a Queen; but if all listeners heard
things so painful, one need no longer guard keyholes and chinks of doors.
I must recover my calmness ere I receive Eros.  One thing more.  Is
Barine's hiding-place secure?"

"I don't know--Archibius says so."

"Very well.  They are searching for her zealously enough, as you heard,
and she must not be found.  I am glad that she did not set a snare for
the boy.  How a jealous heart leads us astray!  Were she here, I would
grant her anything to make amends for my unjust suspicion of her and
Antony.  And to think that Alexas--but for your interposition he would
have succeeded--meant to send her to the mines!  It is a terrible warning
to be on my guard.  Against whom?  First of all, my own weakness.  This
is a day of recognition.  A noble aim, but on the way the feet bleed, and
the heart--ah!  Charmian, the poor, weak, disappointed heart!"

She sighed heavily, and supported her head on the arm resting upon the
table at her side.  The polished, exquisitely grained surface of thya-
wood was worth a large estate; the gems in the rings and bracelets which
glittered on her hand and arm would have purchased a principality.  This
thought entered her mind and, overpowered by a feeling of angry disgust,
she would fain have cast all the costly rubbish into the sea or the
destroying flames.

She would gladly have been a beggar, content with the barley bread of
Epicurus, she said to herself, if in return she could but have inspired
her son even with the views of the reckless blusterer Antyllus.  Her
worst fears had not pictured Caesarion so weak, so insignificant.  She
could no longer rest upon her cushions; and while, with drooping head,
she gazed backward over the past, the accusing voice in her own breast
cried out that she was reaping what she had sowed.  She had repressed,
curbed the boy's awakening will to secure his obedience; understood how
to prevent any exercise of his ability or efforts in wider circles.

True, it had been done on many a pretext.  Why should not her son taste
the quiet happiness which she had enjoyed in the garden of Epicurus?  And
was not the requirement that whoever is to command must first learn to
obey, based upon old experiences?

But this was a day of reckoning and insight, and for the first time she
found courage to confess that her own burning ambition had marked out the
course of Caesarion's education.  She had not repressed his talents from
cool calculation, but it had been pleasant to her to see him grow up free
from aspirations.  She had granted the dreamer repose without arousing
him.  How often she had rejoiced over the certainty that this son, on
whom Antony, after his victory over the Parthians, had bestowed the title
of Co-Regent, would never rebel against his mother's guardianship!  The
welfare of the state had doubtless been better secured in her trained
hands than in those of an inexperienced boy.  And the proud consciousness
of power!  Her heart swelled.  So long as she lived she would remain
Queen.  To transfer the sovereignty to another, whatever name he might
bear, had seemed to her impossible.  Now she knew how little her son
yearned for lofty things.  Her heart contracted.  The saying "You reap
what you sowed" gave her no peace, and wherever she turned in her past
life she perceived the fruit of the seeds which she had buried in the
ground.  The field was sinking under the burden of the ears of
misfortune.  The harvest was ripe for the reaper; but, ere he raised the
sickle, the owner's claim must be preserved.  Gorgias must hasten the
building of the tomb; the end could not be long deferred.  How to shape
this worthily, if the victor left her no other choice, had just been
pointed out by the son of whom she was ashamed.  His father's noble blood
forbade him to bear the deepest ignominy with the patience his mother had
inculcated.

It had grown late ere she admitted Antony's body-slave, but for her the
business of the night was just commencing.  After he had gone she would
be engaged for hours with the commanders of the army, the fleet, the
fortifications.  The soliciting of allies, too, must be carried on by
means of letters containing the most stirring appeals to the heart.

Eros, Antony's body-slave, appeared.  His kind eyes filled with tears at
the sight of the Queen.  Grief had not lessened the roundness of his
handsome face, but the expression of mischievous, often insolent, gaiety
had given place to a sorrowful droop of the lips, and his fair hair had
begun to turn grey.

Lucilius's information that Cleopatra had consented to make advances to
Antony had seemed like the rising of the sun after a long period of
darkness.  In his eyes, not only his master, but everything else, must
yield to the power of the Queen.  He had heard Antony at Tarsus inveigh
against "the Egyptian serpent," protesting that he would make her pay so
dearly for her questionable conduct towards himself and the cause of
Caesar that the treasure-houses on the Nile should be like an empty wine-
skin; yet, a few hours after, body and soul had been in her toils.  So it
had continued till the battle of Actium.  Now there was nothing more to
lose; but what might not Cleopatra bestow upon his master?  He thought of
the delightful years during which his face had grown so round, and every
day fresh pleasures and spectacles, such as the world would never again
witness, had satiated eye and ear, palate and nostril,--nay, even
curiosity.  If they could be repeated, even in a simpler form, so much
the better.  His main--nay, almost his sole-desire was to release his
lord from this wretched solitude, this horrible misanthropy, so ill
suited to his nature.

Cleopatra had kept him waiting two hours, but he would willingly have
loitered in the anteroom thrice as long if she only determined to follow
his counsel.  It was worth considering, and Eros did not hesitate to give
it.  No one could foresee how Antony would greet Cleopatra herself, so he
proposed that she should send Charmian--not alone, but with her clever
hunch-backed maid, to whom the Imperator himself had given the name
"Aisopion."  He liked Charmian, and could never see the dusky maid
without jesting with her.  If his master could once be induced to show a
cheerful face to others besides himself, Eros, and perceived how much
better it was to laugh than to lapse into sullen reverie and anger, much
would be gained, and Charmian would do the rest, if she brought a loving
message from her royal mistress.

Hitherto Cleopatra had not interrupted him; but when she expressed the
opinion that a slave's nimble tongue would have little power to change
the deep despondency of a man overwhelmed by the most terrible disaster,
Eros waved his short, broad hand, saying:

"I trust your Majesty will pardon the frankness of a man so humble in
degree, but those in high station often permit us to see what they hide
from one another.  Only the loftiest and the lowliest, the gods and the
slaves, behold the great without disguise.  May my ears be cropped if the
Imperator's melancholy and misanthropy are so intense!  All this is a
disguise which pleases him.  You know how, in better days, he enjoyed
appearing as Dionysus, and with what wanton gaiety he played the part of
the god.  Now he is hiding his real, cheerful face behind the mask of
unsocial melancholy, because he thinks the former does not suit this time
of misfortune.  True, he often says things which make your skin creep,
and frequently broods mournfully over his own thoughts.  But this never
lasts long when we are alone.  As it is probable that not a few instances
of the employment of the Arabic numeral characters of an earlier date
than that at Heathfield are to be met with in different parts of the
country, will you permit me to make use of your paper to inquire whether
any such are known to any of your readers, and if they will be so
obliging as to communicate their knowledge through the medium of your
columns? As the subject is one of considerable interest, it would be
desirable that _any_ date belonging to the fifteenth or the early part
of the sixteenth century should be made known, and registered in your
valuable publication.

Permit me also to ask, in connection with this subject, for references
to any works or treatises supplying information on the history of the
Arabic numerals, their origin, and their introduction into Europe. I
am already acquainted with Astle, _On Writing_, Wallis's _Algebra,
Nouveau Traité de Diplomatique_, the _Huctiana_, Pegge's _Life of
Grostête_, and the _Philosophical Transactions_; but I wish for
additional, and, if possible, more recent information.

Does any one of your readers know what became of the MSS. formerly in the
possession of the above-named Thomas Astle, formerly Keeper of the
Tower Records?

In Sir W. Burrell's Sussex collections in the British Museum are copies
of charters, "ex MSS. penes T. Aste," with notices of curious seals
appended, which I should be glad to be able to inspect.

E.V.

_Stephen Eiton, or Eden's "Acta Regis Edw. II._"--The interesting
account of St. Thomas of Lancaster, with the appended queries (No.
12. p. 181.), reminds me of the work of Stephen Eiton or Eden, a canon-regular
of Warter, in Yorkshire, entitled, "Acta Regis Edwardi iidi," which is
said still to remain in manuscript.
Where is it deposited?

T.J.
_Dog Latin._--Permit me also to ask, what is the origin of the
expression "Dog Latin"?

T.J.
_The Cuckoo--the Welch Ambassador._--In Middleton's _A Trick to
Catch the Old One_, Act iv. sc. 5., Dampet says:--
"Why, thou rogue of universality, do I not know thee? Thy sound is
like the cuckoo, the Welch Embassador."
And the editor of the continuation of Dodsley's _Collection_ remarks
on the passage,--
"Why the cuckoo is called the Welch Embassador, I know notWhile we were building, you showed good taste and often
suggested new ideas.  When Gorgias brings the plans for the mausoleum you
shall examine them with me.  You have a right to do so, for, if I am not
mistaken, few will visit the finished structure more frequently than my
Iras."

The girl started up and, raising her hand as if taking a vow, exclaimed:
"Your tomb will vainly wait my visit; your end will be mine also."

"May the gods preserve your youth from it!" replied the Queen in a tone
of grave remonstrance.  "We still live and will do battle."




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Epicurus, who believed that with death all things ended
No,  she was not created to grow old
Nothing in life is either great or small
Priests: in order to curb the unruly conduct of the populace
She would not purchase a few more years of valueless life
To govern the world one must have less need of sleep
What changes so quickly as joy and sorrow