Edited by Charles Aldarondo Aldarondo@yahoo.com


TALES OF MEN AND GHOSTS

BY

EDITH WHARTON


LONDON

1910


CONTENTS

I _The Bolted Door_
II _His Father's Son_
III _The Daunt Diana_
IV _The Debt_
V _Full Circle_
VI _The Legend_
VII _The Eyes_
VIII _The Blond Beast_
IX _Afterward_
X _The Letters_


THE BOLTED DOOR

I


HUBERT GRANICE, pacing the length of his pleasant lamp-lit library,
paused to compare his watch with the clock on the chimney-piece.

Three minutes to eight.

In exactly three minutes Mr. Peter Ascham, of the eminent legal firm
of Ascham and Pettilow, would have his punctual hand on the
door-bell of the flat. It was a comfort to reflect that Ascham was
so punctual--the suspense was beginning to make his host nervous.
And the sound of the door-bell would be the beginning of the
end--after that there'd be no going back, by God--no going back!

Granice resumed his pacing. Each time he reached the end of the room
opposite the door he caught his reflection in the Florentine mirror
above the fine old walnut _credence_ he had picked up at Dijon--saw
himself spare, quick-moving, carefully brushed and dressed, but
furrowed, gray about the temples, with a stoop which he corrected by
a spasmodic straightening of the shoulders whenever a glass
confronted him: a tired middle-aged man, baffled, beaten, worn out.

As he summed himself up thus for the third or fourth time the door
opened and he turned with a thrill of relief to greet his guest. But
it was only the man-servant who entered, advancing silently over the
mossy surface of the old Turkey rug.

"Mr. Ascham telephones, sir, to say he's unexpectedly detained and
can't be here till eight-thirty."

Granice made a curt gesture of annoyance. It was becoming harder and
harder for him to control these reflexes. He turned on his heel,
tossing to the servant over his shoulder: "Very good. Put off
dinner."

Down his spine he felt the man's injured stare. Mr. Granice had
always been so mild-spoken to his people--no doubt the odd change in
his manner had already been noticed and discussed below stairs. And
very likely they suspected the cause. He stood drumming on the
writing-table till he heard the servant go out; then he threw
himself into a chair, propping his elbows on the table and resting
his chin on his locked hands.

Another half hour alone with it!

He wondered irritably what could have detained his guest. Some
professional matter, no doubt--the punctilious lawyer would have
allowed nothing less to interfere with a dinner engagement, more
especially since Granice, in his note, had said: "I shall want a
little business chat afterward."

But what professional matter could have come up at that
unprofessional hour? Perhaps some other soul in misery had called on
the lawyer; and, after all, Granice's note had given no hint of his
own need! No doubt Ascham thought he merely wanted to make another
change in his will. Since he had come into his little property, ten
years earlier, Granice had been perpetually tinkering with his will.

Suddenly another thought pulled him up, sending a flush to his
sallow temples. He remembered a word he had tossed to the lawyer
some six weeks earlier, at the Century Club. "Yes--my play's as good
as taken. I shall be calling on you soon to go over the contract.
Those theatrical chaps are so slippery--I won't trust anybody but
you to tie the knot for me!" That, of course, was what Ascham would
think he was wanted for. Granice, at the idea, broke into an audible
laugh--a queer stage-laugh, like the cackle of a baffled villain in
a melodrama. The absurdity, the unnaturalness of the sound abashed
him, and he compressed his lips angrily. Would he take to soliloquy
next?

He lowered his arms and pulled open the upper drawer of the
writing-table. In the right-hand corner lay a thick manuscript,
bound in paper folders, and tied with a string beneath which a
letter had been slipped. Next to the manuscript was a small
revolver. Granice stared a moment at these oddly associated objects;
then he took the letter from under the string and slowly began to
open it. He had known he should do so from the moment his hand
touched the drawer. Whenever his eye fell on that letter some
relentless force compelled him to re-read it.

It was dated about four weeks back, under the letter-head of "The
Diversity Theatre." "MY DEAR MR. GRANICE:

"I have given the matter my best consideration for the last month,
and it's no use--the play won't do. I have talked it over with Miss
Melrose--and you know there isn't a gamer artist on our stage--and I
regret to tell you she feels just as I do about it. It isn't the
poetry that scares her--or me either. We both want to do all we can
to help along the poetic drama--we believe the public's ready for
it, and we're willing to take a big financial risk in order to be
the first to give them what they want. _But we don't believe they
could be made to want this._ The fact is, there isn't enough drama
in your play to the allowance of poetry--the thing drags all
through. You've got a big idea, but it's not out of swaddling
clothes.

"If this was your first play I'd say: _Try again_. But it has been
just the same with all the others you've shown me. And you remember
the result of 'The Lee Shore,' where you carried all the expenses of
production yourself, and we couldn't fill the theatre for a week.
Yet 'The Lee Shore' was a modern problem play--much easier to swing
than blank verse. It isn't as if you hadn't tried all kinds--"

Granice folded the letter and put it carefully back into the
envelope. Why on earth was he re-reading it, when he knew every
phrase in it by heart, when for a month past he had seen it, night
after night, stand out in letters of flame against the darkness of
his sleepless lids?

"_It has been just the same with all the others you've shown me._"

That was the way they dismissed ten years of passionate unremitting
work!

"_You remember the result of 'The Lee Shore.'_"

Good God--as if he were likely to forget it! He re-lived it all now
in a drowning flash: the persistent rejection of the play, his
sudden resolve to put it on at his own cost, to spend ten thousand
dollars of his inheritance on testing his chance of success--the
fever of preparation, the dry-mouthed agony of the "first night,"
the flat fall, the stupid press, his secret rush to Europe to escape
the condolence of his friends!

"_It isn't as if you hadn't tried all kinds._"

No--he had tried all kinds: comedy, tragedy, prose and verse, the
light curtain-raiser, the short sharp drama, the bourgeois-realistic
and the lyrical-romantic--finally deciding that he would no longer
"prostitute his talent" to win popularity, but would impose on the
public his own theory of art in the form of five acts of blank
verse. Yes, he had offered them everything--and always with the same
result.

Ten years of it--ten years of dogged work and unrelieved failure.
The ten years from forty to fifty--the best ten years of his life!
And if one counted the years before, the silent years of dreams,
assimilation, preparation--then call it half a man's life-time: half
a man's life-time thrown away!

And what was he to do with the remaining half? Well, he had settled
that, thank God! He turned and glanced anxiously at the clock. Ten
minutes past eight--only ten minutes had been consumed in that
stormy rush through his whole past! And he must wait another twenty
minutes for Ascham. It was one of the worst symptoms of his case
that, in proportion as he had grown to shrink from human company, he
dreaded more and more to be alone. ... But why the devil was he
waiting for Ascham? Why didn't he cut the knot himself? Since he was
so unutterably sick of the whole business, why did he have to call
in an outsider to rid him of this nightmare of living?

He opened the drawer again and laid his hand on the revolver. It was
a small slim ivory toy--just the instrument for a tired sufferer to
give himself a "hypodermic" with. Granice raised it slowly in one
hand, while with the other he felt under the thin hair at the back
of his head, between the ear and the nape. He knew just where to
place the muzzle: he had once got a young surgeon to show him. And
as he found the spot, and lifted the revolver to it, the inevitable
phenomenon occurred. The hand that held the weapon began to shake,
the tremor communicated itself to his arm, his heart gave a wild
leap which sent up a wave of deadly nausea to his throat, he smelt
the powder, he sickened at the crash of the bullet through his
skull, and a sweat of fear broke out over his forehead and ran down
his quivering face...

He laid away the revolver with an oath and, pulling out a
cologne-scented handkerchief, passed it tremulously over his brow
and temples. It was no use--he knew he could never do it in that
way. His attempts at self-destruction were as futile as his snatches
at fame! He couldn't make himself a real life, and he couldn't get
rid of the life he had. And that was why he had sent for Ascham to
help him...

The lawyer, over the Camembert and Burgundy, began to excuse himself
for his delay.

"I didn't like to say anything while your man was about--but the
fact is, I was sent for on a rather unusual matter--"

"Oh, it's all right," said Granice cheerfully. He was beginning to
feel the usual reaction that food and company produced. It was not
any recovered pleasure in life that he felt, but only a deeper
withdrawal into himself. It was easier to go on automatically with
the social gestures than to uncover to any human eye the abyss
within him.

"My dear fellow, it's sacrilege to keep a dinner waiting--especially
the production of an artist like yours." Mr. Ascham sipped his
Burgundy luxuriously. "But the fact is, Mrs. Ashgrove sent for me."

Granice raised his head with a quick movement of surprise. For a
moment he was shaken out of his self-absorption.

"_Mrs. Ashgrove?_"

Ascham smiled. "I thought you'd be interested; I know your passion
for _causes celebres_. And this promises to be one. Of course it's
out of our line entirely--we never touch criminal cases. But she
wanted to consult me as a friend. Ashgrove was a distant connection
of my wife's. And, by Jove, it _is_ a queer case!" The servant
re-entered, and Ascham snapped his lips shut.

Would the gentlemen have their coffee in the dining-room?

"No--serve it in the library," said Granice, rising. He led the way
back to the curtained confidential room. He was really curious to
hear what Ascham had to tell him.

While the coffee and cigars were being served he fidgeted about the
library, glancing at his letters--the usual meaningless notes and
bills--and picking up the evening paper. As he unfolded it a
headline caught his eye.

"ROSE MELROSE WANTS TO PLAY POETRY.

"THINKS SHE HAS FOUND HER POET."

He read on with a thumping heart--found the name of a young author
he had barely heard of, saw the title of a play, a "poetic drama,"
dance before his eyes, and dropped the paper, sick, disgusted. It
was true, then--she _was_ "game"--it was not the manner but the
matter she mistrusted!

Granice turned to the servant, who seemed to be purposely lingering.
"I shan't need you this evening, Flint. I'll lock up myself."

He fancied the man's acquiescence implied surprise. What was going
on, Flint seemed to wonder, that Mr. Granice should want him out of
the way? Probably he would find a pretext for coming back to see.
Granice suddenly felt himself enveloped in a network of espionage.

As the door closed he threw himself into an armchair and leaned
forward to take a light from Ascham's cigar.

"Tell me about Mrs. Ashgrove," he said, seeming to himself to speak
stiffly, as if his lips were cracked.

"Mrs. Ashgrove? Well, there's not much to _tell_."

"And you couldn't if there were?" Granice smiled.

"Probably not. As a matter of fact, she wanted my advice about her
choice of counsel. There was nothing especially confidential in our
talk."

"And what's your impression, now you've seen her?"

"My impression is, very distinctly, _that nothing will ever be
known._"

"Ah--?" Granice murmured, puffing at his cigar.

"I'm more and more convinced that whoever poisoned Ashgrove knew his
business, and will consequently never be found out. That's a capital
cigar you've given me."

"You like it? I get them over from Cuba." Granice examined his own
reflectively. "Then you believe in the theory that the clever
criminals never _are_ caught?"

"Of course I do. Look about you--look back for the last dozen
years--none of the big murder problems are ever solved." The lawyer
ruminated behind his blue cloud. "Why, take the instance in your own
family: I'd forgotten I had an illustration at hand! Take old Joseph
Lenman's murder--do you suppose that will ever be explained?"

As the words dropped from Ascham's lips his host looked slowly about
the library, and every object in it stared back at him with a stale
unescapable familiarity. How sick he was of looking at that room! It
was as dull as the face of a wife one has wearied of. He cleared his
throat slowly; then he turned his head to the lawyer and said: "I
could explain the Lenman murder myself."

Ascham's eye kindled: he shared Granice's interest in criminal
cases.

"By Jove! You've had a theory all this time? It's odd you never
mentioned it. Go ahead and tell me. There are certain features in
the Lenman case not unlike this Ashgrove affair, and your idea may
be a help."

Granice paused and his eye reverted instinctively to the table
drawer in which the revolver and the manuscript lay side by side.
What if he were to try another appeal to Rose Melrose? Then he
looked at the notes and bills on the table, and the horror of taking
up again the lifeless routine of life--of performing the same
automatic gestures another day--displaced his fleeting vision.

"I haven't a theory. I _know_ who murdered Joseph Lenman."

Ascham settled himself comfortably in his chair, prepared for
enjoyment.

"You _know?_ Well, who did?" he laughed.

"I did," said Granice, rising.

He stood before Ascham, and the lawyer lay back staring up at him.
Then he broke into another laugh.

"Why, this is glorious! You murdered him, did you? To inherit his
money, I suppose? Better and better! Go on, my boy! Unbosom
yourself! Tell me all about it! Confession is good for the soul."

Granice waited till the lawyer had shaken the last peal of laughter
from his throat; then he repeated doggedly: "I murdered him."

The two men looked at each other for a long moment, and this time
Ascham did not laugh.

"Granice!"

"I murdered him--to get his money, as you say."

There was another pause, and Granice, with a vague underlying sense
of amusement, saw his guest's look change from pleasantry to
apprehension.

"What's the joke, my dear fellow? I fail to see."

"It's not a joke. It's the truth. I murdered him." He had spoken
painfully at first, as if there were a knot in his throat; but each
time he repeated the words he found they were easier to say.

Ascham laid down his extinct cigar.

"What's the matter? Aren't you well? What on earth are you driving
at?"

"I'm perfectly well. But I murdered my cousin, Joseph Lenman, and I
want it known that I murdered him."

"_You want it known?_"

"Yes. That's why I sent for you. I'm sick of living, and when I try
to kill myself I funk it." He spoke quite naturally now, as if the
knot in his throat had been untied.

"Good Lord--good Lord," the lawyer gasped.

"But I suppose," Granice continued, "there's no doubt this would be
murder in the first degree? I'm sure of the chair if I own up?"

Ascham drew a long breath; then he said slowly: "Sit down, Granice.
Let's talk."


II


GRANICE told his story simply, connectedly.

He began by a quick survey of his early years--the years of drudgery
and privation. His father, a charming man who could never say "no,"
had so signally failed to say it on certain essential occasions that
when he died he left an illegitimate family and a mortgaged estate.
His lawful kin found themselves hanging over a gulf of debt, and
young Granice, to support his mother and sister, had to leave
Harvard and bury himself at eighteen in a broker's office. He
loathed his work, and he was always poor, always worried and in
ill-health. A few years later his mother died, but his sister, an
ineffectual neurasthenic, remained on his hands. His own health gave
out, and he had to go away for six months, and work harder than ever
when he came back. He had no knack for business, no head for
figures, no dimmest insight into the mysteries of commerce. He
wanted to travel and write--those were his inmost longings. And as
the years dragged on, and he neared middle-age without making any
more money, or acquiring any firmer health, a sick despair possessed
him. He tried writing, but he always came home from the office so
tired that his brain could not work. For half the year he did not
reach his dim up-town flat till after dark, and could only "brush
up" for dinner, and afterward lie on the lounge with his pipe, while
his sister droned through the evening paper. Sometimes he spent an
evening at the theatre; or he dined out, or, more rarely, strayed
off with an acquaintance or two in quest of what is known as
"pleasure." And in summer, when he and Kate went to the sea-side for
a month, he dozed through the days in utter weariness. Once he fell
in love with a charming girl--but what had he to offer her, in God's
name? She seemed to like him, and in common decency he had to drop
out of the running. Apparently no one replaced him, for she never
married, but grew stoutish, grayish, philanthropic--yet how sweet
she had been when he had first kissed her! One more wasted life, he
reflected...

But the stage had always been his master-passion. He would have sold
his soul for the time and freedom to write plays! It was _in
him_--he could not remember when it had not been his deepest-seated
instinct. As the years passed it became a morbid, a relentless
obsession--yet with every year the material conditions were more and
more against it. He felt himself growing middle-aged, and he watched
the reflection of the process in his sister's wasted face. At
eighteen she had been pretty, and as full of enthusiasm as he. Now
she was sour, trivial, insignificant--she had missed her chance of
life. And she had no resources, poor creature, was fashioned simply
for the primitive functions she had been denied the chance to
fulfil! It exasperated him to think of it--and to reflect that even
now a little travel, a little health, a little money, might
transform her, make her young and desirable... The chief fruit of
his experience was that there is no such fixed state as age or
youth--there is only health as against sickness, wealth as against
poverty; and age or youth as the outcome of the lot one draws.

At this point in his narrative Granice stood up, and went to lean
against the mantel-piece, looking down at Ascham, who had not moved
from his seat, or changed his attitude of rigid fascinated
attention.

"Then came the summer when we went to Wrenfield to be near old
Lenman--my mother's cousin, as you know. Some of the family always
mounted guard over him--generally a niece or so. But that year they
were all scattered, and one of the nieces offered to lend us her
cottage if we'd relieve her of duty for two months. It was a
nuisance for me, of course, for Wrenfield is two hours from town;
but my mother, who was a slave to family observances, had always
been good to the old man, so it was natural we should be called
on--and there was the saving of rent and the good air for Kate. So
we went.

"You never knew Joseph Lenman? Well, picture to yourself an amoeba
or some primitive organism of that sort, under a Titan's microscope.
He was large, undifferentiated, inert--since I could remember him he
had done nothing but take his temperature and read the _Churchman_.
Oh, and cultivate melons--that was his hobby. Not vulgar,
out-of-door melons--his were grown under glass. He had miles of it
at Wrenfield--his big kitchen-garden was surrounded by blinking
battalions of green-houses. And in nearly all of them melons were
grown--early melons and late, French, English, domestic--dwarf
melons and monsters: every shape, colour and variety. They were
petted and nursed like children--a staff of trained attendants
waited on them. I'm not sure they didn't have a doctor to take their
temperature--at any rate the place was full of thermometers. And
they didn't sprawl on the ground like ordinary melons; they were
trained against the glass like nectarines, and each melon hung in a
net which sustained its weight and left it free on all sides to the
sun and air...

"It used to strike me sometimes that old Lenman was just like one of
his own melons--the pale-fleshed English kind. His life, apathetic
and motionless, hung in a net of gold, in an equable warm ventilated
atmosphere, high above sordid earthly worries. The cardinal rule of
his existence was not to let himself be 'worried.' . . I remember
his advising me to try it myself, one day when I spoke to him about
Kate's bad health, and her need of a change. 'I never let myself
worry,' he said complacently. 'It's the worst thing for the
liver--and you look to me as if you had a liver. Take my advice and
be cheerful. You'll make yourself happier and others too.' And all
he had to do was to write a cheque, and send the poor girl off for a
holiday!

"The hardest part of it was that the money half-belonged to us
already. The old skin-flint only had it for life, in trust for us
and the others. But his life was a good deal sounder than mine or
Kate's--and one could picture him taking extra care of it for the
joke of keeping us waiting. I always felt that the sight of our
hungry eyes was a tonic to him.

"Well, I tried to see if I couldn't reach him through his vanity. I
flattered him, feigned a passionate interest in his melons. And he
was taken in, and used to discourse on them by the hour. On fine
days he was driven to the green-houses in his pony-chair, and
waddled through them, prodding and leering at the fruit, like a fat
Turk in his seraglio. When he bragged to me of the expense of
growing them I was reminded of a hideous old Lothario bragging of
what his pleasures cost. And the resemblance was completed by the
fact that he couldn't eat as much as a mouthful of his melons--had
lived for years on buttermilk and toast. 'But, after all, it's my
only hobby--why shouldn't I indulge it?' he said sentimentally. As
if I'd ever been able to indulge any of mine! On the keep of those
melons Kate and I could have lived like gods...

"One day toward the end of the summer, when Kate was too unwell to
drag herself up to the big house, she asked me to go and spend the
afternoon with cousin Joseph. It was a lovely soft September
afternoon--a day to lie under a Roman stone-pine, with one's eyes on
the sky, and let the cosmic harmonies rush through one. Perhaps the
vision was suggested by the fact that, as I entered cousin Joseph's
hideous black walnut library, I passed one of the under-gardeners, a
handsome full-throated Italian, who dashed out in such a hurry that
he nearly knocked me down. I remember thinking it queer that the
fellow, whom I had often seen about the melon-houses, did not bow to
me, or even seem to see me.

"Cousin Joseph sat in his usual seat, behind the darkened windows,
his fat hands folded on his protuberant waistcoat, the last number
of the _Churchman_ at his elbow, and near it, on a huge dish, a fat
melon--the fattest melon I'd ever seen. As I looked at it I pictured
the ecstasy of contemplation from which I must have roused him, and
congratulated myself on finding him in such a mood, since I had made
up my mind to ask him a favour. Then I noticed that his face,
instead of looking as calm as an egg-shell, was distorted and
whimpering--and without stopping to greet me he pointed passionately
to the melon.

"'Look at it, look at it--did you ever see such a beauty? Such
firmness--roundness--such delicious smoothness to the touch?' It was
as if he had said 'she' instead of 'it,' and when he put out his
senile hand and touched the melon I positively had to look the other
way.

"Then he told me what had happened. The Italian under-gardener, who
had been specially recommended for the melon-houses--though it was
against my cousin's principles to employ a Papist--had been assigned
to the care of the monster: for it had revealed itself, early in its
existence, as destined to become a monster, to surpass its plumpest,
pulpiest sisters, carry off prizes at agricultural shows, and be
photographed and celebrated in every gardening paper in the land.
The Italian had done well--seemed to have a sense of responsibility.
And that very morning he had been ordered to pick the melon, which
was to be shown next day at the county fair, and to bring it in for
Mr. Lenman to gaze on its blonde virginity. But in picking it, what
had the damned scoundrelly Jesuit done but drop it--drop it crash on
the sharp spout of a watering-pot, so that it received a deep gash
in its firm pale rotundity, and was henceforth but a bruised,
ruined, fallen melon?

"The old man's rage was fearful in its impotence--he shook,
spluttered and strangled with it. He had just had the Italian up and
had sacked him on the spot, without wages or character--had
threatened to have him arrested if he was ever caught prowling about
Wrenfield. 'By God, and I'll do it--I'll write to Washington--I'll
have the pauper scoundrel deported! I'll show him what money can
do!' As likely as not there was some murderous Black-hand business
under it--it would be found that the fellow was a member of a
'gang.' Those Italians would murder you for a quarter. He meant to
have the police look into it... And then he grew frightened at his
own excitement. 'But I must calm myself,' he said. He took his
temperature, rang for his drops, and turned to the _Churchman_. He
had been reading an article on Nestorianism when the melon was
brought in. He asked me to go on with it, and I read to him for an
hour, in the dim close room, with a fat fly buzzing stealthily about
the fallen melon.

"All the while one phrase of the old man's buzzed in my brain like
the fly about the melon. '_I'll show him what money can do!_' Good
heaven! If _I_ could but show the old man! If I could make him see
his power of giving happiness as a new outlet for his monstrous
egotism! I tried to tell him something about my situation and
Kate's--spoke of my ill-health, my unsuccessful drudgery, my longing
to write, to make myself a name--I stammered out an entreaty for a
loan. 'I can guarantee to repay you, sir--I've a half-written play
as security...'

"I shall never forget his glassy stare. His face had grown as smooth
as an egg-shell again--his eyes peered over his fat cheeks like
sentinels over a slippery rampart.

"'A half-written play--a play of _yours_ as security?' He looked at
me almost fearfully, as if detecting the first symptoms of insanity.
'Do you understand anything of business?' he enquired mildly. I
laughed and answered: 'No, not much.'

"He leaned back with closed lids. 'All this excitement has been too
much for me,' he said. 'If you'll excuse me, I'll prepare for my
nap.' And I stumbled out of the room, blindly, like the Italian."

Granice moved away from the mantel-piece, and walked across to the
tray set out with decanters and soda-water. He poured himself a tall
glass of soda-water, emptied it, and glanced at Ascham's dead cigar.

"Better light another," he suggested.

The lawyer shook his head, and Granice went on with his tale. He
told of his mounting obsession--how the murderous impulse had waked
in him on the instant of his cousin's refusal, and he had muttered
to himself: "By God, if you won't, I'll make you." He spoke more
tranquilly as the narrative proceeded, as though his rage had died
down once the resolve to act on it was taken. He applied his whole
mind to the question of how the old man was to be "disposed of."
Suddenly he remembered the outcry: "Those Italians will murder you
for a quarter!" But no definite project presented itself: he simply
waited for an inspiration.

Granice and his sister moved to town a day or two after the incident
of the melon. But the cousins, who had returned, kept them informed
of the old man's condition. One day, about three weeks later,
Granice, on getting home, found Kate excited over a report from
Wrenfield. The Italian had been there again--had somehow slipped
into the house, made his way up to the library, and "used
threatening language." The house-keeper found cousin Joseph gasping,
the whites of his eyes showing "something awful." The doctor was
sent for, and the attack warded off; and the police had ordered the
Italian from the neighbourhood.

But cousin Joseph, thereafter, languished, had "nerves," and lost
his taste for toast and butter-milk. The doctor called in a
colleague, and the consultation amused and excited the old man--he
became once more an important figure. The medical men reassured the
family--too completely!--and to the patient they recommended a more
varied diet: advised him to take whatever "tempted him." And so one
day, tremulously, prayerfully, he decided on a tiny bit of melon. It
was brought up with ceremony, and consumed in the presence of the
house-keeper and a hovering cousin; and twenty minutes later he was
dead...

"But you remember the circumstances," Granice went on; "how
suspicion turned at once on the Italian? In spite of the hint the
police had given him he had been seen hanging about the house since
'the scene.' It was said that he had tender relations with the
kitchen-maid, and the rest seemed easy to explain. But when they
looked round to ask him for the explanation he was gone--gone clean
out of sight. He had been 'warned' to leave Wrenfield, and he had
taken the warning so to heart that no one ever laid eyes on him
again."

Granice paused. He had dropped into a chair opposite the lawyer's,
and he sat for a moment, his head thrown back, looking about the
familiar room. Everything in it had grown grimacing and alien, and
each strange insistent object seemed craning forward from its place
to hear him.

"It was I who put the stuff in the melon," he said. "And I don't
want you to think I'm sorry for it. This isn't 'remorse,'
understand. I'm glad the old skin-flint is dead--I'm glad the others
have their money. But mine's no use to me any more. My sister
married miserably, and died. And I've never had what I wanted."

Ascham continued to stare; then he said: "What on earth was your
object, then?"

"Why, to _get_ what I wanted--what I fancied was in reach! I wanted
change, rest, _life_, for both of us--wanted, above all, for myself,
the chance to write! I travelled, got back my health, and came home
to tie myself up to my work. And I've slaved at it steadily for ten
years without reward--without the most distant hope of success!
Nobody will look at my stuff. And now I'm fifty, and I'm beaten, and
I know it." His chin dropped forward on his breast. "I want to chuck
the whole business," he ended.


III


IT was after midnight when Ascham left.

His hand on Granice's shoulder, as he turned to go--"District
Attorney be hanged; see a doctor, see a doctor!" he had cried; and
so, with an exaggerated laugh, had pulled on his coat and departed.

Granice turned back into the library. It had never occurred to him
that Ascham would not believe his story. For three hours he had
explained, elucidated, patiently and painfully gone over every
detail--but without once breaking down the iron incredulity of the
lawyer's eye.

At first Ascham had feigned to be convinced--but that, as Granice
now perceived, was simply to get him to expose himself, to entrap
him into contradictions. And when the attempt failed, when Granice
triumphantly met and refuted each disconcerting question, the lawyer
dropped the mask suddenly, and said with a good-humoured laugh: "By
Jove, Granice you'll write a successful play yet. The way you've
worked this all out is a marvel."

Granice swung about furiously--that last sneer about the play
inflamed him. Was all the world in a conspiracy to deride his
failure?

"I did it, I did it," he muttered sullenly, his rage spending itself
against the impenetrable surface of the other's mockery; and Ascham
answered with a smile: "Ever read any of those books on
hallucination? I've got a fairly good medico-legal library. I could
send you one or two if you like..."

Left alone, Granice cowered down in the chair before his
writing-table. He understood that Ascham thought him off his head.

"Good God--what if they all think me crazy?"

The horror of it broke out over him in a cold sweat--he sat there
and shook, his eyes hidden in his icy hands. But gradually, as he
began to rehearse his story for the thousandth time, he saw again
how incontrovertible it was, and felt sure that any criminal lawyer
would believe him.

"That's the trouble--Ascham's not a criminal lawyer. And then he's a
friend. What a fool I was to talk to a friend! Even if he did
believe me, he'd never let me see it--his instinct would be to cover
the whole thing up... But in that case--if he _did_ believe me--he
might think it a kindness to get me shut up in an asylum..."
Granice began to tremble again. "Good heaven! If he should bring in
an expert--one of those damned alienists! Ascham and Pettilow can do
anything--their word always goes. If Ascham drops a hint that I'd
better be shut up, I'll be in a strait-jacket by to-morrow! And he'd
do it from the kindest motives--be quite right to do it if he thinks
I'm a murderer!"

The vision froze him to his chair. He pressed his fists to his
bursting temples and tried to think. For the first time he hoped
that Ascham had not believed his story.

"But he did--he did! I can see it now--I noticed what a queer eye he
cocked at me. Good God, what shall I do--what shall I do?"

He started up and looked at the clock. Half-past one. What if Ascham
should think the case urgent, rout out an alienist, and come back
with him? Granice jumped to his feet, and his sudden gesture brushed
the morning paper from the table. Mechanically he stooped to pick it
up, and the movement started a new train of association.

He sat down again, and reached for the telephone book in the rack by
his chair.

"Give me three-o-ten ... yes."

The new idea in his mind had revived his flagging energy. He would
act--act at once. It was only by thus planning ahead, committing
himself to some unavoidable line of conduct, that he could pull
himself through the meaningless days. Each time he reached a fresh
decision it was like coming out of a foggy weltering sea into a calm
harbour with lights. One of the queerest phases of his long agony
was the intense relief produced by these momentary lulls.

"That the office of the _Investigator?_ Yes? Give me Mr. Denver,
please... Hallo, Denver... Yes, Hubert Granice. ... Just
caught you? Going straight home? Can I come and see you ... yes,
now ... have a talk? It's rather urgent ... yes, might give you
some first-rate 'copy.' ... All right!" He hung up the receiver
with a laugh. It had been a happy thought to call up the editor of
the _Investigator_--Robert Denver was the very man he needed...

Granice put out the lights in the library--it was odd how the
automatic gestures persisted!--went into the hall, put on his hat
and overcoat, and let himself out of the flat. In the hall, a sleepy
elevator boy blinked at him and then dropped his head on his folded
arms. Granice passed out into the street. At the corner of Fifth
Avenue he hailed a crawling cab, and called out an up-town address.
The long thoroughfare stretched before him, dim and deserted, like
an ancient avenue of tombs. But from Denver's house a friendly beam
fell on the pavement; and as Granice sprang from his cab the
editor's electric turned the corner.

The two men grasped hands, and Denver, feeling for his latch-key,
ushered Granice into the brightly-lit hall.

"Disturb me? Not a bit. You might have, at ten to-morrow morning ...
but this is my liveliest hour ... you know my habits of old."

Granice had known Robert Denver for fifteen years--watched his rise
through all the stages of journalism to the Olympian pinnacle of the
_Investigator's_ editorial office. In the thick-set man with
grizzling hair there were few traces left of the hungry-eyed young
reporter who, on his way home in the small hours, used to "bob in"
on Granice, while the latter sat grinding at his plays. Denver had
to pass Granice's flat on the way to his own, and it became a habit,
if he saw a light in the window, and Granice's shadow against the
blind, to go in, smoke a pipe, and discuss the universe.

"Well--this is like old times--a good old habit reversed." The
editor smote his visitor genially on the shoulder. "Reminds me of
the nights when I used to rout you out... How's the play, by the
way? There _is_ a play, I suppose? It's as safe to ask you that as to
say to some men: 'How's the baby?'"

Denver laughed good-naturedly, and Granice thought how thick and
heavy he had grown. It was evident, even to Granice's tortured
nerves, that the words had not been uttered in malice--and the fact
gave him a new measure of his insignificance. Denver did not even
know that he had been a failure! The fact hurt more than Ascham's
irony.

"Come in--come in." The editor led the way into a small cheerful
room, where there were cigars and decanters. He pushed an arm-chair
toward his visitor, and dropped into another with a comfortable
groan.

"Now, then--help yourself. And let's hear all about it."

He beamed at Granice over his pipe-bowl, and the latter, lighting
his cigar, said to himself: "Success makes men comfortable, but it
makes them stupid."

Then he turned, and began: "Denver, I want to tell you--"

The clock ticked rhythmically on the mantel-piece. The room was
gradually filled with drifting blue layers of smoke, and through
them the editor's face came and went like the moon through a moving
sky. Once the hour struck--then the rhythmical ticking began again.
The atmosphere grew denser and heavier, and beads of perspiration
began to roll from Granice's forehead.

"Do you mind if I open the window?"

"No. It _is_ stuffy in here. Wait--I'll do it myself." Denver pushed
down the upper sash, and returned to his chair. "Well--go on," he
said, filling another pipe. His composure exasperated Granice.

"There's no use in my going on if you don't believe me."

The editor remained unmoved. "Who says I don't believe you? And how
can I tell till you've finished?"

Granice went on, ashamed of his outburst. "It was simple enough, as
you'll see. From the day the old man said to me, 'Those Italians
would murder you for a quarter,' I dropped everything and just
worked at my scheme. It struck me at once that I must find a way of
getting to Wrenfield and back in a night--and that led to the idea
of a motor. A motor--that never occurred to you? You wonder where I
got the money, I suppose. Well, I had a thousand or so put by, and I
nosed around till I found what I wanted--a second-hand racer. I knew
how to drive a car, and I tried the thing and found it was all
right. Times were bad, and I bought it for my price, and stored it
away. Where? Why, in one of those no-questions-asked garages where
they keep motors that are not for family use. I had a lively cousin
who had put me up to that dodge, and I looked about till I found a
queer hole where they took in my car like a baby in a foundling
asylum... Then I practiced running to Wrenfield and back in a
night. I knew the way pretty well, for I'd done it often with the
same lively cousin--and in the small hours, too. The distance is
over ninety miles, and on the third trial I did it under two hours.
But my arms were so lame that I could hardly get dressed the next
morning...

"Well, then came the report about the Italian's threats, and I saw I
must act at once... I meant to break into the old man's room,
shoot him, and get away again. It was a big risk, but I thought I
could manage it. Then we heard that he was ill--that there'd been a
consultation. Perhaps the fates were going to do it for me! Good
Lord, if that could only be! ..."

Granice stopped and wiped his forehead: the open window did not seem
to have cooled the room.

"Then came word that he was better; and the day after, when I came
up from my office, I found Kate laughing over the news that he was
to try a bit of melon. The house-keeper had just telephoned her--all
Wrenfield was in a flutter. The doctor himself had picked out the
melon, one of the little French ones that are hardly bigger than a
large tomato--and the patient was to eat it at his breakfast the
next morning.

"In a flash I saw my chance. It was a bare chance, no more. But I
knew the ways of the house--I was sure the melon would be brought in
over night and put in the pantry ice-box. If there were only one
melon in the ice-box I could be fairly sure it was the one I wanted.
Melons didn't lie around loose in that house--every one was known,
numbered, catalogued. The old man was beset by the dread that the
servants would eat them, and he took a hundred mean precautions to
prevent it. Yes, I felt pretty sure of my melon ... and poisoning
was much safer than shooting. It would have been the devil and all
to get into the old man's bedroom without his rousing the house; but
I ought to be able to break into the pantry without much trouble.

"It was a cloudy night, too--everything served me. I dined quietly,
and sat down at my desk. Kate had one of her usual headaches, and
went to bed early. As soon as she was gone I slipped out. I had got
together a sort of disguise--red beard and queer-looking ulster. I
shoved them into a bag, and went round to the garage. There was no
one there but a half-drunken machinist whom I'd never seen before.
That served me, too. They were always changing machinists, and this
new fellow didn't even bother to ask if the car belonged to me. It
was a very easy-going place...

"Well, I jumped in, ran up Broadway, and let the car go as soon as I
was out of Harlem. Dark as it was, I could trust myself to strike a
sharp pace. In the shadow of a wood I stopped a second and got into
the beard and ulster. Then away again--it was just eleven-thirty
when I got to Wrenfield.

"I left the car in a dark lane behind the Lenman place, and slipped
through the kitchen-garden. The melon-houses winked at me through
the dark--I remember thinking that they knew what I wanted to know. ...
By the stable a dog came out growling--but he nosed me out,
jumped on me, and went back... The house was as dark as the grave.
I knew everybody went to bed by ten. But there might be a prowling
servant--the kitchen-maid might have come down to let in her
Italian. I had to risk that, of course. I crept around by the back
door and hid in the shrubbery. Then I listened. It was all as silent
as death. I crossed over to the house, pried open the pantry window
and climbed in. I had a little electric lamp in my pocket, and
shielding it with my cap I groped my way to the ice-box, opened
it--and there was the little French melon ... only one.

"I stopped to listen--I was quite cool. Then I pulled out my bottle
of stuff and my syringe, and gave each section of the melon a
hypodermic. It was all done inside of three minutes--at ten minutes
to twelve I was back in the car. I got out of the lane as quietly as
I could, struck a back road that skirted the village, and let the
car out as soon as I was beyond the last houses. I only stopped once
on the way in, to drop the beard and ulster into a pond. I had a big
stone ready to weight them with and they went down plump, like a
dead body--and at two o'clock I was back at my desk."

Granice stopped speaking and looked across the smoke-fumes at his
listener; but Denver's face remained inscrutable.

At length he said: "Why did you want to tell me this?"

The question startled Granice. He was about to explain, as he had
explained to Ascham; but suddenly it occurred to him that if his
motive had not seemed convincing to the lawyer it would carry much
less weight with Denver. Both were successful men, and success does
not understand the subtle agony of failure. Granice cast about for
another reason.

"Why, I--the thing haunts me ... remorse, I suppose you'd call it..."

Denver struck the ashes from his empty pipe.

"Remorse? Bosh!" he said energetically.

Granice's heart sank. "You don't believe in--_remorse?_"

"Not an atom: in the man of action. The mere fact of your talking of
remorse proves to me that you're not the man to have planned and put
through such a job."

Granice groaned. "Well--I lied to you about remorse. I've never felt
any."

Denver's lips tightened sceptically about his freshly-filled pipe.
"What was your motive, then? You must have had one."

"I'll tell you--" And Granice began again to rehearse the story of
his failure, of his loathing for life. "Don't say you don't believe
me this time ... that this isn't a real reason!" he stammered out
piteously as he ended.

Denver meditated. "No, I won't say that. I've seen too many queer
things. There's always a reason for wanting to get out of life--the
wonder is that we find so many for staying in!"

Granice's heart grew light. "Then you _do_ believe me?" he faltered.

"Believe that you're sick of the job? Yes. And that you haven't the
nerve to pull the trigger? Oh, yes--that's easy enough, too. But all
that doesn't make you a murderer--though I don't say it proves you
could never have been one."

"I _have_ been one, Denver--I swear to you."

"Perhaps." He meditated. "Just tell me one or two things."

"Oh, go ahead. You won't stump me!" Granice heard himself say with a
laugh.

"Well--how did you make all those trial trips without exciting your
sister's curiosity? I knew your night habits pretty well at that
time, remember. You were very seldom out late. Didn't the change in
your ways surprise her?"

"No; because she was away at the time. She went to pay several
visits in the country soon after we came back from Wrenfield, and
was only in town for a night or two before--before I did the job."

"And that night she went to bed early with a headache?"

"Yes--blinding. She didn't know anything when she had that kind. And
her room was at the back of the flat."

Denver again meditated. "And when you got back--she didn't hear you?
You got in without her knowing it?"

"Yes. I went straight to my work--took it up at the word where I'd
left off--_why, Denver, don't you remember?_" Granice suddenly,
passionately interjected.

"Remember--?"

"Yes; how you found me--when you looked in that morning, between two
and three ... your usual hour ...?"

"Yes," the editor nodded.

Granice gave a short laugh. "In my old coat--with my pipe: looked as
if I'd been working all night, didn't I? Well, I hadn't been in my
chair ten minutes!"

Denver uncrossed his legs and then crossed them again. "I didn't
know whether _you_ remembered that."

"What?"

"My coming in that particular night--or morning."

Granice swung round in his chair. "Why, man alive! That's why I'm
here now. Because it was you who spoke for me at the inquest, when
they looked round to see what all the old man's heirs had been doing
that night--you who testified to having dropped in and found me at
my desk as usual. ... I thought _that_ would appeal to your
journalistic sense if nothing else would!"

Denver smiled. "Oh, my journalistic sense is still susceptible
enough--and the idea's picturesque, I grant you: asking the man who
proved your alibi to establish your guilt."

"That's it--that's it!" Granice's laugh had a ring of triumph.

"Well, but how about the other chap's testimony--I mean that young
doctor: what was his name? Ned Ranney. Don't you remember my
testifying that I'd met him at the elevated station, and told him I
was on my way to smoke a pipe with you, and his saying: 'All right;
you'll find him in. I passed the house two hours ago, and saw his
shadow against the blind, as usual.' And the lady with the toothache
in the flat across the way: she corroborated his statement, you
remember."

"Yes; I remember."

Well, then?"

"Simple enough. Before starting I rigged up a kind of mannikin with
old coats and a cushion--something to cast a shadow on the blind.
All you fellows were used to seeing my shadow there in the small
hours--I counted on that, and knew you'd take any vague outline as
mine."

"Simple enough, as you say. But the woman with the toothache saw the
shadow move--you remember she said she saw you sink forward, as if
you'd fallen asleep."

"Yes; and she was right. It _did_ move. I suppose some extra-heavy
dray must have jolted by the flimsy building--at any rate, something
gave my mannikin a jar, and when I came back he had sunk forward,
half over the table."

There was a long silence between the two men. Granice, with a
throbbing heart, watched Denver refill his pipe. The editor, at any
rate, did not sneer and flout him. After all, journalism gave a
deeper insight than the law into the fantastic possibilities of
life, prepared one better to allow for the incalculableness of human
impulses.

"Well?" Granice faltered out.

Denver stood up with a shrug. "Look here, man--what's wrong with
you? Make a clean breast of it! Nerves gone to smash? I'd like to
take you to see a chap I know--an ex-prize-fighter--who's a wonder
at pulling fellows in your state out of their hole--"

"Oh, oh--" Granice broke in. the rich! the noble! and the great!
Most brave! most happy! most unfortunate!

Kings were thy courtiers!

--Queens have sued to share Thy wealth, thy triumphs--e'en thy
_name_ to bear!

Tyrants have bowed thy children to the dust, Some for their
worth--and some who broke their trust!

And there was _one_ among thy race, who died To Henry's shame!--his
country's boast and pride:
Immortal Surrey!

--Offspring of the Muse!
Bold as the lion, gentle as the dews That fall on flowers to 'wake
their odorous breath, And shield their blossoms from the touch of
death, Surrey!

--thy fate was wept by countless eyes, A nation's woe assailed
the pitying skies, When thy pure spirit left this scene of strife,
And soared to him who breathed it into life:
Thy funeral knell pealed o'er the world!--thy fall Was mourned by
hearts that loved thee, mourned by all-- All, save thy
murderers!--thou hast won thy crown:
And _thou_, fair Framlinghame! a bright renown, Yes! thy rich
temple holds the stately tomb, Where sleeps the Poet in his
lasting home, Lamented Surrey!--hero, bard divine, Pride, grace, and
glory of brave Norfolk's line.
Departed spirit!--Oh! I love to hold Communion sweet with lofty
minds of old, To catch a spark of that celestial fire Which glows and
kindles in thy rapturous lyre; Though varying themes demand my future
lays, Yet thus my soul a willing homage pays To that bright glory
which illumes thy name, Though naught can raise the splendour of
thy fame!

Mr. Bird is also advantageously known as the author of the Vale of
Slaughden; Poetical Memoirs; Dunwich, a tale of the Splendid City;
and other poems, which abound with vivid imagery, life-breathing
incidents, and interesting narrative; though it is but late justice
to recommend his _Framlingham_ to the admirers of fervid verse.

* * * * *

SPIRIT DRINKING.

"Nothing like the simple element dilutes The food, or gives the
chyle so soon to flow."
The direful practice of spirit-drinking seems to have arrived at
its acme in the metropolis.

Splendid mansions rear their _dazzling heads_ at almost every
turning; and it appears as if Circe had fixed her abode
in these superb haunts. Happy are those who, like Ulysses
of old, will not partake of her deadly cup. If the unhappy dram-drinker
was merely to calculate the annual expense of two glasses of gin per
day, he would find a sum expended which would procure for him many
comforts, for the want of which he is continually grumbling. If this
sum is expended for only two glasses of spirits, what must be the
expense to the habitual and daily sot, who constantly haunts
the tap-room or the wretched bar? to say nothing of the loss of
time, health, and every comfort.

Dr. Willan says--"On comparing my own observations with the bills
of mortality, I am convinced that considerably more than one-eighth
of all the deaths which take place in persons above twenty years
old, happen prematurely, through excess in drinking spirits."

Spirits, like other poisons, if taken in a sufficient quantity, prove
immediately fatal. The newspapers frequently furnish us with
examples of almost instant death, occasioned by wantonly swallowing
a pint or other large quantity of spirits, for the sake of wager,
or in boast.

Dr. Trotter says--"We daily see, in all parts of the world, men who,
by profligacy and hard-drinking, have brought themselves to a goal;
yet, if we consult the register of the prison, it does not appear
that any of these habitual drunkards die by being forced to lead
sober lives."

And he contends, that "whatever debility of the constitution
exists, it is to be cured by the usual medicinal means which are
employed to restore weakened organs.

But the great difficulty in these attempts to cure inebriety is in
satisfying the mind, and in whetting the blunted resolutions of
the patient; and this is, doubtless, more easily accomplished by a
gradual abstraction of his favourite potations."

Dr. Lettsom mentions a person who usually drank twelve drams a day;
but being convinced of his approaching misery, took the resolution
to wean himself from this poison. He always drank out of one glass,
into which he daily let fall a drop of sealing-wax. By this means
he had twelve drops less of spirit every day, till at length, his
glass being filled with wax, his habit was cured.

"In the drunkard," says Dr. Willan, "the memory and the faculties
depending on it, being impaired, there takes place an indifference
towards usual occupations, and accustomed society or amusements.

No interest is taken in the concerns of others--no love, no sympathy
remain: even natural affection to nearest relatives is gradually
extinguished, and the moral sense obliterated. The wretched victims
of a fatal poison fall, at length, into a state of fatuity, and
die with the powers both of body and mind wholly exhausted. Some,
after repeated fits of derangement, expire in a sudden and violent
phrenzy; some are hurried out the world by apoplexies; others perish
by the slower process of jaundice, dropsy," &c.

P.T.W.

* * * * *

A SCENE ON WINDERMERE.

"Beautiful scene! how fitted to allure The printless
footsteps of some sea-born maid."

It was a holy calm--the sunbeams tinged The lake with gold, and
flush'd the gorgeous brow Of many a cloud whose image shone
beneath The blue translucent wave; the mountain-peaks Were robed in
purple, and the balmy air Derived its fragrance from the breath
of flow'rs That seem'd as if they wish'd to close their eyes, And
yield their empire to the starry throng.

The wind, as o'er the lake it gently died, Bequeath'd its cadence to
the shore, and waked The echo slumbering in the distant
vales, Diversified with woods, and rural homes.
The calm was lovely! and o'er such a scene It brooded like a spirit,
softening all That lay beneath its blessed influence!

On Windermere--what poetry belongs To such a name--deep, pure and
beautiful, As its trout-peopled wave!--on Windermere Our skiff
pursued its way amid the calm Which fill'd the heart with holiest
communings.
On Windermere--what scenes entranced the eye That wander'd o'er them!
either undefined Or traced upon the outline of the sky.
Afar the lovely panorama glow'd, Until the mountains, on whose
purple brows The clouds were pillow' d, closed it from our view.

The fields were fraught with bloom, on them appear'd The verdant
robe that Nature loves to wear, And rocky pathways fringed with
bristling pine, O'er which the wall of many a cottage-home Graced
with the climbing vine, or beautified With roses bending to each
passing breeze, Attracts the eye, and glistens in the sun--
Were interspersed around; while in the vale The streamlet gave a
silver gleam, and flow'd Beneath the hill, on whose majestic brow,
Dimm'd with the ivy of a thousand years, The rural fane, encircled
with its tombs, Displayed its mouldering form.

Amid the light And harmony of this enchanting scene, 'Tis sweet to
have a temple that recalls The heart from earth's turmoil, and
hallows it With hopes that soar beyond the flight of time.

Beautiful Lake! most lovely Windermere!
Thou mirror to the mountains that enclose Thy shores with zone
magnificent;--in storm, Or calm--when summer wantons with thy
waves, Or winter clouds thy crystal brow with gloom, Oh!

mayst thou still entrance the wanderer's eye, And keep congenial
quiet in his soul.
Thy fairy haunts, where solitude pervades The feelings like a spirit,
might allure Some visionary youth to muse beneath The rocks empurpled
with the sunny beam, And blend the music of his harp with thine In
gentlest murmurs,--consecrated Lake!

G.R.C.

* * * * *

NEW BOOKS.

* * * * *

PETER THE GREAT.

(_Concluded from page 303._)

His attention was forcibly attracted to the magnificent building of
Greenwich Hospital, which, until he had visited it, and seen the old
pensioners, he had some difficulty in believing to be any thing
but a royal palace.

King William having one day asked him how he liked his hospital for
decayed seamen, the Tzar answered, "If I were the adviser of your
Majesty, I should counsel you to remove your court to Greenwich,
and convert St.

James's into a hospital."
It being term time while the Tzar was in London, he was taken into
Westminster Hall; he inquired who all those busy people in black gowns
and flowing wigs were, and what they were about?

Being answered, "They are lawyers, sir;"--"Lawyers!"

said he, with marks of astonishment, "why, I have but _two_ in my
whole dominions, and I believe I shall hang one of them the moment
I get home

."[1]

[1] Gentleman's Mag. vol. vii.

In the first week of March, vice-admiral Mitchell was ordered to
repair forthwith to Spithead, and, taking several ships (eleven in
number) under his command, hoist the blue flag at the fore-topmast
head of one of them.

It is not stated for what purpose these vessels were put under his
command, nor was any public order given.

But the _Postman_,[2] under date of 26th March, says, "On Tuesday the
Tzar of Muscovy went on board admiral Mitchell, in his Majesty's
ship the Humber, who presently hoisted sail and put to sea from
Spithead, as did also his Majesty's ships the Restauration,
Chichester, Defiance, Swiftsure, York, Monmouth, Dover, Kingston,
Coventry, Seaforth, and Swan."

And the _Flying-post_, or _Postmaster_,[3] has the following intelligence:
"The representation of a sea engagement was excellently performed
before the Tzar of Muscovy, and continued a considerable time,
each ship having twelve pounds of powder allowed; but all their
bullets were locked up in the hold, for fear the sailors should
mistake."

It is stated in the logs of the Humber and the Kingston that they
had two sham fights; that the ships were divided into two squadrons,
and every ship took her opposite and fired three broad-sides _aloft
and one alow_ without shot.

The Tzar was extremely pleased with the performance. It is said,
indeed, he was so much delighted with every thing he saw in the
British navy, that he told admiral Mitchell he considered the
condition of an English admiral happier than that of a Tzar of
Russia.[4]
[2] Postman, No. 441.

[3] Postmaster, No. 449.

[4] Nestesuranoi. Mottley.

On returning from Portsmouth, Peter and his party stopped at
Godalming for the night, where, it would appear, from the bill
of fare, they feasted lustily. Among the papers of Ballard's
Collection, in the Bodleian Library, is one from Mr. Humphrey
Wanley[5] to Dr.
Charlett,[6] which contains the following passage:--"I cannot vouch
for the following bill of fare, which the Tzar and his company,
thirteen at table, and twenty-one in all, ate up at Godalming (or
Godliming), in Surrey, in their way home, but it is averred for
truth by an eye-witness, who saw them eating, and had this bill
from the landlord.

At breakfast--half a sheep, a quarter of lamb, ten pullets, twelve
chickens, three quarts of brandy, six quarts of mulled wine, seven
dozen of eggs, with salad in proportion. At dinner:--five ribs
of beef, weight three stone; one sheep, fifty-six pounds; three
quarters of lamb, a shoulder and loin of veal boiled, eight pullets,
eight rabbits, two dozen and a half of sack, one dozen of
claret."[7]

[5] Author of "Wonders of the little World."
[6] Master of University College.

[7] There are among our countrymen those who are scarcely outdone by
the Tzar of Russia and his companions.

At the same place, and probably at the same house, long known as
_Moon's_, two noble dukes, the one dead, the other yet living,
stopped, as they intended, for a moment, while sitting in their
carriages, to eat a mutton chop, which they found so good that
they each of them devoured _eighteen_, and drank five bottles of
claret.

It would appear, indeed, from all accounts, that the Tzar was a
prodigiously hard drinker, in his younger days. In a letter from
Mr.

A. Bertie to Dr. Charlett, and in the same collection, he says, "The
Tzar lay the other night at Mr.

James Herbert's, being come from Deptford to see the Redoubt,[8]
which the justices have suppressed, by placing six constables at
the door.

Upon that disappointment he fell to drinking hard at one Mr. Morley's;
and the Marquess of Carmarthen, it being late, resolved to lodge him
at his brother-in-law's, where he dined the next day; drank a pint
of brandy and a bottle of sherry for his morning draught; and after
that about eight more bottles of sack and so went to the playhouse

."[9]

[8] It is presumed some notorious place of ill fame

.

[9] Ballard's Collection. Bodleian.

The King having given a grand ball at St.

James's, in honour of the Princess's birthday, Peter was
invited; but instead of mixing with the company, he was put into
a small room, from whence he could see all that passed without being
himself seen.

This extraordinary aversion for a crowd kept him away from all
great assemblies. Once, indeed, he attempted to subdue it, from a
desire to hear the debates in the House of Commons, but even
then the Marquess of Carmarthen could not prevail on him
to go into the body of the house.

Having dined with the King at Kensington, he was prevailed on to
see the ceremony of his Majesty passing four bills; but,
it appears from a note of Lord Dartmouth, that here, as
in the Commons, he avoided going into the house. His Lordship says,
"He had a great dislike to being looked at, but had a mind to see the
King in parliament; in order to which he was placed in a gutter upon
the house-top, to peep in at the window, where he made so ridiculous
a figure, that neither king nor people could forbear laughing,
which obliged him to retire sooner than he intended."
From the same authority we learn that Peter was, at another time,
placed in an awkward situation. "The King made the Tzar a visit, in
which an odd incident happened. The Tzar had a favourite monkey,
which sat upon the back of his chair; as soon as the King was sat
down, the monkey jumped upon him, in some wrath, which discomposed
the whole ceremonial, and most of the time was afterwards spent in
apologies for the monkey's misbehaviour."[10]

[10] Lord Dartmouth.--Note in Burnet's History of his own Times.

The Tzar is said to have paid a visit to the University
of Oxford; but not a trace appears on any of the records of that
university of his having ever done so. His body physician, Posnikof,
who stayed in England some months behind his master, is, however,
known to have been there. Mr.

Wanley writes thus, from London, to Dr. Charlett;--"I will wait
on the doctor (Posnikof,) and if you had been pleased to have given
me orders, I would have been at Oxford before now, for his sake,
and returned hither with him again.

His master (the Tzar) gave the King's servants, at his departure,
one hundred and twenty guineas, which was more than they deserved,
they being very rude to him; but to the King he presented a rough
ruby, which the greatest jewellers of Amsterdam (as well Jews as
Christians) valued at ten thousand pounds sterling.

'Tis bored through, and when it is cut and polished, it must be set
upon the top of the imperial crown of England

."[11]
[11] Ballard's Collection. Bodleian. With plain downright simplicity
and free from all ostentation Peter carried this valuable ruby to
the king in his waistcoat pocket, and presented it wrapped up in a
piece of brown paper.

"Remorse--_remorse_," he repeated, rolling the word under his tongue
with an accent that was a clue to the psychology of the popular
drama; and Granice, perversely, said to himself: "If I could only
have struck that note I should have been running in six theatres at
once."

He saw that from that moment McCarren's professional zeal would be
fanned by emotional curiosity; and he profited by the fact to
propose that they should dine together, and go on afterward to some
music-hall or theatre. It was becoming necessary to Granice to feel
himself an object of pre-occupation, to find himself in another
mind. He took a kind of gray penumbral pleasure in riveting
McCarren's attention on his case; and to feign the grimaces of moral
anguish became a passionately engrossing game. He had not entered a
theatre for months; but he sat out the meaningless performance in
rigid tolerance, sustained by the sense of the reporter's
observation.

Between the acts, McCarren amused him with anecdotes about the
audience: he knew every one by sight, and could lift the curtain
from every physiognomy. Granice listened indulgently. He had lost
all interest in his kind, but he knew that he was himself the real
centre of McCarren's attention, and that every word the latter spoke
had an indirect bearing on his own problem.

"See that fellow over there--the little dried-up man in the third
row, pulling his moustache? _His_ memoirs would be worth publishing,"
McCarren said suddenly in the last _entr'acte_.

Granice, following his glance, recognized the detective from
Allonby's office. For a moment he had the thrilling sense that he
was being shadowed.

"Caesar, if _he_ could talk--!" McCarren continued. "Know who he is,
of course? Dr. John B. Stell, the biggest alienist in the country--"

Granice, with a start, bent again between the heads in front of him.
"_That_ man--the fourth from the aisle? You're mistaken. That's not
Dr. Stell."

McCarren laughed. "Well, I guess I've been in court enough to know
Stell when I see him. He testifies in nearly all the big cases where
they plead insanity."

A cold shiver ran down Granice's spine, but he repeated obstinately:
"That's not Dr. Stell."

"Not Stell? Why, man, I _know_ him. Look--here he comes. If it isn't
Stell, he won't speak to me."

The little dried-up man was moving slowly up the aisle. As he neared
McCarren he made a slight gesture of recognition.

"How'do, Doctor Stell? Pretty slim show, ain't it?" the reporter
cheerfully flung out at him. And Mr. J. B. Hewson, with a nod of
amicable assent, passed on.

Granice sat benumbed. He knew he had not been mistaken--the man who
had just passed was the same man whom Allonby had sent to see him: a
physician disguised as a detective. Allonby, then, had thought him
insane, like the others--had regarded his confession as the
maundering of a maniac. The discovery froze Granice with horror--he
seemed to see the mad-house gaping for him.

"Isn't there a man a good deal like him--a detective named J. B.
Hewson?"

But he knew in advance what McCarren's answer would be. "Hewson? J.
B. Hewson? Never heard of him. But that was J. B. Stell fast
enough--I guess he can be trusted to know himself, and you saw he
answered to his name."


VI


SOME days passed before Granice could obtain a word with the
District Attorney: he began to think that Allonby avoided him.

But when they were face to face Allonby's jovial countenance showed
no sign of embarrassment. He waved his visitor to a chair, and
leaned across his desk with the encouraging smile of a consulting
physician.

Granice broke out at once: "That detective you sent me the other
day--"

Allonby raised a deprecating hand.

"--I know: it was Stell the alienist. Why did you do that, Allonby?"

The other's face did not lose its composure. "Because I looked up
your story first--and there's nothing in it."

"Nothing in it?" Granice furiously interposed.

"Absolutely nothing. If there is, why the deuce don't you bring me
proofs? I know you've been talking to Peter Ascham, and to Denver,
and to that little ferret McCarren of the _Explorer_. Have any of
them been able to make out a case for you? No. Well, what am I to
do?"

Granice's lips began to tremble. "Why did you play me that trick?"

"About Stell? I had to, my dear fellow: it's part of my business.
Stell _is_ a detective, if you come to that--every doctor is."

The trembling of Granice's lips increased, communicating itself in a
long quiver to his facial muscles. He forced a laugh through his dry
throat. "Well--and what did he detect?"

"In you? Oh, he thinks it's overwork--overwork and too much smoking.
If you look in on him some day at his office he'll show you the
record of hundreds of cases like yours, and advise you what
treatment to follow. It's one of the commonest forms of
hallucination. Have a cigar, all the same."

"But, Allonby, I killed that man!"

The District Attorney's large hand, outstretched on his desk, had an
almost imperceptible gesture, and a moment later, as if an answer to
the call of an electric bell, a clerk looked in from the outer
office.

"Sorry, my dear fellow--lot of people waiting. Drop in on Stell some
morning," Allonby said, shaking hands.

McCarren had to own himself beaten: there was absolutely no flaw in
the alibi. And since his duty to his journal obviously forbade his
wasting time on insoluble mysteries, he ceased to frequent Granice,
who dropped back into a deeper isolation. For a day or two after his
visit to Allonby he continued to live in dread of Dr. Stell. Why
might not Allonby have deceived him as to the alienist's diagnosis?
What if he were really being shadowed, not by a police agent but by
a mad-doctor? To have the truth out, he suddenly determined to call
on Dr. Stell.

The physician received him kindly, and reverted without
embarrassment to the conditions of their previous meeting. "We have
to do that occasionally, Mr. Granice; it's one of our methods. And
you had given Allonby a fright."

Granice was silent. He would have liked to reaffirm his guilt, to
produce the fresh arguments which had occurred to him since his last
talk with the physician; but he feared his eagerness might be taken
for a symptom of derangement, and he affected to smile away Dr.
Stell's allusion.

"You think, then, it's a case of brain-fag--nothing more?"

"Nothing more. And I should advise you to knock off tobacco. You
smoke a good deal, don't you?"

He developed his treatment, recommending massage, gymnastics,
travel, or any form of diversion that did not--that in short--

Granice interrupted him impatiently. "Oh, I loathe all that--and I'm
sick of travelling."

"H'm. Then some larger interest--politics, reform, philanthropy?
Something to take you out of yourself."

"Yes. I understand," said Granice wearily.

"Above all, don't lose heart. I see hundreds of cases like yours,"
the doctor added cheerfully from the threshold.

On the doorstep Granice stood still and laughed. Hundreds of cases
like his--the case of a man who had committed a murder, who
confessed his guilt, and whom no one would believe! Why, there had
never been a case like it in the world. What a good figure Stell
would have made in a play: the great alienist who couldn't read a
man's mind any better than that!

Granice saw huge comic opportunities in the type.

But as he walked away, his fears dispelled, the sense of
listlessness returned on him. For the first time since his avowal to
Peter Ascham he found himself without an occupation, and understood
that he had been carried through the past weeks only by the
necessity of constant action. Now his life had once more become a
stagnant backwater, and as he stood on the street corner watching
the tides of traffic sweep by, he asked himself despairingly how
much longer he could endure to float about in the sluggish circle of
his consciousness.

The thought of self-destruction recurred to him; but again his flesh
recoiled. He yearned for death from other hands, but he could never
take it from his own. And, aside from his insuperable physical
reluctance, another motive restrained him. He was possessed by the
dogged desire to establish the truth of his story. He refused to be
swept aside as an irresponsible dreamer--even if he had to kill
himself in the end, he would not do so before proving to society
that he had deserved death from it.

He began to write long letters to the papers; but after the first
had been published and commented on, public curiosity was quelled by
a brief statement from the District Attorney's office, and the rest
of his communications remained unprinted. Ascham came to see him,
and begged him to travel. Robert Denver dropped in, and tried to
joke him out of his delusion; till Granice, mistrustful of their
motives, began to dread the reappearance of Dr. Stell, and set a
guard on his lips. But the words he kept back engendered others and
still others in his brain. His inner self became a humming factory
of arguments, and he spent long hours reciting and writing down
elaborate statements of his crime, which he constantly retouched and
developed. Then gradually his activity languished under the lack of
an audience, the sense of being buried beneath deepening drifts of
indifference. In a passion of resentment he swore that he would
prove himself a murderer, even if he had to commit another crime to
do it; and for a sleepless night or two the thought flamed red on
his darkness. But daylight dispelled it. The determining impulse was
lacking and he hated too promiscuously to choose his victim... So
he was thrown back on the unavailing struggle to impose the truth of
his story. As fast as one channel closed on him he tried to pierce
another through the sliding sands of incredulity. But every issue
seemed blocked, and the whole human race leagued together to cheat
one man of the right to die.

Thus viewed, the situation became so monstrous that he lost his last
shred of self-restraint in contemplating it. What if he were really
the victim of some mocking experiment, the centre of a ring of
holiday-makers jeering at a poor creature in its blind dashes
against the solid walls of consciousness? But, no--men were not so
uniformly cruel: there were flaws in the close surface of their
indifference, cracks of weakness and pity here and there...

Granice began to think that his mistake lay in having appealed to
persons more or less familiar with his past, and to whom the visible
conformities of his life seemed a final disproof of its one fierce
secret deviation. The general tendency was to take for the whole of
life the slit seen between the blinders of habit: and in his walk
down that narrow vista Granice cut a correct enough figure. To a
vision free to follow his whole orbit his story would be more
intelligible: it would be easier to convince a chance idler in the
street than the trained intelligence hampered by a sense of his
antecedents. This idea shot up in him with the tropic luxuriance of
each new seed of thought, and he began to walk the streets, and to
frequent out-of-the-way chop-houses and bars in his search for the
impartial stranger to whom he should disclose himself.

At first every face looked encouragement; but at the crucial moment
he always held back. So much was at stake, and it was so essential
that his first choice should be decisive. He dreaded stupidity,
timidity, intolerance. The imaginative eye, the furrowed brow, were
what he sought. He must reveal himself only to a heart versed in the
tortuous motions of the human will; and he began to hate the dull
benevolence of the average face. Once or twice, obscurely,
allusively, he made a beginning--once sitting down at a man's side
in a basement chop-house, another day approaching a lounger on an
east-side wharf. But in both cases the premonition of failure
checked him on the brink of avowal. His dread of being taken for a
man in the clutch of a fixed idea gave him an unnatural keenness in
reading the expression of his interlocutors, and he had provided
himself in advance with a series of verbal alternatives, trap-doors
of evasion from the first dart of ridicule or suspicion.

He passed the greater part of the day in the streets, coming home at
irregular hours, dreading the silence and orderliness of his
apartment, and the critical scrutiny of Flint. His real life was
spent in a world so remote from this familiar setting that he
sometimes had the mysterious sense of a living metempsychosis, a
furtive passage from one identity to another--yet the other as
unescapably himself!

One humiliation he was spared: the desire to live never revived in
him. Not for a moment was he tempted to a shabby pact with existing
conditions. He wanted to die, wanted it with the fixed unwavering
desire which alone attains its end. And still the end eluded him! It
would not always, of course--he had full faith in the dark star of
his destiny. And he could prove it best by repeating his story,
persistently and indefatigably, pouring it into indifferent ears,
hammering it into dull brains, till at last it kindled a spark, and
some one of the careless millions paused, listened, believed...

It was a mild March day, and he had been loitering on the west-side
docks, looking at faces. He was becoming an expert in physiognomies:
his eagerness no longer made rash darts and awkward recoils. He knew
now the face he needed, as clearly as if it had come to him in a
vision; and not till he found it would he speak. As he walked
eastward through the shabby reeking streets he had a premonition
that he should find it that morning. Perhaps it was the promise of
spring in the air--certainly he felt calmer than for many days...

He turned into Washington Square, struck across it obliquely, and
walked up University Place. Its heterogeneous passers always allured
him--they were less hurried than in Broadway, less enclosed and
classified than in Fifth Avenue. He walked slowly, watching for his
face.

At Union Square he felt a sudden relapse into discouragement, like a
votary who has watched too long for a sign from the altar. Perhaps,
after all, he should never find his face... The air was languid,
and he felt tired. He walked between the bald grass-plots and the
twisted trees, making for an empty seat. Presently he passed a bench
on which a girl sat alone, and something as definite as the twitch
of a cord made him stop before her. He had never dreamed of telling
his story to a girl, had hardly looked at the women's faces as they
passed. His case was man's work: how could a woman help him? But
this girl's face was extraordinary--quiet and wide as a clear
evening sky. It suggested a hundred images of space, distance,
mystery, like ships he had seen, as a boy, quietly berthed by a
familiar wharf, but with the breath of far seas and strange harbours
in their shrouds... Certainly this girl would understand. He went
up to her quietly, lifting his hat, observing the forms--wishing her
to see at once that he was "a gentleman."

"I am a stranger to you," he began, sitting down beside her, "but
your face is so extremely intelligent that I feel... I feel it is
the face I've waited for ... looked for everywhere; and I want to
tell you--"

The girl's eyes widened: she rose to her feet. She was escaping him!

In his dismay he ran a few steps after her, and caught her roughly
by the arm.

"Here--wait--listen! Oh, don't scream, you fool!" he shouted out.

He felt a hand on his own arm; turned and confronted a policeman.
Instantly he understood that he was being arrested, and something
hard within him was loosened and ran to tears.

"Ah, you know--you _know_ I'm guilty!"

He was conscious that a crowd was forming, and that the girl's
frightened face had disappeared. But what did he care about her
face? It was the policeman who had really understood him. He turned
and followed, the crowd at his heels...


VII


IN the charming place in which he found himself there were so many
sympathetic faces that he felt more than ever convinced of the
certainty of making himself heard.

It was a bad blow, at first, to find that he had not been arrested
for murder; but Ascham, who had come to him at once, explained that
he needed rest, and the time to "review" his statements; it appeared
that reiteration had made them a little confused and contradictory.
To this end he had willingly acquiesced in his removal to a large
quiet establishment, with an open space and trees about it, where he
had found a number of intelligent companions, some, like himself,
engaged in preparing or reviewing statements of their cases, and
others ready to lend an interested ear to his own recital.

For a time he was content to let himself go on the tranquil current
of this existence; but although his auditors gave him for the most
part an encouraging attention, which, in some, went the length of
really brilliant and helpful suggestion, he gradually felt a
recurrence of his old doubts. Either his hearers were not sincere,
or else they had less power to aid him than they boasted. His
interminable conferences resulted in nothing, and as the benefit of
the long rest made itself felt, it produced an increased mental
lucidity which rendered inaction more and more unbearable. At length
he discovered that on certain days visitors from the outer world
were admitted to his retreat; and he wrote out long and logically
constructed relations of his crime, and furtively slipped them into
the hands of these messengers of hope.

This occupation gave him a fresh lease of patience, and he now lived
only to watch for the visitors' days, and scan the faces that swept
by him like stars seen and lost in the rifts of a hurrying sky.

Mostly, these faces were strange and less intelligent than those of
his companions. But they represented his last means of access to the
world, a kind of subterranean channel on which he could set his
"statements" afloat, like paper boats which the mysterious current
might sweep out into the open seas of life.

One day, however, his attention was arrested by a familiar contour,
a pair of bright prominent eyes, and a chin insufficiently shaved.
He sprang up and stood in the path of Peter McCarren.

The journalist looked at him doubtfully, then held out his hand with
a startled deprecating, "_Why--?_"

"You didn't know me? I'm so changed?" Granice faltered, feeling the
rebound of the other's wonder.

"Why, no; but you're looking quieter--smoothed out," McCarren
smiled.

"Yes: that's what I'm here for--to rest. And I've taken the
opportunity to write out a clearer statement--"

Granice's hand shook so that he could hardly draw the folded paper
from his pocket. As he did so he noticed that the reporter was
accompanied by a tall man with grave compassionate eyes. It came to
Granice in a wild thrill of conviction that this was the face he had
waited for...

"Perhaps your friend--he _is_ your friend?--would glance over it--or
I could put the case in a few words if you have time?" Granice's
voice shook like his hand. If this chance escaped him he felt that
his last hope was gone. McCarren and the stranger looked at each
other, and the former glanced at his watch.

"I'm sorry we can't stay and talk it over now, Mr. Granice; but my
friend has an engagement, and we're rather pressed--"

Granice continued to proffer the paper. "I'm sorry--I think I could
have explained. But you'll take this, at any rate?"

The stranger looked at him gently. "Certainly--I'll take it." He had
his hand out. "Good-bye."

"Good-bye," Granice echoed.

He stood watching the two men move away from him through the long
light hall; and as he watched them a tear ran down his face. But as
soon as they were out of sight he turned and walked hastily toward
his room, beginning to hope again, already planning a new statement.

Outside the building the two men stood still, and the journalist's
companion looked up curiously at the long monotonous rows of barred
windows.

"So that was Granice?"

"Yes--that was Granice, poor devil," said McCarren.

"Strange case! I suppose there's never been one just like it? He's
still absolutely convinced that he committed that murder?"

"Absolutely. Yes."

The stranger reflected. "And there was no conceivable ground for the
idea? No one could make out how it started? A quiet conventional
sort of fellow like that--where do you suppose he got such a
delusion? Did you ever get the least clue to it?"

McCarren stood still, his hands in his pockets, his head cocked up
in contemplation of the barred windows. Then he turned his bright
hard gaze on his companion.

"That was the queer part of it. I've never spoken of it--but I
_did_ get a clue."

"By Jove! That's interesting. What was it?"

McCarren formed his red lips into a whistle. "Why--that it wasn't a
delusion."

He produced his effect--the other turned on him with a pallid stare.

"He murdered the man all right. I tumbled on the truth by the merest
accident, when I'd pretty nearly chucked the whole job."

"He murdered him--murdered his cousin?"

"Sure as you live. Only don't split on me. It's about the queerest
business I ever ran into... _Do about it?_ Why, what was I to do?
I couldn't hang the poor devil, could I? Lord, but I was glad when
they collared him, and had him stowed away safe in there!"

The tall man listened with a grave face, grasping Granice's
statement in his hand.

"Here--take this; it makes me sick," he said abruptly, thrusting the
paper at the reporter; and the two men turned and walked in silence
to the gates.


HIS FATHER'S SON

I


AFTER his wife's death Mason Grew took the momentous step of selling
out his business and moving from Wingfield, Connecticut, to
Brooklyn.

For years he had secretly nursed the hope of such a change, but had
never dared to suggest it to Mrs. Grew, a woman of immutable habits.
Mr. Grew himself was attached to Wingfield, where he had grown up,
prospered, and become what the local press described as "prominent."
He was attached to his ugly brick house with sandstone trimmings and
a cast-iron area-railing neatly sanded to match; to the similar row
of houses across the street, the "trolley" wires forming a kind of
aerial pathway between, and the sprawling vista closed by the
steeple of the church which he and his wife had always attended, and
where their only child had been baptized.

It was hard to snap all these threads of association, visual and
sentimental; yet still harder, now that he was alone, to live so far
from his boy. Ronald Grew was practising law in New York, and there
was no more chance of returning to live at Wingfield than of a
river's flowing inland from the sea. Therefore to be near him his
father must move; and it was characteristic of Mr. Grew, and of the
situation generally, that the translation, when it took place, was
to Brooklyn, and not to New York.

"Why you bury yourself in that hole I can't think," had been
Ronald's comment; and Mr. Grew simply replied that rents were lower
in Brooklyn, and that he had heard of a house that would suit him.
In reality he had said to himself--being the only recipient of his
own confidences--that if he went to New York he might be on the
boy's mind; whereas, if he lived in Brooklyn, Ronald would always
have a good excuse for not popping over to see him every other day.
The sociological isolation of Brooklyn, combined with its
geographical nearness, presented in fact the precise conditions for
Mr. Grew's case. He wanted to be near enough to New York to go there
often, to feel under his feet the same pavement that Ronald trod, to
sit now and then in the same theatres, and find on his
breakfast-table the journals which, with increasing frequency,
inserted Ronald's name in the sacred bounds of the society column.
It had always been a trial to Mr. Grew to have to wait twenty-four
hours to read that "among those present was Mr. Ronald Grew." Now he
had it with his coffee, and left it on the breakfast-table to the
perusal of a "hired girl" cosmopolitan enough to do it justice. In
such ways Brooklyn attested the advantages of its propinquity to New
York, while remaining, as regards Ronald's duty to his father, as
remote and inaccessible as Wingfield.

It was not that Ronald shirked his filial obligations, but rather
because of his heavy sense of them, that Mr. Grew so persistently
sought to minimize and lighten them. It was he who insisted, to
Ronald, on the immense difficulty of getting from New York to
Brooklyn.

"Any way you look at it, it makes a big hole in the day; and there's
not much use in the ragged rim left. You say you're dining out next
Sunday? Then I forbid you to come over here for lunch. Do you
understand me, sir? You disobey at the risk of your father's
malediction! Where did you say you were dining? With the Waltham
Bankshires again? Why, that's the second time in three weeks, ain't
it? Big blow-out, I suppose? Gold plate and orchids--opera singers
in afterward? Well, you'd be in a nice box if there was a fog on the
river, and you got hung up half-way over. That'd be a handsome
return for the attention Mrs. Bankshire has shown you--singling out
a whipper-snapper like you twice in three weeks! (What's the
daughter's name--Daisy?) No, _sir_--don't you come fooling round
here next Sunday, or I'll set the dogs on you. And you wouldn't find
me in anyhow, come to think of it. I'm lunching out myself, as it
happens--yes sir, _lunching out_. Is there anything especially comic
in my lunching out? I don't often do it, you say? Well, that's no
reason why I never should. Who with? Why, with--with old Dr.
Bleaker: Dr. Eliphalet Bleaker. No, you wouldn't know about
him--he's only an old friend of your mother's and mine."

Gradually Ronald's insistence became less difficult to overcome.
With his customary sweetness and tact (as Mr. Grew put it) he began
to "take the hint," to give in to "the old gentleman's" growing
desire for solitude.

"I'm set in my ways, Ronny, that's about the size of it; I like to
go tick-ticking along like a clock. I always did. And when you come
bouncing in I never feel sure there's enough for dinner--or that I
haven't sent Maria out for the evening. And I don't want the
neighbors to see me opening my own door to my son. That's the kind
of cringing snob I am. Don't give me away, will you? I want 'em to
think I keep four or five powdered flunkeys in the hall day and
night--same as the lobby of one of those Fifth Avenue hotels. And if
you pop over when you're not expected, how am I going to keep up the
bluff?"

Ronald yielded after the proper amount of resistance--his intuitive
sense, in every social transaction, of the proper amount of force to
be expended, was one of the qualities his father most admired in
him. Mr. Grew's perceptions in this line were probably more acute
than his son suspected. The souls of short thick-set men, with
chubby features, mutton-chop whiskers, and pale eyes peering between
folds of fat like almond kernels in half-split shells--souls thus
encased do not reveal themselves to the casual scrutiny as delicate
emotional instruments. But in spite of the dense disguise in which
he walked Mr. Grew vibrated exquisitely in response to every
imaginative appeal; and his son Ronald was perpetually stimulating
and feeding his imagination.

Ronald in fact constituted his father's one escape from the
impenetrable element of mediocrity which had always hemmed him in.
To a man so enamoured of beauty, and so little qualified to add to
its sum total, it was a wonderful privilege to have bestowed on the
world such a being. Ronald's resemblance to Mr. Grew's early
conception of what he himself would have liked to look might have
put new life into the discredited theory of pre-natal influences. At
any rate, if the young man owed his beauty, his distinction and his
winning manner to the dreams of one of his parents, it was certainly
to those of Mr. Grew, who, while outwardly devoting his life to the
manufacture and dissemination of Grew's Secure Suspender Buckle,
moved in an enchanted inward world peopled with all the figures of
romance. In this high company Mr. Grew cut as brilliant a figure as
any of its noble phantoms; and to see his vision of himself suddenly
projected on the outer world in the shape of a brilliant popular
conquering son, seemed, in retrospect, to give to that image a
belated objective reality. There were even moments when, forgetting
his physiognomy, Mr. Grew said to himself that if he'd had "half a
chance" he might have done as well as Ronald; but this only
fortified his resolve that Ronald should do infinitely better.

Ronald's ability to do well almost equalled his gift of looking
well. Mr. Grew constantly affirmed to himself that the boy was "not
a genius"; but, barring this slight deficiency, he was almost
everything that a parent could wish. Even at Harvard he had managed
to be several desirable things at once--writing poetry in the
college magazine, playing delightfully "by ear," acquitting himself
honorably in his studies, and yet holding his own in the fashionable
sporting set that formed, as it were, the gateway of the temple of
Society. Mr. Grew's idealism did not preclude the frank desire that
his son should pass through that gateway; but the wish was not
prompted by material considerations. It was Mr. Grew's notion that,
in the rough and hurrying current of a new civilization, the little
pools of leisure and enjoyment must nurture delicate growths,
material graces as well as moral refinements, likely to be uprooted
and swept away by the rush of the main torrent. He based his theory
on the fact that he had liked the few "society" people he had
met--had found their manners simpler, their voices more agreeable,
their views more consonant with his own, than those of the leading
citizens of Wingfield. But then he had met very few.

Ronald's sympathies needed no urging in the same direction. He took
naturally, dauntlessly, to all the high and exceptional things about
which his father's imagination had so long sheepishly and
ineffectually hovered--from the start he _was_ what Mr. Grew had
dreamed of being. And so precise, so detailed, was Mr. Grew's vision
of his own imaginary career, that as Ronald grew up, and began to
travel in a widening orbit, his father had an almost uncanny sense
of the extent to which that career was enacting itself before him.
At Harvard, Ronald had done exactly what the hypothetical Mason Grew
would have done, had not his actual self, at the same age, been
working his way up in old Slagden's button factory--the institution
which was later to acquire fame, and even notoriety, as the
birthplace of Grew's Secure Suspender Buckle. Afterward, at a period
when the actual Grew had passed from the factory to the bookkeeper's
desk, his invisible double had been reading law at
Columbia--precisely again what Ronald did! But it was when the young
man left the paths laid out for him by the parental hand, and cast
himself boldly on the world, that his adventures began to bear the
most astonishing resemblance to those of the unrealized Mason Grew.
It was in New York that the scene of this hypothetical being's first
exploits had always been laid; and it was in New York that Ronald
was to achieve his first triumph. There was nothing small or timid
about Mr. Grew's imagination; it had never stopped at anything
between Wingfield and the metropolis. And the real Ronald had the
same cosmic vision as his parent. He brushed aside with a
contemptuous laugh his mother's tearful entreaty that he should stay
at Wingfield and continue the dynasty of the Grew Suspender Buckle.
Mr. Grew knew that in reality Ronald winced at the Buckle, loathed
it, blushed for his connection with it. Yet it was the Buckle that
had seen him through Groton, Harvard and the Law School, and had
permitted him to enter the office of a distinguished corporation
lawyer, instead of being enslaved to some sordid business with quick
returns. The Buckle had been Ronald's fairy godmother--yet his
father did not blame him for abhorring and disowning it. Mr. Grew
himself often bitterly regretted having bestowed his own name on the
instrument of his material success, though, at the time, his doing
so had been the natural expression of his romanticism. When he
invented the Buckle, and took out his patent, he and his wife both
felt that to bestow their name on it was like naming a battle-ship
or a peak of the Andes.

Mrs. Grew had never learned to know better; but Mr. Grew had
discovered his error before Ronald was out of school. He read it
first in a black eye of his boy's. Ronald's symmetry had been marred
by the insolent fist of a fourth former whom he had chastised for
alluding to his father as "Old Buckles;" and when Mr. Grew heard the
epithet he understood in a flash that the Buckle was a thing to
blush for. It was too late then to dissociate his name from it, or
to efface from the hoardings of the entire continent the picture of
two gentlemen, one contorting himself in the abject effort to repair
a broken brace, while the careless ease of the other's attitude
proclaimed his trust in the Secure Suspender Buckle. These records
were indelible, but Ronald could at least be spared all direct
connection with them; and from that day Mr. Grew resolved that the
boy should not return to Wingfield.

"You'll see," he had said to Mrs. Grew, "he'll take right hold in
New York. Ronald's got my knack for taking hold," he added, throwing
out his chest.

"But the way you took hold was in business," objected Mrs. Grew, who
was large and literal.

Mr. Grew's chest collapsed, and he became suddenly conscious of his
comic face in its rim of sandy whiskers. "That's not the only way,"
he said, with a touch of wistfulness which escaped his wife's
analysis.

"Well, of course you could have written beautifully," she rejoined
with admiring eyes.

"_ Written?_ Me!" Mr. Grew became sardonic.

"Why, those letters--weren't _they_ beautiful, I'd like to know?"

The couple exchanged a glance, innocently allusive and amused on the
wife's part, and charged with a sudden tragic significance on the
husband's.

"Well, I've got to be going along to the office now," he merely
said, dragging himself out of his rocking-chair.

This had happened while Ronald was still at school; and now Mrs.
Grew slept in the Wingfield cemetery, under a life-size theo-
logical virtue of her own choosing, and Mr. Grew's prognostications
as to Ronald's ability to "take right hold" in New York were being
more and more brilliantly fulfilled.


II


RONALD obeyed his father's injunction not to come to luncheon on the
day of the Bankshires' dinner; but in the middle of the following
week Mr. Grew was surprised by a telegram from his son.

"Want to see you important matter. Expect me to-morrow afternoon."

Mr. Grew received the telegram after breakfast. To peruse it he had
lifted his eye from a paragraph of the morning paper describing a
fancy-dress dinner which had taken place the night before at the
Hamilton Gliddens' for the house-warming of their new Fifth Avenue
palace.

"Among the couples who afterward danced in the Poets' Quadrille were
Miss Daisy Bankshire, looking more than usually lovely as Laura, and
Mr. Ronald Grew as the young Petrarch."

Petrarch and Laura! Well--if _anything_ meant anything, Mr. Grew
supposed he knew what that meant. For weeks past he had noticed how
constantly the names of the young people appeared together in the
society notes he so insatiably devoured. Even the soulless reporter
was getting into the habit of coupling them in his lists. And this
Laura and Petrarch business was almost an announcement...

Mr. Grew dropped the telegram, wiped his eye-glasses, and re-read
the paragraph. "Miss Daisy Bankshire ... more than usually lovely..."
Yes; she _was_ lovely. He had often seen her photograph in the
papers--seen her represented in every conceivable attitude of the
mundane game: fondling her prize bull-dog, taking a fence on her
thoroughbred, dancing a _gavotte_, all patches and plumes, or
fingering a guitar, all tulle and lilies; and once he had caught a
glimpse of her at the theatre. Hearing that Ronald was going to a
fashionable first-night with the Bankshires, Mr. Grew had for once
overcome his repugnance to following his son's movements, and had
secured for himself, under the shadow of the balcony, a stall whence
he could observe the Bankshire box without fear of detection. Ronald
had never known of his father's presence at the play; and for three
blessed hours Mr. Grew had watched his boy's handsome dark head bent
above the dense fair hair and white averted shoulder that were all
he could catch of Miss Bankshire's beauties.

He recalled the vision now; and with it came, as usual, its ghostly
double: the vision of his young self bending above such a white
shoulder and such shining hair. Needless to say that the real Mason
Grew had never found himself in so enviable a situation. The late
Mrs. Grew had no more resembled Miss Daisy Bankshire than he had
looked like the happy victorious Ronald. And the mystery was that
from their dull faces, their dull endearments, the miracle of Ronald
should have sprung. It was almost--fantastically--as if the boy had
been a changeling, child of a Latmian night, whom the divine
companion of Mr. Grew's early reveries had secretly laid in the
cradle of the Wingfield bedroom while Mr. And Mrs. Grew slept the
deep sleep of conjugal indifference.

The young Mason Grew had not at first accepted this astral episode
as the complete cancelling of his claims on romance. He too had
grasped at the high-hung glory; and, with his fatal tendency to
reach too far when he reached at all, had singled out the prettiest
girl in Wingfield. When he recalled his stammered confession of love
his face still tingled under her cool bright stare. The wonder of
his audacity had struck her dumb; and when she recovered her voice
it was to fling a taunt at him.

"Don't be too discouraged, you know--have you ever thought of trying
Addie Wicks?"

All Wingfield would have understood the gibe: Addie Wicks was the
dullest girl in town. And a year later he had married Addie Wicks...

He looked up from the perusal of Ronald's telegram with this memory
in his mind. Now at last his dream was coming true! His boy would
taste of the joys that had mocked his thwarted youth and his dull
gray middle-age. And it was fitting that they should be realized in
Ronald's destiny. Ronald was made to take happiness boldly by the
hand and lead it home like a bridegroom. He had the carriage, the
confidence, the high faith in his fortune, that compel the wilful
stars. And, thanks to the Buckle, he would have the exceptional
setting, the background of material elegance, that became his
conquering person. Since Mr. Grew had retired from business his
investments had prospered, and he had been saving up his income for
just such a contingency. His own wants were few: he had transferred
the Wingfield furniture to Brooklyn, and his sitting-room was a
replica of that in which the long years of his married life had been
spent. Even the florid carpet on which Ronald's tottering footsteps
had been taken was carefully matched when it became too threadbare.
And on the marble centre-table, with its chenille-fringed cover and
bunch of dyed pampas grass, lay the illustrated Longfellow and the
copy of Ingersoll's lectures which represented literature to Mr.
Grew when he had led home his bride. In the light of Ronald's
romance, Mr. Grew found himself re-living, with a strange tremor of
mingled pain and tenderness, all the poor prosaic incidents of his
own personal history. Curiously enough, with this new splendor on
them they began to emit a small faint ray of their own. His wife's
armchair, in its usual place by the fire, recalled her placid
unperceiving presence, seated opposite to him during the long drowsy
years; and he felt her kindness, her equanimity, where formerly he
had only ached at her obtuseness. And from the chair he glanced up
at the large discolored photograph on the wall above, with a brittle
brown wreath suspended on a corner of the frame. The photograph
represented a young man with a poetic necktie and untrammelled hair,
leaning negligently against a Gothic chair-back, a roll of music in
his hand; and beneath was scrawled a bar of Chopin, with the words:
"_ Adieu, Adele_."

The portrait was that of the great pianist, Fortune Dolbrowski; and
its presence on the wall of Mr. Grew's sitting-room commemorated the
only exquisite hour of his life save that of Ronald's birth. It was
some time before the latter memorable event, a few months only after
Mr. Grew's marriage, that he had taken his wife to New York to hear
the great Dolbrowski. Their evening had been magically beautiful,
and even Addie, roused from her habitual inexpressiveness, had
quivered into a momentary semblance of life. "I never--I never--"
she gasped out helplessly when they had regained their hotel
bedroom, and sat staring back entranced at the evening's evocations.
Her large immovable face was pink and tremulous, and she sat with
her hands on her knees, forgetting to roll up her bonnet-strings and
prepare her curl-papers.

"I'd like to _write_ him just how I felt--I wisht I knew how!" she
burst out suddenly in a final effervescence of emotion.

Her husband lifted his head and looked at her.

"Would you? I feel that way too," he said with a sheepish laugh. And
they continued to stare at each other shyly through a transfiguring
mist of sound.

Mr. Grew recalled the scene as he gazed up at the pianist's faded
photograph. "Well, I owe her that anyhow--poor Addie!" he said, with
a smile at the inconsequences of fate. With Ronald's telegram in his
hand he was in a mood to count his mercies.


III


"A CLEAR twenty-five thousand a year: that's what you can tell 'em
with my compliments," said Mr. Grew, glancing complacently across
the centre-table at his boy's charming face.

It struck him that Ronald's gift for looking his part in life had
never so romantically expressed itself. Other young men, at such a
moment, would have been red, damp, tight about the collar; but
Ronald's cheek was only a shade paler, and the contrast made his
dark eyes more expressive.

"A clear twenty-five thousand; yes, sir--that's what I always meant
you to have."

Mr. Grew leaned back, his hands thrust carelessly in his pockets, as
though to divert attention from the agitation of his features. He
had often pictured himself rolling out that phrase to Ronald, and
now that it was actually on his lips he could not control their
tremor.

Ronald listened in silence, lifting a nervous hand to his slight
dark moustache, as though he, too, wished to hide some involuntary
betrayal of emotion. At first Mr. Grew took his silence for an
expression of gratified surprise; but as it prolonged itself it
became less easy to interpret.

"I--see here, my boy; did you expect more? Isn't it enough?" Mr.
Grew cleared his throat. "Do _they_ expect more?" he asked
nervously. He was hardly able to face the pain of inflicting a
disappointment on Ronald at the very moment when he had counted on
putting the final touch to his felicity.

Ronald moved uneasily in his chair and his eyes wandered upward to
the laurel-wreathed photograph of the pianist above his father's
head.

"_ Is_ it that, Ronald? Speak out, my boy. We'll see, we'll look
round--I'll manage somehow."

"No, no," the young man interrupted, abruptly raising his hand as
though to silence his father.

Mr. Grew recovered his cheerfulness. "Well, what's the matter than,
if _she's_ willing?"

Ronald shifted his position again, and finally rose from his seat.

"Father--I--there's something I've got to tell you. I can't take
your money."

Mr. Grew sat speechless a moment, staring blankly at his son; then
he emitted a puzzled laugh. "My money? What are you talking about?
What's this about my money? Why, it ain't _mine_, Ronny; it's all
yours--every cent of it!" he cried.

The young man met his tender look with a gaze of tragic rejection.

"No, no, it's not mine--not even in the sense you mean. Not in any
sense. Can't you understand my feeling so?"

"Feeling so? I don't know how you're feeling. I don't know what
you're talking about. Are you too proud to touch any money you
haven't earned? Is that what you're trying to tell me?"

"No. It's not that. You must know--"

Mr. Grew flushed to the rim of his bristling whiskers. "Know? Know
_what?_ Can't you speak?"

Ronald hesitated, and the two men faced each other for a long
strained moment, during which Mr. Grew's congested countenance grew
gradually pale again.

"What's the meaning of this? Is it because you've done something ...
something you're ashamed of ... ashamed to tell me?" he suddenly
gasped out; and walking around the table he laid his hand on his
son's shoulder. "There's nothing you can't tell me, my boy."

"It's not that. Why do you make it so hard for me?" Ronald broke out
with passion. "You must have known this was sure to happen sooner or
later."

"Happen? What was sure to hap--?" Mr. Grew's question wavered on his
lip and passed into a tremulous laugh. "Is it something _I've_ done
that you don't approve of? Is it--is it _the Buckle_ you're ashamed
of, Ronald Grew?"

Ronald laughed too, impatiently. "The Buckle? No, I'm not ashamed of
the Buckle; not any more than you are," he returned with a sudden
bright flush. "But I'm ashamed of all I owe to it--all I owe to
you--when--when--" He broke off and took a few distracted steps
across the room. "You might make this easier for me," he protested,
turning back to his father.

"Make what easier? I know less and less what you're driving at," Mr.
Grew groaned.

Ronald's walk had once more brought him beneath the photograph on
the wall. He lifted his head for a moment and looked at it; then he
looked again at Mr. Grew.

"Do you suppose I haven't always known?"

"Known--?"

"Even before you gave me those letters--after my mother's
death--even before that, I suspected. I don't know how it began ...
perhaps from little things you let drop ... you and she ...
and resemblances that I couldn't help seeing ... in myself ...
How on earth could you suppose I shouldn't guess? I always thought
you gave me the letters as a way of telling me--"

Mr. Grew rose slowly from his chair. "The letters? Dolbrowski's
letters?"

Ronald nodded with white lips. "You must remember giving them to me
the day after the funeral."

Mr. Grew nodded back. "Of course. I wanted you to have everything
your mother valued."

"Well--how could I help knowing after that?"

"Knowing _what?_" Mr. Grew stood staring helplessly at his son.
Suddenly his look caught at a clue that seemed to confront it with a
deeper bewilderment. "You thought--you thought those letters ...
Dolbrowski's letters ... you thought they meant ..."

"Oh, it wasn't only the letters. There were so many other signs. My
love of music--my--all my feelings about life ... and art... And
when you gave me the letters I thought you must mean me to know."

Mr. Grew had grown quiet. His lips were firm, and his small eyes
looked out steadily from their creased lids.

"To know that you were Fortune Dolbrowski's son?"

Ronald made a mute sign of assent.

"I see. And what did you mean to do?"

"I meant to wait till I could earn my living, and then repay you ...
as far as I can ever repay you... But now that there's a chance
of my marrying ... and your generosity overwhelms me ... I'm
obliged to speak."

"I see," said Mr. Grew again. He let himself down into his chair,
looking steadily and not unkindly at the young man. "Sit down,
Ronald. Let's talk."

Ronald made a protesting movement. "Is anything to be gained by it?
You can't change me--change what I feel. The reading of those
letters transformed my whole life--I was a boy till then: they made
a man of me. From that moment I understood myself." He paused, and
then looked up at Mr. Grew's face. "Don't imagine I don't appreciate
your kindness--your extraordinary generosity. But I can't go through
life in disguise. And I want you to know that I have not won Daisy
under false pretences--"

Mr. Grew started up with the first expletive Ronald had ever heard
on his lips.

"You damned young fool, you, you haven't _told_ her--?"

Ronald raised his head quickly. "Oh, you don't know her, sir! She
thinks no worse of me for knowing my secret. She is above and beyond
all such conventional prejudices. She's _proud_ of my parentage--"
he straightened his slim young shoulders--"as I'm proud of it ...
yes, sir, proud of it..."

Mr. Grew sank back into his seat with a dry laugh. "Well, you ought
to be. You come of good stock. And you're father's son, every inch
of you!" He laughed again, as though the humor of the situation grew
on him with its closer contemplation.

"Yes, I've always felt that," Ronald murmured, flushing.

"Your father's son, and no mistake." Mr. Grew leaned forward.
"You're the son of as big a fool as yourself. And here he sits,
Ronald Grew."

The young man's flush deepened to crimson; but Mr. Grew checked his
reply with a decisive gesture. "Here he sits, with all your young
nonsense still alive in him. Don't you see the likeness? If you
don't, I'll tell you the story of those letters."

Ronald stared. "What do you mean? Don't they tell their own story?"

"I supposed they did when I gave them to you; but you've given it a
twist that needs straightening out." Mr. Grew squared his elbows on
the table, and looked at the young man across the gift-books and the
dyed pampas grass. "I wrote all the letters that Dolbrowski
answered."

Ronald gave back his look in frowning perplexity. "You wrote them? I
don't understand. His letters are all addressed to my mother."

"Yes. And he thought he was corresponding with her."

"But my mother--what did she think?"

Mr. Grew hesitated, puckering his thick lids. "Well, I guess she
kinder thought it was a joke. Your mother didn't think about things
much."

Ronald continued to bend a puzzled frown on the question. "I don't
understand," he reiterated.

Mr. Grew cleared his throat with a nervous laugh. "Well, I don't
know as you ever will--_quite_. But this is the way it came about. I
had a toughish time of it when I was young. Oh, I don't mean so much
the fight I had to put up to make my way--there was always plenty of
fight in me. But inside of myself it was kinder lonesome. And the
outside didn't attract callers." He laughed again, with an
apologetic gesture toward his broad blinking face. "When I went
round with the other young fellows I was always the forlorn
hope--the one that had to eat the drumsticks and dance with the
left-overs. As sure as there was a blighter at a picnic I had to
swing her, and feed her, and drive her home. And all the time I was
mad after all the things you've got--poetry and music and all the
joy-forever business. So there were the pair of us--my face and my
imagination--chained together, and fighting, and hating each other
like poison.

"Then your mother came along and took pity on me. It sets up a gawky
fellow to find a girl who ain't ashamed to be seen walking with him
Sundays. And I was grateful to your mother, and we got along
first-rate. Only I couldn't say things to her--and she couldn't
answer. Well--one day, a few months after we were married,
Dolbrowski came to New York, and the whole place went wild about
him. I'd never heard any good music, but I'd always had an inkling
of what it must be like, though I couldn't tell you to this day how
I knew. Well, your mother read about him in the papers too, and she
thought it'd be the swagger thing to go to New York and hear him
play--so we went... I'll never forget that evening. Your mother
wasn't easily stirred up--she never seemed to need to let off steam.
But that night she seemed to understand the way I felt. And when we
got back to the hotel she said suddenly: 'I'd like to tell him how I
feel. I'd like to sit right down and write to him.'

"'Would you?' I said. 'So would I.'

"There was paper and pens there before us, and I pulled a sheet
toward me, and began to write. 'Is this what you'd like to say to
him?' I asked her when the letter was done. And she got pink and
said: 'I don't understand it, but it's lovely.' And she copied it
out and signed her name to it, and sent it."

Mr. Grew paused, and Ronald sat silent, with lowered eyes.

"That's how it began; and that's where I thought it would end. But it
didn't, because Dolbrowski answered. His first letter was dated
January 10, 1872. I guess you'll find I'm correct. Well, I went back
to hear him again, and I wrote him after the performance, and he
answered again. And after that we kept it up for six months. Your
mother always copied the letters and signed them. She seemed to
think it was a kinder joke, and she was proud of his answering my
letters. But she never went back to New York to hear him, though I
saved up enough to give her the treat again. She was too lazy, and
she let me go without her. I heard him three times in New York; and
in the spring he came to Wingfield and played once at the Academy.
Your mother was sick and couldn't go; so I went alone. After the
performance I meant to get one of the directors to take me in to see
him; but when the time came, I just went back home and wrote to him
instead. And the month after, before he went back to Europe, he sent
your mother a last little note, and that picture hanging up there..."

Mr. Grew paused again, and both men lifted their eyes to the
photograph.

"Is that all?" Ronald slowly asked.

"That's all--every bit of it," said Mr. Grew.

"And my mother--my mother never even spoke to Dolbrowski?"

"Never. She never even saw him but that once in New York at his
concert."

"The blood crept again to Ronald's face. "Are you sure of that,
sir?" he asked in a trembling voice.

"Sure as I am that I'm sitting here. Why, she was too lazy to look
at his letters after the first novelty wore off. She copied the
answers just to humor me--but she always said she couldn't
understand what we wrote."

"But how could you go on with such a correspondence? It's
incredible!"

Mr. Grew looked at his son thoughtfully. "I suppose it is, to you.
You've only had to put out your hand and get the things I was
starving for--music, and good talk, and ideas. Those letters gave me
all that. You've read them, and you know that Dolbrowski was not
only a great musician but a great man. There was nothing beautiful
he didn't see, nothing fine he didn't feel. For six months I
breathed his air, and I've lived on it ever since. Do you begin to
understand a little now?"

"Yes--a little. But why write in my mother's name? Why make it a
sentimental correspondence?"

Mr. Grew reddened to his bald temples. "Why, I tell you it began
that way, as a kinder joke. And when I saw that the first letter
pleased and interested him, I was afraid to tell him--_I couldn't_
tell him. Do you suppose he'd gone on writing if he'd ever seen me,
Ronny?"

Ronald suddenly looked at him with new eyes. "But he must have
thought your letters very beautiful--to go on as he did," he broke
out.

"Well--I did my best," said Mr. Grew modestly.

Ronald pursued his idea. "Where _are_ all your letters, I wonder?
Weren't they returned to you at his death?"

Mr. Grew laughed. "Lord, no. I guess he had trunks and trunks full
of better ones. I guess Queens and Empresses wrote to him."

"I should have liked to see your letters," the young man insisted.

"Well, they weren't bad," said Mr. Grew drily. "But I'll tell you
one thing, Ronny," he added suddenly. Ronald raised his head with a
quick glance, and Mr. Grew continued: "I'll tell you where the best
of those letters is--it's in _you_. If it hadn't been for that one
look at life I couldn't have made you what you are. Oh, I know
you've done a good deal of your own making--but I've been there
behind you all the time. And you'll never know the work I've spared
you and the time I've saved you. Fortune Dolbrowski helped me do
that. I never saw things in little again after I'd looked at 'em
with him. And I tried to give you the big view from the stars...
So that's what became of my letters."

Mr. Grew paused, and for a long time Ronald sat motionless, his
elbows on the table, his face dropped on his hands.

Suddenly Mr. Grew's touch fell on his shoulder.

"Look at here, Ronald Grew--do you want me to tell you how you're
feeling at this minute? Just a mite let down, after all, at the idea
that you ain't the romantic figure you'd got to think yourself...
Well, that's natural enough, too; but I'll tell you what it proves.
It proves you're my son right enough, if any more proof was needed.
For it's just the kind of fool nonsense I used to feel at your
age--and if there's anybody here to laugh at it's myself, and not
you. And you can laugh at me just as much as you like..."


THE DAUNT DIANA

I


"WHAT'S become of the Daunt Diana? You mean to say you never heard
the sequel?"

Ringham Finney threw himself back into his chair with the smile of
the collector who has a good thing to show. He knew he had a good
listener, at any rate. I don't think much of Ringham's snuff-boxes,
but his anecdotes are usually worth while. He's a psychologist
astray among _bibelots_, and the best bits he brings back from his
raids on Christie's and the Hotel Drouot are the fragments of human
nature he picks up on those historic battle-fields. If his _flair_
in enamel had been half as good we should have heard of the Finney
collection by this time.

He really has--queer fatuous investigator!--an unusually sensitive
touch for the human texture, and the specimens he gathers into his
museum of heterogeneous memories have almost always some mark of the
rare and chosen. I felt, therefore, that I was really to be
congratulated on the fact that I didn't know what had become of the
Daunt Diana, and on having before me a long evening in which to
learn. I had just led my friend back, after an excellent dinner at
Foyot's, to the shabby pleasant sitting-room of my _rive-gauche_
hotel; and I knew that, once I had settled him in a good arm-chair,
and put a box of cigars at his elbow, I could trust him not to budge
till I had the story.


II


YOU remember old Neave, of course? Little Humphrey Neave, I mean. We
used to see him pottering about Rome years ago. He lived in two tiny
rooms over a wine shop, on polenta and lentils, and prowled among
the refuse of the Ripetta whenever he had a few _soldi_ to spend.
But you've been out of the collector's world for so long that you
may not know what happened to him afterward...

He was always a queer chap, Neave; years older than you and me, of
course--and even when I first knew him, in my raw Roman days, he
gave me an extraordinary sense of age and experience. I don't think
I've ever known any one who was at once so intelligent and so
simple. It's the precise combination that results in romance; and
poor little Neave was romantic.

He told me once how he'd come to Rome. He was _originaire_ of
Mystic, Connecticut--and he wanted to get as far away from it as
possible. Rome seemed as far as anything on the same planet could
be; and after he'd worried his way through Harvard--with shifts and
shavings that you and I can't imagine--he contrived to get sent to
Switzerland as tutor to a chap who'd failed in his examinations.
With only the Alps between, he wasn't likely to turn back; and he
got another fellow to take his pupil home, and struck out on foot
for the seven hills.

I'm telling you these early details merely to give you a notion of
the man's idealism. There was a cool persistency and a headlong
courage in his dash for Rome that one wouldn't have guessed in the
little pottering chap we used to know. Once on the spot, he got more
tutoring, managed to make himself a name for coaxing balky youths to
take their fences, and was finally able to take up the more
congenial task of expounding "the antiquities" to cultured
travellers. I call it more congenial--but how it must have seared
his soul! Fancy unveiling the sacred scars of Time to ladies who
murmur: "Was this _actually_ the spot--?" while they absently feel
for their hatpins! He used to say that nothing kept him at it but
the exquisite thought of accumulating the _lire_ for his collection.
For the Neave collection, my dear fellow, began early, began almost
with his Roman life, began in a series of little nameless odds and
ends, broken trinkets, torn embroideries, the amputated extremities
of maimed marbles: things that even the rag-picker had pitched away
when he sifted his haul. But they weren't nameless or meaningless to
Neave; his strength lay in his instinct for identifying, putting
together, seeing significant relations. He was a regular Cuvier of
bric-a-brac. And during those early years, when he had time to brood
over trifles and note imperceptible differences, he gradually
sharpened his instinct, and made it into the delicate and
redoubtable instrument it is. Before he had a thousand francs' worth
of _anticaglie_ to his name he began to be known as an expert, and
the big dealers were glad to consult him. But we're getting no
nearer the Daunt Diana...

Well, some fifteen years ago, in London, I ran across Neave at
Christie's. He was the same little man we'd known, effaced,
bleached, indistinct, like a poor "impression"--as unnoticeable as
one of his own early finds, yet, like them, with a _quality_, if one
had an eye for it. He told me he still lived in Rome, and had
contrived, by fierce self-denial, to get a few decent bits
together--"piecemeal, little by little, with fasting and prayer; and
I mean the fasting literally!" he said.

He had run over to London for his annual "look-round"--I fancy one
or another of the big collectors usually paid his journey--and when
we met he was on his way to see the Daunt collection. You know old
Daunt was a surly brute, and the things weren't easily seen; but he
had heard Neave was in London, and had sent--yes, actually
sent!--for him to come and give his opinion on a few bits, including
the Diana. The little man bore himself discreetly, but you can
imagine his pride. In his exultation he asked me to come with
him--"Oh, I've the _grandes et petites entrees_, my dear fellow:
I've made my conditions--" and so it happened that I saw the first
meeting between Humphrey Neave and his fate.

For that collection _was_ his fate: or, one may say, it was embodied
in the Diana who was queen and goddess of the realm. Yes--I shall
always be glad I was with Neave when he had his first look at the
Diana. I see him now, blinking at her through his white lashes, and
stroking his seedy wisp of a moustache to hide a twitch of the
muscles. It was all very quiet, but it was the _coup de foudre_. I
could see that by the way his hands trembled when he turned away and
began to examine the other things. You remember Neave's hands--thin,
sallow, dry, with long inquisitive fingers thrown out like antennae?
Whatever they hold--bronze or lace, hard enamel or brittle
glass--they have an air of conforming themselves to the texture of
the thing, and sucking out of it, by every finger-tip, the
mysterious essence it has secreted. Well, that day, as he moved
about among Daunt's treasures, the Diana followed him everywhere. He
didn't look back at her--he gave himself to the business he was
there for--but whatever he touched, he felt her. And on the
threshold he turned and gave her his first free look--the kind of
look that says: _"You're mine."_

It amused me at the time--the idea of little Neave making eyes at
any of Daunt's belongings. He might as well have coquetted with the
Kohinoor. And the same idea seemed to strike him; for as we turned
away from the big house in Belgravia he glanced up at it and said,
with a bitterness I'd never heard in him: "Good Lord! To think of
that lumpy fool having those things to handle! Did you notice his
stupid stumps of fingers? I suppose he blunted them gouging nuggets
out of the gold fields. And in exchange for the nuggets he gets all
that in a year--only has to hold out his callous palm to have that
great ripe sphere of beauty drop into it! That's my idea of
heaven--to have a great collection drop into one's hand, as success,
or love, or any of the big shining things, drop suddenly on some
men. And I've had to worry along for nearly fifty years, saving and
paring, and haggling and intriguing, to get here a bit and there a
bit--and not one perfection in the lot! It's enough to poison a
man's life."

The outbreak was so unlike Neave that I remember every word of it:
remember, too, saying in answer: "But, look here, Neave, you
wouldn't take Daunt's hands for yours, I imagine?"

He stared a moment and smiled. "Have all that, and grope my way
through it like a blind cave fish? What a question! But the sense
that it's always the blind fish that live in that kind of aquarium
is what makes anarchists, sir!" He looked back from the corner of
the square, where we had paused while he delivered himself of this
remarkable metaphor. "God, I'd like to throw a bomb at that place,
and be in at the looting!"

And with that, on the way home, he unpacked his grievance--pulled
the bandage off the wound, and showed me the ugly mark it had made
on his little white soul.

It wasn't the struggling, stinting, self-denying that galled him--it
was the inadequacy of the result. It was, in short, the old tragedy
of the discrepancy between a man's wants and his power to gratify
them. Neave's taste was too exquisite for his means--was like some
strange, delicate, capricious animal, that he cherished and pampered
and couldn't satisfy.

"Don't you know those little glittering lizards that die if they're
not fed on some wonderful tropical fly? Well, my taste's like that,
with one important difference--if it doesn't get its fly, it simply
turns and feeds on me. Oh, it doesn't die, my taste--worse luck! It
gets larger and stronger and more fastidious, and takes a bigger
bite of me--that's all."

That was all. Year by year, day by day, he had made himself into
this delicate register of perceptions and sensations--as far above
the ordinary human faculty of appreciation as some scientific
registering instrument is beyond the rough human senses--only to
find that the beauty which alone could satisfy him was
unattainable--that he was never to know the last deep identification
which only possession can give. He had trained himself in short, to
feel, in the rare great thing--such an utterance of beauty as the
Daunt Diana, say--a hundred elements of perfection, a hundred
_reasons why_, imperceptible, inexplicable even, to the average
"artistic" sense; he had reached this point by a long austere
process of discrimination and rejection, the renewed great refusals
of the intelligence which perpetually asks more, which will make no
pact with its self of yesterday, and is never to be beguiled from
its purpose by the wiles of the next-best-thing. Oh, it's a poignant
case, but not a common one; for the next-best-thing usually wins...

You see, the worst of Neave's state was the fact of his not being a
mere collector, even the collector raised to his highest pitch of
efficiency. The whole thing was blent in him with poetry--his
imagination had romanticized the acquisitive instinct, as the
religious feeling of the Middle Ages turned passion into love. And
yet his could never be the abstract enjoyment of the philosopher who
says: "This or that object is really mine because I'm capable of
appreciating it." Neave _wanted_ what he appreciated--wanted it with
his touch and his sight as well as with his imagination.

It was hardly a year afterward that, coming back from a long tour in
India, I picked up a London paper and read the amazing headline:
"Mr. Humphrey Neave buys the Daunt collection"... I rubbed my eyes
and read again. Yes, it could only be our old friend Humphrey. "An
American living in Rome ... one of our most discerning
collectors"; there was no mistaking the description. I clapped on my
hat and bolted out to see the first dealer I could find; and there I
had the incredible details. Neave had come into a fortune--two or
three million dollars, amassed by an uncle who had a corset-factory,
and who had attained wealth as the creator of the Mystic
Super-straight. (Corset-factory sounds odd, by the way, doesn't it?
One had fancied that the corset was a personal, a highly specialized
garment, more or less shaped on the form it was to modify; but,
after all, the Tanagras were all made from two or three moulds--and
so, I suppose, are the ladies who wear the Mystic Super-straight.)

The uncle had a son, and Neave had never dreamed of seeing a penny
of the money; but the son died suddenly, and the father followed,
leaving a codicil that gave everything to our friend. Humphrey had
to go out to "realize" on the corset-factory; and his description of
_that_ ... Well, he came back with his money in his pocket, and
the day he landed old Daunt went to smash. It all fitted in like a
Chinese puzzle. I believe Neave drove straight from Euston to Daunt
House: at any rate, within two months the collection was his, and at
a price that made the trade sit up. Trust old Daunt for that!

I was in Rome the following spring, and you'd better believe I
looked him up. A big porter glared at me from the door of the
Palazzo Neave: I had almost to produce my passport to get in. But
that wasn't Neave's fault--the poor fellow was so beset by people
clamouring to see his collection that he had to barricade himself,
literally. When I had mounted the state _Scalone_, and come on him,
at the end of half a dozen echoing saloons, in the farthest,
smallest _reduit_ of the vast suite, I received the same welcome
that he used to give us in his little den over the wine shop.

"Well--so you've got her?" I said. For I'd caught sight of the Diana
in passing, against the bluish blur of an old _verdure_--just the
background for her poised loveliness. Only I rather wondered why she
wasn't in the room where he sat.

He smiled. "Yes, I've got her," he returned, more calmly than I had
expected.

"And all the rest of the loot?"

"Yes. I had to buy the lump."

"Had to? But you wanted to, didn't you? You used to say it was your
idea of heaven--to stretch out your hand and have a great ripe
sphere of beauty drop into it. I'm quoting your own words, by the
way."

Neave blinked and stroked his seedy moustache. "Oh, yes. I remember
the phrase. It's true--it _is_ the last luxury." He paused, as if
seeking a pretext for his lack of warmth. "The thing that bothered
me was having to move. I couldn't cram all the stuff into my old
quarters."

"Well, I should say not! This is rather a better setting."

He got up. "Come and take a look round. I want to show you two or
three things--new attributions I've made. I'm doing the catalogue
over."

The interest of showing me the things seemed to dispel the vague
apathy I had felt in him. He grew keen again in detailing his
redistribution of values, and above all in convicting old Daunt and
his advisers of their repeated aberrations of judgment. "The miracle
is that he should have got such things, knowing as little as he did
what he was getting. And the egregious asses who bought for him were
no better, were worse in fact, since they had all sorts of
humbugging wrong reasons for admiring what old Daunt simply coveted
because it belonged to some other rich man."

Never had Neave had so wondrous a field for the exercise of his
perfected faculty; and I saw then how in the real, the great
collector's appreciations the keenest scientific perception is
suffused with imaginative sensibility, and how it's to the latter
undefinable quality that in the last resort he trusts himself.

Nevertheless, I still felt the shadow of that hovering apathy, and
he knew I felt it, and was always breaking off to give me reasons
for it. For one thing, he wasn't used to his new quarters--hated
their bigness and formality; then the requests to show his things
drove him mad. "The women--oh, the women!" he wailed, and
interrupted himself to describe a heavy-footed German Princess who
had marched past his treasures as if she were inspecting a cavalry
regiment, applying an unmodulated _Mugneeficent_ to everything from
the engraved gems to the Hercules torso.

"Not that she was half as bad as the other kind," he added, as if
with a last effort at optimism. "The kind who discriminate and say:
'I'm not sure if it's Botticelli or Cellini I mean, but _one of that
school_, at any rate.' And the worst of all are the ones who
know--up to a certain point: have the schools, and the dates and the
jargon pat, and yet wouldn't know a Phidias if it stood where they
hadn't expected it."

He had all my sympathy, poor Neave; yet these were trials
inseparable from the collector's lot, and not always without their
secret compensations. Certainly they did not wholly explain my
friend's attitude; and for a moment I wondered if it were due to
some strange disillusionment as to the quality of his treasures. But
no! the Daunt collection was almost above criticism; and as we
passed from one object to another I saw there was no mistaking the
genuineness of Neave's pride in his possessions. The ripe sphere of
beauty was his, and he had found no flaw in it as yet...

A year later came the amazing announcement--the Daunt collection was
for sale. At first we all supposed it was a case of weeding out
(though how old Daunt would have raged at the thought of anybody's
weeding _his_ collection!) But no--the catalogue corrected that
idea. Every stick and stone was to go under the hammer. The news ran
like wildfire from Rome to Berlin, from Paris to London and New
York. Was Neave ruined, then? Wrong again--the dealers nosed that
out in no time. He was simply selling because he chose to sell; and
in due time the things came up at Christie's.

But you may be sure the trade had found an answer to the riddle; and
the answer was that, on close inspection, Neave had found the
collection less impeccable than he had supposed. It was a
preposterous answer--but then there was no other. Neave, by this
time, was pretty generally recognized as having the subtlest _flair_
of any collector in Europe, and if he didn't choose to keep the
Daunt collection it could be only because he had reason to think he
could do better.

In a flash this report had gone the rounds and the buyers were on
their guard. I had run over to London to see the thing through, and
it was the queerest sale I ever was at. Some of the things held
their own, but a lot--and a few of the best among them--went for
half their value. You see, they'd been locked up in old Daunt's
house for nearly twenty years, and hardly shown to any one, so that
the whole younger generation of dealers and collectors knew of them
only by hearsay. Then you know the effect of suggestion in such
cases. The undefinable sense we were speaking of is a ticklish
instrument, easily thrown out of gear by a sudden fall of
temperature; and the sharpest experts grow shy and self-distrustful
when the cold current of depreciation touches them. The sale was a
slaughter--and when I saw the Daunt Diana fall at the wink of a
little third-rate _brocanteur_ from Vienna I turned sick at the
folly of my kind.

For my part, I had never believed that Neave had sold the collection
because he'd "found it out"; and within a year my incredulity was
justified. As soon as the things were put in circulation they were
known for the marvels they are. There was hardly a poor bit in the
lot; and my wonder grew at Neave's madness. All over Europe, dealers
began to be fighting for the spoils; and all kinds of stuff were
palmed off on the unsuspecting as fragments of the Daunt collection!

Meanwhile, what was Neave doing? For a long time I didn't hear, and
chance kept me from returning to Rome. But one day, in Paris, I ran
across a dealer who had captured for a song one of the best
Florentine bronzes in the Daunt collection--a marvellous _plaquette_
of Donatello's. I asked him what had become of it, and he said with
a grin: "I sold it the other day," naming a price that staggered me.

"Ye gods! Who paid you that for it?"

His grin broadened, and he answered: "Neave."

"_ Neave?_ Humphrey Neave?"

"Didn't you know he was buying back his things?"

"Nonsense!"

"He is, though. Not in his own name--but he's doing it."

And he _was_, do you know--and at prices that would have made a sane
man shudder! A few weeks later I ran across his tracks in London,
where he was trying to get hold of a Penicaud enamel--another of his
scattered treasures. Then I hunted him down at his hotel, and had it
out with him.

"Look here, Neave, what are you up to?"

He wouldn't tell me at first: stared and laughed and denied. But I
took him off to dine, and after dinner, while we smoked, I happened
to mention casually that I had a pull over the man who had the
Penicaud--and at that he broke down and confessed.

"Yes, I'm buying them back, Finney--it's true." He laughed
nervously, twitching his moustache. And then he let me have the
story.

"You know how I'd hungered and thirsted for the _real thing_--you
quoted my own phrase to me once, about the 'ripe sphere of beauty.'
So when I got my money, and Daunt lost his, almost at the same
moment, I saw the hand of Providence in it. I knew that, even if I'd
been younger, and had more time, I could never hope, nowadays, to
form such a collection as _that_. There was the ripe sphere, within
reach; and I took it. But when I got it, and began to live with it,
I found out my mistake. It was a _mariage de convenance_--there'd
been no wooing, no winning. Each of my little old bits--the rubbish
I chucked out to make room for Daunt's glories--had its own personal
history, the drama of my relation to it, of the discovery, the
struggle, the capture, the first divine moment of possession. There
was a romantic secret between us. And then I had absorbed its
beauties one by one, they had become a part of my imagination, they
held me by a hundred threads of far-reaching association. And
suddenly I had expected to create this kind of intense personal tie
between myself and a roomful of new cold alien presences--things
staring at me vacantly from the depths of unknown pasts! Can you
fancy a more preposterous hope? Why, my other things, my _own_
things, had wooed me as passionately as I wooed them: there was a
certain little bronze, a little Venus Callipyge, who had drawn me,
drawn me, drawn me, imploring me to rescue her from her unspeakable
surroundings in a vulgar bric-a-brac shop at Biarritz, where she
shrank out of sight among sham Sevres and Dutch silver, as one has
seen certain women--rare, shy, exquisite--made almost invisible by
the vulgar splendours surrounding them. Well! that little Venus, who
was just a specious seventeenth century attempt at the 'antique,'
but who had penetrated me with her pleading grace, touched me by the
easily guessed story of her obscure, anonymous origin, was more to
me imaginatively--yes! more than the cold bought beauty of the Daunt
Diana..."

"The Daunt Diana!" I broke in. "Hold up, Neave--_the Daunt Diana?_"

He smiled contemptuously. "A professional beauty, my dear
fellow--expected every head to be turned when she came into a room."

"Oh, Neave," I groaned.

"Yes, I know. You're thinking of what we felt that day we first saw
her in London. Many a poor devil has sold his soul as the result of
such a first sight! Well, I sold _her_ instead. Do you want the
truth about her? _Elle etait bete a pleurer._"

He laughed, and stood up with a little shrug of disenchantment.

"And so you're impenitent?" I paused. "And yet you're buying some of
the things back?"

Neave laughed again, ironically. "I knew you'd find me out and call
me to account. Well, yes: I'm buying back." He stood before me half
sheepish, half defiant. "I'm buying back because there's nothing
else as good in the market. And because I've a queer feeling that,
this time, they'll be _mine_. But I'm ruining myself at the game!"
he confessed.

It was true: Neave was ruining himself. And he's gone on ruining
himself ever since, till now the job's nearly done. Bit by bit, year
by year, he has gathered in his scattered treasures, at higher
prices than the dealers ever dreamed of getting. There are fabulous
details in the story of his quest. Now and then I ran across him,
and was able to help him recover a fragment; and it was wonderful to
see his delight in the moment of reunion. Finally, about two years
ago, we met in Paris, and he told me he had got back all the
important pieces except the Diana.

"The Diana? But you told me you didn't care for her."

"Didn't care?" He leaned across the restaurant table that divided
us. "Well, no, in a sense I didn't. I wanted her to want me, you
see; and she didn't then! Whereas now she's crying to me to come to
her. You know where she is?" he broke off.

Yes, I knew: in the centre of Mrs. Willy P. Goldmark's yellow and
gold drawing-room, under a thousand-candle-power chandelier, with
reflectors aimed at her from every point of the compass. I had seen
her wincing and shivering there in her outraged nudity at one of the
Goldmark "crushes."

"But you can't get her, Neave," I objected.

"No, I can't get her," he said.

Well, last month I was in Rome, for the first time in six or seven
years, and of course I looked about for Neave. The Palazzo Neave was
let to some rich Russians, and the splendid new porter didn't know
where the proprietor lived. But I got on his trail easily enough,
and it led me to a strange old place in the Trastevere, an ancient
crevassed black palace turned tenement house, and fluttering with
pauper clothes-lines. I found Neave under the leads, in two or three
cold rooms that smelt of the _cuisine_ of all his neighbours: a poor
shrunken little figure, seedier and shabbier than ever, yet more
alive than when we had made the tour of his collection in the
Palazzo Neave.

The collection was around him again, not displayed in tall cabinets
and on marble tables, but huddled on shelves, perched on chairs,
crammed in corners, putting the gleam of bronze, the opalescence of
old glass, the pale lustre of marble, into all the angles of his low
dim rooms. There they were, the proud presences that had stared at
him down the vistas of Daunt House, and shone in cold transplanted
beauty under his own painted cornices: there they were, gathered in
humble promiscuity about his bent shabby figure, like superb wild
creatures tamed to become the familiars of some harmless old wizard.

As we went from bit to bit, as he lifted one piece after another,
and held it to the light of his low windows, I saw in his hands the
same tremor of sensation that I had noticed when he first examined
the same objects at Daunt House. All his life was in his
finger-tips, and it seemed to communicate life to the exquisite
things he touched. But you'll think me infected by his mysticism if
I tell you they gained new beauty while he held them...

We went the rounds slowly and reverently; and then, when I supposed
our inspection was over, and was turning to take my leave, he opened
a door I had not noticed, and showed me into a slit of a room
beyond. It was a mere monastic cell, scarcely large enough for his
narrow iron bed and the chest which probably held his few clothes;
but there, in a niche of the bare wall, facing the foot of the
bed--there stood the Daunt Diana.

I gasped at the sight and turned to him; and he looked back at me
without speaking.

"In the name of magic, Neave, how did you do it?"

He smiled as if from the depths of some secret rapture. "Call it
magic, if you like; but I ruined myself doing it," he said.

I stared at him in silence, breathless with the madness and the
wonder of it; and suddenly, red to the ears, he flung out his boyish
confession. "I lied to you that day in London--the day I said I
didn't care for her. I always cared--always worshipped--always
wanted her. But she wasn't mine then, and I knew it, and she knew it ...
and now at last we understand each other." He looked at me
shyly, and then glanced about the bare cold cell. "The setting isn't
worthy of her, I know; she was meant for glories I can't give her;
but beautiful things, my dear Finney, like beautiful spirits, live
in houses not made with hands..."

His face shone with extraordinary sweetness as he spoke; and I saw
he'd got hold of the secret we're all after. No, the setting isn't
worthy of her, if you like. The rooms are as shabby and mean as
those we used to see him in years ago over the wine shop. I'm not
sure they're not shabbier and meaner. But she rules there at last,
she shines and hovers there above him, and there at night, I doubt
not, steals down from her cloud to give him the Latmian kiss.


THE DEBT

I


YOU remember--it's not so long ago--the talk there was about
Dredge's "Arrival of the Fittest"? The talk has subsided, but the
book of course remains: stands up, in fact, as the tallest thing of
its kind since--well, I'd almost said since "The Origin of Species."

I'm not wrong, at any rate, in calling it the most important
contribution yet made to the development of the Darwinian theory, or
rather to the solution of the awkward problem about which that
theory has had to make such a circuit. Dredge's hypothesis will be
contested, may one day be disproved; but at least it has swept out
of the way all previous conjectures, including of course Lanfear's
magnificent attempt; and for our generation of scientific
investigators it will serve as the first safe bridge across a
murderous black whirlpool.

It's all very interesting--there are few things more stirring to the
imagination than that sudden projection of the new hypothesis, light
as a cobweb and strong as steel, across the intellectual abyss; but,
for an idle observer of human motives, the other, the personal, side
of Dredge's case is even more interesting and arresting.

Personal side? You didn't know there was one? Pictured him simply as
a thinking machine, a highly specialized instrument of precision,
the result of a long series of "adaptations," as his own jargon
would put it? Well, I don't wonder--if you've met him. He does give
the impression of being something out of his own laboratory: a
delicate scientific instrument that reveals wonders to the
initiated, and is absolutely useless in an ordinary hand.

In his youth it was just the other way. I knew him twenty years ago,
as an awkward lout whom young Archie Lanfear had picked up at
college, and brought home for a visit. I happened to be staying at
the Lanfears' when the boys arrived, and I shall never forget
Dredge's first appearance on the scene. You know the Lanfears always
lived very simply. That summer they had gone to Buzzard's Bay, in
order that Professor Lanfear might be near the Biological Station at
Wood's Holl, and they were picnicking in a kind of sketchy bungalow
without any attempt at elegance. But Galen Dredge couldn't have been
more awe-struck if he'd been suddenly plunged into a Fifth Avenue
ball-room. He nearly knocked his shock head against the low doorway,
and in dodging this peril trod heavily on Mabel Lanfear's foot, and
became hopelessly entangled in her mother's draperies--though how he
managed it I never knew, for Mrs. Lanfear's dowdy muslins ran to no
excess of train.

When the Professor himself came in it was ten times worse, and I saw
then that Dredge's emotion was a tribute to the great man's
proximity. That made the boy interesting, and I began to watch.
Archie, always enthusiastic but vague, had said: "Oh, he's a
tremendous chap--you'll see--" but I hadn't expected to see quite so
clearly. Lanfear's vision, of course, was sharper than mine; and the
next morning he had carried Dredge off to the Biological Station.
And that was the way it began.

Dredge is the son of a Baptist minister. He comes from East Lethe,
New York State, and was working his way through college--waiting at
White Mountain hotels in summer--when Archie Lanfear ran across him.
There were eight children in the family, and the mother was an
invalid. Dredge never had a penny from his father after he was
fourteen; but his mother wanted him to be a scholar, and "kept at
him," as he put it, in the hope of his going back to "teach school"
at East Lethe. He developed slowly, as the scientific mind generally
does, and was still adrift about himself and his tendencies when
Archie took him down to Buzzard's Bay. But he had read Lanfear's
"Utility and Variation," and had always been a patient and curious
observer of nature. And his first meeting with Lanfear explained him
to himself. It didn't, however, enable him to explain himself to
others, and for a long time he remained, to all but Lanfear, an
object of incredulity and conjecture.

"_ Why_ my husband wants him about--" poor Mrs. Lanfear, the kindest
of women, privately lamented to her friends; for Dredge, at that
time--they kept him all summer at the bungalow--had one of the most
encumbering personalities you can imagine. He was as inexpressive as
he is to-day, and yet oddly obtrusive: one of those uncomfortable
presences whose silence is an interruption.

The poor Lanfears almost died of him that summer, and the pity of it
was that he never suspected it, but continued to lavish on them a
floundering devotion as uncomfortable as the endearments of a
dripping dog--all out of gratitude for the Professor's kindness! He
was full, in those days, of raw enthusiasms, which he forced on any
one who would listen when his first shyness had worn off. You can't
picture him spouting sentimental poetry, can you? Yet I've seen him
petrify a whole group of Mrs. Lanfear's callers by suddenly
discharging on them, in the strident drawl of Western New York,
"Barbara Frietchie" or "The Queen of the May." His taste in
literature was uniformly bad, but very definite, and far more
assertive than his views on biological questions. In his scientific
judgments he showed, even then, a remarkable temperance, a
precocious openness to the opposite view; but in literature he was a
furious propagandist, aggressive, disputatious, and extremely
sensitive to adverse opinion.

Lanfear, of course, had been struck from the first by his gift of
accurate observation, and by the fact that his eagerness to learn
was offset by his reluctance to conclude. I remember Lanfear's
telling me that he had never known a lad of Dredge's age who gave
such promise of uniting an aptitude for general ideas with the
plodding patience of the accumulator of facts. Of course when
Lanfear talked like that of a young biologist his fate was sealed.
There could be no question of Dredge's going back to "teach school"
at East Lethe. He must take a course in biology at Columbia, spend
his vacations at the Wood's Holl laboratory, and then, if possible,
go to Germany for a year or two.

All this meant his virtual adoption by the Lanfears. Most of
Lanfear's fortune went in helping young students to a start, and he
devoted his heaviest subsidies to Dredge.

"Dredge will be my biggest dividend--you'll see!" he used to say, in
the chrysalis days when poor Galen was known to the world of science
only as a perpetual slouching presence in Mrs. Lanfear's
drawing-room. And Dredge, it must be said, took his obligations
simply, with that kind of personal dignity, and quiet sense of his
own worth, which in such cases saves the beneficiary from
abjectness. He seemed to trust himself as fully as Lanfear trusted
him.

The comic part of it was that his only idea of making what is known
as "a return" was to devote himself to the Professor's family. When
I hear pretty women lamenting that they can't coax Professor Dredge
out of his laboratory I remember Mabel Lanfear's cry to me: "If
Galen would only keep away!" When Mabel fell on the ice and broke
her leg, Galen walked seven miles in a blizzard to get a surgeon;
but if he did her this service one day in the year, he bored her by
being in the way for the other three hundred and sixty-four. One
would have imagined at that time that he thought his perpetual
presence the greatest gift he could bestow; for, except on the
occasion of his fetching the surgeon, I don't remember his taking
any other way of expressing his gratitude.

In love with Mabel? Not a bit! But the queer thing was that he _did_
have a passion in those days--a blind, hopeless passion for Mrs.
Lanfear! Yes: I know what I'm saying. I mean Mrs. Lanfear, the
Professor's wife, poor Mrs. Lanfear, with her tight hair and her
loose figure, her blameless brow and earnest eye-glasses, and her
perpetual attitude of mild misapprehension. I can see Dredge
cowering, long and many-jointed, in a diminutive drawing-room chair,
one square-toed shoe coiled round an exposed ankle, his knees
clasped in a knot of red knuckles, and his spectacles perpetually
seeking Mrs. Lanfear's eye-glasses. I never knew if the poor lady
was aware of the sentiment she inspired, but her children observed
it, and it provoked them to irreverent mirth. Galen was the
predestined butt of Mabel and Archie; and secure in their mother's
virtuous obtuseness, and in her worshipper's timidity, they allowed
themselves a latitude of banter that sometimes turned their audience
cold. Dredge meanwhile was going on obstinately with his work. Now
and then he had queer fits of idleness, when he lapsed into a state
of sulky inertia from which even Lanfear's admonitions could not
rouse him. Once, just before an examination, he suddenly went off to
the Maine woods for two weeks, came back, and failed to pass. I
don't know if his benefactor ever lost hope; but at times his
confidence must have been sorely strained. The queer part of it was
that when Dredge emerged from these eclipses he seemed keener and
more active than ever. His slowly growing intelligence probably
needed its periodical pauses of assimilation; and Lanfear was
marvellously patient.

At last Dredge finished his course and went to Germany; and when he
came back he was a new man--was, in fact, the Dredge we all know. He
seemed to have shed his blundering, encumbering personality, and
come to life as a disembodied intelligence. His fidelity to the
Lanfears was unchanged; but he showed it negatively, by his
discretions and abstentions. I have an idea that Mabel was less
disposed to deride him, might even have been induced to softer
sentiments; but I doubt if Dredge even noticed the change. As for
his ex-goddess, he seemed to regard her as a motherly household
divinity, the guardian genius of the darning needle; but on
Professor Lanfear he looked with a deepening reverence. If the rest
of the family had diminished in his eyes, its head had grown even
greater.


II


FROM that day Dredge's progress continued steadily. If not always
perceptible to the untrained eye, in Lanfear's sight it never
deviated, and the great man began to associate Dredge with his work,
and to lean on him more and more. Lanfear's health was already
failing, and in my confidential talks with him I saw how he counted
on Galen Dredge to continue and amplify his doctrine. If he did not
describe the young man as his predestined Huxley, it was because any
such comparison between himself and his great predecessors would
have been repugnant to his taste; but he evidently felt that it
would be Dredge's role to reveal him to posterity. And the young man
seemed at that time to take the same view of his calling. When he
was not busy about Lanfear's work he was recording their
conversations with the diligence of a biographer and the accuracy of
a naturalist. Any attempt to question or minimize Lanfear's theories
roused in his disciple the only flashes of wrath I have ever seen a
scientific discussion provoke in him. In defending his master he
became almost as intemperate as in the early period of his literary
passions.

Such filial dedication must have been all the more precious to
Lanfear because, about that time, it became evident that Archie
would never carry on his father's work. He had begun brilliantly,
you may remember, by a little paper on _Limulus Polyphemus_ that
attracted a good deal of notice when it appeared in the _Central
Blatt_; but gradually his zoological ardour yielded to an absorbing
passion for the violin, which was followed by a sudden plunge into
physics. At present, after a side-glance at the drama, I understand
he's devoting what is left of his father's money to archaeological
explorations in Asia Minor.

"Archie's got a delightful little mind," Lanfear used to say to me,
rather wistfully, "but it's just a highly polished surface held up
to the show as it passes. Dredge's mind takes in only a bit at a
time, but the bit stays, and other bits are joined to it, in a hard
mosaic of fact, of which imagination weaves the pattern. I saw just
how it would be years ago, when my boy used to take my meaning in a
flash, and answer me with clever objections, while Galen disappeared
into one of his fathomless silences, and then came to the surface
like a dripping retriever, a long way beyond Archie's objections,
and with an answer to them in his mouth."

It was about this time that the crowning satisfaction of Lanfear's
career came to him: I mean, of course, John Weyman's gift to
Columbia of the Lanfear Laboratory, and the founding, in connection
with it, of a chair of Experimental Evolution. Weyman had always
taken an interest in Lanfear's work, but no one had supposed that
his interest would express itself so magnificently. The honour came
to Lanfear at a time when he was fighting an accumulation of
troubles: failing health, the money difficulties resulting from his
irrepressible generosity, his disappointment about Archie's career,
and perhaps also the persistent attacks of the new school of German
zoologists.

"If I hadn't Galen I should feel the game was up," he said to me
once, in a fit of half-real, half-mocking despondency. "But he'll do
what I haven't time to do myself, and what my boy can't do for me."

That meant that he would answer the critics, and triumphantly affirm
Lanfear's theory, which had been rudely shaken, but not displaced.

"A scientific hypothesis lasts till there's something else to put in
its place. People who want to get across a river will use the old
bridge till the new one's built. And I don't see any one who's
particularly anxious, in this case, to take a contract for the new
one," Lanfear ended; and I remember answering with a laugh: "Not
while Horatius Dredge holds the other."

It was generally known that Lanfear had not long to live, and the
Laboratory was hardly opened before the question of his successor in
the chair of Experimental Evolution began to be a matter of public
discussion. It was conceded that whoever followed him ought to be a
man of achieved reputation, some one carrying, as the French say, a
considerable "baggage." At the same time, even Lanfear's critics
felt that he should be succeeded by a man who held his views and
would continue his teaching. This was not in itself a difficulty,
for German criticism had so far been mainly negative, and there were
plenty of good men who, while they questioned the permanent validity
of Lanfear's conclusions, were yet ready to accept them for their
provisional usefulness. And then there was the added inducement of
the Laboratory! The Columbia Professor of Experimental Evolution has
at his disposal the most complete instrument of biological research
that modern ingenuity has yet produced; and it's not only in
theology or politics _que Paris vaut bien une messe!_ There was no
trouble about finding a candidate; but the whole thing turned on
Lanfear's decision, since it was tacitly understood that, by
Weyman's wish, he was to select his successor. And what a cry there
was when he selected Galen Dredge!

Not in the scientific world, though. The specialists were beginning
to know about Dredge. His remarkable paper on Sexual Dimorphism had
been translated into several languages, and a furious polemic had
broken out over it. When a young fellow can get the big men fighting
over him his future is pretty well assured. But Dredge was only
thirty-four, and some people seemed to feel that there was a kind of
deflected nepotism in Lanfear's choice.

"If he could choose Dredge he might as well have chosen his own
son," I've heard it said; and the irony was that Archie--will you
believe it?--actually thought so himself! But Lanfear had Weyman
behind him, and when the end came the Faculty at once appointed
Galen Dredge to the chair of Experimental Evolution.

For the first two years things went quietly, along accustomed lines.
Dredge simply continued the course which Lanfear's death had
interrupted. He lectured well even then, with a persuasive
simplicity surprising in the slow, inarticulate creature one knew
him for. But haven't you noticed that certain personalities reveal
themselves only in the more impersonal relations of life? It's as if
they woke only to collective contacts, and the single consciousness
were an unmeaning fragment to them.

If there was anything to criticize in that first part of the course,
it was the avoidance of general ideas, of those brilliant rockets of
conjecture that Lanfear's students were used to seeing him fling
across the darkness. I remember once saying this to Archie, who,
having recovered from his absurd disappointment, had returned to his
old allegiance to Dredge.

"Oh, that's Galen all over. He doesn't want to jump into the ring
till he has a big swishing knock-down argument in his fist. He'll
wait twenty years if he has to. That's his strength: he's never
afraid to wait."

I thought this shrewd of Archie, as well as generous; and I saw the
wisdom of Dredge's course. As Lanfear himself had said, his theory
was safe enough till somebody found a more attractive one; and
before that day Dredge would probably have accumulated sufficient
proof to crystallize the fluid hypothesis.


III


THE third winter I was off collecting in Central America, and didn't
get back till Dredge's course had been going for a couple of months.
The very day I turned up in town Archie Lanfear descended on me with
a summons from his mother. I was wanted at once at a family council.

I found the Lanfear ladies in a state of incoherent distress, which
Archie's own indignation hardly made more intelligible. But
gradually I put together their fragmentary charges, and learned that
Dredge's lectures were turning into an organized assault on his
master's doctrine.

"It amounts to just this," Archie said, controlling his women with
the masterful gesture of the weak man. "Galen has simply turned
round and betrayed my father."

"Just for a handful of silver he left us," Mabel sobbed in
parenthesis, while Mrs. Lanfear tearfully cited Hamlet.

Archie silenced them again. "The ugly part of it is that he must
have had this up his sleeve for years. He must have known when he
was asked to succeed my father what use he meant to make of his
opportunity. What he's doing isn't the result of a hasty conclusion:
it means years of work and preparation."

Archie broke off to explain himself. He had returned from Europe the
week before, and had learned on arriving that Dredge's lectures were
stirring the world of science as nothing had stirred it since
Lanfear's "Utility and Variation." And the incredible outrage was
that they owed their sensational effect to the fact of being an
attempted refutation of Lanfear's great work.

I own that I was staggered: the case looked ugly, as Archie said.
And there was a veil of reticence, of secrecy, about Dredge, that
always kept his conduct in a half-light of uncertainty. Of some men
one would have said off-hand: "It's impossible!" But one couldn't
affirm it of him.

Archie hadn't seen him as yet; and Mrs. Lanfear had sent for me
because she wished me to be present at the interview between the two
men. The Lanfear ladies had a touching belief in Archie's violence:
they thought him as terrible as a natural force. My own idea was
that if there were any broken bones they wouldn't be Dredge's; but I
was too curious as to the outcome not to be glad to offer my
services as moderator.

First, however, I wanted to hear one of the lectures; and I went the
next afternoon. The hall was jammed, and I saw, as soon as Dredge
appeared, what increased security and ease the interest of his
public had given him. He had been clear the year before, now he was
also eloquent. The lecture was a remarkable effort: you'll find the
gist of it in Chapter VII of "The Arrival of the Fittest." Archie
sat at my side in a white rage; he was too clever not to measure the
extent of the disaster. And I was almost as indignant as he when we
went to see Dredge the next day.

I saw at a glance that the latter suspected nothing; and it was
characteristic of him that he began by questioning me about my
finds, and only afterward turned to reproach Archie for having been
back a week without notifying him.

"You know I'm up to my neck in this job. Why in the world didn't you
hunt me up before this?"

The question was exasperating, and I could understand Archie's
stammer of wrath.

"Hunt you up? Hunt you up? What the deuce are you made of, to ask me
such a question instead of wondering why I'm here now?"

Dredge bent his slow calm scrutiny on his friend's quivering face;
then he turned to me.

"What's the matter?" he said simply.

"The matter?" shrieked Archie, his clenched fist hovering excitedly
above the desk by which he stood; but Dredge, with unwonted
quickness, caught the fist as it descended.

"Careful--I've got a _Kallima_ in that jar there." He pushed a chair
forward, and added quietly: "Sit down."

Archie, ignoring the gesture, towered pale and avenging in his
place; and Dredge, after a moment, took the chair himself.

"The matter?" Archie reiterated with rising passion. "Are you so
lost to all sense of decency and honour that you can put that
question in good faith? Don't you really _know_ what's the matter?"

Dredge smiled slowly. "There are so few things one _really knows_."

"Oh, damn your scientific hair-splitting! Don't you know you're
insulting my father's memory?"

Dredge stared again, turning his spectacles thoughtfully from one of
us to the other.

"Oh, that's it, is it? Then you'd better sit down. If you don't see
at once it'll take some time to make you."

Archie burst into an ironic laugh.

"I rather think it will!" he conceded.

"Sit down, Archie," I said, setting the example; and he obeyed, with
a gesture that made his consent a protest.

Dredge seemed to notice nothing beyond the fact that his visitors
were seated. He reached for his pipe, and filled it with the care
which the habit of delicate manipulations gave to all the motions of
his long, knotty hands.

"It's about the lectures?" he said.

Archie's answer was a deep scornful breath.

"You've only been back a week, so you've only heard one, I suppose?"

"It was not necessary to hear even that one. You must know the talk
they're making. If notoriety is what you're after--"

"Well, I'm not sorry to make a noise," said Dredge, putting a match
to his pipe.

Archie bounded in his chair. "There's no easier way of doing it than
to attack a man who can't answer you!"

Dredge raised a sobering hand. "Hold on. Perhaps you and I don't
mean the same thing. Tell me first what's in your mind."

The request steadied Archie, who turned on Dredge a countenance
really eloquent with filial indignation.

"It's an odd question for you to ask; it makes me wonder what's in
yours. Not much thought of my father, at any rate, or you couldn't
stand in his place and use the chance he's given you to push
yourself at his expense."

Dredge received this in silence, puffing slowly at his pipe.

"Is that the way it strikes you?" he asked at length.

"God! It's the way it would strike most men."

He turned to me. "You too?"

"I can see how Archie feels," I said.

"That I'm attacking his father's memory to glorify myself?"

"Well, not precisely: I think what he really feels is that, if your
convictions didn't permit you to continue his father's teaching, you
might perhaps have done better to sever your connection with the
Lanfear lectureship."

"Then you and he regard the Lanfear lectureship as having been
founded to perpetuate a dogma, not to try and get at the truth?"

"Certainly not," Archie broke in. "But there's a question of taste,
of delicacy, involved in the case that can't be decided on abstract
principles. We know as well as you that my father meant the
laboratory and the lectureship to serve the ends of science, at
whatever cost to his own special convictions; what we feel--and you
don't seem to--is that you're the last man to put them to that use;
and I don't want to remind you why."

A slight redness rose through Dredge's sallow skin. "You needn't,"
he said. "It's because he pulled me out of my hole, woke me up, made
me, shoved me off from the shore. Because he saved me ten or twenty
years of muddled effort, and put me where I am at an age when my
best working years are still ahead of me. Every one knows that's
what your father did for me, but I'm the only person who knows the
time and trouble that it took."

It was well said, and I glanced quickly at Archie, who was never
closed to generous emotions.

"Well, then--?" he said, flushing also.

"Well, then," Dredge continued, his voice deepening and losing its
nasal edge, "I had to pay him back, didn't I?"

The sudden drop flung Archie back on his prepared attitude of irony.
"It would be the natural inference--with most men."

"Just so. And I'm not so very different. I knew your father wanted a
successor--some one who'd try and tie up the loose ends. And I took
the lectureship with that object."

"And you're using it to tear the whole fabric to pieces!"

Dredge paused to re-light his pipe. "Looks that way," he conceded.
"This year anyhow."

"_ This year_--?" Archie gasped at him.

"Yes. When I took up the job I saw it just as your father left it.
Or rather, I didn't see any other way of going on with it. The
change came gradually, as I worked."

"Gradually? So that you had time to look round you, to know where
you were, to see you were fatally committed to undoing the work he
had done?"

"Oh, yes--I had time," Dredge conceded.

"And yet you kept the chair and went on with the course?"

Dredge refilled his pipe, and then turned in his seat so that he
looked squarely at Archie.

"What would your father have done in my place?" he asked.

"In your place--?"

"Yes: supposing he'd found out the things I've found out in the last
year or two. You'll see what they are, and how much they count, if
you'll run over the report of the lectures. If your father'd been
alive he might have come across the same facts just as easily."

There was a silence which Archie at last broke by saying: "But he
didn't, and you did. There's the difference."

"The difference? What difference? Would your father have suppressed
the facts if he'd found them? It's _you_ who insult his memory by
implying it! And if I'd brought them to him, would he have used his
hold over me to get me to suppress them?"

"Certainly not. But can't you see it's his death that makes the
difference? He's not here to defend his case."

Dredge laughed, but not unkindly. "My dear Archie, your father
wasn't one of the kind who bother to defend their case. Men like him
are the masters, not the servants, of their theories. They respect
an idea only as long as it's of use to them; when it's usefulness
ends they chuck it out. And that's what your father would have
done."

Archie reddened. "Don't you assume a good deal in taking it for
granted that he would have had to in this particular case?"

Dredge reflected. Yes: I was going too far. Each of us can only
answer for himself. But to my mind your father's theory is refuted."

"And you don't hesitate to be the man to do it?"

"Should I have been of any use if I had? And did your father ever
ask anything of me but to be of as much use as I could?"

It was Archie's turn to reflect. "No. That was what he always
wanted, of course."

"That's the way I've always felt. The first day he took me away from
East Lethe I knew the debt I was piling up against him, and I never
had any doubt as to how I'd pay it, or how he'd want it paid. He
didn't pick me out and train me for any object but to carry on the
light. Do you suppose he'd have wanted me to snuff it out because it
happened to light up a fact he didn't fancy? I'm using _his_ oil to
feed my torch with: yes, but it isn't really his torch or mine, or
his oil or mine: they belong to each of us till we drop and hand
them on."

Archie turned a sobered glance on him. "I see your point. But if the
job had to be done I don't see that you need have done it from his
chair."

"There's where we differ. If I did it at all I had to do it in the
best way, and with all the authority his backing gave me. If I owe
your father anything, I owe him that. It would have made him sick to
see the job badly done. And don't you see that the way to honour
him, and show what he's done for science, was to spare no advantage
in my attack on him--that I'm proving the strength of his position
by the desperateness of my assault?" Dredge paused and squared his
lounging shoulders. "After all," he added, "he's not down yet, and
if I leave him standing I guess it'll be some time before anybody
else cares to tackle him."

There was a silence between the two men; then Dredge continued in a
lighter tone: "There's one thing, though, that we're both in danger
of forgetting: and that is how little, in the long run, it all
counts either way." He smiled a little at Archie's outraged gesture.
"The most we can any of us do--even by such a magnificent effort as
your father's--is to turn the great marching army a hair's breadth
nearer what seems to us the right direction; if one of us drops out,
here and there, the loss of headway's hardly perceptible. And that's
what I'm coming to now."

He rose from his seat, and walked across to the hearth; then,
cautiously resting his shoulder-blades against the mantel-shelf
jammed with miscellaneous specimens, he bent his musing spectacles
on Archie.

"Your father would have understood why I've done, what I'm doing;
but that's no reason why the rest of you should. And I rather think
it's the rest of you who've suffered most from me. He always knew
what I was _there for_, and that must have been some comfort even
when I was most in the way; but I was just an ordinary nuisance to
you and your mother and Mabel. You were all too kind to let me see
it at the time, but I've seen it since, and it makes me feel that,
after all, the settling of this matter lies with you. If it hurts
you to have me go on with my examination of your father's theory,
I'm ready to drop the lectures to-morrow, and trust to the Lanfear
Laboratory to breed up a young chap who'll knock us both out in
time. You've only got to say the word."

There was a pause while Dredge turned and laid his extinguished pipe
carefully between a jar of embryo sea-urchins and a colony of
regenerating planarians.

Then Archie rose and held out his hand.

"No," he said simply; "go on."


FULL CIRCLE

I


GEOFFREY BETTON woke rather late--so late that the winter sunlight
sliding across his warm red carpet struck his eyes as he turned on
the pillow.

Strett, the valet, had been in, drawn the bath in the adjoining
dressing-room, placed the crystal and silver cigarette-box at his
side, put a match to the fire, and thrown open the windows to the
bright morning air. It brought in, on the glitter of sun, all the
shrill crisp morning noises--those piercing notes of the American
thoroughfare that seem to take a sharper vibration from the
clearness of the medium through which they pass.

Betton raised himself languidly. That was the voice of Fifth Avenue
below his windows. He remembered that when he moved into his rooms
eighteen months before, the sound had been like music to him: the
complex orchestration to which the tune of his new life was set. Now
it filled him with horror and weariness, since it had become the
symbol of the hurry and noise of that new life. He had been far less
hurried in the old days when he had to be up by seven, and down at
the office sharp at nine. Now that he got up when he chose, and his
life had no fixed framework of duties, the hours hunted him like a
pack of blood-hounds.

He dropped back on his pillows with a groan. Yes--not a year ago
there had been a positively sensuous joy in getting out of bed,
feeling under his bare feet the softness of the sunlit carpet, and
entering the shining tiled sanctuary where his great porcelain bath
proffered its renovating flood. But then a year ago he could still
call up the horror of the communal plunge at his earlier lodgings:
the listening for other bathers, the dodging of shrouded ladies in
"crimping"-pins, the cold wait on the landing, the reluctant descent
into a blotchy tin bath, and the effort to identify one's soap and
nail-brush among the promiscuous implements of ablution. That memory
had faded now, and Betton saw only the dark hours to which his blue
and white temple of refreshment formed a kind of glittering
antechamber. For after his bath came his breakfast, and on the
breakfast-tray his letters. His letters!

He remembered--and _that_ memory had not faded!--the thrill with
which he had opened the first missive in a strange feminine hand:
the letter beginning: "I wonder if you'll mind an unknown reader's
telling you all that your book has been to her?"

_ Mind?_ Ye gods, he minded now! For more than a year after the
publication of "Diadems and Faggots" the letters, the inane
indiscriminate letters of condemnation, of criticism, of
interrogation, had poured in on him by every post. Hundreds of
unknown readers had told him with unsparing detail all that his book
had been to them. And the wonder of it was, when all was said and
done, that it had really been so little--that when their thick broth
of praise was strained through the author's anxious vanity there
remained to him so small a sediment of definite specific
understanding! No--it was always the same thing, over and over and
over again--the same vague gush of adjectives, the same incorrigible
tendency to estimate his effort according to each writer's personal
preferences, instead of regarding it as a work of art, a thing to be
measured by objective standards!

He smiled to think how little, at first, he had felt the vanity of
it all. He had found a savour even in the grosser evidences of
popularity: the advertisements of his book, the daily shower of
"clippings," the sense that, when he entered a restaurant or a
theatre, people nudged each other and said "That's Betton." Yes, the
publicity had been sweet to him--at first. He had been touched by
the sympathy of his fellow-men: had thought indulgently of the
world, as a better place than the failures and the dyspeptics would
acknowledge. And then his success began to submerge him: he gasped
under the thickening shower of letters. His admirers were really
unappeasable. And they wanted him to do such preposterous things--to
give lectures, to head movements, to be tendered receptions, to
speak at banquets, to address mothers, to plead for orphans, to go
up in balloons, to lead the struggle for sterilized milk. They
wanted his photograph for literary supplements, his autograph for
charity bazaars, his name on committees, literary, educational, and
social; above all, they wanted his opinion on everything: on
Christianity, Buddhism, tight lacing, the drug-habit, democratic
government, female suffrage and love. Perhaps the chief benefit of
this demand was his incidentally learning from it how few opinions
he really had: the only one that remained with him was a rooted
horror of all forms of correspondence. He had been unutterably
thankful when the letters began to fall off.

"Diadems and Faggots" was now two years old, and the moment was at
hand when its author might have counted on regaining the blessed
shelter of oblivion--if only he had not written another book! For it
was the worst part of his plight that his first success had goaded
him to the perpetration of this particular folly--that one of the
incentives (hideous thought!) to his new work had been the desire to
extend and perpetuate his popularity. And this very week the book
was to come out, and the letters, the cursed letters, would begin
again!

"In the first court was a deep well, of excellent workmanship,
compassed with carved pillars, which supported its leaden roof, and
though out of repair, was in being in the year of our Lord 1651.
A chapel stood in the same court, adjoining to the east watch-tower;
which in the reign of Henry VIII. was hung with cloth of arras,
of the history of Christ's passion; and a lamp of the value of seven
shillings was usually burnt before the altar there.

On the side of the court, towards the west watch-tower, was the
hall, covered with lead; and over the gate thereof were formerly
cut in stone the arms of Brotherton impaled with Bouchier, quartering
Louvain, supported with a lion and an eagle.

Divers other arms there were in the rest of the buildings, some cut
on stone and some on timber, to be seen in the year of our Lord
1651--as Bygods, Brothertons, Seagraves, Mowbrays, Howards, and St.

Edmund's, the king and martyr.

Between the hall and chancel, fronting the great castle gate, was
a large chamber, with several rooms, and a cloyster under it, pulled
down A.D. 1700; for which, when standing, in the reign of King Henry
VIII., there was one suit of hangings of the story of Hercules;
which are supposed to be those still remaining at the seat of Lord
Howard, of Walden.

"Out of the castle were three passages--one a postern, with an iron
gate, on the east side over a private bridge into the park, where
there were arbours, pleasant walks, and trees planted for profit
and delight.

Another passage was on the west side, leading to a dungeon, and
forth on to the mere, now filled up with mire and weeds.

But the largest passage and most used was, and is, that towards
the south and town; there being formerly a portcullis over that
gate, which was made in one of the strongest towers, and a drawbridge
without, defended by an half-moon of stone, about a man's height,
standing in the year 1657."

These splendid buildings within the walls have long since been demolished,
so that scarcely a vestige remains; but with their materials
a workhouse has been built for the poor. The only armorial bearings
traceable are three shields over the castle-gate.

Over the centre of the gate is a large one; the arms and quarterings
of John Howard IV., first Duke of Norfolk, who died in 1485; and
with lions for supporters.

Crest--a lion passant-guardant.

1. A bend between six cross crosslets, for ... Howard.

2. Three lions passant-guardant in pale--England, for ...

Brotherten.

3. Checky ... Warren.

4. A lion rampant ... Mowbray.

5. A lion rampant crowned ... Seagrave.

6. Semé de cross crosslets fitchy, and a lion rampant, double queue
... Broes, or Bruce.

All within the garter.

On the west side, a shield, quarterly--1. Howard--2.
Brotherton--3. Mowbray--4. Seagrave.

On the east side, quarterly--1. Brotherton--2. Warren--3.
Seagrave--4. Broes.

This venerable and majestic remain of antiquity, when viewed at a
distance, has certainly more the appearance of a castle than the
ruins of one, the outward walls being almost entire, and presenting
nearly the same appearance they did thirty years ago.

Betton, full
of compunction, would gladly have advanced the sum himself; but he
was hard up too, and could only swear inwardly: "I'll write to
Apthorn." Then he glanced again at the manuscript, and reflected:
"No--there are things in it that need explaining. I'd better see
him."

Once he went so far as to telephone Apthorn, but the publisher was
out. Then he finally and completely forgot.

One Sunday he went out of town, and on his return, rummaging among
the papers on his desk, he missed "The Lifted Lamp," which had been
gathering dust there for half a year. What the deuce could have
become of it? Betton spent a feverish hour in vainly increasing the
disorder of his documents, and then bethought himself of calling the
maid-servant, who first indignantly denied having touched anything
("I can see that's true from the dust," Betton scathingly
interjected), and then mentioned with hauteur that a young lady had
called in his absence and asked to be allowed to get a book.

"A lady? Did you let her come up?"

"She said somebody'd sent her."

Vyse, of course--Vyse had sent her for his manuscript! He was always
mixed up with some woman, and it was just like him to send the girl
of the moment to Betton's lodgings, with instructions to force the
door in his absence. Vyse had never been remarkable for delicacy.
Betton, furious, glanced over his table to see if any of his own
effects were missing--one couldn't tell, with the company Vyse
kept!--and then dismissed the matter from his mind, with a vague
sense of magnanimity in doing so. He felt himself exonerated by
Vyse's conduct.

The sense of magnanimity was still uppermost when the valet opened
the door to announce "Mr. Vyse," and Betton, a moment later, crossed
the threshold of his pleasant library.

His first thought was that the man facing him from the hearth-rug
was the very Duncan Vyse of old: small, starved, bleached-looking,
with the same sidelong movements, the same queer air of anaemic
truculence. Only he had grown shabbier, and bald.

Betton held out a hospitable hand.

"This is a good surprise! Glad you looked me up, my dear fellow."

Vyse's palm was damp and bony: he had always had a disagreeable
hand.

"You got my note? You know what I've come for?" he said.

"About the secretaryship? (Sit down.) Is that really serious?"

Betton lowered himself luxuriously into one of his vast Maple
arm-chairs. He had grown stouter in the last year, and the cushion
behind him fitted comfortably into the crease of his nape. As he
leaned back he caught sight of his image in the mirror between the
windows, and reflected uneasily that Vyse would not find _him_
unchanged.

"Serious?" Vyse rejoined. "Why not? Aren't _you?_"

"Oh, perfectly." Betton laughed apologetically. "Only--well, the
fact is, you may not understand what rubbish a secretary of mine
would have to deal with. In advertising for one I never imagined--I
didn't aspire to any one above the ordinary hack."

"I'm the ordinary hack," said Vyse drily.

Betton's affable gesture protested. "My dear fellow--. You see it's
not business--what I'm in now," he continued with a laugh.

Vyse's thin lips seemed to form a noiseless "_ Isn't_ it?" which
they instantly transposed into the audibly reply: "I inferred from
your advertisement that you want some one to relieve you in your
literary work. Dictation, short-hand--that kind of thing?"

"Well, no: not that either. I type my own things. What I'm looking
for is somebody who won't be above tackling my correspondence."

Vyse looked slightly surprised. "I should be glad of the job," he
then said.

Betton began to feel a vague embarrassment. He had supposed that
such a proposal would be instantly rejected. "It would be only for
an hour or two a day--if you're doing any writing of your own?" he
threw out interrogatively.

"No. I've given all that up. I'm in an office now--business. But it
doesn't take all my time, or pay enough to keep me alive."

"In that case, my dear fellow--if you could come every morning; but
it's mostly awful bosh, you know," Betton again broke off, with
growing awkwardness.

Vyse glanced at him humorously. "What you want me to write?"

"Well, that depends--" Betton sketched the obligatory smile. "But I
was thinking of the letters you'll have to answer. Letters about my
books, you know--I've another one appearing next week. And I want to
be beforehand now--dam the flood before it swamps me. Have you any
idea of the deluge of stuff that people write to a successful
novelist?"

As Betton spoke, he saw a tinge of red on Vyse's thin cheek, and his
own reflected it in a richer glow of shame. "I mean--I mean--" he
stammered helplessly.

"No, I haven't," said Vyse; "but it will be awfully jolly finding
out."

There was a pause, groping and desperate on Betton's part,
sardonically calm on his visitor's.

"You--you've given up writing altogether?" Betton continued.

"Yes; we've changed places, as it were." Vyse paused. "But about
these letters--you dictate the answers?"

"Lord, no! That's the reason why I said I wanted somebody--er--well
used to writing. I don't want to have anything to do with them--not
a thing! You'll have to answer them as if they were written to
_you_--" Betton pulled himself up again, and rising in confusion
jerked open one of the drawers of his writing-table.

"Here--this kind of rubbish," he said, tossing a packet of letters
onto Vyse's knee.

"Oh--you keep them, do you?" said Vyse simply.

"I--well--some of them; a few of the funniest only."

Vyse slipped off the band and began to open the letters. While he
was glancing over them Betton again caught his own reflection in the
glass, and asked himself what impression he had made on his visitor.
It occurred to him for the first time that his high-coloured
well-fed person presented the image of commercial rather than of
intellectual achievement. He did not look like his own idea of the
author of "Diadems and Faggots"--and he wondered why.

Vyse laid the letters aside. "I think I can do it--if you'll give me
a notion of the tone I'm to take."

"The tone?"

"Yes--that is, if I'm to sign your name."

"Oh, of course: I expect you to sign for me. As for the tone, say
just what you'd--well, say all you can without encouraging them to
answer."

Vyse rose from his seat. "I could submit a few specimens," he
suggested.

"Oh, as to that--you always wrote better than I do," said Betton
handsomely.

"I've never had this kind of thing to write. When do you wish me to
begin?" Vyse enquired, ignoring the tribute.

"The book's out on Monday. The deluge will begin about three days
after. Will you turn up on Thursday at this hour?" Betton held his
hand out with real heartiness. "It was great luck for me, your
striking that advertisement. Don't be too harsh with my
correspondents--I owe them something for having brought us
together."


II


THE deluge began punctually on the Thursday, and Vyse, arriving as
punctually, had an impressive pile of letters to attack. Betton, on
his way to the Park for a ride, came into the library, smoking the
cigarette of indolence, to look over his secretary's shoulder.

"How many of 'em? Twenty? Good Lord! It's going to be worse than
'Diadems.' I've just had my first quiet breakfast in two years--time
to read the papers and loaf. How I used to dread the sight of my
letter-box! Now I sha'n't know I have one."

He leaned over Vyse's chair, and the secretary handed him a letter.

"Here's rather an exceptional one--lady, evidently. I thought you
might want to answer it yourself--"

"Exceptional?" Betton ran over the mauve pages and tossed them down.
"Why, my dear man, I get hundreds like that. You'll have to be
pretty short with her, or she'll send her photograph."

He clapped Vyse on the shoulder and turned away, humming a tune.
"Stay to luncheon," he called back gaily from the threshold.

After luncheon Vyse insisted on showing a few of his answers to the
first batch of letters. "If I've struck the note I won't bother you
again," he urged; and Betton groaningly consented.

"My dear fellow, they're beautiful--too beautiful. I'll be let in
for a correspondence with every one of these people."

Vyse, at this, meditated for a while above a blank sheet. "All
right--how's this?" he said, after another interval of rapid writing.

Betton glanced over the page. "By George--by George! Won't she _see_
it?" he exulted, between fear and rapture.

"It's wonderful how little people see," said Vyse reassuringly.

The letters continued to pour in for several weeks after the
appearance of "Abundance." For five or six blissful days Betton did
not even have his mail brought to him, trusting to Vyse to single
out his personal correspondence, and to deal with the rest according
to their agreement. During those days he luxuriated in a sense of
wild and lawless freedom; then, gradually, he began to feel the need
of fresh restraints to break, and learned that the zest of liberty
lies in the escape from specific obligations. At first he was
conscious only of a vague hunger, but in time the craving resolved
into a shame-faced desire to see his letters.

"After all, I hated them only because I had to answer them"; and he
told Vyse carelessly that he wished all his letters submitted to him
before the secretary answered them.

At first he pushed aside those beginning: "I have just laid down
'Abundance' after a third reading," or: "Every day for the last
month I have been telephoning my bookseller to know when your novel
would be out." But little by little the freshness of his interest
revived, and even this stereotyped homage began to arrest his eye.
At last a day came when he read all the letters, from the first word
to the last, as he had done when "Diadems and Faggots" appeared. It
was really a pleasure to read them, now that he was relieved of the
burden of replying: his new relation to his correspondents had the
glow of a love-affair unchilled by the contingency of marriage.

One day it struck him that the letters were coming in more slowly
and in smaller numbers. Certainly there had been more of a rush when
"Diadems and Faggots" came out. Betton began to wonder if Vyse were
exercising an unauthorized discrimination, and keeping back the
communications he deemed least important. This sudden conjecture
carried the novelist straight to his library, where he found Vyse
bending over the writing-table with his usual inscrutable pale
smile. But once there, Betton hardly knew how to frame his question,
and blundered into an enquiry for a missing invitation.

"There's a note--a personal note--I ought to have had this morning.
Sure you haven't kept it back by mistake among the others?"

Vyse laid down his pen. "The others? But I never keep back any."

Betton had foreseen the answer. "Not even the worst twaddle about my
book?" he suggested lightly, pushing the papers about.

"Nothing. I understood you wanted to go over them all first."

"Well, perhaps it's safer," Betton conceded, as if the idea were new
to him. With an embarrassed hand he continued to turn over the
letters at Vyse's elbow.

"Those are yesterday's," said the secretary; "here are to-day's," he
added, pointing to a meagre trio.

"H'm--only these?" Betton took them and looked them over
lingeringly. "I don't see what the deuce that chap means about the
first part of 'Abundance' 'certainly justifying the title'--do you?"

Vyse was silent, and the novelist continued irritably: "Damned
cheek, his writing, if he doesn't like the book. Who cares what he
thinks about it, anyhow?"

And his morning ride was embittered by the discovery that it was
unexpectedly disagreeable to have Vyse read any letters which did
not express unqualified praise of his books. He began to fancy there
was a latent rancour, a kind of baffled sneer, under Vyse's manner;
and he decided to return to the practice of having his mail brought
straight to his room. In that way he could edit the letters before
his secretary saw them.

Vyse made no comment on the change, and Betton was reduced to
wondering whether his imperturbable composure were the mask of
complete indifference or of a watchful jealousy. The latter view
being more agreeable to his employer's self-esteem, the next step
was to conclude that Vyse had not forgotten the episode of "The
Lifted Lamp," and would naturally take a vindictive joy in any
unfavourable judgments passed on his rival's work. This did not
simplify the situation, for there was no denying that unfavourable
criticisms preponderated in Betton's correspondence. "Abundance" was
neither meeting with the unrestricted welcome of "Diadems and
Faggots," nor enjoying the alternative of an animated controversy:
it was simply found dull, and its readers said so in language not
too tactfully tempered by regretful comparisons with its
predecessor. To withhold unfavourable comments from Vyse was,
therefore, to make it appear that correspondence about the book had
died out; and its author, mindful of his unguarded predictions,
found this even more embarrassing. The simplest solution would be to
get rid of Vyse; and to this end Betton began to address his
energies.

One evening, finding himself unexpectedly disengaged, he asked Vyse
to dine; it had occurred to him that, in the course of an
after-dinner chat, he might delicately hint his feeling that the
work he had offered his friend was unworthy so accomplished a hand.

Vyse surprised him by a momentary hesitation. "I may not have time
to dress."

Betton stared. "What's the odds? We'll dine here--and as late as you
like."

Vyse thanked him, and appeared, punctually at eight, in all the
shabbiness of his daily wear. He looked paler and more shyly
truculent than usual, and Betton, from the height of his florid
stature, said to himself, with the sudden professional instinct for
"type": "He might be an agent of something--a chap who carries
deadly secrets."

Vyse, it was to appear, did carry a deadly secret; but one less
perilous to society than to himself. He was simply
poor--inexcusably, irremediably poor. Everything failed him, had
always failed him: whatever he put his hand to went to bits.

This was the confession that, reluctantly, yet with a kind of
white-lipped bravado, he flung at Betton in answer to the latter's
tentative suggestion that, really, the letter-answering job wasn't
worth bothering him with--a thing that any type-writer could do.

"If you mean you're paying me more than it's worth, I'll take less,"
Vyse rushed out after a pause.

"Oh, my dear fellow--" Betton protested, flushing.

"What _do_ you mean, then? Don't I answer the letters as you want
them answered?"

Betton anxiously stroked his silken ankle. "You do it beautifully,
too beautifully. I mean what I say: the work's not worthy of you.
I'm ashamed to ask you--"

"Oh, hang shame," Vyse interrupted. "Do you know why I said I
shouldn't have time to dress to-night? Because I haven't any evening
clothes. As a matter of fact, I haven't much but the clothes I stand
in. One thing after another's gone against me; all the infernal
ingenuities of chance. It's been a slow Chinese torture, the kind
where they keep you alive to have more fun killing you." He
straightened himself with a sudden blush. "Oh, I'm all right
now--getting on capitally. But I'm still walking rather a narrow
plank; and if I do your work well enough--if I take your idea--"

Betton stared into the fire without answering. He knew next to
nothing of Vyse's history, of the mischance or mis-management that
had brought him, with his brains and his training, to so unlikely a
pass. But a pang of compunction shot through him as he remembered
the manuscript of "The Lifted Lamp" gathering dust on his table for
half a year.

"Not that it would have made any earthly difference--since he's
evidently never been able to get the thing published." But this
reflection did not wholly console Betton, and he found it
impossible, at the moment, to tell Vyse that his services were not
needed.


III


DURING the ensuing weeks the letters grew fewer and fewer, and
Betton foresaw the approach of the fatal day when his secretary, in
common decency, would have to say: "I can't draw my pay for doing
nothing."

What a triumph for Vyse!

The thought was intolerable, and Betton cursed his weakness in not
having dismissed the fellow before such a possibility arose.

"If I tell him I've no use for him now, he'll see straight through
it, of course;--and then, hang it, he looks so poor!"

This consideration came after the other, but Betton, in rearranging
them, put it first, because he thought it looked better there, and
also because he immediately perceived its value in justifying a plan
of action that was beginning to take shape in his mind.

"Poor devil, I'm damned if I don't do it for him!" said Betton,
sitting down at his desk.

Three or four days later he sent word to Vyse that he didn't care to
go over the letters any longer, and that they would once more be
carried directly to the library.

The next time he lounged in, on his way to his morning ride, he
found his secretary's pen in active motion.

"A lot to-day," Vyse told him cheerfully.

His tone irritated Betton: it had the inane optimism of the
physician reassuring a discouraged patient.

"Oh, Lord--I thought it was almost over," groaned the novelist.

"No: they've just got their second wind. Here's one from a Chicago
publisher--never heard the name--offering you thirty per cent. on
your next novel, with an advance royalty of twenty thousand. And
here's a chap who wants to syndicate it for a bunch of Sunday
papers: big offer, too. That's from Ann Arbor. And this--oh, _this_
one's funny!"

He held up a small scented sheet to Betton, who made no movement to
receive it.

"Funny? Why's it funny?" he growled.

"Well, it's from a girl--a lady--and she thinks she's the only
person who understands 'Abundance'--has the clue to it. Says she's
never seen a book so misrepresented by the critics--"

"Ha, ha! That _is_ good!" Betton agreed with too loud a laugh.

"This one's from a lady, too--married woman. Says she's
misunderstood, and would like to correspond."

"Oh, Lord," said Betton.--"What are you looking at?" he added
sharply, as Vyse continued to bend his blinking gaze on the letters.

"I was only thinking I'd never seen such short letters from women.
Neither one fills the first page."

"Well, what of that?" queried Betton.

Vyse reflected. "I'd like to meet a woman like that," he said
wearily; and Betton laughed again.

The letters continued to pour in, and there could be no farther
question of dispensing with Vyse's services. But one morning, about
three weeks later, the latter asked for a word with his employer,
and Betton, on entering the library, found his secretary with half a
dozen documents spread out before him.

"What's up?" queried Betton, with a touch of impatience.

Vyse was attentively scanning the outspread letters.

"I don't know: can't make out." His voice had a faint note of
embarrassment. "Do you remember a note signed _Hester Macklin_ that
came three or four weeks ago? Married--misunderstood--Western army
post--wanted to correspond?"

Betton seemed to grope among his memories; then he assented vaguely.

"A short note," Vyse went on: "the whole story in half a page. The
shortness struck me so much--and the directness--that I wrote her:
wrote in my own name, I mean."

"In your own name?" Betton stood amazed; then he broke into a groan.

"Good Lord, Vyse--you're incorrigible!"

The secretary pulled his thin moustache with a nervous laugh. "If
you mean I'm an ass, you're right. Look here." He held out an
envelope stamped with the words: "Dead Letter Office." "My effusion
has come back to me marked 'unknown.' There's no such person at the
address she gave you."

Betton seemed for an instant to share his secretary's embarrassment;
then he burst into an uproarious laugh.

"Hoax, was it? That's rough on you, old fellow!"

Vyse shrugged his shoulders. "Yes; but the interesting question
is--why on earth didn't _your_ answer come back, too?"

"My answer?"

"The official one--the one I wrote in your name. If she's unknown,
what's become of _that?_"

Betton stared at him with eyes wrinkled by amusement. "Perhaps she
hadn't disappeared then."

Vyse disregarded the conjecture. "Look here--I believe _all_ these
letters are a hoax," he broke out.

Betton stared at him with a face that turned slowly red and angry.
"What are you talking about? All what letters?"

"These I've spread out here: I've been comparing them. And I believe
they're all written by one man."

Burton's redness turned to a purple that made his ruddy moustache
seem pale. SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1832. [PRICE 2d.

* * * * *

[Illustration]
FRAMLINGHAM CASTLE.

Castle of Ancient Days! in times long gone Thy lofty halls in regal
splendour shone!

Thou stoodst a monument of strength sublime, A Giant, laughing at
the threats of Time!

Strange scenes have passed within thy walls! and strange Has been thy
fate through many a chance and change!

Thy Towers have heard the war-cry, and the shout Of friends within,
and answering foes without, Have rung to sounds of revelry, while
mirth Held her carousal, when the sons of earth Sported with joy,
till even _he_ could bring No fresh delight upon his drooping wing!

JAMES BIRD.

(_From a Correspondent_.)

This Castle is said to have been founded by Redwald, or Redowald,
one of the most powerful kings of the East Angles, between A.D. 599
and 624.

It belonged to St. Edmund, one of the Saxon monarchs of East
Anglia, who, upon the invasion of the Danes, fled from Dunwich, or
Thetford, to this castle; from which being driven, and being overtaken
at _Hegilsdon_, (now Hoxne, a distance of twelve miles from
Framlingham,) he was cruelly put to death, being bound to a tree
and shot with arrows, A.D. 870.

His body, after many years, was removed to a place called
_Bederics-gueord_, now St.

Edmund's Bury. The castle remained in the hands of the Danes
fifty years, when they were brought under the obedience of the
Saxons.

William the Conqueror and his son Rufus retained the Castle
in their own possession; but the third son of William, Henry I.,
granted it, with the Manor of Framlingham, to Roger Bigod.

--The castle continued in this family till Roger Bigod, the last
of the race, and a man more turbulent than any of his predecessors,
was compelled to resign it to King Edward I.; Edward II.
gave it to his half-brother, Thomas Plantagenet, surnamed De
Brotherton; from whom it descended to Thomas de Mowbray, twelfth
Baron Mowbray, created Duke of Norfolk 29th of September, 1397.

From the Mowbrays it descended to the Howards, Dukes of Norfolk, Sir
Robert Howard having married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Mowbray,
first Duke of Norfolk.

His son, John Howard, was created Earl Marshal and Duke of Norfolk,
28th of June, 1483.

He was slain at Bosworth Field, 1485; and his son, Thomas, Earl of
Surrey, being attainted, the castle fell into the hands of King
Henry VII., who granted it to John de Vere, thirteenth Earl of
Oxford, from whom it again returned to the Howards.

Thomas Howard, third Duke of Norfolk, being attainted, (38 Henry
VIII.

1546,) it was seized by the king, who dying the same year, his
successor, Edward VI., granted it to his sister, the Princess,
afterwards Queen Mary. King James I. granted it to Thomas Howard,
first Baron Howard de Walden, youngest son of Thomas, fourth
Duke of Norfolk, created Earl of Suffolk 21st of July, 1603; but his
lordship making Audley Inn his seat, the castle fell into
decay, and his son, Theophilus, second Earl of Suffolk, sold it
in 1635, with the domains, to Sir Robert Hitcham, knight, senior
sergeant to James I.; who by his will, dated 10th of August, 1636,
bequeathed it to the master and scholars of Pembroke College, in
trust for certain charitable uses; the advowson of the living, the
castle and the manor, he bequeathed to the college for its own use;
since which time the castle has remained in a dismantled state.

Loder, in his _History of Framlingham_, thus describes the former
state of the structure: "This castle, containing an acre, a rood,
and eleven perches of land, within the walls now standing, but
anciently a much larger quantity before the walls enclosing the
same were demolished, was in former ages very fair and beautiful,
standing within a park (long since disparked) on the north side of
the town; fortified with a double ditch, high banks, rampires, and
stone walls 44 feet high and 8 feet thick; in these walls were
thirteen towers, 14 feet higher than the walls, built four-square--whereof
two were watch-towers, one looking towards the east and the other
towards the west: and the rooms within the castle were very commodious
and necessary, capable to receive and contain abundance of people.

"Had it done last year, thanks." Betton glanced away from Vyse's
face. It was piteous, how he needed the job!

"I see. ... Of course this is just a temporary lull in the
letters. They'll begin again--as they did before. The people who
read carefully read slowly--you haven't heard yet what _they_
think."

Betton felt a rush of puerile joy at the suggestion. Actually, he
hadn't thought of that!

"There _was_ a big second crop after 'Diadems and Faggots,'" he
mused aloud.

"Of course. Wait and see," said Vyse confidently.

The letters in fact began again--more gradually and in smaller
numbers. But their quality was different, as Vyse had predicted. And
in two cases Betton's correspondents, not content to compress into
one rapid communication the thoughts inspired by his work, developed
their views in a succession of really remarkable letters. One of the
writers was a professor in a Western college; the other was a girl
in Florida. In their language, their point of view, their reasons
for appreciating "Abundance," they differed almost diametrically;
but this only made the unanimity of their approval the more
striking. The rush of correspondence evoked by Betton's earlier
novel had produced nothing so personal, so exceptional as these
communications. He had gulped the praise of "Diadems and Faggots" as
undiscriminatingly as it was offered; now he knew for the first time
the subtler pleasures of the palate. He tried to feign indifference,
even to himself; and to Vyse he made no sign. But gradually he felt
a desire to know what his secretary thought of the letters, and,
above all, what he was saying in reply to them. And he resented
acutely the possibility of Vyse's starting one of his clandestine
correspondences with the girl in Florida. Vyse's notorious lack of
delicacy had never been more vividly present to Betton's
imagination; and he made up his mind to answer the letters himself.

He would keep Vyse on, of course: there were other communications
that the secretary could attend to. And, if necessary, Betton would
invent an occupation: he cursed his stupidity in having betrayed the
fact that his books were already catalogued.

Vyse showed no surprise when Betton announced his intention of
dealing personally with the two correspondents who showed so
flattering a reluctance to take their leave. But Betton immediately
read a criticism in his lack of comment, and put forth, on a note of
challenge: "After all, one must be decent!"

Vyse looked at him with an evanescent smile. "You'll have to explain
that you didn't write the first answers."

Betton halted. "Well--I--I more or less dictated them, didn't I?"

"Oh, virtually, they're yours, of course."

"You think I can put it that way?"

"Why not?" The secretary absently drew an arabesque on the
blotting-pad. "Of course they'll keep it up longer if you write
yourself," he suggested.

Betton blushed, but faced the issue. "Hang it all, I sha'n't be
sorry. They interest me. They're remarkable letters." And Vyse,
without observation, returned to his writings.

The spring, that year, was delicious to Betton. His college
professor continued to address him tersely but cogently at fixed
intervals, and twice a week eight serried pages came from Florida.
There were other letters, too; he had the solace of feeling that at
last "Abundance" was making its way, was reaching the people who, as
Vyse said, read slowly because they read intelligently. But welcome
as were all these proofs of his restored authority they were but the
background of his happiness. His life revolved for the moment about
the personality of his two chief correspondents. The professor's
letters satisfied his craving for intellectual recognition, and the
satisfaction he felt in them proved how completely he had lost faith
in himself. He blushed to think that his opinion of his work had
been swayed by the shallow judgments of a public whose taste he
despised. Was it possible that he had allowed himself to think less
well of "Abundance" because it was not to the taste of the average
novel-reader? Such false humility was less excusable than the
crudest appetite for praise: it was ridiculous to try to do
conscientious work if one's self-esteem were at the mercy of popular
judgments. All this the professor's letters delicately and
indirectly conveyed to Betton, with the result that the author of
"Abundance" began to recognize in it the ripest flower of his
genius.

But if the professor understood his book, the girl in Florida
understood _him;_ and Betton was fully alive to the superior
qualities of discernment which this process implied. For his lovely
correspondent his novel was but the starting-point, the pretext of
her discourse: he himself was her real object, and he had the
delicious sense, as their exchange of thoughts proceeded, that she
was interested in "Abundance" because of its author, rather than in
the author because of his book. Of course she laid stress on the
fact that his ideas were the object of her contemplation; but
Betton's agreeable person had permitted him some insight into the
incorrigible subjectiveness of female judgments, and he was
pleasantly aware, from the lady's tone, that she guessed him to be
neither old nor ridiculous. And suddenly he wrote to ask if he might
see her. ...

The answer was long in coming. Betton fumed at the delay, watched,
wondered, fretted; then he received the one word "Impossible."

He wrote back more urgently, and awaited the reply with increasing
eagerness. A certain shyness had kept him from once more modifying
the instructions regarding his mail, and Strett still carried the
letters directly to Vyse. The hour when he knew they were passing
under the latter's eyes was now becoming intolerable to Betton, and
it was a profound relief when the secretary, suddenly advised of his
father's illness, asked permission to absent himself for a
fortnight.

Vyse departed just after Betton had despatched to Florida his second
missive of entreaty, and for ten days he tasted the furtive joy of a
first perusal of his letters. The answer from Florida was not among
them; but Betton said to himself "She's thinking it over," and
delay, in that light, seemed favourable. So charming, in fact, was
this phase of sentimental suspense that he felt a start of
resentment when a telegram apprised him one morning that Vyse would
return to his post that day.

Betton had slept later than usual, and, springing out of bed with
the telegram in his hand, he learned from the clock that his
secretary was due in half an hour. He reflected that the morning's
mail must long since be in; and, too impatient to wait for its
appearance with his breakfast-tray, he threw on a dressing-gown and
went to the library. There lay the letters, half a dozen of them:
but his eye flew to one envelope, and as he tore it open a warm wave
rocked his heart.

The letter was dated a few days after its writer must have received
his own: it had all the qualities of grace and insight to which his
unknown friend had accustomed him, but it contained no allusion,
however indirect, to the special purport of his appeal. Even a
vanity less ingenious than Betton's might have read in the lady's
silence one of the most familiar motions of consent; but the smile
provoked by this inference faded as he turned to his other letters.
For the uppermost bore the superscription "Dead Letter Office," and
the document that fell from it was his own last letter from Florida.

Betton studied the ironic "Unknown" for an appreciable space of
time; then he broke into a laugh. He had suddenly recalled Vyse's
similar experience with "Hester Macklin," and the light he was able
to throw on that obscure episode was searching enough to penetrate
all the dark corners of his own adventure. He felt a rush of heat to
the ears; catching sight of himself in the glass, he saw a red
ridiculous congested countenance, and dropped into a chair to hide
it between flushed fists. He was roused by the opening of the door,
and Vyse appeared on the threshold.

"Oh, I beg pardon--you're ill?" said the secretary.

Betton's only answer was an inarticulate murmur of derision; then he
pushed forward the letter with the imprint of the Dead Letter
Office.

"Look at that," he jeered.

Vyse peered at the envelope, and turned it over slowly in his hands.
Betton's eyes, fixed on him, saw his face decompose like a substance
touched by some powerful acid. He clung to the envelope as if to
gain time.

"It's from the young lady you've been writing to at Swazee Springs?"
he asked at length.

"It's from the young lady I've been writing to at Swazee Springs."

"Well--I suppose she's gone away," continued Vyse, rebuilding his
countenance rapidly.

"Yes; and in a community numbering perhaps a hundred and
seventy-five souls, including the dogs and chickens, the local
post-office is so ignorant of her movements that my letter has to be
sent to the Dead Letter Office."

Vyse meditated on this; then he laughed in turn. "After all, the
same thing happened to me--with 'Hester Macklin,' I mean," he
recalled sheepishly.

"Just so," said Betton, bringing down his clenched fist on the
table. "_ Just so_," he repeated, in italics.

He caught his secretary's glance, and held it with his own for a
moment. Then he dropped it as, in pity, one releases something
scared and squirming.

"The very day my letter was returned from Swazee Springs she wrote
me this from there," he said, holding up the last Florida missive.

"Ha! That's funny," said Vyse, with a damp forehead.

"Yes, it's funny; it's funny," said Betton. He leaned back, his
hands in his pockets, staring up at the ceiling, and noticing a
crack in the cornice. Vyse, at the corner of the writing-table,
waited.

"Shall I get to work?" he began, after a silence measurable by
minutes. Betton's gaze descended from the cornice.

"I've got your seat, haven't I?" he said, rising and moving away
from the table.

Vyse, with a quick gleam of relief, slipped into the vacant chair,
and began to stir about vaguely among the papers.

"How's your father?" Betton asked from the hearth.

"Oh, better--better, thank you. He'll pull out of it."

"But you had a sharp scare for a day or two?"

"Yes--it was touch and go when I got there."

Another pause, while Vyse began to classify the letters.

"And I suppose," Betton continued in a steady tone, "your anxiety
made you forget your usual precautions--whatever they were--about
this Florida correspondence, and before you'd had time to prevent it
the Swazee post-office blundered?"

Vyse lifted his head with a quick movement. "What do you mean?" he
asked, pushing his chair back.

"I mean that you saw I couldn't live without flattery, and that
you've been ladling it out to me to earn your keep."

Vyse sat motionless and shrunken, digging the blotting-pad with his
pen. "What on earth are you driving at?" he repeated.

"Though why the deuce," Betton continued in the same steady tone,
"you should need to do this kind of work when you've got such
faculties at your service--those letters were magnificent, my dear
fellow! Why in the world don't you write novels, instead of writing
to other people about them?"

Vyse straightened himself with an effort. "What are you talking
about, Betton? Why the devil do you think _I_ wrote those letters?"

Betton held back his answer, with a brooding face. "Because I wrote
'Hester Macklin's'--to myself!"

Vyse sat stock-still, without the least outcry of wonder. "Well--?"
he finally said, in a low tone.

"And because you found me out (you see, you can't even feign
surprise!)--because you saw through it at a glance, knew at once
that the letters were faked. And when you'd foolishly put me on my
guard by pointing out to me that they were a clumsy forgery, and had
then suddenly guessed that _I_ was the forger, you drew the natural
inference that I had to have popular approval, or at least had to
make _you_ think I had it. You saw that, to me, the worst thing
about the failure of the book was having _you_ know it was a
failure. And so you applied your superior--your immeasurably
superior--abilities to carrying on the humbug, and deceiving me as
I'd tried to deceive you. And you did it so successfully that I
don't see why the devil you haven't made your fortune writing
novels!"

Vyse remained silent, his head slightly bent under the mounting tide
of Betton's denunciation.

"The way you differentiated your people--characterised them--avoided
my stupid mistake of making the women's letters too short and
logical, of letting my different correspondents use the same
expressions: the amount of ingenuity and art you wasted on it! I
swear, Vyse, I'm sorry that damned post-office went back on you,"
Betton went on, piling up the waves of his irony.

But at this height they suddenly paused, drew back on themselves,
and began to recede before the spectacle of Vyse's pale distress.
Something warm and emotional in Betton's nature--a lurking
kindliness, perhaps, for any one who tried to soothe and smooth his
writhing ego--softened his eye as it rested on the drooping figure
of his secretary.

"Look here, Vyse--I'm not sorry--not altogether sorry this has
happened!" He moved slowly across the room, and laid a friendly palm
on Vyse's shoulder. "In a queer illogical way it evens up things, as
it were. I did you a shabby turn once, years ago--oh, out of sheer
carelessness, of course--about that novel of yours I promised to
give to Apthorn. If I _had_ given it, it might not have made any
difference--I'm not sure it wasn't too good for success--but anyhow,
I dare say you thought my personal influence might have helped you,
might at least have got you a quicker hearing. Perhaps you thought
it was because the thing _was_ so good that I kept it back, that I
felt some nasty jealousy of your superiority. I swear to you it
wasn't that--I clean forgot it. And one day when I came home it was
gone: you'd sent and taken it. And I've always thought since you
might have owed me a grudge--and not unjustly; so this ... this
business of the letters ... the sympathy you've shown ... for I
suppose it _is_ sympathy ... ?"

Vyse startled and checked him by a queer crackling laugh.

"It's _not_ sympathy?" broke in Betton, the moisture drying out of
his voice. He withdrew his hand from Vyse's shoulder. "What is it,
then? The joy of uncovering my nakedness? An eye for an eye? Is it
_that?_"

Vyse rose from his seat, and with a mechanical gesture swept into a
heap all the letters he had sorted.

"I'm stone broke, and wanted to keep my job--that's what it is," he
said wearily ...


THE LEGEND

I


ARTHUR BERNALD could never afterward recall just when the first
conjecture flashed on him: oddly enough, there was no record of it
in the agitated jottings of his diary. But, as it seemed to him in
retrospect, he had always felt that the queer man at the Wades' must
be John Pellerin, if only for the negative reason that he couldn't
imaginably be any one else. It was impossible, in the confused
pattern of the century's intellectual life, to fit the stranger in
anywhere, save in the big gap which, some five and twenty years
earlier, had been left by Pellerin's unaccountable disappearance;
and conversely, such a man as the Wades' visitor couldn't have lived
for sixty years without filling, somewhere in space, a nearly
equivalent void.

At all events, it was certainly not to Doctor Wade or to his mother
that Bernald owed the hint: the good unconscious Wades, one of whose
chief charms in the young man's eyes was that they remained so
robustly untainted by Pellerinism, in spite of the fact that Doctor
Wade's younger brother, Howland, was among its most impudently
flourishing high-priests.

The incident had begun by Bernald's running across Doctor Robert
Wade one hot summer night at the University Club, and by Wade's
saying, in the tone of unprofessional laxity which the shadowy
stillness of the place invited: "I got hold of a queer fish at St.
Martin's the other day--case of heat-prostration picked up in
Central Park. When we'd patched him up I found he had nowhere to go,
and not a dollar in his pocket, and I sent him down to our place at
Portchester to re-build."

The opening roused his hearer's attention. Bob Wade had an odd
unformulated sense of values that Bernald had learned to trust.

"What sort of chap? Young or old?"

"Oh, every age--full of years, and yet with a lot left. He called
himself sixty on the books."

"Sixty's a good age for some kinds of living. And age is of course
purely subjective. How has he used his sixty years?"

"Well--part of them in educating himself, apparently. He's a
scholar--humanities, languages, and so forth."

"Oh--decayed gentleman," Bernald murmured, disappointed.

"Decayed? Not much!" cried the doctor with his accustomed
literalness. "I only mentioned that side of Winterman--his name's
Winterman--because it was the side my mother noticed first. I
suppose women generally do. But it's only a part--a small part. The
man's the big thing."

"Really big?"

"Well--there again. ... When I took him down to the country,
looking rather like a tramp from a 'Shelter,' with an untrimmed
beard, and a suit of reach-me-downs he'd slept round the Park in for
a week, I felt sure my mother'd carry the silver up to her room, and
send for the gardener's dog to sleep in the hall the first night.
But she didn't."

"I see. 'Women and children love him.' Oh, Wade!" Bernald groaned.

"Not a bit of it! You're out again. We don't love him, either of us.
But we _feel_ him--the air's charged with him. You'll see."

And Bernald agreed that he _would_ see, the following Sunday. Wade's
inarticulate attempts to characterize the stranger had struck his
friend. The human revelation had for Bernald a poignant and
ever-renewed interest, which his trade, as the dramatic critic of a
daily paper, had hitherto failed to discourage. And he knew that Bob
Wade, simple and undefiled by literature--Bernald's specific
affliction--had a free and personal way of judging men, and the
diviner's knack of reaching their hidden springs. During the days
that followed, the young doctor gave Bernald farther details about
John Winterman: details not of fact--for in that respect his
visitor's reticence was baffling--but of impression. It appeared
that Winterman, while lying insensible in the Park, had been robbed
of the few dollars he possessed; and on leaving the hospital, still
weak and half-blind, he had quite simply and unprotestingly accepted
the Wades' offer to give him shelter till such time as he should be
strong enough to go to work.

"But what's his work?" Bernald interjected. "Hasn't he at least told
you that?"

"Well, writing. Some kind of writing." Doctor Bob always became
vague and clumsy when he approached the confines of literature. "He
means to take it up again as soon as his eyes get right."

Bernald groaned. "Oh, Lord--that finishes him; and _me!_ He's
looking for a publisher, of course--he wants a 'favourable notice.'
I won't come!"

"He hasn't written a line for twenty years."

"A line of _what?_ What kind of literature can one keep corked up
for twenty years?"

Wade surprised him. "The real kind, I should say. But I don't know
Winterman's line," the doctor added. "He speaks of the things he
used to write merely as 'stuff that wouldn't sell.' He has a
wonderfully confidential way of _not_ telling one things. But he
says he'll have to do something for his living as soon as his eyes
are patched up, and that writing is the only trade he knows. The
queer thing is that he seems pretty sure of selling _now_. He even
talked of buying the bungalow of us, with an acre or two about it."

"The bungalow? What's that?"

"The studio down by the shore that we built for Howland when he
thought he meant to paint." (Howland Wade, as Bernald knew, had
experienced various "calls.") "Since he's taken to writing nobody's
been near it. I offered it to Winterman, and he camps there--cooks
his meals, does his own house-keeping, and never comes up to the
house except in the evenings, when he joins us on the verandah, in
the dark, and smokes while my mother knits."

"A discreet visitor, eh?"

"More than he need be. My mother actually wanted him to stay on in
the house--in her pink chintz room. Think of it! But he says houses
smother him. I take it he's lived for years in the open."

"In the open where?"

"I can't make out, except that it was somewhere in the East. 'East
of everything--beyond the day-spring. In places not on the map.'
That's the way he put it; and when I said: 'You've been an explorer,
then?' he smiled in his beard, and answered: 'Yes; that's it--an
explorer.' Yet he doesn't strike me as a man of action: hasn't the
hands or the eyes."

"What sort of hands and eyes has he?"

Wade reflected. His range of observation was not large, but within
its limits it was exact and could give an account of itself.

"He's worked a lot with his hands, but that's not what they were
made for. I should say they were extraordinarily delicate conductors
of sensation. And his eye--his eye too. He hasn't used it to
dominate people: he didn't care to. He simply looks through 'em all
like windows. Makes me feel like the fellows who think they're made
of glass. The original of the annexed Cut is a lithograph frontispiece
to _Framlingham_: a Narrative of _the Castle_--a poem of very
considerable merit, by Mr.

James Bird, of Yoxford: the introduction to which furnishes the
following impassioned apostrophe to Framlingham and its decaying
Castle:-- 
Heir of Antiquity!

--fair castled Town, Rare spot of beauty, grandeur, and renown,
Seat of East-Anglian kings!

--proud child of fame, Hallowed by time, illustrious Framlinghame!

I touch my lyre delighted, thus to bring To thee my heart's full
homage while I sing!
And thou, old Castle!--thy bold turrets high, Have shed their deep
enchantment on mine eye, Though years have changed thee, I have
gazed intent In silent joy, on tower and battlement, When all thy
time-worn glories met my sight; Thou have I felt such rapture, such
delight, That, had the splendour of thy days of yore Flashed on my
view, I had not loved thee more!

Scene of immortal deeds! thy walls have rung To pealing shouts from
many a warrior's tongue; When first thy founder, Redwald of the
spear, Manned thy high towers, defied his foemen near, When, girt
with strength, East-Anglia's king of old, The sainted Edmund, sought
thy sheltering hold, When the proud _Dane_, fierce Hinguar, in his
ire Besieged the king, and wrapped thy walls in fire, While Edmund
fled, but left thee with his name Linked, and for ever, to the chain
of fame:
Then wast thou great!

Wade, apparently apprehensive lest her son should have given
Bernald an exaggerated notion of their visitor's importance, had
hastened to qualify it before the latter appeared.

"He's not what you or Howland would call intellectual--"(Bernald
writhed at the coupling of the names)--"not in the least _literary;_
though he told Bob he used to write. I don't think, though, it could
have been what Howland would call writing." Mrs. Wade always
mentioned her younger son with a reverential drop of the voice. She
viewed literature much as she did Providence, as an inscrutably
mystery; and she spoke of Howland as a dedicated being, set apart to
perform secret rites within the veil of the sanctuary.

"I shouldn't say he had a quick mind," she continued, reverting
apologetically to Winterman. "Sometimes he hardly seems to follow
what we're saying. But he's got such sound ideas--when he does speak
he's never silly. And clever people sometimes _are_, don't you think
so?" Bernald groaned an unqualified assent. "And he's so capable.
The other day something went wrong with the kitchen range, just as I
was expecting some friends of Bob's for dinner; and do you know,
when Mr. Winterman heard we were in trouble, he came and took a
look, and knew at once what to do? I told him it was a dreadful pity
he wasn't married!"

Close on midnight, when the session on the verandah ended, and the
two young men were strolling down to the bungalow at Winterman's
side, Bernald's mind reverted to the image of the fertilizing cloud.
There was something brooding, pregnant, in the silent presence
beside him: he had, in place of any circumscribing impression of the
individual, a large hovering sense of manifold latent meanings. And
he felt a distinct thrill of relief when, half-way down the lawn,
Doctor Bob was checked by a voice that called him back to the
telephone.

"Now I'll be with him alone!" thought Bernald, with a throb like a
lover's.

In the low-ceilinged bungalow Winterman had to grope for the lamp on
his desk, and as its light struck up into his face Bernald's sense
of the rareness of his opportunity increased. He couldn't have said
why, for the face, with its ridged brows, its shabby greyish beard
and blunt Socratic nose, made no direct appeal to the eye. It seemed
rather like a stage on which remarkable things might be enacted,
like some shaggy moorland landscape dependent for form and
expression on the clouds rolling over it, and the bursts of light
between; and one of these flashed out in the smile with which
Winterman, as if in answer to his companion's thought, said simply,
as he turned to fill his pipe: "Now we'll talk."

So he'd known all along that they hadn't yet--and had guessed that,
with Bernald, one might!

The young man's glow of pleasure was so intense that it left him for
a moment unable to meet the challenge; and in that moment he felt
the brush of something winged and summoning. His spirit rose to it
with a rush; but just as he felt himself poised between the
ascending pinions, the door opened and Bob Wade plunged in.

"Too bad! I'm so sorry! It was from Howland, to say he can't come
to-morrow after all." The doctor panted out his news with honest
grief.

"I tried my best to pull it off for you; and my brother _wants_ to
come--he's keen to talk to you and see what he can do. But you see
he's so tremendously in demand. He'll try for another Sunday later
on."

Winterman nodded with a whimsical gesture. "Oh, he'll find me here.
I shall work my time out slowly." He pointed to the scattered sheets
on the kitchen table which formed his writing desk.

"Not slowly enough to suit us," Wade answered hospitably. "Only, if
Howland could have come he might have given you a tip or two--put
you on the right track--shown you how to get in touch with the
public."

Winterman, his hands in his sagging pockets, lounged against the
bare pine walls, twisting his pipe under his beard. "Does your
brother enjoy the privilege of that contact?" he questioned gravely.

Wade stared a little. "Oh, of course Howland's not what you'd call a
_popular_ writer; he despises that kind of thing. But whatever he
says goes with--well, with the chaps that count; and every one tells
me he's written _the_ book on Pellerin. You must read it when you
get back your eyes." He paused, as if to let the name sink in, but
Winterman drew at his pipe with a blank face. "You must have heard
of Pellerin, I suppose?" the doctor continued. "I've never read a
word of him myself: he's too big a proposition for _me_. But one
can't escape the talk about him. I have him crammed down my throat
even in hospital. The internes read him at the clinics. He tumbles
out of the nurses' pockets. The patients keep him under their
pillows. Oh, with most of them, of course, it's just a craze, like
the last new game or puzzle: they don't understand him in the least.
Howland says that even now, twenty-five years after his death, and
with his books in everybody's hands, there are not twenty people who
really understand Pellerin; and Howland ought to know, if anybody
does. He's--what's their great word?--_interpreted_ him. You must
get Howland to put you through a course of Pellerin."

And as the young men, having taken leave of Winterman, retraced
their way across the lawn, Wade continued to develop the theme of
his brother's accomplishments.

"I wish I _could_ get Howland to take an interest in Winterman: this
is the third Sunday he's chucked us. Of course he does get bored
with people consulting him about their writings--but I believe if he
could only talk to Winterman he'd see something in him, as we do.
And it would be such a god-send to the poor man to have some one to
advise him about his work. I'm going to make a desperate effort to
get Howland here next Sunday."

It was then that Bernald vowed to himself that he would return the
next Sunday at all costs. He hardly knew whether he was prompted by
the impulse to shield Winterman from Howland Wade's ineptitude, or
by the desire to see the latter abandon himself to the full
shamelessness of its display; but of one fact he was blissfully
assured--and that was of the existence in Winterman of some quality
which would provoke Howland to the amplest exercise of his fatuity.
"How he'll draw him--how he'll draw him!" Bernald chuckled, with a
security the more unaccountable that his one glimpse of Winterman
had shown the latter only as a passive subject for experimentation;
and he felt himself avenged in advance for the injury of Howland
Wade's existence.


III


THAT this hope was to be frustrated Bernald learned from Howland
Wade's own lips, the day before the two young men were to meet at
Portchester.

"I can't really, my dear fellow," the Interpreter lisped, passing a
polished hand over the faded smoothness of his face. "Oh, an
authentic engagement, I assure you: otherwise, to oblige old Bob I'd
submit cheerfully to looking over his foundling's literature. But
I'm pledged this week to the Pellerin Society of Kenosha: I had a
hand in founding it, and for two years now they've been patiently
waiting for a word from me--the _Fiat Lux_, so to speak. You see
it's a ministry, Bernald--I assure you, I look upon my calling quite
religiously."

As Bernald listened, his disappointment gradually changed to relief.
Howland, on trial, always turned out to be too insufferable, and the
pleasure of watching his antics was invariably lost in the impulse
to put a sanguinary end to them.

"If he'd only keep his beastly pink hands off Pellerin," Bernald
groaned, thinking of the thick manuscript condemned to perpetual
incarceration in his own desk by the publication of Howland's
"definitive" work on the great man. One couldn't, _after _Howland
Wade, expose one's self to the derision of writing about Pellerin:
the eagerness with which Wade's book had been devoured proved, not
that the public had enough appetite for another, but simply that,
for a stomach so undiscriminating, anything better than Wade had
given it would be too good. And Bernald, in the confidence that his
own work was open to this objection, had stoically locked it up. Yet
if he had resigned his exasperated intelligence to the fact that
Wade's book existed, and was already passing into the immortality of
perpetual republication, he could not, after repeated trials, adjust
himself to the author's talk about Pellerin. When Wade wrote of the
great dead he was egregious, but in conversation he was familiar and
fond. It might have been supposed that one of the beauties of
Pellerin's hidden life and mysterious taking off would have been to
guard him from the fingering of anecdote; but biographers like
Howland Wade were born to rise above such obstacles. He might be
vague or inaccurate in dealing with the few recorded events of his
subject's life; but when he left fact for conjecture no one had a
firmer footing. Whole chapters in his volume were constructed in the
conditional mood and packed with hypothetical detail; and in talk,
by the very law of the process, hypothesis became affirmation, and
he was ready to tell you confidentially the exact circumstances of
Pellerin's death, and of the "distressing incident" leading up to
it. Bernald himself not only questioned the form under which this
incident was shaping itself before posterity, but the mere radical
fact of its occurrence: he had never been able to discover any break
in the dense cloud enveloping Pellerin's later life and its
mysterious termination. He had gone away--that was all that any of
them knew: he who had so little, at any time, been with them or of
them; and his going had so slightly stirred the public consciousness
that even the subsequent news of his death, laconically imparted
from afar, had dropped unheeded into the universal scrap-basket, to
be long afterward fished out, with all its details missing, when
some enquiring spirit first became aware, by chance encounter with a
two-penny volume in a London book-stall, not only that such a man as
John Pellerin had died, but that he had ever lived, or written.

It need hardly be noted that Howland Wade had not been the pioneer
in question: his had been the wiser part of swelling the chorus when
it rose, and gradually drowning the other voices by his own
insistent note. He had pitched the note so screamingly, and held it
so long, that he was now the accepted authority on Pellerin, not
only in the land which had given birth to his genius but in the
Europe which had first acclaimed it; and it was the central point of
pain in Bernald's sense of the situation that a man who had so
yearned for silence as Pellerin should have his grave piped over by
such a voice as Wade's.

Bernald's talk with the Interpreter had revived this ache to the
momentary exclusion of other sensations; and he was still sore with
it when, the next afternoon, he arrived at Portchester for his
second Sunday with the Wades.

At the station he had the surprise of seeing Winterman's face on the
platform, and of hearing from him that Doctor Bob had been called
away to assist at an operation in a distant town.

"Mrs. Wade wanted to put you off, but I believe the message came too
late; so she sent me down to break the news to you," said Winterman,
holding out his hand.

Perhaps because they were the first conventional words that Bernald
had heard him speak, the young man was struck by the relief his
intonation gave them.

"She wanted to send a carriage," Winterman added, "but I told her
we'd walk back through the woods." He looked at Bernald with a
sudden kindness that flushed the young man with pleasure.

"Are you strong enough? It's not too far?"

"Oh, no. I'm pulling myself together. Getting back to work is the
slowest part of the business: not on account of my eyes--I can use
them now, though not for reading; but some of the links between
things are missing. It's a kind of broken spectrum ... here, that
boy will look after your bag."

The walk through the woods remained in Bernald's memory as an
enchanted hour. He used the word literally, as descriptive of the
way in which Winterman's contact changed the face of things, or
perhaps restored them to their primitive meanings. And the scene
they traversed--one of those little untended woods that still, in
America, fringe the tawdry skirts of civilization--acquired, as a
background to Winterman, the hush of a spot aware of transcendent
visitings. Did he talk, or did he make Bernald talk? The young man
never knew. He recalled only a sense of lightness and liberation, as
if the hard walls of individuality had melted, and he were merged in
the poet's deeper interfusion, yet without losing the least sharp
edge of self. This general impression resolved itself afterward into
the sense of Winterman's wide elemental range. His thought encircled
things like the horizon at sea. He didn't, as it happened, touch on
lofty themes--Bernald was gleefully aware that, to Howland Wade,
their talk would hardly have been Talk at all--but Winterman's mind,
applied to lowly topics, was like a powerful lens that brought out
microscopic delicacies and differences.

The lack of Sunday trains kept Doctor Bob for two days on the scene
of his surgical duties, and during those two days Bernald seized
every moment of communion with his friend's guest. Winterman, as
Wade had said, was reticent as to his personal affairs, or rather as
to the practical and material conditions to which the term is
generally applied. But it was evident that, in Winterman's case, the
usual classification must be reversed, and that the discussion of
ideas carried one much farther into his intimacy than any specific
acquaintance with the incidents of his life.

"That's exactly what Howland Wade and his tribe have never
understood about Pellerin: that it's much less important to know
how, or even why, he disapp--"

Bernald pulled himself up with a jerk, and turned to look full at
his companion. It was late on the Monday evening, and the two men,
after an hour's chat on the verandah to the tune of Mrs. Wade's
knitting-needles, had bidden their hostess good-night and strolled
back to the bungalow together.

"Come and have a pipe before you turn in," Winterman had said; and
they had sat on together till midnight, with the door of the
bungalow open on a heaving moonlit bay, and summer insects bumping
against the chimney of the lamp. Winterman had just bent down to
re-fill his pipe from the jar on the table, and Bernald, jerking
about to catch him in the yellow circle of lamplight, sat
speechless, staring at a fact that seemed suddenly to have
substituted itself for Winterman's face, or rather to have taken on
its features.

"No, they never saw that Pellerin's ideas _were_ Pellerin. ..." He
continued to stare at Winterman. "Just as this man's ideas are--why,
_are_ Pellerin!"

The thought uttered itself in a kind of inner shout, and Bernald
started upright with the violent impact of his conclusion. Again and
again in the last forty-eight hours he had exclaimed to himself:
"This is as good as Pellerin." Why hadn't he said till now: "This
_is_ Pellerin"? ... Surprising as the answer was, he had no choice
but to take it. He hadn't said so simply because Winterman was
_better than Pellerin_--that there was so much more of him, so to
speak. Yes; but--it came to Bernald in a flash--wouldn't there by
this time have been any amount more of Pellerin? ... The young man
felt actually dizzy with the thought. That was it--there was the
solution of the haunting problem! This man was Pellerin, and more
than Pellerin! It was so fantastic and yet so unanswerable that he
burst into a sudden startled laugh.

Winterman, at the same moment, brought his palm down with a sudden
crash on the pile of manuscript covering the desk.

"What's the matter?" Bernald gasped.

"My match wasn't out. In another minute the destruction of the
library of Alexandria would have been a trifle compared to what
you'd have seen." Winterman, with his large deep laugh, shook out
the smouldering sheets. "And I should have been a pensioner on
Doctor Bob the Lord knows how much longer!"

Bernald pulled himself together. "You've really got going again? The
thing's actually getting into shape?"

"This particular thing _is_ in shape. I drove at it hard all last
week, thinking our friend's brother would be down on Sunday, and
might look it over."

Bernald had to repress the tendency to another wild laugh.

"Howland--you meant to show _Howland_ what you've done?"

Winterman, looming against the moonlight, slowly turned a dusky
shaggy head toward him.

"Isn't it a good thing to do?"

Bernald wavered, torn between loyalty to his friends and the
grotesqueness of answering in the affirmative. After all, it was
none of his business to furnish Winterman with an estimate of
Howland Wade.

"Well, you see, you've never told me what your line _is_," he
answered, temporizing.

"No, because nobody's ever told _me_. It's exactly what I want to
find out," said the other genially.

"And you expect Wade--?"

"Why, I gathered from our good Doctor that it's his trade. Doesn't
he explain--interpret?"

"In his own domain--which is Pellerinism."

Winterman gazed out musingly upon the moon-touched dusk of waters.
"And what _is_ Pellerinism?" he asked.

Bernald sprang to his feet with a cry. "Ah, I don't know--but you're
Pellerin!"

They stood for a minute facing each other, among the uncertain
swaying shadows of the room, with the sea breathing through it as
something immense and inarticulate breathed through young Bernald's
thoughts; then Winterman threw up his arms with a humorous gesture.

"Don't shoot!" he said.


IV


DAWN found them there, and the risen sun laid its beams on the rough
floor of the bungalow, before either of the men was conscious of the
passage of time. Bernald, vaguely trying to define his own state in
retrospect, could only phrase it: "I floated ... floated. ..."

The gist of fact at the core of the extraordinary experience was
simply that John Pellerin, twenty-five years earlier, had
voluntarily disappeared, causing the rumour of his death to be
reported to an inattentive world; and that now he had come back to
see what that world had made of him.

"You'll hardly believe it of me; I hardly believe it of myself; but
I went away in a rage of disappointment, of wounded pride--no,
vanity! I don't know which cut deepest--the sneers or the
silence--but between them, there wasn't an inch of me that wasn't
raw. I had just the one thing in me: the message, the cry, the
revelation. But nobody saw and nobody listened. Nobody wanted what I
had to give. I was like a poor devil of a tramp looking for shelter
on a bitter night, in a town with every door bolted and all the
windows dark. And suddenly I felt that the easiest thing would be to
lie down and go to sleep in the snow. Perhaps I'd a vague notion
that if they found me there at daylight, frozen stiff, the pathetic
spectacle might produce a reaction, a feeling of remorse. ... So I
took care to be found! Well, a good many thousand people die every
day on the face of the globe; and I soon discovered that I was
simply one of the thousands; and when I made that discovery I really
died--and stayed dead a year or two. ... When I came to life again
I was off on the under side of the world, in regions unaware of what
we know as 'the public.' Have you any notion how it shifts the point
of view to wake under new constellations? I advise any who's been in
love with a woman under Cassiopeia to go and think about her under
the Southern Cross. ... It's the only way to tell the pivotal
truths from the others. ... I didn't believe in my theory any
less--there was my triumph and my vindication! It held out,
resisted, measured itself with the stars. But I didn't care a snap
of my finger whether anybody else believed in it, or even knew it
had been formulated. It escaped out of my books--my poor still-born
books--like Psyche from the chrysalis and soared away into the blue,
and lived there. I knew then how it frees an idea to be ignored; how
apprehension circumscribes and deforms it. ... Once I'd learned
that, it was easy enough to turn to and shift for myself. I was sure
now that my idea would live: the good ones are self-supporting. I
had to learn to be so; and I tried my hand at a number of things ...
adventurous, menial, commercial. ... It's not a bad thing for a
man to have to live his life--and we nearly all manage to dodge it.
Our first round with the Sphinx may strike something out of us--a
book or a picture or a symphony; and we're amazed at our feat, and
go on letting that first work breed others, as some animal forms
reproduce each other without renewed fertilization. So there we are,
committed to our first guess at the riddle; and our works look as
like as successive impressions of the same plate, each with the
lines a little fainter; whereas they ought to be--if we touch earth
between times--as different from each other as those other
creatures--jellyfish, aren't they, of a kind?--where successive
generations produce new forms, and it takes a zoologist to see the
hidden likeness. ...

"Well, I proved my first guess, off there in the wilds, and it
lived, and grew, and took care of itself. And I said 'Some day it
will make itself heard; but by that time my atoms will have waltzed
into a new pattern.' Then, in Cashmere one day, I met a fellow in a
caravan, with a dog-eared book in his pocket. He said he never
stirred without it--wanted to know where I'd been, never to have
heard of it. It was _my guess_--in its twentieth edition! ... The
globe spun round at that, and all of a sudden I was under the old
stars. That's the way it happens when the ballast of vanity shifts!
I'd lived a third of a life out there, unconscious of human
opinion--because I supposed it was unconscious of _me_. But
now--now! Oh, it was different. I wanted to know what they said. ...
Not exactly that, either: I wanted to know _what I'd made them
say_. There's a difference. ... And here I am," said John
Pellerin, with a pull at his pipe.

So much Bernald retained of his companion's actual narrative; the
rest was swept away under the tide of wonder that rose and submerged
him as Pellerin--at some indefinitely later stage of their
talk--picked up his manuscript and began to read. Bernald sat
opposite, his elbows propped on the table, his eyes fixed on the
swaying waters outside, from which the moon gradually faded, leaving
them to make a denser blackness in the night. As Pellerin read, this
density of blackness--which never for a moment seemed inert or
unalive--was attenuated by imperceptible degrees, till a greyish
pallour replaced it; then the pallour breathed and brightened, and
suddenly dawn was on the sea.

Something of the same nature went on in the young man's mind while
he watched and listened. He was conscious of a gradually withdrawing
light, of an interval of obscurity full of the stir of invisible
forces, and then of the victorious flush of day. And as the light
rose, he saw how far he had travelled and what wonders the night had
prepared. Pellerin had been right in saying that his first idea had
survived, had borne the test of time; but he had given his hearer no
hint of the extent to which it had been enlarged and modified, of
the fresh implications it now unfolded. In a brief flash of
retrospection Bernald saw the earlier books dwindle and fall into
their place as mere precursors of this fuller revelation; then, with
a leap of helpless rage, he pictured Howland Wade's pink hands on
the new treasure, and his prophetic feet upon the lecture platform.


V


"IT won't do--oh, he let him down as gently as possible; but it
appears it simply won't do."

Doctor Bob imparted the ineluctable fact to Bernald while the two
men, accidentally meeting at their club a few nights later, sat
together over the dinner they had immediately agreed to consume in
company.

Bernald had left Portchester the morning after his strange
discovery, and he and Bob Wade had not seen each other since. And
now Bernald, moved by an irresistible instinct of postponement, had
waited for his companion to bring up Winterman's name, and had even
executed several conversational diversions in the hope of delaying
its mention. For how could one talk of Winterman with the thought of
Pellerin swelling one's breast?

"Yes; the very day Howland got back from Kenosha I brought the
manuscript to town, and got him to read it. And yesterday evening I
nailed him, and dragged an answer out of him."

"Then Howland hasn't seen Winterman yet?"

"No. He said: 'Before you let him loose on me I'll go over the
stuff, and see if it's at all worth while.'"

Bernald drew a freer breath. "And he found it wasn't?"

"Between ourselves, he found it was of no account at all. Queer,
isn't it, when the _man_ ... but of course literature's another
proposition. Howland says it's one of the cases where an idea might
seem original and striking if one didn't happen to be able to trace
its descent. And this is straight out of bosh--by Pellerin. ...
Yes: Pellerin. It seems that everything in the article that isn't
pure nonsense is just Pellerinism. Howland thinks poor Winterman
must have been tremendously struck by Pellerin's writings, and have
lived too much out of the world to know that they've become the
text-books of modern thought. Otherwise, of course, he'd have taken
more trouble to disguise his plagiarisms."

"I see," Bernald mused. "Yet you say there _is_ an original
element?"

"Yes; but unluckily it's no good."

"It's not--conceivably--in any sense a development of Pellerin's
idea: a logical step farther?"

"_Logical?_ Howland says it's twaddle at white heat."

Bernald sat silent, divided between the fierce satisfaction of
seeing the Interpreter rush upon his fate, and the despair of
knowing that the state of mind he represented was indestructible.
Then both emotions were swept away on a wave of pure joy, as he
reflected that now, at last, Howland Wade had given him back John
Pellerin.

The possession was one he did not mean to part with lightly; and the
dread of its being torn from him constrained him to extraordinary
precautions.

"You've told Winterman, I suppose? How did he take it?"

"Why, unexpectedly, as he does most things. You can never tell which
way he'll jump. I thought he'd take a high tone, or else laugh it
off; but he did neither. He seemed awfully cast down. I wished
myself well out of the job when I saw how cut up he was." Bernald
thrilled at the words. Pellerin had shared his pang, then--the "old
woe of the world" at the perpetuity of human dulness!

"But what did he say to the charge of plagiarism--if you made it?"

"Oh, I told him straight out what Howland said. I thought it fairer.
And his answer to that was the rummest part of all."

"What was it?" Bernald questioned, with a tremor.

"He said: 'That's queer, for I've never read Pellerin.'"

Bernald drew a deep breath of ecstasy. "Well--and I suppose you
believed him?"

"I believed him, because I know him. But the public won't--the
critics won't. And if it's a pure coincidence it's just as bad for
him as if it were a straight steal--isn't it?"

Bernald sighed his acquiescence.

"It bothers me awfully," Wade continued, knitting his kindly brows,
"because I could see what a blow it was to him. He's got to earn his
living, and I don't suppose he knows how to do anything else. At his
age it's hard to start fresh. I put that to Howland--asked him if
there wasn't a chance he might do better if he only had a little
encouragement. I can't help feeling he's got the essential thing in
him. But of course I'm no judge when it comes to books. And Howland
says it would be cruel to give him any hope." Wade paused, turned
his wineglass about under a meditative stare, and then leaned across
the table toward Bernald. "Look here--do you know what I've proposed
to Winterman? That he should come to town with me to-morrow and go
in the evening to hear Howland lecture to the Uplift Club. They're
to meet at Mrs. Beecher Bain's, and Howland is to repeat the lecture
that he gave the other day before the Pellerin Society at Kenosha.
It will give Winterman a chance to get some notion of what Pellerin
_was:_ he'll get it much straighter from Howland than if he tried to
plough through Pellerin's books. And then afterward--as if
accidentally--I thought I might bring him and Howland together. If
Howland could only see him and hear him talk, there's no knowing
what might come of it. He couldn't help feeling the man's force, as
we do; and he might give him a pointer--tell him what line to take.
Anyhow, it would please Winterman, and take the edge off his
disappointment. I saw that as soon as I proposed it."

"Some one who's never heard of Pellerin?"

Mrs. Beecher Bain, large, smiling, diffuse, reached out
parenthetically from the incoming throng on her threshold to waylay
Bernald with the question as he was about to move past her in the
wake of his companion.

"Oh, keep straight on, Mr. Winterman!" she interrupted herself to
call after the latter. "Into the back drawing-room, please! And
remember, you're to sit next to me--in the corner on the left, close
under the platform."

She renewed her interrogative clutch on Bernald's sleeve. "Most
curious! Doctor Wade has been telling me all about him--how
remarkable you all think him. And it's actually true that he's never
heard of Pellerin? Of course as soon as Doctor Wade told me _that_,
I said 'Bring him!' It will be so extraordinarily interesting to
watch the first impression.--Yes, do follow him, dear Mr. Bernald,
and be sure that you and he secure the seats next to me. Of course
Alice Fosdick insists on being with us. She was wild with excitement
when I told her she was to meet some one who'd never heard of
Pellerin!"

On the indulgent lips of Mrs. Beecher Bain conjecture speedily
passed into affirmation; and as Bernald's companion, broad and
shaggy in his visibly new evening clothes, moved down the length of
the crowded rooms, he was already, to the ladies drawing aside their
skirts to let him pass, the interesting Huron of the fable.

How far he was aware of the character ascribed to him it was
impossible for Bernald to discover. He was as unconscious as a tree
or a cloud, and his observer had never known any one so alive to
human contacts and yet so secure from them. But the scene was
playing such a lively tune on Bernald's own sensibilities that for
the moment he could not adjust himself to the probable effect it
produced on his companion. The young man, of late, had made but rare
appearances in the group of which Mrs. Beecher Bain was one of the
most indefatigable hostesses, and the Uplift Club the chief medium
of expression. To a critic, obliged by his trade to cultivate
convictions, it was the essence of luxury to leave them at home in
his hours of ease; and Bernald gave his preference to circles in
which less finality of judgment prevailed, and it was consequently
less embarrassing to be caught without an opinion.

But in his fresher days he had known the spell of the Uplift Club
and the thrill of moving among the Emancipated; and he felt an odd
sense of rejuvenation as he looked at the rows of faces packed about
the embowered platform from which Howland Wade was presently to hand
down the eternal verities. Many of these countenances belonged to
the old days, when the gospel of Pellerin was unknown, and it
required considerable intellectual courage to avow one's acceptance
of the very doctrines he had since demolished. The latter moral
revolution seemed to have been accepted as submissively as a change
in hair-dressing; and it even struck Bernald that, in the case of
many of the assembled ladies, their convictions were rather newer
than their clothes.

One of the most interesting examples of this facility of adaptation
was actually, in the person of Miss Alice Fosdick, brushing his
elbow with exotic amulets, and enveloping him in Arabian odours, as
she leaned forward to murmur her sympathetic sense of the situation.
Miss Fosdick, who was one of the most advanced exponents of
Pellerinism, had large eyes and a plaintive mouth, and Bernald had
always fancied that she might have been pretty if she had not been
perpetually explaining things.

"Yes, I know--Isabella Bain told me all about him. (He can't hear
us, can he?) And I wonder if you realize how remarkably interesting
it is that we should have such an opportunity _now_--I mean the
opportunity to see the impression of Pellerinism on a perfectly
fresh mind. (You must introduce him as soon as the lecture's over.)
I explained that to Isabella as soon as she showed me Doctor Wade's
note. Of course you see why, don't you?" Bernald made a faint motion
of acquiescence, which she instantly swept aside. "At least I think
I can _make you see why_. (If you're sure he can't hear?) Why, it's
just this--Pellerinism is in danger of becoming a truism. Oh, it's
an awful thing to say! But then I'm not afraid of saying awful
things! I rather believe it's my mission. What I mean is, that we're
getting into the way of taking Pellerin for granted--as we do the
air we breathe. We don't sufficiently lead our _conscious life_ in
him--we're gradually letting him become subliminal." She swayed
closer to the young man, and he saw that she was making a graceful
attempt to throw her explanatory net over his companion, who,
evading Mrs. Bain's hospitable signal, had cautiously wedged himself
into a seat between Bernald and the wall.

"_Did_ you hear what I was saying, Mr. Winterman? (Yes, I know who
you are, of course!) Oh, well, I don't really mind if you did. I was
talking about you--about you and Pellerin. I was explaining to Mr.
Bernald that what we need at this very minute is a Pellerin revival;
and we need some one like you--to whom his message comes as a
wonderful new interpretation of life--to lead the revival, and rouse
us out of our apathy. ...

"You see," she went on winningly, "it's not only the big public that
needs it (of course _their_ Pellerin isn't ours!) It's we, his
disciples, his interpreters, who discovered him and gave him to the
world--we, the Chosen People, the Custodians of the Sacred Books, as
Howland Wade calls us--it's _we_, who are in perpetual danger of
sinking back into the old stagnant ideals, and practising the Seven
Deadly Virtues; it's _we_ who need to count our mercies, and realize
anew what he's done for us, and what we ought to do for him! And
it's for that reason that I urged Mr. Wade to speak here, in the
very inner sanctuary of Pellerinism, exactly as he would speak to
the uninitiated--to repeat, simply, his Kenosha lecture, 'What
Pellerinism means'; and we ought all, I think, to listen to him with
the hearts of little children--just as _you_ will, Mr. Winterman--as
if he were telling us new things, and we--"

"Alice, _dear_--" Mrs. Bain murmured with a deprecating gesture; and
Howland Wade, emerging between the palms, took the centre of the
platform.

A pang of commiseration shot through Bernald as he saw him there, so
innocent and so exposed. His plump pulpy body, which made his
evening dress fall into intimate and wrapper-like folds, was like a
wide surface spread to the shafts of irony; and the mild ripples of
his voice seemed to enlarge the vulnerable area as he leaned
forward, poised on confidential finger-tips, to say persuasively:
"Let me try to tell you what Pellerinism means."

Bernald moved restlessly in his seat. He had the obscure sense of
being a party to something not wholly honourable. He ought not to
have come; he ought not to have let his companion come. In the
accompanying report the above conclusions will be found more formally
stated for the purposes of a proclamation.

Respectfully submitted.

THOMAS O.

MARVIN, _Chairman_.

EDWARD P. COSTIGAN, HENRY H. GLASSIE, ALFRED P. DENNIS, A. H. BALDWIN,
_Commissioners_.

SEPARATE STATEMENT OF COMMISSIONER COSTIGAN, IN PART CONCURRING
AND IN PART DISSENTING, IN THE INVESTIGATION OF MEN'S SEWED STRAW
HATS

While I concur with my associates in transmitting the
commission's data in the investigation of men's sewed straw hats,
a differentiation of views must be expressed with respect to certain
conclusions which may be drawn from such data.

_Both higher and lower duties indicated by the commission's cost
figures._--Under the provisions of section 315 of the tariff act
of 1922, the information secured by the commission and summarized in
this report points not only to an increased duty on lower-priced
hats but also to a decreased duty on higher-priced hats. It is
submitted that no satisfactory reason can be assigned under the present
record for failing to recommend such a simultaneous upward and
downward change in the present rate of duty by the use of the
provisions for flexibility in the tariff act of 1922. Under
the controlling statute all commissioners are agreed that a clear
distinction exists between the bulk of the lower-priced hats coming
from Italy and the lesser but considerable quantity of higher-priced
hats imported from Great Britain.

This feature of the commission's summarized data is particularly
presented in Tables 5, 6, and 7, in which are shown the sources,
volume, and foreign values of imported hats. Table 8 presents American
and Italian costs of lower-priced hats; Table 9, cost data for
higher-priced hats in the United States and Great Britain. Table 8
indicates that, in lieu of the present duty of 60 per cent
on foreign value, a duty of 88 per cent on foreign value is required
to equalize the costs incurred with respect to the lower-priced
hats; and Table 9, that a duty of 55 per cent on foreign value will
suffice to equalize such costs in the case of the higher-priced hats.

In other words, the record establishes the need, if competitive
costs are to be equalized under section 315, for creating two classes
of men's sewed straw hats, with a different principal competing
country and a separate rate of duty for each class.

Under the circumstances, to confine the findings of the commission
to an increased duty on lower-priced hats is, in one important
particular, to fall short of the statutory responsibility
undertaken when the commission ordered an investigation of the
adequacy of the present 60 per cent ad valorem duty as a measure
of equalized costs in the United States and foreign countries.

A partial conclusion from the commission's data, where, as here, a
comprehensive conclusion is clearly warranted, would appear to
be discriminatory and fail to fulfill the scientific and impartial
purposes of the provisions of section 315.

_Determining the dividing line for tariff purposes between higher
and lower priced hats._--The above tables sufficiently demonstrate
that the great bulk of men's sewed straw hats, imported at the port
of New York during the period of investigation, came from
Italy and had a foreign value of $7 or less per dozen, and much
the larger part of the higher-priced hats came from England and had
a foreign value of $8.50 or more per dozen.

The separation into classes of lower and higher priced hats, with
different duties for each class tends to result in an overstatement
of the values of the lower-priced imports in order to obtain the
benefit of the lower duty on high-priced imports. There is also a
tendency of the higher-priced imports to increase in volume. To
meet the changed situation a higher "breaking point" than the $7
value is desirable. For example, with a 90 per cent duty, a hat
whose foreign value is $7 per dozen would cost, landed, duty
and transportation paid, $14.40. If the rate of 60 per cent
remain on hats in the higher bracket, as certain commissioners
suggest that it continue to do, instead of the $7 hat it might be
profitable to import a hat worth $8.25 per dozen, which would
enter, duty paid and transportation included, for $14.30.Their eyes met across the crowd; but Bernald gathered only
perplexity from the encounter. What were Pellerin's eyes saying to
him? What orders, what confidences, what indefinable apprehension
did their long look impart? The young man was still trying to
decipher their complex message when he felt a tap on the arm, and
turned to encounter the rueful gaze of Bob Wade, whose meaning lay
clearly enough on the surface of his good blue stare.

"Well, it won't work--it won't work," the doctor groaned.

"What won't?"

"I mean with Howland. Winterman won't. Howland doesn't take to him.
Says he's crude--frightfully crude. And you know how Howland hates
crudeness."

"Oh, I know," Bernald exulted. It was the word he had waited for--he
saw it now! Once more he was lost in wonder at Howland's miraculous
faculty for always, as the naturalists said, being true to type.

"So I'm afraid it's all up with his chance of writing. At least _I_
can do no more," said Wade, discouraged.

Bernald pressed him for farther details. "Does Winterman seem to
mind much? Did you hear his version?"

"His version?"

"I mean what he said to Howland."

"Why no. What the deuce was there for him to say?"

"What indeed? I think I'll take him home," said Bernald gaily.

He turned away to join the circle from which, a few minutes before,
Pellerin's eyes had vainly and enigmatically signalled to him; but
the circle had dispersed, and Pellerin himself was not in sight.

Bernald, looking about him, saw that during his brief aside with
Wade the party had passed into the final phase of dissolution.
People still delayed, in diminishing groups, but the current had set
toward the doors, and every moment or two it bore away a few more
lingerers. Bernald, from his post, commanded the clearing
perspective of the two drawing-rooms, and a rapid survey of their
length sufficed to assure him that Pellerin was not in either.
Taking leave of Wade, the young man made his way back to the
drawing-room, where only a few hardened feasters remained, and then
passed on to the library which had been the scene of the late
momentous colloquy. But the library too was empty, and drifting back
uncertainly to the inner drawing-room Bernald found Mrs. Beecher
Bain domestically putting out the wax candles on the mantel-piece.

"Dear Mr. Bernald! Do sit down and have a little chat. What a
wonderful privilege it has been! I don't know when I've had such an
intense impression."

She made way for him, hospitably, in a corner of the sofa to which
she had sunk; and he echoed her vaguely: "You _were_ impressed,
then?"

"I can't express to you how it affected me! As Alice said, it was a
resurrection--it was as if John Pellerin were actually here in the
room with us!"

Bernald turned on her with a half-audible gasp. "You felt that, dear
Mrs. Bain?"

"We all felt it--every one of us! I don't wonder the Greeks--it
_was_ the Greeks?--regarded eloquence as a supernatural power. As
Alice says, when one looked at Howland Wade one understood what they
meant by the Afflatus."

Bernald rose and held out his hand. "Oh, I see--it was Howland who
made you feel as if Pellerin were in the room? And he made Miss
Fosdick feel so too?"

"Why, of course. But why are you rushing off?"

"Because I must hunt up my friend, who's not used to such late
hours."

"Your friend?" Mrs. Bain had to collect her thoughts. "Oh, Mr.
Winterman, you mean? But he's gone already."

"Gone?" Bernald exclaimed, with an odd twinge of foreboding.
Remembering Pellerin's signal across the crowd, he reproached
himself for not having answered it more promptly. Yet it was
certainly strange that his friend should have left the house without
him.

"Are you quite sure?" he asked, with a startled glance at the clock.

"Oh, perfectly. He went half an hour ago. But you needn't hurry home
on his account, for Alice Fosdick carried him off with her. I saw
them leave together."

"Carried him off? She took him home with her, you mean?"

"Yes. You know what strange hours she keeps. She told me she was
going to give him a Welsh rabbit, and explain Pellerinism to him."

"Oh, _if_ she's going to explain--" Bernald murmured. But his
amazement at the news struggled with a confused impatience to reach
his rooms in time to be there for his friend's arrival. There could
be no stranger spectacle beneath the stars than that of John
Pellerin carried off by Miss Fosdick, and listening, in the small
hours, to her elucidation of his doctrines; but Bernald knew enough
of his sex to be aware that such an experiment may present a less
humorous side to its subject than to an impartial observer. Even the
Uplift Club and its connotations might benefit by the attraction of
the unknown; and it was conceivable that to a traveller from
Mesopotamia Miss Fosdick might present elements of interest which
she had lost for the frequenters of Fifth Avenue. There was, at any
rate, no denying that the affair had become unexpectedly complex,
and that its farther development promised to be rich in comedy.

In the charmed contemplation of these possibilities Bernald sat over
his fire, listening for Pellerin's ring. He had arranged his modest
quarters with the reverent care of a celebrant awaiting the descent
of his deity. He guessed Pellerin to be unconscious of visual
detail, but sensitive to the happy blending of sensuous impressions:
to the intimate spell of lamplight on books, and of a deep chair
placed where one could watch the fire. The chair was there, and
Bernald, facing it across the hearth, already saw it filled by
Pellerin's lounging figure. The autumn dawn came late, and even now
they had before them the promise of some untroubled hours. Bernald,
sitting there alone in the warm stillness of his room, and in the
profounder hush of his expectancy, was conscious of gathering up all
his sensibilities and perceptions into one exquisitely-adjusted
instrument of notation. Until now he had tasted Pellerin's society
only in unpremeditated snatches, and had always left him with a
sense, on his own part, of waste and shortcoming. Now, in the lull
of this dedicated hour, he felt that he should miss nothing, and
forget nothing, of the initiation that awaited him. And catching
sight of Pellerin's pipe, he rose and laid it carefully on a table
by the arm-chair.

"No. I've never had any news of him," Bernald heard himself
repeating. He spoke in a low tone, and with the automatic utterance
that alone made it possible to say the words.

They were addressed to Miss Fosdick, into whose neighbourhood chance
had thrown him at a dinner, a year or so later than their encounter
at the Uplift Club. Hitherto he had successfully, and intentionally,
avoided Miss Fosdick, not from any animosity toward that unconscious
instrument of fate, but from an intense reluctance to pronounce the
words which he knew he should have to speak if they met.

Now, as it turned out, his chief surprise was that she should wait
so long to make him speak them. All through the dinner she had swept
him along on a rapid current of talk which showed no tendency to
linger or turn back upon the past. At first he ascribed her reserve
to a sense of delicacy with which he reproached himself for not
having previously credited her; then he saw that she had been
carried so far beyond the point at which they had last faced each
other, that it was by the merest hazard of associated ideas that she
was now finally borne back to it. For it appeared that the very next
evening, at Mrs. Beecher Bain's, a Hindu Mahatma was to lecture to
the Uplift Club on the Limits of the Subliminal; and it was owing to
no less a person than Howland Wade that this exceptional privilege
had been obtained.

"Of course Howland's known all over the world as the interpreter of
Pellerinism, and the Aga Gautch, who had absolutely declined to
speak anywhere in public, wrote to Isabella that he could not refuse
anything that Mr. Wade asked. Did you know that Howland's lecture,
'What Pellerinism Means,' has been translated into twenty-two
languages, and gone into a fifth edition in Icelandic? Why, that
reminds me," Miss Fosdick broke off--"I've never heard what became
of your queer friend--what was his name?--whom you and Bob Wade
accused me of spiriting away after that very lecture. And I've never
seen _you_ since you rushed into the house the next morning, and
dragged me out of bed to know what I'd done with him!"

With a sharp effort Bernald gathered himself together to have it
out. "Well, what _did_ you do with him?" he retorted.

She laughed her appreciation of his humour. "Just what I told you,
of course. I said good-bye to him on Isabella's door-step."

Bernald looked at her. "It's really true, then, that he didn't go
home with you?"

She bantered back: "Have you suspected me, all this time, of hiding
his remains in the cellar?" And with a droop of her fine lids she
added: "I wish he _had_ come home with me, for he was rather
interesting, and there were things I think I could have explained to
him."

Bernald helped himself to a nectarine, and Miss Fosdick continued on
a note of amused curiosity: "So you've really never had any news of
him since that night?"

"No--I've never had any news of him."

"Not the least little message?"

"Not the least little message."

"Or a rumour or report of any kind?"

"Or a rumour or report of any kind."

Miss Fosdick's interest seemed to be revived by the strangeness of
the case. "It's rather creepy, isn't it? What _could_ have happened?
You don't suppose he could have been waylaid and murdered?" she
asked with brightening eyes.

Bernald shook his head serenely. "No. I'm sure he's safe--quite
safe."

"But if you're sure, you must know something."

"No. I know nothing," he repeated.

She scanned him incredulously. "But what's your theory--for you must
have a theory? What in the world can have become of him?"

Bernald returned her look and hesitated. "Do you happen to remember
the last thing he said to you--the very last, on the door-step, when
he left you?"

"The last thing?" She poised her fork above the peach on her plate.
"I don't think he said anything. Oh, yes--when I reminded him that
he'd solemnly promised to come back with me and have a little talk
he said he couldn't because he was going home."

"Well, then, I suppose," said Bernald, "he went home."

She glanced at him as if suspecting a trap. "Dear me, how flat! I
always inclined to a mysterious murder. But of course you know more
of him than you say."

She began to cut her peach, but paused above a lifted bit to ask,
with a renewal of animation in her expressive eyes: "By the way, had
you heard that Howland Wade has been gradually getting farther and
farther away from Pellerinism? It seems he's begun to feel that
there's a Positivist element in it which is narrowing to any one who
has gone at all deeply into the Wisdom of the East. He was intensely
interesting about it the other day, and of course I _do_ see what he
feels. ... Oh, it's too long to tell you now; but if you could
manage to come in to tea some afternoon soon--any day but
Wednesday--I should so like to explain--"


THE EYES

I


WE had been put in the mood for ghosts, that evening, after an
excellent dinner at our old friend Culwin's, by a tale of Fred
Murchard's--the narrative of a strange personal visitation.

Seen through the haze of our cigars, and by the drowsy gleam of a
coal fire, Culwin's library, with its oak walls and dark old
bindings, made a good setting for such evocations; and ghostly
experiences at first hand being, after Murchard's brilliant opening,
the only kind acceptable to us, we proceeded to take stock of our
group and tax each member for a contribution. There were eight of
us, and seven contrived, in a manner more or less adequate, to
fulfil the condition imposed. It surprised us all to find that we
could muster such a show of supernatural impressions, for none of
us, excepting Murchard himself and young Phil Frenham--whose story
was the slightest of the lot--had the habit of sending our souls
into the invisible. So that, on the whole, we had every reason to be
proud of our seven "exhibits," and none of us would have dreamed of
expecting an eighth from our host.

Our old friend, Mr. Andrew Culwin, who had sat back in his
arm-chair, listening and blinking through the smoke circles with the
cheerful tolerance of a wise old idol, was not the kind of man
likely to be favoured with such contacts, though he had imagination
enough to enjoy, without envying, the superior privileges of his
guests. By age and by education he belonged to the stout Positivist
tradition, and his habit of thought had been formed in the days of
the epic struggle between physics and metaphysics. But he had been,
then and always, essentially a spectator, a humorous detached
observer of the immense muddled variety show of life, slipping out
of his seat now and then for a brief dip into the convivialities at
the back of the house, but never, as far as one knew, showing the
least desire to jump on the stage and do a "turn."

Among his contemporaries there lingered a vague tradition of his
having, at a remote period, and in a romantic clime, been wounded in
a duel; but this legend no more tallied with what we younger men
knew of his character than my mother's assertion that he had once
been "a charming little man with nice eyes" corresponded to any
possible reconstitution of his dry thwarted physiognomy.

"He never can have looked like anything but a bundle of sticks,"
Murchard had once said of him. "Or a phosphorescent log, rather,"
some one else amended; and we recognized the happiness of this
description of his small squat trunk, with the red blink of the eyes
in a face like mottled bark. He had always been possessed of a
leisure which he had nursed and protected, instead of squandering it
in vain activities. His carefully guarded hours had been devoted to
the cultivation of a fine intelligence and a few judiciously chosen
habits; and none of the disturbances common to human experience
seemed to have crossed his sky. Nevertheless, his dispassionate
survey of the universe had not raised his opinion of that costly
experiment, and his study of the human race seemed to have resulted
in the conclusion that all men were superfluous, and women necessary
only because some one had to do the cooking. On the importance of
this point his convictions were absolute, and gastronomy was the
only science which he revered as dogma. It must be owned that his
little dinners were a strong argument in favour of this view,
besides being a reason--though not the main one--for the fidelity of
his friends.

Mentally he exercised a hospitality less seductive but no less
stimulating. His mind was like a forum, or some open meeting-place
for the exchange of ideas: somewhat cold and draughty, but light,
spacious and orderly--a kind of academic grove from which all the
leaves had fallen. In this privileged area a dozen of us were wont
to stretch our muscles and expand our lungs; and, as if to prolong
as much as possible the tradition of what we felt to be a vanishing
institution, one or two neophytes were now and then added to our
band.

Young Phil Frenham was the last, and the most interesting, of these
recruits, and a good example of Murchard's somewhat morbid assertion
that our old friend "liked 'em juicy." It was indeed a fact that
Culwin, for all his mental dryness, specially tasted the lyric
qualities in youth. As he was far too good an Epicurean to nip the
flowers of soul which he gathered for his garden, his friendship was
not a disintegrating influence: on the contrary, it forced the young
idea to robuster bloom. Nay, more than that, all the races of Russia
understood that a challenge had been thrown out to Russia by
Germany that morally compelled her, in the interests of the whole
and of the various parts, to forget for the time all quarrels and
grievances.
Indeed, the skill with which Culwin had contrived to
stimulate his curiosities without robbing them of their young bloom
of awe seemed to me a sufficient answer to Murchard's ogreish
metaphor. There was nothing hectic in Frenham's efflorescence, and
his old friend had not laid even a finger-tip on the sacred
stupidities. One wanted no better proof of that than the fact that
Frenham still reverenced them in Culwin.

"There's a side of him you fellows don't see. _I_ believe that story
about the duel!" he declared; and it was of the very essence of this
belief that it should impel him--just as our little party was
dispersing--to turn back to our host with the absurd demand: "And
now you've got to tell us about _your_ ghost!"

The outer door had closed on Murchard and the others; only Frenham
and I remained; and the vigilant servant who presided over Culwin's
destinies, having brought a fresh supply of soda-water, had been
laconically ordered to bed.

Culwin's sociability was a night-blooming flower, and we knew that
he expected the nucleus of his group to tighten around him after
midnight. But Frenham's appeal seemed to disconcert him comically,
and he rose from the chair in which he had just reseated himself
after his farewells in the hall.

"_My_ ghost? Do you suppose I'm fool enough to go to the expense of
keeping one of my own, when there are so many charming ones in my
friends' closets?--Take another cigar," he said, revolving toward me
with a laugh.

Frenham laughed too, pulling up his slender height before the
chimney-piece as he turned to face his short bristling friend.

