"The Dragon's quite safe in the pit, good people," shouted Sir
Godfrey. "A few more minutes and you'll all see him."

The old gentleman continued welcoming the new arrivals, chatting
heartily, with a joke for this one and a kind inquiry for the other.
But wretched Geoffrey! So the Dragon was to be seen in a few minutes!
And where were the monks of Oyster-le-Main? Still, a bold face must be
kept. He was thankful that Elaine, after the custom of brides, was
invisible. The youth's left hand rested upon the hilt of his sword; he
was in rich attire, and the curly hair that surrounded his forehead
had been carefully groomed. Half-way up the stone steps as he stood,
his blue eyes watching keenly for the monks, he was a figure that made
many a humble nymph turn tender glances upon him. Old Piers, the
ploughman, remained beside a barrel of running ale and drank his
health all day. For he was a wonderful old man.

Hither and thither the domestics scurried swiftly, making
preparations. Some were cooking rare pasties of grouse and ptarmigan,
goslings and dough-birds; some were setting great tables in-doors and
out; and some were piling fagots for the Dragon's funeral pyre.
Popham, with magnificent solemnity and a pair of new calves, gave
orders to Meeson and Welsby, and kept little Whelpdale panting for
breath with errands; while in and out, between everybody's legs, and
over or under all obstacles, stalked the two ravens Croak James and
Croak Elizabeth, a big white wedding-favour tied round the neck of
each. To see these grave birds, none would have suspected how
frequently they had been in the mince-pies that morning, though Popham
had expressly ruled (in somewhat stilted language) that they should
"take nothink by their bills."

"Geoffrey," said the Baron, "I think we'll begin. Popham, tell them to
light that fire there."

"The guests are still coming, sir," said Geoffrey.

"No matter. It is half after eleven." The Baron showed his sun-dial,
and there was no doubt of it. "Here, take the keys," he said, "and
bring the monster out for us."

"I'll go and put on my armour," suggested the young man. That would
take time; perhaps the monks might arrive.

"Why, the brute's chained. You need no armour. Nonsense!"

"But think of my clothes in that pit, sir,--on my wedding-day."

"Pooh! That's the first sign of a Frenchman I've seen in you. Take the
keys, sir."

The crackle of the kindling fagots came to Geoffrey's ears. He saw the
forty men with chains that were to haul the Dragon into the fire.

"But there's Father Anselm yet to come," he protested. "Surely we wait
for him."

[Illustration]

"I'll wait for nobody. He with his Crusades and rubbish! Haven't I got
this Dragon, and there's no Crusade?--Ah, Cousin Modus, glad you
could come over. Just in time. The sherry's to your left. Yes, it's a
very fine day. Yes, yes, this is Geoffrey my girl's to marry and all
that.--What do I care about Father Anselm?" the old gentleman resumed
testily, when his cousin Modus had shuffled off. "Come, sir."

He gave the keys into Geoffrey's unwilling hand, and ordered silence
proclaimed.

"Hearken, good friends!" said he, and all talk and going to and fro
ceased. The tenantry stood down in the court-yard, a mass of
motionless russet and yellow, every face watching the Baron. The
gentry swarmed noiselessly out upon the steps behind him, their
handsome dresses bright against the Manor walls. There was a short
pause. Old Gaffer Piers made a slight disturbance falling over with
his cup of ale, but was quickly set on his feet by his neighbours. The
sun blazed down, and the growling of the Dragon came from the pit.

"Yonder noise," pursued Sir Godfrey, "speaks more to the point than I
could. I'll give you no speech." All loudly cheered at this.

