E-text prepared by David Deley


THE FALLEN STAR, or, THE HISTORY OF A FALSE RELIGION

by E. L. If a native of this island ill, he is now by all the relatives and
fellow countrymen shunned, he is quite helpless and dependent on
its own, a process which is bitterly avenge enough: because they
are most common Uebel, those at low easy cure, but neglect to be
tödtlich (Turnbull 260 and 292).

As a surgeon, they were like all Polynesians cleverly (Mörenhout
1, 161).

In America we can find pretty much the same.

The history of the origin of one supernatural religion will,
with slight alterations, serve to describe them all. Their claim
to credence rests on the exhibition of so-called miracles--that
is, on a violation of the laws of nature,--for, if religions
were founded on the demonstrated truths of science, there would
be no mystery, no supernaturalism, no miracles, no skepticism,
no false religion. We would have only verified truths and
demonstrated facts for the basis of our belief. But this simple
foundation does not satisfy the unreasoning multitude. They
demand signs, portents, mysteries, wonders and miracles for
their faith and the supply of prophets, knaves and impostors has
always been found ample to satisfy this abnormal demand of
credulity.

Designing men, even at the present day, find little difficulty
in establishing new systems of faith and belief. Joseph Smith,
who invented the Mormon religion, had more followers and
influence in this country at his death, than the Carpenter's Son
obtained centuries ago from the unlettered inhabitants of
Palestine; and yet Smith achieved his success among educated
people in this so-called enlightened age, while Jesus taught in
an age of semi-barbarism and faith, when both Jews and Pagans
asserted and believed that beasts, birds, reptiles and even
fishes understood human language, were often gifted with human
speech, and sometimes seemed to possess even more than ordinary
human intelligence.

They taught that the serpent, using the language of sophistry,
beguiled Eve in Eden, who in turn corrupted Adam, her first and
only husband. At the baptism of Jesus by John in the river
Jordan, the voice of a dove resounded in the heavens, saying,
quite audibly and distinctly, "Thou art my beloved Son; in thee
I am well pleased." Balaam disputed with his patient beast of
burden, on their celebrated journey in the land of Moab, and the
ass proved wiser in the argument that ensued than the inspired
prophet who bestrode him, The great fish Oannes left his native
element and taught philosophy to the Chaldeans on dry land.
One reputable woman, of Jewish lineage,--the mother of an
interesting family--was changed to a pillar of salt in Sodom
while another female of great notoriety known to fame as the
celebrated "Witch of Endor," raised Samuel from his grave in
Ramah. Saint Peter found a shilling in the mouth of a fish which
he caught in the Sea of Galilee, and this lucky incident enabled
the impecunious apostle to pay the "tribute money" in Capernaum.
Another famous Israelite,--so it is said,--broke the record of
balloon ascensions in Judea, and ascended into heaven in a
chariot of fire.

In an age of ignorance wonders abound, prodigies occur, and
miracles become common, The untaught masses are easily deceived,
and their unreasoning credulity enables them to proudly boast of
their unquestioning faith. When their feelings are excited and
their passions aroused by professional evangelists, they even
profess to believe that which they cannot comprehend; and, in
the satirical language of Bulwer, they endeavor to "_assist
their ignorance by the conjectures of their superstition_."

Among the multitudes of diverse and opposing religions which
afflict mankind, it is self-evident that but one religion may
justly claim the inspiration of truth, and it is equally evident
to all reasoning minds that that religion is the religion of
kindness and humanity,--the religion of noble thoughts and
generous deeds,--which removes the enmities of race and creed,
and "makes the whole world kin!" And which, in its observance is
blessed with sympathy, friendship, happiness and love.

This religion needs no creed, no profession of faith, no
incense, no prayer, no penance, no sacrifice. Its whole duty
consists in comforting the afflicted, assisting the unfortunate,
protecting the helpless, and in honestly fulfilling our duties
to our fellow mortals. In the language of Confucius, the ancient
Chinese Sage, it is simply "to behave to others as I would
require others to behave to me."

"Do unto others as you would they should do unto you," says
Jesus; and in the Epistle of James, we are told that "Pure
Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world."

The same benign and generous conduct is commended in even
grander and nobler language in the lectures to the French
Masonic Lodges: "Love one another, teach one another, help one
another. That is all our doctrine, all our science, all our
law."

It is believed that the learned dissertation of Lord Brougham on
the _Origin of Evil_, which is annexed to this work, will need
no commendation to ensure its careful perusal.

                         PETER ECKLER.


THE FALLEN STAR, or, THE HISTORY OF A FALSE RELIGION

by E. L. Bulwer


HISTORY OF A FALSE RELIGION.
AN ALLEGORY OF THE STARS.

And the Stars sat, each on his ruby throne, and watched with
sleepless eyes upon the world. It was the night ushering in the
new year, a night on which every star receives from the
archangel that then visits the universal galaxy, its peculiar
charge.

The destinies of men and empires are then portioned forth for
the coming year, and, unconsciously to ourselves, our fates
become minioned to the stars.

A hushed and solemn night is that in which the dark gates of
time open to receive the ghost of the dead year, and the young
and radiant stranger rushes forth from the clouded chasms of
eternity. On that night, it is said that there are given to the
spirits that we see not, a privilege and a power; the dead are
troubled in their forgotten graves, and men feast and laugh,
while demon and angel are contending for their doom.

It was night in heaven; all was unutterably silent, the music of
the spheres had paused, and not a sound came from the angels of
the stars; and they who sat upon those shining thrones were
three thousand and ten, each resembling each.

Eternal youth clothed their radiant limbs with celestial beauty,
and on their faces was written the dread of calm, that fearful
stillness which feels not, sympathizes not with the dooms over
which it broods.

War, tempest, pestilence, the rise of empires, and their fall,
they ordain, they, compass, unexultant and uncompassionate. The
fell and thrilling crimes that stalk abroad when the world
sleeps--the parricide with his stealthy step, and horrent brow,
and lifted knife; the unwifed mother that glides out and looks
behind, and behind, and shudders, and casts her babe upon the
river, and hears the wail, and pities not--the splash, and does
not tremble!

These the starred kings behold--to these they lead the
unconscious step; but the guilt blanches not their lustre,
neither doth remorse wither their unwrinkled youth.

Each star wore a kingly diadem; round the loins of each was a
graven belt, graven with many and mighty signs; and the foot of
each was on a burning ball, and the right arm dropped over the
knee as they bent down from their thrones; they moved not a limb
or feature, save the finger of the right hand, which ever and
anon moved slowly, pointing, and regulated the fates of men as
the hand of the dial speaks the career of time.

One only of the three thousand and ten wore not the same aspect
as his crowned brethren; a star, smaller than the rest, and less
luminous. The countenance of this star was not impressed with
the awful calmness of the others; but there were sullenness and
discontent upon his mighty brow.

And this star said to himself--"Behold, I am created less
glorious than my fellows, and the archangel apportions not to me
the same lordly destinies. Not for me are the dooms of kings and
bards, the rulers of empires, or, yet nobler, the swayers and
harmonists of souls. Sluggish are the spirits and base the lot
of the men I am ordained to lead through a dull life to a
fameless grave. And wherefore?--Is it mine own fault, or is it
the fault which is not mine, that I was woven of beams less
glorious than my brethren? Lo! when the archangel comes, I will
bow not my crowned head to his decrees. I will speak, as the
ancestral Lucifer before me: _he_ rebelled because of his glory,
_I_ because of my obscurity; _he_ from the ambition of pride,
and _I_ from its discontent."

And while the star was thus communing with himself, the upward
heavens were parted as by a long river of light, and adown that
stream swiftly, and without sound, sped the archangel visitor of
the stars; his vast limbs floated in the liquid lustre, and his
outspread wings, each plume the glory of a sun, bore him
noiselessly along; but thick clouds veiled his lustre from the
eyes of mortals, and while above all was bathed in the serenity
of his splendor, tempest and storm broke below over the children
of the earth:

"He bowed the heavens and came down, and darkness was under his
feet."

And the stillness on the faces of the stars became yet more
still, and the awfulness was humbled into awe. Right above their
thrones paused the course of the archangel; and his wings
stretched from east to west, overshadowing with the shadow of
light the immensity of space. Then forth in the shining
stillness, rolled the dread music of his voice: and, fulfilling
the heraldry of god, to each star he appointed the duty and the
charge, and each star bowed his head yet lower as he heard the
fiat, while his throne rocked and trembled at the majesty of the
word. But at last, when each of the brighter stars had, in
succession, received the mandate, and the viceroyalty over the
nations of the earth, the purple and diadems of kings--the
archangel addressed the lesser star as he sat apart from his
fellows

"Behold," said the archangel, "the rude tribes of the north, the
fishermen of the river that flows beneath, and the hunters of
the forests, that darken the mountain-tops with verdure! these
be thy charge, and their destinies thy care. Nor deem thou, O
star of the sullen beams, that thy duties are less glorious than
the duties of thy brethren; for the peasant is not less to thy
master and mine than the monarch; nor doth the doom of empires
rest more upon the sovereign than on the herd. The passions and
the heart are the dominion of the stars--a mighty realm; nor
less mighty beneath the hide that garbs the shepherd, than the
jewelled robes of eastern kings."

Then the star lifted his pale front from his breast, and
answered the archangel:

"Lo!" he said, "ages have past, and each year thou hast
appointed me to the same ignoble charge. Release me, I pray
thee, from the duties that I scorn; or, if thou wilt that the
lowlier race of men be my charge, give unto me the charge not of
many, but of one, and suffer me to breathe into him the desire
that spurns the valleys of life, and ascends its steeps. If the
humble are given to me, let there be amongst them one whom I may
lead on the mission that shall abase the proud; for, behold, O
Appointer of the Stars, as I have sat for uncounted years upon
my solitary throne, brooding over the things beneath, my spirit
hath gathered wisdom from the changes that shift below. Looking
upon the tribes of earth, I have seen how the multitude are
swayed, and tracked the steps that lead weakness into power; and
fain would I be the ruler of one who, if abased, shall aspire to
rule."

As a sudden cloud over the face of noon was the change on the
brow of the archangel.

"Proud and melancholy star," said the herald, "thy wish would
war with the courses of the invisible destiny, that, throned far
above, sways and harmonizes all; the source from which the
lesser rivers of fate are eternally gushing through the heart of
the universe of things. Thinkest thou that thy wisdom, of
itself, can lead the peasant to become a king?"

And the crowned star gazed undauntedly on the face of the
archangel, and answered:

"Yea!--grant me but one trial!"

Ere the archangel could reply, the farthest centre of the heaven
was rent as by a thunderbolt; and the divine herald covered his
face with his hands, and a voice low and sweet, and mild with
the consciousness of unquestionable power, spoke forth to the
repining star:

"The time has arrived when thou mayest have thy wish. Below
thee, upon yon solitary plain, sits a mortal, gloomy as thyself,
who, born under thy influence, may be moulded to thy will."

The voice ceased, as the voice of a dream. Silence was over the
seas of space, and the archangel, once more borne aloft, slowly
soared away into the farther heaven, to promulgate the divine
bidding to the stars of far-distant worlds.

But the soul of the discontented star exulted within itself; and
it said, "I will call forth a king from the valley of the
herdsmen, that shall trample on the kings subject to my fellows,
and render the charge of the contemned star more glorious than
the minions of its favored brethren; thus shall I revenge
neglect--thus shall I prove my claim hereafter to the heritage
of the great of earth!"


At that time, though the world had rolled on for ages, and the
pilgrimage of man had passed through various states of existence,
which our dim traditionary knowledge has not preserved, yet the
condition of our race in the northern hemisphere was then what
_we_, in our imperfect lore, have conceived to be among the
earliest.


FORMING A NEW RELIGION.

By a rude and vast pile of stones, the masonry of arts
forgotten, a lonely man sat at midnight, gazing upon the
heavens. A storm had just passed from the earth--the clouds had
rolled away, and the high stars looked down upon the rapid
waters of the Rhine; and no sound save the roar of the waves and
the dripping of the rain from the mighty trees, was heard around
the ruined pile: the white sheep lay scattered on the plain, and
slumber with them. He sat watching over the herd, lest the foes
of a neighboring tribe seized them unawares, and thus he
coummuned with himself:

"The king sits upon his throne, and is honored by a warrior
race, and the warrior exults in the trophies he has won; the
step of the huntsman is bold upon the mountain-top, and his name
is sung at night round the pine-fires, by the lips of the bard;
and the bard himself hath honor in the hail. But I, who belong
not to the race of kings, and whose limbs can bound not to the
rapture of war, nor scale the eyries of the eagle and the haunts
of the swift stag; whose hand cannot string the harp, and whose
voice is harsh in the song; _I_ have neither honor nor command,
and men bow not the head as I pass along; yet do I feel within
me the consciousness of a great power that should rule my
species--not obey. My eye pierces the secret hearts of men--I
see their thoughts ere their lips proclaim them; and I scorn,
while I see, the weakness and the vices which I never shared. I
laugh at the madness of the warrior--I mock within my soul at
the tyranny of kings. Surely there is something in man's nature
more fitted to command--more worthy of renoun, than the sinews
of the arm, or the swiftness of the feet, or the accident of
birth!"

As Morven, the son of Osslah, thus mused within himself, still
looking at the heavens, the solitary man beheld a star suddenly
shooting from its place, and speeding through the silent air,
till it as suddenly paused right over the midnight river, and
facing the inmate of the pile of stones.

As he gazed upon the star strange thoughts grew slowly over him.
He drank, as it were, from its solemn aspect, the spirit of a
great design. A dark cloud rapidly passing over the earth,
snatched the star from his sight; but left to his awakened mind
the thoughts and the dim scheme that had come to him as he
gazed.

When the sun arose one of his brethren relieved him of his
charge over the herd, and he went away, but not to his father's
home. Musingly he plunged into the dark and leafless recesses of
the winter forest; and shaped out of his wild thoughts, more
palpably and clearly, the outline of his daring hope.

While thus absorbed, he heard a great noise in the forest, and,
fearful lest the hostile tribe of the Alrich might pass that
way, he ascended one of the loftiest pine-trees, to whose
perpetual verdure the winter had not denied the shelter he
sought, and, concealed by its branches, he looked anxiously
forth in the direction whence the noise had proceed.

And IT came--it came with a tramp and a crash, and a crushing
tread upon the crunched boughs and matted leaves that strewed
the soil--it came--it came, the monster that the world now holds
no more--the mighty mammoth of the North!

Slowly it moved in its huge strength along, and its burning eyes
glittered through the gloomy shade: its jaws, falling apart,
showed the grinders with which it snapped asunder the young oaks
of the forest; and the vast tusks, which, curved downward to the
midst of its massive limbs, glistened white and ghastly,
curdling the blood of one destined hereafter to be the dreaded
ruler of the men of that distant age.

The livid eyes of the monster fastened on the form of the
herdsman, even amidst the thick darkness of the pine. It
paused--it glared upon him--its jaws opened, and a low deep
sound, as of gathering thunder, seemed to the son of Osslah as
the knell of a dreadful grave. But after glaring on him for some
moments, it again, and calmly, pursued its terrible way,
crashing the boughs as it marched along, till the last sound of
its heavy tread died away upon his ear.

Ere yet, however, before Morven had summoned the courage to
descend the tree, he saw the shining of arms through the bare
branches of the wood, and presently a small hand of the hostile
Alrich came into sight. He was perfectly hidden from them; and,
listening as they passed him, he heard one say to another:

"The night covers all things; why attack them by day?"

And he who seemed the chief of the band, answered "Right.
To-night, when they sleep in their city, we will upon them. Lo!
they will be drenched in wine, and fall like sheep into our
hands."

"But where, O chief," said a third of the band, shall our men
hide during the day? for there are many hunters among the youth
of the Oestrich tribe, and they might see us in the forest
unawares, and arm their race against our coming."

"I have prepared for that," answered the chief. "Is not the dark
cavern of Oderlin at hand? Will it not shelter us from the eyes
of the victims?"

Then the men laughed, and shouting, they went their way adown
the forest.


When they were gone Morven cautiously descended, and, striking
into a broad path, hastened to a vale that lay between the
forest and the river in which was the city where the chief of
his country dwelt.

As he passed by the warlike men, giants in that day, who
thronged the streets (if streets they might be called), their
half garments parting from their huge limbs, the quiver at their
backs, and the hunting spears in their hands, they laughed and
shouted out, and, pointing to him, cried:

"Morven, the woman! Morven, the cripple! what dost thou among
men?"

For the son of Osslah was small in stature and of slender
strength, and his step had halted from his birth; but he passed
through the warriors unheedingly.

At the outskirts of the city he came upon a tail pile, in which
some old men dwelt by themselves, and counseled the king when
times of danger, or when the failure of the season, the famine,
or the drought, perplexed the ruler, and clouded the savage
fronts of his warrior tribe.

They gave the counsels of experience, and when experience
failed, they drew, in their believing ignorance, assurances and
omens from the winds of heaven, the changes of the moon, and the
flights of the wandering birds. Filled (by the voices of the
elements, and the variety of mysteries which ever shift along
the face of things, unsolved by the wonder which pauses not, the
fear which believes, and that eternal reasoning of all experience,
which assigns causes to effects) with the notion of superior
powers, _they assisted their ignorance by the conjectures of
their superstition_. But as yet they knew no craft and practiced
no _voluntary_ delusion; they trembled too much at the mysteries,
which had created their faith, to seek to belie them. They
counselled as they believed, and the bold dream had never dared
to cross men thus worn and grey with age, of governing their
warriors and their kings by the wisdom of deceit.

The son of Osslah entered the vast pile with a fearless step,
and approached the place at the upper end of the hall, where the
old men sat in conclave.

"How, base-torn and craven limbed!" cried the eldest, who had
been a noted warrior in his day; "darest thou enter unsummoned
amidst the secret councils of the wise men? Knowest thou not,
scatterling! that the penalty is death?"

"Slay me, if thou wilt," answered Morven "but hear!

"As I sat last night in the ruined palace of our ancient kings,
tending, as my father bade me, the sheep that grazed around,
lest the fierce tribe of Alrich should descend unseen from the
mountains upon the herd, a storm came darkly on; and when the
storm, had ceased and I looked above on the sky, I saw a star
descend from its height towards me, and a voice from the star
said, 'Son of Osslah, leave thy herd and seek the council of the
wise men, and say unto them, that they take thee as one of their
number, or that sudden will be the destruction of them, and
theirs.'

"But I had courage to answer the voice, and I said, 'Mock not
the poor son of the herdsman. Behold they will kill me if I
utter so rash a word, for I am poor and valueless in the eyes of
the tribe of Oestrich, and the great in deeds and the grey of
hair alone sit in the council of the wise men.'

"Then the voice said, 'Do my bidding, and I will give thee a
token that thou comest from the powers that sway the seasons and
sail upon the eagles of the winds. Say unto the wise men that
this very night if they refuse to receive thee of their band,
evil shall fall upon them, and the morrow shall dawn in blood.'

"Then the voice ceased, and a cloud passed over the star; and I
communed with myself, and came, O dread fathers, mournfully unto
you. For I feared that ye would smite me because of my bold
tongue, and that ye would, sentence me to the death, in that I
asked what may scarce be given even to the sons of kings."

Then the grim elders looked one at the other and marvelled much,
nor knew they what answer they should make to the herdsman's
son.

At length one of the wise men said, "Surely there must be truth
in the son of Osslah, for he would not dare to falsify the great
lights of heaven. If he had given unto men the words of the
star, verily we might doubt the truth. But who would brave the
vengeance of the gods of night?"

Then the elders shook their heads approvingly; but one answered
and said:

"Shall we take the herdsman's son as our equal? No!"

The name of the man who thus answered was Darvan, and his words
were pleasing to the elders.

But Morven spoke out:

"Of a truth, O councilors of kings! I look not to be an equal
with yourselves. Enough if I tend the gates of your palace, and
serve you as the son of Osslah may serve;" and he bowed his head
humbly as he spoke.

Then said the chief of the elders, for he was wiser than the
others, "But how wilt thou deliver us from the evil that is to
come? Doubtless the star hath informed thee of the service thou
canst render to us if we take thee into our palace, as well as
the ill that will fall on us if we refuse."

Morven answered meekly: "Surely, if thou acceptest thy servant,
the star will teach him that which may requite thee; but as yet
he knows only what he has uttered."

Then the sages bade him withdraw, and they communed with
themselves and they differed much; but though fierce men and
bold at the war cry of a human foe, they shuddered at the
prophecy of a star. So they resolved to take the son of Osslah,
and suffer him to keep the gate of the council-hall.

He heard their decree and towed his head, and went to the gate,
and sat down by it in silence.

And the sun went down in the west, and the first stats of the
twilight began to glimmer, when Morven started front his seat,
and a trembling appeared to seize his limbs. His lips foamed; an
agony and a fear possessed him; he writhed as a man whom the
spear of a foeman has pierced with a mortal wound, and suddenly
fell upon his face on the stony earth.


The elders approached him; wondering, they lifted him up. He
slowly recovered as from a swoon; his eyes rolled wildly.

"Heard ye not the voice of the star?" he said.

And the chief of the elders answered, "Nay, we heard no sound."

Then Morven sighed heavily.

"To me only the word was given. Summon instantly, O councilors
of the king! summon the armed men, and all the youth of the
tribe, and let them take the sword and the spear, and follow thy
servant. For lo! the star hath announced to him that the foe
shall fall into our hands as the wild beast of the forests."

The son of Osslah spoke with the voice of command, and the
elders were amazed.

"Why, pause ye?" he cried. "Do the gods of the night lie? On my
head rest the peril if I deceive ye."

Then the elders communed together; and they went forth and
summoned the men of arms, and all the young of the tribe; and
each man took the sword and the spear, and Morven also. And the
son of Osslah walked first, still looking up at the star; and he
motioned them to be silent, and move with a stealthy step.

The port, a result of large hydraulic works, but incomplete,
moving towards the sea on one side, is an erratic stock market,
about 1500 meters of development. Upon entering, sees the new
right and symmetric population _Barceloneta_, a kind of city
business, which has advanced in the dock for unloading, the
lighthouse station and the first quarter of this control is called
egoista _Aduana_.

Basically and left are: the main door which gives on the
beautiful "Plaza de Palacio," the office, the Palace of Fine
Arts and the Stock Exchange, and then highlights the huge wall
to the south, providing a basis for large parapet, dominated
by a long line of magnificent houses, large, colorful, have
the air of palaces of the middle class. Then, the curve is
extended as if to close the port and its coast is dominated by a
high hill that serves as the seat of strong _Monjuí_, sentry post
there for the genius of war and mistrust, as a threat to the secular
trade, which is the genius of peace and prosperity.

Catalonia is a country that can not be described in broad terms
but because it is a cosmopolitan country, where the details
disappear before the interest of the whole.

If the reader to penetrate into the other Spanish provinces in
much detail I will, because they are all in the region goda,
Andalusian and Vascongada, - to show my feelings in Catalonia have
to be reduced to the general appearance of the country, which shows
all conditions.

Catalonia, between the Pyrenees, the Aragon, the province of
Castellon and the Mediterranean, took a fifteenth part of
Spanish territory and has a total population of 1700000 souls, ie,
the ninth of the Spanish population in Europe.

This disproportion nomas indicates greater activity of Catalonia
by a stronger condensation of inhabitants, which means more farming
and more industrial, commercial and social culture.

The city of Barcelona is only 190,000, but 200,000 inhabitants
and other cities in Catalonia are well regarded as Reus,
Tarragona and Lleida, and some that do not descend from 14,000
souls, but in the general population of Catalonia is divided into
fields and a multitude of small factories very interesting.

Land ownership, on the other hand, is highly distributed;
surfing activity absorbs a strong part of the population, naturally
independent, and remains essentially as the manufacturer country,
bodies of workers in their populations are much consideration.

All these facts are of the utmost importance to assess the
social conditions of Catalonia.

Nature, as elsewhere, has given all the phenomena characteristic
of the Catalan country. A fertile land, the climate very healthy
and mostly flat, lies there, surrounded by a considerable river
(the Ebro) and many other non-navigable, but excellent for the
irrigation of fields and the propulsion of the factories.

In all directions except east, rich country that is surrounded
by mountains that isolate it more or less with the rest of Spain
(except Aragon) and France. Nature, therefore, invited to seek
the Catalan coastline to get in touch with the world. Taking
the hand ports, the largest Catalanes found a way to expand your
social or institutional change. Its rich soil made the farmers,
their mountains, as barriers of defense, have made them proud
and indomitable; equal ground has allowed easier communication,
and the extensive coastline with many ports have been invited to
manufacture and commerce activity.

At the same time, they prepared their geographical position
ethnological conditions.

Bearing in neighboring France, and Italy in front at your
disposal throughout the Mediterranean, its shores have been open
to all invasions. First gave a way the Phoenicians, then the
Carthaginians. Later, the Romans gave them his seal, dominating
in Catalonia than in any other region of Iberia. Finally, the
successive invasions by Gauls and Franks, and the domination that
at various times have had there, after the Goths, the Saracens, the
French, the Aragonese, the Neapolitan and even the British, have
so disrupted the type primitive, that after Catalonia, as a reflection
of the diverse races, has been a peculiar situation of fusion and
poligenésis.

Such is its essential form, which is revealed in customs,
language, race, industry and even local institutions. Anywhere,
in Catalonia, the race has its kind, their language and their
habits, qualities and defects mixed in any society, acting with
unusual energy.

Women there have masculine forms, usually lacking in the mildness,
kindness and the accompanying morbidity anywhere, to a greater
or lesser degree, to be feminine.

The beauty found there are a proud and stiff and resolute expression.
The common man is what the complexion dark, eyes lively and
penetrating, the factions angled, strongly marked lines, black
hair, LASO and abundant, voice loud and free.

Organizations have the stamp of force and work: robust and
vigorous, but not elegance or polish. Is that the conscience
of society that it has prevailed on _útil_ notions of spirituality
and art.

The language, such as race and history, is a compound. I say the
_lengua_ because catalan is not a dialect, but a complete language,
which has its own grammar and literature.

By listening carefully to a lively conversation in catalan, cree
was attending a dialogue between men of all nations.

Presto is perceived as sweet Italian word, as the French voice,
heavily accented and turned into a gritty sound, and feel the echo
and noise filled the Spanish word, pompous for its abundance of
vowels, such as acute stress and effort the guttural _j_ that
distinguishes the poetic language of the Arabs.

Thus, the catalan is simultaneously Phoenician, Italian,
Gothic, Arabic and French, but the predominant type in Italian
and French elements.

And indeed, the Catalan, cosmopolitan businessman par excellence,
is the highly impressionable ardentía's Italian, as well as
mocking the spark and spirit of the French speculator. The most
characteristic features of Catalan, which has wonderful qualities,
are frank without wantonness, independence, strictness in the
fulfillment of a commitment, and the intimate feeling of equality
and personality.

If you need a Catalan, hit the circle in which you hallais, mixes
without ceremony, he says what you want, and withdrew without being
fulfilled by anyone.

And so it is not rude or discourteous, if not because business
is friendly, talkative and expansive. If you want to your home,
you will find hospitable, generous and fine, as long as it merezcais.

With the exception of matters that absolutely require writing for
their validity, the Catalan word does business, and any agreement
worth more than the best document.

Several times I saw in the stock market made strong transactions
without the intervention of agents of change and without seeking
esprofeso witnesses.

One day I visited, as an observer, the vast hall of the Barcelona
Stock Exchange, the Palace of Arts, I stopped in front of two
powerful speculators who spoke thus: - Is U. income of three - I
have some thirty thousand hard .-- To what?

- The price quoted yesterday. - would reduce U. ten cents - if not
in time itself - Could U. ten thousand more get hard?

- Yes. - Another five thousand? - Yes. - _Dicho. _ The two
traders, without further conversation, they split, after tightening
the hand.

The next day I knew, because the matter had concerned me greatly,
that the businessman had been questioned, at ten o'clock, home to
deliver the other forty-five thousand in income from hard _tres_
and receive money on tickets bank.

The seller had lost a thousand hard to get the fifteen thousand
more promised that he had no cash.

Without that, it would have been dishonored and lost to the trade
in Barcelona.

The word _dicho_, after a conversation made clear, closed a
contract and makes it mandatory. If a trader who had just made
a payment will be warned before the twenty-four hours that he
has received some less, by mistake, which is paying claims, and
without further proof that his word (if male known), is the deficit.

Since everything can be verified later, not ever think that a
dealer may fail to know the truth or commit fraud.

A town where the word has such a high value, is obviously an
honest and active people. * * * * * The relative isolation that
the Catalans had lived with respect to the Spaniards, there has
developed a distinct people ibero of all conditions and very special.

Catalonia is not like but to Catalonia. The spirit of independence,
developed habits and maritime trade, has qualified for the Catalans
is lawless rioters, and especially to its population of mountain
_terrible_.

Wrong. The real intractable who wanted to oppress and deprive
the Catalans of their traditional freedoms, their language, their
customs and prosperity.

The mountains of Catalonia, the brave inhabitants of _Puigcerdá_,
no man is supposed to be fierce.

If left alone is great, laborious and very accessible, but if he
attacks, is relentless in the war and no truce until the country
is free of enemies.

Guerrilla catalan was the most terrible enemy of Napoleon,
and will at all times to guarantee the independence Spanish.
It is true that the Catalans are opposed to war and have a profound
spirit of progress, they have always sought the demolition of
fortifications, in order to expand their cities, hoping to defend
their interests rather than the guns of the thick walls.

Just recently authorized the demolition of part of these fortifications,
and the cities of Barcelona and Tarragona grow and improve and
regenerate as if by magic.

Within a few years Barcelona is a vast and beautiful capital of
350,000 people. There is a catalan people more deeply ingrained
sense of equality and personality. This comes from love and
respect to work there for the industry.

The sample of your store or your shop is a true craftsman or Blason
for the trafficker.

The noblest men in Catalonia, is working with more tenacity,
intelligence and probity.

There are no more noble than the work and all work, all are equal
and are treated with a simplicity that allows the fusion of all
social classes.

If Catalan is essentially independent and liberal, it's the craftsman.

A poor shopkeeper cree is sovereign in her shop as a banker on your
desktop and batelero in his boat.

Hence certain dignity without haughty rudeness, some awareness of
their personality, that makes all genres Catalan work imaginable
and pure, but that makes it unable to completely degrade in ignoble
occupations, such as the rogue or the trapacero.

Here everyone is busy in producing something.

Batelero If the rough is so common and foul, as elsewhere, the
artisan is attentive and affectionate farmer. Arriving at Barcelona
is penosísima an impression caused by the many beggars that surround
and torment abroad.

Begging me seemed very strange in a city as affluent and active.
Soon learned that there are excellent institutes of charity to
pick up beggars, and provide care for work.

But these are no beggars in Barcelona, people come from far
inland to exploit foreigners, but flee and hide every time they
want to pick, to reappear later in wandering bands. Beggars in
Spain are the tracks that are no longer living convents and
institutions vicious.

Catalanes The two qualities are very fertile for industrial and
moral progress: a high spirit of partnership, and the dotted for
the imitation of all good things, Not to be outdone.

All great things, as more passengers, made in Catalonia by the
association. Shipping companies, lighting and prosecuted,
railroads, banks, large factories, many credit institutions,
theaters, casinos, cafes and even dances and parties, come from
voluntary associations, without any interference or warranty
of authority. This spirit is very good for social purposes. The
whole world is interested in business, everything going well and
apriesa, nothing fell, monuments and recreation, such as theaters,
casinos, etc.. Are always auje, although often without profits.
As all shareholders are in the theaters, all together, and Barcelona
is always excellent artists.

The Catalan people are the first in Spain to have gas lighting,
railroads, and said credit companies, irrigation and intelligent
things distinguish the civilization England and France advanced.
Any progress is immediately received by the Catalans, and, what
is even more remarkable, their progress or their works are the
result of their own efforts and resources.

Railways (which are already many) are almost _catalanas_ the
absolute sense of the word. In Catalonia until the people of
three thousand people are lighting gas, and steam roars everywhere
as the engine of the large manufacturing work.

Besides its excellent roads, railways, its many lines of
inquiries and hundreds of sailing ships, the Catalans have a good
vapor service for international navigation and costanera.

So their ports are always full of vessels that feed the
powerful activity in the country. catalan The country is highly
agricultural, with strong exports wines, oils, fruits and
many other items.

It's also commercial excellence. But which prints its most
distinctive mark is the manufacturing industry, which resembles
the English Catalonia a region. No gender manufacturing there
is no reception, being the most important fabrics of cotton, wool,
silk and linen in large-scale manufacture of paper and linen.

Regardless of the important cities of Tarragona and Reus, then
that talk, and those of Lerida and Gerona, which are not industrial,
the most important towns in Catalonia are manufacturers par
excellence.

After Barcelona, whose production is strong and where everything
is centralized within the movement, the following deserve special
mention: _Mataró_, sea port, with a wide variety of manufacturing
and 17,000 souls. _Manresa_, With 15,300. _Sabadell_, With
14,000 and a very strong and advanced manufacturing. _Vich_,
with 14,000, as well as important agricultural center.
_Badalona_, neighboring port of Barcelona, with 10,500 souls.
_San Andres de Palomar_, with 10,000 inhabitants. _Tarrasa_,
in 9000, famous for its superior fabrics. _Clot_, With 7000 souls.
_Arenys Of Mar_, in 5000, also notable for its excellent three
yards.

Catalonia, by the nature of its productions, has active relations
with all world markets. Although beginning to actively exploit
their bogs and coal mines of England received a huge amount of
values in coal to fuel its factories, railways and vapors.
Oils Catalans will be purified in France or the world for
general consumption, such as the popular and cheap wine.

Tissues supplied not only the country but to some villages of the
New World, where his role will also foil as estimated by lawyers
and notaries and governments who love the stamped paper.

The New World it sends its cotton Catalonia; Italy, Valencia
and other countries their silks, cáñamos, etc.. The Catalan,
but loves his country, is essentially traveler. There is a
civilized country, in both continents, where the shop is not
Catalan's laborious, full of the most varied articles Spaniards.
The inhabitant of Catalonia considers his country as a
nation.

Jamas said _soy Español_ but: _soy Catalan_.

If the better educated classes of society speak Spanish well,
when they need, the crowd knows what evil, and many people
ignore it completely and speak only Catalan, a language that abounds
in strong consonants and sounds particularly acute.

This is Catalonia, as I understand with a quick study.

If my impressions are wrong, at least have the quality to be
honest. * * * * * An interesting and beautiful Barcelona is
divided into two parts, ancient and modern by splendid _Rambla_
of the street (which is also a walk), where the two major theaters,
some sumptuous casinos, hotels and cafes and offices of many steps
a day.

To the north is the ancient city, though very embellished and
renovated, the new south, with its beautiful promenade of _Prado_.

Under the city: on one side, near Barcelona, the magnificent
_plaza of Toros_ (monument in every city indispensable Spanish),
and between it and two of the city railway station. On the other
hand, to the west, toward the plain, split two other railroads.

Barcelona, then, is linked to the peoples of the coast and inland
by four railroads, there will be too late and not completed,
leading to Madrid, and by Lerida Zaragoza, Valencia and the
south, Tarragona, and France, for Gerona. Barcelona is interesting
in all aspects, because he wanted to reconcile the economy with
refined pleasures of civilization. I will speak first of the
monuments visited quickly, and then the custom features I could
perceive. Barcelona is an ancient city, whose monuments
have left their mark, more or less marked, the different
dominations.

Above all, the Roman and Gothic art erected stone memories
that time has observed. Generally the houses have a solid
floor, elegant and built, and today many buildings are very
beautiful, which always dominates the French style, enhanced by the
picturesque green or blue balcony Spanish modern taste.

Among the monuments profane are distinguished by their shape or by
the importance of what they contain: the Palace of Arts, a beautiful
Renaissance style building, which is both a museum and Exchange,
the famous file _Real_ of the Crown of Aragon, the most precious
of its kind in Europe, the main library, very substantial and well
maintained (apart from three, and several other files), Customs,
building large and beautiful proportions, and theaters _Principal_
and _Liceo_ (there are other junior), which are the best in Spain.

The Lyceum is considered the largest in Europe, and is an elegant
simplicity, which may contain up to 4,800 people, but its enormity,
and some make it sound defects unsuitable for anything that is not
noisy opera.

Barcelona is also beautiful rides, some public parks, a school
for deaf-mute hospice, and a multitude of charities and
educational establishments of varied objects, which do honor
to the capital of Catalonia.

As a historic building and curious, is also the former palace of
the kings of Aragon. Deserve particular attention, among the
many religious monuments (not of great artistic merit), the
cathedral and the churches of St. James and San Miguel.

The cathedral, in Gothic style of the twelfth century, although
lacking boldness in its three naves, is an imposing majesty
of the interior of grim severity.
"'Wherefore, wisely do ye deem that the children of the air are
the fit interpreters between the sons of men and the lords of
the world above.

"'Say then to the people and the chiefs, that they shall take,
from among the doves that nest in the roof of the palace, a
white dove, and they shall let it loose in the air, and verily
the gods of the night shall deem the dove as a prayer coming
from the people, and they shall send a messenger to grant the
prayer and give to the tribes of Oestrich a king worthy of
themselves.'

"With that the star spoke no more."

Then the friends of Voltoch murmured among themselves, and they
said, "Shall this man dictate to us who shall be king?"

But the people and the warriors shouted:

"Listen to the star; do we not give or deny battle according as
the bird flies--shall we not by the same token choose him by
whom the battle should be led?"

And the thing seemed natural to them, for it was after the
custom of the tribe.

Then they took one of the doves that built in the roof of the
palace, and they bought it to the spot where Morven stood, and
he, looking up to the stars and muttering to himself, released
the bird.

There was a copse of trees a little distance from the spot, and
as the dove ascended, a hawk suddenly rose from the copse and
pursued the dove; and the dove was terrified, and soared
circling high above the crowd, when, lo, the hawk, poising
itself one moment on its wings, swooped with a sudden swoop,
and, abandoning its prey, alighted on the plumed head of Siror.

"Behold," cried Morven in a loud voice, "behold your king!"

"Hail, all hail the king!" shouted the people. "All hail the
chosen of the stars!"

Then Morven lifted his right hand, and the hawk left the prince,
and alighted on Morven's shoulder.

"Bird of the gods!" said he, reverently, "hast thou not a secret
message for my ear?" Then the hawk put its beak to Morven's ear,
and Morven bowed his head submissively; and the hawk rested with
Morven from that moment and would not be scared away.

And Morven said:

"The stars have sent me this bird, that, in the day-time, when I
see them not, we may never be without a counsellor in distress."

So Siror was made king, and Maven the son of Osslah was
constrained by the king's will to take Orna for his wife; and
the people and the chiefs honored Morven, the prophet, above all
the elders of the tribe.


One day Morven said unto himself, musing, "Am I not already
equal with the king? nay, is not the king my servant? did I not
place him over the heads of his brothers? am I not, therefore,
more fit to reign than he is? shall I not push him from his
seat?

"It is a troublesome and stormy office to reign over the wild
men of Oestrich, to feast in the crowded hail, and to lead die
warriors to the fray.

"Surely, if I feasted not, neither went out to war, they might
say, 'This is no king, but the cripple Morven;' and some of the
race of Siror might slay me secretly.

"But can I not be greater far than kings, and continue to choose
and govern them, living as now at mine own ease?

"_Verily, the stars shall give me a new palace, and many
subjects_."

Among the wise men was Darvan; and Morven feared him, for his
eye often sought the movements of the son of Osslah.

And Morven said "It were better to TRUST this man than to BLIND,
for surely I want a helpmate and a friend."

So he said to the wise man as he sat alone watching the setting
sun:

"It seemeth to me, O Darvan! I that we ought to build a great
pile in honor of the stars and the pile should be more glorious
than all the palaces of the chiefs and the palaces of the king;
for are not the stars our masters?

"And thou and I should be the chief dwellers in this new palace,
and we would serve the gods of night, and fatten their altars
with the choicest of the herd, and the freshest of the fruits of
the earth."

And Darvan said:

"thou speakest as becomes the servant of the stars. But will the
people help to build the pile, for they are a war-like race and
they love not toil?"

And Morven answered:

"_Doubtless the stars will ordain the work to be done. Fear
not_."

"In truth thou art a wondrous man, thy words ever come to pass,
answered Darvan; "and I wish thou wouldest teach me, friend, the
language of the stars."

"Assuredly if thou servest me thou shalt know," answered the
proud Morven; and Darvan was secretly wroth that the son of the
herdsman should command the service of an elder and a chief.

And when Morven returned to his wife he found her weeping much.

Now she loved the son of Osslah with an exceeding love, for he
was not savage and fierce as the men she had known, and she was
proud of his fame among the tribe; and he took her in his arms
and kissed her, and asked her why she wept.

Then she told him that her brother, the king, had visited her
and had spoken bitter words of Morven.

"He taketh from me the affection of my people," said Siror, "and
blindeth them with lies. And since he hath made me king, what if
he take my kingdom from me? Verily, a new tale of the stars
might undo the old."

And the king had ordered her to keep watch on Morven's secrecy,
and to see whether truth was in him when he boasted of his
commune with the Powers of Night.

But Orna loved Morven better than Siror, therefore she told her
husband all.

And Morven resented the king's ingratitude, and was troubled
much, for a king is a powerful foe; but tie comforted Orna, and
bade her dissemble and complain also of him to her brother, so
that he might confide to her unsuspectingly whatsoever he might
design against Morven.

There was a cave by Morven's house in which he kept the sacred
hawk, and wherein he secretly trained and nurtured other birds
against future need, and the door of the cave was always barred.

And one day he was thus engaged when he beheld a chink in the
wall, that he had never noted before, and the sun came playfully
in; and while he looked he perceived the sunbeam was darkened,
and presently he saw a human face peering in through the chink.

And Morven trembled, for he knew he had been watched.


Morven ran hastily from the cave, but the spy had disappeared
among the trees, and Morven went straight to the chamber of
Darvan and sat himself down.

Darvan did not return home till late, and he started and turned
pale when he saw Morven.

But Morven greeted him as a brother, and bade him to a feast,
which, for the first time, he purposed giving at the full of the
moon, in honor of the stars.

And going out of Darvan's chamber, he returned to his wife, and
bade her hair, and go at the dawn of day to the king, her
brother, and complain bitterly of Morven's treatment, and pluck
the black schemes from the breast of the king. "For surely,"
said he, "Darvan hath lied to thy brother, and some evil awaits
me that I would fain know."

So the next morning Orna sought the king, and she said:

"The herdsman's son hath reviled me, and spoken harsh words to
me; stall I not be avenged?"

Then the king stamped his feet and shook his mighty sword.

"Surely thou shalt be avenged, for I have learned from one of
the elders that which convinceth me that the man hath lied to
the people, and the base-born shall surely die.

"Yea, the first time that he goeth alone into the forest my
brother and I will fall upon him and smite him to the death."

And with this comfort Siror dismissed Orna.

And Orna flung herself at the feet of her husband.

"Fly now, O my beloved!--fly into the forests afar from my
brethren, or surely the sword of Siror will end thy days."

Then the son of Osslab folded his arms, and seemed buried in
black thoughts; nor did he heed the voice of Orna, until again
and again she had implored him to fly.

"Fly!" he said at length. "Nay, I was doubting what punishment
the stars should pour down upon our foe. Let warriors fly.
Morven, the prophet, conquers by arms mightier than the sword."

Nevertheless Morven was perplexed in his mind, and knew not how
to save himself from the vengeance of the king.


Now, while Morven was musing hopelessly, he heard a roar of
waters; and behold the river, for it was now the end of autumn,
had burst its bounds, and was rushing along the valley to the
houses of the city.

And now the men of the tribe, and the women, and the children,
came running, and with shrieks to Morven's house, crying:

"Behold the river has burst upon us!--Save us, O ruler of the
stars!"

Then the sudden thought broke upon Morven and he resolved to
risk his fate upon one desperate scheme.

And he came out from the house calm and sad, and he said:

"Ye know not what ye ask; I cannot save ye from this peril: ye
have brought it on yourselves."

And they cried: "How? O son of Osslah--we are ignorant of our
crime."

And he answered:

"Go down to the king's palace and wait before it, and surely I
will follow ye, and ye shall learn wherefore ye have incurred
this punishment from the gods."

Then the crowd rolled murmuring back, as a receding sea; and
when it was gone from the place, Morven went alone to the house
of Darvan, which was next his own: and Darvan was greatly
terrified, for he was of a great age, and had no children,
neither friends, and he feared that he could not of himself
escape the waters.

And Morven said to him, soothingly:

"Lo, the people love me, and I will see that thou art saved for
verily thou hast been friendly to me, and done me much service
with the king."

And as he thus spake, Morven opened the door of the house and
looked forth, and saw that they were quite alone; then he seized
the old man by the throat, and ceased not his grip till he was
quite dead.

And leaving the body of the elder on the floor, Morven, stole
from the house and shut the gate.

And as he was going to his cave he mused a little while, when,
hearing the mighty roar of the waves advancing, and afar off the
shrieks of women, he lifted up his head, and said proudly:

"No! in this hour terror alone shall be my slave; I will use no
art save the power of my soul."

So, leaning on his pine staff, he strode down to the palace.

And it was now evening, and many of the men held torches, that
they might see each other's faces in the universal fear.

Red flashed the quivering flames on the dark robes and pale
front of Morven; and he seemed mightier than the rest, because
his face alone was calm amidst the tumult.

And louder and hoarser came the roar of the waters; and swift
rusted the shades of night over the hastening tide.

And Morven said in a stern voice:

"Where is the king; and wherefore is he absent from his people
in the hour of dread?"

Then the gate of the palace opened; and, behold Siror was
sitting in the hall by the vast pine-fire and his brother by his
side, and his chiefs around him: for they would not deign to
come amongst the crowd at the bidding of the herdsman's son.

Then Morven, standing upon a rock above the heads of the people
(the same rack whereon he had proclaimed the king), thus spake:

"Ye desired to know, O sons of Oestrich! wherefore the river
hath burst its bounds, and the peril hath come upon you.

"Learn then, that the stars resent as the foulest of human
crimes an insult to their servants and delegates below.

"Ye are all aware of the manner of life of Morven, whom ye have
surnamed the Prophet!

"He harms not man or beast; he lives alone; and, far from the
wild joys of the warrior tribe, he worships in awe and fear the
Powers of Night!

"So is he able to advise ye of the coming danger--so is he able
to save ye from the foe. Thus are your huntsmen swift and your
warriors bold; and thus do your cattle bring forth their young,
and the earth its fruits.

"What think ye, and what do ye ask to hear?

"Listen, men of Oestrich!--they have laid snares for my life; and
there are amongst you those who have whetted the sword against
the bosom that is only filled with love for you.

"Therefore have the stern lords of heaven loosened the chains of
the river--therefore doth this evil menace ye.

"Neither will it pass away until they who dig the pit for the
servant of the stars are buried in the same."

Then, by the red torches, the faces of the men looked fierce and
threatening; and ten thousand voices shouted forth:

"Name them who conspired against thy life, O holy prophet! and
surely they shall be torn limb from limb."

And Morven turned aside, and they saw that he wept bitterly; and
he said:

"Ye have asked me, and I have answered: but now scarce will ye
believe the foe that I have provoked against me; and by the
heavens themselves I swear, that if my death would satisfy their
fury, nor bring down upon yourselves, and your children's
children, the anger of the throned stars, gladly would I give my
bosom to the knife. Yes," he cried, lifting up his voice, and
pointing his shadowy arm towards the hall where the king sat by
the pine-fire--"yes, thou whom by my voice the stars chose above
thy brother--yes, Siror, the guilty one! take thy sword, and
come hither--strike, if thou hast the heart to strike, the
Prophet of the Gods!"

The king started to his feet, and the crowd were hushed in a
shuddering silence.

Morven resumed:

"Know then, O men of Oestrich, that Siror and Voltoch, his
brother, and Darvan, the elder of the wise men, have purposed to
slay your prophet, even at such hour as when alone he seeks the
shade of the forest to devise new benefits for you. Let the king
deny it, if he can!"

Then Voltoch, of the giant limbs, strode forth from the hall,
and his spear quivered in his hand.

"Rightly hast thou spoken, base son of my father's herdsman! and
for thy sins shalt thou surely die; for thou liest when thou
speakest of thy power with the stars, and thou laughest at the
folly of them who hear thee: wherefore put him to death."

Then the chiefs in the hall clashed their arms, and rushed forth
to slay the son of Osslah.

But he, stretching his unarmed hands on high, exclaimed:

"Hear him, O dread ones of the night--hark how he blasphemeth."

Then the crowd took up the word, and cried:

"He blasphemeth--he blasphemeth against the prophet!"

But the king and the chiefs who hated Morven, because of his
power with the people, rushed into the crowd; and the crowd were
irresolute, nor knew they how to act, for never yet had they
rebelled against their chiefs, and they feared alike the prophet
and the king.

And Siror cried:

"Summon Darvan to us, for he bath watched the steps of Morven,
and he shall lift the veil from my people's eyes."

Then three of the swift of foot started forth to the house of
Darvan.

And Morven cried out with a loud voice:

"Hark! thus saith the star who, now riding through yonder cloud
breaks forth upon my eyes--'For the lie that the elder hath
uttered against my servant, the curse of the stars shall fall
upon him.' Seek, and as ye find him, so may ye find ever the
foes of Morven and the gods."

A chill and an icy fear fell over the crowd, and even the cheek
of Siror grew pale; and Morven, erect and dark above the waving
torches, stood motionless with folded arms.

And hark--far and fast came on the war-steeds of the wave--the
people heard them marching to the land, and tossing their white
manes in the roaring wind.

"Lo, as ye listen," said Morven, calmly, "the river sweeps on.
Haste, for the gods will have a victim, be it your prophet or
your king."

"Slave!" shouted Siror, and his spear left his hand, and far
above the heads of the crowd sped hissing beside the dark form
of Morven, and rent the trunk of the oak behind.

Then the people, wroth at the danger of their beloved seer,
uttered a wild yell, and gathered round him with brandished
swords, facing their chieftains and their king.

But at that instant, ere the war had broken forth among the
tribe, the three warriors returned, and they bore Darvan on
their shoulders, and laid him at the feet of the king, and they
said tremblingly:

"Thus found we the elder in the centre of his own hall."

And the people saw that Darvan was a corpse, and that the
prediction of Morven was thus verified.

"So perish the enemies of Morven and the Stars!" cried the son
of Osslah. And the people echoed the cry.

Then the fury of Siror was at its height, and waving his sword
above his head, he plunged into the crowd:

"Thy blood, base-born, or mine."

"So be it!" answered Morven, quailing not. "People, smite the
blasphemer. Hark how the river pours down upon your children and
your hearths. On, on, or ye perish!"

And Siror fell, pierced by five hundred spears.

"Smite! smite!" cried Morven, as the chiefs of the royal house
gathered round the king.

And the clash of swords, and the gleam of spears, and the cries
of the dying, and the yell of the trampling people, mingled with
the roar of the elements, and the voices of the rushing wave.

Three hundred of the chiefs perished that night by the swords of
their own tribe. And the last cry of the victors was, "_Morven
the prophet_--MORVEN THE KING!"

And the son of Osslah, seeing the waves now spreading over the
valley, led Orna his wife, and the men of Oestrich, their women
and their children, to a high mount, where they waited the
dawning sun.

But Orna sat apart and wept bitterly, for her brothers were no
more, and her race had perished from the earth.

And Morven sought to comfort her in vain.

When the morning rose, they saw that the river had overspread
the greater part of the city, and now stayed its course among
the hollows of the vale.

Then Morven said to the people: "The star kings are avenged, and
their wrath appeased. Tarry only here until the water have
melted into the crevices of the soil."

And on the fourth day they returned to the city, and no man
dared to name another, save Morven, as the king.


But Morven retired into his cave and mused deeply; and then
assembling the people, he gave them new laws; and he made them
build a mighty temple in honor of the stars, and made them heap
within it all that the tribe held most precious.

And he took unto him fifty children from the most famous of the
tribe; and he took also ten from among the men who had served
him best, and he ordained that they should serve the stars in
the great temple: and Morven was their chief.

And he put away the crown they pressed upon him, and he chose
from among the elders a new king.

And he ordained that henceforth the servants only of the stars
in the great temple should elect the king and the rulers, and
hold council, and proclaim war: but he suffered the king to
feast, and to hunt, and to make merry in the banquet halls.

And Morven built altars in the temple, and was the first who, in
the North, _sacrificed the beast and the bird, and afterwards
human flesh_, upon the altars.

And he drew auguries from the entrails of the victim, and made
schools for the science of the prophet; and Morven's piety was
the wonder of the tribe, in that he refused to be a king.

And Morven, the high-priest, was _ten thousand times mightier
than the king_.

He taught the people to till the ground, and to sow the herb;
and by his wisdom, and the valor that his prophecies instilled
into men, he conquered all the neighboring tribes.

And the sons of Oestrich spread themselves over a mighty empire,
and with them spread the name and the laws of Morven.

And in every province which he conquered, he ordered them to
build a temple to the stars.

But a heavy sorrow fell upon the years of Morven.

The sister of Siror bowed down her head and survived not long
the slaughter of her race.

And she left Morven childless.

And he mourned bitterly and as one distraught, for her only in
the world had his heart the power to love.

And he sat down and covered his face, saying:

"Lo: I have conquered and travailed; and never before in the
world did man conquer what I have conquered.

"Verily, the empire of the iron thews and the giant limbs is no
more; I have found a new power, that henceforth shall sway the
lands;--_the empire of plotting brain and a commanding mind_.

"But, behold, my fate is barren, and I feel already that it will
grow neither fruit nor tree as a shelter to mine old age.

"Desolate and lonely shall I pass away unto my grave.

"O Orna! my beautiful! my loved! none were like unto thee, and
to thy love do I owe my glory and my life.

"Would for thy sake, O sweet bird! that nestled in the dark
cavern of my heart--would for thy sake that thy brethren had
been spared, for verily with my life would I have purchased
thine.

"Alas! only when I lost thee did I find that thy love was dearer
to me than the fear of others."

And Morven mourned night and day, and none might comfort him.

But from that time forth he gave himself solely to the cares of
his calling; and his nature and his affections, and whatever
there was left soft in him, grew hard like stone; and he was a
man without love, _and he forbade love and marriage to the
priest_.

Now, in his latter years, there arose OTHER prophets; for the
world had grown wiser even by Morven's wisdom, and some did say
unto themselves:

"Behold Morven, the herdsman's son, is a king of kings: this did
the stars for their servant; shall we not, therefore, be also
servants to the star?"

And they wore black garments like Morven, and went about
prophesying of what the stars foretold them.

And Morven was exceeding wroth; for he, more than other men,
knew that the prophets lied; wherefore he went forth against
them with the ministers of the temple, and he took them and
burned them by a slow fire: for thus said Morven to the people:

"_A true prophet hath honor, but I only am a true prophet!_"

"To all false prophets there shall be surely death."

And the people applauded the piety of the son of Osslah.

And Morven educated the wisest of the children in the mysteries
of the temple, so that they grew up to succeed him worthily.

And he died full of years and honor; and they carved his effigy
on a mighty stone before the temple, and the effigy endured for
a thousand ages, and whoso looked on it trembled; for the face
was calm with the calmness of unspeakable awe!

And Morven was the first mortal of the North
that made _Religion the stepping stone to Power_.

Of a surety Morven was a great man!


CONCLUSION

It was the last night of the old year, and the stars sat, each
upon his ruby throne, and watched with sleepless eyes upon the
world. The night was dark and troubled, the dread winds were
abroad, and fast and frequent hurried the clouds beneath the
thrones of the kings of night. But ever and anon fiery meteors
flashed along the depths of heaven, and were again swallowed up
in the graves of darkness.

And far below his brethren, and with a lurid haze around his
orb, sat the discontented star that had watched over the hunters
of the North. And on the lowest abyss of space there was spread
a thick and mighty gloom, from which, as from a caldron, rose
columns of wreathing smoke; and still, when the great winds
rested for an instant on their paths, voices of woe and
laughter, mingled with shrieks, were heard booming from the
abyss to the upper air.

And now, in the middest night, a vast figure rose slowly from
the abyss, and its wings threw blackness over the world. High
upward to the throne of the discontented star sailed the fearful
shape, and the star trembled on his throne when the form stood
before him face to face. And the shape said: "Hail, brother!--
all hail!"

"I know thee not," answered the star: "thou art not the
archangel that visitests the kings of night."

And the shape laughed loud. "I am the fallen star of the
morning.--I am Lucifer, thy brother. Hast thou not, O sullen
king, served me and mine? and hast thou not wrested the earth
from thy Lord who sittest above and given it to me by _darkening
the souls of men with the religion of fear?_ Wherefore come,
brother, come;--thou hast a throne prepared beside my own in the
fiery gloom. Come.--The heavens are no more for thee." Then the
star rose from his throne, and descended to the side of Lucifer.
For ever hath the spirit of discontent had sympathy with the
soul of pride.

And slowly they sank down to the gulf of gloom. It was the first
night of the new year, and the stars sat each on his ruby
throne, and watched with sleepless eyes upon the world. But
sorrow dimmed the bright faces of the kings of night, for they
mourned in silence and in fear for a fallen brother.

And the gates of the heaven of heavens flew open with a golden
sound, and the swift archangel fled down on his silent wings;
and the archangel gave to each of the stars, as before, the
message of his Lord; and to each star was his appointed charge.

And when the heraldry seemed done, there came a laugh from the
abyss of gloom, and half way from the gulf rose the lurid shape
of Lucifer, the fiend.

"Thou countest thy flock ill, O radiant shepherd. Behold! one
star is missing from the three thousand and ten."

"Back to thy gulf, false Lucifer!--the throne of thy brother
hath been filled."

And lo! as the archangel spake, the stars beheld a young and all
lustrous stranger on the throne of the erring star; and his face
was so soft to look upon, that the dimmest of human eyes might
have gazed upon its splendor unabashed; but the dark fiend alone
was dazzled by its lustre, and, with a yell that shook the
flaming pillars of the universe, he plunged backwards into the
gloom.

Then, far and sweet from the arch unseen, came forth the voice
of God:

"Behold! _on the throne of the discontented star sits the star
of hope; and he that breathed into mankind the Religion of Fear
hath a successor in him who shall teach earth the Religion of
Love._"

And evermore the Star of Fear dwells with Lucifer, and the Star
of Love keeps vigil in heaven.


ON THE ORIGIN OF EVIL

BY LORD BROUGHAM.


A DISSERTATION ON THE ORIGIN OF EVIL.

The question which has more than, any other harassed
metaphysical reasoners, but especially theologians, and upon
which it is probable that no very satisfactory conclusion will
ever be reached by the human faculties, is the Origin and
Sufferance of Evil.

Its existence being always assumed, philosophers have formed
various theories for explaining it, but they have always drawn
very different inferences from it.

The ancient Epicureans argued against the existence of the
Deity, because they held that the existence of Evil either
proved him to be limited in power or of a malignant nature;
either of which imperfections is inconsistent with the first
notions of a divine being.

In this kind of reasoning they have been followed both by the
atheists and sceptics of later times.

Bayle regarded the subject of evil as one of the great arsenals
from whence his weapons were to be chiefly drawn. None of the
articles in his famous Dictionary are more labored than those in
which he treats of this subject. _Monichian_, and still more
_Paulician_, almost assume the appearance of formal treatises
upon the question; and both _Marchionite_ and _Zoroaster_ treat
of the same subject. All these articles are of considerable
value; they contain the greater part of the learning upon the
question; and they are distinguished by the acuteness of
reasoning which was the other characteristic of their celebrated
author.

Those ancient philosophers who did not agree with Epicurus in
arguing from the existence of evil against the existence of a
providence that superintended and influenced the destinies of
the world, were put to no little difficulty in accounting for
the fact which they did not deny, and yet maintaining the power
of a divine ruler. The doctrine of a double principle, or of two
divine beings of opposite natures, one beneficent, the other
mischievous, was the solution which one class of reasoners
deemed satisfactory, and to which they held themselves driven by
the phenomena of the universe.

Others unable to deny, the existence of things which men
denominate evil, both physical and moral, explain them in a
different way. They maintained that physical evil only obtains
the name from our imperfect and vicious or feeble dispositions;
that to a wise man there is no such thing; that we may rise
superior to all such groveling notions as make us dread or
repine at any events which can befall the body; that pain,
sickness, loss of fortune or of reputation, exile, death itself,
are only accounted ills by a weak and pampered mind; that if we
find the world tiresome, or woeful, or displeasing, we may at
any moment quit it; and that therefore we have no right whatever
to call any suffering connected with existence on earth an evil,
because almost all sufferings can be borne by a patient and firm
mind; since if the situation we are placed in becomes either
intolerable, or upon the whole more painful than agreeable, it
is our own fault that we remain in it.

But these philosophers took a further view of the question which
especially applied to moral evil. They considered that nothing
could be more groundless than to suppose that if there were no
evil there could be any good in the world; and they illustrated
this position by asking how we could know anything of temperance,
fortitude or justice, unless there were such things as excess,
cowardice and injustice.

These were the doctrines of the Stoics, from whose sublime and
impracticable philosophy they seemed naturally enough to flow.
Aulus Gellius relates that the last-mentioned argument was
expounded by Chrysippus, in his work upon providence. The answer
given by Plutarch seems quite sufficient: "As well might you say
that Achilles could not have a fine head of hair unless
Thersites had been bald; or that one man's limbs could not be
all sound if another had not the gout."

In truth, the Stoical doctrine proceeds upon the assumption that
all virtue is only the negative of vice; and is as absurd, if
indeed it be not the very same absurdity, as the doctrine which
should deny the existence of affirmative or positive truths,
resolving them all into the opposite of negative propositions.
Indeed, if we even were to admit this as an abstract position,
the actual existence of evil would still be unnecessary to the
idea, and still more to the existence, of good. For the
conception of evil, the bare idea of its possibility, would be
quite sufficient, and there would be no occasion for a single
example of it.

The other doctrine, that of two opposite principles, was
embraced by most of the other sects, as it should seem, at some
period or other of their inquiries. Plato himself, in his later
works, was clearly a supporter of the system; for he held that
there were at least two principles, a good and an evil; to which
he added a third, the moderator or mediator between them.

Whether this doctrine was, like many others, imported into
Greece from the East, or was the natural growth of the schools,
we cannot ascertain. Certain it is that the Greeks themselves
believed it to have been taught by Zoroaster in Asia, at least
five centuries before the Trojan war; so that it had an
existence there long before the name of philosophy was known in
the western world.

Zoroaster's doctrine agreed in every respect with Plato's; for
besides Oomazes, the good, and Arimanius, the evil principle, he
taught that there was a third, or mediatory one, called Mithras.
That it never became any part of the popular belief in Greece or
Italy is quite clear. All the polytheism of those countries
recognized each of the gods as authors alike of good and evil.
Nor did even the chief of the divinities, under whose power the
rest were placed, offer any exception to the general rule; for
Jupiter not only gave good from one urn and ill from another, but
he was also, according to the barbarous mythology of classical
antiquity, himself a model at once of human perfections and of
human vices.

After the light of the Christian religion had made some way
toward supplanting the ancient polytheism, the doctrine of two
principles was broached; first by Marcion, who lived in the time
of Adrian and Antonius Pius, early in the second century; and
next by Manes, a hundred years later. He was a Persian slave,
who was brought into Greece, where he taught this doctrine,
since known by his name, having learned it, as is said, from
Scythianus, an Arabian. The Manichean doctrines, afterwards
called also Paulician, from a great teacher of them in the
seventh century, were like almost all the heresies in the
primitive church, soon mixed up with gross impurities of sacred
rites as well as extravagant absurdities of creed.

The Manicheans were, probably as much on this account as from
the spirit of religious intolerance, early the objects of severe
persecution; and the Code of Justinian itself denounces capital
punishment against any of the sect, if found within the Roman
dominions.

It must be confessed that the theory of two principles, when
kept free from the absurdities and impurities which were
introduced into the Manichean doctrine, is not unnaturally
adopted by men who have no aid from the light of revelation,[1]
and who are confounded by the appearance of a world where evil
and good are mixed together, or seem to struggle with one
another, sometimes the one prevailing, and sometimes the other;
and accordingly, in all countries, in the most barbarous
nations, as well as among the most refined, we find plain traces
of reflecting men having been driven to this solution of the
difficulty.

It seems upon a superficial view to be very easily deducible
from the phenomena; and as the idea of infinite power, with
which it is manifestly inconsistent, does by no means so
naturally present itself to the mind, as long as only a very
great degree of power, a power which in comparison of all human
force may be termed infinite, is the attribute with which the
Deity is believed to be endued. Manichean hypothesis is by no
means so easily refuted. That the power of the Deity was
supposed to have limits even in the systems of the most
enlightened heathens is unquestionable. They, generally
speaking, believed in the eternity of matter, and conceived some
of its qualities to be so essentially necessary to its existence
that no divine agency could alter them. They ascribed to the
Deity a plastic power, a power not of creating or annihilating,
but only of moulding, disposing and moving matter. So over mind
they generally give him the like power, considering it as a kind
of emanation from his own greater mind or essence, and destined
to be re-united with him hereafter. Nay, over all the gods, and
of superior potency to any, they conceived fate to preside; an
overruling and paramount necessity, of which they formed some
dark conceptions, and to which the chief of all the gods was
supposed to submit. It is, indeed, extremely difficult to state
precisely what the philosophic theory of theology was in Greece
and Rome, because the wide difference between the esoteric and
exoteric doctrines, between the belief of the learned few and
the popular superstition, makes it very difficult to avoid
confounding the two, and lending to the former some of the
grosser errors with which the latter abounded. Nevertheless, we
may rely upon what has been just stated, as conveying, generally
speaking, the opinion of philosophers, although some sects
certainly had a still more scanty measure of belief.

But we shall presently find that in the speculation of the much
more enlightened moderns, Christians of course, errors of a like
kind are to be traced. They constantly argue the great question
of evil upon a latent assumption, that the power of the Deity
is restricted by some powers or qualities inherent in matter;
notions analogous to that of faith are occasionally perceptible;
not stated or expanded indeed into propositions, but influencing
the course of the reasoning; while the belief of infinite
attributes is never kept steadily in view, except when it is
called in as requisite to refute the Manichean doctrines. Some
observers of the controversy have indeed not scrupled to affirm
that those of whom we speak are really Manicheans without
knowing it; and build their systems upon assumptions secretly
borrowed from the disciples of Zoroaster, without ever stating
those assumptions openly in the form of postulates or definition.

The refutation of the Manichean hypothesis is extremely easy if
we be permitted to assume that both the principles which it
supposes are either of infinite power or of equal power. If they
are of infinite power, the supposition of their co-existence
involves a contradiction in terms; for the one being in
opposition to the other, the power of each must be something
taken from that of the other; consequently neither can be of
infinite power. If, again, we only suppose both to be of equal
power, and always acting against each other, there could be
nothing whatever done, neither good or evil; the universe would
be at a standstill; or rather no act of creation could ever have
been performed, and no existence could be conceived beyond that
of the two antagonistic principles.

Archbishop Tillotson's argument, properly speaking, amounts to
this last proposition, and is applicable to equal and opposite
principles, although he applies it to two beings, both infinitely
powerful and counteracting one another. When he says they would
tie up each other's bands, he might apply this argument to such
antagonistic principles if only equal, although not infinitely
powerful. The hypothesis of their being both infinitely powerful
needs no such refutation; it is a contradiction in terms. But it
must be recollected that the advocates of the Manichean doctrine
endeavor to guard themselves against the attack by contending,
that the conflict between the two principles ends in a kind of
compromise, so that neither has it all his own way; there is a
mixture of evil admitted by the good principle, because else
the whole would beat a standstill; while there is much good
admitted by the evil principle, else nothing, either good or
evil, would be done. Another answer is therefore required to
this theory than what Tillotson and his followers have given.

_First_, we must observe that this reasoning of the Manicheans
proceeds upon the analogy of what we see in mortal contentions;
where neither party having the power to defeat the other, each
is content to yield a little to his adversary, and so, by mutual
concession, both are successful to some extent, and both to some
extent disappointed. But in a speculation concerning the nature
of the Deity, there seems no place for such notions.

_Secondly_, the equality of power is not an arbitrary
assumption; it seems to follow from the existence of the two
opposing principles. For if they are independent of one another
as to existence, which they must needs be, else one would
immediately destroy the other, so must they also, in each
particular instance, be independent of each other, and also
equal each to the other, else one would have the mastery, and
the influence of the other could not be perceived. To say that
in some things the good principle prevails and in others the
evil, is really saying nothing more than that good exists here
and evil there. It does not further the argument one step, nor
give anything like an explanation. For it must always be borne
in mind that the whole question respecting the Origin of Evil
proceeds upon the assumption of a wise, benevolent and powerful
Being having created the world. The difficulty, and the only
difficulty, is, how to reconcile existing evil with such a
Being's attributes; and if the Manichean only explains this by
saying the good Being did what is good, and another and evil
Being did what is bad in the universe, he really tells us
nothing more than the fact; he does not apply his explanation to
the difficulty; and he supposes the existence of a second Deity
gratuitously and to no kind of purpose.

But, _thirdly_, in whatever light we view the hypothesis, it
seems exposed to a similar objection, namely, of explaining
nothing in its application, while it is wholly gratuitous in
itself. It assumes, of course, that creation was the act of the
good Being; and it also assumes that Being's goodness to have
been perfect, though his power is limited. Then as he must have
known the existence of the evil principle and foreseen the
certainty of misery being occasioned by his existence, why did
he voluntarily create sentient beings, to put them, in some
respects at least, under the evil one's power, and thus be
exposed to suffering? The good Being, according to this theory,
is the remote cause of the evil which is endured, because but
for his act of creation the evil Being could have had, no
subjects whereon to work mischief; so that the hypothesis wholly
fails in removing, by more than one step, the difficulty which
it was invented to solve.

_Fourthly_, there is no advantage gained to the argument by
supposing two Beings, rather than one Being of a mixed nature.
The facts lead to this supposition just as naturally as to the
hypothesis of two principles. From the above it follows an important
law: it is never a reason alone, what a nation is destroyed,
but always together several of which, however, a focus may be.
Also, the extermination of the Marianas, Tasmanians and the
Antilles population is no exception, since here the limitations
of the terrain as the second reason, in Tasmania character and
lifestyle of residents in a third attack must bring. Where
only one of these causes is, or even more of the child, as is,
now as far as human history and observation goes, no extinction
On; so keep the fire country, despite their miserable life,
so are the Fiji continues, despite the well to them mightily
invaded culture, despite the massive Menschentödtung, so you
can pursue it further. This phenomenon is anthropologically
significant because they are like no other, the tenacious vitality
of humanity and at the same time proves that this life force
in all branches of the human race is evenly vertheilt,
yes in the rather more primitive peoples, like the nations
kultivirten occurs, which the latter because they organisirt
finer than the unkultivirten people, including far less able to
endure are.

Because when we ask: are the reasons cited strong enough
to withstand the winds Hinsch entire peoples to make? we
must answer: they are abundant and in excess, each already, and
now even more united. Is it not a true miracle that the
human nature in a country like Neuholland be held, where
Europeans, despite all the equipment usually so hopelessly lost?
And yet this is held in the eternal war with his peers, under the
adverse influences of their own flawed culture? or Polynesians
to its often so small barren islands in the middle of the
ungeheuersten all oceans, and he perpetual war and infanticide
and the annoying excesses subject? Not a wonder that after the
terrible destruction of war by the White not one of those people
is totally vertilgt except small tribes? Certainly, if we think
about all this, we will not live by the inability of primitive
peoples, but rather from its extraordinary vitality and
indestructibility must convince us. And so here is the place to
return the question to which we were led by Waitz: are we really
on the confessions genöthigt that we have the extinction of primitive
peoples fully explain yet succeed?

We are not. When the history of each nation subsequently asks
how is it that siecht and then it dwindles, we are always
completely exhaustive of the reasons discern which of us is
always the combined cycle will be. These explain the
extinction of the population so completely that some of what
Räthselhaften not the least space remains when one considers
only the individual reasons, in their physical and mental
effectiveness with sufficient Consequenz before eyes. But it is
well to note that the indestructibility this harder peoples
has its limit. We saw in Neuholland a human strain of the past
seem better condition herabgesunken, the same is the case with
the actual Micronesia and Polynesia, as well as with the Hottentots.
The most advanced was the expiration of the Polynesians:
therefore because they are relatively easy kick from outside
her quickly and much unstoppable collapse, as for example the
Hottentots or Melanesians and other peoples. This decline had
when its causes, the excesses, wars and squandering of human life,
effectively stayed, always go faster and so they were lost in any
case - if they are not rescued her from the outside, and this has,
so far it was still possible the culture by and large done.

And we may even complain as much as the Europeans are the
most primitive peoples to have behaved: we must recognize that
all these peoples unkultivirten when in their natural states still
lives on for centuries, a very slow but safe destruction, whose
germs they wore themselves, contrary to received. They had
no dominion over the surrounding nature won, they were dissipated,
dedicated solely to their desires, irregular, with little thought
to the future, in enormous inertia, war, revenge and so were
they fixed habits, the superstition, so often the victims of
human required, they totally dominated, and their mental
life was little, the intellectual Thätigkeit only practical side
developed. These trains had to their nature but in the course
of centuries and millennia always be rigid and insurmountable:
and there is no question that they are used, sooner or later,
because if you like the end of this time to determine, had to
succumb.

The nature in which they lived, offered no decisive moment of
parent power, and would it by any changes in them are still
needed, they were no longer able to use it to make, since
they and millennia-long habituation were frozen. So these
people should be saved, it was a sudden impulse, it was the
intervention of culture necessarily, and even though the same
task as their bloody solved, so this is necessarily but
an idea that many of the blood and misery that they or Rather,
its makers have created, somewhat comforted. § 19 Comparison
of natural and cultural nations in terms of their life force.
As from now all these reasons, the extinction of primitive peoples
fully explained, even as the nature of their effectiveness us
quite the vitality of the human race proves that it is already
so self-acceptance as if the natural peoples "by nature destined
for destruction" organisirt lower than the culture of peoples.
This is clearly and irrefutably demonstrate the effectiveness if
we are the same reasons the European nations to consider. We will
play exactly the same, so a far worse to see the same success.
Everything Caesar the Gauls inflicted, the devastation of the
country, the great loss of human life, the crush of national
feeling, everything that's not really compare with what Mexico,
for example, or the North Americans suffer from: and yet there
was not by Caesar in 10 years the people of Gaul, which he
admittedly has herabgesunken that interrupts so broke
that it is his own language to the lost. However, the civil
wars Italic Italy about 70 years on the most horrific devastated,
but after them we find the land inside and broke the power of
the Roman state on foreign troops based Lingenfelder; masse
until mixed with fresh Germanic elements, and also because
after a long silence raises the Italic population, now an entirely
new nation, rising again. But his sufferings were much lower than
that of Americans. And the Greeks! Why have they stopped a
historically important people to be? because they were exasperated
by the most heinous excesses and their latest crush force
was first through the storms of the migrations and then
through the Turkish yoke. But what the Greeks had height
inne once - and it is not too much said, if you have the average
education of the Greeks with the same footing as the remaining
Mexicans. The 30-year-old war, which in the beginning but only
locally and never without interruptions and with wüthete all its
horrors and its duration is not that what the nature of suffering
peoples had achieved what he has boundless devastation in the
population served our Fatherland! Seriously it was the German
nation in its existence at risk and it is a widely expressed
truth that even our national character through this terrible war
and manifold changes herabgedrückt is, on the other hand we still
to this day with the healing of wounds, which he our social and
political life has beaten to thun have. so we look at these few
historical examples in the same causes kultivirten Nations even
more effective, than among primitive peoples: it is a short
psychological perspective teach us the same.

Although we have a religion, what consolation grant the
believers even in the worst accident, although we are by the
culture of many Hülfsmittel also distressed assets have such
an impact on us but a lot of things, which is based on the primitive
peoples did not and a lot of other which they have far less
influence. We are in our physical life verzärtelt to a lot of
convenience, habit, we can not do, and we are mentally much
more sensitive and a Prostrating what we hold sacred, pushes
us to the ground. Love of the relatives, shame, just a whole
series of powerful mental factors in the culture peoples such
dominion over life, that if they are seriously injured, with the
life is threatened, and you can probably tell, ever formed a
people is the sooner it is in constant mischief eat. If for
example we only consider the effects of the feeling of
powerless Furor, the longer time in us once again would
have to have on us as individuals can remove themselves, so
once we appreciate how the same feeling on the nature of
peoples eingewirkt must have, which is so horrible mistreatment
by continuously again and it was very understandable, if
you know this fact alone would be gone and we will see what
the educated Mexicans and Peruvians who have suffered and
why they are so rapidly with the overthrow of their education
was basically, we will but must admit that we have under similar
circumstances probably much less resistance would have, as
those nations, and certainly right now to stop by a special life
of primitive peoples inability to speak, because we are the
evil, those which are subject to much more quickly would be
subject. Yes, we would be looking after the grounds, as it comes,
that those nations a greater resistance as we have, and find the
same in their greater physical Resilience, as well as in their
low intellectual sensitivity, which is always low Geistesentwickelung
goes hand in hand .- -If we are still the most powerless people
of culture and historically insignificant, but not actually
disappear, so does this, therefore, that it is precisely in such
times of danger with new people Schaars are interspersed.

Devastate The in Italy, the Germans, settled en masse in the
flowering of the defeated country's corridors down, just like
the Bulgarians in Greece, etc. Or the already existing culture
offers new Hülfsmittel, while also the number of French immigrants
in our country after 30 years of war may be expected . Examples
of cultural peoples, which are completely destroyed, as their
culture, the history of Asia Minor. It is from here once a look
at the Division, after which the Carus humans, you can see here how
little it is valid, because his Tagmenschen have no greater
resistance than its night or twilight people, and while he claimed
(17) that the Western peoples of twilight, the Americans, "the
sinking zugewendet really" were, so we see the Tagvölker nor
their rapid demise zueilen, even if they are by far milder fates
are afflicted .-- The Division of Mankind into active and
passive people, as they enter the terminal and Wuttke (Waitz
1, 344) has its very serious, it is wrong for you in greater activity
at the same time After each direction Kraftentwickelung looks
bigger, because the "active" people (the culture of peoples) in the
breakup of unhappiness is much easier than the harder, tougher and
primitive peoples, it is also wrong if they saw it as in the original
nature of humanity justified if one So activity or passivity as
different peoples innate view: because of the same house from
organisirt has mankind through different surroundings, different
destinies, etc., over the years developed as different as we find
in historical time. § 20 Extinction and persistent primitive peoples.

If the adoption of a lower viability of entire peoples were correct,
but so should all these people that are evenly Hinsch winds
show. How comes it that one becomes extinct and the other next
to it is not tight? yes, that one and the same people of a branch
dies, the other safely continue living? And also there is often.
The Tongan die and are not like the Tahitian Polynesians, Maoris
or Kanakas, most Micronesian islands (including notably
Gilbertarchipel) have a dense population, Kusaier dying out,
and both micro-and Polynesians, are just one branch of the great
Malay tribe, where such a Hinsch winds, the small island and some
Engano miserable in the mountains except for brief tribes, but
nowhere else is noticed.

The Kamtschadalen dying out, the other Nordasiaten their close
relatives, are not.

But perhaps there were those of us discussed the reasons for
extinction not Thätigkeit? During the rest of Melanesians at
many points be reduced, the Fiji, despite the European influence,
despite its wars and human sacrifice, and at full force
even worse numbers than almost all other peoples are the niggers
of depressed domestic and foreign tyrants, and while for one of
the richest tribes apply the not to be reduced, die Neuholländer,
after the cards Carus night when people like them off - whatever
the case, admittedly ethnologic nonsense, African and
Melanesian Negroes to a race to unite the however, not alone
Carus finds the probative value of notes. But the other examples
show completely percussive, like the mistaken opinion that the
winding Hinsch peoples as a result of their Inferiorität Race
ausstürben, so we do not need to linger. If our view, however
valid, it must be demonstrated by the fact that where the reasons
for which we are the extinction of primitive peoples to explain
not occur or be eliminated, because the people that grow, evolve,
or are recovering, yes even the so overcome dangerous culture
and to her, even if only very gradually, you can lift. And
the proof is easy. In Africa, the Hottentots prove the Herrnhut
colony Baavianskloof which depicts Lichtenstein. 1799, the
number of apprentices (Licht. 1, 247) 100; the village where
they lived was similar with its 200 houses, its gardens, its
straight roads all over a German village, the Hottentots were
efficient in the field and house and all the others brought
no punishment than exclusion from the church (251).
or if he be,
with what view he has created it? This assumes him to be
infinitely powerful, or at least powerful enough to have
prevented the evil; but indeed we are now arguing with the
Archbishop on the supposition that he has proved the Deity to be
of infinite power. The skeptic rests upon his dilemma, and
either alternative, limited power or limited goodness, satisfies
him.

It is quite plain, therefore, that King has assumed the thing to
be proved in his first argument, or argument _a priori_. For he
proceeds upon the postulates that the Deity is infinitely good,
and that he only had human happiness in view when he made the
world. Either supposition would have served his purpose; and
making either would have been taking for granted the whole
matter in dispute. But he has assumed both; and it must be
added, he has made his assumption of both as if he was only
laying down a single position. This part of the work is
certainly more slovenly than the rest. It is the third section
of the first chapter.

It is certainly not from any reluctance to admit the existence
of evil that the learned author and his able commentator have
been led into this inconclusive course of reasoning. We shall
nowhere find more striking expositions of the state of things in
this respect, nor more gloomy descriptions of our condition,
than in their celebrated work. "Whence so many, inaccuracies,"
says the Archbishop, "in the work of a most good and powerful
God? Whence that perpetual war between the very elements,
between animals, between men? Whence errors, miseries and vices,
the constant companions of human life from its infancy? Whence
good to evil men, evil to the good? If we behold anything
irregular in the work of men, if any machine serves not the end
it was made for, if we find something in it repugnant to itself
or others, we attribute that to the ignorance, impatience or
malice of the workman. But since these qualities have no place
in God, how come they to have place in anything? Or why does God
suffer his works to be deformed by them?"--Chap. ii. s. 3.
Bishop Law, in his admirable preface, still more cogently puts
the case: "When I inquire how I got into the world, and came to
be what I am, I am told that an absolutely perfect being
produced me out of nothing, and placed me here on purpose to
communicate some part of his happiness to me, and to make me in
some manner like himself. This end is not obtained--the direct
contrary appears--I find myself surrounded with nothing but
perplexity, want and misery--by whose fault I know not--how to
better myself I cannot tell. What notions of good and goodness
can this afford me? What ideas of religion? What hopes of a
future state? For if God's aim in producing me be entirely
unknown, if it be either his glory (as some will have it), which
my present state is far from advancing, nor mine own good, which
the same is equally inconsistent with, how know I what I have to
do here, or indeed in what manner I must endeavor to please him?
Or why should I endeavor it at all? For if I must be miserable
in this world, what security have I that I shall not be so in
another too (if there be one), since if it were the will of my
Almighty Creator, I might (for aught I see) have been happy in
both."--Pref. viii. The question thus is stated. The difficulty
is raised in its full and formidable magnitude by both these
learned and able men; that they have signally failed to lay it
by the argument _a priori_ is plain. Indeed, it seems wholly
impossible ever to answer by an argument _a priori_ any
objection whatever which arises altogether out of the facts made
known to us by experience alone, and which are therefore in the
nature of contingent truths, resting upon contingent evidence,
while all demonstrations _a priori_ must necessarily proceed
upon mathematical truths. Let us now see if their labors have
been more successful in applying to the solution of the
difficulty the reasoning _a posteriori._

Archbishop King divides evil into three kinds--imperfection,
natural evil and moral evil--including under the last head all
the physical evils that arise from human actions, as well as the
evils which consists in the guilt of those actions.

The existence of imperfection is stated to be necessary,
because everything which is created and not self-existent must
be imperfect; consequently every work of the Deity, in other
words, everything but the Deity himself, must have imperfection
in its nature. Nor is the existence of some beings which are
imperfect any interference with the attributes of others. Nor
the existence of beings with many imperfections any interference
with others having pre-eminence. The goodness of the Deity
therefore is not impugned by the existence of various orders of
created beings more or less approaching to perfection. His
creating none at all would have left the universe less admirable
and containing less happiness than it now does. Therefore, the
act of mere benevolence which called those various orders into
existence is not impeached in respect of goodness any more than
of power by the variety of the attributes possessed by the
different beings created.

He now proceeds to grapple with the real difficulty of the
question. And it is truly astonishing to find this acute
metaphysician begin with an assumption which entirely begs
that question. As imperfection, says he, arises from created
beings having been made out of nothing, so natural evils arise
"from all natural things having a relation to matter, and on
this account being necessarily subject to natural evil." As
long as matter is subject to motion, it must be the subject of
generation and corruption. "These and all other natural evils,"
says the author, "are so necessarily connected with the material
origin of things that they cannot be separated from it, and thus
the structure of the world either ought not to have been formed
at all, or these evils must have been tolerated without any
imputation on the divine power and goodness." Again, he says,
"corruption could not be avoided without violence done to the
laws of motion and the nature of matter." Again, "All manner of
inconveniences could not be avoided because of the imperfection
of matter and the nature of motion. That state of things were
therefore preferable which was attained with the fewest and the
least inconveniences." Then follows a kind of menace, "And who
but a very rash, indiscreet person will affirm that God has not
made choice of this?"--when every one must perceive that the
bare propounding of the question concerning evil calls upon us
to exercise this temerity and commit this indiscretion.--Chap.
iv. s. I, div. 7. He then goes into more detail as to particular
cases of natural evil; but all are handled in the same way. Thus
death is explained by saying that the bodies of animals are a
kind of vessels which contain fluids in motion, and being
broken, the fluids are spilt and the motions cease; "because by
the native imperfection of matter it is capable of dissolution,
and the spilling and stagnation must necessarily follow, and
with it animal life must cease."--Chap. iv. s. 3. Disease is dealt
with in like manner. "It could not be avoided unless animals had
been made of a quite different frame and constitution."--Chap. iv.
s. 7. The whole reasoning is summed up in the concluding section
of this part, where the author somewhat triumphantly says, "The
difficult question then, whence comes evil? is not unanswerable.
For it arises from the very nature and constitution of created
beings, and could not be avoided without a contradiction."--
Chap. iv. s. 9. To this the commentary of Bishop Law adds
(Note 4i), "that natural evil has been shown to be, in every
case, unavoidable, without introducing into the system a greater
evil."

It is certain that many persons, led away by the authority of a
great name, have been accustomed to regard this work as a
text-book, and have appealed to Archbishop King and his learned
commentator as having solved the question. So many men have
referred to the _Principia_ as showing the motions of the
heavenly bodies, who never read, or indeed could read, a page of
that immortal work. But no man ever did open it who could read
it and find himself disappointed in any one particular; the
whole demonstration is perfect; not a link is wanting; nothing
is assumed. How different the case here! We open the work of the
prelate and find it from the first to last a chain of gratuitous
assumptions, and, of the main point, nothing whatever is either
proved or explained. Evil arises, he says, from the nature of
matter. Who doubts it? But is not the whole question why matter
was created with such properties as of necessity to produce
evil? It was impossible, says he, to avoid it consistently with
the laws of motion and matter. Unquestionably; but the whole
dispute is upon those laws. If indeed the laws of nature, the
existing constitution of the material world, were assumed as
necessary, and as binding upon the Deity, how is it possible that
any question ever could have been raised? The Deity having the
power to make those laws, to endow matter with that constitution,
and having also the power to make different laws and to give
matter another constitution, the whole question is, how his
choosing to create the present existing order of things--the
laws and the constitution which we find to prevail--can be
reconciled with perfect goodness. The whole argument of the
Archbishop assumes that matter and its laws are independent of
the Deity; and the only conclusion to which the inquiry leads
us is that the Creator has made a world with as little of evil
in it as the nature of things,--that is, as the laws of nature
and matter--allowed him; which is nonsense, if those laws were
made by him, and leaves the question where it was, or rather
solves it by giving up the omnipotence of the Creator, if these
laws were binding upon him.

It must be added, however, that Dr. King and Dr. Law are not
singular in pursuing this most inconclusive course of reasoning.

Thus Dr. J. Clarke, in his treatise on natural evil, quoted by
Bishop Law (Note 32), shows how mischiefs arise from the laws of
matter; and says this could not be avoided "without altering
those primary laws, i. e., making it something else than what it
is, or changing it into another form; the result of which would
only be to render it liable to evils of another kind against
which the same objections would equally lie." So Dr. J. Burnett,
in his discourses on evil, at the Boyle Lecture (vol. ii. P.
201), conceives that he explains death by saying that the
materials of which the body is composed "cannot last beyond
seventy years, or thereabouts, and it was originally intended
that we should die at that age." Pain, too, he imagines is
accounted for by observing that we are endowed with feelings,
and that if we could not feel pain, so neither could we pleasure
(p. 202). Again, he says that there are certain qualities which
"in the nature of things matter is incapable of" (p. 207). And
as if he really felt the pressure of this difficulty, be at
length comes to this conclusion, that life is a free gift, which
we had no right to exact, and which the Deity lay under no
necessity to grant, and therefore we must take it with the
conditions annexed (p. 210); which is undeniably true, but
is excluding the discussion and not answering the question
proposed. Nor must it be forgotten that some reasoners deal
strangely with the facts. Thus Derham, in his _Physico-Theology_,
explaining the use of poison in snakes, first desires us to
bear in mind that many venomous ones are of use medicinally
in stubborn diseases, which is not true, and if it were, would
prove nothing, unless the venom, not the flesh, were proved to
be medicinal; and then says, they are "scourges upon ungrateful
and sinful men;" adding the truly astounding absurdity, "that
the nations which know not God are the most annoyed with noxious
reptiles and other pernicious creatures." (Book ix. c. I); which
if it were true would raise a double difficulty, by showing that
one people was scourged because another had neglected to preach
the gospel among them. Dr. J. Burnett, too, accounts for animals
being suffered to be killed as food for man, by affirming that
they thereby gain all the care which man is thus led to bestow
upon them, and so are, on the whole, the better for being eaten.
(Boyle Lecture, II. 207). But the most singular error has perhaps
been fallen into by Dr. Sherlock, and the most, unhappy--which
yet Bishop Law has cited as a sufficient answer to the objection
respecting death: "It is a great instrument of government, and
makes men afraid of committing such villanies as the laws of
their country have made capital." (Note 34). So that the greatest
error in the criminal legislation of all countries forms part of
the divine providence, and man has at length discovered, by the
light of reason, the folly and the wickedness of using an
instrument expressly created by divine Omniscience to be abused!

The remaining portion of King's work, filling the second volume
of Bishop Law's edition, is devoted to the explanation of Moral
Evil; and here the gratuitous assumption of the "nature of
things," and the "laws of nature," more or less pervade the
whole as in the former parts of the Inquiry.

The fundamental position of the whole is, that man having been
endowed with free will, his happiness consists in making due
elections, or in the right exercise of that free will. Five
causes are then given of undue elections, in which of course his
misery consists as far as that depends on himself; these causes
are error, negligence, over-indulgence of free choice, obstinacy
or bad habit, and the importunity of natural appetites; which
last, it must in passing be remarked, belongs to the head of
physical evil, and cannot be assumed in this discussion without
begging the question. The great difficulty is then stated and
grappled with, namely, how to reconcile these undue elections
with divine goodness. The objector states that free will might
exist without the power of making undue elections, he being
suffered to range, as it were, only among lawful objects of
choice. But the answer to this seems sound, that such a will
would only be free in name; it would be free to choose among
certain things, but would not be free-will. The objector again
urges, that either the choice is free and may fall upon evil
objects, against the goodness of God, or it is so restrained as
only to fall on good objects. Against freedom of the will King's
solution is, that more evil would result from preventing these
undue elections than from suffering them, and so the Deity has
only done the best he could in the circumstances; a solution
obviously liable to the same objection as that respecting
Natural Evil. There are three ways, says the Archbishop, in
which undue elections might have been prevented; not creating a
free agent--constant interference with his free-will--removing
him to another state where he would not be tempted to go astray
in his choice. A fourth mode may, however, be suggested--creating
a free-agent without any inclination to evil, or any temptation
from external objects. When our author disposes of the second
method, by stating that it assumes a constant miracle, as great
in the moral as altering the course of the planets hourly would
be in the material universe, nothing can be more sound or more
satisfactory. But when he argues that our whole happiness
consists in a consciousness of freedom of election, and that we
should never know happiness were we restrained in any particular,
it seems wholly inconceivable how he should have omitted to
consider the prodigious comfort of a state in which we should
be guaranteed against any error or impropriety of choice; a
state in which we should both be unable to go astray and always
feel conscious of that security. He, however, begs the question
most manifestly in dealing with the two other methods stated,
by which undue elections might have been precluded. "You would
have freedom," says he, "without any inclination to sin; but
it may justly be doubted if this is possible _in the present
state of things_," (chap. v. s. 5, sub. 2); and again, in
answering the question why God did not remove us into another
state where no temptation could seduce us, he says: "It is
plain that _in the present state of things_ it is impossible
for men to live without natural evils or the danger of sinning."
(_Ib_.) Now the whole question arises upon the constitution of
the present state of things. If that is allowed to be inevitable,
or is taken as a datum in the discussion, there ceases to be any
question at all.

The doctrine of a chain of being is enlarged upon, and with much
felicity of illustration. But it only wraps up the difficulty in
other words, without solving it. For then the question becomes
this--Why did the Deity create such a chain as could not be
filled up without misery? It is, indeed, merely restating the
fact of evil existing; for whether we say there is suffering
among sentient beings--or the universe consists of beings more
or less happy, more or less miserable--or there exists a chain
of beings varying in perfection and in felicity--it is manifestly
all one proposition. The remark of Bayle upon this view of the
subject is really not at all unsound, and is eminently ingenious:
"Would you defend a king who should confine all his subjects of
a certain age in dungeons, upon the ground that if he did not,
many of the cells he had built must remain empty?" The answer
of Bishop Law to this remark is by no means satisfactory. He
says it assumes that more misery than happiness exists. Now,
in this view of the question, the balance is quite immaterial.
The existence of any evil at all raises the question as much
as the preponderance of evil over good, because the question
conceives a perfectly good Being, and asks how such a Being
can have permitted any evil at all. Upon this part of the
subject both King and Law have fallen into an error which recent
discoveries place in a singularly clear light. They say that the
argument they are dealing with would lead to leaving the earth
to the brutes without human inhabitants. But the recent
discoveries in Fossil Osteology have proved that the earth, for
ages before the last 5,000 or 6,000 years, was left to the lower
animals; nay, that in a still earlier period of its existence no
animal life at all was maintained upon its surface. So that, in
fact, the foundation is removed of the _reductio ad absurdum_
attempted by the learned prelates.

A singular argument is used towards the latter end of the
inquiry. When the Deity, it is said, resolved to create other
beings, He must of necessity tolerate imperfect natures in his
handiwork, just as he must the equality of a circle's radii when
he drew a circle. Who does not perceive the difference? The
meaning of the word circle is that the radii are all equal; this
equality is a necessary truth. But it is not shown that men
could not exist without the imperfections they labor under.
Yet this is the argument suggested by these authors while
complaining (chap. v. s. 5, sub. 7, div. 7), that Lactantius
had not sufficiently answered the Epicurean dilemma; it is the
substitute propounded to supply that father's deficiency.--
"When, therefore," says the Archbishop, "matter, motion and
free-will are constituted, the Deity must necessarily permit
corruption of things and the abuse of liberty, or something
worse, for these cannot be separated without a contradiction,
and God is no more important, because he cannot separate
equality of radii from a circle."Honesty, loyalty, trust,
decency, hospitality, humanity, pure religion, the better
moral qualities not usually found on the side of the Europeans,
but so deeply despised primitive peoples, and Seume's "We are
still savages bessre People" has a deep reason. You do not say
that the Europeans perpetrated wickedness only by individual
basis and also only the individuals alleged to be had, they are
pretty much evenly from the entire population colonists
executed and in any event, it has been approved höchlich, yes
it is still missing much that they would now widely blamed.
It is evident from these considerations also how incredibly
slow the moral progress of humanity and how little intellectual
development through a step after that side is due. The
Columbus just mentioned may serve as evidence, he, mentally
as much about his time was, had quite the same moral level
inne. His entire time but was in spite of the Christenthums, in
spite of the external culture nor to a position of intellectual
savagery that is still unlikely to be the essence of human nature
is different, and indeed by many developed and completely unbridled
passions even lower than that displayed.

How huge is the evolution of intelligence in the last three
centuries has increased, Everyone knows, but look at the culture
of peoples of the 19th Century - think of the Englishman
in Tasmania, Neuholland, North America, the Portuguese and Spaniards
in South America - is one of a moral progress did little notice,
because they behave, but not in such a community, just as brutally
and inhumane, as the Spaniards in the 16th Century.

Also, you can not say that today's propaganda and its methods in
the South Seas to its very advantages of the missionaries
of the 16th and 17 Century differed, what they are about
to Gewaltthätigkeit lost, which she won in untruth. And when
you're in the 19th Century with the same recklessness as the
16th just to baptize, baptized: it is in our times is far worse
than in those previous. Until now, so has the level of intellectual
development is far from decisive and in the Maass than you think
should be on the moral side of human nature knitted - for reasons
beyond their deeper psychological Motivirung us here would lead
too far. And yet, it not läugnen that everything is real
progression of the entire humanity, so they are always pure and
truly evolved human, not both at the intellectual rather than
moral Geistesthaten based. The European society is to its present
height emporgehoben stage first, by the equality of women among
the Germans, secondly, the purely moral power of the
Christenthums, thirdly, the cleaning of the Christenthums and the
recognition of individual freedom of mind by the Reformation and
the cleaning of the social relationships through the revolution of
the last century.

The latter was also equal to the primitive peoples the best
fruit, because that Polynesia is treated much different than
America, contributed not a little to the teachings of men like
Rousseau, the idea that all people who want it now stands, or by
skin color and language differ seem, in their equal human beings
are indeed the view, which one of these people a long time
harbored in Europe, also based on this idea, since it mainly
through the works of Forster were caused, but Rousseau's avid
supporters were .-- Besides those main funding of humanity
can be some other, not in the first line, but also just
completely overlooked, and so is the awakening of the
pure sense of beauty, the true art by the Greeks. While
now in the lives of peoples and individuals are all too often
shows that the largest intelligence training on the moral
perfection of a human being has no influence, it promotes vice
versa every moral progress of human society and their
intellectual performance is no such promotion not to think, because
any truly significant moral progress mankind in her whole being
rises and further developed, and only where this double progress
happens, it can be a real heights of the question. It never
raises a people only by industry and educational institutions if
it is a rich and well-informed can make, it only raises it
when its ideal beliefs and promotes explained. But rather
than promoting it occurs that the presence of the ideal of past
centuries as the only full healing wishes, which is obvious.
§ 23rd Future of primitive peoples. Means to raise. What
will the future of the peoples of his nature? Virtually destroyed
only a few are up now and we still can, and because we lack of
development, physical or mental, they can find nowhere, we still
have hope.

Of course is much ruined, and the ease of approach, the
confidence with which they entgegenkamen culture, is at most
irretrievably lost. As before, the missionaries, the
largest contributions to these people, so shall also, when we
ask about the future our eyes on the first missionaries. If we
consider that the Polynesians we can say that their rescue
currently owe them that "the Hottentots, and many American tribe
alone and only by chance they had, even the good sides of the
culture to learn, so we can not urgent enough hope that their
work is beneficial may always spread. This includes initial
support from the secular powers, albeit differently than
they are from France, the Catholic missionaries to Theil was
because the states must, in the interest of every native, every
blessed effectiveness as much of what Confession equally
protected. And so, in order not to speak of Christenthum,
also from the anthropological point of view, the Catholic
Church and France in their service in the South Seas have
passed difficult. The forces, which are classified as primitive
peoples have colonies, particularly England, have the biggest
advantages of a good effectiveness of the missionaries, because
once they are useless wars, but also the White often harmful
enough to be avoided, and also the natives, even the Colony
won. It is therefore of the state due to emission by all means
promote (not by force will only help), but also a watchful eye
on them and they Nöthiger case to account. Because humanity may
occur and are also among the Protestant missionaries from the
South Pacific chen occurred, eg in New Zealand through its land
purchases and speculation, and their cause, and the natives
have the same amount of harm. But the missionaries have to
himself the strictest attention have. You need more and more
to the right and get key insight that there is nothing helps
people to baptize, or to abstract, and for those people just
as incomprehensible as useless Lehrbegriffe noted, if you
do not mind all of its forces, who are teaching these truths
imbalances. According to this page - who would it läugnen? but
also exceed it quite flawlessly to act far human effort -
according to this site have both missed a lot of churches,
the Catholic by often quite unprecedentedly reckless christenings,
where they are settled quietly Heidenthum (examples of this
assertion hard to deliver Annales de la propagation de la foi,
Michelis Lutteroth enough and we lead single of brevity not),
the Protestant by Ernst too strict and stubborn stiffening to
the abstract theories. But will any unbiased by far the better
efficacy of protestant side, if we are even remotely, to
disregard what the Catholic church has done great. Men like
Las Casas and his faith so many comrades, almost the only
protection of the oppressed Americans were so many Jesuits,
with the greatest zeal of faith is any risk for the Christenthum
subject, such as the mighty San Vitores on blood Marianas: all
these men have in the first series is called, when it comes to
presentation of the merits of the mission .

It makes the only natural people to people, then Christians,
then they slowly and by the culture from which the highest
flower Christenthum yes just wants to be. Non-knowledge and
recognition, and it would be the highest wisdom, Thätigkeit much
more independent and build their own lives are the only people
moral support and moral force: it awakens, create, transfer
it and they will promote the Christenthum. Is it true that
those criminals, from which rise to the deportation of
places and at different points Oceanian settlers, by the fragments
of culture that the natives mittheilten the Christenthum and
pioneered the missionaries and have much easier without having
to even though they wanted and often with the culture also
taught many crimes. If you want to, but without sufficient
preparation for rapid success, so nothing will affect the mission
reports (both Confessions) amply demonstrate how such a
thöricht quest is and how it often to the self-deceptions
allergröbsten leads. Only the loving and devoted work of many
generations of devotion can be real and lasting success won.
Muth Man but not the primitive peoples to the level of education
in Flights to own only what the most gifted peoples culture in
the course of millennia, and with such frequent relapse, so
hot battle so steady work to win. But the secular power
must bring Hülfe , initially negative, they do not condone
that other, what the missionaries build undermine and tearing, and
also positively by those initiated by the concept.

It must be the natives in their natural rights protected in the
Eigenthumsrecht they inhabit on the ground and recognize that
Strictest keep them from that side of the colonists no injustice
is done. Admittedly, such men as Lord Gray, with the greatest
prudence and energy, the purest love of people have not often
found, but it can also be used in the election of a supreme
colonial administration not too much tuna. Special suggestions
for Australia Gray, Dieffenbach for New Zealand others for other
people made, and it could be, despite all the difficulties,
if the forces which have colonies, that is, above all, England
seriously wanted to certainly prevent much misery, much good
and much confusion spoiled produce.

Until now, admittedly, the British and indeed European sailors
usually only one right of the violence, and the iniquities
which they commit to those peoples, remain unpunished, while
the worst hit will be penalties if the natives of any White
freveln. On Theil Nöthiger is this injustice to the distant
White Protect Theil but it is also in itself is still very poor
moral development of white, which in such violence in the
whole hardly a great sacrilege. see. What can we say if
Schandgeschichten like this under the protection of England
official has happened, and in the newspapers, also in
German, almost as a joke to be told? After the murder of a
businessman [O] appeared in the English warship Perseus, Captain
Stevens, 1867 in the spring of Palau (Pelewsinseln, western
Micronesia) to Genugthuung to demand: it turned out, the
clerk at the command of the king, on his island Koror, he lived
and owned property, was killed because the enemy he had sold the
same firearm. "Although Stevens einsah means that those would
have done better, no murder weapons for sale", as he believes
it to be strictly procedural and demanded the execution of the
King. The Islanders, of the warship threatened, decided not to
resist - but they asked that the execution of sailors of the
ship would be executed, what Stevens did not allow. »Islanders
should work thun." It happened because. And it happened even
more. The so-called treated the islanders to their Schiffscapitän
King. He immediately took the crown and showed that he had the
royal prerogative in fruitful way to help understand.

He ordered his Unterthanen, chicken, eggs, fruits and many
others on board the steamer and bring to this command was willing
to follow. A payment for the delivered goods were beyond
question, but improvisirte his Majesty was so kind, some gifts,
which are: knives, Scheeren, etc. administering it. When this
happened, he thanked and left the Paleuinsulanern, now another
king after her tastes are looking for "(Globus 12, 59, after the
Overland China Mail v. May 30, 1867 and the" Press "to Manila).
Does not mean any self-esteem of a nation with feet occur? not,
of justice and humanity in the face beat? And that a representative
of the English government in the name of justice! And such a
story as exhilarated anecdote a European audience! The
islanders had, despite their pleas, their own king shoot,
because he is one of them decided against hostile acting
Englishman, however frevelhaftem ways, had discarded! As long as
such stories are still possible as long, however, for
primitive peoples still not too much to hope for. And they
will, we fear it, nor long be possible, certainly at least as
long as the culture of peoples of all other things seem good
substance, as those "savages" who are arguably the form, but
not the rights of people admitted. Against this total Exclusion
of all European life, as the natives in the colonial countries
almost always have to tolerate, the state would have what
is in his power, tuna, that if he really wanted to raise,
because that is what they are now most of the Culture and back
in misery. But it is difficult if not impossible, and mankind,
it seems, is still some need to step forward thun before
this equality (if it is still possible) is also only
approximate reality is, so that in this effect probably can tell,
everything in Europe to raise the white population and their
moral life happens, which is also indirectly the peoples good
nature. § 24th Werth the primitive peoples to humanity and its
evolution.

Final. But we must still ask, can assist a government, the civilized
peoples zumuthen so much effort and work on the nature of
people to use them but for other purposes, and perhaps better
or would have to withdraw more useful?
But why this was
the form of those orbits no one could even conjecture. If any
person, the most deeply skilled in mathematical science, and the
most internally convinced of the universal prevalence of design
and contrivance in the structure of the universe, had been asked
what reason there was for the planets moving in ellipses so,
nearly approaching to circles, he could not have given any good
reason, at least beyond a guess. The force of gravitation, even
admitting that to be, as it were, a condition of the creation of
matter, would have made those bodies revolve in ellipses of any
degree of eccentricity just as well, provided the angle and the
force of projection had been varied. Then, why was this form
rather, than any other chosen? No one knew; yet no one doubted
that there was ample reason for it. Accordingly the sublime
discoveries of Lagrange and La Place have shown us that this
small eccentricity is one material element in the formula by
which it is shown that all the irregularities of the system are
periodical, and that the deviation never can exceed a certain
amount on either hand.

But, again, while we are ignorant of this, perhaps the most
sublime truth in all science, we were always arguing as if the
system had an imperfection, as if the disturbing forces of the
different planets and the sun, acting on one another, constantly
changed the orbits of each planet, and must, in a course of
ages, work the destruction of the whole planetary arrangement
which we had contemplated with so great admiration and with awe.
It was deemed enough if we could show that this derangement must
be extremely slow, and that, therefore, the system might last
for many more ages without requiring any interposition of
omnipotent skill to preserve it by rectifying its motions. Thus
one of the most celebrated writers above cited argues that,
"from the nature of gravitation and the concentricity of the
orbits, the irregularities produced are so slowly operated in
contracting, dilating and inclining those orbits, that the
system may go on for many thousand years before any extraordinary
interference becomes necessary in order to correct it." And Dr.
Burnett adds, that "those small irregularities cast no discredit
on the good contrivance of the whole." Nothing, however, could
cast greater discredit if it were as he supposed, and as all men
previous to the late discoveries supposed; it was only, they
rather think, a "small irregularity," which was every hour
tending to the destruction of the whole system, and which
must have deranged or confounded its whole structure long before
it destroyed it. Yet now we see that the wisdom, to which a
thousand years are as one day, not satisfied with constructing a
fabric which might last for "many thousand years without His
interference," has so formed it that it may thus endure forever.

Now if such be the grounds of our belief in the universal
prevalence of Design, and such the different lights which at
different periods of our progress in science we possess upon
this branch of the divine government; if we undoubtingly believe
that contrivance is universal only because we can trace and
comprehend it in a great majority of instances, and if the
number of exceptions to the rule is occasionally diminished as
our knowledge of the particulars is from time to time extended--
may we not apply the same principle to the apprehension of
Benevolent purpose, and infer from the number of instances
in which we plainly perceive a good intention, that if we
were better acquainted with those cases in which a contrary
intention is now apparent, we should there, too, find the
generally pervading character of Benevolence to prevail? Not
only is this the manner in which we reason respecting the Design
of the Creator from examining his works; it is the manner in
which we treat the conduct of our fellow-creatures. A man of the
most extensive benevolence and strictest integrity in his
general deportment has done something equivocal; nay, something
apparently harsh and cruel; we are slow to condemn him; we give
him credit for acting with a good motive and for a righteous
purpose; we rest satisfied that "if we only knew everything he
would come out blameless." This arises from a just and a sound
view of human character, and its general consistency with
itself. The same reasoning may surely be applied with all
humility and reverence, to the works and the intentions of the
great Being who has implanted in our minds the principles which
lead to that just and sound view of the deeds and motives of
men.

But let the argument be rested upon our course of reasoning
respecting divine contrivance. The existence of Evil is in no
case more apparent than the existence of Disorder seems to be in
many things. To go no further than the last example which has
been given--the mathematician could perceive the derangement in
the planetary orbits, could demonstrate that it must ensue from
the mutual action of the heavenly bodies on each other, could
calculate its progress with the utmost exactness, could tell
with all nicety how much it would alter the forms of the
orbits in a given time, could foresee the time when the whole
system must be irretrievably destroyed by its operation as a
mathematical certainty. Nothing, that we call evil can be much
more certainly perceived than this derangement, of itself an
evil, certainly a great imperfection, if the system was observed
by the mind of man as we regard human works. Yet we now find,
from well considering some things which had escaped attention,
that the system is absolutely free from derangement; that all
the disturbances counterbalance each other; and that the orbits
never can either be flattened or bulged out beyond a definite or
very inconsiderable quantity. Can any one doubt that there is
also a reason for even the small and limited, this regular and
temporary derangement? Why it exists at all, or in any the least
degree, we as yet know not. But who will presume to doubt that
it has a reason which would at once satisfy our minds were it
known to us? Nay, who will affirm that the discovery of it may
not yet be in reserve for some later and happier age? Then are
we not entitled to apply the same reasoning to what at present
appears Evil in a system of which, after all we know of it, so
much still remains concealed from our view?

The mere act of creation in a Being of wisdom so admirable and
power so vast, seems to make it extremely probable that perfect
goodness accompanies the exertion of his perfect skill. There is
something so repugnant to all our feelings, but also to all the
conceptions of our reason, in the supposition of such a Being
desiring the misery, for its own sake, of the Beings whom he
voluntarily called into existence and endowed with a sentient
nature, that the mind naturally and irresistibly recoils from
such a thought. But this is not all. If the nature of that great
Being were evil, his power being unbounded, there would be some
proportion between the amounts of ills and the monuments of that
power. Yet we are struck dumb with the immensity of His works to
which no imperfection can be ascribed, and in which no evil can
be traced, while the amount of mischief that we see might sink
into a most insignificant space; and is such as a being of
inconsiderable power and very limited skill could easily have
accomplished. This is not the same consideration with the
balance of good against evil; and inquirers do not seem to have
sufficiently attended to it. The argument, however, deserves
much attention, for it is purely and strictly inductive. The
divine nature is shown to be clothed with prodigious power and
incomparable wisdom and skill,--power and skill so vast and so
exceeding our comprehension that we ordinarily term them
infinite, and are only inclined to conceive the possibility
of limiting, by the course of the argument upon evil, one
alternative of which is assumed to raise an exception. But
admitting on account of the question under discussion, that we
have only a right to say that power and skill are prodigiously
great, though possibly not boundless, they are plainly shown in
the phenomena of the universe to be the attributes of a Being, who,
if evil-disposed, could have made the monuments of Ill upon a
scale resembling those of Power and Skill; so that if those
things which seem to us evil be really the result of a mischievous
design in such a Being, we cannot comprehend why they are upon
so entirely different a scale. This is a strong presumption from
the facts that we are wrong in imputing those appearances to such
a disposition. If so, what seems evil must needs be capable of
some other explanation consistent with divine goodness--that is
to say, would not prove to be evil at all if we knew the whole
of those facts.

But it is necessary to proceed a step further, especially with a
view to the fundamental position now contended for, the
extending to the question of Benevolence the same principles
which we apply to that of Intelligence. The evil which exists,
or that which we suppose to be evil, not only is of a kind and a
magnitude requiring inconceivably less power and less skill than
the admitted good of the creation--it also bears a very small
proportion in amount; quite as small a proportion as the
cases of unknown or undiscoverable design bear to those of
acknowledged and proved contrivance. Generally speaking, the
preservation and the happiness of sensitive creatures appears
to be the great object of creative exertion and conservative
providence. The expanding of our faculties, both bodily and
mentally, is accompanied with pleasure; the exercise of those
powers is almost always attended with gratification; all labor
so acts as to make rest peculiarly delicious; much of labor is
enjoyment; the gratification of those appetites by which both
the individual is preserved and the race is continued, is highly
pleasurable to all animals; and it must be observed that instead
of being attracted by grateful sensations to do anything
requisite for our good or even our existence, we might have been
just as certainly urged by the feeling of pain, or the dread of
it, which is a kind of suffering in itself. Nature, then,
resembles the law-giver who, to make his subjects obey, should
prefer holding out rewards for compliance with his commands
rather than denounce punishments for disobedience. But nature is
yet more kind; she is gratuitously kind; she not only prefers
inducement to threat or compulsion, but she adds more gratification
than was necessary to make us obey her calls. How well might all
creation have existed and been continued, though the air had not
been balmy in spring, or the shade and the spring refreshing in
summer; had the earth not been enamelled with flowers; and the
air scented with perfumes! One main reason for the effectiveness
of such terrible imported diseases to which we return later,
leads to Humboldt when a 4, 410-11 says: "The dejection of the
mind and the fear of course, multiply the predisposition of
institutions to Miasmen incorporated; therefore it is no wonder
if such epidemics including particularly violently if they
are victorious conquerors of be introduced. "§ 4 Treatment of the
sick among primitive peoples. All of these diseases is now what
the primitive peoples by their nature dangerous enough that,
were it even more wrong by the very way in which those peoples
illnesses treated. The syphilis was thus so dangerous in Polynesia
that you do not Theil they cared and some but if it is that, the
only propagated Uebel. Sun believed in the heady Kavatrank, from
the roots of Piper methysticum is preparing a remedy for them to
have found and there but nothing could be more dangerous than
the disease in this way because not even the misguided, the
effects the disease than ever to make bad (Mörenhout 2,
405). In America turned against the pox is mainly steam baths
immediately following cold ablution and in Polynesia and
Neuholland also have other resources and still thörichtere; course
has already been through this cures the disease almost always
tödtlich.
Nay, the irreparable
injury of a joint gives rise to the formation of a new hinge,
by which the same functions may be not inconveniently, though
less perfectly, performed. Thus, too, recovery of vigor after
sickness is provided for by increased appetite; but there is here
superadded, generally, a feeling of comfort and lightness, an
enjoyment of existence so delightful, that it is a common remark
how nearly this compensates the sufferings of the illness. In
the economy of the mind it is the same thing. All our exertions
are stimulated by curiosity, and the gratification is extreme of
satisfying it. But it might have been otherwise ordered, and
some painful feeling might have been made the only stimulant to
the acquisition of knowledge. So, the charm of novelty is
proverbial; but it might have been the unceasing cause of the
most painful alarms. Habit renders every thing easy; but the
repetition might have only increased the annoyance. The loss of
one organ makes the others more acute. But the partial injury
might have caused, as it were, a general paralysis. 'Tis thus
that Paley is well justified in exclaiming, "It is a happy world
after all!" The pains and the sufferings, bodily and mental, to
which we are exposed, if they do not sink into nothing, at least
retreat within comparatively narrow bounds; the ills are hardly
seen when we survey the great and splendid picture of worldly
enjoyment or ease.

But the existence of considerable misery is undeniable: and the
question is, of course, confined to that. Its exaggeration, in
the ordinary estimate both of the vulgar and of skeptical
reasoners, is equally certain. Paley, Bishop Sumner, as well as
Derham, King, Ray and others of the older writers, have made
many judicious and generally correct observations upon its
amount, and they, as well as some of the able and learned
authors of the _Bridgwater Treatises_, have done much in
establishing deductions necessary to be made, in order that we
may arrive at the true amount. That many things, apparently
unmixed evils, when examined more narrowly, prove to be
partially beneficial, is the fair result of their well-meant
labors; and this, although anything rather than a proof that
there is no evil at all, yet is valuable as still further
proving the analogy between this branch of the argument and that
upon design; and in giving hopes that all may possibly be found
hereafter to be good, as everything will assuredly be found to
be contrived with an intelligent and useful purpose. How to use
"black cattle", the Hottentots, proceeded, as shown in the
following case, the husband tells savings. A Dutchman had a
servant chen Hotte Totti, who was in a fever and his illness by a
request from the Lord's saving man undertaken a cure was worse;
Sparmann looked very downcast Boer beaten to comfort her alone that
went on: he is the devil take care of the Hottentots and his soul
if he steers another officer to his butter to sell, would (Sparmann
273).

But this was no isolated case, but general view and we will forward
to the establishment of the so-called Commandos against the
natives, which first appeared around 1774, may not be very
surprised.
The mere
negation in the creating of some, indeed of many, nay, of any
conceivable number of desirable attributes, is therefore no
proper evidence of evil design or of limited power in the
Creator--it is no proof of the existence of evil properly so
called. But does not this also erase death from the catalogue of
ills? It might well please the Deity to create a mortal being
which, consisting of soul and body, was only to live upon this
earth for a limited number of years. If, when that time has
expired, this being is removed to another and a superior state
of existence, no evil whatever accrues to it from the change;
and all views of the government of this world lead to the
important and consolitary conclusion, that such is the design of
the Creator; that he cannot have bestowed on us minds capable of
such expansion and culture only to be extinguished when they
have reached their highest pitch of improvement; or if this be
considered as begging the question by assuming benevolent
design, we cannot easily conceive that while the mind's force is
so little affected by the body's decay, the destruction or
dissolution of the latter should be the extinction of the
former. But that death operates as an evil of the very highest
kind in two ways is obvious; the dread of it often embitters
life, and the death of friends brings to the mind by far its
most painful infliction; certainly the greatest suffering it can
undergo without any criminal consciousness of its own.

For this evil, then--this grievous and admitted evil--how shall
we account? But first let us consider whether it be not
unavoidable; not merely under the present dispensation, and in
the existing state of things; for that is wholly irrelevant to
the question which is raised upon the fitness of this very state
of things; but whether it be not a necessary evil. That man
might have been created immortal is not denied; but if it were
the will of the Deity to form a limited being and to place him
upon the earth for only a certain period of time, his death was
the necessary consequence of this determination. Then as to the
pain which one person's removal inflicts upon surviving parties,
this seems the equally necessary consequence of their having
affections. For if any being feels love towards another, this
implies his desire that the intercourse with that other should
continue; or what is the same thing, the repugnance and aversion
to its ceasing; that is, he must suffer affliction for that
removal of the beloved object. But could be used for mere
suspension of many Semitic teach children. [J] Also what
Humboldt b5, 110-111 of the "Mysteries of the Botuto," a
trumpet of Thon with several bullet-like swellings, the
solemn ceremony at all is needed, says belongs here, "to the
mysteries of the privy Botuto requires, among other things purely
by his manners and unbeweibt. The insiders take the hostages,
the fasting and attacking other devotional exercises. "Through
the trumpet theilt the great spirit of the insiders with his
will, they are thus closer to the gods in traffic as other people
and that was the basic idea of Areois. Quite similar is
reported from Haiti. "Caziken The fact was," said Waitz 4,
329 according to Herrera, Torquemada and Petr. Martyr, "even
without a priest, but at the top of the Cultus: the temple and
sacrificial places where the worship of God took place, were
either their houses or huts, as they duly were, where were
the pictures of ancestors that are wood, hollow inside and
with a tube of them only to oracle could be consulted and only
debate what they entered. You are intoxicated for that purpose
with a kind of snuff, and led the holy act alone, of course, the
people remained excluded. "Even dances belonged to the religious
mysteries, which they alone knew, even as this again in the
Areois. [ K] Jak. Grimm, Gesch. Language 1 dd Aufl (1848) p. 143
ff provides a lot of people together, which seemed the same
use: Scythe (Issedonen, according to Mela, 3rd edition 1868),
Celtic (3rd edition), various Germanic tribes (Germans, Sweden)
novels and Slavs.

Merkwürdig is that even with Holy skulls of use occurs to Trier
at Neuss, and Aventine (1566 Ausg v. fol. 33, a) Ebersberg
and Regensburg. The use is the same, you see, it was probably
at first a kind of cannibalism, but also a sign of friendship,
love and grateful remembrance. It should be noted is that
Aventine says nobody would have made such a skull drink may not
be an enemy who had killed, because this train Similar to many
among the primitive peoples recalls. But we can very strange line
here is not to pursue. [L] Herod. 4, 26 (after Grimm ibid.) says
of the Issedonen [Greek: epean andri apothanê Pater, hoi
prosêchontes pants prosagousi probata chai epeiten tauta
thysantes chai ta chatatamontes Chrea chatatamnousi chai tou
ton dechomenou tethneôta gonea, anamixantes de ta panta Chrea
daita protitheatai]. Wilz and also the Scythians ate their
deceased parents. The Contact tödteten still in the 16th
Century arbeitsuntüchtigen their fathers under special Ceremonies
(Kühn, Märkische Tales and Mährchen 335). Again we are
faced with an ancient and widespread custom, we are just touching,
can not deal with. See what a little further down over New Guinea
and Mare said. About the same custom of the Romans, Greeks,
Phoenicians (Sardinia), Spanish, German and others peoples Merklin
see in the Memoires de l'academie de Petersbourg 1852 p. 119 and
Osenbrüggen in the preface to Cicero ROSCIO per P. p. 51 ff The
Lithuanian proverb (Schleicher lit. Mährchen 179) "as the little
son is growing up, it also has the Father strangles," could
be based on a similar, now long lost tradition indicates. [M]
When Bech. boys get after drinking a magic food, the ability to
fly. In a very similar Mährchen in Indian Somadeva (Brockhaus
104) people, this dish of meat. A related two stories would not
be unthinkable. [N] The human skull, which at the entrance of
the palace, to the Stadtthoren and all the important places
are appropriate Dahomeys (Waitz 2, 130), one can certainly not
suggest otherwise. Also among the Semites was the widespread
use: the phönicischen cities were made by noted that in
their Thoren and other people eingrub (Movers Phenicia 2,
46).
But this inference is also an
additional argument for a future state, when we couple it with
these other conclusions respecting the economy of the world to
which we are led by wholly different routes, when we investigate
the phenomena around us and within us.

Suppose, for example, it should be found that there are certain
purposes which can in no way whatever--no conceivable way--be
answered except by placing man in a state of trial or probation;
suppose the essential nature of mind shall be found to be such
that it could not in any way whatever exist so as to be capable
of the greatest purity and improvement--in other words, the
highest perfection--without having undergone a probation; or
suppose it should be found impossible to communicate certain
enjoyments to rational and sentient beings without having
previously subjected them to certain trials and certain
sufferings--as, for instance, the pleasures derived from
a consciousness of perfect security, the certainty that we
can suffer and perish no more--this surely is a possible
supposition. Now, to continue the last example--Whatever
pleasure there is in the contrast between ease and previous
vexation or pain, whatever enjoyment we derive from the feeling
of absolute security after the vexation and uncertainty of a
precarious state, implies a previous suffering--a previous state
of precarious enjoyment; and not only implies it but necessarily
implies it, so that the power of Omnipotence itself could not
convey to us the enjoyment without having given us the previous
suffering. Then is it not possible that the object of an all
powerful and perfectly benevolent being should be to create like
beings, to whom as entire happiness, as complete and perfect
enjoyment, should be given as any created beings--that is, any
being, except the Creator himself--can by possibility enjoy?
This is certainly not only a very possible supposition, but it
appears to be quite consistent with, if it be not a necessary
consequence of, his being perfectly good as well as powerful and
wise. Now we have shown, therefore, that such being supposed
the design of Providence, even Omnipotence itself could not
accomplish this design, as far as one great and important class
of enjoyments is concerned, without the previous existence of
some pain, some misery. Whatever gratification arises from
relief--from contrast--from security succeeding anxiety--
from restoration of lost affections--from renewing severed
connections--and many others of a like kind, could not by any
possibility be enjoyed unless the correlative suffering had
first been undergone. Nor will the argument be at all impeached
by observing, that one Being may be made to feel the pleasure of
ease and security by seeing others subjected to suffering and
distress; for that assumes the infliction of misery on those
others; it is "_alterius_ spectare laborem" that we are
supposing to be sweet; and this is still partial evil.

As the whole argument respecting evil must, from the nature of
the question, resolve itself into either a proof of some
absolute or mathematical necessity not to be removed by infinite
power, or the showing that some such proof may be possible
although we have not yet discovered it, an illustration may
naturally be expected to be attainable from mathematical
considerations. Thus, we have already adverted to the law of
periodical irregularities in the solar system. Any one before it
was discovered seemed entitled to expatiate upon the operation
of the disturbing forces arising from mutual attraction, and to
charge the system arranged upon the principle of universal
gravitation with want of skill, nay, with leading to inevitable
mischief--mischief or evil of so prodigious an extent as to
exceed incalculably all the instances of evil and of suffering
which we see around us in this single planet. Nevertheless, what
then appeared so clearly to be a defect and an evil, is now well
known to be the very absolute perfection of the whole heavenly
architecture.

Again, we may derive a similar illustration from a much more
limited instance, but one immediately connected with strict
mathematical reasoning, and founded altogether in the nature of
necessary truth. The problem has been solved by mathematicians,
Sir Isaac Newton having first investigated it, of finding the
form of a symmetrical solid, or solid of revolution, which in
moving through a fluid shall experience the least possible
resistance. The figure bears a striking resemblance to that of a
fish. Now suppose a fish were formed exactly in this shape, and
that some animal endowed with reason were placed upon a portion
of its surface, and able to trace its form for only a limited
extent, say at the narrow part, where the broad portion or end
of the moving body were opposed, or seemed as if it were
opposed, to the surrounding fluid when the fish moved--the
reasoner would at once conclude that the contrivance of the
fish's form was very inconvenient, and that nothing could be
much worse adapted for expeditious or easy movement through the
waters.

Yet it is certain that upon being afterwards permitted to view
THE WHOLE body of the fish, what had seemed a defect and an
evil, not only would appear plainly to be none at all, but it
would appear manifest that this seeming evil or defect was a
part of the most perfect and excellent structure which it was
possible even for Omnipotence and Omniscience to have adopted,
and that no other conceivable arrangement could by possibility
have produced so much advantage, or tended so much to fulfill
the design in view. Previous to being enlightened by such an
enlarged view of the whole facts, it would thus be a rash and
unphilosophical thing in the reasoner whose existence we are
supposing to pronounce an unfavorable opinion. Still more unwise
would it be if numerous other observations had evinced traces of
skill and goodness in the fish's structure. The true and the
safe conclusion would be to suspend an opinion which could only
be unsatisfactorily formed upon imperfect data; and to rest in
the humble hope and belief that one day all would appear for the
best.

THE END.

----------------------------
[1] The "light of revelation," as well as the "light of the
Christian religion," has not dispelled the darkness of ignorance.
The torch of reason is a surer guide.--_Pub._

[2] The human race has from time immemorial been afflicted
with so-called revelations, all claiming inspiration, all
conflicting, and all being equally "mysterious and obscure." It
is no wonder after all if they are from the culture that they
so miserable nameless made and continues to classify them
as wild animals should be treated strictly away, even though they
are clever enough, they are incorporated, and later to develop (
Gray 2, 374).--_Pub._

[3] While it is true that the argument of Design, here given,
places the subject one step in advance, it is still unsatisfactory,
because it fails to explain to us who designed the designer, and
the mystery of creation still remains unsolved.

"What think you of an uncaused cause of everything?" is the
pertinent question which Bishop Watson, in his _Apology for the
Bible_, asked, and vainly asked, of the celebrated deist, Thomas
Paine.--_Pub._