Meanwhile inside the luminous pictures brightened and faded.  I
stood for some while unobserved in the rear of the spectators, when
I could hear just in front of me a pair of lovers following the
show with interest, the male playing the part of interpreter and
(like Adam) mingling caresses with his lecture.  The wild animals,
a tiger in particular, and that old school-treat favourite, the
sleeper and the mouse, were hailed with joy; but the chief marvel
and delight was in the gospel series.  Maka, in the opinion of his
aggrieved wife, did not properly rise to the occasion.  'What is
the matter with the man?  Why can't he talk?' she cried.  The
matter with the man, I think, was the greatness of the opportunity;
he reeled under his good fortune; and whether he did ill or well,
the exposure of these pious 'phantoms' did as a matter of fact
silence in all that part of the island the voice of the scoffer.
'Why then,' the word went round, 'why then, the Bible is true!'
And on our return afterwards we were told the impression was yet
lively, and those who had seen might be heard telling those who had
not, 'O yes, it is all true; these things all happened, we have
seen the pictures.'  The argument is not so childish as it seems;
for I doubt if these islanders are acquainted with any other mode
of representation but photography; so that the picture of an event
(on the old melodrama principle that 'the camera cannot lie,
Joseph,') would appear strong proof of its occurrence.  The fact
amused us the more because our slides were some of them ludicrously
silly, and one (Christ before Pilate) was received with shouts of
merriment, in which even Maka was constrained to join.

Sunday, July 28.--Karaiti came to ask for a repetition of the
'phantoms'--this was the accepted word--and, having received a
promise, turned and left my humble roof without the shadow of a
salutation.  I felt it impolite to have the least appearance of
pocketing a slight; the times had been too difficult, and were
still too doubtful; and Queen Victoria's son was bound to maintain
the honour of his house.  Karaiti was accordingly summoned that
evening to the Ricks, where Mrs. Rick fell foul of him in words,
and Queen Victoria's son assailed him with indignant looks.  I was
the ass with the lion's skin; I could not roar in the language of
the Gilbert Islands; but I could stare.  Karaiti declared he had
meant no offence; apologised in a sound, hearty, gentlemanly
manner; and became at once at his ease.  He had in a dagger to
examine, and announced he would come to price it on the morrow, to-
day being Sunday; this nicety in a heathen with eight wives
surprised me.  The dagger was 'good for killing fish,' he said
roguishly; and was supposed to have his eye upon fish upon two
legs.  It is at least odd that in Eastern Polynesia fish was the
accepted euphemism for the human sacrifice.  Asked as to the
population of his island, Karaiti called out to his vassals who sat
waiting him outside the door, and they put it at four hundred and
fifty; but (added Karaiti jovially) there will soon be plenty more,
for all the women are in the family way.  Long before we separated
I had quite forgotten his offence.  He, however, still bore it in
mind; and with a very courteous inspiration returned early on the
next day, paid us a long visit, and punctiliously said farewell
when he departed.

Monday, July 29.--The great day came round at last.  In the first
hours the night was startled by the sound of clapping hands and the
chant of Nei Kamaunava; its melancholy, slow, and somewhat menacing
measures broken at intervals by a formidable shout.  The little
morsel of humanity thus celebrated in the dark hours was observed
at midday playing on the green entirely naked, and equally
unobserved and unconcerned.

The summer parlour on its artificial islet, relieved against the
shimmering lagoon, and shimmering itself with sun and tinned iron,
was all day crowded about by eager men and women.  Within, it was
boxed full of islanders, of any age and size, and in every degree
of nudity and finery.  So close we squatted, that at one time I had
a mighty handsome woman on my knees, two little naked urchins
having their feet against my back.  There might be a dame in full
attire of holoku and hat and flowers; and her next neighbour might
the next moment strip some little rag of a shift from her fat
shoulders and come out a monument of flesh, painted rather than
covered by the hairbreadth ridi.  Little ladies who thought
themselves too great to appear undraped upon so high a festival
were seen to pause outside in the bright sunshine, their miniature
ridis in their hand; a moment more and they were full-dressed and
entered the concert-room.

At either end stood up to sing, or sat down to rest, the alternate
companies of singers; Kuma and Little Makin on the north,
Butaritari and its conjunct hamlets on the south; both groups
conspicuous in barbaric bravery.  In the midst, between these rival
camps of troubadours, a bench was placed; and here the king and
queen throned it, some two or three feet above the crowded audience
on the floor--Tebureimoa as usual in his striped pyjamas with a
satchel strapped across one shoulder, doubtless (in the island
fashion) to contain his pistols; the queen in a purple holoku, her
abundant hair let down, a fan in her hand.  The bench was turned
facing to the strangers, a piece of well-considered civility; and
when it was the turn of Butaritari to sing, the pair must twist
round on the bench, lean their elbows on the rail, and turn to us
the spectacle of their broad backs.  The royal couple occasionally
solaced themselves with a clay pipe; and the pomp of state was
further heightened by the rifles of a picket of the guard.

With this kingly countenance, and ourselves squatted on the ground,
we heard several songs from one side or the other.  Then royalty
and its guards withdrew, and Queen Victoria's son and daughter-in-
law were summoned by acclamation to the vacant throne.  Our pride
was perhaps a little modified when we were joined on our high
places by a certain thriftless loafer of a white; and yet I was
glad too, for the man had a smattering of native, and could give me
some idea of the subject of the songs.  One was patriotic, and
dared Tembinok' of Apemama, the terror of the group, to an
invasion.  One mixed the planting of taro and the harvest-home.
Some were historical, and commemorated kings and the illustrious
chances of their time, such as a bout of drinking or a war.  One,
at least, was a drama of domestic interest, excellently played by
the troop from Makin.  It told the story of a man who has lost his
wife, at first bewails her loss, then seeks another:  the earlier
strains (or acts) are played exclusively by men; but towards the
end a woman appears, who has just lost her husband; and I suppose
the pair console each other, for the finale seemed of happy omen.
Of some of the songs my informant told me briefly they were 'like
about the weemen'; this I could have guessed myself.  Each side (I
should have said) was strengthened by one or two women.  They were
all soloists, did not very often join in the performance, but stood
disengaged at the back part of the stage, and looked (in ridi,
necklace, and dressed hair) for all the world like European ballet-
dancers.  When the song was anyway broad these ladies came
particularly to the front; and it was singular to see that, after
each entry, the premiere danseuse pretended to be overcome by
shame, as though led on beyond what she had meant, and her male
assistants made a feint of driving her away like one who had
disgraced herself.  Similar affectations accompany certain truly
obscene dances of Samoa, where they are very well in place.  Here
it was different.  The words, perhaps, in this free-spoken world,
were gross enough to make a carter blush; and the most suggestive
feature was this feint of shame.  For such parts the women showed
some disposition; they were pert, they were neat, they were
acrobatic, they were at times really amusing, and some of them were
pretty.  But this is not the artist's field; there is the whole
width of heaven between such capering and ogling, and the strange
rhythmic gestures, and strange, rapturous, frenzied faces with
which the best of the male dancers held us spellbound through a
Gilbert Island ballet.

Almost from the first it was apparent that the people of the city
were defeated.  I might have thought them even good, only I had the
other troop before my eyes to correct my standard, and remind me
continually of 'the little more, and how much it is.'  Perceiving
themselves worsted, the choir of Butaritari grew confused,
blundered, and broke down; amid this hubbub of unfamiliar intervals
I should not myself have recognised the slip, but the audience were
quick to catch it, and to jeer.  To crown all, the Makin company
began a dance of truly superlative merit.  I know not what it was
about, I was too much absorbed to ask.  In one act a part of the
chorus, squealing in some strange falsetto, produced very much the
effect of our orchestra; in another, the dancers, leaping like
jumping-jacks, with arms extended, passed through and through each
other's ranks with extraordinary speed, neatness, and humour.  A
more laughable effect I never saw; in any European theatre it would
have brought the house down, and the island audience roared with
laughter and applause.  This filled up the measure for the rival
company, and they forgot themselves and decency.  After each act or
figure of the ballet, the performers pause a moment standing, and
the next is introduced by the clapping of hands in triplets.  Not
until the end of the whole ballet do they sit down, which is the
signal for the rivals to stand up.  But now all rules were to be
broken.  During the interval following on this great applause, the
company of Butaritari leaped suddenly to their feet and most
unhandsomely began a performance of their own.  It was strange to
see the men of Makin staring; I have seen a tenor in Europe stare
with the same blank dignity into a hissing theatre; but presently,
to my surprise, they sobered down, gave up the unsung remainder of
their ballet, resumed their seats, and suffered their ungallant
adversaries to go on and finish.  Nothing would suffice.  Again, at
the first interval, Butaritari unhandsomely cut in; Makin,
irritated in turn, followed the example; and the two companies of
dancers remained permanently standing, continuously clapping hands,
and regularly cutting across each other at each pause.  I expected
blows to begin with any moment; and our position in the midst was
highly unstrategical.  But the Makin people had a better thought;
and upon a fresh interruption turned and trooped out of the house.
We followed them, first because these were the artists, second
because they were guests and had been scurvily ill-used.  A large
population of our neighbours did the same, so that the causeway was
filled from end to end by the procession of deserters; and the
Butaritari choir was left to sing for its own pleasure in an empty
house, having gained the point and lost the audience.  It was
surely fortunate that there was no one drunk; but, drunk or sober,
where else would a scene so irritating have concluded without
blows?

The last stage and glory of this auspicious day was of our own
providing--the second and positively the last appearance of the
phantoms.  All round the church, groups sat outside, in the night,
where they could see nothing; perhaps ashamed to enter, certainly
finding some shadowy pleasure in the mere proximity.  Within, about
one-half of the great shed was densely packed with people.  In the
midst, on the royal dais, the lantern luminously smoked; chance
rays of light struck out the earnest countenance of our Chinaman
grinding the hand-organ; a fainter glimmer showed off the rafters
and their shadows in the hollow of the roof; the pictures shone and
vanished on the screen; and as each appeared, there would run a
hush, a whisper, a strong shuddering rustle, and a chorus of small
cries among the crowd.  There sat by me the mate of a wrecked
schooner.  'They would think this a strange sight in Europe or the
States,' said he, 'going on in a building like this, all tied with
bits of string.'


CHAPTER VII--HUSBAND AND WIFE


The trader accustomed to the manners of Eastern Polynesia has a
lesson to learn among the Gilberts.  The ridi is but a spare
attire; as late as thirty years back the women went naked until
marriage; within ten years the custom lingered; and these facts,
above all when heard in description, conveyed a very false idea of
the manners of the group.  A very intelligent missionary described
it (in its former state) as a 'Paradise of naked women' for the
resident whites.  It was at least a platonic Paradise, where
Lothario ventured at his peril.  Since 1860, fourteen whites have
perished on a single island, all for the same cause, all found
where they had no business, and speared by some indignant father of
a family; the figure was given me by one of their contemporaries
who had been more prudent and survived.  The strange persistence of
these fourteen martyrs might seem to point to monomania or a series
of romantic passions; gin is the more likely key.  The poor
buzzards sat alone in their houses by an open case; they drank;
their brain was fired; they stumbled towards the nearest houses on
chance; and the dart went through their liver.  In place of a
Paradise the trader found an archipelago of fierce husbands and of
virtuous women.  'Of course if you wish to make love to them, it's
the same as anywhere else,' observed a trader innocently; but he
and his companions rarely so choose.

The trader must be credited with a virtue:  he often makes a kind
and loyal husband.  Some of the worst beachcombers in the Pacific,
some of the last of the old school, have fallen in my path, and
some of them were admirable to their native wives, and one made a
despairing widower.  The position of a trader's wife in the
Gilberts is, besides, unusually enviable.  She shares the
immunities of her husband.  Curfew in Butaritari sounds for her in
vain.  Long after the bell is rung and the great island ladies are
confined for the night to their own roof, this chartered libertine
may scamper and giggle through the deserted streets or go down to
bathe in the dark.  The resources of the store are at her hand; she
goes arrayed like a queen, and feasts delicately everyday upon
tinned meats.  And she who was perhaps of no regard or station
among natives sits with captains, and is entertained on board of
schooners.  Five of these privileged dames were some time our
neighbours.  Four were handsome skittish lasses, gamesome like
children, and like children liable to fits of pouting.  They wore
dresses by day, but there was a tendency after dark to strip these
lendings and to career and squall about the compound in the
aboriginal ridi.  Games of cards were continually played, with
shells for counters; their course was much marred by cheating; and
the end of a round (above all if a man was of the party) resolved
itself into a scrimmage for the counters.  The fifth was a matron.
It was a picture to see her sail to church on a Sunday, a parasol
in hand, a nursemaid following, and the baby buried in a trade hat
and armed with a patent feeding-bottle.  The service was enlivened
by her continual supervision and correction of the maid.  It was
impossible not to fancy the baby was a doll, and the church some
European playroom.  All these women were legitimately married.  It
is true that the certificate of one, when she proudly showed it,
proved to run thus, that she was 'married for one night,' and her
gracious partner was at liberty to 'send her to hell' the next
morning; but she was none the wiser or the worse for the dastardly
trick.  Another, I heard, was married on a work of mine in a
pirated edition; it answered the purpose as well as a Hall Bible.
Notwithstanding all these allurements of social distinction, rare
food and raiment, a comparative vacation from toil, and legitimate
marriage contracted on a pirated edition, the trader must sometimes
seek long before he can be mated.  While I was in the group one had
been eight months on the quest, and he was still a bachelor.

Within strictly native society the old laws and practices were
harsh, but not without a certain stamp of high-mindedness.
Stealthy adultery was punished with death; open elopement was
properly considered virtue in comparison, and compounded for a fine
in land.  The male adulterer alone seems to have been punished.  It
is correct manners for a jealous man to hang himself; a jealous
woman has a different remedy--she bites her rival.  Ten or twenty
years ago it was a capital offence to raise a woman's ridi; to this
day it is still punished with a heavy fine; and the garment itself
is still symbolically sacred.  Suppose a piece of land to be
disputed in Butaritari, the claimant who shall first hang a ridi on
the tapu-post has gained his cause, since no one can remove or
touch it but himself.

The ridi was the badge not of the woman but the wife, the mark not
of her sex but of her station.  It was the collar on the slave's
neck, the brand on merchandise.  The adulterous woman seems to have
been spared; were the husband offended, it would be a poor
consolation to send his draught cattle to the shambles.  Karaiti,
to this day, calls his eight wives 'his horses,' some trader having
explained to him the employment of these animals on farms; and
Nanteitei hired out his wives to do mason-work.  Husbands, at least
when of high rank, had the power of life and death; even whites
seem to have possessed it; and their wives, when they had
transgressed beyond forgiveness, made haste to pronounce the
formula of deprecation--I KANA KIM.  This form of words had so much
virtue that a condemned criminal repeating it on a particular day
to the king who had condemned him, must be instantly released.  It
is an offer of abasement, and, strangely enough, the reverse--the
imitation--is a common vulgar insult in Great Britain to this day.
I give a scene between a trader and his Gilbert Island wife, as it
was told me by the husband, now one of the oldest residents, but
then a freshman in the group.

'Go and light a fire,' said the trader, 'and when I have brought
this oil I will cook some fish.'  The woman grunted at him, island
fashion.  'I am not a pig that you should grunt at me,' said he.

'I know you are not a pig,' said the woman, 'neither am I your
slave.'

'To be sure you are not my slave, and if you do not care to stop
with me, you had better go home to your people,' said he.  'But in
the mean time go and light the fire; and when I have brought this
oil I will cook some fish.'

She went as if to obey; and presently when the trader looked she
had built a fire so big that the cook-house was catching in flames.

'I Kana Kim!' she cried, as she saw him coming; but he recked not,
and hit her with a cooking-pot.  The leg pierced her skull, blood
spouted, it was thought she was a dead woman, and the natives
surrounded the house in a menacing expectation.  Another white was
present, a man of older experience.  'You will have us both killed
if you go on like this,' he cried.  'She had said I Kana Kim!'  If
she had not said I Kana Kim he might have struck her with a
caldron.  It was not the blow that made the crime, but the
disregard of an accepted formula.

Polygamy, the particular sacredness of wives, their semi-servile
state, their seclusion in kings' harems, even their privilege of
biting, all would seem to indicate a Mohammedan society and the
opinion of the soullessness of woman.  And not so in the least.  It
is a mere appearance.  After you have studied these extremes in one
house, you may go to the next and find all reversed, the woman the
mistress, the man only the first of her thralls.  The authority is
not with the husband as such, nor the wife as such.  It resides in
the chief or the chief-woman; in him or her who has inherited the
lands of the clan, and stands to the clansman in the place of
parent, exacting their service, answerable for their fines.  There
is but the one source of power and the one ground of dignity--rank.
The king married a chief-woman; she became his menial, and must
work with her hands on Messrs. Wightman's pier.  The king divorced
her; she regained at once her former state and power.  She married
the Hawaiian sailor, and behold the man is her flunkey and can be
shown the door at pleasure.  Nay, and such low-born lords are even
corrected physically, and, like grown but dutiful children, must
endure the discipline.

We were intimate in one such household, that of Nei Takauti and Nan
Tok'; I put the lady first of necessity.  During one week of fool's
paradise, Mrs. Stevenson had gone alone to the sea-side of the
island after shells.  I am very sure the proceeding was unsafe; and
she soon perceived a man and woman watching her.  Do what she
would, her guardians held her steadily in view; and when the
afternoon began to fall, and they thought she had stayed long
enough, took her in charge, and by signs and broken English ordered
her home.  On the way the lady drew from her earring-hole a clay
pipe, the husband lighted it, and it was handed to my unfortunate
wife, who knew not how to refuse the incommodious favour; and when
they were all come to our house, the pair sat down beside her on
the floor, and improved the occasion with prayer.  From that day
they were our family friends; bringing thrice a day the beautiful
island garlands of white flowers, visiting us any evening, and
frequently carrying us down to their own maniap' in return, the
woman leading Mrs. Stevenson by the hand like one child with
another.

Nan Tok', the husband, was young, extremely handsome, of the most
approved good humour, and suffering in his precarious station from
suppressed high spirits.  Nei Takauti, the wife, was getting old;
her grown son by a former marriage had just hanged himself before
his mother's eyes in despair at a well-merited rebuke.  Perhaps she
had never been beautiful, but her face was full of character, her
eye of sombre fire.  She was a high chief-woman, but by a strange
exception for a person of her rank, was small, spare, and sinewy,
with lean small hands and corded neck.  Her full dress of an
evening was invariably a white chemise--and for adornment, green
leaves (or sometimes white blossoms) stuck in her hair and thrust
through her huge earring-holes.  The husband on the contrary
changed to view like a kaleidoscope.  Whatever pretty thing my wife
might have given to Nei Takauti--a string of beads, a ribbon, a
piece of bright fabric--appeared the next evening on the person of
Nan Tok'.  It was plain he was a clothes-horse; that he wore
livery; that, in a word, he was his wife's wife.  They reversed the
parts indeed, down to the least particular; it was the husband who
showed himself the ministering angel in the hour of pain, while the
wife displayed the apathy and heartlessness of the proverbial man.

When Nei Takauti had a headache Nan Tok' was full of attention and
concern.  When the husband had a cold and a racking toothache the
wife heeded not, except to jeer.  It is always the woman's part to
fill and light the pipe; Nei Takauti handed hers in silence to the
wedded page; but she carried it herself, as though the page were
not entirely trusted.  Thus she kept the money, but it was he who
ran the errands, anxiously sedulous.  A cloud on her face dimmed
instantly his beaming looks; on an early visit to their maniap' my
wife saw he had cause to be wary.  Nan Tok' had a friend with him,
a giddy young thing, of his own age and sex; and they had worked
themselves into that stage of jocularity when consequences are too
often disregarded.  Nei Takauti mentioned her own name.  Instantly
Nan Tok' held up two fingers, his friend did likewise, both in an
ecstasy of slyness.  It was plain the lady had two names; and from
the nature of their merriment, and the wrath that gathered on her
brow, there must be something ticklish in the second.  The husband
pronounced it; a well-directed cocoa-nut from the hand of his wife
caught him on the side of the head, and the voices and the mirth of
these indiscreet young gentlemen ceased for the day.

The people of Eastern Polynesia are never at a loss; their
etiquette is absolute and plenary; in every circumstance it tells
them what to do and how to do it.  The Gilbertines are seemingly
more free, and pay for their freedom (like ourselves) in frequent
perplexity.  This was often the case with the topsy-turvy couple.
We had once supplied them during a visit with a pipe and tobacco;
and when they had smoked and were about to leave, they found
themselves confronted with a problem:  should they take or leave
what remained of the tobacco?  The piece of plug was taken up, it
was laid down again, it was handed back and forth, and argued over,
till the wife began to look haggard and the husband elderly.  They
ended by taking it, and I wager were not yet clear of the compound
before they were sure they had decided wrong.  Another time they
had been given each a liberal cup of coffee, and Nan Tok' with
difficulty and disaffection made an end of his.  Nei Takauti had
taken some, she had no mind for more, plainly conceived it would be
a breach of manners to set down the cup unfinished, and ordered her
wedded retainer to dispose of what was left.  'I have swallowed all
I can, I cannot swallow more, it is a physical impossibility,' he
seemed to say; and his stern officer reiterated her commands with
secret imperative signals.  Luckless dog! but in mere humanity we
came to the rescue and removed the cup.

I cannot but smile over this funny household; yet I remember the
good souls with affection and respect.  Their attention to
ourselves was surprising.  The garlands are much esteemed, the
blossoms must be sought far and wide; and though they had many
retainers to call to their aid, we often saw themselves passing
afield after the blossoms, and the wife engaged with her own in
putting them together.  It was no want of only that disregard so
incident to husbands, that made Nei Takauti despise the sufferings
of Nan Tok'.  When my wife was unwell she proved a diligent and
kindly nurse; and the pair, to the extreme embarrassment of the
sufferer, became fixtures in the sick-room.  This rugged, capable,
imperious old dame, with the wild eyes, had deep and tender
qualities:  her pride in her young husband it seemed that she
dissembled, fearing possibly to spoil him; and when she spoke of
her dead son there came something tragic in her face.  But I seemed
to trace in the Gilbertines a virility of sense and sentiment which
distinguishes them (like their harsh and uncouth language) from
their brother islanders in the east.


PART IV:  THE GILBERTS--APEMAMA


CHAPTER I--THE KING OF APEMAMA:  THE ROYAL TRADER


There is one great personage in the Gilberts:  Tembinok' of
Apemama:  solely conspicuous, the hero of song, the butt of gossip.
Through the rest of the group the kings are slain or fallen in
tutelage:  Tembinok' alone remains, the last tyrant, the last erect
vestige of a dead society.  The white man is everywhere else,
building his houses, drinking his gin, getting in and out of
trouble with the weak native governments.  There is only one white
on Apemama, and he on sufferance, living far from court, and
hearkening and watching his conduct like a mouse in a cat's ear.
Through all the other islands a stream of native visitors comes and
goes, travelling by families, spending years on the grand tour.
Apemama alone is left upon one side, the tourist dreading to risk
himself within the clutch of Tembinok'.  And fear of the same
Gorgon follows and troubles them at home.  Maiana once paid him
tribute; he once fell upon and seized Nonuti:  first steps to the
empire of the archipelago.  A British warship coming on the scene,
the conqueror was driven to disgorge, his career checked in the
outset, his dear-bought armoury sunk in his own lagoon.  But the
impression had been made; periodical fear of him still shakes the
islands; rumour depicts him mustering his canoes for a fresh
onfall; rumour can name his destination; and Tembinok' figures in
the patriotic war-songs of the Gilberts like Napoleon in those of
our grandfathers.

We were at sea, bound from Mariki to Nonuti and Tapituea, when the
wind came suddenly fair for Apemama.  The course was at once
changed; all hands were turned-to to clean ship, the decks holy-
stoned, all the cabin washed, the trade-room overhauled.  In all
our cruising we never saw the Equator so smart as she was made for
Tembinok'.  Nor was Captain Reid alone in these coquetries; for,
another schooner chancing to arrive during my stay in Apemama, I
found that she also was dandified for the occasion.  And the two
cases stand alone in my experience of South Sea traders.

We had on board a family of native tourists, from the grandsire to
the babe in arms, trying (against an extraordinary series of ill-
luck) to regain their native island of Peru.  Five times already
they had paid their fare and taken ship; five times they had been
disappointed, dropped penniless upon strange islands, or carried
back to Butaritari, whence they sailed.  This last attempt had been
no better-starred; their provisions were exhausted.  Peru was
beyond hope, and they had cheerfully made up their minds to a fresh
stage of exile in Tapituea or Nonuti.  With this slant of wind
their random destination became once more changed; and like the
Calendar's pilot, when the 'black mountains' hove in view, they
changed colour and beat upon their breasts.  Their camp, which was
on deck in the ship's waist, resounded with complaint.  They would
be set to work, they must become slaves, escape was hopeless, they
must live and toil and die in Apemama, in the tyrant's den.  With
this sort of talk they so greatly terrified their children, that
one (a big hulking boy) must at last be torn screaming from the
schooner's side.  And their fears were wholly groundless.  I have
little doubt they were not suffered to be idle; but I can vouch for
it that they were kindly and generously used.  For, the matter of a
year later, I was once more shipmate with these inconsistent
wanderers on board the Janet Nicoll.  Their fare was paid by
Tembinok'; they who had gone ashore from the Equator destitute,
reappeared upon the Janet with new clothes, laden with mats and
presents, and bringing with them a magazine of food, on which they
lived like fighting-cocks throughout the voyage; I saw them at
length repatriated, and I must say they showed more concern on
quitting Apemama than delight at reaching home.

We entered by the north passage (Sunday, September 1st), dodging
among shoals.  It was a day of fierce equatorial sunshine; but the
breeze was strong and chill; and the mate, who conned the schooner
from the cross-trees, returned shivering to the deck.  The lagoon
was thick with many-tinted wavelets; a continuous roaring of the
outer sea overhung the anchorage; and the long, hollow crescent of
palm ruffled and sparkled in the wind.  Opposite our berth the
beach was seen to be surmounted for some distance by a terrace of
white coral seven or eight feet high and crowned in turn by the
scattered and incongruous buildings of the palace.  The village
adjoins on the south, a cluster of high-roofed maniap's.  And
village and palace seemed deserted.

We were scarce yet moored, however, before distant and busy figures
appeared upon the beach, a boat was launched, and a crew pulled out
to us bringing the king's ladder.  Tembinok' had once an accident;
has feared ever since to entrust his person to the rotten chandlery
of South Sea traders; and devised in consequence a frame of wood,
which is brought on board a ship as soon as she appears, and
remains lashed to her side until she leave.  The boat's crew,
having applied this engine, returned at once to shore.  They might
not come on board; neither might we land, or not without danger of
offence; the king giving pratique in person.  An interval followed,
during which dinner was delayed for the great man--the prelude of
the ladder, giving us some notion of his weighty body and sensible,
ingenious character, had highly whetted our curiosity; and it was
with something like excitement that we saw the beach and terrace
suddenly blacken with attendant vassals, the king and party embark,
the boat (a man-of-war gig) come flying towards us dead before the
wind, and the royal coxswain lay us cleverly aboard, mount the
ladder with a jealous diffidence, and descend heavily on deck.

Not long ago he was overgrown with fat, obscured to view, and a
burthen to himself.  Captains visiting the island advised him to
walk; and though it broke the habits of a life and the traditions
of his rank, he practised the remedy with benefit.  His corpulence
is now portable; you would call him lusty rather than fat; but his
gait is still dull, stumbling, and elephantine.  He neither stops
nor hastens, but goes about his business with an implacable
deliberation.  We could never see him and not be struck with his
extraordinary natural means for the theatre:  a beaked profile like
Dante's in the mask, a mane of long black hair, the eye brilliant,
imperious, and inquiring:  for certain parts, and to one who could
have used it, the face was a fortune.  His voice matched it well,
being shrill, powerful, and uncanny, with a note like a sea-bird's.
Where there are no fashions, none to set them, few to follow them
if they were set, and none to criticise, he dresses--as Sir Charles
Grandison lived--'to his own heart.'  Now he wears a woman's frock,
now a naval uniform; now (and more usually) figures in a masquerade
costume of his own design:  trousers and a singular jacket with
shirt tails, the cut and fit wonderful for island workmanship, the
material always handsome, sometimes green velvet, sometimes
cardinal red silk.  This masquerade becomes him admirably.  In the
woman's frock he looks ominous and weird beyond belief.  I see him
now come pacing towards me in the cruel sun, solitary, a figure out
of Hoffmann.

A visit on board ship, such as that at which we now assisted, makes
a chief part and by far the chief diversion of the life of
Tembinok'.  He is not only the sole ruler, he is the sole merchant
of his triple kingdom, Apemama, Aranuka, and Kuria, well-planted
islands.  The taro goes to the chiefs, who divide as they please
among their immediate adherents; but certain fish, turtles--which
abound in Kuria,--and the whole produce of the coco-palm, belong
exclusively to Tembinok'.  'A' cobra berong me,' observed his
majesty with a wave of his hand; and he counts and sells it by the
houseful.  'You got copra, king?' I have heard a trader ask.  'I
got two, three outches,' his majesty replied:  'I think three.'
Hence the commercial importance of Apemama, the trade of three
islands being centred there in a single hand; hence it is that so
many whites have tried in vain to gain or to preserve a footing;
hence ships are adorned, cooks have special orders, and captains
array themselves in smiles, to greet the king.  If he be pleased
with his welcome and the fare he may pass days on board, and, every
day, and sometimes every hour, will be of profit to the ship.  He
oscillates between the cabin, where he is entertained with strange
meats, and the trade-room, where he enjoys the pleasures of
shopping on a scale to match his person.  A few obsequious
attendants squat by the house door, awaiting his least signal.  In
the boat, which has been suffered to drop astern, one or two of his
wives lie covered from the sun under mats, tossed by the short sea
of the lagoon, and enduring agonies of heat and tedium.  This
severity is now and then relaxed and the wives allowed on board.
Three or four were thus favoured on the day of our arrival:
substantial ladies airily attired in ridis.  Each had a share of
copra, her peculium, to dispose of for herself.  The display in the
trade-room--hats, ribbbons, dresses, scents, tins of salmon--the
pride of the eye and the lust of the flesh--tempted them in vain.
They had but the one idea--tobacco, the island currency, tantamount
to minted gold; returned to shore with it, burthened but rejoicing;
and late into the night, on the royal terrace, were to be seen
counting the sticks by lamplight in the open air.

The king is no such economist.  He is greedy of things new and
foreign.  House after house, chest after chest, in the palace
precinct, is already crammed with clocks, musical boxes, blue
spectacles, umbrellas, knitted waistcoats, bolts of stuff, tools,
rifles, fowling-pieces, medicines, European foods, sewing-machines,
and, what is more extraordinary, stoves:  all that ever caught his
eye, tickled his appetite, pleased him for its use, or puzzled him
with its apparent inutility.  And still his lust is unabated.  He
is possessed by the seven devils of the collector.  He hears a
thing spoken of, and a shadow comes on his face.  'I think I no got
him,' he will say; and the treasures he has seem worthless in
comparison.  If a ship be bound for Apemama, the merchant racks his
brain to hit upon some novelty.  This he leaves carelessly in the
main cabin or partly conceals in his own berth, so that the king
shall spy it for himself.  'How much you want?' inquires Tembinok',
passing and pointing.  'No, king; that too dear,' returns the
trader.  'I think I like him,' says the king.  This was a bowl of
gold-fish.  On another occasion it was scented soap.  'No, king;
that cost too much,' said the trader; 'too good for a Kanaka.'
'How much you got?  I take him all,' replied his majesty, and
became the lord of seventeen boxes at two dollars a cake.  Or
again, the merchant feigns the article is not for sale, is private
property, an heirloom or a gift; and the trick infallibly succeeds.
Thwart the king and you hold him.  His autocratic nature rears at
the affront of opposition.  He accepts it for a challenge; sets his
teeth like a hunter going at a fence; and with no mark of emotion,
scarce even of interest, stolidly piles up the price.  Thus, for
our sins, he took a fancy to my wife's dressing-bag, a thing
entirely useless to the man, and sadly battered by years of
service.  Early one forenoon he came to our house, sat down, and
abruptly offered to purchase it.  I told him I sold nothing, and
the bag at any rate was a present from a friend; but he was
acquainted with these pretexts from of old, and knew what they were
worth and how to meet them.  Adopting what I believe is called 'the
object method,' he drew out a bag of English gold, sovereigns and
half-sovereigns, and began to lay them one by one in silence on the
table; at each fresh piece reading our faces with a look.  In vain
I continued to protest I was no trader; he deigned not to reply.
There must have been twenty pounds on the table, he was still going
on, and irritation had begun to mingle with our embarrassment, when
a happy idea came to our delivery.  Since his majesty thought so
much of the bag, we said, we must beg him to accept it as a
present.  It was the most surprising turn in Tembinok's experience.
He perceived too late that his persistence was unmannerly; hung his
head a while in silence; then, lifting up a sheepish countenance,
'I 'shamed,' said the tyrant.  It was the first and the last time
we heard him own to a flaw in his behaviour.  Half an hour after he
sent us a camphor-wood chest worth only a few dollars--but then
heaven knows what Tembinok' had paid for it.

Cunning by nature, and versed for forty years in the government of
men, it must not be supposed that he is cheated blindly, or has
resigned himself without resistance to be the milch-cow of the
passing trader.  His efforts have been even heroic.  Like Nakaeia
of Makin, he has owned schooners.  More fortunate than Nakaeia, he
has found captains.  Ships of his have sailed as far as to the
colonies.  He has trafficked direct, in his own bottoms, with New
Zealand.  And even so, even there, the world-enveloping dishonesty
of the white man prevented him; his profit melted, his ship
returned in debt, the money for the insurance was embezzled, and
when the Coronet came to be lost, he was astonished to find he had
lost all.  At this he dropped his weapons; owned he might as
hopefully wrestle with the winds of heaven; and like an experienced
sheep, submitted his fleece thenceforward to the shearers.  He is
the last man in the world to waste anger on the incurable; accepts
it with cynical composure; asks no more in those he deals with than
a certain decency of moderation; drives as good a bargain as he
can; and when he considers he is more than usually swindled, writes
it in his memory against the merchant's name.  What false reports
they circulate!

_Lord A._--The reports were true not long ago, and I believe we
returned about the same time. You, Lady D., have been also travelling,
I believe.

_Lady D._--Yes, we were out of England in the winter. Our physician
commanded a warmer climate for Lord D. so we took a villa on the
Niger, and afterwards spent a short time at Sackatoo.

_Mr. C._--I suppose you found it full of English?

_Lady D._--Oh, quite full--and such a set! We knew hardly any
of them.
In fact, we did not go there for society. We met a few pleasant
people, Australians; the Abershaws, the Hardy Vauxes, and Sir William
and Lady Soames.

_Mr. C._--Did you go by the new Tangier and Timbuctoo road?

_Lady D._--Yes, we did, and we found it excellent. By the bye,
Lord A., to digress to a different latitude, how did you succeed in
your last excursion to the North Pole?

_Lord A.

_--To tell you the truth, extremely ill; we had most improvidently
taken with us scarcely enough of the _solvent_ to work our way
through the ice, and our concentrated essence of caloric was
found to be of a very inferior quality. I shall try again next
summer.

_Lady D._--I believe we shall go to Spitzbergen ourselves.

_Lord A.

_--I am happy to think that, in that case, I may perhaps have the
pleasure of meeting you there on my return. I must go to the Pole,
by the way of North Georgia: I am engaged to visit an Eskimaux
friend.

Still more ludicrous are the following historical blunders:--One
of the party asks how Napoleon is introduced in an historical novel
of 1830?
The reply is--"He and the Emperor Alexander of Russia are
introduced dining with the King at Brighton. Napoleon quarrels
with the two sovereigns, and challenges them to a personal
encounter. Each claims the right of fighting by deputy. The King
of England appoints his prime minister, the Duke of Wellington;
the Emperor Alexander appoints Prince Kutusoff. The Duke of
Wellington is to go out first, and is to meet Napoleon at Battersea
Fields.

There were open fields at Battersea:
_then_: only think! open fields! I don't know how the duel ends--I
am just in the midst of it--it is so interesting."
The author of _Anastasius_ (Mr. Thos. Hope) has contributed five or
six pages on Self-love, Sympathy, and Selfishness--which are deep
enough for any Lady D. of this or the next century. We expected a
powerful and picturesque tale of the East, and not such sententious
matter as this:--"Every sentient entity, from the lowest of brutes
to the highest of human beings, desires self-gratification:" we
may add, a principle as well understood in Covent-garden as
in Portland-place. Mr. Banim has written The Hall of the Castle,
an interesting Irish story; and Lord Normanby, The Prophet of St.
Paul's, of the date of 1514--which concludes the volume.

Among the Poetry are some pretty verses by Lord Porchester; but it
is well that metrical pieces do not predominate, for some of the
writers are sadly unmusical sonneteers.

The "Letters from Lord Byron to several Friends" are not of
interest enough for the space they occupy.

The _Plates_ are beyond praise. The Frontispiece Portrait of
Lady Georgiana Agar Ellis, by Charles Heath, is one of the most
exquisite ever engraved; and two plates illustrating Sir Walter
Scott's _House of Aspen_ have the effect of beautiful pictures
on a blank wall. _Two_ views of Virginia Water are, perhaps,
questionable in the same volume; but they are admirably engraved.
Wilkie's "beautiful, though," as Lord Normanby says, "somewhat
slight cabinet picture of the Princess Doria and the Pilgrims[1]"
has been finely executed by Heath; and a View of Venice, from a
drawing by Prout, is a masterpiece of Freebairne.

Equal to either of these is The Faithful Servant, engraved by
Goodyear, after Cooper, and Dorothea, the title-page plate. Of
The Bride, engraved by Charles Heath, from a picture by Leslie,
it is impossible to speak in terms of sufficient praise, as it is,
without exception, one of the loveliest prints ever beheld. We
have had our laugh at The Portrait, a scene from Foote, painted by
Smirke, and engraved by Portbury. Its whim and humour is
describable only by the British Aristophanes. We can only add, that
it is Lady Pentweazle sitting to Carmine for her portrait--the look
that he despairs of imitating, as we do Foote's account of her
family:--

[1] Some nice calculators have estimated that the various sums
received by Mr. Wilkie for the supplies he has furnished to the
Illustrations of the Annuals of the coming season amount to upwards
of £1,000.--_Athenaeum_.

"All my family, by the mother's side, are famous for their
eyes.

I have a great aunt amongst the beauties at Windsor; she has a
sister at Hampton Court, a perdegeous fine woman! she had but one
eye, but that was a piercer: that one eye got her three husbands."

The painter appears to us to be a portrait of Foote. We ought not to
forget to mention, at least, Francis I. and his Sister,
splendidly engraved by C. Heath, from a picture by Bonington.

* * * * *

THE COMIC ANNUAL.

_By Thomas Hood, Esq._

We intend to let the facetious author have his own _say_ on the comical
contents of this very comical little work, by merely running over a
few of the head and tail pieces of the several pages. We think
with Mr.
Hood, that "In the Christmas Holidays, or rather, Holly Days,
according to one of the emblems of the season, we naturally
look for mirth.
Christmas is strictly a Comic Annual, and its specific gaiety is
even implied in the specific gravity of its oxen." So much for
the design, which is far more congenial to our feelings than the
thousand and one sonnets, pointless epigrams, laments, and monodies,
which are usually showered from crimson and gold envelopes at this
dull season of the year. There are thirty-seven pieces--all in
humorous and "righte merrie conceite." We shall give a few
random extracts, or specimens, and then run over the cuts.
Our first is--(and what should it be?)

NUMBER ONE.

"It's very hard! and so it is, To live in such a row, And witness
this, that every Miss But me has got a beau.
For Love goes calling up and down, But here he seems to shun.
I'm sure he has been asked enough To call at Number One!

"I'm sick of all the double knocks That come to Number Four!

At Number Three I often see A lover at the door; And one in blue,
at Number Two, Calls daily like a dun,-- It's very hard they come
so near And not at Number One.

"Miss Bell, I hear, has got a dear Exactly to her mind, By sitting
at the window pane Without a bit of blind; But I go in the balcony,
Which she has never done, Yet arts that thrive at Number Five Don't
take at Number One.

"'Tis hard with plenty in the street, And plenty passing by,-- There's
nice young men at Number Ten, But only rather shy; And Mrs. Smith
across the way Has got a grown-up son.
But la! he hardly seems to know There is a Number One!

"There's Mr. Wick at Number Nine, But he's intent on pelf, And
though he's pious, will not love His neighbour as himself.
At Number Seven there was a sale-- The goods had quite a run!
And here I've got my single lot On hand at Number One!

"My mother often sits at work And talks of props and stays, And
what a comfort I shall be In her declining days!
The very maids about the house Have set me down a nun, The
sweethearts all belong to them That call at Number One!

"Once only, when the flue took fire, One Friday afternoon, Young
Mr. Long came kindly in, And told me not to swoon.
Why can't he come again without The Phoenix and the Sun?
We cannot always have a flue On fire at Number One!

"I am not old, I am not plain, Nor awkward in my gait-- I am not
crooked like the bride That went from Number Eight; I'm sure white
satin made her look As brown as any bun-- But even beauty has no
chance I think at Number One.

"At Number Six they say Miss Rose Has slain a score of hearts, And
Cupid, for her sake, has been Quite prodigal of darts.
The imp they show with bended bow-- I wish he had a gun; But if he
had, he'd never deign To shoot with Number One.

"It's very hard, and so it is, To live in such a row; And here's
a ballad-singer come To aggravate my woe; O take away your foolish
song And tones enough to stun-- There is 'nae luck about the house,'
I know at Number One."

Next is a prose sketch:

THE FURLOUGH.--AN IRISH ANECDOTE.

"In the autumn of 1825, some private affairs called me into the
sister kingdom; and as I did not travel, like Polyphemus, with my
eye out, I gathered a few samples of Irish character, amongst which
was the following incident:--
"I was standing one morning at the window of 'mine Inn,' when my
attention was attracted by a scene that took place beneath. The
Belfast coach was standing at the door, and on the roof, in front,
sat a solitary outside passenger, a fine young fellow, in the
uniform of the Connaught Rangers. Below, by the front wheel, stood
an old woman, seemingly his mother, a young man, and a younger
woman, sister or sweetheart; and they were all earnestly
entreating the young soldier to descend from his seat on the
coach.

"'Come down wid ye, Thady'--the speaker was the old woman--'come down
now to your ould mother; sure it's flog ye they will, and strip
the flesh off the bones I giv ye. Come down, Thady, darlin!'
"'It's honour, mother,' was the short reply of the soldier; and with
clenched hands and set teeth, he took a stiffer posture on the
coach.

"'Thady, come down--come down, ye fool of the world--come along
down wid ye!' The tone of the present appeal was more impatient and
peremptory than the last; and the answer was more promptly and
sternly pronounced:
'It's honour, brother!' and the body of the speaker rose more rigidly
erect than ever on the roof.

"'O Thady, come down! sure it's me, your own Kathleen, that bids
ye!
Come down, or ye'll break the heart of me, Thady, jewel; come down
then!' The poor girl wrung her hands as she said it, and cast a
look upward that had a visible effect on the muscles of the soldier's
countenance. There was more tenderness in his tone, but it conveyed
the same resolution as before.

"'It's honour, honour bright, Kathleen!' and, as if to defend himself
from another glance, he fixed his look steadfastly in front, while
the renewed entreaties burst from all three in chorus, with the
same answer.

"'Come down, Thady, honey!--Thady, ye fool, come down!--O Thady, come
down to me!'
"'It's honour, mother!--It's honour, brother!--Honour bright, my own
Kathleen!'
"Although the poor fellow was a private, this appeal was so public,
that I did not hesitate to go down and inquire into the particulars
of the distress. It appeared that he had been home, on furlough,
to visit his family,--and having exceeded, as he thought, the
term of his leave, he was going to rejoin his regiment, and to
undergo the penalty of his neglect. I asked him when the furlough
expired?

"'The first of March, your honour--bad luck to it of all the black
days in the world--and here it is, come sudden on me, like a shot!'

"'The first of March!--why, my good fellow, you have a day to
spare then--the first of March will not be here till to-morrow.
It is Leap Year, and February has twenty-nine days.'
"The soldier was thunder-struck.--'Twenty-nine days is it?--you're
sartin of that same! Oh, mother, mother!--the devil fly away wid
yere ould almanack--a base cratur of a book, to be deceaven one,
afther living so long in the family of us!'
"His first impulse was to cut a caper on the roof of the coach, and
throw up his cap with a loud hurrah! His second was to throw himself
into the arms of his Kathleen; and the third was to wring my hand
off in acknowledgment.
"'It's a happy man I am, your honour, for my word's saved, and all
by your honour's manes. Long life to your honour for the same! May
ye live a long hundred--and lape-years every one of them.'"
What will Mr. Gurney's helpers say to the following
SONNET ON STEAM.

BY AN UNDER-OSTLER.
I wish I livd a Thowsen year Ago Wurking for Sober six and Seven
milers And dubble Stages runnen safe and slo!
The Orsis cum in Them days to the Bilers But Now by meens of Powers
of Steem forces A-turning Coches into Smoakey Kettels The Bilers
seam a Cumming to the Orses And Helps and naggs Will sune be out
of Vittels Poor Bruits I wander How we bee to Liv When sutch a
change of Orses is our Faits No nothink need Be sifted in a Siv May
them Blowd ingins all Blow up their Grates And Theaves of Oslers
crib the Coles and Giv Their blackgard Hannimuls a Feed of
Slaits!
Space we have not for the whole of "A Letter from a Market Gardener
to the Secretary of the Horticultural Society," but here is the
concluding paragraph:--
"My Wif had a Tomb Cat that dyd. Being a torture Shell and a Grate
faverit, we had Him berrid in the Guardian, and for the sake of
inrichment of the Mould, I had the carks deposeted under the roots
of a Gosberry Bush. The Frute being up till then of a smooth kind.
But the nex Seson's Frute after the Cat was berrid, the Gosberris
was al hairy--and more Remarkable, the Capilers of the same bush
was All of the same hairy description.
"I am, Sir, your humble servant, 
"THOMAS FROST."
We have lately paid much attention to the subject of Emigration,
but quite in a different vein to the following, which will introduce
one of the cuts:-- 

"Squampash Flatts, 9th Nov. 1827.
"Dear Brother--Here we are, thank Providence, safe and well, and
in the finest country you ever saw. At this moment I have before
me the sublime expanse of Squampash Flatts--the majestic Mudiboo
winding through the midst--with the magnificent range of the Squab
mountains in the distance. But the prospect is impossible to describe
in a letter! I might as well attempt a panorama in a pill-box! We
have fixed our settlement on the left bank of the river. In crossing
the rapids we lost most of our heavy baggage, and all our iron work;
but, by great good fortune, we saved Mrs. Paisley's grand piano,
and the children's toys.
Our infant city consists of three log-huts and one of clay, which,
however, on the second day, fell in to the ground landlords. We
have now built it up again, and, all things considered, are as
comfortable as we could expect: and have christened our settlement
New London, in compliment to the old metropolis. We have one of the
log-houses to ourselves--or at least shall have, when we have built
a new hog-sty. We burnt down the first one in making a bonfire to
keep off the wild beasts, and, for the present, the pigs are in the
parlour. As yet our rooms are rather usefully than elegantly
furnished. We have gutted the Grand Upright, and it makes a convenient
cupboard; the chairs were obliged to blaze at our bivouacs--but
thank Heaven, we have never leisure to sit down, and so do not miss
them. My boys are contented, and will be well when they have got
over some awkward accidents in lopping and felling. Mrs. P. grumbles
a little, but it is her custom to lament most when she is in the
midst of comforts: she complains of solitude, and says she could
enjoy the very stiffest of stiff visits. The first time we lighted
a fire in our new abode, a large serpent came down the chimney,
which I looked upon as a good omen. However, as Mrs. P. is not
partial to snakes, and the heat is supposed to attract those reptiles,
we have dispensed with fires ever since.Toddy and green cocoa-nuts were brought us daily.  We
once had a present of fish from the king, and once of a turtle.
Sometimes we shot so-called plover along on the shore, sometimes
wild chicken in the bush.  The rest of our diet was from tins.

Our occupations were very various.  While some of the party would
be away sketching, Mr. Osbourne and I hammered away at a novel.  We
read Gibbon and Carlyle aloud; we blew on flageolets, we strummed
on guitars; we took photographs by the light of the sun, the moon,
and flash-powder; sometimes we played cards.  Pot-hunting engaged a
part of our leisure.  I have myself passed afternoons in the
exciting but innocuous pursuit of winged animals with a revolver;
and it was fortunate there were better shots of the party, and
fortunate the king could lend us a more suitable weapon, in the
form of an excellent fowling-piece, or our spare diet had been
sparer still.

Night was the time to see our city, after the moon was up, after
the lamps were lighted, and so long as the fire sparkled in the
cook-house.  We suffered from a plague of flies and mosquitoes,
comparable to that of Egypt; our dinner-table (lent, like all our
furniture, by the king) must be enclosed in a tent of netting, our
citadel and refuge; and this became all luminous, and bulged and
beaconed under the eaves, like the globe of some monstrous lamp
under the margin of its shade.  Our cabins, the sides being propped
at a variety of inclinations, spelled out strange, angular patterns
of brightness.  In his roofed and open kitchen, Ah Fu was to be
seen by lamp and firelight, dabbling among pots.  Over all, there
fell in the season an extraordinary splendour of mellow moonshine.
The sand sparkled as with the dust of diamonds; the stars had
vanished.  At intervals, a dusky night-bird, slow and low flying,
passed in the colonnade of the tree stems and uttered a hoarse
croaking cry.


CHAPTER III--THE KING OF APEMAMA:  THE PALACE OF MANY WOMEN


The palace, or rather the ground which it includes, is several
acres in extent.  A terrace encloses it toward the lagoon; on the
side of the land, a palisade with several gates.  These are scarce
intended for defence; a man, if he were strong, might easily pluck
down the palisade; he need not be specially active to leap from the
beach upon the terrace.  There is no parade of guards, soldiers, or
weapons; the armoury is under lock and key; and the only sentinels
are certain inconspicuous old women lurking day and night before
the gates.  By day, these crones were often engaged in boiling
syrup or the like household occupation; by night, they lay ambushed
in the shadow or crouched along the palisade, filling the office of
eunuchs to this harem, sole guards upon a tyrant life.

Female wardens made a fit outpost for this palace of many women.
Of the number of the king's wives I have no guess; and but a loose
idea of their function.  He himself displayed embarrassment when
they were referred to as his wives, called them himself 'my
pamily,' and explained they were his 'cutcheons'--cousins.  We
distinguished four of the crowd:  the king's mother; his sister, a
grave, trenchant woman, with much of her brother's intelligence;
the queen proper, to whom (and to whom alone) my wife was formally
presented; and the favourite of the hour, a pretty, graceful girl,
who sat with the king daily, and once (when he shed tears) consoled
him with caresses.  I am assured that even with her his relations
are platonic.  In the background figured a multitude of ladies, the
lean, the plump, and the elephantine, some in sacque frocks, some
in the hairbreadth ridi; high-born and low, slave and mistress;
from the queen to the scullion, from the favourite to the scraggy
sentries at the palisade.  Not all of these of course are of 'my
pamily,'--many are mere attendants; yet a surprising number shared
the responsibility of the king's trust.  These were key-bearers,
treasurers, wardens of the armoury, the napery, and the stores.
Each knew and did her part to admiration.  Should anything be
required--a particular gun, perhaps, or a particular bolt of
stuff,--the right queen was summoned; she came bringing the right
chest, opened it in the king's presence, and displayed her charge
in perfect preservation--the gun cleaned and oiled, the goods duly
folded.  Without delay or haste, and with the minimum of speech,
the whole great establishment turned on wheels like a machine.
Nowhere have I seen order more complete and pervasive.  And yet I
was always reminded of Norse tales of trolls and ogres who kept
their hearts buried in the ground for the mere safety, and must
confide the secret to their wives.  For these weapons are the life
of Tembinok'.  He does not aim at popularity; but drives and braves
his subjects, with a simplicity of domination which it is
impossible not to admire, hard not to sympathise with.  Should one
out of so many prove faithless, should the armoury be secretly
unlocked, should the crones have dozed by the palisade and the
weapons find their way unseen into the village, revolution would be
nearly certain, death the most probable result, and the spirit of
the tyrant of Apemama flit to rejoin his predecessors of Mariki and
Tapituea.  Yet those whom he so trusts are all women, and all
rivals.

There is indeed a ministry and staff of males:  cook, steward,
carpenter, and supercargoes:  the hierarchy of a schooner.  The
spies, 'his majesty's daily papers,' as we called them, come every
morning to report, and go again.  The cook and steward are
concerned with the table only.  The supercargoes, whose business it
is to keep tally of the copra at three pounds a month and a
percentage, are rarely in the palace; and two at least are in the
other islands.  The carpenter, indeed, shrewd and jolly old Rubam--
query, Reuben?--promoted on my last visit to the greater dignity of
governor, is daily present, altering, extending, embellishing,
pursuing the endless series of the king's inventions; and his
majesty will sometimes pass an afternoon watching and talking with
Rubam at his work.  But the males are still outsiders; none seems
to be armed, none is entrusted with a key; by dusk they are all
usually departed from the palace; and the weight of the monarchy
and of the monarch's life reposes unshared on the women.

Here is a household unlike, indeed, to one of ours; more unlike
still to the Oriental harem:  that of an elderly childless man, his
days menaced, dwelling alone amid a bevy of women of all ages,
ranks, and relationships,--the mother, the sister, the cousin, the
legitimate wife, the concubine, the favourite, the eldest born, and
she of yesterday; he, in their midst, the only master, the only
male, the sole dispenser of honours, clothes, and luxuries, the
sole mark of multitudinous ambitions and desires.  I doubt if you
could find a man in Europe so bold as to attempt this piece of tact
and government.  And seemingly Tembinok' himself had trouble in the
beginning.  I hear of him shooting at a wife for some levity on
board a schooner.  Another, on some more serious offence, he slew
outright; he exposed her body in an open box, and (to make the
warning more memorable) suffered it to putrefy before the palace
gate.  Doubtless his growing years have come to his assistance; for
upon so large a scale it is more easy to play the father than the
husband.  And to-day, at least to the eye of a stranger, all seems
to go smoothly, and the wives to be proud of their trust, proud of
their rank, and proud of their cunning lord.

I conceived they made rather a hero of the man.  A popular master
in a girls' school might, perhaps, offer a figure of his
preponderating station.  But then the master does not eat, sleep,
live, and wash his dirty linen in the midst of his admirers; he
escapes, he has a room of his own, he leads a private life; if he
had nothing else, he has the holidays, and the more unhappy
Tembinok' is always on the stage and on the stretch.

In all my coming and going, I never heard him speak harshly or
express the least displeasure.  An extreme, rather heavy,
benignity--the benignity of one sure to be obeyed--marked his
demeanour; so that I was at times reminded of Samual Richardson in
his circle of admiring women.  The wives spoke up and seemed to
volunteer opinions, like our wives at home--or, say, like doting
but respectable aunts.  Altogether, I conclude that he rules his
seraglio much more by art than terror; and those who give a
different account (and who have none of them enjoyed my
opportunities of observation) perhaps failed to distinguish between
degrees of rank, between 'my pamily' and the hangers-on,
laundresses, and prostitutes.

A notable feature is the evening game of cards when lamps are set
forth upon the terrace, and 'I and my pamily' play for tobacco by
the hour.  It is highly characteristic of Tembinok' that he must
invent a game for himself; highly characteristic of his worshipping
household that they should swear by the absurd invention.  It is
founded on poker, played with the honours out of many packs, and
inconceivably dreary.  But I have a passion for all games, studied
it, and am supposed to be the only white who ever fairly grasped
its principle:  a fact for which the wives (with whom I was not
otherwise popular) admired me with acclamation.  It was impossible
to be deceived; this was a genuine feeling:  they were proud of
their private game, had been cut to the quick by the want of
interest shown in it by others, and expanded under the flattery of
my attention.  Tembinok' puts up a double stake, and receives in
return two hands to choose from:  a shallow artifice which the
wives (in all these years) have not yet fathomed.  He himself, when
talking with me privately, made not the least secret that he was
secure of winning; and it was thus he explained his recent
liberality on board the Equator.  He let the wives buy their own
tobacco, which pleased them at the moment.  He won it back at
cards, which made him once more, and without fresh expense, that
which he ought to be,--the sole fount of all indulgences.  And he
summed the matter up in that phrase with which he almost always
concludes any account of his policy:  'Mo' betta.'

The palace compound is laid with broken coral, excruciating to the
eyes and the bare feet, but exquisitely raked and weeded.  A score
or more of buildings lie in a sort of street along the palisade and
scattered on the margin of the terrace; dwelling-houses for the
wives and the attendants, storehouses for the king's curios and
treasures, spacious maniap's for feast or council, some on pillars
of wood, some on piers of masonry.  One was still in hand, a new
invention, the king's latest born:  a European frame-house built
for coolness inside a lofty maniap':  its roof planked like a
ship's deck to be a raised, shady, and yet private promenade.  It
was here the king spent hours with Rubam; here I would sometimes
join them; the place had a most singular appearance; and I must say
I was greatly taken with the fancy, and joined with relish in the
counsels of the architects.

Suppose we had business with his majesty by day:  we strolled over
the sand and by the dwarfish palms, exchanged a 'Konamaori' with
the crone on duty, and entered the compound.  The wide sheet of
coral glared before us deserted; all having stowed themselves in
dark canvas from the excess of room.  I have gone to and fro in
that labyrinth of a place, seeking the king; and the only breathing
creature I could find was when I peered under the eaves of a
maniap', and saw the brawny body of one of the wives stretched on
the floor, a naked Amazon plunged in noiseless slumber.  If it were
still the hour of the 'morning papers' the quest would be more
easy, the half-dozen obsequious, sly dogs squatting on the ground
outside a house, crammed as far as possible in its narrow shadow,
and turning to the king a row of leering faces.  Tembinok' would be
within, the flaps of the cabin raised, the trade blowing through,
hearing their report.  Like journalists nearer home, when the day's
news were scanty, these would make the more of it in words; and I
have known one to fill up a barren morning with an imaginary
conversation of two dogs.  Sometimes the king deigns to laugh,
sometimes to question or jest with them, his voice sounding shrilly
from the cabin.  By his side he may have the heir-apparent, Paul,
his nephew and adopted son, six years old, stark naked, and a model
of young human beauty.  And there will always be the favourite and
perhaps two other wives awake; four more lying supine under mats
and whelmed in slumber.  Or perhaps we came later, fell on a more
private hour, and found Tembinok' retired in the house with the
favourite, an earthenware spittoon, a leaden inkpot, and a
commercial ledger.  In the last, lying on his belly, he writes from
day to day the uneventful history of his reign; and when thus
employed he betrayed a touch of fretfulness on interruption with
which I was well able to sympathise.  The royal annalist once read
me a page or so, translating as he went; but the passage being
genealogical, and the author boggling extremely in his version, I
own I have been sometimes better entertained.  Nor does he confine
himself to prose, but touches the lyre, too, in his leisure
moments, and passes for the chief bard of his kingdom, as he is its
sole public character, leading architect, and only merchant.

His competence, however, does not reach to music; and his verses,
when they are ready, are taught to a professional musician, who
sets them and instructs the chorus.  Asked what his songs were
about, Tembinok' replied, 'Sweethearts and trees and the sea.  Not
all the same true, all the same lie.'  For a condensed view of
lyrical poetry (except that he seems to have forgot the stars and
flowers) this would be hard to mend.  These multifarious
occupations bespeak (in a native and an absolute prince) unusual
activity of mind.

The palace court at noon is a spot to be remembered with awe, the
visitor scrambling there, on the loose stones, through a splendid
nightmare of light and heat; but the sweep of the wind delivers it
from flies and mosquitoes; and with the set of sun it became
heavenly.  I remember it best on moonless nights.  The air was like
a bath of milk.  Countless shining stars were overhead, the lagoon
paved with them.  Herds of wives squatted by companies on the
gravel, softly chatting.  Tembinok' would doff his jacket, and sit
bare and silent, perhaps meditating songs; the favourite usually by
him, silent also.  Meanwhile in the midst of the court, the palace
lanterns were being lit and marshalled in rank upon the ground--six
or eight square yards of them; a sight that gave one strange ideas
of the number of 'my pamily':  such a sight as may be seen about
dusk in a corner of some great terminus at home.  Presently these
fared off into all corners of the precinct, lighting the last
labours of the day, lighting one after another to their rest that
prodigious company of women.  A few lingered in the middle of the
court for the card-party, and saw the honours shuffled and dealt,
and Tembinok' deliberating between his two; hands, and the queens
losing their tobacco.  Then these also were scattered and
extinguished; and their place was taken by a great bonfire, the
night-light of the palace.  When this was no more, smaller fires
burned likewise at the gates.  These were tended by the crones,
unseen, unsleeping--not always unheard.  Should any approach in the
dark hours, a guarded alert made the circuit of the palisade; each
sentry signalled her neighbour with a stone; the rattle of falling
pebbles passed and died away; and the wardens of Tembinok' crouched
in their places silent as before.


CHAPTER IV--THE KING OF APEMAMA:  EQUATOR TOWN AND THE PALACE


Five persons were detailed to wait upon us.  Uncle Parker, who
brought us toddy and green nuts, was an elderly, almost an old man,
with the spirits, the industry, and the morals of a boy of ten.
His face was ancient, droll, and diabolical, the skin stretched
over taut sinews, like a sail on the guide-rope; and he smiled with
every muscle of his head.  His nuts must be counted every day, or
he would deceive us in the tale; they must be daily examined, or
some would prove to be unhusked; nothing but the king's name, and
scarcely that, would hold him to his duty.  After his toils were
over he was given a pipe, matches, and tobacco, and sat on the
floor in the maniap' to smoke.  He would not seem to move from his
position, and yet every day, when the things fell to be returned
the plug had disappeared; he had found the means to conceal it in
the roof, whence he could radiantly produce it on the morrow.
Although this piece of legerdemain was performed regularly before
three or four pairs of eyes, we could never catch him in the fact;
although we searched after he was gone, we could never find the
tobacco.  Such were the diversions of Uncle Parker, a man nearing
sixty.  But he was punished according unto his deeds:  Mrs.
Stevenson took a fancy to paint him, and the sufferings of the
sitter were beyond description.

Three lasses came from the palace to do our washing and racket with
Ah Fu.  They were of the lowest class, hangers-on kept for the
convenience of merchant skippers, probably low-born, perhaps out-
islanders, with little refinement whether of manner or appearance,
but likely and jolly enough wenches in their way.  We called one
Guttersnipe, for you may find her image in the slums of any city;
the same lean, dark-eyed, eager, vulgar face, the same sudden,
hoarse guffaws, the same forward and yet anxious manner, as with a
tail of an eye on the policeman:  only the policeman here was a
live king, and his truncheon a rifle.  I doubt if you could find
anywhere out of the islands, or often there, the parallel of Fatty,
a mountain of a girl, who must have weighed near as many stones as
she counted summers, could have given a good account of a life-
guardsman, had the face of a baby, and applied her vast mechanical
forces almost exclusively to play.  But they were all three of the
same merry spirit.  Our washing was conducted in a game of romps;
and they fled and pursued, and splashed, and pelted, and rolled
each other in the sand, and kept up a continuous noise of cries and
laughter like holiday children.  Indeed, and however strange their
own function in that austere establishment, were they not escaped
for the day from the largest and strictest Ladies' School in the
South Seas?

Our fifth attendant was no less a person than the royal cook.  He
was strikingly handsome both in face and body, lazy as a slave, and
insolent as a butcher's boy.  He slept and smoked on our premises
in various graceful attitudes; but so far from helping Ah Fu, he
was not at the pains to watch him.  It may be said of him that he
came to learn, and remained to teach; and his lessons were at times
difficult to stomach.  For example, he was sent to fill a bucket
from the well.  About half-way he found my wife watering her
onions, changed buckets with her, and leaving her the empty,
returned to the kitchen with the full.  On another occasion he was
given a dish of dumplings for the king, was told they must be eaten
hot, and that he should carry them as fast as possible.  The wretch
set off at the rate of about a mile in the hour, head in air, toes
turned out.  My patience, after a month of trial, failed me at the
sight.  I pursued, caught him by his two big shoulders, and
thrusting him before me, ran with him down the hill, over the
sands, and through the applauding village, to the Speak House,
where the king was then holding a pow-wow.  He had the impudence to
pretend he was internally injured by my violence, and to profess
serious apprehensions for his life.

All this we endured; for the ways of Tembinok' are summary, and I
was not yet ripe to take a hand in the man's death.  But in the
meanwhile, here was my unfortunate China boy slaving for the pair,
and presently he fell sick.  I was now in the position of Cimondain
Lantenac, and indeed all the characters in Quatre-Vingt-Treize:  to
continue to spare the guilty, I must sacrifice the innocent.  I
took the usual course and tried to save both, with the usual
consequence of failure.  Well rehearsed, I went down to the palace,
found the king alone, and obliged him with a vast amount of
rigmarole.  The cook was too old to learn:  I feared he was not
making progress; how if we had a boy instead?--boys were more
teachable.  It was all in vain; the king pierced through my
disguises to the root of the fact; saw that the cook had
desperately misbehaved; and sat a while glooming.  'I think he
tavvy too much,' he said at last, with grim concision; and
immediately turned the talk to other subjects.  The same day
another high officer, the steward, appeared in the cook's place,
and, I am bound to say, proved civil and industrious.

As soon as I left, it seems the king called for a Winchester and
strolled outside the palisade, awaiting the defaulter.  That day
Tembinok' wore the woman's frock; as like as not, his make-up was
completed by a pith helmet and blue spectacles.  Conceive the
glaring stretch of sandhills, the dwarf palms with their noon-day
shadows, the line of the palisade, the crone sentries (each by a
small clear fire) cooking syrup on their posts--and this chimaera
waiting with his deadly engine.  To him, enter at last the cook,
strolling down the sandhill from Equator Town, listless, vain and
graceful; with no thought of alarm.  As soon as he was well within
range, the travestied monarch fired the six shots over his head, at
his feet, and on either hand of him:  the second Apemama warning,
startling in itself, fatal in significance, for the next time his
majesty will aim to hit.  I am told the king is a crack shot; that
when he aims to kill, the grave may be got ready; and when he aims
to miss, misses by so near a margin that the culprit tastes six
times the bitterness of death.  The effect upon the cook I had an
opportunity of seeing for myself.  My wife and I were returning
from the sea-side of the island, when we spied one coming to meet
us at a very quick, disordered pace, between a walk and a run.  As
we drew nearer we saw it was the cook, beside himself with some
emotion, his usual warm, mulatto colour declined into a bluish
pallor.  He passed us without word or gesture, staring on us with
the face of a Satan, and plunged on across the wood for the
unpeopled quarter of the island and the long, desert beach, where
he might rage to and fro unseen, and froth out the vials of his
wrath, fear, and humiliation.  Doubtless in the curses that he
there uttered to the bursting surf and the tropic birds, the name
of the Kaupoi--the rich man--was frequently repeated.  I had made
him the laughing-stock of the village in the affair of the king's
dumplings; I had brought him by my machinations into disgrace and
the immediate jeopardy of his days; last, and perhaps bitterest, he
had found me there by the way to spy upon him in the hour of his
disorder.

Time passed, and we saw no more of him.  The season of the full
moon came round, when a man thinks shame to lie sleeping; and I
continued until late--perhaps till twelve or one in the morning--to
walk on the bright sand and in the tossing shadow of the palms.  I
played, as I wandered, on a flageolet, which occupied much of my
attention; the fans overhead rattled in the wind with a metallic
chatter; and a bare foot falls at any rate almost noiseless on that
shifting soil.  Yet when I got back to Equator Town, where all the
lights were out, and my wife (who was still awake, and had been
looking forth) asked me who it was that followed me, I thought she
spoke in jest.  'Not at all,' she said.  'I saw him twice as you
passed, walking close at your heels.  He only left you at the
corner of the maniap'; he must be still behind the cook-house.'
Thither I ran--like a fool, without any weapon--and came face to
face with the cook.  He was within my tapu-line, which was death in
itself; he could have no business there at such an hour but either
to steal or to kill; guilt made him timorous; and he turned and
fled before me in the night in silence.  As he went I kicked him in
that place where honour lies, and he gave tongue faintly like an
injured mouse.  At the moment I daresay he supposed it was a deadly
instrument that touched him.

What had the man been after?  I have found my music better
qualified to scatter than to collect an audience.  Amateur as I
was, I could not suppose him interested in my reading of the
Carnival of Venice, or that he would deny himself his natural rest
to follow my variations on The Ploughboy.  And whatever his design,
it was impossible I should suffer him to prowl by night among the
houses.  A word to the king, and the man were not, his case being
far beyond pardon.  But it is one thing to kill a man yourself;
quite another to bear tales behind his back and have him shot by a
third party; and I determined to deal with the fellow in some
method of my own.  I told Ah Fu the story, and bade him fetch me
the cook whenever he should find him.  I had supposed this would be
a matter of difficulty; and far from that, he came of his own
accord:  an act really of desperation, since his life hung by my
silence, and the best he could hope was to be forgotten.  Yet he
came with an assured countenance, volunteered no apology or
explanation, complained of injuries received, and pretended he was
unable to sit down.  I suppose I am the weakest man God made; I had
kicked him in the least vulnerable part of his big carcase; my foot
was bare, and I had not even hurt my foot.  Ah Fu could not control
his merriment.  On my side, knowing what must be the nature of his
apprehensions, I found in so much impudence a kind of gallantry,
and secretly admired the man.  I told him I should say nothing of
his night's adventure to the king; that I should still allow him,
when he had an errand, to come within my tapu-line by day; but if
ever I found him there after the set of the sun I would shoot him
on the spot; and to the proof showed him a revolver.  He must have
been incredibly relieved; but he showed no sign of it, took himself
off with his usual dandy nonchalance, and was scarce seen by us
again.

These five, then, with the substitution of the steward for the
cook, came and went, and were our only visitors.  The circle of the
tapu held at arm's-length the inhabitants of the village.  As for
'my pamily,' they dwelt like nuns in their enclosure; only once
have I met one of them abroad, and she was the king's sister, and
the place in which I found her (the island infirmary) was very
likely privileged.  There remains only the king to be accounted
for.  He would come strolling over, always alone, a little before a
meal-time, take a chair, and talk and eat with us like an old
family friend.  Gilbertine etiquette appears defective on the point
of leave-taking.  It may be remembered we had trouble in the matter
with Karaiti; and there was something childish and disconcerting in
Tembinok's abrupt 'I want go home now,' accompanied by a kind of
ducking rise, and followed by an unadorned retreat.  It was the
only blot upon his manners, which were otherwise plain, decent,
sensible, and dignified.  He never stayed long nor drank much, and
copied our behaviour where he perceived it to differ from his own.
Very early in the day, for instance, he ceased eating with his
knife.  It was plain he was determined in all things to wring
profit from our visit, and chiefly upon etiquette.  The quality of
his white visitors puzzled and concerned him; he would bring up
name after name, and ask if its bearer were a 'big chiep,' or even
a 'chiep' at all--which, as some were my excellent good friends,
and none were actually born in the purple, became at times
embarrassing.  He was struck to learn that our classes were
distinguishable by their speech, and that certain words (for
instance) were tapu on the quarter-deck of a man-of-war; and he
begged in consequence that we should watch and correct him on the
point.  We were able to assure him that he was beyond correction.
His vocabulary is apt and ample to an extraordinary degree.  God
knows where he collected it, but by some instinct or some accident
he has avoided all profane or gross expressions.  'Obliged,'
'stabbed,' 'gnaw,' 'lodge,' 'power,' 'company,' 'slender,'
'smooth,' and 'wonderful,' are a few of the unexpected words that
enrich his dialect.  Perhaps what pleased him most was to hear
about saluting the quarter-deck of a man-of-war.  In his gratitude
for this hint he became fulsome.  'Schooner cap'n no tell me,' he
cried; 'I think no tavvy!  You tavvy too much; tavvy 'teama', tavvy
man-a-wa'.  I think you tavvy everything.' Yet he gravelled me
often enough with his perpetual questions; and the false Mr. Barlow
stood frequently exposed before the royal Sandford.  I remember
once in particular.  We were showing the magic-lantern; a slide of
Windsor Castle was put in, and I told him there was the 'outch' of
Victoreea.  'How many pathom he high?' he asked, and I was dumb
before him.  It was the builder, the indefatigable architect of
palaces, that spoke; collector though he was, he did not collect
useless information; and all his questions had a purpose.  After
etiquette, government, law, the police, money, and medicine were
his chief interests--things vitally important to himself as a king
and the father of his people.  It was my part not only to supply
new information, but to correct the old.  'My patha he tell me,' or
'White man he tell me,' would be his constant beginning; 'You think
he lie?'  Sometimes I thought he did.  Great and titled names only
furnish the _gilt:_ and this fact is now so generally understood,
that readers are no longer deceived by them, in the quality of
the gingerbread. Mr. Watts is so convinced of this fact, that he
has given the cut direct to many titled authors; and, for aught
we know, he has produced as good a volume this year as on any
former occasion. The proprietor of the _Keepsake_ appears to think
otherwise; and his editor has accordingly produced a book of
very meagre interest, though of mightier pretensions than his
rivals.
Months ago we were told by announcement, paragraph and advertisement,
of a tragedy, _The House of Aspen_, by Sir Walter Scott, which now
turns out to be as dull an affair as any known in these days of
dramatic poverty and theatrical ups and downs.

Sir Walter, in an advertisement of great modesty, dated April 1,
says, that "being of too small a size of consequence for a separate
publication, the piece is sent as a contribution to the _Keepsake_,
where its demerits may be hidden amid the beauties of more valuable
articles."

The piece has been adapted to a minor stage with some effect, but
nothing higher than a melodrama. We have neither room nor inclination
to extract a scene, but one of the metrical pieces has tempted
us:--

Sweet shone the sun on the fair Lake of Toro, Weak were the whispers
that waved the dark wood, As a fair maiden bewilder'd in
sorrow, Sigh'd to the breezes and wept to the flood.

"Saints from the mansion of bliss lowly bending, Virgin, that hear'st
the poor suppliant's cry, Grant my petition, in anguish ascending.

My Frederick restore, or let Eleanor die."
Distant and faint were the sounds of the battle, With the breezes
they rise, with the breezes they fail, Till the shout, and the
groan, and the conflict's dread rattle, And the chase's wild clamour
came loading the gale.

Breathless she gaz'd through the woodland so dreary, Slowly approaching,
a warrior was seen; Life's ebbing tide mark'd his footstep so
weary, Cleft was his helmet, and woe was his mien.

"Save thee, fair maid, for our armies are flying; Save thee, fair
maid, for thy guardian is low; Cold on yon heath thy bold Frederick
is lying, Fast through the woodland approaches the foe."

Two of the best stories are The Bride, by Theodore Hook, and the
Shooting Star, an Irish tale, by Lord Nugent; and a Dialogue for
the year 2310, by the author of Granby, has considerable smartness.
The scene is in London, where one of the speakers has just arrived
"from out of Scotland; breakfasted this morning at Edinburgh,
and have not been in town above a couple of hours. The roads are
dreadfully heavy now:
conceive my having been seven hours and a half coming from
Edinburgh to London. Killing between four and five thousand
head of game in one day is shooting ill; and one of the party has
a gun which would give twenty-seven discharges in a minute, and
mine would give only twenty-five. I really must change my maker.
Have you seen the last new invention, the hydro-potassian lock?"
Hunting machines, that would fly like balloons over a ten-foot
wall--A candidate for the Circumnavigation Club, who has been
four times round the world in his own, yacht--A point of bad taste
to make a morning call by daylight--Dining at twelve P.M.--A
spring-door with a self-acting knocker, which gives a treble knock,
and is opened by a steam porter in livery--A chair mounting from
the hall, through the ceiling, into the drawing room--Talking to a
lady two miles off through a telescope, till one's fingers ache--A
callisthenic academy for the children of pauper operatives--An
automaton note-writer--A lady professing ignorance of Almack's, "a
club where Swift and Johnson used to meet, but I don't profess to
be an antiquarian"--"Love and Algebra," one of the common scientific
novels thumbed by coal-heavers and orange-women, very well for the
common people--Every thing is taught them now by means of scientific
novels:
such as "Geological Atoms, or the Adventures of a Dustman"--Doubted
very much whether English wheat is fit for any thing but the brute
creation--Dark times of the 19th century--Six-hourly and half-daily
newspapers--"_apropos_, as the hackney-coachmen say"--Turkey, one
of the southern provinces of Russia--His Majesty Jonathan III. of
Washington--The Emperor of India--The Burmese Republic--English the
language of three-fourths of Asia, nine-tenths of North America,
half Africa, and all the insular states in the South Seas--and
England, that little kingdom, with a population of not more than
forty millions, has had the honour of colonizing half the globe;
but "these countries are our colonies no longer."

Such are a few of the wonders of 2130! In the Dialogue is an admirable
joke with a scientific street-sweeper and a learned beggar, who
pleads _necessitas non habet legem_, and "embraces the profession
of an operative mendicant." But here is a _morceau_:

_Lady D.
To make two bites of a cherry is good enough:  to make two
burthens of a soldier's kit, for a distance of perhaps half a
furlong, passes measure.  Woman, being the less childish animal, is
less relaxed by servile conditions.  Even in the king's absence,
even when they were alone, I have seen Apemama women work with
constancy.  But the outside to be hoped for in a man is that he may
attack his task in little languid fits, and lounge between-whiles.
So I have seen a painter, with his pipe going, and a friend by the
studio fireside.  You might suppose the race to lack civility, even
vitality, until you saw them in the dance.  Night after night, and
sometimes day after day, they rolled out their choruses in the
great Speak House--solemn andantes and adagios, led by the clapped
hand, and delivered with an energy that shook the roof.  The time
was not so slow, though it was slow for the islands; but I have
chosen rather to indicate the effect upon the hearer.  Their music
had a church-like character from near at hand, and seemed to
European ears more regular than the run of island music.  Twice I
have heard a discord regularly solved.  From farther off, heard at
Equator Town for instance, the measures rose and fell and
crepitated like the barking of hounds in a distant kennel.

The slaves are certainly not overworked--children of ten do more
without fatigue--and the Apemama labourers have holidays, when the
singing begins early in the afternoon.  The diet is hard; copra and
a sweetmeat of pounded pandanus are the only dishes I observed
outside the palace; but there seems no defect in quantity, and the
king shares with them his turtles.  Three came in a boat from Kuria
during our stay; one was kept for the palace, one sent to us, one
presented to the village.  It is the habit of the islanders to cook
the turtle in its carapace; we had been promised the shells, and we
asked a tapu on this foolish practice.  The face of Tembinok'
darkened and he answered nothing.  Hesitation in the question of
the well I could understand, for water is scarce on a low island;
that he should refuse to interfere upon a point of cookery was more
than I had dreamed of; and I gathered (rightly or wrongly) that he
was scrupulous of touching in the least degree the private life and
habits of his slaves.  So that even here, in full despotism, public
opinion has weight; even here, in the midst of slavery, freedom has
a corner.

Orderly, sober, and innocent, life flows in the isle from day to
day as in a model plantation under a model planter.  It is
impossible to doubt the beneficence of that stern rule.  A curious
politeness, a soft and gracious manner, something effeminate and
courtly, distinguishes the islanders of Apemama; it is talked of by
all the traders, it was felt even by residents so little beloved as
ourselves, and noticeable even in the cook, and even in that
scoundrel's hours of insolence.  The king, with his manly and plain
bearing, stood out alone; you might say he was the only Gilbert
Islander in Apemama.  Violence, so common in Butaritari, seems
unknown.  So are theft and drunkenness.  I am assured the
experiment has been made of leaving sovereigns on the beach before
the village; they lay there untouched.  In all our time on the
island I was but once asked for drink.  This was by a mighty
plausible fellow, wearing European clothes and speaking excellent
English--Tamaiti his name, or, as the whites have now corrupted it,
'Tom White':  one of the king's supercargoes at three pounds a
month and a percentage, a medical man besides, and in his private
hours a wizard.  He found me one day in the outskirts of the
village, in a secluded place, hot and private, where the taro-pits
are deep and the plants high.  Here he buttonholed me, and, looking
about him like a conspirator, inquired if I had gin.

I told him I had.  He remarked that gin was forbidden, lauded the
prohibition a while, and then went on to explain that he was a
doctor, or 'dogstar' as he pronounced the word, that gin was
necessary to him for his medical infusions, that he was quite out
of it, and that he would be obliged to me for some in a bottle.  I
told him I had passed the king my word on landing; but since his
case was so exceptional, I would go down to the palace at once, and
had no doubt that Tembinok' would set me free.  Tom White was
immediately overwhelmed with embarrassment and terror, besought me
in the most moving terms not to betray him, and fled my
neighbourhood.  He had none of the cook's valour; it was weeks
before he dared to meet my eye; and then only by the order of the
king and on particular business.

The more I viewed and admired this triumph of firm rule, the more I
was haunted and troubled by a problem, the problem (perhaps) of to-
morrow for ourselves.  Here was a people protected from all serious
misfortune, relieved of all serious anxieties, and deprived of what
we call our liberty.  Did they like it? and what was their
sentiment toward the ruler?  The first question I could not of
course ask, nor perhaps the natives answer.  Even the second was
delicate; yet at last, and under charming and strange
circumstances, I found my opportunity to put it and a man to reply.
It was near the full of the moon, with a delicious breeze; the isle
was bright as day--to sleep would have been sacrilege; and I walked
in the bush, playing my pipe.  It must have been the sound of what
I am pleased to call my music that attracted in my direction
another wanderer of the night.  This was a young man attired in a
fine mat, and with a garland on his hair, for he was new come from
dancing and singing in the public hall; and his body, his face, and
his eyes were all of an enchanting beauty.  Every here and there in
the Gilberts youths are to be found of this absurd perfection; I
have seen five of us pass half an hour in admiration of a boy at
Mariki; and Te Kop (my friend in the fine mat and garland) I had
already several times remarked, and long ago set down as the
loveliest animal in Apemama.  The philtre of admiration must be
very strong, or these natives specially susceptible to its effects,
for I have scarce ever admired a person in the islands but what he
has sought my particular acquaintance.  So it was with Te Kop.  He
led me to the ocean side; and for an hour or two we sat smoking and
talking on the resplendent sand and under the ineffable brightness
of the moon.  My friend showed himself very sensible of the beauty
and amenity of the hour.  'Good night! Good wind!' he kept
exclaiming, and as he said the words he seemed to hug myself.  I
had long before invented such reiterated expressions of delight for
a character (Felipe, in the story of Olalla) intended to be partly
bestial.  But there was nothing bestial in Te Kop; only a childish
pleasure in the moment.  He was no less pleased with his companion,
or was good enough to say so; honoured me, before he left, by
calling me Te Kop; apostrophised me as 'My name!' with an
intonation exquisitely tender, laying his hand at the same time
swiftly on my knee; and after we had risen, and our paths began to
separate in the bush, twice cried to me with a sort of gentle
ecstasy, 'I like you too much!'  From the beginning he had made no
secret of his terror of the king; would not sit down nor speak
above a whisper till he had put the whole breadth of the isle
between himself and his monarch, then harmlessly asleep; and even
there, even within a stone-cast of the outer sea, our talk covered
by the sound of the surf and the rattle of the wind among the
palms, continued to speak guardedly, softening his silver voice
(which rang loud enough in the chorus) and looking about him like a
man in fear of spies.  The strange thing is that I should have
beheld him no more.  In any other island in the whole South Seas,
if I had advanced half as far with any native, he would have been
at my door next morning, bringing and expecting gifts.  But Te Kop
vanished in the bush for ever.  My house, of course, was
unapproachable; but he knew where to find me on the ocean beach,
where I went daily.  I was the Kaupoi, the rich man; my tobacco and
trade were known to be endless:  he was sure of a present.  I am at
a loss how to explain his behaviour, unless it be supposed that he
recalled with terror and regret a passage in our interview.  Here
it is:

'The king, he good man?' I asked.

'Suppose he like you, he good man,' replied Te Kop:  'no like, no
good.'

That is one way of putting it, of course.  Te Kop himself was
probably no favourite, for he scarce appealed to my judgment as a
type of industry.  And there must be many others whom the king (to
adhere to the formula) does not like.  Do these unfortunates like
the king?  Or is not rather the repulsion mutual? and the
conscientious Tembinok', like the conscientious Braxfield before
him, and many other conscientious rulers and judges before either,
surrounded by a considerable body of 'grumbletonians'?  Take the
cook, for instance, when he passed us by, blue with rage and
terror.  He was very wroth with me; I think by all the old
principles of human nature he was not very well pleased with his
sovereign.  It was the rich man he sought to waylay:  I think it
must have been by the turn of a hair that it was not the king he
waylaid instead.  And the king gives, or seems to give, plenty of
opportunities; day and night he goes abroad alone, whether armed or
not I can but guess; and the taro-patches, where his business must
so often carry him, seem designed for assassination.  The case of
the cook was heavy indeed to my conscience.  I did not like to kill
my enemy at second-hand; but had I a right to conceal from the
king, who had trusted me, the dangerous secret character of his
attendant?  And suppose the king should fall, what would be the
fate of the king's friends?  It was our opinion at the time that we
should pay dear for the closing of the well; that our breath was in
the king's nostrils; that if the king should by any chance be
bludgeoned in a taro-patch, the philosophical and musical
inhabitants of Equator Town might lay aside their pleasant
instruments, and betake themselves to what defence they had, with a
very dim prospect of success.  These speculations were forced upon
us by an incident which I am ashamed to betray.  The schooner H. L.
Haseltine (since capsized at sea, with the loss of eleven lives)
put into Apemama in a good hour for us, who had near exhausted our
supplies.  The king, after his habit, spent day after day on board;
the gin proved unhappily to his taste; he brought a store of it
ashore with him; and for some time the sole tyrant of the isle was
half-seas-over.  He was not drunk--the man is not a drunkard, he
has always stores of liquor at hand, which he uses with
moderation,--but he was muzzy, dull, and confused.  He came one day
to lunch with us, and while the cloth was being laid fell asleep in
his chair.  His confusion, when he awoke and found he had been
detected, was equalled by our uneasiness.  When he was gone we sat
and spoke of his peril, which we thought to be in some degree our
own; of how easily the man might be surprised in such a state by
grumbletonians; of the strange scenes that would follow--the royal
treasures and stores at the mercy of the rabble, the palace
overrun, the garrison of women turned adrift.  And as we talked we
were startled by a gun-shot and a sudden, barbaric outcry.  I
believe we all changed colour; but it was only the king firing at a
dog and the chorus striking up in the Speak House.  A day or two
later I learned the king was very sick; went down, diagnosed the
case; and took at once the highest medical degree by the exhibition
of bicarbonate of soda.  Within the hour Richard was himself again;
and I found him at the unfinished house, enjoying the double
pleasure of directing Rubam and making a dinner of cocoa-nut
dumplings, and all eagerness to have the formula of this new sort
of pain-killer--for pain-killer in the islands is the generic name
of medicine.  So ended the king's modest spree and our anxiety.

On the face of things, I ought to say, loyalty appeared unshaken.
When the schooner at last returned for us, after much experience of
baffling winds, she brought a rumour that Tebureimoa had declared
war on Apemama.  Tembinok' became a new man; his face radiant; his
attitude, as I saw him preside over a council of chiefs in one of
the palace maniap's, eager as a boy's; his voice sounding abroad,
shrill and jubilant, over half the compound.  War is what he wants,
and here was his chance.  The English captain, when he flung his
arms in the lagoon, had forbidden him (except in one case) all
military adventures in the future:  here was the case arrived.  All
morning the council sat; men were drilled, arms were bought, the
sound of firing disturbed the afternoon; the king devised and
communicated to me his plan of campaign, which was highly elaborate
and ingenious, but perhaps a trifle fine-spun for the rough and
random vicissitudes of war.  And in all this bustle the temper of
the people appeared excellent, an unwonted animation in every face,
and even Uncle Parker burning with military zeal.

Of course it was a false alarm.  Tebureimoa had other fish to fry.
The ambassador who accompanied us on our return to Butaritari found
him retired to a small island on the reef, in a huff with the Old
Men, a tiff with the traders, and more fear of insurrection at home
than appetite for wars abroad.  The plenipotentiary had been placed
under my protection; and we solemnly saluted when we met.  He
proved an excellent fisherman, and caught bonito over the ship's
side.  He pulled a good oar, and made himself useful for a whole
fiery afternoon, towing the becalmed Equator off Mariki.  He went
to his post and did no good.  He returned home again, having done
no harm.  O si sic omnes!


CHAPTER VI--THE KING OF APEMAMA:  DEVIL-WORK


The ocean beach of Apemama was our daily resort.  The coast is
broken by shallow bays.  The reef is detached, elevated, and
includes a lagoon about knee-deep, the unrestful spending-basin of
the surf.  The beach is now of fine sand, now of broken coral.  The
trend of the coast being convex, scarce a quarter of a mile of it
is to be seen at once; the land being so low, the horizon appears
within a stone-cast; and the narrow prospect enhances the sense of
privacy.  Man avoids the place--even his footprints are uncommon;
but a great number of birds hover and pipe there fishing, and leave
crooked tracks upon the sand.  Apart from these, the only sound
(and I was going to say the only society), is that of the breakers
on the reef.

On each projection of the coast, the bank of coral clinkers
immediately above the beach has been levelled, and a pillar built,
perhaps breast-high.  These are not sepulchral; all the dead being
buried on the inhabited side of the island, close to men's houses,
and (what is worse) to their wells.  I was told they were to
protect the isle against inroads from the sea--divine or diabolical
martellos, probably sacred to Taburik, God of Thunder.

The bay immediately opposite Equator Town, which we called Fu Bay,
in honour of our cook, was thus fortified on either horn.  It was
well sheltered by the reef, the enclosed water clear and tranquil,
the enclosing beach curved like a horseshoe, and both steep and
broad.  The path debouched about the midst of the re-entrant angle,
the woods stopping some distance inland.  In front, between the
fringe of the wood and the crown of the beach, there had been
designed a regular figure, like the court for some new variety of
tennis, with borders of round stones imbedded, and pointed at the
angles with low posts, likewise of stone.  This was the king's Pray
Place.  When he prayed, what he prayed for, and to whom he
addressed his supplications I could never learn.  The ground was
tapu.

In the angle, by the mouth of the path, stood a deserted maniap'.
Near by there had been a house before our coming, which was now
transported and figured for the moment in Equator Town.  It had
been, and it would be again when we departed, the residence of the
guardian and wizard of the spot--Tamaiti.  Here, in this lone
place, within sound of the sea, he had his dwelling and uncanny
duties.  I cannot call to mind another case of a man living on the
ocean side of any open atoll; and Tamaiti must have had strong
nerves, the greater confidence in his own spells, or, what I
believe to be the truth, an enviable scepticism.  Whether Tamaiti
had any guardianship of the Pray Place I never heard.  But his own
particular chapel stood farther back in the fringe of the wood.  It
was a tree of respectable growth.  Around it there was drawn a
circle of stones like those that enclosed the Pray Place; in front,
facing towards the sea, a stone of a much greater size, and
somewhat hollowed, like a piscina, stood close against the trunk;
in front of that again a conical pile of gravel.  In the hollow of
what I have called the piscina (though it proved to be a magic
seat) lay an offering of green cocoa-nuts; and when you looked up
you found the boughs of the tree to be laden with strange fruit:
palm-branches elaborately plaited, and beautiful models of canoes,
finished and rigged to the least detail.  The whole had the
appearance of a mid-summer and sylvan Christmas-tree al fresco.
Yet we were already well enough acquainted in the Gilberts to
recognise it, at the first sight, for a piece of wizardry, or, as
they say in the group, of Devil-work.

The plaited palms were what we recognised.  We had seen them before
on Apaiang, the most christianised of all these islands; where
excellent Mr. Bingham lived and laboured and has left golden
memories; whence all the education in the northern Gilberts traces
its descent; and where we were boarded by little native Sunday-
school misses in clean frocks, with demure faces, and singing hymns
as to the manner born.

Our experience of Devil-work at Apaiang had been as follows:- It
chanced we were benighted at the house of Captain Tierney.  My wife
and I lodged with a Chinaman some half a mile away; and thither
Captain Reid and a native boy escorted us by torch-light.  On the
way the torch went out, and we took shelter in a small and lonely
Christian chapel to rekindle it.  Stuck in the rafters of the
chapel was a branch of knotted palm.  'What is that?' I asked.  'O,
that's Devil-work,' said the Captain.  'And what is Devil-work?' I
inquired.  'If you like, I'll show you some when we get to
Johnnie's,' he replied.  'Johnnie's' was a quaint little house upon
the crest of the beach, raised some three feet on posts, approached
by stairs; part walled, part trellised.  Trophies of advertisement-
photographs were hung up within for decoration.  There was a table
and a recess-bed, in which Mrs. Stevenson slept; while I camped on
the matted floor with Johnnie, Mrs. Johnnie, her sister, and the
devil's own regiment of cockroaches.  Hither was summoned an old
witch, who looked the part to horror.  The lamp was set on the
floor; the crone squatted on the threshold, a green palm-branch in
her hand, the light striking full on her aged features and picking
out behind her, from the black night, timorous faces of spectators.
Our sorceress began with a chanted incantation; it was in the old
tongue, for which I had no interpreter; but ever and again there
ran among the crowd outside that laugh which every traveller in the
islands learns so soon to recognise,--the laugh of terror.
Doubtless these half-Christian folk were shocked, these half-
heathen folk alarmed.  Chench or Taburik thus invoked, we put our
questions; the witch knotted the leaves, here a leaf and there a
leaf, plainly on some arithmetical system; studied the result with
great apparent contention of mind; and gave the answers.  Sidney
Colvin was in robust health and gone a journey; and we should have
a fair wind upon the morrow:  that was the result of our
consultation, for which we paid a dollar.  The next day dawned
cloudless and breathless; but I think Captain Reid placed a secret
reliance on the sibyl, for the schooner was got ready for sea.  By
eight the lagoon was flawed with long cat's-paws, and the palms
tossed and rustled; before ten we were clear of the passage and
skimming under all plain sail, with bubbling scuppers.  So we had
the breeze, which was well worth a dollar in itself; but the
bulletin about my friend in England proved, some six months later,
when I got my mail, to have been groundless.  Perhaps London lies
beyond the horizon of the island gods.

Tembinok', in his first dealings, showed himself sternly averse
from superstition:  and had not the Equator delayed, we might have
left the island and still supposed him an agnostic.  It chanced one
day, however, that he came to our maniap', and found Mrs. Stevenson
in the midst of a game of patience.  She explained the game as well
as she was able, and wound up jocularly by telling him this was her
devil-work, and if she won, the Equator would arrive next day.
Tembinok' must have drawn a long breath; we were not so high-and-
dry after all; he need no longer dissemble, and he plunged at once
into confessions.  He made devil-work every day, he told us, to
know if ships were coming in; and thereafter brought us regular
reports of the results.  It was surprising how regularly he was
wrong; but he always had an explanation ready.  There had been some
schooner in the offing out of view; but either she was not bound
for Apemama, or had changed her course, or lay becalmed.  I used to
regard the king with veneration as he thus publicly deceived
himself.  I saw behind him all the fathers of the Church, all the
philosophers and men of science of the past; before him, all those
that are to come; himself in the midst; the whole visionary series
bowed over the same task of welding incongruities.  To the end
Tembinok' spoke reluctantly of the island gods and their worship,
and I learned but little.  Taburik is the god of thunder, and deals
in wind and weather.  A while since there were wizards who could
call him down in the form of lightning.  'My patha he tell me he
see:  you think he lie?'  Tienti--pronounced something like
'Chench,' and identified by his majesty with the devil--sends and
removes bodily sickness.  He is whistled for in the Paumotuan
manner, and is said to appear; but the king has never seen him.
The doctors treat disease by the aid of Chench:  eclectic Tembinok'
at the same time administering 'pain-killer' from his medicine-
chest, so as to give the sufferer both chances.  'I think mo'
betta,' observed his majesty, with more than his usual self-
approval.  Apparently the gods are not jealous, and placidly enjoy
both shrine and priest in common.  On Tamaiti's medicine-tree, for
instance, the model canoes are hung up ex voto for a prosperous
voyage, and must therefore be dedicated to Taburik, god of the
weather; but the stone in front is the place of sick folk come to
pacify Chench.

It chanced, by great good luck, that even as we spoke of these
affairs, I found myself threatened with a cold.  I do not suppose I
was ever glad of a cold before, or shall ever be again; but the
opportunity to see the sorcerers at work was priceless, and I
called in the faculty of Apemama.  They came in a body, all in
their Sunday's best and hung with wreaths and shells, the insignia
of the devil-worker.  Tamaiti I knew already:  Terutak' I saw for
the first time--a tall, lank, raw-boned, serious North-Sea
fisherman turned brown; and there was a third in their company
whose name I never heard, and who played to Tamaiti the part of
famulus.  Tamaiti took me in hand first, and led me, conversing
agreeably, to the shores of Fu Bay.  The famulus climbed a tree for
some green cocoa-nuts.  Tamaiti himself disappeared a while in the
bush and returned with coco tinder, dry leaves, and a spray of
waxberry.  I was placed on the stone, with my back to the tree and
my face to windward; between me and the gravel-heap one of the
green nuts was set; and then Tamaiti (having previously bared his
feet, for he had come in canvas shoes, which tortured him) joined
me within the magic circle, hollowed out the top of the gravel-
heap, built his fire in the bottom, and applied a match:  it was
one of Bryant and May's.  The flame was slow to catch, and the
irreverent sorcerer filled in the time with talk of foreign places-
-of London, and 'companies,' and how much money they had; of San
Francisco, and the nefarious fogs, 'all the same smoke,' which had
been so nearly the occasion of his death.  I tried vainly to lead
him to the matter in hand.  'Everybody make medicine,' he said
lightly.  And when I asked him if he were himself a good
practitioner--'No savvy,' he replied, more lightly still.  At
length the leaves burst in a flame, which he continued to feed; a
thick, light smoke blew in my face, and the flames streamed against
and scorched my clothes.  He in the meanwhile addressed, or
affected to address, the evil spirit, his lips moving fast, but
without sound; at the same time he waved in the air and twice
struck me on the breast with his green spray.  So soon as the
leaves were consumed the ashes were buried, the green spray was
imbedded in the gravel, and the ceremony was at an end.

A reader of the Arabian Nights felt quite at home.  Here was the
suffumigation; here was the muttering wizard; here was the desert
place to which Aladdin was decoyed by the false uncle.  But they
manage these things better in fiction.  The effect was marred by
the levity of the magician, entertaining his patient with small
talk like an affable dentist, and by the incongruous presence of
Mr. Osbourne with a camera.  As for my cold, it was neither better
nor worse.

I was now handed over to Terutak', the leading practitioner or
medical baronet of Apemama.  His place is on the lagoon side of the
island, hard by the palace.  A rail of light wood, some two feet
high, encloses an oblong piece of gravel like the king's Pray
Place; in the midst is a green tree; below, a stone table bears a
pair of boxes covered with a fine mat; and in front of these an
offering of food, a cocoa-nut, a piece of taro or a fish, is placed
daily.  On two sides the enclosure is lined with maniap's; and one
of our party, who had been there to sketch, had remarked a daily
concourse of people and an extraordinary number of sick children;
for this is in fact the infirmary of Apemama.  The doctor and
myself entered the sacred place alone; the boxes and the mat were
displaced; and I was enthroned in their stead upon the stone,
facing once more to the east.  For a while the sorcerer remained
unseen behind me, making passes in the air with a branch of palm.
Then he struck lightly on the brim of my straw hat; and this blow
he continued to repeat at intervals, sometimes brushing instead my
arm and shoulder.  I have had people try to mesmerise me a dozen
times, and never with the least result.  But at the first tap--on a
quarter no more vital than my hat-brim, and from nothing more
virtuous than a switch of palm wielded by a man I could not even
see--sleep rushed upon me like an armed man.  My sinews fainted, my
eyes closed, my brain hummed, with drowsiness.  I resisted, at
first instinctively, then with a certain flurry of despair, in the
end successfully; if that were indeed success which enabled me to
scramble to my feet, to stumble home somnambulous, to cast myself
at once upon my bed, and sink at once into a dreamless stupor.
When I awoke my cold was gone.  So I leave a matter that I do not
understand.

Meanwhile my appetite for curiosities (not usually very keen) had
been strangely whetted by the sacred boxes.  They were of pandanus
wood, oblong in shape, with an effect of pillaring along the sides
like straw work, lightly fringed with hair or fibre and standing on
four legs.  The outside was neat as a toy; the inside a mystery I
was resolved to penetrate.  But there was a lion in the path.  I
might not approach Terutak', since I had promised to buy nothing in
the island; I dared not have recourse to the king, for I had
already received from him more gifts than I knew how to repay.  In
this dilemma (the schooner being at last returned) we hit on a
device.  Captain Reid came forward in my stead, professed an
unbridled passion for the boxes, and asked and obtained leave to
bargain for them with the wizard.  That same afternoon the captain
and I made haste to the infirmary, entered the enclosure, raised
the mat, and had begun to examine the boxes at our leisure, when
Terutak's wife bounced out of one of the nigh houses, fell upon us,
swept up the treasures, and was gone.  There was never a more
absolute surprise.  She came, she took, she vanished, we had not a
guess whither; and we remained, with foolish looks and laughter on
the empty field.  Such was the fit prologue of our memorable
bargaining.

Presently Terutak' came, bringing Tamaiti along with him, both
smiling; and we four squatted without the rail.  In the three
maniap's of the infirmary a certain audience was gathered:  the
family of a sick child under treatment, the king's sister playing
cards, a pretty girl, who swore I was the image of her father; in
all perhaps a score.  Terutak's wife had returned (even as she had
vanished) unseen, and now sat, breathless and watchful, by her
husband's side.  Perhaps some rumour of our quest had gone abroad,
or perhaps we had given the alert by our unseemly freedom:
certain, at least, that in the faces of all present, expectation
and alarm were mingled.

Captain Reid announced, without preface or disguise, that I was
come to purchase; Terutak', with sudden gravity, refused to sell.
He was pressed; he persisted.  It was explained we only wanted one:
no matter, two were necessary for the healing of the sick.  He was
rallied, he was reasoned with:  in vain.  He sat there, serious and
still, and refused.  All this was only a preliminary skirmish;
hitherto no sum of money had been mentioned; but now the captain
brought his great guns to bear.  He named a pound, then two, then
three.  Out of the maniap's one person after another came to join
the group, some with mere excitement, others with consternation in
their faces.  The pretty girl crept to my side; it was then that--
surely with the most artless flattery--she informed me of my
likeness to her father.  Tamaiti the infidel sat with hanging head
and every mark of dejection.  Terutak' streamed with sweat, his eye
was glazed, his face wore a painful rictus, his chest heaved like
that of one spent with running.  The man must have been by nature
covetous; and I doubt if ever I saw moral agony more tragically
displayed.  His wife by his side passionately encouraged his
resistance.

And now came the charge of the old guard.  The captain, making a
skip, named the surprising figure of five pounds.  At the word the
maniap's were emptied.  "Sow, and ye shall also reap." But the farmer
says, "I cannot; I haven't enough. If I had plenty I would sow, but
I haven't. My family could not live as well as my neighbor; we could
not set a good enough table; we might even have to go hungry." But
the command comes again: "Sow, and ye shall also reap," and I
venture to say that there is not a farmer in this country of ours
but who would go hungry, yea, he and his children would go
bare-footed, but he would take some portion of the grain that he
had and throw it broadcast over his field, knowing that it would
lie there and decay, but trusting in the Lord that it would
come back to him after many days.

Why cannot we use the same wisdom in spiritual matters?

But there is something that is of more value even than money. It
seems to me that the one thing we need is more consecrated women
in our churches, women that have more love for their Master and for
his cause, women that do not do this work from a sense of duty, but
because they love their Lord and Saviour. It seems to me we ought
to put love in the same place where Christ put it, on the same
pinnacle where Paul put it: "Though I speak with the tongues of men
and of angels and have not love, it profiteth me nothing;
though I understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though
I have all faith so that I could remove mountains, and have not
love, it profiteth me nothing; and though I give my body to be
burned, and though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
have not love, it profiteth me nothing."
My dear friends, if we only had this love, this consecration, we
would be interested in everything that interests our Master. And
hearing of our sister in the mountains who knows nothing of him, we
would hasten to go ourselves or make it easy for others to go
and tell her of His love. And thinking of our colored sister in
the South who is oppressed and down-trodden, if we loved Him we
would hasten to go with joy and tell her of the yoke that is easy
and the burden that is light.

And remembering our Indian sister who is so in the dark and is so
destitute of knowledge we would find a way to tell her of Him who
is the light of the world. And knowing of our Chinese sister
here on our shores, who looks forward to a heavenly home for her
husband, though she has no such hope for herself, we would go
and tell her--or see that some one else told her--of Him who
said: "Whosoever cometh unto me shall have eternal life." Our work
then would not be done from a sense of duty but as the expression
of our love and joy, and all we would ask in return would be the
words: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these,
ye have done it unto me."

* * * * *
ADDRESS BY MISS ANNETTE P. BRICKETT.

In the few minutes which are assigned me in which to bring before
you the work of our Indian mission and boarding school at Fort
Berthold, among the Rees, Mandans and Gros Ventres, there is
no time for me to discuss the "Indian Problem," about which I am
not at all wise, nor to talk of the Indian character, nor to defend
it against the numberless unjust opinions and popular newspaper and
magazine prejudice with which you are all so familiar.

I think you want to know all that I shall have time to tell you of
our past year's work, our encouragements, our difficulties and
successes.

There has been an increasing spirit of loving, gentle, helpfulness
among our school girls, both in the home and school life. We have
all gladly noticed that our boys have become more courteous and
thoughtful. Many of them have learned for the first time, under
their wise and consecrated matron, the value of strict adherence
to God's great law of obedience in the forming of manly characters
and in the making of happy homes.

Our older Ree girls came back to school this fall more neatly
and cleanly clad than ever before. Some of them made tasteful
calico dresses for themselves with which to return to us. Several
of these older girls, under the leadership of one of our ladies,
organized themselves into a "Cleaning Club" at the close of school
in July and have kept faithfully at work all through the
vacation, each week meeting at a certain house and giving the
poor little log home, with its mud-plugged walls and dirt floor
a most vigorous and thorough "scrub." After the beds had been made
up cleanly with sheets and pillow cases, which were in each case
the property of the school girl at whose house they met, and putting
up cheap scrim curtains at the two little windows, then these
students of scrubology, on a stove, shining with a perhaps unprecedented
coat of blacking, prepared before their somewhat dazed parents a
neat and wholesome meal of such simple material as they had, set
it out on a white covered table just as nicely as they are taught
to do at school, and invited their parents to eat with them.But now I had a difficult task in
front of me; it was not in my view that Terutak' should suffer by
his virtue; and I must persuade the king to share my opinion, to
let me enrich one of his subjects, and (what was yet more delicate)
to pay for my present.  Nothing shows the king in a more becoming
light than the fact that I succeeded.  He demurred at the
principle; he exclaimed, when he heard it, at the sum.  'Plenty
money!' cried he, with contemptuous displeasure.  But his
resistance was never serious; and when he had blown off his ill-
humour--'A' right,' said he.  'You give him.  Mo' betta.'

Armed with this permission, I made straight for the infirmary.  The
night was now come, cool, dark, and starry.  On a mat hard by a
clear fire of wood and coco shell, Terutak' lay beside his wife.
Both were smiling; the agony was over, the king's command had
reconciled (I must suppose) their agitating scruples; and I was
bidden to sit by them and share the circulating pipe.  I was a
little moved myself when I placed five gold sovereigns in the
wizard's hand; but there was no sign of emotion in Terutak' as he
returned them, pointed to the palace, and named Tembinok'.  It was
a changed scene when I had managed to explain.  Terutak', long,
dour Scots fisherman as he was, expressed his satisfaction within
bounds; but the wife beamed; and there was an old gentleman
present--her father, I suppose--who seemed nigh translated.  His
eyes stood out of his head; 'Kaupoi, Kaupoi--rich, rich!' ran on
his lips like a refrain; and he could not meet my eye but what he
gurgled into foolish laughter.

I might now go home, leaving that fire-lit family party gloating
over their new millions, and consider my strange day.  I had tried
and rewarded the virtue of Terutak'.  I had played the millionaire,
had behaved abominably, and then in some degree repaired my
thoughtlessness.  And now I had my box, and could open it and look
within.  It contained a miniature sleeping-mat and a white shell.
Tamaiti, interrogated next day as to the shell, explained it was
not exactly Chench, but a cell, or body, which he would at times
inhabit.  Asked why there was a sleeping-mat, he retorted
indignantly, 'Why have you mats?'  And this was the sceptical
Tamaiti!  But island scepticism is never deeper than the lips.


"Economy!"

Is not that just the place it always begins? Can we look back over
the last two years, those of us who have been affected by the hard
times, and truthfully say that we did not begin at the giving end
to economize? It seems to me that this is just where we all make
our mistakes. Is not this just the reason why our church work is
so cold and lifeless? We are trying to do Christ's work in
man's way and we can no more do it than the Indian we are told
about, who tried to run the machine controlled by electricity in
his own way rather than in the way the inventor intended it to be
run. God has given us a plan for doing this work and saving souls,
and we are trying man's way rather than God's way. What is man's way?To
feel, to use his power, to embellish his island and the picture of
the island life after a private ideal, to milk the island
vigorously, to extend his singular museum--these employ
delightfully the sum of his abilities.  I never saw a man more
patently in the right trade.

It would be natural to suppose this monarchy inherited intact
through generations.  And so far from that, it is a thing of
yesterday.  I was already a boy at school while Apemama was yet
republican, ruled by a noisy council of Old Men, and torn with
incurable feuds.  And Tembinok' is no Bourbon; rather the son of a
Napoleon.  Of course he is well-born.  No man need aspire high in
the isles of the Pacific unless his pedigree be long and in the
upper regions mythical.  And our king counts cousinship with most
of the high families in the archipelago, and traces his descent to
a shark and a heroic woman.  Directed by an oracle, she swam beyond
sight of land to meet her revolting paramour, and received at sea
the seed of a predestined family.  'I think lie,' is the king's
emphatic commentary; yet he is proud of the legend.  From this
illustrious beginning the fortunes of the race must have declined;
and Tenkoruti, the grandfather of Tembinok', was the chief of a
village at the north end of the island.  Kuria and Aranuka were yet
independent; Apemama itself the arena of devastating feuds.
Through this perturbed period of history the figure of Tenkoruti
stalks memorable.  In war he was swift and bloody; several towns
fell to his spear, and the inhabitants were butchered to a man.  In
civil life this arrogance was unheard of.  When the council of Old
Men was summoned, he went to the Speak House, delivered his mind,
and left without waiting to be answered.  Wisdom had spoken:  let
others opine according to their folly.  He was feared and hated,
and this was his pleasure.  He was no poet; he cared not for arts
or knowledge.  'My gran'patha one thing savvy, savvy pight,'
observed the king.  In some lull of their own disputes the Old Men
of Apemama adventured on the conquest of Apemama; and this unlicked
Caius Marcius was elected general of the united troops.  Success
attended him; the islands were reduced, and Tenkoruti returned to
his own government, glorious and detested.  He died about 1860, in
the seventieth year of his age and the full odour of unpopularity.
He was tall and lean, says his grandson, looked extremely old, and
'walked all the same young man.'  The same observer gave me a
significant detail.  The survivors of that rough epoch were all
defaced with spearmarks; there was none on the body of this skilful
fighter.  'I see old man, no got a spear,' said the king.

Tenkoruti left two sons, Tembaitake and Tembinatake.  Tembaitake,
our king's father, was short, middling stout, a poet, a good
genealogist, and something of a fighter; it seems he took himself
seriously, and was perhaps scarce conscious that he was in all
things the creature and nursling of his brother.  There was no
shadow of dispute between the pair:  the greater man filled with
alacrity and content the second place; held the breach in war, and
all the portfolios in the time of peace; and, when his brother
rated him, listened in silence, looking on the ground.  Like
Tenkoruti, he was tall and lean and a swift talker--a rare trait in
the islands.  He possessed every accomplishment.  He knew sorcery,
he was the best genealogist of his day, he was a poet, he could
dance and make canoes and armour; and the famous mast of Apemama,
which ran one joint higher than the mainmast of a full-rigged ship,
was of his conception and design.  But these were avocations, and
the man's trade was war.  'When my uncle go make wa', he laugh,'
said Tembinok'.  He forbade the use of field fortification, that
protractor of native hostilities; his men must fight in the open,
and win or be beaten out of hand; his own activity inspired his
followers; and the swiftness of his blows beat down, in one
lifetime, the resistance of three islands.  He made his brother
sovereign, he left his nephew absolute.  'My uncle make all
smooth,' said Tembinok'.  'I mo' king than my patha:  I got power,'
he said, with formidable relish.

Such is the portrait of the uncle drawn by the nephew.  I can set
beside it another by a different artist, who has often--I may say
always--delighted me with his romantic taste in narrative, but not
always--and I may say not often--persuaded me of his exactitude.  I
have already denied myself the use of so much excellent matter from
the same source, that I begin to think it time to reward good
resolution; and his account of Tembinatake agrees so well with the
king's, that it may very well be (what I hope it is) the record of
a fact, and not (what I suspect) the pleasing exercise of an
imagination more than sailorly.  A., for so I had perhaps better
call him, was walking up the island after dusk, when he came on a
lighted village of some size, was directed to the chief's house,
and asked leave to rest and smoke a pipe.  'You will sit down, and
smoke a pipe, and wash, and eat, and sleep,' replied the chief,
'and to-morrow you will go again.'  Food was brought, prayers were
held (for this was in the brief day of Christianity), and the chief
himself prayed with eloquence and seeming sincerity.  All evening
A. sat and admired the man by the firelight.  He was six feet high,
lean, with the appearance of many years, and an extraordinary air
of breeding and command.  'He looked like a man who would kill you
laughing,' said A., in singular echo of one of the king's
expressions.  And again:  'I had been reading the Musketeer books,
and he reminded me of Aramis.'  Such is the portrait of
Tembinatake, drawn by an expert romancer.

We had heard many tales of 'my patha'; never a word of my uncle
till two days before we left.  As the time approached for our
departure Tembinok' became greatly changed; a softer, a more
melancholy, and, in particular, a more confidential man appeared in
his stead.  To my wife he contrived laboriously to explain that
though he knew he must lose his father in the course of nature, he
had not minded nor realised it till the moment came; and that now
he was to lose us he repeated the experience.  We showed fireworks
one evening on the terrace.  It was a heavy business; the sense of
separation was in all our minds, and the talk languished.  As for
wild beasts, we hear them howling and roaring round the fence
every night from dusk till daylight; but we have only been inconvenienced
by one lion. The first time he came, in order to get rid of the
brute peaceably, we turned out an old ewe, with which he was well
satisfied, but ever since he comes to us as regular as clock-work
for his mutton; and if we do not soon contrive to cut his acquaintance,
we shall hardly have a sheep in the flock. It would have been easy
to shoot him, being well provided with muskets; but Barnaby mistook
our remnant of gunpowder for onion seed, and sowed it all in
the kitchen garden. We did try to trap him into a pit-fall; but
after twice catching Mrs. P. and every one of the children in turn,
it was given up. They are now, however, perfectly at ease about the
animal, for they never stir out of doors at all; and, to make them
quite comfortable, I have blocked up all the windows, and
barricaded the door. We have lost only one of our number since
we came--namely, Diggory, the market-gardener, from Glasgow, who
went out one morning to botanize, and never came back. I am much
surprised at his absconding, as he had nothing but a spade to go off
with.

Chippendale, the carpenter, was sent after him, but did not return;
and Gregory, the smith, has been out after them these two days.
I have just dispatched Mudge, the herdsman, to look for all three,
and hope he will soon give a good account of them, as they are
the most useful men in the whole settlement, and, in fact,
indispensable to its existence. The river Mudiboo is deep and
rapid, and said to swarm with alligators, though I have heard but
of three being seen at one time, and none of those above eighteen
feet long: this, however, is immaterial, as we do not use the
river fluid, which is thick and dirty, but draw all our water from
natural wells and tanks. Poisonous springs are rather common, but
are easily distinguished by containing no fish or living animal.
Here was a strange thing,
that he should have talked so much of his family, and not once
mentioned that relative of whom he was plainly the most proud.
Nay, more:  he had hitherto boasted of his father; thenceforth he
had little to say of him; and the qualities for which he had
praised him in the past were now attributed where they were due,--
to the uncle.  A confusion might be natural enough among islanders,
who call all the sons of their grandfather by the common name of
father.  But this was not the case with Tembinok'.  Now the ice was
broken the word uncle was perpetually in his mouth; he who had been
so ready to confound was now careful to distinguish; and the father
sank gradually into a self-complacent ordinary man, while the uncle
rose to his true stature as the hero and founder of the race.

The more I heard and the more I considered, the more this mystery
of Tembinok's behaviour puzzled and attracted me.  And the
explanation, when it came, was one to strike the imagination of a
dramatist.  Tembinok' had two brothers.  One, detected in private
trading, was banished, then forgiven, lives to this day in the
island, and is the father of the heir-apparent, Paul.  The other
fell beyond forgiveness.  I have heard it was a love-affair with
one of the king's wives, and the thing is highly possible in that
romantic archipelago.  War was attempted to be levied; but
Tembinok' was too swift for the rebels, and the guilty brother
escaped in a canoe.  He did not go alone.  Tembinatake had a hand
in the rebellion, and the man who had gained a kingdom for a
weakling brother was banished by that brother's son.  The fugitives
came to shore in other islands, but Tembinok' remains to this day
ignorant of their fate.

So far history.  And now a moment for conjecture.  Tembinok'
confused habitually, not only the attributes and merits of his
father and his uncle, but their diverse personal appearance.
Before he had even spoken, or thought to speak, of Tembinatake, he
had told me often of a tall, lean father, skilled in war, and his
own schoolmaster in genealogy and island arts.  How if both were
fathers, one natural, one adoptive?  How if the heir of Tembaitake,
like the heir of Tembinok' himself, were not a son, but an adopted
nephew?  How if the founder of the monarchy, while he worked for
his brother, worked at the same time for the child of his loins?
How if on the death of Tembaitake, the two stronger natures, father
and son, king and kingmaker, clashed, and Tembinok', when he drove
out his uncle, drove out the author of his days?  Here is at least
a tragedy four-square.

The king took us on board in his own gig, dressed for the occasion
in the naval uniform.  He had little to say, he refused
refreshments, shook us briefly by the hand, and went ashore again.
That night the palm-tops of Apemama had dipped behind the sea, and
the schooner sailed solitary under the stars.