"There are pens and ink and paper," she said, her voice tremulous with
suppressed passion.  "I want you to write down a plain, straightforward
declaration that Royal Maillot is innocent, and then follow it with the
reasons why you know him to be innocent--for you have those reasons.
Doubtless it will include an exposure of the guilty; very well, this is
the time for such a disclosure."

The amazing effrontery of the proposal made me gasp.  Suppose I were to
tell her that I believed her father to be the guilty man?  Heavens and
earth!  Here was a pretty pass!

"Miss Fluette," I said at length, very gravely, "such a declaration
from me would have no more weight than the sheet of paper itself.  The
matter is entirely out of my hands.  Further than to procure the
evidence necessary to convict the guilty, I have no influence whatever."

"So!"  Her lip curled and her eyes flashed.  "You would weave a rope
about Royal's neck!"

"I would not," I emphatically disputed.  "If Royal Maillot was
instrumental in Felix Page's death, he was so innocently.  He don't
know now--"

She broke in, leaning with intense eagerness across the chair-back.

"Then _why_ is he in prison?"  There was a note of triumph in her
voice, as if she had me cornered.

"Miss Fluette," I replied earnestly, "will you listen to me for a few
minutes?  Believe me, there is no occasion for this desperate manner--"

"I _am_ desperate."

"Perhaps.  I understand your feelings; you and Mr. Maillot have my
deepest sympa--"

She cut me short with a rap of the pistol upon the chair-back; I looked
to see the thing go off.

"We don't want sympathy," she said through her teeth.  "We want
justice.  And justice we 'll have.  Go over there and write!"

She imperiously indicated the desk.

Was a man ever caught in such an absurd predicament!  I was truly sober
now.  I was resolved not to commit myself to anything that would only
make me ridiculous; but this passionate, high-strung girl had told only
the truth when she warned me that she was in dead earnest.  My dilemma
was most perplexing--and irritating, too.  Could she be made to
understand that if I exposed my hand now, before the issue was ripe,
that the disclosure might work irreparable injury?  Would she
comprehend that such a course would immediately drive the guilty inside
their defences?  Could she be made to see that it was better for her
lover to endure a temporary inconvenience, than to be left in a
position where he could never be freed from reproach?  Perhaps so, but
only by showing her where her father stood.  I scarcely need point how
impossible such a choice was.  And in her present mood!

"Where is Miss Cooper?" I asked at last.

She abruptly clutched the hand that held the keys, so that they clicked
together.

"Never mind," she flared at me, with a stamp of her foot.  "Obey me."

"And if I don't?"

And now she levelled the pistol at me.  She threw back her head and her
lips curved.

"I 'll shoot," she announced, in a tense tone.  "So help me, I 'll
shoot."

[Illustration: "I 'll shoot," she announced in a tense tone, "so help
me, I 'll shoot."]

For a moment we confronted each other, I utterly nonplussed, every line
of the girl's figure breathing relentless determination.

"Miss Fluette," I tried to reason with her, "you are beside yourself.
Pray don't do anything you 'll regret."

But she stopped me.  Her voice was harsh and strained.

"Get up out of that chair.  Do as I say."

Should I continue to humor her?--for further parleying was wholly out
of the question.  And if I wrote anything at all, it would doubtless
have to pass her critical inspection--and also into her
possession--before she would yield an inch.

I had to decide quickly.  I started to shake my head, and _bang!_--the
pistol blazed right into my face.

Heaven knows where the bullet went; I only know that it missed me.
Next instant I was too busy to think about how narrow had been my
escape.  I sprang up agilely enough now, and was only just in time to
catch the drooping figure before it fell.  As I passed a supporting arm
round her, her hair tumbled about her face and over her shoulders.  Her
eyes were closed, her brow was gathered in a frown, her lips were
pinched and livid.

I acted rapidly.  She had not fainted--was not wholly unconscious--for
she was still putting forth a feeble effort to help herself.  I eased
her into the chair, behind which she had been standing and into which
she now sank limp and silent.  Her chin fell forward upon her bosom,
and now and then her shoulders rose in a racking, gasping sob.

She let the still smoking pistol drop into my hand.  Somewhere below I
could hear Genevieve calling wildly and some one pounding away upon a
door.

Next I got the keys from Miss Belle's yielding fingers, and soon had
the door to the room open.  The cries and pounding had ceased, and I
surmised that the troop of maids and other servants chattering on the
lower stairs and in the second story hall had been attracted to their
source.  Then a hope came to me that the shot had passed unnoticed.

Well, it transpired that Genevieve was locked in a room on the second
floor, much to the amazement of the servants, none of whom, I was
thankful to learn, had heard the shot.  Genevieve had, though, or I was
very much mistaken in the cause of her vigorous effort to attract
attention and her present frenzied appeals for some one to break down
the door.

"Oh, please, please, don't wait for the key," she was importuning them.
"Break in the door--only hurry!"

"Everything's all right, Miss Cooper," I called.  A little cry of
relief came from beyond the closed portal.  "I have the key," I added.

The second key which Miss Fluette had held was the one, and I had the
bolt shot in a jiffy.  Genevieve ran straight to me and threw herself
into my arms.

Whatever it was she meant to say in her first overjoyed transport,
remained unsaid; for I unceremoniously clapped a hand over her mouth,
picked her up and carried her bodily back into the room, and slammed
the door upon the gaping servants.

"They don't know," I said.  "Go up-stairs to Belle; she has fainted.
The explosion was accidental, and no one was hurt."  I was still
holding her close in my arms.  "God bless you!" I whispered at her ear.
And then--

Well, even the exigencies of a memoir do not require that I should set
down what occurred then.  Genevieve, her cheeks aflame, broke from my
embrace and ran out of the room.  I heard her light steps upon the
stairs, and then the door to the room which had come near being the
scene of a tragedy, opened and closed.


CHAPTER XX

GENEVIEVE'S MISSION

Almost at once a summons came from the up-stairs room for Miss Belle's
maid.  The rest of the servants were dismissed, and Genevieve signalled
over the balusters for me to wait.

A very old man, cheerfully garrulous, who announced that he was the
butler, took me downstairs.

"The drawing-room--living-room--or if you're of a mind to smoke, sir,
Mr. Fluette's study."  He indicated each of the rooms mentioned with a
little flourish of the hand.

Although I am not a smoker, the word "study" arrested my attention.  I
indicated my preference.  The old man instantly clapped a hand to one
ear, and, leaning toward me, shouted into my face, "Hey?"  So I decided
the matter for myself by striding down the hall to where a door stood
invitingly open.

Now perhaps you may consider it to have been the first duty of a
traditional detective to take advantage of this opportunity, and
perhaps you may be right.  However, I believe I can assert, with some
measure of authority, that a man in my profession may be a man of
principle and honor and still succeed.  I believe I may go even
further: honest, straightforward conduct and upright dealing, by
winning the confidence and respect of those with whom he holds
intercourse, will carry a detective farther along the road to success
in a given undertaking than any other means he may adopt.  Honesty, in
my calling as in all others, is the best policy.

But there are certain subtle impressions, often difficult to define,
which are more potent than foot-prints and thumb-marks.  A man's words,
for example, are often of far less importance than his manner of
uttering them.  A man's personality is the stamp by which he declares
his status among his fellows, and everybody is entitled to scan it that
he may weigh and consider and judge.  Hence a man's surroundings bear a
thousand tokens of his character; for him to try to obliterate them, to
keep them hid, is not to be frank and open, and that in itself invites
suspicion.

My sole object in entering Alfred Fluette's study, therefore, was
prompted by a hope that I might absorb something of its atmosphere.  I
did not know the man.  Here was the place where he spent his leisure
hours, where he unbent and became his normal self.  It were indeed
strange if I failed to gain some concept of his character.

I leaned against a window-casing, and surveyed the room with much
interest.  From the appearance of the books on the shelves--they were
worn from use, but their coating of dust evidenced neglect--I gathered
the idea that the master of the house had once been a bookish man, but
that of late he had grown away from such pursuits.  Here and there on
the wide-topped writing-table were letters and papers in neat piles,
while other letters and papers were heaped up and scattered about in
the most careless disorder.  The ink-well and blotting-pad were
scrupulously tidy, but he never troubled to clean his pens after using
them, or even to place them in the pen receiver.

To me, all this argued a man whose moral forces were undergoing a slow
but certain deterioration; and with a man in Alfred Fluette's position,
and with his responsibilities, the possibilities were manifold and
ominous.  His conscience still had a voice to raise in protest against
meddling with his niece's heritage; but he remained deaf to the voice.
He could stoop to villainy; but he was not so callous to wrongdoing but
that the stooping hurt.  Alfred Fluette needed a jolt--somebody to
bring him up with a short turn--and I resolved, having the means, to be
the one to do it.

As my glance roved hither and thither about the room, it was suddenly
arrested and held.

On the writing-table, among a thousand and one odds and ends, was a
memorandum calendar.  It was in nowise different from scores of other
calendars; the date displayed was to-day's, and in the blank space
below, written in a large, firm handy appeared a notation.

But this memorandum contained a most peculiar word.  Somehow, as my eye
encountered it, a thrill ran through me.  I could not define it; the
thrill was without perceptible meaning, but I felt that the odd word
should tell me something.  The word was so odd, in fact, that I feared
I could not remember it.  So I copied it upon the back of an envelope,
thus:

  TSHEN-BYO-YEN.

Immediately under it had been written: "10 o'clock."

Further speculation on the matter was interrupted by Genevieve coming
down-stairs.  I stepped into the hall when I heard her, and she at once
joined me.  We went into the living-room.

Her beautiful eyes were round with wonder, her sweet face filled with
concern; but before I entered into any explanations, I turned to her
and held out my arms.

"First," I whispered, "I want to know whether it is real."

She caught her breath sharply; the color came quickly to her cheeks, a
tender light to the blue eyes.  She put her hands confidently into mine.

"What has happened to you?" she asked, standing away from me and
staring with perplexed solicitude at the testimony of Stodger's
barbarous surgery.  I had forgotten all about the red-hot poker.

"A mere scratch--a nothing," I made light of it.  "I 'll tell you all
about it when the time comes.  There are too many other things to be
disposed of first."

"But--you have been wounded," she persisted, now thoroughly alarmed.
And so I had to tell her about the night's adventure, which I did, for
the most part shamefacedly enough.

It was a delight to watch the different expressions flit across her
lovely countenance, to see them mingle and blend and give way to
others--wonder, amazement, awe, horror, terror--I can't begin to name
them all.  A score of times she interrupted me, but it was always a
welcome interruption.

"Stodger 's a trump," I concluded.  "Think of him jumping up from a
sound sleep and throwing himself into the thick of the fray, without
one second's hesitation."

"Y-e-s," she agreed, but there was no enthusiasm in her tone.  Then she
turned warmly upon me.

"I 'm thinking, though, that you 've been gifted with mighty little
sense, Knowles Swift, to have acted so recklessly.  The very idea of a
sane man creeping through that dark hall and up those dark stairs, and
plunging into he knew not what!"  She eyed me severely.

"But I did know," I protested meekly.  "It was the _étagère_"

There was a solemn rebuke in the slow shaking of her head.  "A man
swears so," she sighed, "when he does anything awkward, like that."

I remained discreetly silent.

However, she was too much exercised over my "wound"--as she persisted
in calling the scratch on my cheek--and the loss of the ruby to
encourage any levity.  Honestly, at that moment I cared not a whit for
the ruby.  Besides, there were consolations which I need not record.
It _was_ real--very, very real; and I was the happiest man in the world.

Genevieve was also curious to learn--and very naturally so--what had
transpired between Belle and me.

"How is she now?" I parried.  I had concluded that when Miss Belle was
again her normal self, she would rather have our little episode
forgotten.

"Calm as a graven image," was the reply.  Grief and anxiety trembled in
Genevieve's voice.  "But it is a stony, deathlike sort of calm that
gives me the creeps.  The poor girl is distracted.  She wants to be
alone; she sent me to you."

"_She_ sent you," said I, with quick interest.  This struck me as being
rather curious.

"Oh, I know Belle," said Genevieve.  "She probably said some very
bitter things to you; now she 's sorry."

I trusted that the impulsive young lady was experiencing some pangs of
remorse; but before I confided anything, I learned how Genevieve came
to be locked in Belle's room.

Early in the morning Belle had grown quite tranquil, but insisted upon
talking.  To humor and soothe her, Genevieve, during their talk,
asserted that I could be depended upon to save Royal.  She also
mentioned that I was expected to call.

After breakfast Genevieve had fallen asleep, through sheer weariness.
Belle must have risen cautiously, determined to treat with me herself.
Her impulsive decision was manifestly arrived at after I rang the bell,
because she had had no time to dress.

Soon after, Genevieve had awakened with a start, to find herself locked
in and the bell-button dug out of its socket.  She could not summon the
servants without creating an uproar.  She soon surmised something of
what Belle had in mind, but never, until she heard the muffled report
of the pistol, had she dreamed that the frenzied girl contemplated
anything so desperate and rash.

Well, I softened the matter as much as I could for Miss Belle, making
it very clear that I realized from the start that she was not
responsible, and that I had been most of the time engaged in calming
her and trying to persuade her to return to her room.  I even stretched
a point about the shooting; I feared that Genevieve would never forgive
her for that.  I said it had occurred--without intent--while I was
struggling with her; which, after all, was perhaps not far from the
truth.

"Why should Miss Belle have any reason for despising Alexander Burke?"
I asked during our conference, for the girl's patent abhorrence of the
fellow stuck in my mind.

Genevieve's expression became all at once very grave.  For a moment she
sat silent, toying with a plait of her skirt; then she looked up at me,
saying soberly:

"It is one of the things that I shouldn't talk about.  Still--I don't
know," she faltered.  "It is Burke alone who has roused her
resentment."  Then she decided.

"I will tell you this much: She overheard a conversation between him
and her father.  It filled her with loathing for the fellow--that
and--and something else."

"I shall not try to force your confidence, my dear girl," I said.
"Tell me only what you think you ought."

"Belle trusts me implicitly," she said simply.

"And I want her to continue to.  The something else that makes her
loathe him--are you free to speak of that?"

"It's nothing; it's ridiculous."  She laughed nervously.  "He has tried
to make love to her.  _Ugh!_"  She shuddered at the idea.

"The dickens he has!"

Such a thought had never entered my head; it was impossible to imagine
that slippery rascal in the role of an ardent lover.  His blood was as
cold as a fish's.  But now I understood the fellow's animus toward
Maillot; his hatred was inspired by jealousy.  Belle had never spoken
of the matter to Maillot--mortification was potent to hold this
confidence in check--but he had instinctively distrusted and disliked
Burke in return.

I could not bring myself to confide in my lovely coadjutor my
convictions respecting her uncle.  I learned that he had left the house
that morning at an hour unusually early for him, and I thought at once
of the queer memorandum on his calendar.  He was still very much
worried, declared Genevieve, and when at home kept more and more to
himself as time went by.  Mrs. Fluette was asleep after the night's
ordeal with her daughter.

"If Royal were free to come after her," said Genevieve, not without
some bitterness, "he could carry Belle away this very minute; there
would be nobody to say him nay.  Poor boy!"

"It is more than likely that he shall soon," I offered in dubious
comfort.  And then we got down to the purpose of my call.

"Do you know where your aunt and uncle were married?" I asked.

"Yes.  It was in a little town in Ohio--"

"Merton," said I.

"That's it!  But how did you know?"

I smiled at her surprise.  "It's Felix Page's birth-place; the rest was
inference."

She waited with ill-concealed curiosity for what was to follow.  I
found it necessary to hold her hands--both of them--while I told her.

"Would you mind making a journey there?--at once--to-day?"

Her eyes opened wide; even her sweet lips parted; but she waited.

And now I found it really essential to put my arm around her and draw
her to me--she was too agitated to hear otherwise what I had to say.  I
hastened to explain how impossible it was for me to leave the city just
at the time, what with my anxiety to recover the ruby and the necessity
of keeping in close touch with Burke.

"I require only one more piece to complete the answer to our riddle," I
affirmed,--I really thought so at the time,--"and you can get it for
me.  Don't bother your aunt; she will keep back all essentials, anyway.
Your uncle and aunt and Felix Page all came from the same town, and
there you can find plenty of old gossips who can--they 'll be only too
willing to--give you all the information you want.  They 'll give you
more; but we can winnow the wheat from the chaff after you get back.
Do you feel equal to such an undertaking?"

The proposal appeared to overcome her.  She considered for a time, then
turned to me, her eyes dancing, her cheeks flushed.

"Yes," she said, with bated breath.  "I can't do Belle any good; she
only wants to be alone.  What do you want me to do?"

"Dig up every scrap of family history that you can--the Pages', the
Fluettes', and the Coopers'; especially as they affect one another.
Being a Cooper yourself, the task should be easy for you; you are
compiling a family-tree, you know."

Genevieve gave me a sly look, and retorted:

"'When first we practise to deceive'--"

"Oh, no," I assured her.  "If you do your work thoroughly, you
certainly will have a complete family-tree.  So there 's no deception
about it."

Well, it was finally settled that she would go, and that she would
report the result of her journey to me as soon as possible.

She then elicited a confession of my inability to solve the
cipher--which confession was yielded up to the accompaniment of an
exceedingly sour smile.

"That old house is a hoodoo," I said bitterly.  "I have failed in
everything I ever undertook inside its walls.  The rest of the chase
will be pursued on the outside."

"And you did n't even find the little daisy what-you-may-call-'ems--the
originals, I mean?"  She meant the crazy designs on the cipher.

"I did not."

Genevieve laughed.

"Wait till I get back.  I mean to have a try at our cryptograph.  If
the daisies are in the old Page place, I 'll find them."

"They 're there, all right.   I 'm sure you 're welcome to try--if you
'll let me assist in the search."

She wrinkled her nose and sniffed.  "Hmf!  A lot of assistance I can
look for from _you_."  Her tone was emphatically disparaging.  "No, I
'll find them by myself.  But I 'd be afraid to stay--for long--alone
in that empty house."

I cared not in what capacity I served, just so I might be with her.

After making me promise that I would have the scratch on my face
attended to at once, she sent me away.

I had not proceeded far toward town when I discovered that somebody was
dogging my steps.


CHAPTER XXI

SHADOWS

It required some little time for me to determine that my shadow was one
of the "Japanese"; for it was a most intangible and elusive shadow.
Whatever else I might think of these worthies, I could not deny that
their ability to hang on a man's trail, and at the same time keep
themselves well-nigh invisible, amounted positively to genius.  With
all my doubling back and lurking in doorways around corners, the fellow
never came up to where I could get a good view of him.

Of course it occurred to me that here was a chance to attempt a
capture.  But was it?  The fellow was so slippery and artful that I
risked a greater chance of losing him altogether.  And then, to capture
one of the quintet--or whatever their number might be--would more
likely than not merely serve as a warning for the ring-leader of the
crowd.  Doubtless I could drag nothing at all from the fellow, even
though I did succeed in laying hands upon him.  If he had been set to
watch me he would continue to do so unless I scared him away.  I
resolved to let him alone for the time being; but the first thing I did
after reaching Dr. De Breen's offices was to ring up headquarters and
request the Captain to send a man to get on my shadow's trail.

The doctor gave me a bad half-hour.  The instant he was through I
hurried to a window to learn how events were progressing in the street.
Before I had time to ascertain whether my shadow was still on duty, or
whether the Central Office man had showed up, my whole attention was
absorbed by the appearance of two familiar figures on the opposite
side.  They were Mr. Fluette and Alexander Burke, walking along
together in the most intimate manner imaginable.

I glanced at my watch; it still lacked a minute or two of ten, the hour
Mr. Fluette had jotted on his calendar along with the extraordinary
memorandum.  Inasmuch as he and his strangely chosen companion were
moving rapidly, it was a reasonable assumption that he was even then on
his way to keep his engagement.

For a moment I stood irresolute.  I was very anxious to follow the
twain to the rendezvous, while at the same time I did not want to lose
my shadow.  I glanced eagerly up and down the street, studying the
hurrying crowd on the walk, but could not see him anywhere.  Then I
hurried out to the elevator, and within the next minute was dropped to
the ground floor.

I was obliged to walk fast to get within range of Fluette and Burke
again--not an easy thing to do among the crowd--but still I could see
nothing of my headquarters man, nor of the Jap.  And right then I
perceived the last mentioned.  He had manifestly only at that instant
caught up with the speculator and his companion--though why I had
failed to see him before I can't imagine--and he was evidently
addressing one or the other, or both of them.

It seemed to me that the fellow was trying to make his presence as
inconspicuous as possible.  He strode stolidly along, close behind
them, looking into the shop windows and apparently not noticing the two
men at all.  Yet I knew that he was talking to them.  I could tell by
the surprised way with which both Fluette and Burke swung round and
stared at him.

I quickened my steps.  Yes, the Oriental was talking, and talking
volubly.  And, if I might judge by the consternation and anger
reflected in the faces of his two auditors, his message was anything
but welcome.  That is to say, Alfred Fluette's strong features showed
these emotions, while, as always, it was difficult to read what was
going on behind Burke's impassive mask.  Still it was pretty plain that
the secretary was utterly at his wits'-end.

At last the three stopped at a corner, where they moved up close to the
building to avoid the rush of pedestrians.  I dared not draw near
enough to hope to hear any of their conversation; I could do no more
than watch from a distance, trusting to their absorption to keep them
oblivious of my proximity.

Both were now excitedly questioning the Jap, who seemed to be wholly
unmoved by their agitation.  Presently Fluette turned angrily upon
Burke.  From his manner it was not difficult to imagine that he was
soundly berating the secretary, who, whenever he could make himself
heard, was just as plainly attempting to present some extenuating
argument.

The entire episode was perplexing enough, but what immediately ensued
caught me unawares.  Without the least warning the trio separated, each
hurrying away in a different direction.  At this critical juncture a
voice said, right at my ear:

"Shall I stick to Burke?--or follow one of the others?"

I jerked my head round to confront Fanshawe, the man detailed to keep
Burke under surveillance.  I had not observed him before--not
surprising, since he had just caught up with me--but I welcomed his
presence now.

"Stay with your own man," I shot at him, and turned to look for the
Jap.  He was gone.

To make the account of this discomfiting episode as brief as possible,
I shall say, merely, that out of the three men whom we were watching,
two of them walked away from under our very noses without our having
the slightest idea in which direction they went.  How did they do it?
The momentary diversion occasioned by Fanshawe's arrival, the brief
distraction of our attention, had been sufficient.  He lost track of
Burke, and I never had so much as another glimpse of the Jap.

We had the assistance of another headquarters man, too.  The one for
which I had telephoned showed up immediately after Fanshawe addressed
me.  The last-named skurried away to find Burke, while Pennington, my
other colleague, and I devoted our efforts to catching the Jap.

"One of those Japs has been shadowing me all morning, Pennington," I
advised him.  "He 's as shifty and evasive as a fox.  Fall half a block
behind me, and if he shows up again give me a signal and close in.  I
want him."

But he did n't show up.

It was humiliating to be outwitted by the Oriental--it was the second
time for me, too; it would be calamitous to lose Burke.  The day
dragged along, and when each succeeding minute brought no news of him
my anxiety increased by leaps and bounds.  Before nightfall, every
available man in the department was scouring the city for the
ex-secretary.

Subsequent events, however, showed that we might have spared ourselves
all the trouble and worry; for one more pertinacious even than Fanshawe
clung to Alexander Burke's heels all that day and night.

I found time during my purposeless running to and fro to learn that
Alfred Fluette had arrived at his brokers' offices in Quincy Street
shortly after ten, where he remained until the Board of Trade closed,
and that Genevieve had left on an afternoon train for a brief visit
with relatives in Merton, Ohio.  Fluette had failed in his engagement;
Genevieve had kept hers.

Some time after dark I boarded a Sheridan Park car, and rode out to the
Page place; I don't now know why, unless it was because of the
disastrous turn affairs had taken, and that I hoped, in this dismal,
dispiriting environment, to find a balm for my depressed feelings.

It was only that morning, in the midst of a blinding snow-storm,
thoroughly disheartened by the loss of the ruby, that Stodger and I had
left the old house; but as I approached it that night, it bore every
appearance of having been abandoned for years instead of only a few
hours.  No smoke curled from the chimneys; no light gleamed at any of
the windows.  In its white setting of snow, it loomed silent and
spectral.

In the afternoon I had turned the keys over to Mr. Page's lawyer, and
how I hoped to effect an entrance--if I had any such intention at
all--I have long since forgotten.  It may have been because it was here
that I first met Genevieve, that I came mooning through the cold and
snow.  She was gone upon a journey; I knew that I could not see her for
days; and perhaps I thought to find some companionship in the more
intimate associations clustered about the dreary spot.  At any rate,
here I was.  And I saw nothing else for me to do than to turn round and
go back to town again.

However, I started to enter the gate.  Next instant I stopped short.
The snow bore other tracks besides Stodger's and mine--tracks pointing
toward the house instead of away from it.  They were fresh, made since
the snow ceased.

I advanced a little farther into the yard, where the tracks had not
been obliterated by pedestrians on the sidewalk, and soon comprehended
that they had been made by two men.  Were they in the house now?  And
if so, who were they?  What errand could be so pressing that it would
bring anybody here on such a night?

My indifference and discouragement fell away from me in a flash.
Cautiously I followed the trail up to the front steps, where at first I
fancied it disappeared upon the porch.  Still I could not see a glint
of light, nor did the most attentive harkening favor me with the
slightest sound.

It occurred to me while I stood pondering on the porch that, after all,
Mr. White--Felix Page's lawyer--might have been responsible for the
tracks in the snow.  It was possible that he had sent somebody to look
after the place; a caretaker, perhaps, who would stay here until a
disposition could be made of the property.

But this idea no sooner occurred than it was dismissed.  All at once I
noticed that one pair of foot-prints, instead of mounting the porch
steps, had turned to one side.  They led off to the east, and
disappeared round the wing in that direction.  The two persons had not
come in company; the first, I presently concluded, had carried a key,
and the second had been following him.  There were no retreating
impresses to indicate that either had departed.

I tiptoed to the front door and turned the knob.  The door did not
yield.  Then for the first time I recalled the window which our
housebreakers had forced the night before; unless the latch had been
repaired during the day, it would be an easy matter to gain access to
the dining-room, which was located in the western wing.

Now it was the eastern wing or gable which sheltered the library, the
conservatory, and Mr. Page's bedroom, and it was thither the second
man's foot-prints led.  I followed them round the corner of the house.

From their appearance it was easy to trace all the mysterious
intruder's movements.  Evidently after the door had closed behind the
first arrival, Number Two had stood for some time at the east end of
the porch.  Then he had moved toward the same end of the house, pausing
at every window and trying the sash to ascertain whether it was
fastened.  Turning at the corner, he had proceeded along the side of
the house, still testing the windows and bestowing particular attention
upon the glass conservatory.  This was true of every window as far as
the bedroom, at least; beyond that I did not explore.  Just as I drew
opposite the first of the bedroom windows I came to an abrupt halt.

There was a light in the room.

Nor was this all.  Some person was in the room, too, and by the
silhouette on the blind I could see that he was industriously applying
himself to some task, the nature of which I could not determine.  The
longer I watched the shadow on the blind, the more puzzled I grew.  I
could imagine no occupation that would account for such singular
actions.

The shadow was a man's; I could distinguish that much.  He appeared to
be bending over something, while his hands flew hither and thither, as
if they were performing a quick-step upon a piano.  But no sound of
music came from the lighted room.

It would be impossible to say how long I stood there, the snow nearly
to my knees, fascinated by the remarkable antics of that shadow.  Then
of a sudden the hands ceased flying.  The man straightened and became
motionless, as if startled by some unexpected sound.

Well, perhaps within the next second he knew what had alarmed him; I 'm
sure that I did not.  The shadow flashed away from the blind.  Then my
scalp tingled and the blood seemed to freeze in my veins.

From within the room there came a most unearthly cry.  It was weird,
terrifying, utterly unlike anything I had ever heard--save once.  For
it was a repetition of the wild, inhuman note that had thrilled me when
I first dashed open the bath room door the previous night.

The terrible cry was not immediately repeated, but for a while the
utmost confusion prevailed within.  I could hear furniture knocked and
slammed about, a tumult of stamping, scraping feet, and once--for the
briefest moment--another shadow was projected upon the blind.

It was a hideous, squat, dwarfish shadow.  Two long gorilla-like arms
were upraised in an abandonment of fury.  Then came that awful,
blood-curdling scream again, and the shadow's owner seemed to plunge
headlong forward.

Another crash followed.  The light was suddenly blotted out.  The
silence was once more absolute.


CHAPTER XXII

ASHES OF OLD ROMANCE

It was Friday afternoon when Genevieve started on her mission; the
following Wednesday morning I received a telegram from her announcing
that she would be home that same afternoon.  The interim was so
uneventful that my note-book mentions only two incidents as being
worthy of preservation.

Late Friday night the welcome news came to headquarters that Alexander
Burke had been found.  He appeared at his lodgings shortly before
midnight, looking wretchedly ill and exhausted.  Saturday morning a
physician was called in, and the whilom secretary was not able to
appear upon the streets again until Tuesday.  Then it was observed that
a change had come over the man.  His impassivity had been penetrated at
last; it could no longer hide a nervousness and apprehension which kept
his head perpetually pivoting in backward glances across his shoulder.

I smiled with satisfaction when Fanshawe told me this.

"Stay with him," I said; "it makes no difference whether or not he
knows that you are always close behind him.  In fact, I want him to
know it; I want to break that man, and I will."

The other incident referred to was a meeting I succeeded in securing
between Maillot and Miss Belle--memorable for me as being the first
occasion upon which I was favored with a glimpse of Mrs. Fluette.

Sunday afternoon mother and daughter drove up to headquarters in the
family carriage.  Although the girl had been tactful enough to eschew a
heavy veil and sombre apparel, it was plain to be seen that the event
was almost too great an ordeal for even her proud and dauntless spirit.

Belle descended from the carriage hesitantly, and then stood looking
about with an air of such helpless terror that I approached--I had
previously resolved to keep myself effaced during the visit--and
conducted her into the Captain's private office, where Maillot was
waiting.  She gave me an embarrassed, beseeching glance, and murmured a
barely audible "Thank you."  No more was said.  She faltered an instant
on the threshold, then, sobbing, rushed in.  I made haste to close the
door and rejoin Mrs. Fluette.

This lady was slight and frail, with hair as white as snow, and about
her there hung an intangible something which gave me the impression
that she was a woman who had suffered much.  Although I strove to speak
cheerfully of the prospects of Maillot's early release, her manner was
quite discouraging to all my overtures.  When she spoke at all it was
only in the faintest of monosyllables--usually with her eyes avoiding
mine.  She looked at me, when at all, shyly, started at every unusual
sound, and trembled during the whole time she sat in the Captain's big
easy-chair.

At the end of the allotted half-hour--I was n't very particular over
the number of minutes--Mrs. Fluette's increasing nervousness and
impatience moved me to rap upon the private-room door.  Belle emerged,
her cheeks white and her eyes swollen with weeping.  The poor girl
pressed my hand when I helped her into the carriage--clung to it
despairingly, to be exact--and the tears again gushed to her eyes.

"This is killing me!" she moaned.  "Oh, it is! it is!  I can't stand it
much longer."

"Courage, Miss Fluette," I undertoned assuasively.  "Everything is
working for the best, believe me."

Ah, but was it?  I could not say the words with much assurance.  They
drove away, two sad, harassed women.

Touching again upon Wednesday afternoon, I was pretty sure that the
Fluette carriage would meet Genevieve at the station--very likely with
Belle, or possibly Mrs. Fluette.  In anticipation of this contingency I
had sent a note to the house with the request that she find an excuse
to meet me at the earliest possible moment, for I was all impatience to
hear her report.

But Genevieve had anticipated also.  She arrived armed with a
commission from the Ohio cousin, the performance of which would brook
no delay.  So I had a minute alone with her downtown.  She had been
thoughtful enough to record a detailed statement of her investigations;
it lies before me now as I write; and I shall condense from it those
portions that are essential to advancing this chronicle.


In the early '50's Clara Cooper was the belle of the village of Merton.
Wooers were many, but favors were few and grudgingly bestowed; and in
time all the suitors withdrew, leaving the field clear to Alfred
Fluette and Felix Page.

The Coopers and the Fluettes represented the wealth and aristocracy of
the community, while Felix Page was a poor, struggling young man whose
only advantages and prospects for the future lay in his indomitable
pluck and a resolution that was ready to ride roughshod over all
opposition.

And Clara favored the poor young man.  He went forth from Merton
resolved to wrest a fortune from the world and lay it at his
sweetheart's feet.  She promised to wait for him until he returned with
the fulfilment of his ambitious aims.

Alas, though, for the fiery Felix: she was not of a very resolute
character, being easily influenced by her sterner parents, whose
patrician eyes looked askance upon the presumptuous lover's claims.
Besides, Felix was absent--supposedly engaged in his laudable
enterprise of wresting a fortune from the world--while Alfred,
handsome, polished of manner, patient and persistently attentive, was
ever at her elbow.

Then, too, there was Miss Clara's family, to the last one of them
espousing Alfred's cause.  In the end the girl allowed herself to drift
with the current.  Felix would have accomplished more to his purpose
had he remained at home and married Clara, and then gone after the
fortune.  At any rate, after one or two letters from Felix, which
glowed with hope and boundless zeal, she ceased to hear from him.
Doubtless he had come to realize that the wresting operation demanded
all his powers; but his silence was easily made to appear of more
significance than it deserved.  It was construed--for Miss Clara, not
by her--as indisputable evidence of forgetfulness.  Within the year she
married Alfred Fluette.

Six years passed.  Alfred Fluette had migrated with his bride to the
city.  Then Felix Page returned triumphant to Merton.  His triumph,
however, was short-lived.  He was well on the road, even then, to his
subsequent commercial success; a good deal of the wresting had been
accomplished; but the girl he had steadfastly loved, whom he had never
for one instant put out of his thoughts, had married his rival.

To get together most of her report Genevieve had been obliged to labor
patiently and painstakingly; when it came to the events associated with
Felix Page's return to his birth-place, her task was suddenly
transformed from one of gleaning to another equally arduous, of
selecting from the plethora of material at her disposal.

One gathers the idea, after reading it all, that his rage was that of a
cave-man who returns from the day's hunt to find that his home in the
hillside cliff has been despoiled.  One thing stands out clear and
unmistakable; from that hour his life was embittered, his character
warped with the shattering of his ideals.  He registered a solemn vow
of vengeance against Alfred Fluette, then disappeared.

So much for this portion of the report.  Nothing in the subsequent
relations of the two men was now obscure.

And here, too, we are given a new light upon Alexander Burke, oiling
door-hinges that he might the better spy upon his employer, patiently
working out the combination of the hidden safe and running to Alfred
Fluette with the old love-letters and mementos--for a price, of
course,--playing the vindictiveness of the one against the hatred and
fear of the other, and scrupling not to gain profit for himself
whenever and wherever he might.

But it is proverbial that a woman invariably reserves the most
interesting and important item for the postscript.  And it was so with
Genevieve's report.  I quote the concluding paragraphs _in toto_.


On the very first day of my arrival, and from the very first person to
whom I confided the nature of my errand, I received the surprising
intelligence that I was not the first to pursue similar inquiries in
Merton.  Said my informant: "Why, there was a man here two or three
weeks ago, trying to find out all he could about the Pages and the
Coopers and the Fluettes.  Has some one of them died and left a lot of
money?"

I did not think so much of it the first time, but when my second victim
told me the same thing, I sat up and began to take notice.  "Juanita,
Job lived a great while ago."

"Yes, Miss Daisy."
"How much did he know about the sun? does the Bible tell?"
"It tells a little what he didn't know, Miss Daisy."
"Oh, Juanita, after I get through my tea, and when you have had
yours, won't you read me in the Bible all about Job and the sun?"

Mrs. Benoit liked nothing better; and whatever other amusements failed,
or whatever other parties anywhere in the land found their employments
unsatisfactory, there was one house where intent interest and unflagging
pleasure went through the whole evening; it was where Daisy and Mrs.

Benoit read "about Job and the sun." Truth to tell, as that portion
of Scripture is but small, they extended their reading somewhat.

Daisy's first visitor the next day was her father. He came with fresh
flowers and fresh fruit, and with "Sandford and Merton," too, in
which he read to her; so the morning went well.

"Papa," said Daisy, when he was about leaving her, "do you not
think Dr.

Sandford is a very interesting man?"

"It is the general opinion of ladies, I believe, Daisy; but I advise
you not to lose your heart to him.

I am afraid he is not to be depended on."

"Oh, papa," said Daisy, a little shocked, "I do not mean that he is a man
one would get _fond_ of."
"Pray who do you think is, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, maintaining his
gravity admirably.

"Papa, don't you think Captain Drummond is — and —"
"And who, Daisy?"

"I was thinking — Mr. Dinwiddie, papa." Daisy did not quite know how
well this last name would be relished, and she coloured a little
apprehensively.

"You are impartial in your professional tastes, I am glad to see,"
said Mr. Randolph.

Then, observing how innocent of understanding him was the grave
little face of Daisy, he bent down to kiss her.

"And you are unfortunate in your favourites. — Both at a distance! How
is Gary McFarlane?"
"Papa, I think he has good nature; but I think he is rather frivolous."

Mr.

Randolph looked soberly at the little face before him, and went
away, thinking his own thoughts.

But he had the cruelty to repeat to Dr. Sandford so much of this
conversation as concerned that gentleman; in doing so he unwittingly
laid the foundation of more attention to Daisy on the doctor's
part, than he probably would ever otherwise have given her.

To say truth — the idea propounded by Daisy was so very novel to the
doctor that it both amused and piqued him.

Mr.

Randolph had hardly gone out, when Hephzibah came in. And then followed
a lesson the like of which Daisy had not given yet. Hephzibah's
attention was on everything but the business in hand. Also, she had a
little less awe of Daisy lying on Mrs.

Benoit's couch in a loose gown, than when she met her in the Belvedere
at Melbourne, dressed in an elegant cambric frock, with a resplendent
sash.

"C, a, spells ca, Hephzibah. Now what is that?"
"Over your finger?"

"Yes."
"That's — C."
"C, a. And what does it spell?"
"Did the stone fall right onto your foot?"
"Yes — partly on."

"And was it broke right off?"
"No. Oh, no. Only the bone of my ankle was broken."
"It smarted some, I guess; didn't it?"

"No. Now Hephzibah, what do those two letters spell?"
"C, a, ca. That don't mean nothin'."
" Now the next. D, a —"

"What's D, a?"

"D, a, da."
"What's that?"
"Nothing; only it spells that."
"How soon'll you be up again?"
"I do not know. In a few weeks."
"Before the nuts is ripe?"

"Oh, yes, I hope so."
"Well, I'll show you where there's the biggest hickory nuts you ever
see! They're right back of Mr. Lamb's barn — only three fields to
cross — and there's three hickory trees; and the biggest one has
the biggest nuts, mother says, she ever see.

Will you go and get some?"
"But, Hephzibah, those are Mr. Lamb's nuts, aren't they?"
"I don't care."
"But," said Daisy, looking very grave, "don't you know, Hephzibah,
it is wrong to meddle with anything that belongs to other people?"

"He hain't no right to 'em, I don't believe."

"I thought you said they were in Mr. Lamb's field?"
"So they be."
"Then they are his nuts. You would not like anybody to take them,
if they belonged to you."
"It don't make no odds," said Hephzibah, sturdily, but looking down
at the same time. "He'll get it out of us some other way."
"Get it out of you?" said Daisy.

"Yes." 
"What do you mean?"
"He gets it out of everybody," said Hephzibah. "Tain't no odds."

"But, Hephzibah, if those trees were yours, would you like to have
Mr. Lamb come and take the nuts away?"
"No. I'd get somebody to shoot him."Just this: no one knows you are here; there is a certain small cell
below stairs, dark as Egypt, provided expressly for recalcitrant
individuals.  You could lie there for a year, and nobody be a whit the
wiser.  I, for one, wouldn't care how long you stayed."

"Swift," the fellow stammered, "this--this is outrageous!"

"Perhaps," agreed I, carelessly, surveying him with a narrowed look.
"I 'm not here to excuse police methods; they 're not very gentle, I
'll admit; but when we deal with crooks we 're obliged to hand them the
only treatment they 're amenable to.

"Burke, you can't excite one bit of pity or sympathy in me for you, for
I know you to be a cold-blooded, treacherous scoundrel, and whatever
you have coming to you is only what you deserve.  I 'm fixed to put you
through as a principal in the murder of Page--sit down!" I thundered at
him, for he had started to rise from his seat.  He dropped back limply.
"You wait till I 'm through.  Your chance is coming in just about a
minute.  I promise not to interrupt--as long as you tell a
straightforward story.

"As I said," I went on, "I 'm prepared to put you through as one of the
principals; the bare fact of your arrest should be enough to convince
you of my readiness.

"However, while I have n't any desire to spare you, we are in the habit
of trading leniency to a rascal who is willing to turn State's
evidence.  It's a plain business proposition."

I imagined that he perked up a bit at this.

"Ah, then you are not so sure," he seemed to muse; "you would have me
convict myself for your precious benefit."

"Maybe you can judge better before I have finished," returned I,
unmoved.  "You need not tell me anything about yourself, but I do need
a few facts to complete my case against the others who were involved in
this crime.  It's up to you."

I retreated a step, folded my arms, and stood watching him--and
waiting.  I knew that he could n't tell the truth without filling in
the gaps in his own case.  I never am deterred by any compunction over
the methods I am sometimes obliged to use to make an individual, whom I
know deserves no consideration, speak.  With a knave like Burke I would
as lief resort to thumb-screws, the boot, the rack, or even to choking
the words from him, as to trust to persuasion alone.  To tell the
truth, my preference lies with the means first enumerated: they are
much more prompt and direct.  The worst indictment that one may bring
against the old-time torture is that it was not applied with judgment
and discrimination, nor always confined to legitimate ends.  I fear
that I shock you.  But I am not by any means a cruel, blood-thirsty
person.  I merely speak from long years of experience.  Whenever I hear
a misguided soul deploring the so-called "third degree"--why, I have
something in pickle for _him_.

This, however, is not the place to open the pickle-jar.

Perhaps, though, Burke's suffering was as poignant as if his ordeal
were physical.  How restlessly the man's slender, bloodless fingers
curled and uncurled!  Still, his self-control was wonderful; his white
face remained indecipherable, the pale eyes stared at me unblinkingly
and without mirroring a single emotion that I could discern.  Then the
change came so quickly that it almost caught me off my guard.

One hand shot to his bosom.  When it re-appeared something flashed
dully in the dim light.  At the same time, with a cat-like spring, he
was out of his chair and upon me.

I concentrated all my attention upon the hand that held the murderous
knife.  I caught it as it lunged at me; then, with a quick twist, I
bent it backward and behind him, until he groaned with pain.  The
long-bladed knife clattered to the floor, and I shoved him roughly away
from me.  Then I picked up the weapon.

The fellow acted for all the world like a whipped and cowed panther.
He brought up violently against the wall, where, in a stooping posture,
he commenced running to and fro the width of the room, spitting and
snarling venomously.  The pale eyes were no longer blank.  The pupils
had widened, and the look of them was deadly.

I smiled with quiet satisfaction, for I knew that Burke was--as we
specify it in police parlance--"coming through."

After a while he quieted, and at last stood panting in the corner
farthest away from me.  I pointed to the chair.

"Sit down," I said, precisely as if he had n't tried his best to murder
me but a minute before.

He moved slowly--fearfully--toward the chair, and sank into it.  His
head was dropped forward, his shoulders were bowed, and the fingers
were no longer restless.  All the man's defences were at last down.

"Now, then, Burke," I went on calmly, "I suppose we are ready to get
down to business?"

He muttered inaudibly, without raising his head.

"What's that?"--sharply,

"You devil!" he whispered.

"Yes, yes, I know.  I 've heard that from you before.  I don't care to
hear it again."  I advanced and stood threateningly over him.

"Look at me," I sternly commanded.

Slowly he raised his head until his eyes met mine.  The pallid mask was
pinched, and it wore a look of torment.

"Once for all, Burke, are you going to speak?"  I suppose the quietness
with which I uttered it was ominous to the wretch.  "Or will I be
obliged to drag you to that cell of which I spoke?"

With a quick gesture, he outspread his arms.

"Enough, Swift, enough!" he cried, in a hoarse, distressed voice.  "I
know when I 'm beaten; I 'll give up.  What do you want?"

"Good," without alteration of tone or manner.  "Let's go to a
pleasanter place."  And we went into the Captain's private room, where
a stenographer sat concealed by a screen.

Burke dropped into a chair.  I thrust my hands into my coat pockets,
and as I slowly paced to and fro, addressed him.

"I 'll tell my story.  When I 'm wrong you may correct me.  See that
you do it, too, because you won't know when I 'm testing you or when I
am really ignorant of the facts.  You see how much I trust you, Mr.
Burke.

"To begin at the beginning, your first treacherous act toward your
employer was when you determined to steal the Paternoster ruby, and
started in to hunt for it.  You had your work all cut out for you, too,
Burke; Felix Page was no fool; he would n't trust the safekeeping of so
valuable an object even to his confidential clerk, nor could that clerk
search for it with impunity.

"You 've been gifted with the same brand of patience, though, Burke,
that keeps a cat glued to a rat-hole for hours upon end; you bided your
time.  And you never let an opportunity slip by you, either.

"Felix Page was in the habit of talking to himself--a trait not
uncommon to people who live much to themselves--so you oiled the
door-hinges in order that you might steal upon him undetected, from any
part of the house, and listen to his self-communings.  No wonder, when
you talked with me, that you were fearful of the curtained alcove!

"But I 'll be brief.  By and by you learned of the hidden safe;
then--still with infinite patience--you set about trying to discover
its combination.  You succeeded."

I halted abruptly in front of him.

"Burke, the opening of that safe door was a revelation; it offered new
possibilities which must have overwhelmed you.  What did you think when
your eyes first fell upon those old love mementos from Clara Cooper to
Felix Page?  Don't look astonished so soon; wait till I 'm done.  I 'll
have no difficulty convincing you that my case against you is pretty
complete.

"But your find was extremely aggravating, for you were afraid to make
use of it.  Without doubt, Alfred Fluette would give a pretty penny to
get them from Felix Page.  But you lacked sand to brave Page's wrath.

"Then what did you do?"  I paused to eye him a moment.  "Why, you went
down to Merton and dug up all the old family skeletons.  Now you were
surer of your ground; you were ready to levy tribute--blackmail--not
from Page, though, because he would have promptly kicked you out--but
again your nerve failed you.  That's where you have fallen down, Burke,
all the way through.  You carried a letter or two to Fluette to prove
your claims; then, before their loss was discovered, you brought them
back again, and replaced them in the safe.  Oh, that old man, in his
lifetime, inspired a wholesome fear of him in your soul."

Then, circumstantially, I detailed as a statement of the case, my
reconstruction of the tragic night, concluding with his hiding the ruby
in the bar of soap.  At this point I suddenly wheeled upon him, and
asked point-blank:

"Tell me what you were doing in Mr. Page's bedroom Friday night, and
what it was that surprised you there?"

He stared at me in amazement.  He had been, whilst I was talking,
slowly regaining his self-possession--crawling into himself, as it
were, and pulling down the blinds; and now, when he spoke, it was with
something of his old manner.

"Swift, my biggest blunder was in underestimating your intelligence.  I
thought I could play hob with you; but I was a fool."  His face gave me
a certain impression of slyness, which I did n't at all like.

"Careful now," I sharply warned.

He sat silent for a moment, then spoke.

"I 'm not taking any more chances.  Swift; don't worry. . . .  What was
I doing Friday night?  I was hunting for the ruby."

"Look here,"--impatiently.  "I thought you had trifled enough."

He raised a protesting hand.

"Let me finish.  Friday was the first time since Mr. Page's death that
I have managed to shake off the man who has been following me.  When I
became convinced that I really had succeeded in doing so, I stayed
under cover until nightfall; then--well, you yourself have said that I
'm an opportunist.  I did n't know the cake of soap had been removed
from the bath room; when I discovered it was not there I supposed you
had found the ruby's hiding-place, and that you had concealed it
elsewhere.  I was trying to find it, when--when somebody came in."

"One of the Japanese," I supplied.

"They 're not Japanese," he corrected, with a provoking air of superior
knowledge.  "They are Burmese."

"Whatever they are, you have been playing them and Fluette against each
other.  Burke, I suppose you can't help lying; it comes easier for you
than telling the truth.  You know that those fellows managed to steal
the bar of soap--"

"While you were watching it," he interpolated.

"--and," I went on, ignoring the thrust, "they notified you and Fluette
of the fact Friday morning."

"Yes," he said slowly, after a pause, "they told us they had secured
the bar of soap."

"If that's so," I fixed him with a level look, "why did the
intelligence floor you so?"

"You draw your conclusions so admirably that you ought to be able to
supply the answer to that question yourself."

"I 'm not here for that purpose,"--curtly.  "Come, speak up."

He sat for a long while silent; then,--

"Well," said he, "it would come as a shock to any man to be bluntly
told that he had just been deprived of a fortune.  Mr. Fluette,
confident that he was within a step of securing the stone, blamed me
with being the cause of his disappointment."

The fellow's demeanor angered me beyond endurance.

"Burke," I cried heatedly, "do you think you can make me believe that a
man of Alfred Fluette's calibre would purchase the Paternoster ruby
from you, knowing that it was not yours to sell?  Bah!"  I was filled
with disgust.

"Ah, Swift, Swift," the rogue said, complacently wagging his head at
me, "there are some things of which even you are ignorant.

"Here is one of them--listen: the Paternoster ruby was no more Felix
Page's than it is yours or mine.  It is the property of the king of
Burma; it was stolen from him years ago, and the Burmese nobleman who
is at present in this country with his retinue--"

"Tshen-byo-yen," I said quietly, and had the satisfaction of beholding
Mr. Burke favor me with a startled glance.

"Yes," he pursued, with considerably less assurance, "that's his name."

"And one of the 'retinue,' as you are pleased to call his gang of
thugs, is that hideous, misshapen monster that shrieks like a ghoul.  I
suppose that he too was hunting for the ruby Friday night--after having
stolen it the night before."  My sarcasm failed to touch Burke.  He
shuddered, saying:

"The dwarf?  He's a mute--Tshen's slave.  Tongue 's been torn out.
And--truly--believe me; you may easily verify what I say--Tshen is the
properly accredited representative of the king of Burma, invested with
full power and authority to dispose of the stone.  Does the fact that
it was stolen from his royal master--that it has for some years been
out of the king's possession--in any way lessen or invalidate his right
to it?  Surely you would not dispute that?"

"I don't propose debating the matter with you."  And then I pointed
out: "If his claim is good, there are the courts."

Burke's shoulders twitched in a tiny shrug.

"Who can fathom the Oriental mind?" said he, oracularly.

I swung on my heel squarely away from him; I had no more patience for
such shuffling with words.

"You come with me," I said curtly; "I 'll at least get you straight on
the police docket--since you seem to prefer it to frankness."

He was out of his chair like a flash.

"No--no--no, Swift!" he implored.  "I swear I'm telling the truth.  Not
that I--not that!"  He hesitated a second.

"It was n't the ruby that was in the bar of soap"--the words literally
dragged from his lips.  "_I_ thought it was.  But it was only the paste
imitation."


CHAPTER XXIV

CONFESSION

I stared at Burke in speechless amazement.

The tremendous possibilities opened up by this revelation left me
bewildered.  But the wave of joy which suddenly swept over me was
unmistakable.

"Then, how--" I began, and stopped.

If I could not understand, it was only too clear that Burke could not
tell me what I wanted to know; for it was also plain that he too was
utterly at a loss to account for the circumstance.  This, then, had
been the intelligence imparted by the Burman on Friday morning, which
had so upset Fluette and Burke.

But again, why in the first place should Burke have informed the
Burmese of the supposed gem's hiding-place?  And how could it have been
the replica instead of the real stone?  The whole thing was fraught
with many perplexities; something here, which I could not seize upon,
flaunted itself in obscurity, and if I wanted to learn more from Burke
it would not do for him to discover how far I was at sea.  Was it
possible that he still fostered a hope of getting his fingers upon the
real gem?

I was again surveying him with a cold, suspicious eye.

"Burke," I said, "just how did you come to put the gem--or the paste
replica--in the soap?"

For a long time he sat contemplating his hand, first the back and then
the palm, and then closing the fingers and scrutinizing the nails.
Finally, with another shrug and a little gesture in which I read
resignation, he said:

"I might as well tell it.  As you say, I knew the jewel-box--and I
honestly thought it contained the ruby--and the Clara Cooper letters
were in the safe, and I never had an opportunity to take them till
Tuesday night a week ago.  The assurance that Page was going to Duluth
that night, combined with the backing Tshen would give me, put me in a
position where I could take the ruby and defy Page.  I was so sure that
Page was going to Duluth that night that I arranged a meeting between
Fluette and the Burman at Page's house.

"For you surmised correctly when you declared that Fluette would not
buy the ruby on the strength of my representations alone.  The purpose
of that meeting was to convince Fluette of the good faith of Tshen's
claim to the stone, whereupon I was to procure it from the safe--the
letters, too--and he was to pay over a certain sum of money for them."

"How much?" I bluntly demanded.

"Two hundred thousand dollars."

So this was the reason why Alfred Fluette must needs help himself to
Genevieve's patrimony.  That rapacious monster, the Wheat Pit, had
exhausted all of his legitimate resources, and so mad was his obsession
that he scrupled not to steal.

I entertained only hard feelings for him at that moment.  He had not
bought the ruby, however, and doubtless Genevieve's fortune was still
intact.

"Go on," I commanded curtly.  "What happened then?"

"Well, Maillot's arrival demoralized everything.  Fluette was to come
at ten o'clock, and Tshen at ten-thirty.  I did n't know what to do.  I
had no way of getting them word at that time of night, and I soon
realized that Page had given over the trip.  I contrived, however, to
smuggle all of them up to my room, without anybody being the wiser.

"I explained the state of affairs, and assured them that I would fulfil
my part of the agreement as soon as Page and Maillot retired and the
house grew quiet.

"Some time after eleven I heard Page and Maillot coming up-stairs.  The
light was out in my room, and, peering through the crack of my door, I
watched Page bid Maillot good-night.  The old man was holding a lighted
candle in one hand and the small leather box in the other.  I _know_ it
was the ruby he showed Maillot--"

"I suppose you were in the curtained alcove while he and Maillot were
talking," I interrupted.

"Not all the time; I didn't dare be.  The old man was as sharp as a
fox.  He didn't trust anybody.

"However, I carried out my part of the programme, all right; but just
as I reached the top of the stairs I felt the magnetism of somebody's
presence.  I looked back and saw Page--he looked positively
diabolical--following me.  How he enjoyed catching anybody in such a
predicament!"

"And then?"

"Well, then--why, I must have lost my head.  I started for my room, but
the old man commanded me to stop, and I stopped.  People generally did
when Page told them to.  Fluette heard him and came into the hall to
learn what was the matter.  Page could not see him then because of the
angle in the corridor, and the old man paused by the _étagère_ to light
the candle in the iron candlestick.

"After that the old man walked right up to me and held out his hand for
the box and the bundle of letters; but before I had time to give them
to him, Fluette rushed in between us.  His appearance startled the old
man so that he recoiled a pace or two.  This gave Fluette the
opportunity he needed to take the things from me.  He smiled at Page,
and said:

"'By God, Felix Page, you sha'n't thwart me this time; for once I 've
got the upper-hand of you, and I mean to keep it.'  Fluette, you see,
had put in the time while waiting in my room listening to Tshen's story
and examining his credentials.

"That infuriated Page so that he went clear off his head.  He set down
the iron candlestick upon the floor, and plunged right into Fluette.
Quicker than you can think, they were wrestling furiously for the box
and the bundle of letters.

"'I ran into my room and told Tshen what was going on.  Three of his
party were with him, and they were all so excited that I could scarcely
do anything with them.  Next I ran back into the hall, where the two
men were still struggling and threshing about.  They saved their breath
for their exertions, each trying with might and main to wrest the
precious package from the other.

"All at once the jewel-box was wrenched open.  The ruby--or what I
thought was the ruby--flew out and fell at my feet.  I stooped in a
flash and picked it up.  As I straightened upright, I saw that Page had
succeeded in recovering the jewel-case, although Fluette had the
letters.  With an oath, Page cast the empty box away from him.  'I 'll
cut your heart out for that!' he snarled, and started for Fluette.
Fluette hastily jabbed the letters into his coat pocket, grabbed up the
candlestick and threw it above his head.  The light was extinguished,
and the candlestick crushed upon Page's head.

"It was an inspiration that made me press the ruby into the soap; I
could n't have found a better hiding-place if I had searched the house
over."

I was no longer heeding him.  The last doubt had been removed.  After
all, then, Alfred Fluette was the guilty man.

My heart ached for the three women upon whom the blow would fall the
hardest.  The tangle was unravelling in accord with my theory.  I had
warned Genevieve of what she might expect--indeed, she had apprehended
the probable outcome herself; it had been hopeless to attempt to
prepare Belle.  But all this failed to relieve the situation any.

However, the ruby presently rose uppermost in my mind, and with it came
a conviction that Burke had not told me everything that he might have
respecting the gem.  If it had not been in the bar of soap, where was
it?  Then light flashed upon the enigma.

Burke and the Burmese had been afforded more time than I in which to
speculate upon the substitution of the false for the genuine stone, and
Burke had not gone inconsiderately to the Page place on Friday night,
but, quite the reverse, to prosecute a definite plan of search.  How
near he came to the goal I did n't appreciate till later.

The discovery by the Burmese that the soap contained merely the paste
replica, made them suspect Burke of duplicity.  Hence, after Fanshawe
and I lost them Friday morning, the Burman had continued to dog the
ex-secretary until relieved some time during the day by the misshapen
dwarf, who, in turn, had followed him to the Page place after nightfall.

The mute--whose ugly visage Genevieve had seen at the alcove
curtains--had attacked him, perhaps in the belief that Burke had found
the gem, and that he had been deceiving them respecting it.

It was this struggle in the bedroom which had created such a tumult,
frightening Burke within an inch of his life, and driving him pellmell
away and to his bed, where he had remained until the following Tuesday.
Both had utterly vanished by the time I effected an entrance to the
house.

"I can truthfully say, Burke," I confided, "that I never underestimated
your intelligence.  You did not go blindly to the Page place Friday
night.  You reasoned that, if Mr. Page displayed the genuine ruby to
Maillot, and if the jewel-case contained only the replica when you
robbed the safe an hour or so later, why, the substitution must have
occurred somewhere between the library table, where Maillot and Page
had been sitting, and the safe.  Consequently you were encouraged by
the assurance that the scope of your search would be restricted.

"I believe you argued correctly.  And to keep you out of further
mischief, or from setting your precious Burmese upon me again, why, you
may stay here a while and think over it."

Despite his protestations, when I left headquarters the last glimpse I
had of him was through the bars of a cell door.

I went directly to the Fluette residence to inform Genevieve that her
apprehensions and uncertainties had at last crystallized into dread
reality.  I shall not dwell upon this wretched conference; it is quite
enough to say that the poor girl was torn with grief, yet not wholly
convinced.

"Knowles,"--she was clinging to my arm, her voice hoarse and
distressed,--"it is too terrible--too monstrous for belief.  I can not
do it--can't believe it--unless I hear the words from Uncle Alfred's
own lips.  He is here now; he did n't go down-town to-day.  The
horrible charge has been made--confront him with it.  He's up-stairs
with Aunt Clara."

"Very well," I quietly returned.  "You go and ask him, as calmly as
possible, to come down to his study.  Don't alarm Miss Belle or her
mother; it may not be necessary."

Moving blindly toward the stairs, she paused on the first landing and
turned to me a tragic face.

"Courage!" I whispered.

Then she found the strength to carry her on to the end of her revulsive
errand.  I went direct to the study, and waited.

Fluette came in hastily, his manner wild, his face white and haggard.
Genevieve, distressed and heart-broken, followed close behind him.  She
closed the door.  The man began speaking at once, incoherently, in a
harsh, strident whisper that signified constricted throat muscles.

"So!  It's come at last!  You--keep it from--from--my God! keep it from
my wife and daughter!"

I answered him roughly, in an attempt to keep him from breaking
completely down.

"Pull yourself together, man!  What sort of way is this to act?"  I
surveyed his abject figure an instant, then added with some bitterness:
"It is not I that you fear, but your own conscience."

I was thinking of the women.

He slumped into a chair, clasped his out-stretched hands upon the
writing-table, and allowed his head to droop between his arms.  At that
moment I heard Belle calling "Papa!"  She was running lightly down the
stairs.  Again she called, and I knew that she was coming swiftly
toward the library.

Genevieve made a move as if to bolt the door, but I checked her with a
gesture.  Of what use would it be to bar the way of her who came so
impulsively?  The dreadful truth must be broken to her.  It was a task
that no third person might assume; let her hear it wrung from her
father's unwilling lips.

"Papa!"  She was approaching quickly.  How youthful and self-reliant
her voice sounded!  The sweet, girlish contralto jarred painfully upon
at least two of our tense, waiting group.  And Belle continued to
advance all unsuspectingly.

"Papa, where are you?  Why don't you answer?"

Genevieve ran over to her uncle, and laid one arm across his bowed
shoulders.

"Uncle!  Uncle!"  She shook him, striving in an agitated way to rouse
him to a sense of realization.  "Uncle!  Sit up!  Don't go all to
pieces, this way!  Belle is at the door!"

[Illustration: "Uncle, Uncle!  Sit up!  Don't go to pieces this way"]

And sure enough, as the bent figure painfully straightened a light rap
sounded upon the panel, and Belle's fresh young voice again called:

"Are you in there, papa?  May I come in?"

Genevieve drew suddenly back to a shadowed corner, wringing her hands
with a helpless, despairing gesture.  Fluette rose unsteadily to his
feet.  Then the door opened, and Belle stood framed in the doorway.

The man's look darted feverishly between the two girls--Genevieve
well-nigh overcome, while the smile on Belle's handsome face quickly
gave way to an expression of bewilderment, and then to a dawning one of
alarm.  Next she rushed into the room, and stopped abruptly.  Bending a
look of anxious inquiry first upon her cousin and then upon me, she
finally confronted her father.

"Papa," she faltered, her voice quaking with the fear that suddenly
gripped her heart, "what is it?  What does this mean?"  Then, as she
started blindly toward him, she uttered one piercing, agonizing cry:
"Papa!"

Unconsciously he brushed aside her beseeching arms.  He did not answer
her directly; his words were a response to the charge that I had not
yet made.

"Man, you are right," he said huskily, "it is my conscience.  It is not
you that accuse me, but the pure eyes of these two innocent girls--the
unspoken reproach of that broken, white-haired woman who sits in
silence up-stairs--those fling the charge into my face--sear it into my
very soul--every minute of the day and night.

"Take me.  I am guilty.  It was I who killed Felix Page."


CHAPTER XXV

"THIMBLE, THIMBLE----"

It is needless to dwell upon the scene in Alfred Fluette's study; I
shall take up merely such details as constitute an integral part of
this memoir, and hurry along.

After Genevieve had led Belle away, Mr. Fluette quickly mastered
himself.  The bitter moment of the confession once passed, it seemed as
if his mind had been relieved of a great burden, and he talked to me
with comparative unreserve.  But his appearance was in pitiable
contrast with what it must have been before he wandered into devious
ways.  He was crushed, his mien one of hopeless submission to whatever
the future might have in store for him.

"First of all," he began, with impressive earnestness, "I want to
emphasize the fact that when I snuffed out that man's life I was in
imminent peril of my own.  When I snatched up the candlestick, if ever
a man had murder in his heart Felix Page had at that moment.

"The rest was automatic; I could no more have stayed the deadly blow
than I can now hope to escape its consequences.  Revolt from almost a
lifetime of pitiless, persistent persecution filled me with an
irresistible impulse to destroy and rendered my arm invincible."

I went with him, step by step, over the ground that is already
familiar.  Felix Page had ever been the thorn in his flesh.

"It wasn't as if I had a tangible enemy," he declared; "he would n't
come out into the open and fight.  His aims were always petty, he
perpetually annoyed and harassed me by mean and ignoble ways, which I
was obliged to bear with an assumption of ignoring them, or else lower
myself to his level to meet them.  Any bold, decisive stroke would at
least have won my respect; but no, the cunning hound knew that my
disposition could not forever turn aside his sly thrusts; he knew that,
by degrees but inevitably, he was warping my nature, slowly but surely
destroying all that was best in me.

"Well," bitterly, "he has succeeded.  He has ruined me not only
financially, but body and soul as well.

"Time and time again he flaunted in my face some old letters which my
wife wrote when she was a mere girl.  They were such as any artless,
inexperienced girl might write to a man who has for the moment captured
her fancy; but how could that be made clear to a public ever greedy for
scandal?  How would those letters read in the light of my wife's years
and the dignity of her present position?  Yet the scoundrel has
threatened me times without number that he would scatter them broadcast.

"Then--the ruby: that was a crowning stroke.  He deliberately stepped
in and wrested it from my grasp simply because he in some way found out
that I had set my heart upon it for my collection.  It was as if he
perpetually had his fingers upon the pulse of my desires and
intentions; he seemed to divine and anticipate my every move.

"But I was soon reconciled to the stone's loss, and I would have
remained so had it not been for that creature, Burke.  When he put the
idea into my mind that perhaps Page had no legal title to it, I was
tempted--and I fell.  He presented to me too good an opportunity to
retaliate for me to let it pass.

"It was a foolish thing for me to do, going to his house that fatal
Tuesday night; but there was no other way.  Burke was willing to
procure the stone from its hiding-place, but flatly refused to assume
the risk of conveying it through the streets.  Page was to be away from
town that night, so in an evil moment I decided to take the chance.

"You know what happened.  I failed to get the gem that night; your
unrelaxing vigilance prevented Burke from getting at where he supposed
he had hidden it, and at last the Burmese determined to make the
attempt Thursday night.  Friday morning I was to have again met
Tshen-byo-yen to close the deal for the stone, when one of his henchmen
notified Burke and me that the attempt had been a failure, that they
had succeeded in securing only the replica.  We both charged Burke with
double-dealing."

I started suddenly at his last words; a possibility had flashed into my
mind, so huge and significant that I could comprehend it only by
degrees.  I spoke with quick eagerness.

"Mr. Fluette, do you think the Burmese would have devoted all these
years to recovering the jewel, if they were willing to sell it to the
first would-be  purchaser  that  happened  along?  Doesn't that strike
you as a bit peculiar?--as being inconsistent with their unflagging
zeal, their tireless efforts to regain what they contend was once
stolen from them?  Those fellows are very far from home, please bear in
mind."

"I never before regarded it in that light," he thoughtfully returned.

He was not interested, and did not press me for an explanation.  But
his suggestion of Burke's double-dealing had given me an idea which was
clearing away one dark corner of the puzzle: the possibility was
opening up more rapidly.  I looked at him shrewdly.

"Just how did Maillot's story of his experience with Page impress you?"
I asked.

He gave me a quick glance.

"It was amazing.  I could not believe that Maillot was wilfully
fabricating; yet, to accept his extraordinary story left me, as the
only alternative, a conviction that Felix Page had either undergone a
change of heart, or else had lost his mind."

"It did n't occur to you that Page might be trying a game of his own?"

"No."

"Did you ever see the replica?" I asked.

"Yes, many times.  It is a remarkably excellent imitation--silicate of
alumina; the weight, color, and hardness, the measurements--table,
girdle, and _culasse_--all correspond exactly with the original.  It
lacks only in density, and perhaps a trifle in--but no; it would
require an expert test to determine that it was not a true ruby."

"Then," I eagerly pursued, "even an expert might be imposed upon by the
replica?"

"Well," he slowly admitted, "perhaps--yes.  But not for long; men who
deal in precious stones after a time develop a sort of sixth sense that
protects them against imposition.  It is too subtle to define; but any
diamond merchant will tell you that the most perfect imitation will
raise a doubt in his mind as to its genuineness; a true stone, never."

When I considered his special knowledge of the subject in general, and
of the Paternoster ruby in particular, I was astounded at his
obtuseness.  Later, I was no less astounded at my own.

"Is it possible, Mr. Fluette," I went on, with an enthusiasm which he
did not in the least share, "that it never occurred to you what Burke's
game might be?  With the connivance of these Burmese, he was
deliberately attempting to swindle you; he meant to practise the old
familiar game of 'switching' the false for the real stone.  The Burmese
want the stone, not the money without the stone; but for a generous
share in the proceeds, they were willing to lend themselves to Burke's
fraud.  There 's the Oriental for you."

The man stared at me dully.  I continued, warming with the subject.

"And Felix Page--he was craftier than even you give him credit for.
Mr. Fluette, there 's nothing extraordinary in Maillot's story of his
Tuesday night adventure--except our stupidity in comprehending its real
significance.

"Remember Page's strict injunction to Maillot not to let the jewel-case
out of his possession until he and Miss Belle were married; think of
the alacrity with which he acceded to Maillot's request; think of his
sly chuckles and furtive manner, of his attitude during the whole of
that remarkable conference, and tell me what it means if he, too,
didn't intend palming off the false stone on you?  Maillot and Miss
Belle once married, then the young man--in complete innocence, to be
sure--would have handed you, not the ruby, but--the replica."

Slowly the dull look died out in Alfred Fluette's eyes, and in spite of
his distress, his face flushed darkly with anger.

"The hound!" he muttered through his clenched teeth.  "What a dupe I
've been.  But," he added, with kindling interest, "where _is_ the
ruby, then?"

"Ah, precisely.  That's what I would like to know myself.  I think,
however, I have the key that will unlock its hiding-place, when I learn
how to use it."  And I showed him the cipher.  He shook his head over
it; it was utterly meaningless to him.

There was one phase of our conference concerning which I insisted that
the wretched man be minutely circumstantial.  Our talk touching upon
this point was much too painful for me to reproduce here in its
entirety; but after I had almost literally dragged from him every
minute detail of the actual tragedy, I felt justified in offering a
word of encouragement.

It is sufficient simply to record now the point brought out, to
supplement it with certain details acquired from Burke, and to state
that it had a vital bearing upon the outcome of the case.  The Page
affair was by no means closed yet.

When Mr. Fluette struck the blow with the candlestick he was standing
at the angle of the balustrade nearest the rooms which Burke and
Maillot were occupying.  Mr. Page was facing in that direction--that
is, toward the west--and consequently his left side was opposed to the
balustrade.  Such were the respective positions of the two men at the
instant the candlestick was snatched from the floor.

Immediately after the blow was struck both Burke and Fluette were
thrown into a panic.  The latter at once ran wildly down the front
stairs, stumbling over the body on the landing, and out at the front
door and away.  Burke followed hastily after him, his teeth chattering
with fright, and promptly bolted the front door.  The act was
accomplished so soon after the flight that Fluette, overcome with
horror at his deed, distinctly heard the bolt shoot while he was
speeding down the walk.

Burke had already informed me that after he made fast the front door he
ran back to the rear stairs--he was afraid to pass again the body on
the landing--where he observed the rear door wide-open.  This he also
closed and locked, then hurried up to the second floor, being governed
by only one idea--to secure, as quickly as he possibly could, Maillot's
companionship.

Between the instant he started to follow Fluette down-stairs and the
time he stood rapping at Maillot's door, he had consumed much less than
a minute.  Some time later he thought of the Burmese, but when he
looked into his room it was empty.  The open back door accounted for
their absence.

When I departed from Alfred Fluette--and I did that very thing; walked
deliberately away from him, leaving him hopeful in the midst of his
household--my heart was exultant, although I had in contemplation a
task that might have dismayed Hercules.

But sometimes, usually when we are least expecting it, or when we are
getting our affairs into too much of a muddle.  Providence intervenes,
and with a decisive stroke straightens matters out for us.  After all,
it is ridiculous wasting so much time and energy in rough-hewing our
ends, when the shaping lies with other hands than ours.  On this day of
days Providence appeared in the guise of Dr. Wentworth De Breen.

His buggy drew up at the curb beside me.

"Hullo!" was his gruff salutation.

I was pleased at the meeting.

"The very man I was wanting to see," said I.  "How many hospitals are
there in the city and the immediate vicinity?"

He eyed me in his customary serious, intent manner.  I amplified:

"I have n't the least idea, you know.  Perhaps I could name a dozen,
perhaps a score; but there might be five hundred.  Anyhow, I have to
search them all--or, until I find what I want."

"The deuce you have!" he jerked out.  "Anything to do with your ruby
case?"

"Everything," said I.

"Well!"  He stared at me a moment, then with a sudden movement whipped
the fur lap-robe aside.  "Get in here," he commanded, in his abrupt
manner.

The next instant I was seated beside him, and his spirited mare was
dashing along the street at a pace which I regarded as altogether too
reckless.  Dr. De Breen had a weakness for spirited horses, and he
handled them with a careless ease that never failed to excite in me a
secret envy; for--I here confess it--I always have been a bit afraid of
horses, whether spirited or not; not much, but just enough to make me
cautious.  I never take any liberties with even a blind and spavined
derelict.

"What d'ye want to find?" he bluntly asked, after we had ridden the
better part of five minutes in silence.

"A disabled Burmese," was the reply.  "I trust to find some part of his
upper-works in a more or less damaged condition."

"Burmese!" he echoed in an exclamation.  "Good.  I win.  Larrimer bet
me a five he was a Javanese."  The doctor sniffed scornfully, "Devilish
lot Larrimer knows about ethnology."  He then became lucid.

"Larrimer's head at the Drevel Hospital, y' know; deuced clever at the
operating-table, but set in his ideas.  Lord, dynamite would n't move
him; stubborn's no name for it.

"Your Burmese is there: triple fracture of the left parietal, left
clavicle and bladebone badly crushed; trephined him last night.  Beggar
'll die."

"It certainly sounds serious enough," commented I.  "Is the parietal a
part of his upper-works?"

He jabbed with the tip of one gloved finger the side of my head nearest
him, which happened to be the right.

"That's your right parietal," he explained; "the left one 's on the
other side."

"Thank Heaven for sending you across my path this day!"--fervently.
"That's my man."

The doctor was a good deal of a scoffer.  "Heaven had nothing to do
with it," said he, with unnecessary asperity.  "I knew you 'd be
wanting to see him; I was hunting for you.  Beggar speaks English
fairly well, and he let out a word or two that made me think he knew
something you ought to know. . . .  Whoa!  Jump out!"

We entered the hospital, and soon were at the bedside of the dying man.
The operation had relieved the brain from the pressure of the fractured
skull, and the man's wanderings were interspersed with rational
periods, during which his story was taken down in shorthand, with
infinite difficulty, by the hospital's stenographer.  I have taken the
liberty of preparing a summary from the long rambling account,
sufficient to show my justification for anticipating that the case was
on the eve of taking an unexpected turn, and to satisfy the curious
respecting certain aspects of the ruby's history.

The man, whose name was Chaya, was a priest of the temple at Tounghain,
Upper Burma, "where the sublime Da-Fou-Jan sits in eternal meditation
among the thousand caverns that lie beyond Mandalay."  His companions
were also priests, and Tshen-byo-yen was a wealthy noble of the
district, whose family was accountable to the king for the safeguarding
of the temple's sacred relic--the "Heart of Budda."  Thus was the great
ruby known, and the rich crimson jewel was averred by tradition to be
nothing less holy than the actual blood of "the Perfectly Enlightened
One," bestowed upon mankind in an imperishable form.

Naturally, the gem was greatly venerated and not to be profaned by
impious hands.  But in the time of Tshen's father, it was stolen from
the temple by an English adventurer, who succeeded in escaping out of
the country with it and making his way to London.

However, a curse went with the ruby.  In the temple its influence was
beneficent, its crimson glow benignant and abounding with blessings for
all true believers; but when desecrated by the plundering vandal's
touch it became a great power for evil.

Therefore it came to pass that by the time the reckless Englishman set
foot upon his native soil he was only too glad to part with his
ill-gotten treasure at almost any price.  He was in rags, starving and
broken in health.

Thus it was that the rough, uncut gem passed into the possession of
Luca Paternostro.

The recovery of the Heart of Budda straightway became a sacred charge
upon all the priests.  Tshen's father devoted his entire fortune to the
cause.  With infinite patience, laboring tirelessly, the Burmese never
lost sight of their precious relic; but in England they soon found that
conditions were vastly different from those of their home country.  It
was impossible to approach the object which they coveted; and their
opinion of legal redress was based upon their familiarity with what
passed for justice in Burma.  But they never grew disheartened; and at
last their opportunity came.

It was Tshen's father who slew Paternostro.  It was he who won undying
honor by recovering the jewel.  It was he who, hard-pressed by the
police, was obliged to seek the nearest sanctuary, which happened to be
France.  The rest we know.

But the gem still carried its baleful spell, for we also know how the
expert whom the Paternostros carried with them to Paris, was drowned
just as the homeward-bound vessel was entering Dover harbor.

So much for the ruby's eventful history.

Chaya's declaration also confirmed my conclusions respecting Burke's
designed imposition upon Alfred Fluette--which, by the way, he seemed
to regard as perfectly legitimate.  And then it concluded with the most
important matter of all.

On the night of Felix Page's murder, while his companions were all in
the second story, Chaya had remained on guard below.  He had watched
Page following Burke up-stairs, after the robbery, but could not warn
the thief without alarming the pursuer.

After the struggle began in the hall, Chaya harkened to it a while,
then dashed up the rear stairs to take a hand, in case the jewel was to
be snatched from his companions at the very moment of victory.  He
passed through the bath room during the brief period Burke was in his
own room informing Tshen of the state of affairs, entered the hall,
where, by the dim light of the solitary candle, the two men were locked
in combat.  The struggle was so furious that his presence was not
noticed.  He proceeded to the _north-east_ angle of the balustrade,
where he crouched around the corner and followed through the balusters
the uncertain issues of the fight.

He watched the two chief actors so intently, in fact, that he failed to
perceive Burke snatch up the supposed ruby from the floor; but he did
see Page wrest the leather case from Fluette.

Now was the time for him to act.  He was armed with a black-jack--a
ball of lead wrapped in leather and with a short, flexible leather
handle--and just as Fluette grabbed up the iron candle-stick he plunged
forward.

At this instant the light was extinguished, and he received the full
weight of a human body as it staggered backward.  He supposed it to be
Page's.  He struck out blindly with his own cruel weapon, at the same
time shoving the body away from him.  He felt his bludgeon crush upon
his victim's head; and then he was himself felled to the floor with a
tremendous blow that blotted out everything else for him.  The base of
the candlestick had found a mark wholly unsuspected by any one.

He knew afterwards that his companions had carried him down the rear
stairs and away; that they tried to doctor him until they grew alarmed
at the seriousness of his injuries; whereupon they deserted him in his
room, after notifying the landlord, who had in turn notified the
hospital authorities.  Chaya was well supplied with funds, so there had
been no difficulty on that score.


And thus was my deduction proved to be correct.  Felix Page's _left_
side had been toward the balustrade at the instant Fluette snatched up
the candle-stick; on the balustrade was a deep indentation where the
base of the improvised weapon had impinged, after glancing; and the
fatal blow had struck upon the victim's _right_ temple.  A single
descending blow can not very well pass down one side of a man and end
upon the other.

But while Chaya's story gratified me beyond measure, at the same time
it was incomplete; it threw no light upon the ruby's resting-place, and
for the simple reason that he knew no more about it than any of the
rest of the individuals interested in discovering where it had been
hidden.  I was satisfied that the cipher, once I had interpreted it,
would lead me to the gem.  Therefore, it remained for me to find it.

Well, the cryptic writing was solved, pretty soon; but the solution
came like a crash of thunder, revealing the one twist toward the end
that I had least expected.

And, worst of all, I should have known!


CHAPTER XXVI

THE CIPHER SOLVED

Chaya's ante-mortem statement, properly attested by Dr. Larrimer, Dr.
De Breen, the hospital secretary, and myself, together with the
otherwise complete case I had, was sufficient of course to open the
prison doors for Royal Maillot.  It should also have lifted the cloud
from Alfred Fluette; but, alas! it did not.

To make my story end as all well-conditioned stories ought to end, I
should here be able to wave my wand, or invoke some good genie, or
however it is that the writer-folk bestow happiness at a stroke upon
the helpless creatures whom they have been ruthlessly dragging through
a sea of trial and tribulation, and show you the actors in my own drama
transported with joy.  But I am recording what actually happened.  It
was a strange fatality that cast itself into the lives of these people.
They were dismayed, overwhelmed, rendered helpless, left
uncomprehending.  However much I may desire to do so, therefore, I can
not twist the truth to give my own story precisely the ending that you
or I might desire it to have.

As for myself, I couldn't carry the news fast enough to Maillot and to
Mr. Fluette, and to Belle and Genevieve.  My enthusiasm met its first
damper when the cell door swung open, and the young fellow walked out a
free man.  It is true that his gratitude was immeasurable; he could
find no words to express it, and he wrung my hand until--strong man
that I am--I had to tear away from him.

But after his elation had time to cool, he grew morose and gloomy; he
was more inclined to cling to what he had gone through, than to accept
the extremely satisfactory assurance that he stood clear and as far
above suspicion as Caesar's wife.

"No use talking, Swift," he responded to my attempts to rally him out
of his humor; "the taint will stick to me.  People will say I 'm the
fellow who was arrested for killing his uncle so that he could inherit
his fortune.  They 'll always point me out and shake their heads and
say I was released only because the police couldn't find evidence to
convict me.  I hope to Heaven the old man made a will giving all his
money to charity."

"Faugh!"  Such morbid talk was thoroughly exasperating.  "Mr. Fluette
had a much narrower escape than you did."

"Perhaps," he admitted heavily.  "But nobody knows it outside of you
and his family.  I can't go to Belle with the odor of prison clinging
to me.  And what's more, I sha'n't."

"If you don't," I said quietly, "you 'll break her heart.  Your
suffering has been as nothing compared with hers."  Then I lost my
patience completely.  "Maillot," I flung at him, "you're a damned
fool!"  And I swung on my heel and strode away.

"Hi!  Swift!  Come back here!" he yelled after me.  In the next second
he had caught hold of my arm and jerked me to a standstill.

"Good Lord, man!  I did n't know you had such a nasty temper!  Here you
come and drag me out of jail, telling me I 'm innocent and all that
sort of thing, and because I don't strike out hot-footed and throw
myself into the presence of the cleanest, sweetest girl in the world,
you think I 'm an ass.

"Look here.  _I_ knew I was innocent; but at the same time I did n't
try to blink my compromising predicament.  I wouldn't blame _any_
fair-minded person for being suspicious of me.  But everything 's
happened so sudden--I can't understand,--and--well, hang it, Swift! you
have n't made yourself clear, by a long shot.  If you think I ought to
go to Belle, why, I 'll go."

But I can tell you this.

If you and I were to set off on a railway train, straight for the
sun, and go at the rate of thirty-two miles an hour, — you know
that is pretty fast travelling?"

"How fast do we go on the cars from here to New York?"

Ulysses White about it, and he said that Felix
Page was one of the sort who have a holy horror of last testaments.  If
the old gentleman ever made any such disposition of his property, Mr.
White had no hand in it."

To dismiss the matter, I will say here that no will ever did turn up,
and that Maillot inherited the entire Page fortune.  I merely mentioned
this topic to pave the way for that of the ruby.

"Not the least part of the estate," I pursued, "will be the Paternoster
ruby."

The young fellow interrupted me impulsively.

"By George, Swift! it's yours.  Find it and keep it--or sell it and
keep the money.  I 'll not have the ghastly thing--chuck it into the
lake first."

"That's no proper way to dispose of it; and later on you might regret
such a gift to me.  This was what I was going to suggest.

"I believe the claim of the Burmese to be just, for I suppose they 're
honest according to their lights.  They would have a pretty hard time
establishing it, though, if you are of a mind to contest the matter."

"Great Scott!  Forget that cursed ruby; talk about something else.  I
want to get the thing out of my mind and never think of it again."

"All right.  I sha'n't mention it after to-day.  But let me get
through.  Here 's an easy way to settle the matter.

"Let the Burmese have it after reimbursing the estate for what your
uncle paid for it; it would be only fair--at least, in a measure.

"I want to hold Tshen and his entourage of mild-eyed cutthroats until I
put Burke through; they 're my best witnesses.  We can't hang the
rascal, but we have an excellent ease against him for burglary,
attempted swindling, and attempted blackmail.  After I find the ruby
you can do the bargaining."

He agreed to this.  After a bit he favored me with a quizzical regard.

"I don't mind explaining that ring episode--now," he said, in response
to my look of inquiry.  "When you first pointed out the true import of
the wax impression on the candlestick, it brought to my mind at once
Fluette's capricious notion of wearing a ring on the middle finger of
his right hand.  I was keeping tab on you the day of the inquest.  I
knew that he was going to attend, and that the circumstance would be of
considerable significance to you.  I saw your look dart to his right
hand---saw you watching him--"

"And you thought you 'd confuse me, eh?"

"Exactly.  When you saw the ring on his finger only, the circumstance
was pregnant--portentous.  When you had _two_ rings on _two_ right
hands, why, you were puzzled, but the effect was scattering and weak."

I approached Mr. Fluette with an enthusiasm decidedly tempered, and so
I was not as disappointed as I might have been.  My good news seemed to
produce not the slightest effect upon him.  He appeared to have aged
twenty years; and from that day until his death, which occurred only
four months later, he remained melancholy and without interest in
anything whatever.

However, I was placed in the most embarrassing position that I ever
experienced in my life.  Before explanations were half made, Miss Belle
flew at me--I 'm not attempting a pun, either--with a glad, impetuous
cry, threw her arms around my neck, and, drawing herself to her
tiptoes--_kissed me_!  I had been far more at ease under her levelled
revolver.

In the afternoon Genevieve and I repaired to the old Page place.  She
was so confident that she could find the originals of the designs on
the cipher, that I was anxious to give her the chance.  Besides, she
was afraid to go alone, and I simply had to accompany her.  Belle could
not without Maillot tagging along, and--well, we didn't want anybody
else.

First of all, Genevieve had to be shown the dent made by the
candlestick in the railing of the balustrade.  She placed the tip of
one little finger in the depression, and drew back with a shudder.

"Let's go," she said, in a hushed voice.  "I never expect to come up
these stairs again.  Let's find the daisies, and go."

She understood as well as I did that Felix Page must have substituted
the stones somewhere between the library table and the hidden safe in
his bedroom.  She proposed to start at the table and examine every
object, if necessary, between the two points mentioned.

Our progress was slow until we reached the bedroom.  Genevieve drew to
an abrupt halt on the threshold.

"There was a table there, by the head of the bed," she said; "where is
it?"

"Lying on its side in that corner"--I pointed.  "It was hurled there
last Friday night, when the dwarf surprised Burke here."

She went over to it, while I raised the blinds.  Instantly she recoiled
with a cry, and then in a flash was fairly wild with excitement.

"Knowles, Knowles!" she screamed.  "Here they are!"

And sure enough, there they were--the brass tacks with which the
artificial leather cover had been fastened on.  Their heads were
ornamental, with just such crenellated edges as might have prompted the
circular figures at each end of the cipher.

I stared at them in stupefied silence.  The row of gleaming tacks
staggered me.  How many times had I lingered by that very table while I
racked my brain to remember where I had seen the peculiar figure!  Why,
once I even had paused and drawn the design in the dust on the leather
cover!  What a dunce--how blind I had been!

The cipher was not difficult to read now.  At once I recalled Burke's
shadow on the blind; he had been bending over this table, and the agile
movements of his hands were no longer mysterious.  He, too, had some
knowledge of the cipher, and he had been rapidly running over the
tack-heads, hunting for the combination that would reveal a concealed
compartment.

After a while we grew rational again.  I got out the cipher, and once
more Genevieve and I put our heads together over it.  Here it is; you
may follow us while we dig it out:

[Illustration: Cipher]

"If you remember," I said presently, "I told you that very likely it
would have to be interpreted in connection with something not on the
paper.  Count the tacks along the front edge."

There were nineteen of them.

"Counting from either end," I went on, "the centre tack will be ten.
It 's as simple as A-B-C.  That's our starting-point from which to find
the others.  Find the fourth one to the right of the centre
tack--number ten."

She placed the tip of one forefinger upon it--a bit gingerly, I smiled
to see.

"Why, it gives!" she announced in surprise.

"I 'd be terribly cut up if it did n't," said I.  "Now, then, the
eleventh to the right."

This carried her to the third one around the side; number thirteen was
the fifth on the left side, number seventeen the ninth on the right
side, while number five was on the front edge, of course, close to the
centre.  Each of them yielded a trifle beneath her pressure--until she
came to number five.  Here she drew back and clasped her hands tightly
together.

"Oh, I can't!" she cried excitedly.  "I'm just so nervous that I can't
put my finger upon it.  You do it."

"Nonsense!" said I.  "If you don't find the ruby, it will never be
found.  That's the last one."

At last, with shining eyes and parted lips, the little finger went
slowly down upon the fateful tack-head.  She screwed up her eyes and
closed her lips tightly, as if she feared something would explode, then
pushed with all her might.  The tack gave; but nothing else happened.

We stared at the table, our faces long with disappointment; then we
looked at each other in unspoken questioning.  Genevieve's expression
was so woe-begone that I laughed.  The nerve-racking suspense was
broken.

"How silly!" she exclaimed.  "There!"

With a quick movement, she bore down upon the centre tack--number
ten--and lo! a section of the table edge flew outward, disclosing an
aperture perhaps six inches long and a quarter of an inch wide.  It was
very much like a slit in a door for letters.

But there was no ruby yet, nor any aperture large enough to accommodate
the one for which we were looking.  I leaned over with a puzzled scowl
and peered into the slit.

"There 's a folded paper in there," I announced.  My fingers were too
large to force into the opening, and Genevieve promptly produced a
hat-pin.  Next moment we had the paper out--or papers, for there were
three sheets folded together.

Across the back, written in Felix Page's small cramped hand, was this
inscription:

  _Memorandum of Agreement between_
  _Felix Page_
  _and_
  _Cristofano Paternostro, Michele Paternostro_
  _and Filippo Paternostro._


"Well, we 're hot on the scent, at any rate," was my comment, as I
unfolded the papers.  Then I quickly folded them again, without a
glance inside.

"Wait!" said I.  "This is a solemn occasion, and it should be
recognized with some fitting observance."

"Oh, don't tease!" cried Genevieve, dancing up and down with
impatience, and trying to pluck the papers from my hand.

"I 'm not teasing, my dear," said I; "I 'm terribly serious.  We are
pretty near the end of the trail, little girl; after we have read this
imposing document we will have reached the end.  I 'm halfway sorry,
too, notwithstanding the grim tragedy that has hung over us.  We must
celebrate the last event with an appropriate rite--a fire upon the
library hearth."

She flushed with delight, and consented to wait until I had the fire
going properly.  It was a most successful fire.  We dragged the library
table up close; I jumped Genevieve to a seat upon it, and then seated
myself beside her.  She placed a hand upon my shoulder, and our heads
were again very close together.

"Now, then!"  I shook the papers open.

The more imposing one--the agreement--I placed beneath; its dry legal
phraseology was not at all inviting.  The other sheets were, however.
They too were written all over in Felix Page's hand, but bore the
blunt, direct phrases of a man used to expressing himself without any
rhetorical embellishment or nonsense.

And this is what we read:


This explanation is written to clear up any misunderstanding or doubt,
that may arise after my death, over the stone called the Paternoster
Ruby.

In June, 1884, I learned that Alfred Fluette was trying to buy it from
the Paternostros.  I at once determined that he should not have the
stone if money could prevent it.  So I too became a bidder.

The first figure set by the dealers was almost prohibitive, but as
Fluette seemed willing to meet it, I was ready to go him one better.
But the wily Italians hedged.  They set us to bidding against each
other, and as the price rose my resolution to get the stone grew more
set.

While the bids mounted, I was given ample satisfaction for the weight
of whatever financial obligations I was incurring by Fluette's
increasing worry and chagrin.  He was like a pup that does n't know
whether the bone is going into the soup-kettle or the garbage-can.  I
swore to have that bit of red glass if it took every cent that I could
rake and scrape together--and I had a few of them.

Finally Fluette drew out, cursing me.  I brought the Italians to a
showdown.

Still they hesitated.  I became suspicious.

One night Cristofano Paternostro, the head of the firm, called at my
hotel.  He was nervous and ill at ease.  He informed me, with many hems
and haws, that the ruby Fluette and I had been snarling over was lying
at the bottom of the English Channel, and that they would be unable to
deliver the goods.  He had a good deal to say about the prestige the
ruby gave the firm, and much more to the same effect, until I cut him
off short.  I told him that the ruby was nearer to making him
ridiculous.

It seems that after they recovered the stone in Paris, the expert who
accompanied them could n't resist the temptation to steal it.  Besides
being a gem expert and an expert thief, this fellow was accounted an
expert swimmer.  When the boat was near land he tried to get away with
the prize by jumping overboard, under cover of night, and swimming
ashore.  He did succeed in reaching the nearest land--which is to say,
straight down.  Benoit went off to prepare her breakfast. Like
everything else, that was beautifully done.

By and by, in she came with a tray and white napkin, white as napkin
could be, and fine damask too.
For Juanita had treasures of various sorts, besides old moreen curtains.
On this tray, for instance, there was not only a fine napkin of
damask; there was a delicate cup and saucer of fine china, which
Daisy thought very beautiful.

It was as thin and fine as any cup at Melbourne House, and had a dainty
vine of leaves and flowers running round it, in a light red brown
colour.

The plate was not to match; it was a common little white plate; but
that did not matter. The tea was in the little brown cup, and Daisy's
lips closed upon it with entire satisfaction.
"Nice thing for the Paternostros," says I, "when all this comes out."

Cristofano turned green.  He begged me not to tell.  He promised me the
pick of his gems if I 'd only keep the secret.

I looked at him pretty sour.  "Very well," says I at last.  "You give
me the imitation stone.  I 'll never disclose the fact that you did n't
have the original ruby, _if you will announce to the world that it was
sold to me for $500,000_.  As long as you keep your mouth shut, I 'll
keep mine."

He was tickled to death.  Nothing would do but he must have in the rest
of the firm (his brother and cousin).  When they came I had a written
contract prepared for them, setting forth the terms of our agreement
and binding them with a penalty heavy enough to keep them from
blabbing.  (Contract memo. attached hereto.)


How long we remained silent in the midst of a speechless wonder, I
haven't the least idea.  Words were wholly inadequate even feebly to
express the mingled feelings with which we slowly digested the full
force and import of this remarkable document.

So the very heart and essence of the tragedy, the crimson woof that
knitted together the dark warp of its fabric, had all along been unreal
and without substance!  For a gem that can not be applied to its
ordained function can scarcely be said to have an existence.  Yet the
Paternoster ruby had been potent to project its maleficent influence
from the depths of its watery grave, and shape the destinies of the
living.  Verily, Fate never played a grimmer joke.

My thoughts drifted back to the night of the murder.  Why had Felix
Page paused beside the table while going between the hidden safe and
Maillot, who was waiting in the library?  I could imagine only one
explanation: as he passed the table he was seized with a sudden impulse
to impart the secret to the young man, even going to the extent of
setting down the jewel-box so that one hand would be free to manipulate
the tack-heads.  But a second thought had prevailed.  He picked up the
box and proceeded on his way.

Genevieve, round-eyed, sat staring into the dying fire.  (That was a
jolly fire!)  Presently her head bent over to my shoulder, and without
looking up she quoted a familiar couplet which must have occurred to
the reader ere this:

  "Full many a gem of purest ray serene
  The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear."

I mention the circumstance because it prompted an idea which suddenly
set me to laughing.  Genevieve looked at me in alarm.

"What in the world!" she marvelled, for the silence had been very
sedate.

"Little girl," I at last enlightened her, "it will pay you to go with
me when we leave here--to the Central Station.  There 's something I
want us to enjoy together; it will compensate for a deal of your late
trouble and anxiety."

"What is it?"

"I want to hand Alexander Burke these papers, tell him they 're what
was hidden in the table--then quietly watch him while he reads."

I meant to do it, too.  But Genevieve failed to enter into the spirit
of the suggestion.

"Mercy!" she shuddered.  "I don't want to gloat over the poor wretch."

I said no more about it, but--well, the result was all that I had
anticipated.

Genevieve reminded me that we should be thankful for having been
relieved from a final perplexity.

"I don't understand," said I.

"Why, we haven't the ruby to dispose of; that would have puzzled even
you."

"I don't know about that.  Royal gave it to me.  I see where I stand to
lose a fortune.  Five hundred thousand--_whew_!"

Suddenly she snuggled closer and clasped her hands tightly upon my
shoulder.  Her hair teased my cheek, and the delicate perfume of it
made me light-headed.  Twisting her pretty head sideways, she flashed
an arch look at me from under her lashes, then glanced quickly away
again.  Blue eyes and long dark lashes are a potently disturbing
combination.

"Well," she sighed, "the Page case may have cost you a fortune, but--it
gave you _me_.  And _I_--for one--am very content and happy, Mr. Swift."




THE END