Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


The Cliff Climbers
A Sequel to "The Plant Hunters"

By Captain Mayne Reid
________________________________________________________________________
The book begins with two young brothers and an Indian guide, in a valley
in the Himalayas, into which they had ascended with some difficulty in
the preceding book - "The Plant Hunters".

Unfortunately they find they cannot get out at the top of the valley,
and they cannot go back the way they came.  So they are stuck.

They try various ingenious ideas for getting out, each of which appears
as though it would work, but in the end does not, usually in a quite
entertaining way.  Eventually they do think of a way, which I will not
divulge here, and they get out, but it had been a long nerve-racking
period before their final release.

The copy of the book I worked from looked at first sight as though it
had been beautifully printed.  But this turned out to be a delusion, for
the type-setting had been truly awful.  It does seem sad that an author,
a well-known one at the time, could take the trouble to write a good
book, that he should use a good publisher, and a good illustrator, a
good book-binder, only to have the whole thing let down by very poor
type-setting.  And that goes on down to proof-reading, too, for the
publisher should have checked all this as well.  NH
________________________________________________________________________

THE CLIFF CLIMBERS
A SEQUEL TO "THE PLANT HUNTERS"

BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID


CHAPTER ONE.

THE HIMALAYAS.

Who has not heard of the Himalayas--those Titanic masses of mountains
that interpose themselves between the hot plains of India and the cold
table-lands of Thibet--a worthy barrier between the two greatest empires
in the world, the Mogul and the Celestial?  The veriest tyro in
geography can tell you that they are the tallest mountains on the
surface of the earth; that their summits--a half-dozen of them at
least--surmount the sea-level by more than five miles of perpendicular
height; that more than thirty of them rise above twenty thousand feet,
and carry upon their tops the eternal snow!

The more skilled geographer, or _geognosist_, could communicate hundreds
of other interesting facts in relation to these majestic mountains; vast
volumes might be filled with most attractive details of them--their
_fauna_, their _sylva_, and their _flora_.  See also pg. 755. [50] _Memorias
of the Academy of Historia_, volume VI, ill. Lampillas .-- 16, _Letteratura
Spagnuola_, Volume II, pp. 382 et seq and 792 et seq .-- Marineo, _Cosas
memorables_, fol. 11 .-- _Semanario erudito_, Volume XVIII. [51]
Clemencín, _Elogio of Queen Isabel_ .-- Mendez, _Typografía
española_, pp. 35 et seq. [52] It is worth noted that the absurd
belief in incantations, which were so widespread in Germany, England
and France until recently was not generally accepted in Spain, look
like regular home of all superstition.

At the time, which burned thousands sorcerers and German was a
crime to doubt even the pacts with the devil, the Spaniards made fun
of these things, looking as delusions and deceits of the plebs. See
_Coloquio of perros_ and _Licenciado Vidriera_, Cervantes, and the
comedies of Lope de Vega and Agustin de Salazar, entitled _The gentleman
Olmedo_ and _The second Celestina_. The first says: "I do not believe
in witchcraft, that all are vanity: Those who are entered will merit
and obstinacy." And the last is read as follows: "Well, heel, and all
are, not who you are stunning views fools, because they are witches
because men are stupid. "[53] Jovellanos, _Memorias on entertainment
públicas_, p. 36. .-- Navarrete, _Vida of Cervantes_, pp. 113 and
456. [54] reads as Lope de Vega in volume XV of _Comedias_, in
dedication to D.

Rodrigo de Tapia, a knight of Santiago, the ungrateful arrepentido_ _The
entitled: "The actions of a square are not inferior to the
just and tournaments on horseback, but most gallant daring, for the
ferocity of the enemy, that a gentleman undertaken in a fair armed his
opponent, while bearing the risk, pathetic example of who was the king
of France, and is rightly held that the censorship of the Turkish
brother said that was not really for _que and teasing mucho_ not it
is as big as a bull waiting for the skill, spirit and courage with
which your worship rushed and paid the fierceness of the more angry
he has seen the Tagus and Jarama created along its banks appeared
in the eyes of FS, SS.

AA. and all this court action worthy of those years, such ascendants and
such obligations, together with such galas, forced me to bring that same
day the Mets, with envy of other pens, etc.. [55] Mariana, _De rebus
hispanicis_, lib. XI, chaps. 13 and 14 .-- Andres Mendo, _De ordinibus
equestribus_ .-- Caro de Torres, _Historia of the military orders
of Santiago Calatrava and Alcántara_: Madrid, 1629. [56] Calderón, for
example, was inspired by _The Knight of the Febo_ writing a _Castillo
of Lindabridis_; in _Fierabrás_, for his _Puente of Mantible_;
Montalván in _The Palmerin of Otiva_, to write his comedy of the
same title, etc.. [57] are permissible here to refer in passing to
an art who arrived in Spain to high altitudes, and who seek only
to historians who have written so far on this point.

We talk about the color of sculpture in wood, which produced innumerable
works throughout the peninsula, mainly in the southern provinces. The
best are of the seventeenth century, which flourished in many
famous teachers, such as mountains, Alonso Cano, Bernardo de
Mora, and Pedro de Mena and Alonso. Masterpieces of this species,
so remarkable for the perfection of his sculpture and for its pure
color and taste, are in Seville (in the Hospital de la Caridad, La
Cartuja, etc..) And Granada (San Jerónimo and the new provincial museum).
[58] V. the historical memory of D.
Towards the east--in Bhotan and Sikhim--they are chiefly of
the Mongolian stock, in customs and manners resembling the people of
Thibet, and, like them, practising the religion of the Lamas.  In the
western Himalayas there is an admixture of Ghoorka mountaineers, Hindoos
from the south, Sikhs from Lahore, and Mahometans from the old empire of
the Moguls; and here, also, are to be found, in full profession, the
three great representative religions of Asia--Mahometan, Buddhist, and
Brahmin.

The population, however, is exceedingly small compared with the surface
over which it is distributed; and there are many tracts in the Himalayan
hills, thousands of square miles in extent, where no human being
dwells--where no chimney sends up its smoke.  Indeed, there are vast
tracts, especially among the high snow-covered summits, that have either
never been explored, or only very rarely, by the adventurous hunter.
Others there are quite inaccessible; and it is needless to say, that the
highest peaks--such as Chumulari, Kinchinjunga, Donkia, Dawalghisi, and
the like--are far beyond the reach of even the most daring climber.
Perhaps no one has ever ascended to the height of five miles above the
level of the sea; and it is a question whether at that elevation a human
being could exist.  At such a height it is probable that animal life
would become extinct, by reason either of the extreme cold or the rarity
of the atmosphere.

Though the Himalaya mountains have been known from the earliest historic
times--for they are the _Imaus_ and _Emodus_ of the ancient writers--it
is only within the present century that we in Europe have obtained any
definite knowledge of them.  The Portuguese and Dutch--the first
European colonists of India--have told us very little about them; and
even our own Anglo-Indian writers were long silent upon this interesting
theme.  Exaggerated accounts of the hostility and cruelty of the
Himalayan highlanders--more especially the Ghoorkas--prevented private
explorations; and with the exception of some half-dozen books, most of
them referring to the western section of the Himalayas, and
comparatively valueless, from the want of scientific knowledge on the
part of their authors, this vast tract has remained almost a _terra
incognita_ up to the present time.

Of late, however, we have obtained a better acquaintance with this
interesting portion of the earth's surface.  The botanist, lured thither
by its magnificent _flora_, has opened to us a new world of vegetation.
Royle and Hooker have ably achieved this task.  The zoologist, equally
attracted by its varied _fauna_, has made us acquainted with new forms
of animal life.  Hodgson and Wallich are the historians in this
department.  Scarcely less are we indebted to the sportsman and hunter--
to Markham, Dunlop, and Wilson the "mountaineer."

But in addition to these names, that have become famous through the
published reports of their explorations, there are others that still
remain unrecorded.  The _plant-hunter_--the humble but useful
commissioner of the enterprising nurseryman--has found his way into the
Himalayas; has penetrated their most remote gorges; has climbed their
steepest declivities; and wandered along the limit of their eternal
snow.  In search of new forms of leaf and flower, he has forded the
turbid stream, braved the roaring torrent, dared the dangerous
avalanche, and crossed the dread crevasse of the glistening glacier; and
though no printed book may record his adventurous experience, not the
less has he contributed to our knowledge of this great mountain world.
Chapter Fourth Chapter "My only desire now was," Wilhelm drove away,
"a second production of the play to see. I was the mother, and
this looked to be located a hour, the father bereden alone their effort
was in vain.
It is ours
to chronicle the story of an humble expedition of this kind--the
adventures of a young plant-hunter, the _employe_ of an enterprising
"seedsman" well-known in the world's metropolis.


CHAPTER TWO.

A VIEW FROM CHUMULARI.

Our scene lies in the very heart of the Himalayas--in that district of
them least explored by English travellers, though not the most distant
from the Anglo-Indian capital, Calcutta.  Almost due north of this city,
and in that portion of the Himalayan ranges embraced by the great bend
of the Burrampooter, may be found the spot upon which our interest is to
be fixed.  Literally may it be termed a spot, when compared in
superficies with the vast extent of wilderness that surrounds it--a
wilderness of bleak, barren ridges, of glistening glaciers, of snow-clad
summits, soaring one above another, or piled incongruously together like
cumuli in the sky.

In the midst of this chaos of rock, ice, and snow, Chumulari raises his
majestic summit, crowned and robed in white, as becomes his sacred
character.  Around are other forms, his acolytes and attendants, less in
stature, but mighty mountains nevertheless, and, like him, wearing the
vestment of everlasting purity.

Could you stand upon the top of Chumulari, you would have under your
eye, and thousands of feet below your feet, the scene of our narrative--
the arena in which its various incidents were enacted.  Not so unlike an
amphitheatre would that scene appear--only differing from one, in the
small number of the _dramatis persona_, and the entire absence of
spectators.

From the top of Chumulari, looking down among the foot hills of this
majestic mountain, you might behold a valley of a singular character--so
singular as at once to fix your attention.  You would note that it is of
a regular oval shape; and that instead of being bounded by sloping
declivities, it is girt by an almost vertical cliff that appears to be
continuous all around it.  This cliff of dark granitic rock you might
guess with your eye to rise several hundred feet sheer from the bottom
of the valley.  If it were in the season of summer, you might further
observe, that receding from its brow a dark-coloured declivity of the
mountain rises still higher, terminating all around in peaks and
ridges--which, being above the snow-line are continually covered with
the pale white mantle that has fallen upon them from the heavens.

These details would be taken in at the first glance; and then your eye
would wander into the valley below, and rest there--fixed by the
singularity of the scene, and charmed by its soft loveliness--so
strongly contrasting with the rude surroundings on which you had been
hitherto gazing.

The form of the valley would suggest the existence of the grand
elliptical crater of some extinct volcano.  But instead of the black
sulphuric _scoria_, that you might expect to see strewed over its base,
you behold a verdant landscape of smiling loveliness, park-like plains
interposed with groves and copses, here and there a mound of rock-work,
as if piled artificially and for ornament.  Around the cliffs appears a
belt of forest of darker green; and occupying the centre a limpid lake,
on whose silver surface at a certain hour of the day you might see
reflected part of the snow-crowned summit on which you are standing--the
cone of Chumulari itself.

With a good glass you might distinguish quadrupeds of several _species_
straying over the verdant pastures; birds of many kinds upon the wing,
and others disporting themselves upon the surface of the lake.

You would be tempted to look for a grand mansion.  You would send your
glance in every direction, expecting to see chimneys and turrets
overtopping the trees; but in this you would be disappointed.

On one side of the valley, near to the base of its bounding cliff, you
might see a white vapour ascending from the surface of the earth.  It
would be an error to believe it smoke.  It is not that--only the _rime_
rising over a hot-spring bubbling out from the rocks and forming the
little rivulet, that, like a silver string, connects it with the lake.

Charmed with the view of this lovely valley, you would desire to visit
it.  You would descend the long slope of Chumulari, and straggling
through the labyrinth of rugged foot hills that surround it, you would
reach the brow of the bounding precipice; but there you must come to a
halt.  No path leads downward; and if you are still determined to set
foot on the shores of that smiling lake, you will have to make the
descent of the cliffs by means of a rope or rope-ladder several hundred
feet in length.

With comrades to help you, you may accomplish this; but once in the
valley, you can only get out of it by remounting your rope-ladder: for
you will find no other means of exit.

At one end of the valley you may perceive a gap in the cliffs; and fancy
that through this you may make your way out to the side of the mountain.
The gap may be easily reached, by going up a gentle acclivity; but
having passed through it, you will discover that it only guides you into
a gorge, like the valley itself, bounded on both sides by precipitous
cliff's.  This gorge is half filled by a glacier; on the surface of
which you may pass for a certain distance downward.  At the end of that
descent you will find the glacier cut by a deep crevasse, a hundred feet
in depth and a hundred in width.  Without bridging the crevasse, you can
go no further; and if you did succeed in bridging it, further down you
would find others deeper and wider, over which it would be impossible
for you to pass.

Return then, and examine the singular valley into which you have made
your way.  You will find there trees of many kinds, quadrupeds of many
kinds, birds of many kinds, and insects of many kinds--you will find
every form of animal life, except that of the human being.  If you find
not man, however, you may discover traces of him.  Close to the
hot-spring, and forming a sort of "lean-to" against the cliff, you may
observe a rude hut built with blocks of stone, and plastered with mud
from the bed of the rivulet.  Enter it.  You will find it empty, cold,
untenanted by living thing.  No furniture.  Stone couches covered with
sedge and grass, upon which men may have slept or lain; and two or three
blocks of granite upon which they may have sat.  That is all.  Some
pieces of skin hanging around the walls, and the bones of animals
strewed over the ground outside, give a clue to the kind of food upon
which the inhabitants of the hut may have subsisted.  Hunters they must
have been.  That will be your natural conjecture.

But how did they get into this valley, and how got they out of it?  Of
course, like yourself, they descended into it, and then ascended out
again, by means of a rope-ladder.

That would be the explanation at which you would arrive; and it would be
a satisfactory one, but for a circumstance that just now comes under
your observation.

Scanning the _facade_ of the cliff, your eye is arrested by a singular
appearance.  You perceive a serried line, or rather a series of serried
lines, running from the base in a vertical direction.  On drawing nearer
to these curious objects, you discover them to be ladders--the lowest
set upon the earth, and reaching to a ledge, upon which the second is
rested; this one extending to a second ledge, on which the third ladder
finds support; and so on throughout a whole series of six.

At first sight, it would appear to you as if the _ci-devant_ denizens of
the hut had made their exodus from the valley by means of these ladders;
and such would be the natural conviction, but for a circumstance that
forbids belief in this mode of exit: _the ladders do not continue to the
top of the cliff_!  A long space, which would require two or three more
such ladders to span it, still intervenes between the top of the highest
and the brow of the precipice; and this could not have been scaled
without additional ladders.  Where are they?  It is scarcely probable
they had been drawn up; and had they fallen back into the valley, they
would still be there.  There are none upon the ground.

But these conjectures do not require to be continued.  A short
examination of the cliff suffices to convince you that the design of
scaling it by ladders could not have succeeded.  The ledge against which
rests the top of the highest must have been found too narrow to support
another; or rather, the rocks above and projecting over would render it
impossible to place a ladder upon this ledge.  It is evident that the
scheme had been tried and abandoned.

The very character of the attempt proves that they who had made it must
have been placed in a desperate situation--imprisoned within that
cliff-girt valley, with no means of escaping from it, except such as
they themselves might devise.

Moreover, after a complete exploration of the place, you can find no
evidence that they ever did escape from their strange prison; and your
thoughts can only shape themselves into conjectures, as to who they were
that had wandered into this out-of-the-way corner of the world; how they
got into, and how out of it; and, finally, whether they ever succeeded
in getting out at all.  Your conjectures will come to an end, when you
have read the history of the _Cliff-climbers_.


CHAPTER THREE.

THE PLANT-HUNTER AND HIS COMPANIONS.

Karl Linden, a young German student, who had taken part in the
revolutionary struggles of 1848, had by the act of banishment sought an
asylum in London.  Like most refugees, he was without means; but,
instead of giving himself up to idle habits, he had sought and obtained
employment in one of those magnificent "nurseries" which are to be met
with in the suburbs of the world's metropolis.  His botanical knowledge
soon attracted the attention of his employer, the proprietor of the
nursery--one of those enterprising and spirited men who, instead of
contenting themselves with merely cultivating the trees and
flowering-plants already introduced into our gardens and greenhouses,
expend large sums of money in sending emissaries to all parts of the
earth, to discover and bring home other rare and beautiful kinds.

These emissaries--botanical collectors, or "plant-hunters," as they may
be called--in the pursuit of their calling, have explored, and are still
engaged in exploring, the wildest and most remote countries of the
globe--such as the deep, dark forests upon the Amazon, the Orinoco, and
the Oregon in America; the hot equatorial regions of Africa; the
tropical jungles of India; the rich woods of the Oriental islands; and,
in short, wherever there is a prospect of discovering and obtaining new
floral or sylvan beauties.

The exploration of the Sikhim Himalaya by the accomplished botanist,
Hooker--recorded in a book of travels not inferior to that of the great
Humboldt--had drawn attention to the rich and varied _flora_ of these
mountains; and in consequence of this, the enterprising "seedsman" who
had given Karl Linden temporary employment in his garden, promoted him
to a higher and more agreeable field of labour, by sending him as a
"plant-hunter" to the Thibetan Himalayas.

Accompanied by his brother, Caspar, the young botanist proceeded to
Calcutta; and, after a short residence there, he set out for the
Himalayas--taking a direction almost due north from the city of the
Ganges.

He had provided himself with a guide, in the person of a celebrated
Hindoo hunter or "shikaree," called Ossaroo; and this individual was the
sole attendant and companion of the two brothers--with the exception of
a large dog, of the boar-hound species, which had been brought with them
from Europe, and that answered to the name of Fritz.

The young botanist had come to India furnished with a letter of
introduction to the manager of the Botanical Garden of Calcutta--an
establishment of world-wide renown.  There he had been hospitably
received on his arrival in the Oriental city; and during his sojourn he
had spent much of his time within its boundaries.  Moreover, the
authorities of the place, interested in his expedition, had given him
all the information in their power as to the route he intended
pursuing--though that was not much: for the portion of the Himalayas he
was about to explore was at that time a _terra incognita_ to
Englishmen--even in the city of Calcutta!

It is not necessary here to detail the many adventures that befel our
plant-hunter and his party, during the progress of their journey towards
the Himalayas, and after they had entered within the grand gorges of
these mountains.  Suffice it to say, that in pursuit of a beautiful
little animal--a "musk-deer"--they had gone up a gully filled by one of
those grand glaciers so common in the higher Himalayas; that the pursuit
had led them far up the ravine, and afterwards conducted them into a
singular crater-like valley--the one already described; that once in
this valley, they could find no way out of it, but by the ravine through
which they had entered; and that on returning to make their exit, they
discovered to their great consternation that a crevasse in the glacier,
over which they had passed, had opened during their absence, and to such
an extent as to render their exit impossible!

They had endeavoured to span this crevasse; and had spent much time in
making a bridge of pine-trees for the purpose.  They had succeeded at
length in getting across the chasm--but only to find others in the
glacier below, which no ingenuity could enable them to get over.

They were compelled to abandon the idea, and return again to the valley;
which, though lovely to the eye, had now become hateful to their
thoughts: since they knew it to be their _prison_.

During their residence in the place, many adventures befel them with
wild animals of various kinds.  There chanced to be a small herd of
"yaks," or grunting oxen, in the valley; and these formed for a time the
staple article of their food.  Caspar, who, though younger than Karl,
was the more skilled hunter of the two, had a very narrow escape from
the old yak bull; though he succeeded at length in killing the dangerous
animal.  Ossaroo was very near being eaten up by a pack of wild dogs--
every one of which he afterwards succeeded in killing; and Ossaroo was
also in danger of being swallowed up by an enemy of a very different
kind--that is by a _quicksand_, into which he had got his legs while
engaged in taking fish out of a net!

Karl was not without _his_ hair-breadth "'scape"--having been chased by
a bear along a ledge of the cliff, from which he was compelled to make a
most perilous descent.  The bear itself took refuge in a cave, where it
was afterwards pursued and killed, by all three acting in concert,
materially assisted by the dog Fritz.  They had incurred great risk in
this chase of the bear: for although they had succeeded in destroying
the formidable animal they lost themselves in the great labyrinthine
cavern, and were only able to find their way out by making a fire with
the stocks of their guns, and rendering the bear's-grease available for
candles--which fortunately enabled them to extricate themselves.

During the pursuit of the bear, and their subsequent endeavours to find
their way out, our adventurers had been struck by the enormous
dimensions of the cavern in which the animal had taken refuge; and in
the hope that some of its great galleries might lead out through the
mountain, and offer them a way of escape from the valley, they had made
torches, and explored it from end to end.  It was all to no purpose; and
becoming satisfied that there was no exit by way of the cavern, they had
at length desisted from the search.

From this point shall we continue, in more circumstantial detail, the
history of their attempts to escape from their mountain prison; which
they were now convinced could only be done by _climbing the cliff_ that
encircled it.

The Cliff Climbers--by Captain Mayne Reid


CHAPTER FOUR.

HOME TO THE HUT.

Emerging from the cave after their fruitless exploration, all three--
Karl, Caspar, and Ossaroo--sat down upon the rocks in front of the
cliff, and for some time remained silent.  The looks of all betokened a
deep and hopeless despair.  The same thought was passing in their minds.
A painful thought it was--that they were completely cut off from all
communication with the world, and might never again look on human faces,
save their own!

Caspar was the first to give expression to this gloomy foreboding.

"Oh, brother!" groaned he, addressing himself to Karl, who sat nearest
to him, "oh! it is an awful fate!  Here must we live, here must we die,
far away from home, far away from the world--alone--alone!"

"No," replied Karl, deeply moved by the distress of his brother, "no,
Caspar, not alone--God is with us.  Let Him be our world."

However Caspar in his conscience might have acknowledged the justice of
the admonition, it failed to cheer him.  Indeed, he could not help
perceiving, that Karl had uttered the speech half doubtingly, and with
the design of affording consolation.  Moreover, the effort which Karl
was making to look hopeful and cheerful was evidently constrained; and
only the more convinced his companions that neither hope nor joy was in
his breast.

To Karl's consolatory words his brother made no rejoinder.  Ossaroo,
however, gave vent to his thoughts by an ambiguous shake of the head,
and a brief speech characteristic of that belief in fatalism peculiar to
his race.

"Ah, sahibs," said he, addressing himself to both, "if the Great Sahib
in the sky will we go out from here, we go--if He no will, we no go--
nivvamore."

Ossaroo's speech, however compatible with a true faith, did not
contribute much towards cheering the spirits of the party; and for
another long interval all remained silent.

Caspar and Ossaroo appeared completely prostrated by the new
disappointment.  Karl, on the other hand, seemed less disposed to view
things despairingly; and as he sate, was evidently engaged in active
thought.

After awhile his companions observed this; though neither made any
attempt to rouse him from his reverie.  They guessed, that, whatever was
passing in his mind would soon be communicated to them.

They were right in this conjecture: for in a few minutes Karl terminated
the silence by addressing them.

"Come!" said he, speaking in a tone of encouragement, "we are wrong in
so soon yielding to despair.  Let us not give up, till we are beaten at
all points.  I have told you what my object was, when I first mounted
upon that ledge, and discovered the cave and its surly occupant, the
bear.  I thought then, that, if we could find a series of ledges one
above another, and sufficiently near each other, we might plant ladders
upon them, and so reach the top.  You see that there is such a
succession of ledges--just before your faces there.  Unfortunately there
is one of the spaces high up yonder--where the cliff is darkest--that
cannot be less than sixty or seventy feet in width.  I have ascertained
that by comparing it with the height from the ground to the cave--which
I had just finished measuring when I met the bear.  It would be
impossible for us to make a ladder that length--or even to hoist it up
there if made--so that all thought of scaling the cliff at this point
must be given up."

"Perhaps," interposed Caspar, catching at Karl's idea, "there may be
some other part of the precipice where the ledges are nearer to each
other?  Did you examine it all around?"

"No.  I had got no further than this place, when I met Master Bruin;
and, as you know, our adventures with him and our exploration of the
cave have taken up our time ever since, and, indeed, driven the design
of the ladders quite out of my head.  Now, however, we may return to it;
and our next move will be to go all round, and see whether a better
place may not be discovered.  To-night it is too late.  It already
begins to darken; and we must have clear daylight for such a purpose.
Let us home to our hut, and have some supper and then go to rest--having
first prayed to Him for success.  We may rise in better spirits, and
continue our examination in the morning."

To this proposal there was no objection on the part of either Caspar or
Ossaroo.  On the contrary, the mention of supper--both being very
hungry--had caused them to start to their feet with remarkable alacrity;
and Karl, taking the lead, they followed him, Fritz in turn following
them.

On arriving at their hut, supper was cooked and eaten, with that zest
which hunger always gives, even to the coarsest viands; and, having
carried out the remaining part of the programme which Karl had
suggested--that is, the offering up a prayer for success on the morrow--
the trio sought their grass-covered couches with a feeling of renewed
hopefulness.


CHAPTER FIVE.

A MIDNIGHT INTRUDER.

They had been asleep several hours, when all three were suddenly
awakened by the barking of Fritz.  During night hours the faithful
creature stayed habitually within the hut--where he also had his bed of
dry grass.  On hearing any unusual noise without, he would rush forth
and prowl about for awhile; and, after satisfying himself that there was
no enemy in the neighbourhood, would return quietly to his lair.

Fritz was far from being a noisy dog.  He had seen too much service, and
gathered too much wisdom, to waste his breath in idle barking; and it
was only upon grand and important occasions that he condescended to give
tongue.  Then, however, his bark--or bay, it should rather be termed--
was terrific.

On the occasion in question--which happened just about the hour of
midnight--the three sleepers were suddenly awakened by his expansive
"yowl," that filled the whole valley, and reverberating from the cliffs,
appeared continuous.  The dog, after uttering this warning note, had
rushed out of the hut--which had no door to it--and it was from some
place down near the lake that his barking appeared to proceed.

"What can it be?" was the prompt and _very_ natural inquiry of the three
individuals, whom Fritz had so abruptly awakened from their slumbers.

"Something Fritz is frightened at," said Caspar, who knew the dog's
nature better than either of the others.  "He don't bark that way at any
sort of game that he knows he can conquer.  It's some animal that's a
match for him, I warrant.  If the old yak bull were still alive, I
should say it was he."

"There may be tigers in this valley; I never thought of that," rejoined
Karl.  "Now that I do think of it," continued he, drawing upon the
reminiscences of his zoological reading, "it is quite probable.  People
believe the tiger to be exclusively an inhabitant of tropical or
subtropical regions.  That is an error.  On this continent (the speaker
was in Asia) the royal Bengal tiger ranges at least as far north as the
latitude of London.  I know he is found on the Amoor as high as the
fiftieth degree."

"Mercy on us!" broke in Caspar; "it may be a tiger, and we have never
thought of having a door to our hut!  If it should be one--"

Here the hypothetic speech of Caspar was abruptly brought to a
conclusion, by a singular noise from without--which was heard mingling
in chorus with the baying of Fritz.

The noise in question bore some resemblance to the sound of a trumpet,
only sharper and more treble in its character.  It was in effect more
like the squeak of a _penny trumpet_ than the real article; and yet,
withal, there was something terrifying in the sound.

It must have terrified Fritz: for the moment after it was heard, the dog
came rushing back into the hut, as if pursued by a legion of horned
bulls; and, though he kept up his angry baying, he appeared altogether
disinclined to venture out again.

Just then, the singular noise was heard outside the door--something
between a shriek and a whistle--and this time with a far more terrifying
effect: since, whatever produced it--bird, beast, or man--was evidently
near, and still approaching nearer.

Of the three individuals within the hut, only one had ever before heard
a sound exactly similar to that.  Ossaroo was the one.  The old shikaree
recognised the noise the moment it reached his ears, and knew perfectly
well the sort of instrument that must have been producing it; but he was
hindered for a time from proclaiming his knowledge, by surprise, as well
as a strong feeling of terror at hearing such a sound in such a place.

"By de wheels ob Juggernaut car!" he gasped out.  "Can't be--can't be;
no possible him be here."

"Who?  What?" demanded Karl and Caspar, in a breath.

"See, sahibs! it him--it him!" hurriedly rejoined the Hindoo, in a sort
of shrieking whisper.  "We all perish--it him--it him--de god--de
mighty--de terrible--"

There was no light within the hovel, except a faint glimmer from the
moon shining brightly enough outside; but it did not require any light
to tell that the shikaree was frightened pretty nearly out of his
senses.  His companions could discover by his voice that he had suddenly
changed position, and was retreating backward to that corner of the hut
furthest from the doorway.  At the same time his words reached them in
whispers, cautioning them to lie close and keep silent.

Both, without knowing what the danger was, of course obeyed injunctions
thus emphatically delivered; and remained sitting up on their couches
without uttering a word.  Ossaroo, after having delivered his cautioning
speeches, kept equally silent.

Once more the strange sound fell upon their ears--this time as if the
instrument that produced it had been thrust into the doorway of the
hovel.  At the same instant the turf outside, hitherto glistening under
a bright moonlight, became darkened by the shadow of an enormous
creature--as if the queen of night had suddenly disappeared behind the
blackest of clouds!  Still the light could be seen beyond, and the moon
was shining.  It was no cloud that had obscured her; but some vast body
moving over the earth, and which, having come up to the front of the
hovel, was there halting.

Karl and Caspar fancied they could see a gigantic living form, with huge
thick limbs, standing outside; but, indeed, both were as much terrified
by the apparition as Ossaroo himself, though perhaps for a different
reason.

Your slave 'and I'm all of those, The ring on this finger bear. "Although
fell horrified and afraid Zagen The Aladdin speaking as strong as ever,
but only need to rescue, he quickly gave the spirit to answer:" Who
you always seist, Help me, where's in your power, That is a gruesome
places!

"were hardly discussed, the words" As he found himself during
the day Shell After he feels a pull, in the open again at the point
where he led the Zaubrer. But showed no more Blocks And no door to the
tomb walls; Only erloschnen sticks from a fire Häuflein ash was
around.

While glad to die, but dull and half-starved, he greedily sought after
home in the city. Fortunately it was not too difficult. The rocks helped
him close and tight on the narrow path to reach the three days before
he committed. The gardens were soon in sight, And far been greeted him
ahead of the well-known towers and rooftops.

He dragged weak and weaker, until Of to his mother's house and suggested,
as soon as he entered it, fainted in the room out. The mother, who
from the beginning with the time crying and praying with him and spent
last robs Any hope, believed dead, was the greatest endeavor to Him back
to itself to bring, but he said, barely animated: "Oh, mother, hol 'me,
above all, what to eat her, as fast must I three days altogether." She
gave him what was in the house , and warns him to get überhasten,
because what is rapidly hinunterwürge, Das could not verdau'n good,
And just so that he promise her, slowly and properly kau'n, drum
should, while he was at the table, it does not Ask and answer
torment, he may 'tell her nothing more, as until he tired and totally
fresh.

He followed this good advice, By thus employing only mute the physical
well-being sufficeth did.

But then, through the meal gekräftigt, description in the small and
in the large number of He after exactly what it is now admitted
encounter; He, as his wife wackre not wanted to believe it and swore
that he dreamed of on his finger the ring and pulled the colorful
things that he picked from the tree shows.

They too, because like you have never ever respected and always
wrong with poor people, never rich, whose value completely unrecognized.

It is said that her possession of it to the colored Geglitzer could
enjoy, but this praise to the Son Published not significant, why
it almost scornfully In irdgendeine Loading pushed.

The lamp has brought no better off, to no purpose Schien fit this
Trödelkram as to rust in the corner. confessed that the last two,
the blame for all the evil bears the false uncle rascality; klärlich
joined because it revealed that from this evil Aladdin Consecrated
was despicable Decline and only by chance, he managed to live from
the yarn to be solved.

The mother had to swear and humiliation of some curse Zaubrers resound;
But were still dieweil she spoke, the son's eyes are covered.

He had two full nights of sleep to persuade shunned; Drum heischte
the night before the Today unbezwinglich his rights.

Halb pulled, half carried abiding concern with the woman's staggering to
bed ; As he lay motionless as a stone And snored until late morning.
But no sooner had he finally awake, as his hunger came back And
the breakfast he coveted. sigh But the mother cried: "Oh, I do not
have a morsel of bread; Because everything I still obsessed with
the past, you have eaten.

How do we help ourselves out of necessity?

I must again näh'n and spin, which is before I can earn. "" No,
mother, careful 'you are not, "began The son, after some reflection.

"For our today's needs satisfied, the lamp for sale, Yesterday, I threw
aside. I want to run it to the dealer; The will certainly give me a
penny or two to pay." The mother came and she said: "Your brilliance
has long been extinguished, too, is of dust and rust and dirt from top
to bottom they are fully, if they should buy the dealer, is it
advisable that I'll clean them."

So she took because water and sand; Hardly But she began to scrub with
experienced hands, As rose in a dreadful and gruesome horror figure
Room fulfilling entire room, one up her mind before the roaring
markerschütternder With violence you anfuhr: "What is thy desire?

To serve thee, komm 'ich her. I must obeying anyone who holds the
lamp in these hands.

"Alone time before he won, in order to complete his speech, fell,
stood apart, to bemeistern The mother rang around and under air.

[Illustration: The appearance of the Spirit] But Aladdin, in the crypt
Learning how to proceed with such spirits, took the lamp quickly lined
And not to command him: "A good breakfast building 'set to'!"

The spirit vanished. Not able to count three to one, since he came back
with a large silver plate, and placed her gently down.

What some of you wish had had the thing in abundance is: twelve
silver bowls, drin And many a fine meal was included, Two bottles
fully erlesnen wine, four loaves of the best flour, short a breakfast
without miscarriage.

The mother was still faint, as is the spirit already recommended, and
could 'only slowly recovering, by the spicy scent she smelled. The son
seized them Arm And when they urged, the good food Geziemend honor to
prove, because they do not last forever remained warm. She said, puzzled
in the highest grade: "How do because this abundance? shows us his mercy
to the Sultan?" Top Aladdin: "First of enjoyment, Explanations
then hinterdrein.

"And he is a safe manner. The mother, in surprise, confused, looked at
each pause, the feast took place between her, The beautiful silver
tableware, and when the two-saturated, yet was quite enough in any
dish for this and the next day.

She asked again the key to this strange adventure, and when her son had
described wahrheit scattering the Begebnis, Staggered they fully
Scheubeck banger: "With ghosts is not good to joke; Drum success' me,
throw the lamp continued And take the pressure of my heart. "" No, "cried
he," If such a refuge, who once he has protected. Now, what I do
not only understood me clearly - the false uncle trick and the reason
of his fury. Quite the lamp wollt 'er, because they versehn gifts
with wonder, And right now it belongs to me. I want to salvage and protect
while ago our neighbors envy and greed, but in emergency use, and the
ring on my hand. I can trust my luck, because this rogue arge treacherousness
so good to have that issue. "4 [Illustration: D] Once it's all on the
Tilt, Holds thus sparing one house, and that the hunger permanently
silent, Does not matter how fat treat. The dishes were so empty, and
Aladdin, the early risers beneath the stomach growled again, picked
from the twelve, and contributed in his mantle folds you secretly
to them feilzuhalten, To the Flea in the next lane ; But as the
most mischievous man, the question did to him what price he will
leave the bowl, Aladdin, even confessed to him frankly, how much
it was worth, wiss' he does not.

The old scoundrel, covetous of their stately Tested Weight And noticed
that From the young Fant his treasures did not understand him, so
he is not selling something in front of them still can, Geschwind
a gold piece for the product.

With this he flew into muntrem run, Des advantage glad he came, The boy
for a baker and slaughterman, Dieweil him that sly fox Nachsah with quiet
Hohngelächter. In this kind gradually let Eleven bowls, one after
the other, if the distress of it was new, he became the unsuspecting Flea
hiking. Now came to him during the next case to sense the Plate poised;
could 'he does not himself contribute, Was much too heavy but its metal.
So he asked, because he has not become wiser, that rascal into the
house, and quickly paid the fraudster ten gold pieces for him. The
twelfth bowl remained behind.

After a nice money zerflossen, Wollt 'he just decided to Flea
disappearances even this last piece. But the middle of the road
became a goldsmith friendly towards him and said: "Not for the
curiosity Ask me why the same path I often, my son, see you walk. Here
lives a junk dealer in the vicinity; Hast thou with thee appeared, then
be warned and see you before, because every skin over his ear. I want
to like them, to appreciate what for sale around you, And you'd never
cheated.

"The boy was now the bowl from the dress withdrawn. The goldsmith saw
without the words Of all the pages to experts with a view and then
asked, Whether he already sells this variety andre hab 'and for
how much.

"A piece of gold he has given me," Aladdin language. "In my life, The
Spitzbub knows no measure nor aim" Staggered full of indignation.
"My son, you were not on alert and have in-depth infatuation squandered
a considerable asset. For such a dish but the same piece of gold! Unduly
O! sixty-eight Because I want to on the spot to get rich. "From
this day was the darbe For mother and son off, And overpainted with
rose colors Schien previously so gray world. If your cash is no
longer reached, Ließ Aladdin lamp spirit, Ob The mother feared before
him, and bade him show bold, new breakfast anzurichten; Punctually performed
his duties. The silver bowls and plates Bracht 'er this as often as
it was time To Goldschmied out that always was ready to full amount to
reimburse him.

Henceforth drum was it easy, convenient and comfortable to live, but
unfortunately it never doubtful that envy creeps behind fortunes And
we must guard against envious people, they avoided despite good
drink and good food any pomp in her house and her clothes and kept behind
the castle sich'rem Thus the secret golden Bronnen, The unversiegbar
they flowed. Four years were so verronnen. At a pretty young man was
Aladdin herangereist, straight and slender as a pine. Bärtchen A tiny,
delicately curved, shoot over his lip edge And nobody had more the boor,
once the turmoil in the idle time missed, recognized in him. His gaze
was now no longer tarnished by inertia, his mind through serious
handling forces rehearsed on a variety of shops. The man driving a whole,
your work, costumes, fear, hope in every craft, every office Lag like a
book open before him now. He had a lot of traffic maintained in
exchange offices, shops and merchants in his speeches and doing a noble
nature increased. Now he was also from the same customer, "What once
he has not dared to dream: That all the fiery colored fruits from
trees of that garden magic No colored glass, as he thought, but the
delicious gems. He took probably eight, from fear, you can 'steal him
drum, it any someone to tell. The mother's self-he failed strict.
Durchwandelnd the streets one day, he heard loud ungewohntermaßen A Bumbum
and Schnettretteng. To the sound of drums and trumpets Rief public a
herald that you should close every house and not enter the road
more.

Princess Bedrulbudur namely, the Sultan's daughter, wanted to go
today For the bathwater, and comfortable in front Saved Gegaff of
the people.

Because curiosity loht doubly fierce, if you encounter a ban, Ward
at once by this procedure in Aladdin awakens the desire, the Sultan's
daughter from uncovered to maintaining its veil.

He therefore slipped on light soles of the bathroom door to cats liable
furtive And then crouched behind a pillar shaft. He had not long
geharrt, as already a large state with women from the princess seam.
She took from its Nothing merkend present, entirely at ease in her
veil from the anteroom, Aladdin And, just three steps away, managed
according to your desire to face hüllenlos schaun. Was also - except
for the mother - so far from Him unvermummten Frau'n no face to
come So was with a shock he realized that this was the best here.

[Illustration: Aladdin overhears the princess] reduction in rich curls
flood their raft chestnut brown hair to her dark eyes glow Her look
was decent and full of goodness, the cheeks, gently rounded, soft And
rose like peach blossom, the two lips like coral. your growth and
career was without blame, And their sweet stimuli in the form
betrayed tausendfalt Hold bliss combined with nobility.

No wonder drum that Aladdin, After Magnificent disappeared forever as
yet tied And how appeared to be enchanted.

Although solidifies to rock and ore to stir He could not, Could 'he
felt like his heart in his chest knocked audible. Even when he was last
violently Of loszureißen was willing, however, persecuted him relentlessly
on the way home their images. The mother's was an easy thing, being
completely and utterly changed by the same care he shows to the
forehead.

Drobe you wondered, and began to auszuforschen Him why He so distracted,
distraught and silent, whether he might head to a dispute ? An
annoyance? A annoyances? But he, like a hard nut to crack, remained
inaccessible and secretive. Even as the evening on the table from her a
braungebratner rabbit was driven into the nose and the seductive
scent penetrated him, pushed him, the man confessed his increasingly
used as Good eaters, overruling the fork and the knife did not bite
And to.

As they noted that at the gates Heut every means was lost, and both
remained silent for the bet. He dreamed awake, sighed deeply, and at last
went to bed; But it is doubtful whether he slept. 5 [Illustration:
A] thing in the morning - at the spinning wheel Saß already anxious
wife fully dimmer thoughts - joined in.

And her son sat down opposite her.

"Oh, mother," emphasized he stated "I just forgive my behavior yesterday;
Pardon me, your questions that I owe you the answer remained.

But if you's with me right verübelt, Tonight I want to open dir gestehn:
I can, as far as I nachgegrübelt, Not summarize what happens to me
geschehn. I'm not sick, but rather had 'the worst pain I felt when this
mysterious fever, That rages inside me and dug.

With the name I know not to call and do not know how one's fixes , but
you'll certainly know's, if you hear what I experienced. " Plan he gave
her exact science, as yesterday at the Sultan Badegang daughter succeeded
him, your face from the light Freed from the veil to see, And like
this picture since that time his heart to come to knitting invisible
to the beautiful fairy.

"In short," so he closed his Schildrung, "No doubt, for my deadly woe
Gibt's no help, no Mildrung, it would be because that immediately yourself,
yes, even heal me from all troubles and complaints; thus taken my resolution:
Princess Bedrulbudur On the must forever be my "The mother, who by
their spiders jettisoning listened eagerly cried out, laughing:" Are
you of your senses? Yes, you're so totally infatuated? impossible to start
such a vested Think only fool. "" No , mother, "he said," no, you
are mistaken; wusst Although 'I think that you'll laugh, but my
resolve is firm and rigid.

And if you say ten, entglitten Be all my mind, it remains, the Sultan Do
I want to ask his daughter to hand. "" My son, "began the mother seriously,"
So that you learn quite consider how your speech is childish, Answer
me: who should dare Please forward this to him? "" You yourself! "
cried Aladdin quickly. "I, God forbid it me! Even the thought makes me
tremble! how you allowed your eyes to a rise upwards Sultan child?
Did you forget that a tailor Bescheidnen rank was your father, all your
ancestors Unfortunately hunger? And , then ask me, not for our ruler,
son of a prince nor niedrem to ethics, if he in his home country has
no prospect of a throne? "They preached only deaf ears." Nom's madness,
rated 'it Eigensinn; I 've sworn it to me once, And nothing shakes
me in it. As long as I am of the sky under construction Not krachend
buries its own expense, werd 'ich nicht ruhn and rest, until the princess
my wife. Yes, if you do not want to die miserable already sehn
On heut'gen day, then you need to, kost 'what it may be, in my name
to advertise it. "[Illustration: A herald proclaims the Middle of
the princess] The mother was very embarrassed. him to renounce his plan
through persuasion to move Schien hopeless at such folly. Again, she
tried it with kindness: "God knows that for my poor part, I am all
the time to get your salvation with all my strength trying. vollbrächt
For you" I the worst case, the worst act of suitable driving ; For verily,
their child's sake, a mother joyfully Tut everything. Yes, if you
liked a girl, neither too posh nor too rich, non-line würd 'ich,
but you pave your way to the goals, in your name to go free' n And
my blessings to you verleihn.

But to take just by chance that I'll do your will, daring before the
Sultan träte With such frevelnden seekers - Würd 'I vorgelassen überhaupt?
Würd' immediately after a failure to charge me in the arms and grasp
carry me to the door?

Nimm but that's me succeed, by all the pleading crowd to the
Sultan himself nah'n to me, And he who has mercy for all, heat's
also his last subject, allow me to speak freely -- How then implying
"I request you?

What is a merit you own? Can I use your name to show in honor of any
book? Can you by a seltne performance, through a forbearance vielgerühmte
art give the nerve to be at this highest flehn favor? And would still
bear in mind that you must appear before the sultan was not without
a precious gift.

You yourself will hardly vermeinen, find it in your Have A jewel of so
noble sheen, That I can offer is' a gift of the Lord of the greatest
country in the morning. "" Oh, if I grade this note, "Staggered
Aladdin calmly," Then me new courage verliehn.

I would have nothing to Sultan Presents For a good enough? correctly
'but you pretty things, The dazumal I took with me When I finstrem
mouth of the cave had escaped with skin, And my lack of experience
colored glasses for viewing.

Längst but was revelation to me; Lernt 'I by the jewelers but the difference
from wrong and real. Juwelen are not to bad, in order to decorate a crown
By auserlesne color 'and be kind, I can promise you, the Sultan, if
he respected them, violence in the eyes sting, he apparently
overflowing of grace.

"The Magic Fruit Nutshell Participated in total he made the ark,
What to this day they rested, and ordered them carefully in a beautiful
old vase, the base of his mother a birthday settings on your behalf.
Yes indeed, common Glase Kam Lautrer this fire no more now with
the Gefunkel you When blinded by daylight in the evening half-darkness.

After the sublime sheen to the two long geletzt, Aladdin picked the
word.

"What now?

Sag ', mother, you still doubt that my gift from the Sultan estimates?
You become so competitive 'I, in the palace with this gift well received.
Say, what objection you have, you order me to refuse my request?

"Although' it is not convincing, however, because he is wild and wild
bat, Sun knew they no advice as to reluctantly bowing.

"Well, my son's because you ask, Will I venture to take me, Will my
heart defying fear Me to the heavy gear easy. Just do not give me the
guilt, if it later entquillt Born a misfortune, and if we just
wrath of the Lord punished as a malefactor. "" Why not equal the
worst believe?

"replied the son of her cheerful." And if 'he really zürnend snort, then
certainly helps me further my happiness. The lamp , which has
been in years On request soaks us profusely and feeds, Will I
continue to be in danger as assisted send their minds.

"wusst Sun ', he also very handily their last Reasoned resistance of any
kind to break, And it declared itself prepared to When Sultan
vorzusprechen tomorrow, If it's in the field of possibility. 6
[Illustration: V] Before a loud impatience aroused Even before day,
in Dämmerschein The son of the mother, and she put yourself in her
party dress into it.

The vase, filled to the brim with the jewels, was in linen from her
carefully wrapped up, a fine white cloth on the inside, as a coarser
coat, apparently, after the four ends knotted with skillful hands, the
gift was as a bundle. It made so uneasy after the palace itself on
the way and degree as they arrived there, Ward opened the Torgeheg
'. first went inside the Großvezier In other high dignitaries,
lackeys, sticks and hunters; Behind urged, almost numberless, In a
dense swarm of all the people of The Sovereign Divan Floor expected
today, the bounty from a beam above Abzugewinnen.

So, to half and half pushed, they came to the wide, bright hall, the Diwan,
what was kept. There sat the Sultan in person, Umwogt folds of his purple,
your compared to the throne, The Großvezier at his side, then, his
pursuit of Winks, A very impressive escort of government officials
left and right. Anyone who in turn called to analyze stages of the throne,
presented his petition, the established language to justify a sentence ,
receives notice and must 'admit hinwieder the neighbor's place.

The mother was still a long' is not truth, but before they are legally
bethought, passed the short Diwan hour. The prince stood up, fired the
number of Harrenden and progressive in the league with his court from
the floor. The swarm went, and they went in vain as another Bemühn,
post house, where she is the Son Disappointed and substantially
mißgestimmt received.

His displeasure was not hidden, but she felt free of guilt, gently admonished
And patience for it gave her word that she would tomorrow from a new
hingehn .-- What agony! The poor boy was sitting on coals. After seven
fruitless was the attempt yet again, always with the same history: They
came and saw the sultan enthroned , right to speak, to warn and
reward, And again he broke on to it before the series was.

So there would probably unabwendlich you every day Maintained a full
year, it would not last the gaze of the ruler noticed because no
petition in the hand as you always rearmost from all over the throne grad
standing. So, when the Divan was ended on the seventh day, and he is
just in his chamber zurückbegeben, voice he turned to Großvezier:
"for some time Remarks' I know, how every day when I think sitting,
compared to my throne Expect an old statements.
Karl sent the bullet from his rifle right between the tusks of the
advancing foe; while Caspar fired both barrels of his piece "bang" into
the forehead of the monster.  Ossaroo's arrow was seen sticking through
the elephant's trunk; and the moment after Ossaroo's heels were
presented to the enemy.

Karl and Caspar also ran: for it would have been sheer madness to have
remained a moment longer in that perilous proximity.  Indeed, it is but
justice to the shikaree to say, that Karl and Caspar ran first: for they
had been the first to deliver their fire; and as soon as they had done
so, each scampered as he best could.  They ran together; and fortunately
for both a large tree was near, with low horizontal limbs, which
favoured a rapid ascent towards its top.

There was only a second of time between the commencement of their flight
and that of Ossaroo; but short as it was, it decided the preference of
the pursuer, and Ossaroo became the sole object of pursuit.

The shikaree would fain have made for the tree, to which the others were
retreating; but the proboscis of the elephant was already so far
advanced in that direction, that there was every probability it might
get lapped upon him before he could climb beyond reach.  For a moment he
was in a dilemma, and his customary coolness seemed to have forsaken
him.

The elephant was advancing upon him, its little switch of a tail
oscillating rapidly in the air, and its trunk stretched horizontally
towards him, with Ossaroo's own arrow still sticking in it.  It seemed
to know that it was he who had sent that skewer through its gristly
snout--perhaps giving it far more pain than the leaden missiles that had
flattened against its thick skull; and for this reason it had chosen him
as the first victim of its vengeance.

In truth, Ossaroo's position was one of extreme peril--so much so that
Karl and Caspar--now perceiving themselves comparatively safe from the
pursuit--uttered a simultaneous cry: both believing that their faithful
guide and follower was on the point of "coming to grief."

Ossaroo seemed bewildered at the very imminence of the danger.  But it
was only for a moment--only while he hesitated as to whether he should
try to reach the tree.  On perceiving that he could not do this with a
fair chance of safety, he turned and ran in an opposite direction.

Whither?  To the obelisk.  Yes, by good fortune, the pillar from which
he had just descended was only ten paces distant; and Ossaroo, in
returning towards it, measured the ground with less than five.  Flinging
away his now useless weapons, he clutched hold of the prominent points
of the rock, and "swarmed" up it like a squirrel.

He had good occasion to employ all his powers of agility.  A second--
half a second more--and he would have been too late: for ere he had
reached the summit of the pillar, the digit point of the elephant's
trunk was inserted under the skirt of his tunic; and had the garment
been of tougher material; Ossaroo would have been jerked back to the
ground more rapidly than he had ascended.

As it was, the cotton fabric--frail from long wear and exposure--gave
way with a loud "screed;" and although the shikaree was stripped of his
coat-tail, and suffered a rather ignominious exposure, still he had the
satisfaction of knowing that to this circumstance he was indebted for
the safety of his skin.


CHAPTER TEN.

OSSAROO ON THE OBELISK.

The moment after, Ossaroo stood upon the summit of the obelisk.  But
even there he was far from being confident of security: for the pursuer
had not abandoned the hope of being able to reach him.  On the contrary,
the infuriated animal, on finding itself baulked by the worthlessness of
the fabric composing the skirt of the shikaree, spitefully tossed the
piece of cloth from its trunk; and, rearing itself on its hind-legs,
threw its body into an erect attitude, with its fore-feet resting high
up against the rock.

One might have fancied that it was about to climb the obelisk; and this
it would certainly have done had the thing been possible.  As it was,
however, Ossaroo was not out of danger: for as the elephant stood on its
hind-legs, with its prehensile proboscis extended to the full length,
the tip of the latter was not more than six inches from the soles of his
feet.

The shikaree stood upright like a statue on its pedestal--though unlike
to a statue in his features, which were anything but unmoved.  On the
contrary, his countenance exhibited the utmost consternation.  And no
wonder: for he could plainly perceive that should the elephant succeed
in lengthening its carcase only another twelve inches, he himself would
be brushed from the summit like a fly.

In fearful suspense, therefore, did he stand, contemplating the monster
which was making every effort to reach him.

These efforts were made with as much sagacity as energy.  Not only did
the quadruped erect itself to its greatest height--standing, as one
might say, upon its toes--but on finding that it was not tall enough, it
fell back upon all fours, and then reared up afresh in an endeavour to
stretch still higher.

Several times did it repeat the attempt--on each occasion trying a
different side of the rock--as if in hopes that a greater elevation of
the ground around the base might give it that advantage of twelve inches
which it required for seizing its victim.

Fortunately for Ossaroo, the elephant had reached its very highest on
first rearing up; and though it kept going round and round the rock,
from no side could it do more than just touch with the top of its trunk
the edge of the little flat space, upon which the feet of the shikaree
were resting.

Ossaroo was beginning to be satisfied with this fact; and probably might
have come to believe himself secure in his position, but for a
circumstance that was making him uneasy.  It was, that, standing upon
such a limited surface--a pedestal whose diameter was but little over
the length of his own feet--he found it exceedingly difficult to keep
his balance.  Had he been on the ground, there would have been no
difficulty about it; but, perched as he was full twenty-feet aloft, the
thing was quite different; and, with nerves unstrung by the fearful
danger that threatened him below, it was just as much as he could do to
keep his equilibrium.

Though only a "mild Hindoo," Ossaroo was possessed of a high degree of
courage; and, most of his life having been spent as a shikaree, he had
become well inured to the risk of losing it.  Had he been a coward, or
unused to such perils as at that moment surrounded him, he would in all
likelihood have succumbed through fear; and toppled helplessly over upon
the shoulders of the merciless monster that was threatening to destroy
him.  With all his bravery, however, it was just as much as he could do
to keep his balance.  Unfortunately, in climbing up the rock, he had
been compelled to abandon his boar-spear: else with that he might have
supported himself.  His long knife was still in his belt; and this he
drew forth--not with the design of using it upon his antagonist, but
only the better to balance himself.  It is true he would have been fain
to take a chop or two at the gristly proboscis of the elephant; but he
dared not bend his body into a stooping attitude, lest his centre of
gravity might get beyond the supporting base, and thus bring about the
result he dreaded.

No other course remained for him, than to preserve his body in an
upright attitude; and, conscious of this fact, he braced his nerves to
the utmost, and maintained himself erect and rigid as a statue of
bronze.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A WHOLESALE TUMBLE.

In this attitude he remained for several minutes--the elephant all the
while continuing its efforts to reach him Karl and Caspar, seated upon
the branches of the tree, to which they had retreated, were witnesses of
the whole scene from beginning to end.  The situation of Ossaroo would
have bean sufficiently ludicrous for Caspar to have laughed at it, but
for the danger in which the shikaree was placed.  This was so evident,
that instead of indulging in anything akin to levity, Caspar looked on
with feelings of deep anxiety, Karl being equally apprehensive about the
result.  Neither could do anything to aid or rescue him, as they were
unarmed--both having dropped their pieces when ascending the tree.

I have said that Karl was as uneasy about the result as his brother.  He
was even more so.  It was not that he liked Ossaroo better, or would
have more bitterly lamented his fate, had the latter perished by the
proboscis of the elephant.  No, that was not the reason; but simply that
Karl more clearly comprehended the danger in which the shikaree was
placed.

After watching the efforts of the elephant for a short time, Caspar had
become convinced that the animal could not reach Ossaroo--so long as the
latter preserved his balance upon the summit of the rock.  Karl was
equally satisfied of this; and both by their shouts kept encouraging the
shikaree to stand firm.  But Karl soon noted another circumstance, which
was as yet unperceived by Caspar, and it was this that was inspiring him
with keener apprehension than that felt by his brother.  He had noticed
that, each time as the elephant erected himself against the obelisk, the
rock seemed slightly to shake.  Ossaroo was himself well aware of the
circumstance--and more troubled at it than any of them--for it rendered
it more difficult for him to preserve his equilibrium.  Caspar at length
also observed the trembling of the rock, but it gave him no particular
uneasiness: as, after what had passed, he felt confident that Ossaroo
would be able to keep his place.  Nor was it the fear of his falling in
that way that was distressing the young botanist; but rather a deduction
which he drew from the circumstance, not apparent to the less
philosophic mind of his brother.

The shaking of the rock had suggested to Karl a dangerous contingency.
What was it?  The speech addressed by him at that moment to Caspar will
explain.

"Oh, brother!" he exclaimed, on perceiving the danger, "if the rock
should fall--"

"No danger of that," said Caspar, interrupting him; "it stands firm
enough.  True, I see it shake a little, but only a very little; and that
only when the brute springs up against it.  Anton. Nu? what does the!

in my master study? Now Valer went out, a while ago, Juliane, and you're
still there? I believe that you have your meetings here. Wait, Lisette!
I will tell my Lord. I will avenge myself, nor for the Yesterdays;
reflect you? Lisette. I think you Keifer? What do you want with you
yesterday? Anton. A Maulschelle forgets probably at the light, they
are, but the teeth of which have gewackelt who thinks for a time
out.

Wait! wait! Lisette. Who says you kiss me? Anton. Potz star as common
foot clamps would be if all those who should get which you want to
kiss .-- Now, my Lord for thee wacker - Lisette. Thy Lord? I will
not do much. Anton. Not? How many times has he not said that such
a sacred place, a study is one of you unclean creatures should not be
entheiliget? The god of learning - wait, as he calls him - Apollo - no
woman could suffer. Even the smell of which would be against him.

He flee as it surges to the front of the pigeons. - And you think,
sir, it would so watch that you love him the God of the room driver?

Lisette. I think even you fools think God was just with you people man?
Hush, or - Anton. Yes, such a as yesterday, perhaps? Lisette. Another
beßre! the brush yesterday had more than one deserves. He ways; the
point to me, it is dark, he wants to kiss me and I push him back, he ways;
the point again, I beat him on the mouth, it does hurt him, after he
leaves, he complains, he is going to continue - I would like you
nor, if I remember it.

Anton. So I'd probably wait for it to be, how often did your Karesse want
to repeat? Lisette.

That it would still followed, they would always become weaker and
weaker his. Perhaps even the last - but as a stupid devil deserves
nothing. Anton. What I hear? is thy Ernst, Lisette? Soon I would like
to clamp the foot and to forget me again with you to tolerate. Lisette.
Keeping it as you like. What I am now located in your favor? I have
quite a different game on the track. Anton. A different? au
weh, Lisette! That was a slap in the face again, which I shall not soon
forget! A different? I dächte that you have enough at one that you even
went into the net. Lisette. And Muhammad is just nothing on it
.-- But tell me, where is thy Lord? Anton. Thank you God that he will
remain so long, and do that here fortkömmst. When he meets you, then
you're in danger, herausgeprügelt them. Lisette. But let me take care!
Where is he? He is from the post office has not returned?

Anton. How knowest thou that he went to the post office is? Lisette. Enough,
I know it. He wanted to send you a. But how was it that he even went? Ha!
ha! ha! "It is with the Schlingel nothing to start." Truly, the praise
makes me totally in love with you. Anton. Who should get the executioner
said? Lisette. O no, just tell me, is he back? Anton. Already long
ago, when he is below his father. Lisette. And what do they together?
Anton. What they do? they bicker themselves. Lisette. The son certainly
the father of his dexterity on lead?

Anton. Without doubt there must be something. Damis is quite beside
himself: he does not speak a word of the Old afford: he expects his
thousand books, which he saw; thousand, which he has read, or otherwise
thousand, which he wants to write, and hundreds of small little
books, which he has already written .
"No, young sahibs," replied the unseen Ossaroo; "me no killee, me no bit
damage.  If I only can get pass de old rogue, I safe and sound as ibber.
Here go for run!"

At the same moment the shikaree was seen shooting out from among the
branches under which he had been for the time buried; and, then running
with all his might towards the tree upon which the brothers had found
refuge.

Long before the elephant could regain its feet, Ossaroo had reached a
position of perfect security among the upper branches of the great tree;
which Karl and Caspar, no longer thinking of their guns, had also
re-ascended.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

A RING PERFORMANCE.

As the tree into which they had retreated was a very large one, there
was no longer any present fear of danger from the elephant, however
furious the latter might be; and they could look down upon it and watch
its movements with a feeling of perfect security.  The only one of the
party that was in dangerous proximity to that dreaded proboscis was
Fritz; but Fritz had already been well warned of the wicked designs of
the great brute, and was sufficiently swift-footed and sage enough to
give the animal a wide berth.

As for the elephant itself, having recovered its feet, it stood for some
seconds flapping its huge ears, and apparently in a kind of quandary--as
if taken aback by the unexpected accident that had befallen it.  Not for
long, however, did it continue in this tranquil attitude.  The arrow
still sticking in its trunk reminded it of its purposes of vengeance.
Once more angrily elevating its tail, and sounding its shrill trumpet,
it rushed towards the fallen tree, and buried its long proboscis among
the branches.  One by one it turned them over, as if in search of some
object.  It was searching for the shikaree.

After a time it desisted from this manoeuvre, and looked around--
evidently with a puzzled air, and wondering what had become of the man.
It had not seen him as he rushed towards the great tree: for his retreat
had been made while the creature was sprawling upon its back.  Just then
Fritz chanced to show himself--crouching under the branches upon which
his masters had taken refuge, and evidently envying them their secure
situation.

The sight of Fritz was enough.  It was he who had first challenged the
elephant on its approach through the woods, and had conducted it under
that terrible battery of bullets and arrows.  As soon, therefore, as the
latter set eyes upon the dog, its fury not only became rekindled, but
apparently redoubled; and, hoisting its tail on high, it charged full
tilt upon its original adversary.

Had the assailant been a boar, or even a bull, no doubt Fritz would have
stood his ground, or only swerved to one side, the better to elude the
onset, and make an attack in turn.  But with a quadruped as big as a
house--and of which Fritz, not being of Oriental origin, knew so little;
and of that little nothing that was good--one, too, evidently provided
with most formidable weapons, a tongue several feet long, and tusks in
proportion--it is not to be wondered at, nor is it any great blot upon
his escutcheon, that Fritz turned tail and fled.  So fast fled he, that
in less than a score of seconds he was out of sight--not only of his
masters in the tree, but of his pursuer, the elephant.  The latter only
followed him for some half-dozen lengths of its own carcase; and seeing
that the pursuit was likely to be a wild-goose chase, declined following
Fritz any farther.

They in the tree, as the elephant started after the dog, were in hopes
that the pursuit might carry the dangerous animal to some distance, and
thus give them time to get back to the ground, and make their escape
from the spot.

In this, however, they were doomed to disappointment; for having
desisted from the chase of the dog, the great pachyderm returned to the
point from whence it had started; and, after once more tossing the
broken branches of the fallen chestnut tree upon the point of its
proboscis, it commenced pacing round and round the fallen obelisk,
keeping in regular circles, as if it were training itself for some
performance in an amphitheatre.

For more than an hour did the brute continue this circular promenade, at
intervals stopping to give utterance to its shrieking note; but most of
the time moving on in sullen silence.  Now and then it directed its
eyes, and once or twice its trunk, towards the branches of the prostrate
tree as if it had still some suspicion that he who sent that stinging
arrow was there concealed.  Indeed, it appeared by its movements to be
keeping guard over that particular spot, lest its enemy should escape.
It had long since extracted the arrow, by placing its great foot upon
the shaft, and drawing it forth.

Fritz had stolen back to the edge of the thicket, but kept cowering so
close that the elephant could not see him.

The parties perched above were more than annoyed by their imprisonment
thus procrastinated, and began to think of how they might set themselves
free.  They talked of making a rush to possess themselves of their guns;
but to Karl this appeared too perilous to be attempted.  It was not
twenty yards from the tree to the spot where rested the dismounted
monolith; and the elephant, whose eye was in a state of continual
activity, could not fail to see them descending from the branches.  The
massive creature, though it moved about with apparently a gentle griding
step, could go almost as fast as a galloping horse; and should it espy
them in time, there would be but slight chance of eluding its prehensile
trunk.

Moreover, the sight of them--even should they succeed in regaining the
tree--would rekindle its rage, and cause it to prolong its stay upon the
ground.

There was yet another consideration that influenced them to remain
patiently on their perch.  They knew that they had provided themselves
with only a very limited quantity of ammunition.  That article had
become scarce with them; and they had prudently determined to economise
it.  Karl had only two bullets left, with just powder enough to make two
charges; while Caspar's horn and pouch were not better filled.  They
might fire their whole stock of lead into the elephant, and still not
succeed in killing a creature that sometimes walks off triumphantly with
a score of bullets "under his belt."  These shots might only have the
effect of incensing it still more, and causing it to stay upon the
ground to an indefinite period.

It was a true _rogue_--Ossaroo had long since pronounced it one--and an
"old tusker" at that.  It was therefore a most dangerous creature; and
though they knew they would never be safe in that valley until it should
be destroyed, it was agreed by all that it would be more prudent to
leave it undisturbed until some more favourable opportunity occurred for
effecting its destruction.

For these various reasons they resolved to remain quiet in the tree, and
patiently await the termination of that curious "ring performance,"
which the old tusker still continued to keep up.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

AN ODD APPEARANCE.

For the full length of another hour did the trio in the tree have their
patience tested.  During all that time the "rogue" remained upon the
ground, continuing his perambulations around the rock--until he had
trodden out a path that resembled the arena of a circus at the close of
a night's performance.

It is not necessary to say that the time hung heavily upon the hands of
the spectators--to say nothing of Fritz, who would no doubt have been
satisfied with a much shorter programme.

As regards the former, the hour might have been spent less pleasantly
than it was; for it so chanced that an _interlude_ was introduced, of so
interesting a character to all, but more especially to the naturalist
Karl, that for a while the proximity of their savage besieger was
forgotten, and they scarcely remembered that they were besieged.

Favoured by the accident of their situation, they became spectators of a
scene--one of those scenes only to be viewed amid the wild solitudes of
Nature.

Not far from the tree on which they had found shelter, stood another of
equal dimensions, but of an entirely different species.  It was a
sycamore, as even Caspar, without any botanical skill, could testify.
Its smooth bark, piebald with white and green spots, its
widely-straggling limbs and leaves, left no doubt about its being one.
It was the sycamore, identical with its European congener, the _Platanus
orientalis_.

It is the habit of this fine tree to become hollow.  Not only does the
lower part of its trunk exhibit the phenomenon of great cavities, but
holes are found high up in its main shaft or in the larger limbs.

The tree in question stood within a few yards of that on which Karl,
Caspar, and Ossaroo were perched.  It was just before their eyes,
whenever they looked in a horizontal direction; and occasionally, when
tired with watching the monotonous movements of the elephant, one or
other of them _did_ look horizontally.  The scanty foliage upon the
sycamore enabled them to see its trunk and most of its larger limbs,
without any obstruction of leaves or branches.

Caspar had not cast his eyes more than twice in the direction of this
tree, when he saw there was something peculiar about it.  Caspar was a
youth of quick sight and equally quick perception.  In the main stem of
the tree, and about six feet above its first forking, he perceived an
object that at once fixed his attention.  It looked like a goat's horn,
only that it was more like the curving tusk of a rhinoceros or a very
young elephant.  It was sticking out from the tree, with the curve
directed downwards.  Altogether, it looked quite different from a branch
of the sycamore, or anything belonging to the tree.

Once or twice, while Caspar had his eyes upon it, he thought or fancied
that it moved; but not being sure of this, he said nothing, lest the
others might laugh at him.  It would not have been the first time that
Karl, from his superior knowledge, had indulged in a laugh at his
brother's expense.

Caspar's attention being now engrossed by the peculiar appearance he had
noted, he continued to scrutinise it; and soon perceived that around the
curved excrescence there was a circular disc some eight or ten inches in
diameter, and differing in colour from the bark of the sycamore--by
being many shades darker.  This disc appeared composed of some substance
that was not ligneous: for it no more resembled wood than the curved
ivory-like object that protruded from its centre.  Had Caspar been asked
what it did look like, he would have answered that it resembled the
agglutinated mud used by swallows in building their nests--so like it,
that it might have been the same substance.

Caspar continued to scrutinise these two curious objects--the tusk-like
excrescence, and the dark disc from which it protruded; and not until he
became fully aware that the former had life in it, did he communicate
his discovery to his companions.  Of this fact he was convinced by
seeing the crescent suddenly disappear--as if drawn within the tree,
while in its place a dark round hole was alone visible.  Presently the
yellowish horn reappeared through the hole, and protruded outside,
filling it up as before!

Caspar was too much astonished by this exhibition to remain any longer
the sole proprietor of such a mysterious secret, and without more delay
he communicated his discovery to Karl, and indirectly to Ossaroo.

Both at the same time turned their eyes towards the tree, and bent them
upon the indicated spot.  Karl was as much mystified by the strange
appearance as had been Caspar himself.

Not so Ossaroo.  The moment he saw the carving ivory and the
dark-coloured disc, he pronounced, in a tone of careless indifference,
the simple phrase,--

"_Hornbill_--_de bird on him nest_."


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A CURIOUS NEST.

Just then the curved projection was observed to recede within the tree;
and in its place appeared a small dark hole, apparently the entrance to
a larger cavity.  Karl, as Caspar had done the moment before, saw this
with surprise.

"Nest?" repeated Caspar, astonished at the shikaree's statement.  "A
bird's nest?  Is that what you mean, Ossy?"

"That just it, sahib.  Nest of great biggee bird.  Feringhees him call
_horneebill_."

"Well," rejoined Caspar, not greatly enlightened by Ossaroo's
explanation, "that's very curious.  We have seen something like a horn
sticking out of the tree, though it looks more like ivory than horn.  It
may be the bill of a bird; but as to a bird itself, or the nest of one,
where is that, pray?"

Ossaroo intimated that the nest was inside the tree; and that the bird
was on the nest just behind its beak, where it ought to be.

"What! the bird is in that hole where we saw the white thing sticking
out?  Why, it quite filled the hole, and if there's a bird there, and
what we saw be its bill, I have only to say that its bill must be as big
as its body--else how can it get out and in through so small an
aperture?  Certainly I see no hole but the one.  Oh! perhaps the bird is
a _toucan_.  I have heard there are some of that sort that can go
through any place where they can pass their beaks.  Is it a toucan,
Ossaroo?"

Ossaroo could not tell what a toucan was, never having heard of such a
bird.  His ornithological knowledge went no further than to the birds of
Bengal; and the toucan is found only in America.  He stated that the
bird in the tree was called by the Feringhees a "hornbill," but it was
also known to some as the "rhinoceros bird."  Ossaroo added that it was
as large as a goose; and that its body was many times thicker than its
bill, thick as the latter appeared to be.

"And you say it has its nest inside that hole?" interrogated Caspar,
pointing to the little round aperture, which did not appear to be over
three inches in diameter.

"Sure of it, young sahib," was Ossaroo's reply.

"Well, certainly there is some living creature in there, since we have
seen it move; and if it be a bird as large as a goose, will you explain
to me how it got in, and how it means to get out?  There must be a
larger entrance on the other side of the tree."

"No, sahib," confidently asserted Ossaroo; "that you see before your
eye--that the only way to de horneebill nest."

"Hurrah for you, Ossy!  So you mean to say that a bird as large as a
goose can go in and out by that hole?  Why, a sparrow could scarcely
squeeze itself through there!"

"Horneebill he no goee in, he no goee out.  He stay inside till him
little chickees ready for leavee nest."

"Come, Ossy!" said Caspar, in a bantering way; "that story is too good
to be true.  You don't expect us to believe all that?  What, stay in the
nest till the young are ready to leave it!  And how then?  How will the
young ones help their mother out of the scrape?  How will they get out
themselves: for I suppose they don't leave the nest till they are pretty
well grown?  Come! good shikaree; let us have no more circumlocution
about the matter, but explain all these apparently inexplicable
circumstances."

The shikaree, thus appealed to, proceeded to give the explanation
demanded.

The hornbill, he said, when about to bring forth its young, selects a
hollow in some tree, just large enough conveniently to hold the nest
which it builds, and also its own body.  As soon as the nest is
constructed and the eggs all laid, the female bird takes her seat upon
them, and there remains; not only until the eggs are hatched, but for a
long time afterwards--in fact, until the young are nearly fledged and
able to take care of themselves.  In order that she may be protected
during the period of her incubation against weasels, polecats,
ichneumons, and all such vermin, a design exhibiting either wonderful
instinct or sagacity, is carried into execution by the male.  As soon as
his mate has squatted upon her eggs, he goes to work at the masonic art;
and using his great horned mandibles, first as a hod, and afterwards as
a trowel, he walls up the entrance to the nest--leaving an aperture just
large enough to be filled up by the beak of the female.  The material
employed by him for this purpose is a kind of agglutinated mud, which he
procures from the neighbouring watercourse or quagmire, and somewhat
similar to that used by the common house-swallow for constructing _its_
peculiar nest.  When dried, this mud becomes exceedingly hard--bidding
defiance to the teeth and claws of all would-be intruders, whether bird
or quadruped; and with the horny beak of the old hen projected outward,
and quite filling up the aperture, even the slippery tree-snake cannot
find room enough to squeeze his body through.  The female, thus free
from all fear of being molested, quietly continues her incubation!

When Ossaroo had got thus far with his explanation, Caspar interrupted
him with a query.

"What!" said he, "sit all the time--for weeks, I suppose--without ever
coming out--without taking an airing?  And how does she get her food?"

As Caspar put this question, and before Ossaroo had time to answer, a
noise reached their ears which appeared to proceed from the sky above
them.  It was a noise well calculated to inspire terror in those who had
never before heard it, or did not know what was causing it.  It was a
sort of fluttering, clattering sound, or rather a series of sounds,
resembling the quickly repeated gusts of a violent storm.

The moment Ossaroo heard it, he knew what it was; and instead of giving
a direct answer to Caspar's question, he simply said--

"Wait a bit, sahib.  Here come old cockee horneebill; he show you how de
hen getee her food."

The words had scarcely passed from the lips of the shikaree, when the
cause of that singular noise became known to his companions.  The maker
of it appeared before them in the form of a great bird, that with a
strong flapping of its wings flew past the tree in which they were
seated, towards that which contained the nest.

In an instant afterwards, it was seen resting on a spur-like projection
of the trunk, just below the aperture; and it needed not Ossaroo to tell
them that it was the cock hornbill that had there alighted.  The large
beak--the tip of it resembling that which they had already seen sticking
out of the hole, and which was once more visible and in motion--
surmounted by an immense helmet-like protuberance, rising upon the
crown, and running several inches along the top of the upper mandible,
which might have been taken for a second beak--this singular appendage
could belong to no other bird than the _hornbill_.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE HORNBILL.

Karl, although he had never seen one of these birds alive, had yet
examined stuffed specimens of them in museums, and he had no difficulty
in recognising the bird.  He was able even to identify the species, for
there are many species of hornbill, known under the generic name,
_Bucerus_.  That before their eyes was the _Bucerus rhinoceros_, or
"rhinoceros hornbill," called also the "topau," and sometimes the
"horned Indian raven," from a sort of resemblance which it bears both in
shape and habits to the well-known bird of this name.

Ossaroo had not exaggerated the size of these birds when he compared it
to that of a goose.  On the contrary, he had rather moderated the
dimensions: for the one in question looked much larger than either goose
or gander.  It was rather more than three feet in length--reckoning from
the tip of its tail to the point of its curving beak, which of itself
was nearly a foot long!  Its colour was black above, and yellowish-white
underneath, the tail feathers being a clear white, with a broad black
band crossing them near the middle.  Its bill, like that of its mate
already observed, was of a yellowish-white, the upper mandible being
reddish around the base, while the casque-like protuberance exhibited a
mottled surface of white and black.

Ossaroo had to tell them pretty nearly all he knew in relation to this
curious bird; for although there are several species of hornbills
natives of India, it is by no means a common creature, even at home in
its own country.

Karl could have told them much more about its species and habits, and no
doubt he would have done so had they been otherwise engaged.  But
situated as they were, with an angry elephant besieging them in the
tree, and now for a while interested in observing the movements of the
bird itself, Karl was in no humour to deliver an ornithological lecture.
He might have told them that ornithologists have differed much about
the classification of the hornbill--some of them placing it among the
toucans, while others assert that it belongs to the crow family.  Its
immense beak--out of all proportion to its body--is not the only point
of resemblance it bears to the toucans.  Like them, it flings its food
into the air, catching and swallowing it as it comes down.  Unlike the
toucans, however, it cannot climb trees, and is therefore not of the
Scansorial order.  It is said to be omnivorous in its food; and in this
it resembles the crows and ravens: but, indeed, as already stated, there
are many species of hornbills, and the habits of the different kinds, by
no means uniform or alike, have been confounded by most writers.  There
are species in Africa, others in India and the Indian islands, and New
Guinea is known to have one or two distinct species of its own.  All
these differ not only in size, colour, shape of their beak, and the
protuberance that surmounts it; but also in the kind of food which they
live upon.  For instance, the African hornbills, and one or more of the
Asiatic species, are carnivorous, and some even carrion-eaters.  These
are filthy birds, their flesh and feathers smelling rank as those of
vultures.  On the other hand, there is a species in the Indian islands--
the Moluccas more particularly--whose sole food is the nutmeg, which
gives to its flesh an exquisite aromatic flavour, causing it to be much
relished at the tables of Oriental epicures.  The bill of this species
after a certain time appears with a number of grooves or furrows in it.
As these furrows are observed only on the beaks of the old birds, the
Dutch colonists established in the Moluccas believe them to indicate
their age, each wrinkle standing for a year.  Hence the hornbill has
obtained among the colonists the name of _Yerrvogel_ (year bird).

Karl, as I have said, was acquainted with all these facts in the natural
history of the hornbill; but just then he did not think of making them
known to his companions--all three being too much occupied in watching
the movements of the male bird.  It was evident that he was not one of
the vegetable feeders: for on his alighting they could see hanging from
his beak a long cylindrical object, which they were able to identify as
a portion--the head and part of the body--of a dead snake.  It was
equally evident that his mate was not accustomed to a vegetable diet:
for from the way in which he was manoeuvring, the spectators saw that
the mutilated reptile was intended for her.  No doubt it was her dinner,
for it had now got to that hour of the day.

She was not to be kept waiting any longer.  Almost on the instant her
provider alighted on the projecting spur, with a toss of his head he
jerked the piece of snake up into the air, and then caught it as it came
down again--not with the intention to swallow it, but only to get a
better grip, in order that he might deliver it the more adroitly into
the mandibles of his mate--now protruding through the aperture, and
opened to receive it.

In another instant the savoury morsel was transferred from the beak of
the male to that of the female; and then the ivory forceps of the
latter, with the snake held tightly between them, disappeared within the
cavity.

The old cock stayed not a moment longer upon the tree.  He had served
his mate with her dinner, and perhaps he had yet to bring on the
dessert.  Whether or not, he rose immediately afterwards into the air,
with the same clangorous clapping of his wings; but this time the noise
was accompanied by the clattering of his horny mandibles, like a pair of
castanets, causing a sound not only singular, but, if heard by
strangers, calculated to beget within them a considerable feeling of
alarm.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A FOUR-FOOTED BURGLAR.

After the departure of the bird, that had taught our young adventurers
so interesting a chapter of natural history, the elephant once more
engrossed their attention.  Not that there was anything new in the
movements of the latter--for it was acting just as before--but simply
because they knew that, so long as it remained upon the ground, they
would have to stay in the tree; and they naturally bent their eyes upon
it, to see if it was showing any signs of moving off.  They could
perceive none.  Not the slightest appearance to indicate its intention
of departing from the spot.

While engaged in regarding the besieger, their eyes were of course
removed from the sycamore; nor might they have been again turned towards
that tree--at least, not for a good while--but for a sound that reached
their ears, and which appeared to proceed from the direction of the
hornbill's nest.  It was a soft and rather plaintive sound--unlike any
that had been made by the rhinoceros bird; nor was it at all like the
voice of a bird, of any kind.  It was more like the utterance of some
four-footed creature; or it might even have been a human voice
pronouncing the syllable "wha," several times repeated.

That it was neither bird nor human being, Ossaroo could tell the moment
he heard the first "wha."  And like us a lovely area, indeed alone irritant
occurs when the sun, it was all in his eyes beautified and glorified what
they encompassed what they touched. How many times he stood on the theater
behind the walls, which he is the privilege of the Director had
requested!

Then it was certainly the perspective magic disappeared, but the much
more powerful magic of love at first began to work. For hours he could
on dirty cars are light, the smoke of Unschlittlampen revoke after
the beloved, and look out if they back him and hereintrat friendly
installations, lost in delight at the bar tight and batten skeleton into
a heavenly state of feeling. The stuffed lamb, the waterfalls of Zindel,
cardboard rose bushes and the straw huts unilateral excited in him
lovely poetic images of ancient shepherd world. Even the nearby appearing
ugly dancers were not always against him, because they are on a board
with his mistress were large. And it is certain that love which rose
arbours, and Moonlight only Myrtenwäldchen must revive, even
wood shavings and even a semblance Papierschnitzeln animate nature
can give.

She is such a rich flavor that even bowl and ekle broths which are
palatable. Such a wort is certainly needed in order to reasonably state
that, even in the wake pleasant to make, in which he usually their
office, so sometimes they even antraf.

In a fine Bürgerhaus educated, order and cleanliness was the element,
in which he breathed, and he of his father's love of pomp part had
inherited, he knew the boy's years in his room that he was his
little kingdom installations, stately auszustaffieren.

His bed curtains were raised in large folds and fastened with
tassels, how to introduce thrones maintains he had a carpet in the middle
of the room and a fine on the table known to purchase his books and
equipment provided and he almost mechanically so that a Dutch painter
good groups out his still lifes would have been possible. A white
hat, he had to cope as a turban and tied the sleeves of his dressing gown
shortly after oriental costumes Sock leave. But he gave the cause thereof,
that the long, wide sleeves prevented him in the letter. If he was all
alone at night and no longer had to fear, to be disturbed, he was
usually a silken sash around the waist, and he is sometimes a dagger
that he is from an old armory zugeeignet in the belt and put him
as the tragic roles assigned memoriert and tried, yes ebendem meaning
in his prayer kneeling on the carpet have performed.

How happy he therefore praised in earlier times, the actor, he
owned so many majestic clothes, armor and weapons and in a continuous
exercise of a noble conduct saw his mind a mirror of the beautiful
and magnificent, what the world of relationships, attitudes and
passions that have seemed to represent. Just thought Wilhelm also the
domestic life of an actor as a series of tribute acts and activities,
including the appearance of the theater on the outermost tip was
like a silver, by the Läuterfeuer long herumgetrieben been finally
color-beautiful in the eyes of worker at the same time it appears
and suggests that the metal is now supported by all third party
additions gereiniget was. stutzte how much he therefore initially,
when he was with his lover and the happy fog that surrounded him,
nebenaus on tables, chairs and floor saw .

The wreckage of a moment, light and plaster were wrong, like a shiny
dress abgeschuppten fish scattered in a wild mess up. The tools of human
cleanliness, as combs, soap, towels, were the traces of their provision
was also not hidden. Music, roles and shoes, Italian linens and flowers,
wallets, hair pins, make pots and tapes, books and Strohhüte, spurned
the neighborhood, none of the others, all were characterized by a
common element, by powder and dust, unite.

However, since their presence in Wilhelm little noticed by all others, so
much more to him everything that belonged to her, she had touched, had
to be loved, so he was last in this muddled economy a stimulus, which
he in his stately pomp order had never felt. It was him - if he Schnürbrust
their removal to the piano to come up her skirts Bette presented in
order to be able to sit down if they even discuss some natural
frankness, which is otherwise against another from decency to hide
maintains, in front of him not looking to hide - it was him, I say, as
if he with her every moment would be closer than if a community between
them by invisible ties would be attached. Not as easily, he could
consider the other actors, by himself in his first visit with her
sometimes antraf, unite with its terms.

Shops in idleness, they seemed to their profession and purpose at least
to think, about the poetic value of a piece he heard they never talk and
neither inaccurate nor accurate about judging, it was always the
question: "What will make the piece? Is it is a Zugstück? How long
will it play? How many times can it might be? " and what questions and
comments of this nature were. Then it usually go to the Director that
he and Gage to the barren, and especially against one another and
the unjust, then to the audience that with his rare applause rewards
the right man, that the German theater was improving every day that
the actor according to his merits more and more honored and will
not be honored enough.

Then we talked a lot of coffee houses and vineyards, and what occurred
which daselbst how much any comrade debt deduction, and must suffer
from disproportion of weekly Gage, a cabal of other party as being
but as the great and deserved attention of the audience again and
was the influence of theater on the formation of a nation and the
world was not forgotten.

All these things that are otherwise already Wilhelmer some restless
hours had made, he came back into the memory at present, as it slowly
to his horse home, and he wore the various incidents which he encountered
were considered.

The movement, which by the exodus of a girl in a good family
citizens, or even in an entire town had come, had he seen the
scenes on the road and in Amthause which Melinas attitudes, and what
else approach was introduced themselves him again and brought his lively
mind to penetrate into a kind of restlessness sorglicher which he
endured not long, but his horses were the spores and after the city
ran.

Young also ran in this way he only opposed the new inconvenience.

Werner, his friend and alleged brother waited for him to be a
serious, important and unexpected conversation with him to start.

Werner was one of the auditees in their lives certain people that you
usually cold call people to maintain, because they are occasions when
neither fast nor visibly blaze, nor was his dealings with Wilhelm a
continuing strife, resulting in their love but only took up the more
solid, because regardless of their different way of thinking was
all his account with the others.

Werner did something beneficial to the fact that he is the noble, though
sometimes excessive spirit Wilhelms sometimes reins and teeth
seemed to them, and Wilhelm often felt a magnificent triumph, when he is
cautious in its warm friend upsurge with fortnahm. So did one of the
others, they were accustomed to on a daily basis to see, and you
would say, the desire, to find each other, together to discuss,
either through the inability to understand each other to become
increasingly been.

Basically, but they went because they were both good men, coexist
with each other after a goal and could never understand why because
none of the others could reduce its ethos. Werner noticed for some time
that Wilhelm's visits were seltner that he Favorite matters in the
short and scattered abandoned, that he is no longer vibrant in-depth
training strange ideas on what is admittedly a free, in the presence
of the friend found peace and contentment of mind at the safest
indicates.

The punctual and cautious Werner initially examined the error in his own
demeanor, to his city a few conversations on the right track,
and some imprudence brought Wilhelms him closer to the certainty led.
He settled on an investigation and soon discovered even that William
some time ago an actress publicly visited with her at the theater and
asked them had brought home, he would have been dismal, even if the
nightly meetings would become known, because he heard that Mariane is
a seductive girls who his friend probably lost their money and still get
the side by the most unworthy lovers entertained. As soon as he suspected
as much possible to be certain collected, he decided an attack
on Wilhelm and was completely with all stations in readiness, as
this is sullen and out of tune from his trip back.

Werner took him the same evening, everything he knew, only left ,
then by pressing Serious wohldenkenden a friendship that did not train
common friends, and gave his all to taste the bitterness, the quiet-loving
people with virtuous gloating so liberally auszuspenden maintain. But
as you can imagine, he bit. William returned with intense exercise,
but with great confidence: "You know the girl does not! The ticket may
not be to their advantage, but I'm their loyalty and virtue so certainly
than my love." Werner insisted on his indictment and offered to evidence
and witnesses. Wilhelm rejected them and away from his friends sullen
and shaken as if by a clumsy dentist an injury-term fixed tooth taken
in vain and that has geruckt. Uneasily maximum was William, the beautiful
picture only through the Marianas barbecue of the trip, then by Werners
unkindness in his mind clouded and almost disfigured to be seen.
He attacked the safest means to him to complete restore clarity
and beauty, by night on the usual routes to their hineilte.

They received him with a lively pleasure, because he was on his arrival
vorbeigeritten, she had expected him that night, and it is thought that
all the doubts from his heart soon displaced. Yes, their tenderness closed
his confidence again, and he told her how much the audience how much
his friend to her versündiget.

Some lively discussions led to the first days of their acquaintance, whose
memory one of the best conversations of two Lovers remains. The first
steps taken by us in the maze of love will be so pleasant, so the first
prospects irritating that they even liked in his memory back. Each part
explores a preference to retain the other that he had earlier,
disinterested loved, and each one wants in this race to overcome
rather than to be overcome.

Marianas Wilhelm repeated what they had heard so often that they soon
turned its attention from the spectacle and pulled on its own, that their
shape, their game , her voice captivated him, as he only last
the pieces in which they played, have visited, how he finally had
geschlichen of the theater, often without being noticed to be beside
her, had confessed, then he spoke with delight of the happy evenings on
which he found an opportunity, its a favor to erzeigen and initiate
a conversation. Mariane, on the other hand did not want to say that it
would not have noticed, they claimed him on the walks to have seen, and
described him to prove the dress, which he angehabt the same days,
they claimed that it was he above all others and that they liked
his acquaintance had wished.

How happy Wilhelm believed everything! How happy he is talking about
that to him when he approached her, by an irresistible train hingeführt
been that they intentionally between the scenes to him in order to be
closer to see and acquaintance with him, and that they last, because his
reticence and Blödigkeit not been overcome, his opportunity and he
almost forced to have a glass of lemonade herbeizuholen. From this loving
race, they by all the little circumstances of her short novel
pursued them the hours passed very quickly , and William left completely
reassured his mistress with firm intent, his intention to immediately
work to judge. I. Paper, 16 Chapter sixteenth chapter of his departure
to what was needed, had father and mother worried, just some small things
on the missing Equipage, delayed his departure by several days. Wilhelm
used this time to get Mariana to write a letter, making it the
matter is finally wanted to raise, what they are with him to entertain
previously had always avoided.

The letter reads: "Under the cover of night love of my otherwise covered
in your arms, I sit and think and write to you, and what I sense and
driving is just deinetwillen. Mariane O! Me the happiest in men,
is like a bridegroom who ahnungsvoll what a new world in him and
through him will develop on the carpets, and festive during the sacred
ceremonies are thoughtfully concupiscent before the curtains of secrecy,
to where he is aware of the loveliness of love entgegensäuselt. I
have won over me, in a few days you can not see there was hope in light
of such compensation, forever to be with you all the Deinige to
stay!

Should I repeat what I wish? And yet, it is necessary, because it seems
as habest you have not understood me. How often I have with quiet tones
of fidelity, which, because she wants to keep everything, little to say
daring, in your heart after researching the request of one eternal
connection.

Have you understood me, certainly, because in your heart must ebender
desire to germinate, you have heard me in every kiss, in the rest cling
to that happy evenings. As I learn to know your modesty, and as propagated
to my love! Where is another man would be to move through liquid sunshine
on a resolution in the heart of her lover on the maturity to make
a statement hervorzulocken and a promise to fix, just as you pull
back, close to your chest halbgeöffnete beloved again and looking
by an apparent indifference to hide your Beistimmung, but I understand
you!

If that's his purpose," he continued,
without waiting for a reply, "we shall have no peace so long as he
remains alive.  We must either kill him, or he will do as much for us."

"Sahibs," observed the Hindoo, with a significant shake of the head, "we
no able killee him; that elephan' he nebba die."

"Oh, nonsense, Ossy!  If that's what you mean," rejoined Caspar,
disdainfully repudiating the superstitious belief of the shikaree;
"there is not much doubt of our being able to kill him, if we once get a
fair shot; and by my word, the sooner we set about it the better.  It's
evident, from his having gone back to our hut, that he has some wicked
design.  Very likely he remembers being first attacked there by Fritz;
and as he may be under the belief that the dog has retreated there, he
is gone in search of him.  Ho, Fritz, old fellow! you needn't be afraid.
You can easily get out of his way, whenever you like.  Your masters are
in more danger than you, my boy."

"You are sure, Ossaroo," said Karl, who had stood for some time silently
reflecting, "you are sure he has gone to the hut?"

In reply to this interrogation, Ossaroo would not state positively that
he had seen the elephant arrive on the very spot where the hovel stood;
but he had followed his track through the belt of heavy timber; and
then, having climbed a tree, had descried the great quadruped moving in
the direction of the hut.  He had no doubt it was for that point he was
making, though with what design Ossaroo could not guess--his
superstitious dread having hindered him from venturing upon any
conjecture.

"One thing is clear," said Karl, after another interval spent in
reflection: "it will be no list our attempting to continue the survey we
have commenced, until the elephant be got out of the way.  What you say,
brother Caspar, is quite true.  Now that he has become aware of our
presence, and has, moreover, been roused to fury by the wounds we have
given him, it is not likely he will forget what has passed; and we can
hope for neither peace nor safety till we have succeeded in destroying
him.  There is no reason why we should not set about it at once, but
every reason why we should.  Our very lives depend upon his destruction;
and they will not be safe till that has been accomplished."

"Let us after him at once, then," cried Caspar; "and be our motto,
`_Death to the rogue_'!"


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A HOME IN RUINS.

Without further delay, our adventurers took the back track towards the
hut, which was exactly that which the elephant had taken--as they could
tell by traces of the animal all along the route, which the experienced
eye of the shikaree had already discovered, and which he now pointed out
to his companions as they passed on.  Here and there its great
footprints were visible in the turf, in places where the ground was
soft; and at other places where no tracks appeared, leaves and twigs
freshly strewn upon the earth, and also branches of considerable size
broken off from the trees, and borne for some distance before being
dropped, clearly indicated to Ossaroo the route which the rogue had
taken.

The shikaree had often followed the spoor of wild elephants through the
jungles of Bengal, and knew everything about their way of travelling.
He was therefore able to tell the others that the rogue had not been
browsing as he went--for the leaves and twigs showed no signs of his
teeth--but on the contrary, he had moved forward rapidly, and as if with
some special determination.  The broken branches which they saw were
more likely to have been torn off out of spite at the ill-usage he had
received, and the disappointment at not having succeeded in his purposes
of vengeance.

It did not need for Ossaroo to caution his companions to circumspection.
They knew as well as he that an elephant enraged as this one was,
whether a _rogue_ elephant or an _honest_ one, was anything but a safe
customer to come in contact with; and that this particular rogue was
most particularly angry they had just had both ocular and auricular
evidence.

They went forward, therefore, with unusual caution, taking care to keep
both their eyes and ears on the alert, and at the same time moving in
perfect silence, or conversing only in whispers.

The path upon which they were returning was not that by which they had
gone forth.  The reconnoissance of the cliffs had carried them a good
distance around the edge of the valley; but now they were following the
track taken by the elephant, which, as already ascertained by Ossaroo,
led almost in a direct line to the hut.

As they drew nearer to their rude habitation, they saw indications that
the enemy was still before them.  As they knew that in the immediate
neighbourhood of the hot-spring, and consequently of the hut itself,
there were no large trees or other place of safety to which they might
retreat in case of being again attacked, they began to advance with
increased caution.  From the direction in which they were approaching,
the hovel could not be seen until they should get within less than two
hundred yards of it.  There was a belt of rather tall jungle to be
passed through, and then it would be in sight.

Through this jungle they commenced advancing; and there, to their no
slight uneasiness, they also observed fresh traces of the elephant.
They were now certain that he had passed through it before them, still
going direct for the hut.

What on earth can he want there? was the query that once more suggested
itself to the minds of all three.  It certainly looked as if he had
proceeded there in search of _them_!  As if, missing them from the scene
of the encounter, he believed they had returned home, and was following
up their acquaintance.

From what they had observed, they could not help attributing to the
great quadruped the possession of an intelligence something more than
natural; and this, though it may have been only an absurd fancy on their
part, had the effect of begetting within their minds a very painful
feeling of apprehension.  What they saw on coming out on the other side
of the jungle not only strengthened this feeling of apprehension, but
increased it all at once to a positive terror.

The hut, which should now have been before their eyes, and at a distance
of not quite two hundred paces, _was no longer there_!  The ruins of it
alone were visible.  The large boulders with which its walls had been
built, the beams and thatch that had composed its roof, the grass
couches upon which they had slept, the rude improvised utensils and
other articles which had served them for furniture, were all strewed far
and wide over the ground; and not the semblance of a house, or even
hovel, remained to show that the spot had been occupied by a human
habitation!

Yes--in what had been their rude dwelling our adventurers beheld only a
ruder ruin--scarce one stone standing upon, another!

They beheld all this with feelings of fear--ay, something stronger--with
awe.  The Pagan worshipper of Brahma or Vishnu was no longer alone in
his superstitious imaginings.  His young Christian companions were
almost equally victims to a belief in the supernatural.  They
comprehended well enough what had caused the destruction of the house.
Though the author of that mischief was nowhere to be seen, they knew it
was the elephant.  There was no alternative but to accept that
explanation; and it was not the act itself that was awing them, but the
contemplation of the human-like, or rather demon-like, intelligence that
had guided the animal thither, and instructed it to this act of
retribution, perhaps only preliminary to a still greater one.

Though the work of devastation could not have been completed many
minutes before their arrival, the elephant appeared to have gone away
from the ground.  At east, it was not to be seen anywhere near the spot;
and it is needless to say that it was carefully looked for.  Dreading
its dangerous proximity, they had kept under cover of the bushes while
contemplating the ruin from a distance; and it was not until after a
considerable interval had elapsed that they ventured forward over the
open space to ascertain the full extent of the damage.

This they at length did, and found that it was _total_ destruction.  So
far as the hut was concerned, not a vestige of construction remained--
walls and roof had been alike levelled with the ground.  But what was a
greater source of chagrin to the now homeless plant-hunters, was that
their little store of ammunition--the gunpowder, which during all the
period of their imprisonment they had been carefully hoarding--was
spilled among the rubbish, and of course irrecoverable.  It had been
deposited in a large gourd-shell prepared for the purpose; and this,
among other similar chattels, the enraged quadruped had crushed under
its feet.  Their cured provisions had also been turned out from their
place of deposit, and trampled into the dust of the earth.  But this,
though also a chagrin, was one of less bitterness.  Other provisions
might be obtained--not now so easily, since the powder was destroyed--
but the latter they could not replace.


CHAPTER TWENTY.

UP A TREE AGAIN!

They might have remained longer on the ground lamenting this irreparable
loss, but that they were still apprehensive of the return of the
elephant.  Amparo thought, being the smallest and weakest, had to
settle for the remainder of the other, and Concha nervously touched his
bow, was furious and grumbled pataditas, looking sidelong, unable
to copy the profile of the funny hairstyle one wrist.

Finally came the moment they returned to his room to get the most
beautiful dresses. Those were the days of the mom; iban to have visits
and had to be present for friends, instead of smiles compassionately
was bitten lips. When they returned to the toilet and looked at the clear
moon, the joy returned. We were not entirely wrong, and with a touch
to the hairstyle and the face, a _bouquet_ two in the chest and
pulled the waist so they do not make wrinkles were satisfied and
went to the public.

It was already near the top ten . The mother was in the hall talking with
Mrs. Clare, a woman unfriendly to the ordinary and visit frequently, and
girls fleeing a visit, went to the dining room. Until there came the
preparations for the feast. Veíanse on the table, forming a circle with
several trays of foam cakes, white at the base, heavy syrup, lightly
browned in their Dentelles ridges and between which peeked card that
sent the sweet memories, two large cakes hold in sugar polished surface
like a mirror in whimsical fruit groups, and in the center of the
table of the bunch home Burriel, architecture nougat, meringue and affecting
the shape of a castle emerging from a pile of flowers and topped by
a ballerina that, mounted on a wire, danced on shaky confectionery
masterpiece.

Around the table, sniff air goloso, English was a tiny dog, who, with his
porcelain skin, their ojillos glass and feet of wire , seemed to break
a toy store. When viewing your love, the animal got lilliputian red
tongue, releasing a bark that looked like a sneeze. - _Miss_ ... My
dear _Miss_! - Amparito shouted, trying to take it in her arms. But
Concha had already advanced to such a desire to seize her, and from the
top of his arms enseñábale the table covered with cakes, while the
kissing on the mouth.

There was fighting between the two sisters on the best right to _Miss_
possession, and dropped the Concha, with such bad luck, crashing on the
table that crushed a couple of pies, and stained with the foam of
the merengue began a furious race to the classroom. - My poor dog!

... ¡Animal! The've died! - Amparito shouted, as if a misfortune had
happened. And raised his fist against threatening her sister. But to
see the strange figure that had _Miss_ with meringue and running pegotes
afraid, recklessness of a laugh its pretty swollen neck, and as if
nothing had happened, it took the size of shells, giving him a resounding
kiss. - How funny ...! Huh? How expensive is going to see if the mother
enter the room with that look ... But the intense laughter that
produced the desvanecióse a cacareo distressing to hear a death rattle
coming from the kitchen.

There were these and upon entering saw the coachman Nelet in shirtsleeves,
with a knife in hand, dealt with the severity of a sacrificer, in
the open Ganot a robust capon Visanteta by claiming feet.

The other maid of the house, which missed the sensitive and close to
exercising the functions of maiden ladies, he returned back to the sacrifice
and watched the pots and pans on the stove boiled to the bank. The
two sisters, inclined reflecting skirts between their legs - to avoid
friction with the ground greasy -, disgorging carefully contemplated,
had the agony of seizures and remain the last drops of blood from a
wound looming, bristling hair coagulated until it fell into a casserole.
This gave Nelet happy and excited for their brutal jocosidad. - How
fat, huh?

- said touching the breast of the corpse -. When you look pelen a
canon .... If I were rich, every morning and make a killing.
Worth it to clean the horse. And to complete the capon waving his
thanks in the air like incense the face of the two maids, which was running
scared all over the kitchen, with great algazara of ladies. The joke
stopped Doña Manuela to appear, dressed in a black silk gown, broad,
with long tails and sleeves missed completing his apostura drama queen.
He had escaped doña Clara, POSM those who never finished any story,
jumping from one conversation to another, making endless visits.
The mother and children returned to the dining room and turned to
the table, reading the accompanying card gifts.

He was the uncle of Don Juan. Always the same. The very stingy, despite
his millions, has been content with half a dozen cakes: total, three
pesetas. Do not ruin. The bouquet was beautiful Pictures of Antonio
and his wife, owners of the shop _Las Three Rosas_. - You have some
people without education, but who can do good things. Doña Manuela
And, after this reflection daughter of appreciation continued to teach
the cards. Eugenio Garcia, a cake ... not bad, the other was "the
judges' and other pastries were not wearing signs of provenance,
but guessed that they were doña Manuela Juanito, that gift with the
child so dear as it was his girlfriend. - And Juanito, where is
mamaíta - In the store, but come before twelve.

Rafael has also emerged. At the door of the staircase sounded a
campanillazo, which showed the brutal tug of a clumsy hand. Nelet quickly
left the kitchen, and doing everything with retemblar his
shoes, ran to open. There were shouts in the lobby as watercress and
caressing strokes that seemed, as if someone with hard wheels. - What
is it? - Doña Manuela said, moving toward the door.

But he stopped at the waterfall and hear the shrill voice that sounded
on the verge. - It's the love ...! He loves it! - Amparito cried with
joy naive.

But immediately contained, blushes, as if they had committed a terrible
inconvenience. Nelet preceded by, entered the room, swinging around
with their thunderous and garish 'good morning! " a thick and Labrador
hombruna. Amparito was the mother of an orphan in the vicinity of
Alboraya mother's coachman, and had grown up in his hut the lady.

Nelet was an offspring worthy of the tree because the freckled face,
and tight skin mofletudo showing the handkerchief under his aunt Quica
herbal noticed the brutality of his funny and resolutely rustic rod.

Hefty volume zagalejos a dozen rameada under the skirt, and sat
when he opened his legs so that the clothing combos, formed between
your thighs mare round a fathomless abyss.

He was always around the basket to the arm, a huge basket, always
white, not to let go and take a seat, and so intimately united to
his person, it seemed a new member of your body.

Overwhelms Amparito with hugs and asphyxiants kisses and lagrimones that
wrested a part of rouge, and after that bothers expansion, which left
stunned at the girl and made the gesture to turn doña Manuela, dejóse
suddenly fall into a chair, which sadly bay under the giant
innkeepers. gave two or three bufidos tired - and hold the basket
- and began to speak in Castilian a fantasy, as in Doña Manuela house
was not allowed another language. How tired is one in Valencia ...
It seemed impossible that people want to live in such rotten.
There, in the garden, it was good, and why she decided to go hard
in Valencia.

He'd come by just like the lady in his life, and that making an effort,
as it was his duty not to depart from its younger sister, who lived in
a shack immediately to your own. - Street siñora! How tight is the
poor! Her husband has left us a drunkard, a comic who turns every
Sunday of the tavern _Copa_ four legs like a donkey, and they have
to get in bed to sleep the monkey a couple of days. And what breaks,
holy Virgin! PPT passes my poor life of Santa Catalina de Sena, and the
very beast that Erre Erre without aborreser to that of _Pimentó_ crook,
which is not worth a cigarette paper.

And this tone continued Aunt Quica the relationship of all misfortunes
of his family, but perhaps stopped, and seeing Amparito, provided that
the silent, burst into a '_jilla meua_! noisy and hold the basket -
that ever - back to hug and besuquearla , taking on the lips white
powders.

How beautiful it was! Miradla; seemed a queen. Who could imagine,
to see those suits, which had in his shack, and in the evening sun played
on the block with Nelet and other boys, between the male, the steer
and two pigs!

Still remembered all her and many who were asked about their health.
No, that year did not pass. Although he opposed the mother, she will lead
the festival of Alboraya, to see how everyone was and what his Amparito
air lordship spent. Y. .. way, the child's uncle _Pallús_ - do you
remember, Amparito ... that guy who walked on all fours and did the
donkey for you to Le Mont - Well, now it came to Valencia by car to collect
manure from the houses, and wanted to leave him clean Nelet the
block.

When coming from the manure and raise Amparito see, and by the way, if
they served no bother, could give any thing: some of the old
ladies trousers, some white clothes, because they all serve the
poor. Aunt Quica realized the bad effects caused their conversation
in Doña Manuela, and hastened to express the object of his embassy,
throwing hand in the basket inseparable.

It took some things to give to the lady in his life; gifts poor, but
offered with the best will in the world. Donuts in a pasta with some
bitterness left, covered with a smooth layer of sugar cakes that seemed
cardboard glued to a greasy, and comfits bittersweet, which is in
the mouth deshacían wore in the garden and the strange name _suspiros_.

The lady thanked, with a chuckle rabbit. Well I knew what these products
cost confectionery paperback. I told her astute father: The bun is
cahizada farmer's wheat.

"After the aunt Quica majestically deposited their gifts on the table,
the lady, as compensation, got into his basket of the half-dozen cakes
that had crushed _Miss_ in his fall, and also gave a tough fight
but not before the farmer, who swore and wanted nothing perjuraba,
while his eyes shone greed.

When he presents in his possession, then an endless hymn of thanksgiving,
overflow in praise, which, in the form of advice on his son. - Look,
Nelet, you can serve the siñoras.

See if you behave well, your father, the uncle sat down, have a
distaste for the absence obligasión. Well you can work. There, he would
have to go in the car to bring wine, bad sleeping and working as the
males. What do you Hase missing here? Papus have good and safe, little
work, you dress like a siñor ... Nelet not raw and see if you like to
give siñoras .... And so this chapter has continued to develop advice,
not to be cut because a campanillazo the floor. A tour. Doña Manuela
and girls went to the lounge, where Mr. Eugenio García, founder _Las
Three Rosas_.

As the years passed he did not. Viejecillo was the same as ever, plump
and smiling, her face red, eyes alive and the white head and smile.
Claimed it was of great physiognomic similarity with Pius IX, and it was
something I remembered the late Pope, despite his captain and the blue
cape without crutch stick, not let go even in the visits. Kissed the
girls as it was his grandfather, and Doña Manuela diol few pats
on the back with a hearty joy of old, ensuring that each time I was
fatter and hermosota.

Came to hear Mass of St. John, his beloved parish, and fulfill the obligation
of every year, I wanted to greet Manuela and girls, and wish them
happiness in the thousand days of the saint. He was not thinking of
leaving next year, in the fall, I was sure, despite all the years he
had said the same.

And speaking of death with the serenity of a peaceful and honored
old age, joking, laughing and letting out shrieks of acute among
toothless gums.

Amparito escuchábale pleased, laughing malignant Cece and old
questions.

What if you had a boyfriend? No, sir, they were still young and
could wait.

Concha it was something, anything .... but she Nobody wanted ... He was
so ugly ...! And the naughty baby experiencing satisfaction inaudible
call that beautiful mouth of eighty years. - But you stay to eat, don
Eugenio - Mrs. -. Since we left the store, any year you wanted to
honor our table. - I can not Manolita. I'm already too old, and
who brings me my sopitas killed me.

In addition, go a gift: an invited my class. Masco as a goat, and 110
amusing to see an old among young people. To each his own. The visit
lasted half an hour, and finally, the old, with the help of a cane,
standing púsose. - I am leaving, my daughters - said in a melancholy
expression, despite their face always cheerful -.

Next year you will remember me by without seeing my visit. And then
what will I need the eternal rest .... do not say no .... Do you
suppose I have no desire to rest ...? But when the time comes, don Eugenio
always steadfast in his shop the market.

¡Trader to death! And after these words punching his chest, left the
room escorted by the ladies. The nurse was gone, and Nelet still in
the kitchen helping the girls. It was day of great feast.

Don John, the uncle of the young ladies, that intractable hedgehog, had
agreed to eat at his sister's home, and were to see the preparations.
Juanito would go at midnight for the guy, and Rafael, before leaving,
had suffered a sermon recommending that her mother was home at the one
o'clock, lunchtime. The desserts come Andresito Pictures and a friend
of Rafael. The bell sounded on the stairs every five minutes. They
were greeting cards, which are stacked in the lobby of the pedestal, and
on which the two sisters rushed, eager curiosity. At eleven, another
visit, Don Antonio Cuadros and his wife, with the solemnities of the
great clothes. Teresa, dressed in black silk, thick and crisp, solid
gold dressing over rocks, covering the fingers of Blonda and loaded as
usual, sortijería cheap. Him, three behind Levite fashion, black
gloves, hat with wings and microscopic vest Maroma real gold. The two,
stiff, majestic, in these suits that, through the numerous reforms were
subsisting from her wedding and only came to light on visits or days
of burial. The marriage took place on the sofa, place of living, honor
blush of pride that made the old maid. - Well, yes, Manuela - said the
husband - in a day like this, we could not do without the customary
visit to you.

We enjoy the happiness of you, because even though I say it is wrong,
we appreciate them very much. And so it followed the shopkeeper in the
market, strung their sentences far-fetched to the naive admiration of
his wife, who saw in him a superior being. Y while continuing the
ongoing conversation, every moment sounded on the door bell. They were
greeting cards, which Mrs looked satisfied, leaving them on the pedestal
so that visitors could read them. The family thanked the Lord for the
gift tables that had been sent. - Stay with us to eat you. Today we
have at the table to my brother John. "These words made the recayese
conversation about the brother of the lady.

The trader was irresistible when it is released for others to speak.
What a strange such a gentleman, Don Juan! For him there are no theaters
or entertainment. He was an estimated fortune of over one hundred
thousand drives, but lived like a ferret into the great house
inherited from his father, no other company that an old maid, and
dragging his annoyance by abandoned workshops, which appeared to
cemeteries.

He had hobbies, and more was to combat the weakness of old age with a
system of continuous activity. Every afternoon spent hours visiting the
works of the Eixample, the reforms undertaken in the township roads.

Pawns knew him, like a master builder or contractor, and when you lack
these heinous walks undertaken distractions: people would be distant,
always walk with a mechanical regularity; square hat above the
eyebrows, the floating palette, not abandoned even in the summer,
and the stick under the arm of his youth, an old and cracked cane
with ivory fist round was almost a billiard ball.

We spoke with mystery and interest of the precious dust piled into their
living rooms .

Included in all auctions as a buyer of power, and whether any
proposed corridor would the acquisition of jewelry or antique
furniture rare - always, it is understood, with considerable advantage
- he accepted without hesitation because no money was missing in
huge _secrétaire_ of the last century, he held a cloth around his
bedroom, often showing the mosaic of the three rows of cajoncitos.

This cabinet also spoke with respect in the house of Doña Manuela. Who
could have known what it contained?

From there came in the form of long outstanding grape, crammed with diamonds
old with bright sortijones as lentils, unmounted stones of considerable
value; chiseled high artistic merit, all strength to become calm
and haggling in the sinking of large fortunes. - You say right,
Antonio.

My brother is a rare entity, an extravagant, which may be fine with
yours, almost prefer to live alone in that house, counting the thousands
of hard and adored as if any lead to the pit.

I would not live in peace ....
Perhaps it may have conceived a hope
either of driving them out of the tree, or forcibly washing them from
the branches; or perhaps it merely designed to make their situation as
uncomfortable as possible, and thus to some extent satisfy its spite.

It would be equally difficult to tell how long the performance might
have lasted.  Perhaps for hours longer--since the supply of water was
inexhaustible; but it was brought to a conclusion which neither the
great pachyderm himself foresaw, nor they who were the subjects of his
aqueous dispensation.


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

SWALLOWED WHOLESALE.

Just while it was in the midst of its performance, keeping its
_water-battery_ in full play, and apparently with malicious enjoyment,
it was seen all at once to desist; and then its huge body commenced
rocking from side to side, one shoulder now upheaving, then the other,
while the long trunk was swept in circles through the air, at the same
time emitting, instead of water, shrill sounds that proclaimed either
pain or terror.

What could it mean?  The quadruped was evidently smitten with some
sudden fear; but who and what was the enemy it dreaded?  So mentally
inquired Karl and Caspar; but before either had time to shape his
thought into an interrogative speech, the shikaree had answered it.

"He-ho!" he exclaimed.  "Goot! vair goot!--praise to the God of the
Great Gangee!  See, sahibs, the rogue he go down, down--he sinkee in de
quicksand that near swalley Ossaroo; he-ho; sinkee! he sinkee!"

Karl and Caspar easily comprehended the meaning of Ossaroo's broken but
exultant speeches.  Bending their eyes on the brute below, and watching
its movements, they at once perceived that the shikaree had spoken the
truth.  The elephant was evidently sinking in the quicksand!

They had noticed that when it first entered the bed of the stream, the
water had not reached far above its knees.  Now it was up to its sides,
and slowly but gradually rising higher.  Its violent struggles,
moreover--the partial and alternate raising of its shoulders, its
excited shrieks--and the proboscis, rapidly extended now to this side,
now to that, as if searching to grasp some support--all proved the truth
of Ossaroo's assertion--the rogue was sinking in the quicksand.  And
rapidly was the creature going down.  Before the spectators had been
watching it five minutes, the water lapped up nearly to the level of its
back, and then inch by inch, and foot by foot, it rose higher, until the
round shoulders were submerged, and only the head and its long
trumpet-like extension appeared above the surface.

Soon the shoulders ceased to play; and the vast body exhibited no other
motion, save that gentle descent by which it was being drawn down into
the bowels of the earth!

The trunk still kept up its vibratory movement, now violently beating
the water into foam, and now feebly oscillating, all the while breathing
forth its accents of agony.

At length the upturned head and smooth protuberant jaws sank beneath the
surface; and only the proboscis appeared, standing erect out of the
water like a gigantic Bologna sausage.  It had ceased to give out the
shrill trumpet scream; but a loud breathing could still be heard,
interrupted at intervals by a gurgling sound.

Karl and Caspar kept their seats upon the tree, looking down upon the
strange scene with feelings of awe depicted in their faces.  Not so the
shikaree, who was no longer aloft.  As soon as he had seen the elephant
fairly locked in the deadly embrace of that quicksand that had so nearly
engulfed his own precious person, he lowered himself nimbly down from
the branches.

For some moments he stood upon the bank, watching the futile efforts
which the animal was making to free itself, all the while talking to it,
and taunting it with spiteful speeches--for Ossaroo had been
particularly indignant at the loss of his skirt.  When at length the
last twelve inches of the elephant's trunk was all that remained above
the surface, the shikaree could hold back no longer.  Drawing his long
knife, he rushed out into the water; and, with one clean cut, severed
the muscular mass from its supporting stem, as a sickle would have
levelled some soft succulent weed.

The parted tube sank instantly to the bottom; a few red bubbles rose to
the surface; and these were the last tokens that proclaimed the exit of
that great elephant from the surface of the earth.  It had gone down
into the deep sands, there to become fossilised--perhaps after the lapse
of many ages to be turned up again by the spade and pick-axe of some
wondering quarry-man.

Thus by a singular accident were our adventurers disembarrassed of a
disagreeable neighbour--or rather, a dangerous enemy--so dangerous,
indeed, that had not some chance of the kind turned up in their favour,
it is difficult to conjecture how they would have got rid of it.  It was
no longer a question of pouring bullets into its body, and killing it in
that way.  The spilling of their powder had spoiled that project; and
the three charges that still remained to them might not have been
sufficient with guns of so small a calibre as theirs.

No doubt in time such gallant hunters as Caspar and Ossaroo, and so
ingenious a contriver as Karl, would have devised some way to circumvent
the rogue, and make an end of him; but for all that they were very well
pleased at the strange circumstance that had relieved them of the
necessity, and they congratulated themselves on such a fortunate result.

On hearing them talking together, and perceiving that they were no
longer in the tree, Fritz, who had all this while been skulking only a
few paces from the spot, now emerged from his hiding-place, and came
running up.  Little did Fritz suspect, while swimming across the straits
to rejoin his masters, that the huge quadruped which had so frequently
given him chase was at that moment so very near him; and that his own
claws, while cutting the water, came within an inch of scratching that
terrible trunk, now _truncated_ to a _frustrum_ of its former self!

But although Fritz had no knowledge of strange incident that had
occurred during his absence--and may have been wondering in what
direction the enemy had gone off--while swimming across the straits, the
red colour of the water at a particular place, or more likely the scent
of blood upon it, admonished him that some sanguinary scene had
transpired; and drew from him a series of excited yelps as he buoyantly
breasted the wave.

Fritz came in for a share of the congratulations.  Although the faithful
creature had retreated on each occasion of his being attacked, no one
thought of casting a slur upon his canine courage.  He had only
exhibited a wise discretion: for what chance would he have stood against
such a formidable adversary?  He had done better, therefore, by taking
to his heels; for had he foolishly stood his ground, and got killed in
the first encounter by the obelisk, the elephant might still have been
alive, and besieging them in the tree.  Besides, it was Fritz who had
sounded the first note of warning, and thus given time to prepare for
the reception of the assailant.

All of the party regarded Fritz as worthy of reward; and Ossaroo had
made up his mind that he should have it, in the shape of a dinner upon
elephant's trunk.  But in wading back into the stream, the shikaree
perceived to his chagrin that the brave dog must be disappointed: since
the piece which he had so skilfully lopped off, had followed the
fortunes of the part from which it had been severed, and was now far
below the surface of the sand!

Ossaroo made no attempt to dig it up again.  He had a wholesome dread of
that treacherous footing; and treading it gingerly, he lost no time in
returning to the bank, and following the sahibs--who had already taken
their departure from the water's edge, and were proceeding in the
direction of the ruined hut.


CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE DEODAR.

The idea that had occurred to them--of making the cave their home--was
no longer deemed worthy of being entertained.  The dangerous proximity
of the elephant had alone suggested it; and this no longer existed.  It
was not likely that there was another _rogue_ in the valley.  Indeed,
Ossaroo was able to set their minds at rest on this point--assuring them
that two animals of the kind are never found occupying the same
district: since two creatures of such malignant dispositions would
certainly enact the tragedy of the Kilkenny cats--though Ossaroo did not
illustrate his meaning by quoting this celebrated expression.

Possibly there might be other animals in the neighbourhood as much to be
dreaded as the elephant had been.  There might be panthers, or leopards,
or tigers, or even another bear; but against any of these the cave would
be no safe asylum--not safer than their old hut.  They could reconstruct
it more strongly than ever; and put a stout door upon it to keep out any
midnight intruder; and to this work did they apply themselves as soon as
they had eaten dinner, and dried their garments--so thoroughly saturated
by the colossal syringe of the defunct elephant.

Several days were spent in restoring the hovel--this time with
considerable improvements.  The winter weather had now fairly set in;
and household warmth had become an important object: so that not only
did they fill up the chinks with a thick coating of clay, but a
fireplace and chimney were constructed, and a strong door was added.

They knew that it would take them a long time to make the ladders--more
than a dozen long ladders--each of which must be light as a reed and
straight as an arrow.

During the milder days of winter they might work in the open air;
indeed, the greater part of their work they must needs do outside the
hut.  Still it would be necessary to have shelter not only during the
nights, but in times of storm and severe weather.

Prudence therefore counselled them to providence; and before proceeding
farther with their design of scaling the cliff, they made all snug
within doors.

They had no fear of suffering from the winter's cold--either for want of
clothing by day, or covering by night.  Some of the yak-skins were still
in good preservation--with the pelts of several other animals that had
fallen before the double-barrel of Caspar--and these would suffice for
warm clothing by day and bed-covering by night.

About their winter's food they were a little more anxious.  The elephant
had succeeded not only in destroying their means of obtaining
provisions, but had also damaged the stock which was on hand, by
trampling it in the mud.  Those portions of the dried venison and
yak-beef that the brute had not succeeded in completely spoiling, were
once more collected, and stored in a safe place; while it was resolved,
in the event of their not being able to procure more, that they should
go on rations proportioned to the time which they might have to continue
in their rock-bound prison.  Of course, though their ammunition was
exhausted, they were not without hopes of being able to add to their
store of provisions.  The arrows of Ossaroo still existed, independent
of either powder or lead.  Snares and traps would enable them to capture
many of the wild creatures that, like themselves, appeared to have found
a prison in that secluded and singular valley.

When all the arrangements regarding their winter residence were
completed, they returned once more to the survey of the cliffs, which
had been interrupted by the elephant.

After a prolonged examination of the ledges, that had been discovered on
that eventful day, they continued on until they had made the circuit of
the valley.  Not a foot of the precipice was passed without the most
elaborate inspection being bestowed upon it; and of course the twin
cliffs which hemmed in the gorge of the glacier were examined with the
rest.

There proved to be no place offering such advantages for an ascent by
ladders as that already discovered; and although there was no positive
certainty that they might be able to accomplish their formidable task,
they determined to make a trial, and without further delay set about
preparing the ladders.

The preliminary step was to select and cut down a sufficient quantity of
timber of the right length.  They were about to have recourse to the
beautiful Thibet pine--the sort which had served them for bridging the
crevasse--when a new tree was discovered by them, equally beautiful, and
more suitable for their purpose.  It was the cedar (_Pinus deodara_).
Ossaroo once more lamented the absence of his beloved bamboos--alleging
that with a sufficient number of these he could have made ladders enough
for scaling the cliff, in less than a quarter of the time it would take
to construct them out of the pines.  This was no exaggeration: for the
culm of the great bamboo, just as it is cut out of the brake, serves for
the side of a ladder, without any pains taken with it, further than to
notch out the holes in which to insert the rounds.  Moreover, the bamboo
being light, would have served better than any other timber for such
ladders as they required--enabling them with less trouble to get them
hoisted up to the ledges--an operation in which they apprehended no
little difficulty.  But although there was a species of cane growing in
the valley--that known to the hill people as the "ringall"--its culms
were neither of sufficient length nor thickness for their purpose.  It
was the great bamboo of the tropical jungles that Ossaroo sighed for;
and which on their way up through the lower ranges of the Himalayas they
had seen growing in vast brakes, its tall stems often rising to the
height of a hundred feet.

The deodar, under favourable circumstances, attains to vast dimensions,
trunks being often met with in the mountains upwards of ten feet in
diameter, and rising to the height of one hundred feet.  A few sticks of
this description would have made their labour both short and easy.

Failing the bamboo, therefore, they selected the second best material
which the forest afforded them--the tall "deodar."  This tree, which is
known to the Anglo-Indian residents of the Himalayan countries as the
"cedar," has long since been introduced into English parks and
arboretums, under the name of _deodara_--its specific botanical
appellation.  It is a true pine and is found in most of the hills and
valleys of the Himalayan chain, growing at almost any elevation and on
any kind of ground--in the low warm valleys, as well as near the line of
everlasting snow.  Its favourite habitat, however, is on the lower
hills, and though by no means a beautiful tree, it is valuable on
account of the great quantity of tar which can be extracted from its
sap.

Where many deodar trees are growing together, they shoot up in long
tapering shafts, with short branches, and present the acute conical form
characteristic of the pines.  When individual trees stand singly, or at
some considerable distance apart, their habit is different.  They then
stretch out long massive arms in a horizontal direction; and as the
separate twigs and leaves also extend horizontally, each branch thus
presents a surface as level as a table.  The deodar often reaches the
height of one hundred feet.

The wood of the deodar is everywhere esteemed throughout the countries
where it is found.  It is excellent for building purposes, easily
worked, almost imperishable, and can be readily split into planks--an
indispensable requisite in a country where saws are almost unknown.  In
Cashmere, bridges are built of it: and the long time that some of these
have been standing, affords a proof of its great durability.  A portion
of these bridges are under water for more than half the year; and
although there are some of them nearly a hundred years old, they are
still in good preservation, and safe enough to be crossed.

When the deodar is subjected to the process by which tar is extracted
from other pines, it yields a much thinner liquid than tar--of a dark
red colour, and very pungent smell.  This liquid is known as "cedar
oil;" and is used by the hill people as a remedy for skin diseases--as
also for all scrofulous complaints in cattle.

The deodar is of very slow growth; and this unfits it for being
introduced into European countries--except as an ornamental timber for
parks and pleasure grounds.

It was chiefly on account of its property of being easily split into
planks, or pieces of light scantling, that the deodar was selected for
making the sides of the ladders.  To have cut down the trunks of heavy
trees to the proper thickness for light ladders--with such imperfect
implements as they were possessed of--would have been an interminable
work for our inexperienced carpenters.  The little axe of Ossaroo and
the knives were the only tools they possessed available for the work.
As the deodar could be split with wedges, it was just the timber wanted
under these circumstances.

While engaged in "prospecting" among the deodar trees, a pine of another
species came under the observation of our adventurers.  It was that
known as the "cheel."

It might have been seen by them without attracting any particular
notice, but for Karl; who, upon examining its leaves, and submitting
them to a botanical test, discovered that within the body of the "cheel"
there existed qualities that, in the circumstances in which they were
placed, would be of great value to them.  Karl knew that the "cheel" was
one of those pines, the wood of which, being full of turpentine, make
most excellent torches; and he had read, that for this very purpose it
is used by all classes of people who dwell among the Himalaya mountains,
and who find in these torches a very capital substitute for candles or
lamps.  Karl could also have told his companions, that the turpentine
itself--which oozes out of the living tree--is used by the people as an
ointment for sores--and that for chapped hands it is a speedy and
effectual cure.  The "cheel" pine is nearly always found side by side
with the deodar--especially where the latter forms the chief growth of
the forest.

Karl could also have informed them that the deodar and the cheel are
not, the only pines indigenous to the Himalayas.  He could have
mentioned several other species, as the "morenda," a large and handsome
tree, with very dark foliage, and one of the tallest of the
_coniferae_--often rising to the stupendous height of two hundred feet;
the "rye" pine, of almost equal height with the morenda, and perhaps
even more ornamental; and the "Kolin," or common pine, which forms
extensive forests, upon the ridges that rise from six to nine thousand
feet above sea-level.  The last thrives best in a dry, rocky soil and it
is surprising in what places it will take root and grow.  In the
perpendicular face of a smooth granite rock, large trees of this species
may be seen.  In the rock there exists a little crevice.  Into this a
seed in some manner finds its way, vegetates, and in time becomes a
great tree--flourishing perhaps for centuries, where, to all appearance,
there is not a particle of soil to nourish it, and probably deriving
sustenance from the rock itself!

It was with no slight gratification that Karl beheld the "cheel" growing
so near.  He knew that from it they would obtain brilliant torches--as
many as they might stand in need of; so that during the dark nights,
instead of sitting idle for the want of light, they could occupy
themselves till a late hour within the hovel, in making the "rounds" of
the ladders, and doing such other little "chores" as the occasion might
require.


CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE SCALING LADDERS.

The cutting down of the trees did not occupy them a very long time.
They chose only those of slender girth--the more slender the better, so
long as they answered the requirements as to length.  Trees of about
fifty feet in total height were the best: as these, when the weaker part
of the tops was cut off, yielded lengths of thirty or more feet.  Where
they were only a few inches in diameter, there was very little trouble
in reducing them to the proper size for the sides of the ladders--only
to strip off the bark and split them in twain.

Making the rounds was also an easy operation--except that it required
considerable time, as there were so many of them.

The most difficult part of the work--and this they had foreseen--would
be the drilling of the holes to receive the rounds; and it was the task
which proved the most dilatory--taking up more time in its
accomplishment than both the cutting of the timber, and reducing it to
its proper shapes and dimensions.

Had they owned an auger or a mortising chisel, or even a good gimlet,
the thing would have been easy enough.  Easier still had they possessed
a "breast bit."  But of course not any of these tools could be obtained;
nor any other by which a hole might be bored big enough to have admitted
the points of their little fingers.  Hundreds of holes would be needed;
and how were they to be made?  With the blades of their small knives it
would have been possible to scoop out a cavity--that is, with much
trouble and waste of time; but vast time and trouble would it take to
scoop out four hundred; and at least that number would be needed.  It
would be a tedious task and almost interminable, even supposing that it
could be accomplished; but this was doubtful enough.  The blades of the
knives might be worn or broken, long before the necessary number of
holes could be made.

Of course, had they been possessed of a sufficient number of nails, they
might have done without holes.  The steps of the ladders could have been
nailed upon the sides, instead of being mortised into them.  But nails
were a commodity quite as scarce with them as tools.  With the exception
of those in the soles of their shoes, or the stocks of their guns, there
was not a nail in the valley.

It is not to be denied that they were in a dilemma.  But Karl had
foreseen this difficulty, and provided against it before a stick of
timber had been cut.  Indeed, close following on the first conception of
the scaling ladders, this matter had passed through his mind, and had
been settled to his satisfaction.  Only theoretically, it is true; but
his theory was afterwards reduced to practice; and, unlike many other
theories, the practice proved in correspondence with it.

Karl's theory was to make the holes by fire--in other words, to bore
them with a red-hot iron.

Where was this iron to be obtained?  That appeared to offer a
difficulty, as great as the absence of an auger or a mortise-chisel.
But by Karl's ingenuity it was also got over.  He chanced to have a
small pocket pistol: it was single-barrelled, the barrel being about six
inches in length, without any thimbles, beading, or ramrod attached to
it.  What Karl intended to do, then, was to heat this barrel red-hot,
and make a boring-iron of it.  And this was exactly what he _did_ do;
and after heating it some hundreds of times, and applying it as often to
the sides of the different ladders, he at last succeeded in burning out
as many holes as there were rounds to go into them, multiplied exactly
by two.

I have to say, gift of the popular adage that job cost me to drink
good wine and get good at Malaga raisins. Almost one third of the
city consists of new construction, in generally excellent, very attractive
for its many balconies and lattice or flown cabinets, green or blue, its
marble floor, big iron trellis, its cheerful and its rooftop lookouts
oriental style. In the new streets are clean and spacious, many large
hotels and cafes, one can see the comfort and pleasure, and it is
not true in cities like material inside Spain.

The famous _Alameda_ is a wonderful street-walking, where there
is an abundance of giant trees, fountains, statues and canapés granite
between two rows of elegant buildings. Similarly, buildings that
dominate the docks or the upcoming port, relay the progress of
good taste and vitality of the maritime cities.

But the bulk of the city, old, is an incomprehensible maze of streets in
the first time, dark, very narrow, often dirty, some reaching an
incredible degree of filth.

There constructions capricious, extravagant, barbarian on any weight,
half-Moorish, half-Spanish, whose moles stirring constantly, to
the narrowness and crushed without pity, a large and active population
of the most heterogeneous.

The elegant and beautiful Malaga (women are very nice there in large
numbers) walks visiting the rich stores and shops of fashion and curios,
shaking with a grace inimitable choice of ebony, sandalwood or nacre with
graceful ornaments and rich landscape, and seduced by the grace of her
walk, but got rid decent. And no less striking for its picaresque
_dejos_ and the air ... Malaga minor - between the guy who _manola_
and _griseta_ -- dressed in brightly colored fabrics, with heads
uncovered, lively and provocative, winking eye to dangerous skill, pink
and brown, round and tempting as a ripe bunches of grapes that produce
pink to the country.
It was no use for either Caspar or Ossaroo to go up again.  They had
been on the ledge already; and had arrived at the same conviction.
Karl's report was final and conclusive.

All their ingenuity defeated--all their toil gone for nothing--their
time wasted--their hopes blighted--the bright sky of their future once
more obscured with darkest clouds--all through that unforeseen
circumstance.

Just as when they returned out of the cavern--after that patient but
fruitless search--just as then, sate they down upon the rocks--each
staggering to that which was nearest him--sad, dispirited, forlorn.

There sate they, with eyes now fixed upon the ground, now turning
towards the cliff and gazing mechanically upon that serried line, like
the stairway of some gigantic spider--those long ladders, planted with
so much pains, climbed only once, and never to be climbed again!


CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

AN EMPTY LARDER.

Long sat they in this attitude, all three, observing a profound silence.
The air was keenly cold, for it was now mid-winter, but none of them
seemed to feel the cold.  The deep disappointment, the bitter chagrin
that filled their minds, hindered them from perceiving bodily pain; and
at that moment had an avalanche threatened to slide down upon them from
the snowy summit above, not one of the three would have much cared to
escape out of its way.

So tired had they become of their aerial prison--so terrified by the
prospect of its continuing for ever--or at least as long as they might
live--they could have contemplated even death without additional terror.

The straw, to which they had so long and so fondly clung, was snatched
from their grasp.  Again were they drowning.

For nearly an hour sat they thus, moody and desponding.  The
purple-coloured tints, that began to play over the surface of the
eternal snows above, admonished them that the sun was far down in the
heavens, and that night was approaching.

Karl was the first to become conscious of this--the first to break
silence.

"Oh, brothers!" said he, under the impress of their common misfortune
including Ossaroo in the fraternal appellation.  "Come away!  It is
useless to stay longer here.  Let us go home!"

"Home!" repeated Caspar, with a melancholy smile.  "Ah!  Karl, I wish
you had not spoken the word.  So sweet at other times, it now rings in
my ears like some unearthly echo.  Home, indeed!  Alas, dear brother! we
shall ne'er go home."

To this pathetic speech Karl made no reply.  He could offer no word of
hope or consolation; and therefore remained silent.  He had already
risen to his feet--the others following his example--and all three
walked moodily away from the spot, taking the most direct route towards
their rude dwelling, which now more than ever they had reason to regard
as their _home_.

On reaching the hut they found still another cause of inquietude.  Their
stock of provisions, which had survived the destructive onset of the
elephant, had been economised with great care.  But as they had been too
busy in making the ladders to waste time on any other species of
industry, nothing had been added to the larder--neither fish, flesh, nor
fowl.  On the contrary, it had dwindled down, until upon that clay when
they issued forth to try their ladders against the cliff, they had left
behind them only a single piece of dried yak-beef--about enough to have
furnished them with a single meal.

Hungry after the day's fruitless exertion, they were contemplating a
supper upon it, and not without some degree of pleasant anticipation:
for nature under all circumstances will assert her rights, and the
cravings of appetite are not to be stifled even by the most anguished
suffering of the spirit.

As they drew nearer to the hut, but more especially when they came in
sight of it, and perceived its rude but hospitable doorway open to
receive them--as from the chill atmosphere through which they were
passing they beheld its sheltering roof of thatch, and thought of its
snug, cosy interior--as, keenly experiencing the pangs both of cold and
hunger, they beheld in fancy a bright faggot fire crackling upon the
hearth, and heard the yak-beef hissing and sputtering in the blaze,
their spirits began to return to their natural condition, and if not
actual joy, something that very much resembled cheerfulness might have
been observed in the demeanour of all.

It is ever thus with the mind of man, and perhaps fortunate that it is
so.  The human soul finds its type in the sky--cloud and sunshine,
sunshine and cloud.

With our adventurers the dark cloud had for the moment passed; and a
gleam of light was once more shining upon their hearts.

It was not destined to shine long.  A light had been struck, and a fire
kindled that soon blazed brightly.  So far one desire had been
satisfied.  They could warm themselves.  But when they came to think of
gratifying an appetite of a far more craving character--when they
essayed to search for that piece of yak flesh that was to furnish forth
their supper--they found it not!

During their absence, the burglar had also been abroad.  Their larder
had been assailed.  The _hung_ beef was hanging there no longer.

Some wild animal--wolf, panther, or other predatory creature--had
entered by the open doorway,--left open in the excitement of that
hopeful departure--found open upon their return--but, like the door of
that oft-quoted stable, not worth shutting, since the steed had been
stolen.

Not a morsel, not a mouthful remained--either of yak-beef or food of any
other kind--and all three, Fritz making the fourth, had to go supperless
to sleep.


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

GOING ABROAD FOR BREAKFAST.

The exertions which they had made in carrying and erecting the ladders
had so wearied them, that, despite their empty stomachs, all three were
able to sleep.  Their slumber, however, was neither profound nor
prolonged; and one and another of them awoke at intervals during the
night and lay awake, reflecting upon the miserable fate that had
befallen them, and the poor prospects now before them.

They were even without the ordinary consolation of knowing that they
might find something to eat in the morning.  Before they could have any
breakfast, they knew they would first have to find it in the forest.
They would have to search, find, and kill, before they could eat.

But they had reason now not only to be in doubt about procuring their
breakfast, but their dinner and supper--in short, their whole future
subsistence.  Circumstances had become changed.  The larder, hitherto
amply provided by Caspar's hunting skill, was now quite empty; and
although he could soon have replenished it had their ammunition not been
destroyed, it was now quite a different thing.  Caspar's power was gone
along with his powder; and the deer and other quadrupeds, which were
known to be yet numerous in the valley--to say nothing of the winged
creatures that frequented it, could now smile at any attempt on the part
of Caspar to trouble them any longer with his double-barrelled
detonator.  The gun would hereafter be as useless as a bar of iron.

Only one charge of powder for each barrel remained, and one more for
Karl's rifle.  When these three should be fired off, not another shot
might ever again be heard ringing through that silent valley, and waking
the echoes of the surrounding cliffs.

But it had not yet entered their minds that they might be unable to kill
any of the wild animals with which the place abounded.  Had they thought
so, they would have been unhappy indeed--perhaps so anxious as not to
have slept another wink for that night.  But they did not yet
contemplate the future so despondingly.  They hoped that, even without
their guns, they would still be enabled to procure sufficient game for
their support; and as they all lay awake, just before the breaking of
the day, this became the subject of their conversation.

Ossaroo still felt full confidence in his bow and arrows; and should
these fail, there was his fishing-net; and if that also were to draw
blank, the experienced shikaree knew a score of other schemes for
circumventing the beasts of the earth, the birds of the air, and the
finny denizens of the water.  Karl expressed his determination, as soon
as spring should return, to commence cultivating certain edible roots
and plants, which grew rather sparsely around, but, by the careful
propagation of which, a crop might be procured of sufficient abundance.
Moreover, they resolved that in the following year they should store up
such wild fruits and berries as were fit for food; and thus insure
themselves against any chance of famine for months to come.  The failure
of their late attempt with the ladders had reproduced within them the
firm though fearful conviction, that for the rest of their lives they
were destined to dwell within the mountain valley--never more to go
beyond the bounds of that stupendous prison-like wall that encircled
them.

With this impression now freshly stamped upon their minds, they returned
to speculate on the means of present existence, as also on that of their
more immediate future; and in this way did they pass the last hour of
the night--that which was succeeded by the daybreak.

As the first streaks of dawning day appeared upon the snowy summits--
several of which were visible from the door of the hut--all three might
have been seen outside preparing themselves for the execution of some
important design.  Their purpose might easily be told from the character
of their preparations.  Caspar was charging his double-barrelled gun;
and carefully too--for it was the "last shot in his locker."

Karl was similarly employed with his rifle, while Ossaroo was arming
himself in his peculiar fashion, looking to the string of his bow, and
filling the little wicker bag, that constituted his quiver, with
sharp-pointed arrows.

From this it was evident that the chase was the occupation immediately
intended, and that all three were about to engage in it.  In truth, they
were going out in search of something for their breakfast; and if a keen
appetite could ensure success, they could scarce fail in procuring it:
for they were all three as hungry as wolves.

Fritz, too, was as hungry as any of them; and looked as if he meant to
do his best in helping them to procure the material for a meal.  Any
creature, beast or bird, that should be so unfortunate as to come within
clutching distance of his gaunt jaws, would have but little chance on
that particular morning of escaping from them.

It had been resolved upon that they should go in different directions:
as by that means there would be three chances of finding game instead of
one; and as something was wanted for breakfast, the sooner it could be
procured the better.  If Ossaroo should succeed in killing anything with
his arrows, he was to give a shrill whistle to call the others back to
the hut; while if either of them should fire, of course the shot would
be heard, and that would be the signal for all to return.

With this understanding, and after some little badinage about who would
be the successful caterer, they all set forth, Caspar going to the
right, Ossaroo to the left, and Karl, followed by Fritz, taking the
centre.


CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

CASPAR ON A STALK.

In a few minutes the three hunters had lost sight of one another, Karl
and Caspar proceeding round the lake by opposite sides, but both keeping
under cover of the bushes; while Ossaroo wended his way along the bottom
of the cliff--thinking he might have a better chance in that direction.

The game which Caspar expected first might fall in his way was the
"kakur," or barking-deer.  These little animals appeared to be more
numerous in the valley than any other creatures.  Caspar had scarcely
ever been abroad upon a shooting excursion without seeing one; and on
several occasions a kakur had constituted his whole "bag."  He had
learnt an ingenious way of bringing them within range of his gun--simply
by placing himself in ambush and imitating their call; which, as may be
deduced from one of their common names, is a sort of bark.  It is a
sound very much resembling the bark of a fox, only that it is much
louder.  This the kakur sends forth, whenever it suspects the presence
of an enemy in its neighbourhood; and keeps repeating it at short
intervals, until it believes either that the danger has been withdrawn,
or withdraws itself from the danger.

The simple little ruminant does not seem to be aware that this sound--
perhaps intended as a note of warning to its companions--too often
becomes its own death-signal, by betraying its whereabouts to the
sportsman or other deadly enemy.  Not only the hunter, man, but the
tiger, the leopard, the cheetah, and other predatory creatures, take
advantage of this foolish habit of the barking-deer; and stealing upon
it unawares, make it their victim.

The bark is very easily imitated by the human voice; and after a single
lesson, with Ossaroo as instructor, not only could Caspar do the decoy
to a nicety, but even Karl, who only overheard the shikaree instructing
his pupil, was able to produce a sound precisely similar.

Present hunger prompted Caspar to go in search of the kakur, as that
would be the game most likely to turn up first.  There were other
quadrupeds, and some birds too, whose flesh would have served better, as
being of superior delicacy: for the venison of the barking-deer is none
of the sweetest.  In the autumn it is not bad--nor up to a late period
in the winter--though it is never very delicious at any season.

On that morning, however, Caspar was not at all fastidious; and he knew
that neither were the others--hunger having robbed them of all delicacy
of appetite.  Even kakur venison would be palatable enough, could he
procure it; and for this purpose was he going in a particular direction,
and not wandering hither and thither, as sportsmen usually do when in
search of game.

He knew of a spot where kakur were almost sure of being found.  It was a
pretty glade, surrounded by thick evergreen shrubbery--not far from the
edge of the lake, and on the side opposite to that where the hut was
built.

Caspar had never entered this glade--and he had gone through it several
times--without seeing kakur browsing upon the grassy turf, or lying in
the shade of the bushes that grew around its edge.  It was but fair to
presume, therefore, that on that morning, as upon others, the glade
would furnish him with this species of game.

Without making stop anywhere else, he walked on till he had got within a
few rods of the spot where he expected to procure the materials of the
breakfast; and then, entering among the underwood, he advanced more
slowly and with greater caution.  To ensure success, he even dropped
upon his knees, and crawled cat-like, using his arms as forelegs and his
hands as paws!  After this fashion he worked his way forward to the edge
of the opening--all the while keeping a thick leafy bush before his body
to screen himself from the eyes of any creature--kakur or other animal--
that might be within the glade.

On getting close up behind the bush, he came to a halt; and then,
cautiously raising his shoulders, he peeped through between the leafy
branches.

It took him some seconds of time to survey the whole surface of the
glade; but when he had finished his scrutiny, a shadow of disappointment
might have been seen passing over his countenance.  There was no game
there--neither kakur nor animals of any other kind.

Not without a certain feeling of chagrin did the young hunter perceive
that the opening was empty: for, to say nothing of the annoyance he felt
on not being able to procure a joint of venison for breakfast, he had
been flattering himself that, from his superior knowledge of the ground,
he would be the first to find the material for their matutinal meal--
about which he had some little feeling of hunter-pride and rivalry.

He did not permit this preliminary disappointment to rob him of all
hope.  If there were no kakur within the glade, there might be some in
the bushes near its edge; and perhaps, by adopting the decoy he had
several times already practised--that of imitating their call--he might
entice one out into the open ground.

Acting upon this idea, he squatted close behind the bush, and commenced
barking, as near as he could, _a la kakur_.


CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE DOUBLE DECOY.

It was some considerable time before he heard any response to cheer him,
or observed any sign that indicated the presence or proximity of an
animal.

He repeated his bark many times, with intervals of silence between--and
was about yielding to the conviction, that not only the open ground, but
the bushes around it, were going to draw blank.

He had uttered his last bark, with all the alluring intonation that he
could throw into the sound; and was about starting to his feet to
proceed elsewhere, when just then the real cry of the kakur responded to
his feigned one--apparently coming from out the thicket on the opposite
side of the glade.

The sound was heard only faintly, as if the animal was at a great
distance off; but Caspar knew that if it was a response to his call--
which he believed it to be--it would soon draw nearer.  He lost no time,
therefore, in giving utterance to a fresh series of barks of the most
seductive character; and then once more strained his ears to listen for
the reply.

Again the barks of the kakur came back upon the breeze--repeated
serially, and so resembling his own, that had Caspar not known that they
proceeded from the throat of a deer, he might have fancied them to be
echoes.  He did not allow many seconds to elapse before barking again,
and again, with an equal straining at allurement.

This time, to the surprise of the young hunter, there was no response.
He listened, but not a sound came back--not even an echo.

He barked again, and again listened.  As before, silence profound,
unbroken.

No--it was not unbroken.  Although it was not the call of the kakur,
another sound interrupted the stillness--a sound equally welcome to the
ear of the young hunter.  It was a rustling among the leaves on the
opposite side of the glade; just such as might indicate the passage of
an animal through the bushes.

Directing his eye towards the spot where the sound appeared to proceed,
Caspar saw, or fancied he saw, some twigs in motion.  But it was no
fancy: for the moment after he not only saw the twigs move, but behind
the bush to which they belonged he could just make out a
darkish-coloured object.  It could be nothing else than the body of the
kakur.  Although it was very near--for the glade was scarce twenty yards
across, and the deer was directly behind the line of low shrubs which
formed a sort of selvedge around it--Caspar could not get a good view of
the animal.  It was well screened by the foliage, and better perhaps by
the absence of a bright light: for it was yet only the grey twilight of
morning.  There was light enough, however, to take aim; and as the
intervening branches were only tiny twigs, Caspar had no fear that they
would interfere with the direction of his ballet.  There was no reason,
therefore, why he should delay longer.  He might not get a better
chance; and if he waited longer, or barked again, the kakur might
discover the decoy, and run back into the bushes.

"Here goes, then!" muttered Caspar to himself; at the same time placing
himself firmly on one knee, raising his gun and cocking it.

It was a splendid lock--that upon the right-hand barrel of Caspar's
gun--one in which the cock, on being drawn to the full, gives tongue to
tell that the spring is in perfect order.

In the profound stillness of the morning-air the "click" sounded clear
enough to have been heard across the glade, and much further.  Caspar
even feared that it might be loud enough to affright the deer; and kept
his eye fixed upon the latter as he drew back the cock.  The animal
stirred not; but instead--almost simultaneous with the click of his gun,
and as if it had been its echo--another click fell upon the hunter's
ear, apparently coming from the spot on which the kakur was standing!

Fortunate was it for Caspar that his own spring had clicked so clear--
and fortunate also he had heard that apparent echo--else he might either
have shot his brother, or his brother him, or each might have shot the
other!

As it was, the second click caused Caspar to start to his feet.  Karl at
the same instant was seen hurriedly rising erect upon the opposite side
of the glade, while both with cocked guns in their hands stood eyeing
each other, like two individuals about to engage in a deadly duel of
rifles!

Had any one seen them at that moment, and in that attitude, their wild
looks would have given colour to the supposition that such was in
reality their intent; and some time would have elapsed before any action
on the part of either would have contradicted this fearful belief: for
it was several seconds before either could find speech to express their
mutual surprise.

It was something more than surprise--it was awe--a deep tragical emotion
of indefinable terror, gradually giving way to a feeling of heartfelt
thankfulness, at the fortunate chance that had made them aware of each
other's presence, and saved them from a mutual fratricide.

For some seconds I have said not a word was spoken; and then only short
exclamations of similar import came trembling from the lips of both.
Both, as if acting under a common impulse, flung their guns to the
ground.  Then, rushing across the glade, they threw their arms around
each other; and remained for some moments locked in a brotherly embrace.

No explanation was needed by either.  Karl, after passing round the lake
by the other side, had strayed by chance in the direction of the glade.
On nearing it, he had heard the barking of a kakur--not dreaming that it
was Caspar acting as a decoy.  He had answered the signal; and finding
that the kakur still kept its place, he had advanced toward the opening
with the intention of stalking it.  On getting nearer he had ceased to
utter the call, under the belief that he should find the deer out in the
open ground.  Just as he arrived by its edge, Caspar was mimicking the
kakur in such an admirable manner, and so energetically, that Karl could
neither fail to be deceived as to the character of the animal, nor
remain ignorant of its position.  The darkish disc visible behind the
evergreen leaves could be no other than the body of the deer; and Karl
was just about cocking his rifle, to bore it with a bullet, when the
click of Caspar's double-barrel sounding ominously in his ear,
fortunately conducted to a far different _denouement_ than that fatal
_finale_ which was so near having occurred.


CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

The signal of the Shikaree.

As if sent to cheer and distract their minds from the feeling of dread
awe which still held possession of them, just then the shrill whistle of
Ossaroo came pealing across the lake, reverberating in echoes from the
cliff toward which he had gone.  Shortly after the signal sounded again
in a slightly different direction--showing that the shikaree had
succeeded in bagging his game, and was returning towards the hut.

On hearing the signal, Karl and Caspar regarded each other with glances
of peculiar significance.

"So, brother," said Caspar, smiling oddly as he spoke, "you see Ossaroo
with his despised bow and arrows has beaten us both.  What, if either of
us had beaten him?"

"Or," replied Karl, "what if we had both beaten him?  Ah! brother
Caspar," added he, shuddering as he spoke, "how near we were to making
an end of each other!  It's fearful to think of it!"

Damis. Itzt Stay here, stay here. Anton. But your father, Mr. ways; the
point. Do you hear? We could not continue talking. (Geht ab.) Damis.
If I but my father wanted to leave undisturbed.

Because he thinks that I'm such a loafer like it? Second appearance Damis.
Chrysander. Chrysander. Always on the damn books! My son, too much is
too much. The pleasure is as necessary as the work. Damis. Lord Father,
studying gives me pleasure enough. Who besides the other sciences nor
amuse studied, the true sweetness of that have not yet tasted.

Chrysander. The do not say! I have in my youth also studied, and I'm up
to the mark of erudition came. But that I am constantly on the books
would have been, it is not true. I went walking, I played, I visited
companies, I made acquaintance with Mrs. rooms. What the father in the
youth has done, can the son do, should the son do.

A bove Majori discat Arar minor! Latins as we speak. Especially the
women's rooms let you talk about how we Latins, de meliori be recommended!
These are fools that a young person before the Women's Room worse
than scorpions warn; it to him, as we talk about Latins, cautius
sanguine viperino to flee commanding .-- Damis.

Cautius sanguine viperino? Yes, that is still Latin! But how is the whole
point? Cur timet flavum Tiberim tangere? cur olivum Sanguine viperino
Cautius Vitatene? - Oh, I hear already, Mr Father, you have not made
the source geschöpft! Because otherwise you would know that
Horace in Ode ebender love as a very negative describes passion, and
the Women's Room - Chrysander. Horace! Horace! Horace was an Italian
and the Italian woman meinet room. Yes before the Italian I warn you,
too! this is dangerous! I have a good friend, who in his youth -
but still! we must not give offense .-- The German Women's Room,
however, the German o! with it is quite otherwise obtain .-- I would
not have become the man who I am when I am the wife of rooms would not
completely zugestutzt. I dächte, you would me's. You've read enough books
dead; look once in a living! Damis. I it amazing - Chrysander. O thou
wilt even more surprising, if only you will go deeper into it. The Women's
Room, you must know, for a young man a new world, where so much to
create, so much to admire there - Damis.

Listen to me! I am amazing, I want to say you have a language to
hear the truth those rules were not printed, which you informed me on
the high school said. Chrysander. Quae, Qualis, quanta! Now and
then! Mutantur Tempora! Latins as we say. Damis. Tempora mutantur? I ask
you to insert but the prejudices of the mob from. The times are not
changed. For once let us see what is time? - Chrysander. Hush! Time
is one thing that I with your useless Geplaudre do not want to
spoil. My former rules were after the former extent of your experience
and your mind set. But now I trust you both so much that thou
delight not to make you work.

For this reason, I advise you thus - Damis. Their speeches have some
appearance of truth. Solo I penetrate deeper. You will immediately see.
The status is Controversiä - Chrysander. Oh, the status
Controversiä like Barbara, or in my behalf in his Celarent. I am not come
to dispute with thee, but - Damis. The art of words Disputierens to learn?
Cheers! So you must know that neither Barbara nor Celarent the Statum -
Chrysander. I would be great! He Bleib me, Mr Informator, with the
antics away, or - Damis. Antics? these strange names, although remnants
of scholastic philosophy, that is true, but such remnants -
Chrysander.

About which I will lose patience when you do not anhörst soon. I come in
the most serious thing in the world to you - because what is more serious
than getting married - and you - Damis. Getting married? Getting married
because of me? to me? Chrysander. Ha! ha! Makes you attentive? So ausculta
et perpende! Damis. Ausculta et perpende? ausculta et perpende? A
happy idea - Chrysander. Oh, I have ideas - Damis. I get there!
Chrysander. Du? Damis. Yes, I do. Do you know where this ausculta
et perpende herschreibt?

Eben, I will make the discovery, from Homer.

O what can I not do everything in my Homer?

Chrysander. You and your Homer, you are a couple of fools! Damis. Me and
Homer? Homer and I? both of us? Hi! Hi! Hi! Certainly, Mr Father? O
thank, thank. Me and Homer! Homer and I! - But you will hear just as
often as Homer - he really was not a fool, as little as I - as
often as he, I say, his hero to the soldiers bravery or encourage
the war in rate is a consultation can raise, as often is the beginning
her speech: Behold, I will talk, and about it!

For example in the Odyssey: "Now Keklute dae meu, Ithakhsioi, oti eipo
ken." [Greek] And because it is often follows: "Oy eiath 'oi d' ara
tau mala men chluon, aed 'epithonto," [Greek] that is: so he said, and
they obeyed to what they had belongs. Chrysander.

They obey him? Nu, which is reasonable! Homer may surely be no fool.
Look at that from you, I also can revoke. Because once again to the
point: I know, my son - Damis. A small moment, Mr Father. I want to just
sit down and write this note. Chrysander. Down? what is down
here?

Who is due to whether the Sprüchelchen from Homer or from the hymnal is?
Damis. The scholarly world is because, my honor and Homer is located on
it! Because a Halbhundert Such observations make a philologist. And it
is new, I must tell you it is brand new. Chrysander. To read it on
another. Damis. If they remove me again? I would be inconsolable. Did
you at least the Validity me once again to be recalled. Chrysander.
Well, I do listen to me just now.

I know, my son, a pretty woman allerliebsten room, and I know you
know it too. Would you probably want - Damis. I will be a women's
room, a lovely room dignified woman know? Oh, Lord Father, if someone
heard what he would think of my learning - I am a lovely woman of
dignity room? - Chrysander. Now truthfully, I do not believe that an
innkeeper may be frightened, if he is guilty, he knew or that the
thieves, erschrickst than you, because you're a women's room shalt know.
Is there a swear? Damis. At least there is no honor, especially for a
scholar. With whom you bypasses whose morals it takes to be sent.

Each room is Mrs. vain, arrogant, garrulous, and quarrelsome life childish,
it may be as old as it wants. Every woman knows little room that has
a soul, which is infinitely more to be concerned as to the body. Getting
dressed, undressing and dressing again, sitting in front of the
mirror, admiring his own charm; ausgekünstelte miens to ponder,
with curious eyes at the idle screen is: nonsense novels to read
and up to the maximum time the needle on hand: these are his
occupations, that is his life.

And you believe that a scholar without the disadvantage of his good name,
such foolish creatures more than their outward shape after should
know? Chrysander. Man, man! your mother returns to the grave. Remember
though, that they also had a women's room! Remember though, that
the nature of things now are no different! Although, as we talk about
Latins maintain nulla regula sine exceptions. And such a Exzeption
is definitely the girl that I now had in his head and you know .-- Damis.
No, no! I swear it to you, except our Muhmen and Julian - Chrysander.
And Juliane? bene!

- Damis. And except for her girls, I know not a single woman. Yes, the sky
will punish me if I ever do come to mind, know more! Chrysander. The
now even that! as you want! Enough, Julian, the kennst du
Damis. Sorry! Chrysander. And Juliane is that I would like to hear
your thoughts .-- Damis. About Julian? my thoughts about Julian? Lord
Father, if you have my thoughts about remembering or Korinnen on
Telesillen or Praxillen required - Chrysander. Shock one thousand! what
are these Illen? The moment he swore that he know of no woman
room, and now he calls half a dozen people .-- Damis.

People? Mr. Father! Chrysander. Yes, Mr. Sohn, people! The ending, there's
certainly not? Netrix, Lotrix, Meretrix .-- Damis. Sky, people! Greek
poets famous people to mention! - Chrysander. Yes, yes, poets! these are
just the right me. Lotrix, Meretrix, Poetrix - Damis. Poetrix? Alas,
my ears!

Poetria would you say or Poetris - Chrysander. Is or ix, Mr. Krämer
letters! Chrysander third appearance. Damis. Lisette. Lisette. Hurtig
down in the living room, Mr. Chrysander! We want you to speak. Chrysander.
Well, what a fool I must jetzo stören? Who is it? Lisette. Should I send
all Fools know? Chrysander. What sayest thou? You have an unhappy mouth,
Lisette. An honest man a fool to grumble? Because an honest man but
it must be what he wanted me otherwise? Lisette. Nu, nu, you will always
forgive my error Maule yours. Chrysander. The failure of the mine?
Lisette. O go yet! the honest man is waiting. Chrysander. Let him wait.
I have not come to fool say .-- I'll be right back, my son.

Lisette (aside). But I must see if I got out of the quaint little maiden
of my imagination can do. Fourth appearance Lisette. Damis. Damis.
Now? Lisette does not? Lisette. I am your obedient servant. When you
order, I will obey. But only one, I would only know. Tell me, for heaven's
sake, how can you constantly be so alone? What do you do for the whole
day on your Studierstube? Be you because not all moments to hours?
Damis. Ah, what use the questions? Fort! away! Lisette. About the
books but you can not lie all the time.

The books, the dead partner! No, I praise my living, and that is
also Mamsell Juliane taste. Although now and then we also read, with
a wandering knight, a Banise, and so something good, but longer than an
hour behind, we believe it are not mutually exclusive.

Whole days so zuzubringen as you, help the sky! in the first three we would
be completely dead and not a word about how you talk, that would be our
hell. One benefit of the entire male sex can not be man because
I know people, so fleeting and yet volatile than we are.

It must be very few great minds that have special gifts .-- Damis. Lisette
speaks not so silly.

It is a pity that such a good mother does not joke with the sciences
is repaired. Lisette. They make me shame. Soon I expected myself to avenge
you and praise the surveys one after another tell you of yesterday's
garden has been made. But I will not offend your modesty. I know the
scholars to hold this virtue too much. Damis. My praise surveys? my?
Lisette. Yes, yes, yours. Damis. O get nothing, my dear Lisette.
I want to praise them as the surveys of another view, and so can my modesty
satisfied. Tell me only.

Just because your lively and unsophisticated nature, express themselves,
I wish to hear. Lisette. O my way is probably not the best. It has me a
teacher like you the truth. But I will obey your commands. You
know very well who the men were yesterday with your father in the
garden Mr schmauseten? Damis. No, not really. Because I do not
dabeisein wanted, so I am also not a matter of sorrow.

Hopefully, however, there have been people who themselves are worthy
of praise that you have written to praise you can imagine anything.
Lisette. That's pretty much it. What would you away but if they also
would not? You really want your praise from surveys modesty as an
alien look. And because the truth depends on the person's lips, which
she contends? Listen only - Damis. Heaven! I hear my father come back.
For God's sake, dear Lisette, that he did not remember that you
are with me for so long was made.

Hurtig you go under it in the Cabinet. Damis fifth appearance. Chrysander.
Chrysander. The desperate Valer! he had me at no time may come
ungelegnern. Is it because the executioner is now back from Berlin? And
he must be the same because I just can log in? Hui that - No, Mr
Valer, so you come too late. - Well, my son - (Damis is scattered, as
in deep thought.) Do you hear, my son? Damis.

I hear, I hear everything. Chrysander. In short, you realize it when I
hinauswollte? A clever three words are enough. Sapienti sat! Latins
say. - Qu but - Damis (still as in thought). What is there to answer?
- Chrysander.

What is there to answer - I will tell you. - Qu, that you understood
me, my request that you'd like, that you like Juliane; me that you
want to obey in all .-- Well, you have the answer - Damis.

I will sehn - (By the assumed dispersal in a beech effect.)

Chrysander. What can be used in the book are like this? - Replies from the
heart and not from the book .-- Ex libro doctus quilibet esse potest;
Latins say .-- Damis (as if he were in the Beech läs). Absolutely
right! But now what next? - Chrysander. The more there are, how 's
Greek. You say yes, she says yes, so is engagement, and wedding is
soon, and alsdenn - you'll see how it goes alsdenn .-- Damis.

However, if this condition - (still as if he läs.) Chrysander. Oh, I do
not advance what would be the least doubtful. Juliane is an
orphan, I am her guardian, I am your father, what should I angelegner,
when you both happy with it? Her father was my friend and was an honest
man, though a fool. He would have a bankruptcy can make honetten; his
creditors would be on third with akkordieren have to leave, and
he was so naive and paid to the last Heller.

What I want? hast thou not know him? Damis. From person. But his life
circumstances, I am very well aware. I saw them, I do not know how
biography, read 'Chrysander. Read? read printed? Damis. Yes, yes,
read. He was against the middle of the last century, was born and is
about twenty years ago, when Generalsuperintendent in Pomerania died. In
oriental languages was his primary strength. With his books are not all
equally good. This is still one of the best.

One particular habit is the man to be had - Chrysander. From whom
speak for you? Damis. You ask me, yes, if I the author of this book would
have known? Chrysander. I think you are dreaming, or is it even a little
anger in your brains before. I ask you, whether you knew Julian's
father still have? Damis. Forgive me when I get a little distracted
answered!

I thought just after, - well why the rabbis - the Schurek M'lo
Pum hot. Chrysander.

By Schurek damned! Give it to the eight, which the father is talking
with you! - (He takes his book out of hand.) You do not know him? I
reflect myself, it's probably not possible. When he died, Juliane was
still very young. I took it immediately after his death in my house,
and thank God! she has a lot of boons enjoyed here. She is beautiful,
she is virtuous, whom should I therefore prefer to treat them as you?
What do you mean? - Answer it!

Are not you there when you finally fixed! - Damis. Yes, yes, Lord Father.
Only one thing is still to be considered .-- Chrysander. You're right,
of course is another thing to consider is: if you find that clever,
soon to be a public office, but because - Damis. How? clever? clever?
So you doubt my skill? - How unfortunate I am that I will not immediately
give the evidence may unwidersprechlichsten! But it will still happen
this evening.

Believe me, even this evening .-- The damn mail! I do not know where she
remains. Chrysander. Calm yourself only, my son. The issue happened from
any suspicion, but merely because I think it chic is not more likely to
marry than to get an office has, as it is, I should think probably not
even send to an office rather than before you know where you get the woman
wants. Damis. Ah, what wedding? what woman? Allow me to leave you alone.
I have him right back to the post. Anton! Anton! But it is with the
Schlingel nothing to start, I just have to go yourself. Sixth
appearance Anton. Chrysander. Anton. Do not call me Mr. Damis? Where is
he? what should I do? Chrysander. I do not know what it is in the head.
He calls you, he wants you to post it bethinks is that you begin Schlingel
nothing, and goes himself. Tell me, do you want life to remain an ass?
Anton. Chamber, Mr Chrysander! I suppose the follies of your son, no
part. More than twelve times, I have him now at the post office
have to run.

He demands letters from Berlin. Is it my fault that they do not come?
Chrysander. The mysterious saint! You are but now so long to him, you
should not his mind, his way of thinking a little familiar? Anton. Ha!
ha! the ways; the point is tantamount to what we learned to know the
minds of call? That I am master, in my honor, I may be just a
word with a talk, I can just see him: Husch, I have the whole man away!
I know immediately whether he or stubborn sense of whether he or
a munificent Knicker - Chrysander.

I believe that you are pointing at me? Anton. O return to my hands not!
- Whether he - Chrysander. Thou shalt show thy art equal! I have my
son proposed a marriage, now say again, if you know him, what will he
do? Anton. Their son, Lord? Mr. Damis?

Excuse me, where is my art, my otherwise well-tried art, begging.
Chrysander. Nu, Rogue, go with and do not brag! Anton. The Gemütsart
a young scholar to know and want to infer something is impossible, and
what is impossible, Mr. Chrysander - this is impossible. Chrysander.
And why? Anton. Because he has none. Chrysander. No? Anton. No, no no,
but all other current stage.

The books and the examples which he reads, the winds, according to
which the weathercock directed his thoughts. Only in the chapter of
Marriage stop, because once on the wallpaper, so I reflect that - because
above all you must know that Mr. Damis never hidden anything from
me has. I have always been his confidant and was always the one with
which he always prefers to plan. Whole days, whole nights we sometimes
have to be disputed with each other at the University. And I do not
know, but he has something to please me, about a property that he does
not find another - Chrysander. I will tell you what it means for a property
is: your stupidity! You enjoy it when he sees that he is erudite than
you Are you now a fully Schalk and widersprichst Lobst and he does not
face him and admire him - Anton. More accursed! You betrayed me
because my whole policy! How clever old businessman is not! Chrysander.
But forget the main work is not! From Weddings - Anton. Yes, he has also
been vicious had crickets in the head.
They had entirely
forsaken that range of hills.

"`All readers of natural history are familiar with the wonderful
climbing and saltatory powers of the ibex; and, although they cannot (as
has been described in print) make a spring and hang on by their horns
until they gain footing, yet in reality, for such heavy-looking animals,
they get over the most inaccessible-looking places in an almost
miraculous manner.  Nothing seems to stop them, nor to impede in the
least their progress.  To see a flock, after being fired at, take a
direct line across country, which they often do, over all sorts of
seemingly impassable ground; now along the naked face of an almost
perpendicular rock, then across a formidable landslip, or an inclined
plane of loose stones or sand, which the slightest touch sets in motion
both above and below; diving into chasms to which there seems no
possible outlet, but instantly reappearing on the opposite side; never
deviating in the slightest from their course; and at the same time
getting over the ground at the rate of something like fifteen miles an
hour, is a sight not easily to be forgotten.  There are few animals, if
any, that excel the ibex in endurance and agility.'"


CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

A BATTLE OF BUCKS.

Karl had scarcely finished speaking, when, as if to illustrate still
further the habits of the ibex, a curious incident occurred to the
animal upon, which their eyes were fixed.

It ceased to be a solitary individual: for while they were gazing at it
another ibex made its appearance upon the cliff, advancing towards the
one first seen.  The new comer was also a male, as its huge
scimitar-shaped horns testified; while in size, as in other respects, it
resembled the one already on the rock as much as if they had been
brothers.  It was not likely they were so.  At all events the behaviour
of the former evinced anything but a fraternal feeling.  On the
contrary, it was advancing with a hostile intent, as its attitudes
clearly proved.  Its muzzle was turned downward and inward, until the
bearded chin almost touched its chest; while the tips of its horns,
instead of being thrown back upon its shoulders--their usual position
when the animal stands erect--were, elevated high in the air.  Moreover,
its short tail, held upright and jerking about with a quick nervous
motion, told that the animal meditated mischief.  Even at so great a
distance the spectators could perceive this: for the forms of both the
ibex were so clearly outlined against the sky, that the slightest motion
on the part of either could be perceived with perfect distinctness.

The new comer, when first observed, appeared to be approaching by
stealth--as if he intended to play the cowardly assassin, and butt the
other over the cliff!  Indeed, this was his actual design, as was
discovered in the sequel; and had the other only remained for six
seconds longer in the attitude in which he had been first seen, his
assailant would no doubt have at once succeeded in his treacherous
intent.

We are sorry to have to say that he _did_ succeed--though not without a
struggle, and the risk of being himself compelled to take that desperate
leap which he had designed for his antagonist.

It was probably the voice of Caspar that hindered the immediate
execution of this wicked intention; though, alas! it only stayed it for
a short time.  Caspar, on seeing the treacherous approach, had
involuntarily uttered a cry of warning.  Though it could not have been
understood by the imperilled ibex, it had the effect of startling him
from his dreamy attitude, and causing him to look around.  In that look
he perceived his danger, and quick as thought, took measures to avert
it.  Suddenly raising himself on his hind-legs, and using them as a
pivot, he wheeled about, and then came to the ground on all fours, face
to face with his adversary.  He showed no sign of any desire to retreat,
but seemed to accept the challenge as a matter of course.  Indeed, from
his position, it would have been impossible for him to have retreated
with any chance of safety.  The cliff upon which he had been standing,
was a sort of promontory projecting beyond the general line of the
precipice; and towards the mountain slope above his escape had been
already cut off by his challenger.  On all other sides of him was the
beetling cliff.  He had no alternative but fight, or be "knocked over."
It was less a matter of choice than necessity that determined him upon
standing his ground.

This determination he had just time to take, and just time to put
himself in an attitude of defence, when his antagonist charged towards
him.  Both animals, at the same instant, uttered a fierce, snorting
sound, and rising upon their hind-legs, stood fronting each other like a
brace of bipeds.  In this movement the spectators recognised the exact
mode of combat practised by common goats; for just in the same fashion
does the ibex exhibit his prowess.  Instead of rushing _horizontally_,
head to head, and pressing each other backwards, as rams do in their
contests, the ibex after rearing aloft, come down again, horns foremost,
using the weight of their bodies as the propelling power, each
endeavouring to crush the other between his massive crest and the earth.
Several times in succession did the two combatants repeat their
rearings aloft, and the downward strokes of their horns; but it soon
became evident, that the one who had been the assailant was also to be
the conqueror.  He had an advantage in the ground: for the platform
which his adversary occupied, and from which he could not escape, was
not wide enough to afford room for any violent movements; and the
imminent danger of getting a hoof over the cliff, evidently inspired him
with fear and constraint.  The assailant having plenty of space to move
in, was able to "back and fill" at pleasure, now receding foot by foot,
then rushing forward, rising erect, and striking down again.  Each time
he made his onslaught with renewed impetus, derived from the advantage
of the ground, as well as the knowledge that if his blow failed, he
should only have to repeat it; whereas, on the part of his opponent, the
failure of a single stroke, or even of a guard, would almost to a
certainty be the prelude to his destruction.

Whether it was that the ibex attacked was the weaker animal of the two,
or whether the disadvantage of the ground was against him, it soon
became evident that he was no match for his assailant.  From the very
first, he appeared to act only on the defensive; and in all likelihood,
had the road been open to him, he would have turned tail at once, and
taken to his heels.

But no opportunity for flight was permitted him at any moment from the
beginning of the contest; and none was likely to be given him until it
should end.  The only chance of escape that appeared, even to him, was
to make a grand leap, and clear his adversary, horns and all.

This idea seemed at length to take possession of his brain: for all on a
sudden he was keen to forsake his attitude of defence, and bound high
into the air--as if to get over his adversary's horns, and hide himself
among the safer snowdrifts of the mountains.

If such was his intent it proved a sad failure.  While soaring in the
air--all his four feet raised high off the ground--the huge horns of his
adversary were impelled with fearful force against his ribs, the stroke
tossing him like a shuttlecock clear over the edge of the cliff!

The blow had been delivered so as to project his body with a revolving
impetus into the air; and turning round and round, it fell with a heavy
concussion into the bottom of the valley; where, after rebounding full
six feet from the ground, it fell back again dead as a stone.

It was some seconds before the spectators could recover from surprise at
an incident so curious, though it was one that may often be witnessed by
those who wander among the wild crags of the Himalayas--where combats
between the males of the ibex, the tahir, the burrell or Himalayan wild
sheep, and also the rams of the gigantic _Ovis ammon_, are of common
occurrence.

These battles are often fought upon the edge of a beetling precipice--
for it is in such places that these four species of animals delight to
dwell--and not unfrequently the issue of the contest is such as that
witnessed by our adventurers--one of the combatants being "butted" or
pushed right over the cliff.

It does not follow that the animal thus put _hors de combat_ is always
killed.  On the contrary, unless the precipice be one of stupendous
height, an ibex, or tahir, or burrell, will get up again after one of
those fearful falls; and either run or limp away from the spot--perhaps
to recover, and try his luck and strength in some future encounter with
the same adversary.  One of the most remarkable instances of this kind
is related by the intelligent sportsman, Colonel Markham, and by him
vouched for as a fact that came under his own observation.  We copy his
account verbatim:--

"I witnessed one of the most extraordinary feats performed by an old
tahir, that I, or any other man, ever beheld.  I shot him when about
eighty yards overhead upon a ledge of rocks.  He fell perpendicularly
that distance, and, without touching the ground or the sides of the
precipice, rebounded, and fell again about fifteen yards further down.
I thought he was knocked to atoms, but he got up and went off; and
although we tracked him by his blood to a considerable distance, we were
after all unable to find him!"

My young readers may remember that many similar feats have been
witnessed in the Rocky Mountains of America, performed by the
"bighorn"--a wild sheep that inhabits these mountains, so closely
resembling the _Ovis ammon_ of the Himalayas, as to be regarded by some
naturalists as belonging to the same species.  The hunters of the
American wilderness positively assert that the bighorn fearlessly flings
himself from high cliffs, alighting on his horns; and, then rebounding
into the air like an elastic ball, recovers his feet unhurt, and even
unstunned by the tremendous "header!"

No doubt there is a good deal of exaggeration in these "hunter stories;"
but it is nevertheless true that most species of wild goats and sheep,
as well as several of the rock-loving antelopes--the chamois and
klipspringer, for instance--can do some prodigious feats in the leaping
line, and such as it is difficult to believe in by any one not
accustomed to the habits of these animals.  It is not easy to comprehend
how Colonel Markham's tahir could have fallen eighty yards--that is, 240
feet--to say nothing of the supplementary descent of forty-five feet
further--without being smashed to "smithereens."  But although we may
hesitate to give credence to such an extraordinary statement, it would
not be a proper thing to give it a flat contradiction.  Who knows
whether there may not be in the bones of these animals some elastic
principle or quality enabling them to counteract the effects of such
great falls?  There are many mechanical contrivances of animal life as
yet but very imperfectly understood; and it is well-known that Nature
has wonderfully adapted her creatures to the haunts and habits for which
she has designed them.  It may be, then, that these wild goats and
sheep--the Blondins and Leotards of the quadruped world--are gifted with
certain saltatory powers, and furnished with structural contrivances
which are altogether wanting to other animals not requiring them.  It
would not be right, therefore, without a better knowledge of the
principles of animal mechanism, to contradict the statement of such a
respectable authority as Colonel Markham--especially since it appears to
be made in good faith, and without any motive for exaggeration.

Our adventurers had entered into no discussion of this subject on
observing the descent of the ibex.  Indeed, there was nothing to suggest
such speculations; for the creature had fallen from such an immense
height, and come down with "such a thump" upon the hard turf, that it
never occurred to any of them to fancy that there was a single gasp of
breath left in its body.  Nor was there; for on reaching the ground
after its rebound, the animal lay with limbs loose and limp, and without
sign of motion--evidently a carcass.


CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

THE BEARCOOTS.

Our adventurers were congratulating themselves on this unexpected
accession to their larder; which, like the manna of old, had, as it
were, rained down from the sky.

"Our dinner!" shouted Caspar, gleefully, as the "thump" of the falling
ibex sounded in their ears.  "Our supper, too," he added.  "Ay, more!
In such a large carcass there must be provision to last us for a week!"

All three rose to their feet, and were about starting forward to secure
the prize; when a shrill scream twice repeated fell upon their ears--
coming down apparently from the top of the cliffs, or rather from the
mountain that trended still higher above them.

Could it be the cry of the conquering ibex--his slogan of triumph?  No;
it was not his voice, nor that of a quadruped of any kind.  Neither did
the spectators for an instant believe it to be so.  On turning their
eyes upward, they saw the creature, or the creatures--for there were two
of them--from whose throats those screams had proceeded.

The victorious ibex was still standing conspicuously upon the cliff.
During the few seconds that the attention of the spectators had been
occupied elsewhere, he appeared to have been contemplating the dire deed
of destruction he had just accomplished, and perhaps indulging in the
triumph he had obtained over his unfortunate rival.  At all events he
had stepped forward upon the projecting point of the rock--to the very
spot so lately occupied by his adversary.

The cry, however, which had been heard in the valley below had reached
his ears at the same time, and perhaps a little sooner: for as the
spectators looked up, they saw that he had been startled by it, and was
looking around him with evident alarm.  In the air above and not many
yards distant from him, were two dark objects, easily recognisable as
birds upon the wing.  They were of large size, nearly black in colour,
and with that peculiar sharpness of outline and sweep of wing that
distinguish the true birds of prey.  There was no mistaking their kind--
they were eagles--of a species known in the Himalayas and the steppes of
Thibet as the "bearcoot."

They were swooping in short, abrupt curves, at intervals repeating their
shrill screams, both crying out together, and from their excited mien,
and the character of their movements, no doubt could be entertained as
to the object of their noisy demonstrations.  They were about to assault
an enemy, and that enemy was no other than the ibex.

The animal appeared to be fully aware of their intent; and seemed for a
moment to be irresolute as to how it should act.  Instead of placing
itself in a bold, defiant attitude--such as it had lately assumed
towards an antagonist of its own kind--it stood cowering, and apparently
paralysed with fear.  It was this very effect which the eagles, by their
screaming, had designed to produce; and certainly the fierce birds were
succeeding to the utmost of their expectations.

The spectators kept their eyes fixed upon the actors of this new drama--
watching every movement, both of the birds and the beast, with intense
interest.  All were desirous of seeing the latter punished for the cruel
act he had just committed, and which they regarded as savouring very
strongly of fratricide.

It was written in the book of fate that their desire should be
gratified, and that the destroyer should himself be destroyed.  They
were expecting to witness a somewhat prolonged combat; but in this
expectation they were disappointed.  The duration of the conflict was as
brief as the preliminaries that led to it; and these were of the
shortest kind: for scarce ten seconds had elapsed, after they had
uttered their first scream, before the bearcoots swooped down to the
level of the cliff, and commenced a joint attack upon the ibex, striking
at him alternately with beak and claws.

For a short time the quadruped was shrouded--almost hidden--under the
broad, shadowy wings of the birds; but even when its figure could be
traced, it appeared to be making no very energetic efforts at defending
itself.  The sudden attack made by such strange enemies seemed to have
completely disconcerted the ibex; and it remained as if still under the
paralysis of fear.

After a moment or two had passed, the ibex appeared to recover
self-possession; and then he, rearing up, struck out with his horns.
But the bearcoots were on the alert; and each time that the animal
attempted a forward movement, they easily avoided the blow by shying to
one side or the other; and then quickly wheeling, they would swoop back
upon it from behind.

In this way was the conflict progressing, the ibex holding the ground
upon which he had been first attacked, turning round and round, with his
two fore hoofs held close together, or else rearing aloft on his
hind-legs, and using them as a pivot.

It would have been better for the ibex had he kept to his fore-feet
altogether; as in that attitude he might have held his ground a little
longer--perhaps until he had either beaten off his winged assailants, or
wearied them out by a prolonged defence.

But to fight on "all fours" did not chance to be his fashion.  It was
contrary to the traditions of his family and race--all of whose members,
from time immemorial, had been accustomed, when battling with an enemy,
to stand erect upon their hind-legs.

Following this fashion, he had raised himself to his full perpendicular,
and was about aiming a "butt" against the breast of one of the bearcoots
that was tantalising him in front, when the other, that had made a short
retrocession in order to gain impetus, came swooping back with the
velocity of an arrow, and seizing the ibex under the chin, by a quick,
strong jerk of its talons, it struck the head of the animal so far
backward that it lost its balance, and went toppling over the cliff.  In
another instant the ibex was in mid-air--falling--falling--through that
same fearful space that had just been traversed by his own victim.

The spectators looked to see him strike the ground without receiving
further molestation from his winged assailants.  Not so, however, did it
result.  Just as the ibex had got about half-way down the face of the
precipice, the second eagle was seen shooting after him with the
velocity of a flash of lightning; and before he could reach the ground,
the bearcoot was seen striking him once more, and causing him to diverge
from his vertical descent.  The body came to the ground at length--but
at a considerable distance from where the other was lying--the eagle
descending with it to the earth, and even remaining over it with wings
and limbs extended, as if still clutching it in his talons!

Why the bearcoot was thus retaining the ibex in his clutch was not quite
so clear: for the animal was evidently dead; and apparently had been so
long before reaching the earth.  There was something strange about this
proceeding on the part of the bird--as there had also been in its mode
of descent through the last forty or fifty yards of space.  From the
manner in which it had extended its wings after striking its prey, and
from the way in which it still kept exercising them, the spectators
began to think that its singular descent, and its remaining over the
carcass in that cowering attitude, were neither of them voluntary acts
on its part.

The truth was soon made clear--proving the contrary to be the case: for
as the bearcoot continued to flap its wings, or rather, flutter them in
a violent irregular motion, it became evident that instead of desiring
to remain by the fallen body of its victim, it was doing its very best
to get away from it!  This was all the more easily believed, when it
commenced uttering a series of wild screams; not as before indicating
rage or menace, but in tones expressive of the greatest terror!

The spectators, who had already risen from their seats, ran towards the
spot--surmising that there was something amiss.

On getting close up to the still screaming and fluttering bird, they
were able to understand what had appeared so incomprehensible.

They saw that the bearcoot was in a dilemma; that its talons were buried
in the body of the ibex, and so firmly fixed, that with all the strength
of its sinewy legs, backed by the power of its elastic pinions, it was
unable to free itself!

In striking the ibex in his descent, the bird had buried its crooked
claws deeply into the soft abdomen of the animal, but in attempting to
draw them out again, had found--no doubt to its great chagrin--that the
thick coating of "poshm" which covered the skin of the ibex, had become
entangled round its shanks; and the more it fluttered to free itself,
turning round and round in the effort, the stronger and tighter became
the rope which it was twisting out of that celebrated staple--the
shawl-wool of Cashmere!

Beyond a doubt the bearcoot was in a bad fix; and, although it was soon
relieved from its tether of _poshm_, it was only to find itself more
securely tied by a stronger string taken out of the pocket of Ossaroo.

The other bearcoot having followed close after, seemed determined upon
rescuing its mate out of the hands of its captors; and uttering loud
screams, it flew, first at one, then at another of them--with its long
pointed talons menacing each of them in turn.

As all of them had weapons in their hands, they succeeded in keeping the
angry bird at bay, but it might not have fared so well with Fritz--who
in turn became the object of its furious attack, and who had no weapon
but his teeth.

These would scarce have been sufficient protection against the talons of
an eagle; and Fritz would very likely have lost one of his eyes, or
perhaps both of them, had it not been for an arrow springing from the
bow of the shikaree; which, transfixing the great bird right through the
gizzard, brought it down with a "flop" upon the surface of the earth.

It was not killed outright by the arrow; and the dog, on seeing it bite
the dust, would fain have "jumped" it.  But perceiving the strong
curving beak and the sharp talons extended towards him, Fritz was easily
persuaded to remain at a prudent distance, and leave the shikaree to
make a finish of the bearcoot with his long boar-spear.


CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

A HOPE BUILT UPON THE BEARCOOT.

In this unexpected supply of food--which might be said almost literally
to have descended from heaven--Karl could not help recognising the hand
of Providence, and pointing it out to his companions.  Even the less
reflecting mind of Caspar, and the half-heathen heart of the Hindoo,
were impressed with a belief that some other agency than mere chance had
befriended them; and they were only too willing to join with Karl in a
prayerful expression of their gratitude to that Being who, although
unseen, was with them even in that lone valley.

For a time they stood contemplating with curiosity, not only the two
ibex, but also the eagles--interesting on account of the knowledge that
all four animals had but lately been roaming freely beyond the
boundaries of that mountain prison--and had just arrived, as it were,
from the outside world, with which they themselves so eagerly longed to
hold communication.  What would they not have given to have been each
provided with a pair of wings like that bearcoot--the one that still
lived?  Furnished in that fashion, they would soon have sought escape
from the valley--to them a valley of tears--and from the snowy mountains
that surrounded it.

While reflecting thus, a thought shaped itself in the mind of the
philosophic Karl, which caused his face to brighten up a little.  Only a
little: for the idea which had occurred to him was not one of the
brightest.  There was something in it, however; and, as the drowning man
will clutch even at straws, Karl caught at a singular conception, and
after examining it a while, communicated it to the others.

It was the bearcoot that had brought forth this conception.  The bird
was a true eagle, strong of wing and muscle like all of his tribe, and
one of the strongest of the genus.  Like an arrow, he could fly straight
up towards the sky.  In a few minutes--ay, in a few seconds--he could
easily shoot up to the summits of the snowy mountains that towered above
them.

"What is to hinder him?" asked Karl, pointing to the bird, "to carry--"

"To carry what?" said Caspar, interrupting the interrogation of his
brother, who spoke in a hesitating and doubtful manner.  "Not us, Karl?"
continued he, with a slight touch of jocularity in his manner--"you
don't mean that, I suppose?"

"Not us," gravely repeated Karl, "but _a rope_ that may carry _us_."

"Ha!" exclaimed Caspar, a gleam of joy overspreading his face as he
spoke.  "There's something in that."

Ossaroo, equally interested in the dialogue, at the same moment gave
utterance to a joyous ejaculation.

"What do _you_ think of it, shikaree?" inquired Karl, speaking in a
serious tone.

The reply of Ossaroo did not bespeak any very sanguine hope on his part.
Still he was ready to counsel a trial of the scheme.  They could try it
without any great trouble.  It would only need to spin some more rope
from the hemp--of which they had plenty--attach it to the leg of the
bearcoot, and give the bird its freedom.  There was no question as to
the direction the eagle would take.  He had already had enough of the
valley; and would no doubt make to get out of it at the very first
flight he should be permitted to make.

Representing the fortune die away from home, the prestige is lost, the
pride that fades, and when you get out of it late at night in dirty
car to be driven to where you last exploit, making your skin shoes, buttons
and bones in your meat in your compost fertilizer, enter the door
ajar by poverty, despair, misery of a concealed, and who knows if
the shame, the eternal companion who cling tenaciously to the heights
where they give .

Bye, _Brillante_! Goodbye, good luck that run forever! And the three women
with a brain dulled by the shock of confusing thoughts, dragging his
beautiful skirts, which smelled a block away, climbed the stairs
slowly, as burdened by the pain. Amparito, in other Sometimes the
most cheerful and playful, which was now crying like a little girl,
her mother had to remove the infected block cogiéndola arm. - Oh,
_Brillante_ ...! Poor me! _Brillante_ ... And he had come to join your
beautiful baby with the head of the beast black nose, filling them in
kisses.

Discouragement took them well into the night nailed the classroom in their
seats, silent, without another little shining light of the public fell
by reverberatory balconies open, producing a weak penumbra. The
three, wrapped in their robes of summer destacábanse motionless in
the darkness like statues. The girls believed in his future, guess
confusedly; on this since that time began a new era for them,
that not all would be merry laughter and indifference for the next day.
Doña Manuela thoughts were still more obscure.

I looked around her, and nothing, not a glimmer of hope badly absorbed
their despair. Needed money to replenish this loss, that could affect
the prestige of the family, and to meet certain commitments, as
usual, overwhelmed with great urgency, but despite being so many
friends, not finding, reviewing their memory, a single name.

And to think that she, who had wasted so many thousands of hard and lived
with some fanfare, by passing anxieties few thousand real ...! The
memory of his brother clung tenaciously to his memory. Ah, damn
greedy! Was badly needed all his heart to let a sister in suffering, their
sentences could remedy some of the waste paper bundles that grubby
old _secrétaire_ sleeping in his bedroom. But that did not think
such a man.

Many times he had humiliated with resounding negative. Another of those
who could not be out of the picture was her son Juanito. Doña
Manuela, who had so long as they wish asombrábase now boasting of their
independence. She had changed her son, she said with a tone of whining
mother resigned. And that change was Juanito refused several times to
make money out of small troubles. Doña Manuela This outraged. Had awakened
in him the fever of the farm. Revived the "blood trade" of his father,
instinctively grabbing his uncle, Don Juan, and inspired by the atmosphere
of games played and victorious million paper breathed continuously in the
shop next to his principal, had finally decided, ignoring the Positive
goods and materials to be launched in the stock market fever.

The act of blind trust of his girlfriend and his old friend fearlessly
delivering savings to the almighty Don Ramón Morte had finally
decided. Would it be more cowardly than those two women? Alcira sold
his orchard, and the eight thousand who gave hard swelled the torrent
of gold, a pulse of blind trust, would fall into the boxes
philanthropist banker . A portion of its capital is invested in
protecting his eminent role of the state and the other, which was
the most narrow, began playing Brokerage, always behind tables and
without daring to imitate its boldness coups.

Some hesitation sometimes felt mysterious terrors at the thought that his
fortune was at the mercy of a whim of chance, but not why I lost confidence,
and nothing had reserved its capital to meet the maturity of the
promissory notes he had made his mother sign.

Why such caution? There was more to listen to your principal and the
powerful banker. Eight thousand and triple bend is hard in a very short
time and then I could pay the debts and marry maternal Tonic.

But meanwhile, they did not his mother with him. The loved, still
worshiping with almost religious respect, but of money, or a Ochavo. Doña
Manuela knew everything, and thus placed his son at the same level
as his brother.

Oops relatives! One could die in the street, well assured that no one
come to your rescue.

Y doña Manuela, infuriated by how difficult the situation, his hands
tense scratched trim his coat.

Only one hope remained to him but did not want to think about it
because it elevábase as a voice of protest.

I was sure that some people would give him the slightest indication
that money that caused him much anguish. Undoubtedly, Mr. Cuadros was
not difficult to save a friend for a few thousand real, that every month
he counted their earnings by thousands of hard, but just thought that
he undertook, was reborn in Doña Manuela scruples he believed dead for
ever . Aware of life, understood the importance of that benefit and which
necessarily had to occur. A month earlier it would not have hesitated
to turn to its former subsidiary, despite how much it hurt his
pride. But now, think of the boldness that was allowed the day of Corpus
Christi and many others made by the bolsista in their daily visits, Doña
Manuela stopped embarrassed, and to be lighted the salon, had seen
his flush. She did so many years not remembered for anything Melchor
Pena sentíalo wander around like a guardian spirit of honest widowhood.
The doctor, from her second husband, was not agreed to anything. The
one good piece, with their infidelities, had no right to hold accountable
for what they could do. What most surprised him was that caused it
is showing now such terrible scruples, when following her first
widowhood had fallen easily and insensibly into Pajares arms. Love then
had drowned all concerns, but now it was a disgraceful exploitation of a
sale that was only supposed caused him embarrassment and shame. The
pride he could regain his seat.

Cuadros, despite his fortune, be kept under the former, the husband
of the maid Teresa, a poor devil who had always treated her with
contempt.

Why that man would lose his reputation of honest women, sustained
for many years at the expense of sacrifices that kept the mystery?

No, before misery.

Doña Manuela And, drunk with the power of resolution, I thought in
poverty as a thing unknown, but that was to sound pleasant to be
the salvation of their honor.

Work she and her daughters. Duchess also, to princesses and queens were
in poverty, faced with dignity.

Y doña Manuela, revising its limited historical knowledge, and felt
flattered his pride almost as a sovereign dethroned falling into poverty.
This was enough to affirm its decision.

When Rafael and Juanito came home, the family moved to the dining room.
The dinner was sad. It seemed that the body lying down in the dirt on
the block, there on the table, looking with glazed eyes and
motionless on their former masters.

At the end of the dinner, the two brothers went out, each going
their own thing. Juanito had changed his habits. Not returned home until
eleven o'clock, and after making a short visit to Tonic and Micaela,
went to a café where people come together, and Exchange were
assessed daily opinions and prophecies of "ups" and "downside" .

At nine p.m. Pajares received a visit from his dad and Andresito. Doña
Manuela, seeing his former dependent, blush, as if he could guess
the thoughts that had troubled earlier.

Mr. Cuadros showed a joyful and radiant, as if the news is happy that the
court had given Nelet. So, the horse was dead? We now explain why iban
that afternoon walk on the Alameda. It was to feel the loss, because
one horse replace _Brillante_ had a decent will cost some money,
but what a devil!

four or five thousand reais not to ruin anyone. And the Lord spoke of the
money tables showing disrespect reversing the head and pulling the belly
as if I had lined with banknotes.

Andresito Girls talked about with the piano, and Doña Manuela, calm and
in possession of itself, I looked fixedly at his former subordinate.
The shocked the contempt with which this man spoke of money, and received
a bloody sarcasm as the assumption that four or five thousand reais
meant nothing to her.

And thinking this, his eyes instinctively went to the marble from
a console, where it had been exhibited in magnificent silver
candlesticks now stored in the Monte de Piedad, and also looked
cheap stickers that adorn the walls of the room, replacing two large
tables inherited from his father, by Juan de Juanes, by whom he had
given the need to live for a month.

The man, blinded by his fortune, he did not know what she said.

Like it was some years before, had farms that sell or pawn and
threw the money into your hands full.

But now carefully hidden and shameful poverty had taught her the value of
money. Mr. Cuadros, always ignorant of the true situation of the
house, Ms Manuela terribly bothered. I wanted to appear friendly,
and that the offers were made sarcastic. Was responsible for the purchase
of the horse. How it would it is cheaper, for a beast as beautiful as
_Brillante_ only have to pay about three thousand reais. He knew
the most famous lighters.

The horse rode his son had bought almost a bicoca, and now hoped to
have the same luck. - What you should Manuela, is to buy the horse
as soon as possible because if people see you walking the many
days like today, will make malicious comments.

Those of us at some point in our debernos look much things.

And the lucky silly, speaking of the height, closed his eyes as if
the feeling of vertigo that are at the top.

What caused the greatest impact in Doña Manuela was the claim that
people would make comments if they are not displayed in public as
ever.

Now reappeared the haughtiness of his character, shudder to think of
mortifying shame they speak of their ruin. She was not to deal with
resignation misery.

I was determined.

Had argued that in height, using all means and then, come all, to just
think about what caused him so much shame. And Mrs vain to assert its
resolution, seeking examples and remember what they had so often
heard in the murmurings of the infamous gatherings: the innumerable cases
of ladies like her very decent, well-regarded by society, and who had
made the same sacrifices to save the prestige of their homes.

And supported by the pernicious example of those women who had both
criticized, looked under his old eyes that revealed impudor a reasoned
and calm. At last - I thought it to be content - Mr Cuadros, though
coarse and vulgarote, a man was acceptable and did not have to resign
herself as other women to seek protection of a valetudinarian disgusting.
The guessed something bolsista eyes of the wife of his former
principal. And credulity of his skull missing and innocent old
body back with some pride, as if he were convinced that their personal
items had influenced so amazing achievement.

He ended the visit at midnight, and when father and son were on their
way the door, accompanied by the ladies of the house, Doña Manuela changed
his last words with Mr Tables. - We - the lady said - that you will
buy the horse. I hope that tomorrow will have made my order. - Oh, sure
...! You know all the things that interest me as my own business. - So,
you come tomorrow at three and I will give him the money. - Would you
shut up? And settle accounts later .... But, finally, come to have the
pleasure of chatting a bit. And Mr.

Cuadros left home satisfied itself bufando satisfaction Conton as
a couple and looking at some pity to his son, who was walking beside
shy and it shrunk.

A sunny optimism made him forget that his father was. Ah! If instead
of the fifty-odd years he had that pazguato, war had much to give
in the world!

The next day, Mr. Cuadros was punctual at three in the afternoon came
in the house of Doña Manuela and pleasantly surprised to see that
the lady was alone in the living room, dressed in the most elegant
of gowns and face with the finest refined menjurjes toilet girls.

The bolsista felt like a rebirth of life, something reminiscent
of his fevers young, when first being dependent joking and chasing
the maid Teresa in the back of _Las Three Rosas_. The girls were
sent home by his mother 'the judges. "Juanito was in the shop, and
as Raphael, was not to wait until well into the night. In the dining oíase
noise that covered the dried Visanteta, the only one who learned
of the visit of Mr. and Tables what was that long. She heard the laughter
of the lady off and hauling some furniture, as if they were driven
to violence, but one girl was cautious and reserved, which only
dealt with their actions, without pausing to interpret the others.

The day following the family could go out and ride in their carriage,
and a couple more horses and better print _Brillante_ held that the vacuum
that the death had left in the manger. Incurred in the bitterness was
forgotten before that Sunday as an abundance rarely enjoyed in that
house. Doña Manuela had money, started to pay the accounts regularly,
do not bother suppliers and demanding payment of arrears, and the French
dressmaker, after pocketing a few thousand real thought lost
forever, the girls did Pajares lucirlos for new costumes at the
fair in July.

All was quiet in the house and doña Manuela, and the content of the
family affected _Las Three Rosas_, where the simple Teresa felt happy.
She knew her husband had broken definitively with Clarita, that "bad
skin" that lived on the streets of the port. No longer paid him
the terms of the mezzanine, or attending to his mad spending.
What's more, a charitable soul that she had not heard that he lost
cheating, taunting him with the boys of the stock exchange and
Antonio showed repentance, not willing to protect more women from
such ilk.

Poor Teresa, when you think that your was the old lady who had done
such a miracle, bringing her husband to the track, I felt such gratitude,
that she could not talk about it without tears leap.

What a good person was doña Manuela! She only knew Mr catechize Cuadros.
X Juanito was delivered to the agitation and fear of trusting their
future to the whims of chance.

He, as methodical and careful to meet their obligations, leaving the
store to go to the Markets with his principal, or where they met
their colleagues from financial exploitation. ¡Valiente thing cared
_Las Three Rosas_! No longer wanted to be the owner of the shop.

The early gains obtained with sweet ease, he was blinded and only thought
to be a millionaire in enslaving fortune, now laughing at those times
that I dreamed of the existence Tonic and monotonous routine of
quiet bourgeois, Ochavo after amassing a Ochavo capital to spend
old age in peace.

His girlfriend practically restrain their financial enthusiasms. Do not
be tempted to fortune, and now that they favor, it was crazy not to
withdraw in time. But Juanito refused to hear it.

What do women know of business? Why would stay in the middle of the road,
where it could continue its principal until paradise of millionaires?

Enamorado increasingly Tonic, he praised the idea of getting married
immediately, but this same honey impulsábale to expect. It was better to
contain their desire for a few months, one year at most, let their
capital, by flipping the stock market, grows like a snowball, and
when he possessed the long-awaited and respectable one million, making
the transformation was complete: enjoy watching the poor costurerilla
became, under the direction of their vain mother in law, in elegant
lady with a big house, carriage and other ornaments of wealth.

The desire to reach as soon as possible to this desired end was what made
her bold and quell fears of a likely collapse. Those who had known him
in times asombrábanse by the radical change in its character. His
uncle, Don Juan and did not speak with him. One day was broken by
the family, are close to hit his nephew. - Juanito, you're a fool
- said the miser with lips trembling in anger, brush mustache erizándosele
-. I always thought that your character had more than your father that
my sister and we loved you, but now I see that fooled me. You lost
bad company, the atmosphere you live a lie, examples of wasteful
your mother and your silly advice from the principal that an oracle
in the business because they earn money blindly by a mockery of the
capricious Hopefully, some day and pay all together, giving me the
pleasure of being able to laugh to see him shirtless.

And you will pass the same. Well if you go ...! Selling the
garden to become owner of Three Rosas_ and _Las marry that girl, which
I understand is a good person would have given pleasure to your uncle.
And if you're missing something, I was here to answer.

So I'd come to say: 'Uncle, I need this, and another beyond it, we
were at the end of the street. But now, you understand? Count for
nothing with me. As if that were not my nephew. I've come to like all of
your family, and I can not love.

I thought you wanted it to be which was next to my bed at the time
of my death, and to recount the four quarters to me, I said: 'This
is for the guy.

"But now I'm disappointed.

Come, come, become a millionaire in the stock market, and if you stay
beggar, do not come looking for me, because what we do is laugh
at your uncle to see what you're gross. The break with his uncle was
saddened to Juanito.

Had not known another father, and also in their calculations trader, had
always included the hope of being the heir of Don Juan. But the
turmoil in the stock market, and especially earnings, despite the shock
of it breaking.

When the end of the month, he received the "differences", said
with surprise: "It seems impossible that we censor ourselves to such
a degree of exploitation. But bah!

Who do these people if stale ', and between, not just the rancid included
his uncle, but Don Eugenio, the founder of _Las Three Rosas_, also
expressed great dissatisfaction to the young.

Whenever Juanito was in the store with the old merchant, he soon threw
glances of compassion and contempt. Sometimes coming up with a
murmuring tone of reproach: - ¡Ay, Juanito, Juanito ...! I am lost.
That demon you drag tables to perdition .... Do not defend him, do not
try justificarte. Now you doing very well so you can convince, but the
fry will laugh. And the old man turned away with the confidence that the
facts would come to support their predictions. Only in Juanito house
was applause and appreciation. His mother wanted him more since he
was handed over to business. His son was no longer dependent on
a trade, it was a bolsista, and this always provides higher social status.
Moreover, their gains were a source of hope for the widow,
but was satisfied that all your needs in the present, not left to
feel concerned about the future.

The good fortune of Juanito could solidify the prestige of the house. The
proximity of the show in July to the family concerned. Never had such
pleasant evenings in the house of birds. At night after dinner came
Mr Tables, Teresa and her son, and began the joyful reunion.

By the balconies open penetrated the breath of neon caliginoso
summer full of enervating perfumes.

The plazuela animábase. The heat resulting from their hovel close to the
people of the lower floors and the doors were blocked by the white
circle shadows sitting in low chairs and breathing loudly.

Up on the roof covering the plaza as a sheet of satin Transparency
apelillado infinite points of light, sky of summer with its
mysterious and opaque transparency. In the dark distinguíanse balconies,
including flower pots and put the botija cool, light clothing
silhouettes confusing.

As the rope showed no symptoms either of stretching or breaking under
the weight of both, it was evident that it might, under any
circumstances, be trusted to carry the weight of one; and in this
confidence, the shikaree descended from the tree.

With the eagle carried under his right arm, and the coil of rope
swinging over his left, Ossaroo now proceeded towards the place where
the ladders rested against the cliff.  Karl and Caspar walked close
after, with Fritz following in the rear--all four moving in silence, and
with a certain solemnity of look and gesture--as befitted the important
business upon which they were bent.

The new experiment, like the trial of the eagle's strength, did not
occupy any great length of time.  Had it proved successful, our
adventurers would have been longer occupied, and in the end would have
been seen triumphantly standing upon the summit of the cliff--with Fritz
frisking up the snowy slope beyond, as if he intended to chase the great
_ovis ammon_ upon the heaven-kissing crest of Chumulari.

Ah! how different was the spectacle presented on the evening of that
eventful day!  A little before sunset the three adventurers were seen
slowly and sadly returning to their hut--that despised hovel, under
whose homely roof they had hoped never to seek shelter again!

Alas! in the now lengthened list of their unsuccessful struggles, they
had once more to record a failure!

Ossaroo, bearing the bearcoot under his arm, had climbed the ladders up
to the highest ledge that could be attained.  From it he had "flown" the
eagle--freely dealing out all the cord in his possession.  That was a
perilous experiment for the shikaree to make; and came very near proving
the last act in the drama of his life.

Thinking that the bearcoot would rise upward into the air, he had not
thought of anything else; and as he stood balancing himself on that
narrow shelf, he was but ill prepared for what actually came to pass.
Instead of soaring upwards, the eagle struck out in a horizontal
direction, not changing its course till it had reached the end of its
tether; and then not changing it, nor even pausing in its flight, but
with the fifty yards of rope trailing behind it--which, fortunately for
Ossaroo, he was himself no longer at the end of--it continued on across
the valley towards the cliffs on the opposite side--the summit of which
it would have no difficulty in attaining by following the diagonal line
in which it was making that unexpected escape from the clutches of the
shikaree.

Not without chagrin did Karl and Caspar behold the spectacle of the
bearcoot's departure; and for a while they were under the impression
that Ossaroo had bungled the business with which he had been entrusted.

Ossaroo's explanations, however, were soon after received; and proved
satisfactory.  It was evident from these, that had he not let go in the
right time, he would have been compelled to make a leap, that would have
left him no opportunity for explaining the nature of the eagle's escape.


CHAPTER FORTY.

FRITZ AND THE FALCONS.

With feelings of sad and bitter disappointment did our adventurers turn
their backs upon these ladders--that had once more deluded them--and
make their way towards the hut.

As upon the former occasion, they walked with slow steps and downcast
mien.  Fritz, by his slouching gait and drooped tail, showed that he
shared the general despondency.

They had arrived nearly at the hut, before any of the three thought of
speaking; when the sight of that rude homestead, to which they had so
often fancied themselves on the eve of bidding farewell--and to which as
often had they been compelled to return--suggested a theme to Karl:
causing him to break silence as they advanced towards the doorway.

"Our true friend," said he, pointing to the hovel, "a friend, when all
else fails us.  Rough it is--like many a friend that is nevertheless
worthy.  I begin to like its honest look, and feel regard for it as one
should for a home."

Caspar said nothing in reply.  He only sighed.  The young chamois-hunter
of the Bavarian Alps thought of another home--far away towards the
setting sun; and, so long as that thought was in his mind, he could
never reconcile himself to a forced residence in the Himalayas.

The thoughts of Ossaroo were equally absent from that spot.  He was
thinking of a bamboo hut by the borders of some crystal stream,
overshadowed by palms and other tropical trees.  He was thinking still
more of rice curry and chutnee; but above all, of his beloved "betel,"
for which the "bang" of the _cannabis sativa_ was but a poor substitute.

But Caspar had another thought in his mind; one which proved that he had
not yet abandoned all hope of returning to the home of his nativity;
and, after they had finished eating their supper of broiled venison, he
gave utterance to it.

He had not volunteered to break the silence.  It was done in obedience
to a request of Karl who, having noticed the abstracted air of his
brother, had asked for an explanation.

"I've been thinking," said Caspar, "ever since the eagle has escaped us,
of another bird I know something about--one that might perform the
service we want quite as well, if not better, than a bearcoot."

"Another bird!" inquired Karl; "of what bird are you speaking?  Do you
mean one of those Brahminy geese upon the lake?  We might catch one
alive, it is true; but let me tell you, brother, that their wings are
constructed just strong enough to carry their own ponderous bodies; and
if you added another pound or two, by tying a cord to their legs, they
could no more mount out of this valley than we can.  No--no.  I fancy we
may as well give up that idea.  There's no bird but an eagle with wing
strong enough to do what you wish."

"The bird I was thinking of," rejoined Caspar, "is of the same _genus_
as the eagle.  I believe that's correctly scientific language.  Isn't
it, my Buffon of a brother?  Ha! ha!  Well, shall I name it?  Surely,
you have already divined the sort of bird to which I allude?"

"No, indeed," replied Karl.  "There are no other birds in this valley of
the same genus as the eagle--except hawks; and according to the closet
naturalists, they are not of the same genus--only of the same _family_.
If you mean a hawk, there are several species in this place; but the
largest of them could not carry anything over the cliff heavier than a
string of twine.  See, there's a brace of them now!" continued Karl,
pointing to two birds that were circling in the air, some twenty yards
overhead.  "`Churk' falcons they are called.  They are the largest of
the Himalayan hawks.  Are these your birds, brother?"

"A couple of kites, are they not?" interrogated Caspar, turning his eyes
upward, and regarding the two winged creatures circling above, and
quartering the air as if in search of prey.

"Yes," answered the naturalist, "they are of that species; and,
correctly described, of the same genus as the eagles.  You don't mean
them, I suppose?"

"No--not exactly," replied Caspar, in a drawling tone, and smiling
significantly as he spoke; "but if they be _kites_--Ho! what now?"
exclaimed the speaker, his train of thought, as well as speech, suddenly
interrupted by a movement on the part of the falcons.  "What the
mischief are the birds about?  As I live, they seem to be making an
attack upon Fritz!  Surely they don't suppose they have the strength to
do any damage to our brave old dog?"

As Caspar spoke, the two falcons were seen suddenly to descend--from the
elevation at which they had been soaring--and then sweep in quick short
circles around the head of the Bavarian boar-hound--where he squatted on
the ground, near a little copse, some twenty yards from the hut.

"Perhaps their nest is there--in the copse?" suggested Karl; "That's why
they are angry with the dog: for angry they certainly appear to be."

So any one might have reasoned, from the behaviour of the birds, as they
continued their attack upon the dog--now rising some feet above him, and
then darting downward in a sort of parabolic curve--at each swoop
drawing nearer and nearer, until the tips of their wings were almost
flapped in his face.  These movements were not made in silence: for the
falcons, as they flew, kept uttering their shrill cries--that sounded
like the voice of a pair of angry vixens.

"Their young must be near?" suggested Karl.

"No, sahib," said Ossaroo, "no nest--no chickee.  Fritz he hab suppa--de
piece ob meat ob da ibex.  Churk wantee take de dog suppa away."

"Oh!  Fritz is eating something, is he?" said Caspar.  "That explains it
then.  How very stupid of these birds, to fancy they could steal his
supper from our valiant Fritz: more especially since he seems to relish
it so much himself!  Why he takes no notice of them!"

It was quite true that Fritz, up to this time, had scarcely noticed the
brace of winged assailants; and their hostile demonstrations had only
drawn from him an occasional "yir."  As they swooped nearer, however,
and the tips of their wings were "wopped" into his very eyes, the thing
was growing unbearable; and Fritz began to lose temper.  His "yirs"
became more frequent; and once or twice he rose from his squatting
attitude, and made a snap at the feathers that were nearest.

For more than five minutes this curious play was kept up between the
boar-hound and the birds; and then the episode was brought to a somewhat
singular--and in Fritz's estimation, no doubt--a very unpleasant
termination.

From the first commencement of their attack, the two falcons had
followed a separate course of action.  One appeared to make all its
approaches from the front; while the other confined its attacks
exclusively to Fritz's rear.  In consequence of these tactics on the
part of his assailants, the dog was compelled to defend himself both
before and behind: and to do this, it became necessary for him to look
"two ways at once."  Now, he would snarl and snap at the assailant in
front--anon, he must sieve himself round, and in like manner menace the
more cowardly "churk" that was attacking him in the rear.  Of the two,
however, the latter was the more demonstrative and noisy; and at length,
not content with giving Fritz an occasional "wop" with its wing, it had
the daring audacity to strike its sharp talons into a part of his
posteriors approximate to the seat of honour.

This was something more than canine flesh and blood could bear; and
Fritz determined not to submit to it any longer.  Dropping the "quid" he
had been chewing, he started up on all fours; wheeled suddenly towards
the kite that had clawed him; and bounded aloft into the air with the
design of clutching it.

But the wary bird had foreseen this action on the part of the quadruped;
and, ere the latter could lay a fang upon it, had soared off--far beyond
the highest leap that any four-footed creature might accomplish.

Fritz, with a disappointed growl, turned round again to betake himself
to his piece of meat; but still more disappointed was his look, when he
perceived that the latter was no longer within reach!  Churk falcon
number one had clawed him over the croup, but churk falcon number two
had deprived him of his supper!

The last look Fritz ever had of that piece of ibex venison, was seeing
it in the beak of the bird, high up in air, growing smaller by degrees
and beautifully less--until it disappeared altogether in the dim
distance.


CHAPTER FORTY ONE.

FRITZ OFFENDED.

This odd little episode, between the boar-hound and the churk falcons,
had interrupted the conversation of the two brothers on the subject
which Caspar had introduced.  Nor was it resumed immediately, on the
termination of the affair: for the look with which Fritz regarded the
departure of the bird, that had so adroitly bilked him out of his bit of
venison, was so supremely ludicrous, as to elicit long loud peals of
laughter from the spectators.

Fritz's "countenance" betrayed the presence of rare emotions.  Profound
surprise and chagrin--strongly blended with a feeling of concentrated
rage--were visible not only in his eyes, but his attitude, and, for some
time, he stood with head erect and muzzle high in air, his glances
speaking unutterable vows of vengeance, as they followed the flight of
the falcons.

Never in all his life--not even when the trunk of the elephant was
trumpeting at his tail--had Fritz so sensibly felt the want of wings.
Never had he so regretted the deficiency in his structure that left him
without those useful appendages; and had he been gifted with the "wand
of a fairy," the use to which he would at that moment have applied it
would have been to furnish himself with a pair, not of "beautiful
wings"--for that was a secondary consideration--but of strong and long
ones, such as would have enabled him to overhaul those churk falcons,
and punish them for their unheard-of audacity.

For more than a minute Fritz preserved the attitude to which we have
alluded: the demeanour of a dog that had been regularly duped and "sold"
by a brace of beings, for whose strength and capacity he had exhibited
supreme contempt; and it was this mingling of surprise and rage that
imparted to him that serio-comic appearance that had set them all
a-laughing.  Nor was his countenance less ludicrous under the expression
with which, on turning round, he regarded his trio of human companions.
He saw that they were making merry at his expense; and his look of
half-reproach half-appeal had no other effect than to redouble their
mirth.  Glancing from one to the other, he appeared to seek sympathy
from each in turn--from Karl, Caspar, and Ossaroo.

It was an idle appeal.  All three had equally surrendered themselves to
hilarity--unsympathetic, as it was uncontrollable.  Fritz had not a
friend on the ground.

Full ten minutes must have elapsed before any of them could check his
loud cachinnations; but long before that time, the butt of their
ridicule had betaken himself out of sight--having moved away from the
spot, where he had been robbed of his supper, and retired, with an
offended and sneaking air, to the more friendly concealment of the
hovel.

It was some time before our adventurers could recover their serious
mood; but the subject of their mirth being now out of their sight, went
gradually also out of their minds.

It might be wondered that, circumstanced as they were, they had thus
given way to a fit of jollity.  But, indeed, there was nothing wonderful
about it.  On the contrary, it was perfectly natural--perfectly true to
the instincts of the human soul--to be thus stirred: joy and sorrow
following each other in periodic succession--as certainly as day follows
night, or fair weather succeeds to the storm.

Though we know not the why and the wherefore of this, we can easily
believe that a wise Providence has ordered it so.  A poet who has sung
sweetly says, that:--

  "Spring would be but gloomy weather,
  If we had nothing else but Spring;"

and our own experience proclaims the truth conveyed in the distich.

He who has lived in the tropical lands of ever-spring--where the leaves
never fall, and the flowers never fade--can well confirm the fact: that
even spring itself may in time become tiresome!  We long for the
winter--its frost and snow, and cold bitter winds.  Though ever so
enamoured of the gay green forest, we like at intervals to behold it in
its russet garb, with the sky in its coat of grey, sombre but
picturesque.  Strange as it may appear, it is true: the moral, like the
natural atmosphere, stands in need of the storm.


CHAPTER FORTY TWO.

A KITE!

As soon as their mirth had fairly subsided, Karl and Caspar resumed the
conversation, which had been broken off so abruptly.

"And so, brother," said Karl, who was the first to return to the
subject, "you say there is a bird of the eagle genus, that might carry a
rope over the cliff for us.  Of what bird are you speaking?"

"Why, Karl, you are dull of comprehension this morning.  Surely the
presence of the two _kites_ should have suggested what I mean."

"Ha! you mean a kite, then?"

"Yes, one with a very broad breast, a very thin body, and a very long
tail: such as you and I used to make not so many years ago."

"A _paper kite_," said Karl, repeating the phrase mechanically, at the
same time settling down, into a reflecting attitude.  "True, brother,"
he added, after a pause; "there might be something in what you have
suggested.  If we had a paper kite--that is, a very large one--it is
possible it would carry a rope over the summit of the cliff; but,
alas!--"

"You need not proceed further, Karl," said Caspar, interrupting him.  "I
know what you are going to say: that we have no paper out of which to
make the kite; and that, of course, puts an end to the matter.  It's no
use our thinking any more about it: since we have not got the materials.
The body and bones we could easily construct; and the tail too.  But
then the wings--ah, the wings.  I only wish we had a file of old
newspapers.  But what's the use of wishing?  We haven't."

Karl, though silent, did not seem to hear, or at all events heed, what
Caspar had been just saying.  He appeared to be buried either in a
reverie, or in some profound speculation.

It was the latter: as was very soon after made manifest by his speech.

"Perhaps," said he, with a hopeful glance towards the wood, "we may not
be so deficient in the material of which you have spoken."

"Of paper, do you mean?"

"We are in the very region of the world where it grows," continued Karl,
without heeding the interrogation.

"What! where paper _grows_?"

"No," replied Karl, "I do not mean that the paper itself grows here; but
a `fabric' out of which that useful article may be made."

"What is that, brother?"

"It is a tree, or rather a shrub, belonging to the order of the
_Thymelaceae_, or `Daphnads.'  The plants of this order are found in
many countries; but chiefly in the cooler regions of India and South
America.  There are even representatives of the order in England: for
the beautiful `spurge laurel' of the woods and hedges--known as a remedy
for the toothache--is a true daphnad.  Perhaps the most curious of all
the Thymelaceae is the celebrated Lagetta, or lace-bark tree of Jamaica;
out of which the ladies of that island know how to manufacture cuffs,
collars, and berthas, that, when cut into the proper shapes, and
bleached to a perfect whiteness, have all the appearance of real lace!
The Maroons, and other runaway negroes of Jamaica, before the abolition
of slavery, used to make clothing out of the lagetta; which they found
growing in plenty in the mountain forests of the island.  Previous also
to the same abolition of slavery, there was another, and less gentle,
use made of the lace-bark, by the masters of these same negroes.  The
cruel tyrants used to spin its tough fibres into thongs for their
slave-whips."

"And you think that paper can be made out of these trees?" asked Caspar,
impatient to know whether there might be any chance of procuring some
for the covering of a kite.

"There are several species of daphnads," replied the botanist, "whose
bark can be converted into paper.  Some are found at the Cape of Good
Hope, and others in the island of Madagascar; but the best kinds for the
purpose grow in these very mountains, and in China.  There is the
`Daphne Bholua,' in Nepaul; from which the Nepaulese make a strong,
tough, packing-paper; and I have reason to believe that it also grows in
the Bhotan Himalayas--at no very great distance from our position here.
Besides, in China and Japan, on the other side of these mountains, there
are two or three distinct kinds of the same plant--out of which the
Chinese make the yellowish-coloured paper, you may have seen in their
books, and pasted upon their tea-chests.  So then," added the botanist,
looking wistfully towards the woods, "since the paper-yielding daphne
grows in China, to the east of us, and in Nepaul and Bhotan to the west,
it is but reasonable to conclude that some species of it may be found in
this valley--where the climate is just that which it affects.  Its seed
may have been transported hither by birds: since many species of birds
are fond of its berries, and eat them without receiving any injury;
though, strange to say, they are poisonous to all kinds of quadrupeds!"

"Do you think you would know the shrub, if you saw it, brother?"

"Well, to say the truth, I do not think I could recognise it by its
general appearance; but if I had a flower of the _daphne_, I could no
doubt tell it by its botanical characteristics.  The leaves of the
paper-yielding species are of a lanceolate form and purplish hue,
glabrous and shining, like the leaves of laurels--to which genus the
_daphne_ is closely allied.  Unfortunately, the shrub would not be in
flower at this season; but if we can find one of the berries, and a leaf
or two, I fancy I shall be able to identify it.  Besides, the bark,
which is very tough, would help to guide us.  Indeed, I have some reason
to think that we shall find it not far off; and that is why I speak with
such confidence, in saying, that we might not be so deficient in the
materials for paper-making."

"What reason, brother Karl?  Perhaps you have seen something like it?"

"I have.  Some time ago, when I was strolling about, I passed through a
thicket of low shrubs--the tops of which reached up to my breast.  They
were then in flower--the flowers being of a lilac colour, and growing at
the tops of the branches in little cymes.  They had no corolla--only a
coloured calyx.  Now these characters correspond with those of the
daphne.  Besides, the leaves were lanceolate, velvety on the surface,
and of purplish colour; and the flowers were of an exceedingly sweet
scent--as is the case with all the daphnads.  I did not think of
examining them at the time; but, now that I recall these
characteristics, I feel almost certain that the shrubs were of this
genus."

"Do you think you can find the thicket again?"

"Oh! yes, easily enough.  It is not very distant from the place, where
we were so near fighting that fearful duel."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Caspar, in reply to the significant remark of the
botanist.  "But, brother!" continued he, "suppose it should prove to be
the shrub you speak of, what good would there be in our finding it, so
long as we don't understand the process of manufacturing it into paper?"

"How do you know that we don't?" said Karl, challenging the too positive
declaration of Caspar.  "I am not so sure that we don't.  I have read
the whole account of the process, as given by one of the old writers
upon China.  It is very simple; and I think I remember enough to be able
to follow it.  Perhaps not to make fine paper, that one might write
upon; but something that would serve our purpose just as well.  We don't
want the best `cream-laid.'  Unfortunately, we have no post-office here.
I wish we had.  If we can fabricate anything as fine as the coarsest
packing-paper, it will do well enough for a kite, I fancy."

"True," replied Caspar.  "It would be all the better to be coarse and
strong.  But, dear Karl, suppose we go at once, and see if we can
discover the trees."

"That is just what we shall do," replied Karl, rising as he spoke, and
preparing to set out in search of the daphne.

All, of course, went together: for Ossaroo was as much interested in the
result of the exploration as any of them; and Fritz, from within the
hut, perceiving that they were about to depart upon some new expedition,
managed partially to coax himself out of his ill-humour; and, sallying
forth from his hiding-place, trotted silently after them.


CHAPTER FORTY THREE.

THE PAPER-TREE.

To the great delight of the party, it turned out just as Karl had
conjectured.  The thicket that he had spoken of was composed chiefly of
daphne shrubs--judging by the appearance of the fallen leaves, and some
berries that still remained on the branches, Karl believed them to be of
this species.  But the bark was also a characteristic: being exceedingly
tenacious, and moreover of a strongly acrid taste--so much so as to
cauterise he skin of Ossaroo's mouth, who had been foolish enough to
chew it too freely.

After duly examining the leaves, berries, and bark, the botanist came to
the conclusion that the shrub must be a true daphne; and so in reality
it was--that species known in Nepaul as the _Daphne Bholua_--from which,
as already stated, the Nepaulese manufacture a coarse, but soft paper.

As soon as this point was determined to their satisfaction, they
resolved upon carrying Caspar's hint into execution--by trying the
experiment of a paper kite.

But for Karl's practical education--which had made him acquainted not
only with the botanical characters of plants and trees, but also with
their uses--and in some cases with the mode of using them--the mere
discovery of the daphne would have availed them nothing.  As it stood in
the thicket, it was no more like paper than any of the trees that grew
around it.  Indeed, there were many others that would have yielded bark
in broader flakes than it, and much more resembling paper: for that of
the daphne, stripping off as it did in narrow pieces, looked like the
last thing in the world of which to make a kite out of.  But Karl knew
the process by which it could be metamorphosed into paper; and without
further delay, he entered upon the performance--the others placing their
services at his disposal, and acting in obedience to his orders.

The knife-blades of all three were called into requisition; and in an
incredibly short space of time, some scores of the little trees were
stripped of their bark--from their roots up to the lower branches.  The
trees themselves were not cut down; as that was not necessary.  They
could be peeled more readily, as they stood; and for this reason they
were left standing.

Up to the hour of sunset did these "cascarilleros" work--with only a few
minutes of interruption, while they went back to the hut, and ate a
hurried luncheon of ibex-meat--and just as the sun was sinking behind
the summit of the great Chumulari, they might have been seen trudging
homeward--each bearing a heavy bundle of bark, with Fritz following
gleefully at their heels.

The thicket from which they had taken their departure, gave evidence of
the industry with which they had been working all day long.  Over a
space, of nearly half an acre in extent, the trees were seen standing,
each with its tiny trunk completely divested of bark: as if a whole gang
of goats had been browsing upon them!

On reaching the hovel, our bark-gatherers did not desist from their
labour.  They only entered upon a new branch of industry: by becoming
_paper manufacturers_.

It was after night; and they had to work by the light of their torches
of cheel-pine, already prepared.  But as these burnt with a clear steady
flame, they served quite as well as candles would have done.

The first process in the paper-making did not require much nicety in its
execution; and, moreover, it could be performed as well inside the hut
as in the largest room of a paper-mill.  All they had to do was to pick
the bark to shreds.  This occupied them the whole evening--during which
there was much conversation of a cheerful kind, with a joke or two about
oakum-picking in a prison; and of this, not only the task in which they
were engaged, but the situation in which they were executing it, did not
fail to remind them.

When they had finished, they ate their frugal supper and retired to
rest--full of the idea of continuing the paper manufacture in the
morning.

When morning came, they had not much to do: for the next process was one
which required the exercise of patience rather than of labour.

When the bark of the daphne has been thoroughly picked to pieces, it is
put into a large pot or cauldron filled with water.  A lixivium of
wood-ashes is then thrown in along with it; and it is suffered to boil
for several hours.

As our manufacturers were without pot or cauldron of any kind, there
would have been here an interruption of an insurmountable kind: had it
not been that they had plenty of water already on the boil, and
perpetually boiling--in the hot-spring near the hut.

Apparently all they should have to do would be, to immerse the prepared
bark in the spring, and there leave it for a proper length of time.  But
then the water, where it was hottest, was constantly in motion--bubbling
up and running off; so that not only would the strings of bark be
carried away, but the ashes would be separated from the mass, and
consequently of no service in aiding to macerate it.

How was this difficulty to be got over?  Easily enough.  They had not
proceeded thus far without thinking of a plan; and this plan was, to
place the bark along with the ashes in one of the large yak-skins still
in good preservation, and after making it up into a sort of bundle--like
clothes intended for the laundry--to plunge the skin and its contents
into the spring, and there leave them--until the boiling water should
perform its part.  By this ingenious contrivance, did they get over the
difficulty, of not being provided with a not.

So now, after a great battle the difficulties cleared away, you are
allowed to 'bring him a customer, that everything he had dreamed, for
what it impossible subject, "What madness as she was Olten, And what he
doubts their addiction Verargt as sacrilegious verstiegen Him Now
as a ripe fruit ready was in the womb to fly.

But he, though overflowing happy, had no time entfliehn, in order to do
what his inevitable coronation of the work appeared. He was the spirit
of new and spoke as this fast genaht: "Prepare me now And take a bath
', after I made me a dress, so rich and grand, How else is just a bear
king." He felt it as soon as is powerfully Covers and moves through the
air.

A beautiful room, on all the walls with colored marble, received him,
then operated, maintained by delicate, invisible hands, he took the bath
in a mild, fragrance-filled by flood. Then, refreshed and rested, Could
'it in a mirror look, That it to his advantage throughout Transforms, and
was pretty nice. Instead of the previous outfit, the poor still had
betraying chute, he found clothes, So beautifully, embroidered
with gold so that each prince and a prince after them Neider would
hingeblickt.

As soon as he finished dressed, appeared on his mind Wink, And he
bade him: "Show 'flink you, I've since given to me what's missing. A noble
horse slowdown' I, at the beauty in all of the Cover Sultan Stalle;
For this also a retinue of slaves, to respect those same clothes
on pomp and stateliness, The my gift to the Sultan brought; Eight
slaves then escorted to my mother, whose every so delicious your
robe Should bring that across the country Soon nothing more andre's
speech.

Also a bag with ten thousand gold pieces brauch 'ich noch. Ans Only quick
work! "The Spirit entschwebte sausend, And everything was in an instant
to suppose. The slaves gave Aladdin command, And to her mother
hinzueilen a national dress anzuziehn. The bare gold, he had to distribute
fine slaves, with the instructions, you should be found on the
entire length of the path with the full hand feeding of poverty throw
into the crowd. He rose and pulled on a horse in the middle of the
ropes through the streets out. Even experts were not in the sense that
he had never ridden, because with the finest Ebenmaß And decency he
sat in the saddle. [Illustration: Aladdin ride to the castle of the
sultan's] many-, bulky, not to count, in turn, ran the Public herbei;
stunning swung from all throats Of Beifallruf jubilation and scream,
especially if, from Sklaventroß dramatically as unusual blessing
To the left to right as rain hail from golden coins are spilled. Who
was the knight on horseback? When could name him nobody mention , Not
even one of ten, the more recently seen him, the old Aladdin recognize.
He recently still poor, unsightly, Sah himself now no longer similar
to the lamp Because miracle forces heard the secret power, the
lucky, they highly placed, also express the nobility anzuheften.

So on the day was crystal clear, That all the glory, so proud of it, by
his merit, he was worthy. He was fast becoming the center of each eye;
jauchzend raised him to heaven And praise of the people like to treat
him this world richest and most perfect salvation. Until the Palace
Where the meantime because, like he rose from the horse. The Ushers
formed two lines from door to door to the reception Increased lend
dignity; This phasing he gently along, joined in the hall and before
the throne.

The Sultan, his harrend know, was very surprised and built both of its
splendor, as his habit and his attitude, step towards him, pulled him
trust Him wehrend, on his knees to fall to his father and left breast,
As he welcomed Him sit tight to his left. "illustrious prince,"
said Aladdin, "I thank thee, that my Erkühnen, instead saying it
hard to atone, So nachsichtsvoll me verziehn.

I knew nothing, as far as I am apologies, as that my heart, of
coercive holdem vanquished, in accepts urge the lovely Princess pays
homage to, And that love, violence flares up in my interior and loht,
non-ending, unstoppable until my life extinguishes even in death. "" My
friend, "Put half in jest, the Sultan," so by this unholy fire scorched
about sehn thy heart, stop ', I now you far too expensive. If this is the
means to kill you, So I know what you will heal. " He gave a sign.
Flight yell music of flutes and cymbals. Drauf He led him
affectionately For wonderful addition to Hall, what is already on golden
plates was served up a meal leckres, The cellars of the imperial
was Furnished with the best wine.

Sultan ate with him alone; Großvezier and The Lord Of all the rank and
blood vollbesetzen circled the table from a distance had zusehn And as
they dined. 10 [Illustration: N] desserts grew at Aladdin Sultan
paternally From the issue addressed whether it is comfortable,
soon the wedding vollziehn.

He replied: "Lord, you know, How much I ask for happiness, The Princess
promises to me. However, so I Range According to their wedding soon
in our impeccable rooms A new home might offer her, nor let me for a short
time line. a castle, with each versehn Zier, Do I want to build. way I
drum a decent plot.

"Sultan The so:" My son, you have the choice. here before If the palace,
as you see an empty scene, Where your palace enough room. Just let it
be built as quickly as possible, because, believe me, I can not
wait to see you married.

"After the vow that he is safe The construction will promote the
fullest, took Aladdin with solemn farewell hug, climbed on a horse,
and trotted through the streets with the same retinue back to the
house, Umbrandet again by the masses of the people with loud cheering
Braus.

Daheim barely arrived, he conjured the spirit again and said: "Even
your former work force stood by and speed out.

But on the immensely works, Das is now indispensable to me, I need your
full strength. Thou shalt in the shortest possible time degrees opposite
the palace of the sultan me a proud castle Build by the ground floor
up to the roof Flagpole The Sultan's daughter, my wife, despite her
very discerning eye to future habitation fit. What a rock for the
building you want to use, whether of marble blocks, snow white
with fine black veins, Ob jasper, agate whether, glaze, make the
'I am in your discretion, but thou - this condition "I only - not
forgetting a large hall in the upper floor of the crowned by a dome,
on the walls With gold and silver was embellished.

Also, to bright light to donate, he twenty-four window include; The framework
was alabaster, The Grid shalt thou with jewels from bepflastern unmatched
brilliance. wohlverwahrten On a square is also a treasure of gold
Gemünzten laid, The for me, my life is enriched. Also wants I think that
is a true escape from kitchens at the right places, addition
pantries each variety, and stables full of noble breeding. Ingleichen
be inside the castle peopled with an army of servants and maids .-- All
created 'my desire And if you're ready, come back. "When he bade the
spirit of this, the evening sun Sank down. On the next day about Morgenrot
Published in the spirit of his bed:" Complete is what you ordered; review,
"he said, "whether you like it." He contributed to it to the site. As
Aladdin was very surprised! stood, built in one night, a castle, as yet
no full half-century working people have prevailed. He really
believed only to dream, As him the spirit in all rooms Herumgeleitete.
There was His mission completed, point by point, by far surpassed even
that arch, columns, pillars, arches of the highest beauty, a swarm from
everywhere Dienstbeflissnen; At Silver nativity in the stable Beautiful
cents, foxes, mold, mouth stock of every kind, not sparing In Küch
'chambers and even verfacht; The treasure in safe custody, by a
faithful Normally guarded, with giant gold-filled bags, heaped,
getürmt up at the ceiling.

After the Aladdin Whole from the ground from prestigious, especially since
too large nor Kuppelsaal, said he, blinded by the splendor, for
the spirit: "I must applaud you, have been met exemplary From you
my desires and my will.

Now only herbeigeschafft A long carpet of damasks From fairylike colors
shimmer; Thou shalt, commanding 'I , from the palace of the Sultan him
to the room, the mistress of this castle wide. Him to be their new
home add hike her foot path. "The spirit in the momentum away, and anyway
that's Aladdin versah, Lag damastne the carpet there.

The Spirit came back without resting And bore him to the house undaunted,
degree than the gates at the palace of the sultan were open. The
gatekeeper wondered much as over there, close to their noses, where
yesterday the empty place And only was overgrown with grass, A
miracle building high and lofty tower you saw in the air. The message
running with Gesumm Buoyed around in the palace, the court made very
stunned faces, and the Großvezier Lief, when he for a while stier the
mysterious spook beglotzt, the Sultan, and said indignantly "Who
is an art piece prides, The experience defies any, is in the covenant
with magic!"

The Sultan gave the answer: "Oh, You must not think the worst. What
is more there, too?

A man who was able to give it, the drum my princely Vertrau'n chose my
husband's daughter, the may well allow the fun, A castle in one night to
bau'n. He gives as the richest man in the world, we only obvious signs
that one with a lot of money equivalent Virtually everything can
be achieved.

The building dates back to golden sources, and if thou seek him as the
fruit of magic arts, adding that Sun is talking to you from the jealousy.
"- The hour, as so the two were discussing, was in her house, the
Aladdin's mother made it, with that state to hold, the slaves whom
you donated, and did, after whose reign your plaster was completed
in the near future, from them to keep the train on their way to the
palace.

Aladdin Also, in the father at home allerletztenmal guest, fallow to
rest after a short pause. vielbewährte The magic lamp he picked wisely
with, ascended his nimble horse and rode to his castle Gradaus ramp.

[Illustration: The Sultan sees the castle Aladdin] The Sound Of solemn
joy drums, whistles and trumpets of the mother yell for reception.

From the battlements of the palace in the winds merrily flying
colorful flags, streamed from shells balsamic scent; The court stood up
and shake the arbours scarves through the air. The city was recently
decorated with foliage, lights and carpets; Much clearer was the
faces of Frohsinn labeled as disturbed at the time of weddings. The
baffled crowd of people saw two palaces, Where the day before only
one was, especially since they admired the new, And according to
known anyone He should not be afraid to compare, yes, get 'the old
advanced.

Meanwhile ward, because the Freedom had expressly reserved, in his own
castle, the wedding ceremony, the glossy design, by Sultan publicly
stated that right now valid princess confusion Bedrulbudurs Marriage
With the husband, of their worth, And the heart of his father
weighed; Also, the contract was completed with traditional formality.

Then emptied a cup joy The mother and the prince zuzweit. He himself gave
her the escort of the princess in residence rooms. There concluded in
its rich decoration and its beauty holdem Prange The bride went
against her with a warm handshake And a kiss on her cheeks.

She ready for release in their spouses castle, by his father farewell.
A two tears flowed down stream before emotion. And as the sun was
diminished last flashing the Dämmerschein, since the train is formed. To
the left her step mother, hinterdrein The slaves and maids all, Previews
A group of musicians with blaring trumpet sound, Last countless satellites,
lackeys, Pfeifer, timpani beaters And Knappen , as the torch bearers
in the course of light had to donate.

So the mistress floated on the rug out damastnen To kerzenhellen castle
of the husband, And all the heitre Volksgewimmel Posted mouth like
a prayer and blessing of the sky wish for their young marriage. 11
[Illustration : V] From his servants surrounded Aladdin booth at
the entrance and led to the quake happy bride to Kuppelsaal up.

She was at first sight already charmed by him, because when you comparison
found that the son he never Großveziers In the water rich.

And Aladdin? Oh, who described what he felt inside, as now, the dream
image of his love Hold Selig bodyguard term before him, he cried:
"Thou greatest of all, before the Taggestirn erbleicht, confess me,
if I was not perhaps Convicted am , to be satisfied with thee!

"" My prince - because this name seems "Staggered them" to charge you -
I have my father ordered you to SELECTION unites you and me. The
father's desire to add is a good Daughter duty ; But I took it
with pleasure, because know you mißfällst me not.

"With this fine answer you flushed his last remaining concern; And now
began a magic festival, The Jam Dear it seemed much as it ever was
daheim compatriots.

The panel flooded Rosen, from diamond rings betaut; From an equally boundless
waste testified the cups, the bowls, plates, forks, knives, even
the food were better than ever at the imperial banquets.

To play flute and lute tone sounds, listen to irritating, A Song Of
doppelstimmiger allerliebsten girls' choirs. After the end of the meal
seemed a swarm of dancers and dancers, To make a dance to begin.

The Castle Lord himself gave his arm, the mistress, and full of
grace swang Following an old custom of the country, the newlyweds
are in dance. The midnight was long elapsed since the castle was coming
to an end the merry. The next day, even when the sun Getting close
ball over the noon peak showed step Aladdin with an army of
servants on the short path Hinüber to the palace and asked the
father to honor his castle to take a look.

Certainly, the Sultan might like At this retreat is comfortable and
was accompanied by the Lord's Court, with him there on foot.

The castle, although he's now often from his window with leisure Viewed
seemed even more beautiful to him unexpectedly, when he is close
and closer now before the eyes saw.

Inside He only barely managed to bemeistern his delight, And even the
large dome room Schien him boundless enthusiasm. He said to Großvezier:
"One wonders how this hab 'I have never been respected. this decision
is, by my beard, My own palace just junk.

"But when he come home again, To some great impression richer. As the
old wound from Schleicher Großvezier is unbegehrt at him with the note:"
Who could consider this construction, sublime, for a work without the
magic of art him to consider?

"The Sultan, with strict views on it:" The high temporal mishap, That
your son got so bad, Can you still do not get over, Are gram Aladdin
And so looking for him anzuschwärzen baseless. "So the Lästrung failed
miserably. The Prince came when he awake, Rather, from now on that
same day in his favorite living chamber, where he enjoyed free
outlook on his son's palace, and was not tired from the window, all
buried in admiration, in form and decoration of the building, the
pride of the eye hours to refresh. dächte Who but that is now closed
daheim Of Aladdin And away from the traffic, would have the completely
fehlgeschossen.

On the contrary, he was constantly changing Lust seen in the city,
went to pray in the mosques, indeed some shopping himself, War in
Often the high nobles to visit, and every time, if he uses a large number
of servant Betreßter ride, strewed Gold from around handfuls.

At his palace gates was no beggar, which is not fully loaded with
donations farewell took. Even if he, in order the hunt to maintain,
add to box hinausstob uninhibited, Ward each village due to its gold
from a flooded stream.

No wonder was it, so if he rose to fame cloud the main span, and when he
soon became revered by the whole nation. But he was not drum vain,
No, showed the state is threatened by the toe to the apex as a real
hero by the fact: The whole empire was one frontier rebellion bright
fire. The commander could not 'dampen it, until Aladdin, the cry of
distress obey manfully be offered, on his own fist combat. From the
ruler of the army top professionals, he moved into the field, Not
respecting toil, frost and heat!

Soon he was surrounded and the enemy was like hunting rabbits in
spite of his superiority in a einz'gen great battle and scattered
in flight beaten. tapfren then led his warriors he homeward in
triumph, the head by a wreath of Fame umlaubt And Aladdin was now
the winner .-- In steady flow gradually falls day to day and year
year, but he was hardly aware of it at his beautiful wife, Page,
Loved and loving, hochgeachtet And yet by simply bescheidnem sense.

The malice which Urbeginn Good seek to destroy, should be 'but after
the grace period it is also hard to take Streiche .

[Illustration: The magician asked the "black art" on Aladdin] The Zaubrer,
with disdainful list once it is selected as a nephew, and since then
heimgewandert years in Africa now sat Wollt 'one day, purely for
fun, more details learn how Aladdin underlying gone. After that the
boy from that tomb Never again, after he caught it, Returned to light
and air, was not it at least questionable; The question that he
has saved, Galt only his death.

He sat comfortably at about a table, which filled with sand in a
square box was in the form, took a pen and drew so after Zaubrerweise
In Sande lines and circles of a strange addition to writing letters.
Calculation, mumbling incomprehensible According principle rule and
commandment Secret Black art, brought 'he finally discovered that Aladdin
is not dead, no, that he emerged from the tomb, For glory and fame to
aufgeschwungen And as the husband, the sultan's daughter live
wonderfully. Ha, was the insidious fabric shredded? He was leichenfahl,
Krebsrot and again kreideblaß And then before envy yellow and yellow.
"How?" he cried out in anger and hatred, "The treasure which laboriously
for myself I ausgespürt with acidic sweat, in a tough, hard years, the
high lamp power Ward miracle to me in my research Lohne niedren
Schneider From a son, from a dawdler entrafft!

He the vermodert I gewähnt, he may be erfrechen to indulge in wealth,
which he borrowed from me! However, only patience, I will avenge
me! "He therefore raised the same day the horse without much reflection
and galloping straight from Hinnen For Reich, the distance to the
east was 12.

[Illustration: N] Once it is based on the long journey Of and his horse
rushed half dead, only to recently geletzt sleep, fueled only with scarce
food, refreshing drink with the barren, The Zaubrer arrived in the
kingdom Sultan, And soon before his eyes emblazoned the capital, where
his rogue String Him miserably back then was failed. In a small inn He
rose from his throat to promote war by inquiries. The most important
thing of course it was unveiled before one days verfloß; For all the
world spoke involuntarily from Aladdin and his castle. He was at the
famous building from his landlord hingeleiten itself, And when him
from all sides Beschnüffelt was exactly as wusst 'he stated that the
Aladdin to a plant of such size that only light force verliehn.

He gave himself ribs clashes Before anger, because this masterpiece
until it totally discretionary taught what he had escaped, and returned
to his guest house back then. Where might well put the lamp? If your
storage space he would be able to discover, then you can 'he awaited
treasure from him erlisten, robbery to robbery, and appropriated by the
Battlements slam him back into the dust. He was nimble as a spider, weaves,
the restless in their networks, The magic square again, And through
the magic acts, with scribbles And he conjured knifflicher calculation,
Ward soon betray him infallible: The lamp Castle was in custody.

The coincidence of the wicked deeds beisteht often, it was also weighed.
Welcome to the news hit him, that three days ago Aladdin On a large
hunting pulled away and was up on the weekly closing. He stepped into
one shop and said plumber "Friend, it will not harm you, if you
are serving me.

I must have twelve lamps, brand new, from bare copper. "" In my faith,
"replied with a broad smile, the plumber - for he was pleased Such brilliant
business to make -" Just twelve? So many hab 'ich heut is not in stock,
but until tomorrow Werd' I obtain the missing. "
It was fearful to look at him thus suspended, and swinging in mid-air.
At times the hearts of the spectators were filled with consternation,
lest the brave shikaree should either have his brains dashed out against
the beetling cliff; or, being forced to let go his hold, be flung far
out, and falling upon the rocks below, get crushed to atoms.

Often during the earlier part of the day were the alarms of Karl and
Caspar raised to such a height, that they shouted to Ossaroo to come
down; and when down, entreated him not to go up again until, by the
lulling of the wind, the danger should become diminished.

Their entreaties, however, were of no avail.  The shikaree, accustomed
all his life to braving the elements, felt no fear of them; but on the
contrary, seemed to feel a pride, if not an actual pleasure, in thus
daring danger.

Even while swinging out from the cliff, and oscillating along its
_facade_--like the pendulum of some gigantic clock--he was seen tying
the strings and adjusting the pieces of stick, as coolly, as if he had
been standing upon _terra firma_ at the bottom!

Thus, nearly to the hour of noon, did Ossaroo continue his arduous
undertaking--of course with the usual intervals of rest, during each of
which Karl and Caspar reiterated their entreaties for him to desist and
leave the work to be executed at a more favourable opportunity.  Fritz,
too, while lavishing his caresses on the daring climber, seemed to look
persuadingly into his face--as if he knew there was danger in what the
Hindoo was doing.

It was all in vain.  The shikaree, while resisting all their efforts to
restrain him, seemed to scorn the danger which they dreaded; and,
without hesitation, returned to his perilous task.

And no doubt he would have succeeded in accomplishing it, allowing due
time for its completion.  It was not the wind that would have shaken him
from that rope, to which he clung with the tenacity of a spider.  Had
the support proved true, he could have held on, even though it had been
blowing a hurricane!

It was not in this that his chief danger lay; nor from such source was
it to come; but from one altogether unexpected and unthought-of.

It was near the hour of noon, and Ossaroo had already succeeded in
setting the steps up to about half the height of the cliff.  He had
descended for a fresh supply of sticks; and, having gone up the
tree-ladder, and swung himself back upon the kite cord, was just
commencing to clamber up it--as he had already done nearly a score of
times.

The eyes of Karl and Caspar were upon him, following his movements, as
they had been doing all along; for, despite his frequent repetition of
the ascent, it was always a perilous performance, and interesting to
behold.

Just as he had got free from the ladder, and fairly out upon the rope, a
cry came from his lips that thrilled the hearts of the spectators with
alarm: for they knew that the utterance was one of terror.  They needed
no explanation of that cry; for at the same moment that it reached their
ears, they perceived the danger that had caused Ossaroo to utter it.  He
was descending along the facade of the cliff--not gliding down the rope
of his own free will, but as if the kite had got loose at the top, and,
yielding to the weight of his body, was being dragged over the surface
of the snow!

At first, he appeared to be descending only very slowly; and, but for
the cries he was putting forth, and the slackening of the rope below,
they upon the ground might not have been aware of what was going on.
But they had not regarded his movements for many seconds, before
perceiving the true state of the case, and the fearful peril in which
their faithful shikaree was now placed.

Beyond doubt the kite had become detached above; and, yielding to the
strain upon the rope, caused by Ossaroo's weighty was being pulled
towards the edge of the precipice!

Would the resistance be equal to the weight of the man's body?  Would it
let him down easily?  Or would the dragging anchor arrive at a place
where the surface was smooth, and then gliding rapidly over it, increase
the velocity of the descent?  In other words, was the shikaree about to
be projected through a fall of thirty feet to the bottom of the cliff?

The spectators were left but little time to speculate on probabilities.
Not a moment was allowed them to take measures for securing the safety
of their companion.  Before they could recover from the surprise, with
which his first shout had inspired them, they saw that his descent was
every moment becoming more accelerated: now in gradual declination, then
in quick, short jerks--until he had got within about twenty-feet of the
ground.  They were in hopes that he might continue to descend in this
fashion for a few yards further, and then the danger would be over; but,
just at that moment, the broad breast of the kite was seen poising
itself over the top of the cliff; and like a great living bird, it
sprang off from the rocks, and soared out over the valley!

Ossaroo, still clinging to the cord, was carried some distance from the
cliff; but, fortunately for him, the weight of his body overbalanced the
resistance which the atmosphere offered to the broad surface of the
kite; else he might have been carried much higher into the air.  Equally
fortunate was it, that the amount of overbalance was exceedingly
slight--otherwise he might have been dashed with violence to the earth!

As it was, he came down as gently as a dove, alighting upon his legs,
and remaining erect upon them, like Mercury upon the top of his
"sky-kissing mountain."

The moment that the shikaree felt his feet touching _terra firma_, he
sprang nimbly to one side, at the same instant letting go the rope, as
if it had been a rod of red-hot iron!

The great kite, no longer held in poise against the wind, commenced
darting hither and thither; at each turn descending lower and lower--
until by one last swoop, in which it seemed to concentrate all its
failing strength, it came down towards Ossaroo like a gigantic bird of
prey descending upon its victim!

It was just as much as the shikaree could do to get out of the way; and,
had he not ducked his head in the very nick of time, he would certainly
have received a blow upon his skull, that would have endangered its
entirety.


CHAPTER FORTY SEVEN.

THE ESCAPE OF THE KITE.

The joy, which all felt at the miraculous escape of Ossaroo, more than
compensated for their chagrin at the circumstance of the kite having
returned to them: more especially, as they believed that the accident
was not without remedy.  It might be attributed to the wind: which no
doubt had lifted the kite from where it lay, detaching it from the rock,
or whatever other object that had for the time entangled it.

They doubted not, but that they might again succeed in sending it up,
and getting it fast as before; and this confidence hindered them from
grieving over the unfortunate occurrence, as they might otherwise have
done.

As the wind on that day was in the wrong quarter for flying a kite
towards the cliff, they determined to postpone the attempt, till a more
favourable opportunity; and, in order that their kite should not be in
danger of getting spoiled by the rain, they once more shouldered, and
carried it back, rope and all, to the shelter of the hut.

Nearly a week elapsed, before there was a breeze that blew in their
favour; but during this interval, they had not been altogether
unemployed.  Still uncertain of the length of time they might be
detained in the valley, they had passed almost every hour of the
daylight in increasing their stock of provisions--so as not to encroach
upon the cured venison of the ibex, of which a considerable quantity was
still to the good.

Their guns were no longer used for procuring food.  The last loads still
remained in the barrels; and were not to be fired off--until every other
means of capturing game should fail them.

Indeed, they were now so confident of being able to get out of their
prison, that at times they almost fancied themselves already on their
way down the mountains; and talked of keeping their guns loaded, against
any danger from large animals they might encounter on their homeward
journey.  For procuring food they knew that firearms were not necessary.
Ossaroo's bow was sufficient weapon for that.  Often might it be heard
twanging among the trees; and as often did the shikaree's arrow pierce
the breast of some fine bird--a peacock, or argus pheasant, or one of
the beautiful Brahminy geese that frequented the waters of the lake.

Ossaroo's nets and lines, too, were not without their use.  Fish were
caught of various kinds, and excellent quality; and there was one sort
in particular, should all else fail, that promised to furnish them with
an inexhaustible supply.  This was a large species of eel, in which the
lake abounded, to such an extent, that it was only necessary to cast in
a hook, with a worm upon it, and an eel of nearly six feet in length
would be instantly landed.

As they did not always relish to dine upon eels, but little of their
time was spent in procuring them.  For all that, they were gratified on
discovering the abundance of these slippery creatures--knowing that,
should other resources fail, they would find in them a staple article of
wholesome food, that could never become scarce, no matter how much they
should eat of it.

A favourable wind at length came on to blow; and the kite was once more
shouldered, and carried to the same place as before.  Just in the same
way did they proceed to fly it; and in the same style it again rose
soaring above the cliff; and--the cord having been suddenly slacked--
sank to rest upon the slope of the mountain.

So far were they once more successful; but alas! it proved to be just so
far and no farther.

Pulling upon the rope, to ascertain whether their anchor had "bit," they
were chagrined to receive an answer in the negative.  The cord came back
to them with scarce any resistance; or only such, as was caused by
friction over the edge of the cliff, and by the drag of the kite itself
along the snowy surface.

Hand over hand, they drew it back: foot by foot, and yard by yard, it
came yieldingly towards them--until they saw the broad curving breast of
the pseudo-bird projecting over the parapet edge of the precipice!

Once more was it launched out into the air; once more was rope given it,
till it had ascended to the full length of its tether; and once more was
it allowed to alight.

Again the pull downward and inward--again the cord came freely to hand--
and again was the rounded bow seen upon the brow of the precipice, and
outlined against the blue sky above; not like the beautiful bow of the
iris--a thing of promise--but one of disappointment and chagrin.

Again the flight--again the failure--again and again; until the patience
of the operators--to say nothing of their strength--was well nigh
exhausted.

But it was no mere play for the sake of pastime.  They were not flying
that kite for their amusement; nor yet for the purpose of making some
scientific experiment.  They were flying it as a means of obtaining
their personal liberty; and they were all of them interested in the
success or failure of the attempt--almost as much as if their lives
rested on the issue.

However tried their strength, or worn out their patience, it would not
do to give up; and therefore--although at each unsuccessful effort, with
hopes constantly becoming diminished--they continued their exertions.

For more than a score of times they had sent up the kite, and as often
dragged it back to the brow of the cliff; not always at the same point:
for they had themselves changed their ground, and tried the flight in
different places.

In all cases, the result was the same.  The bird refused to take hold
with its claws--either on rocks, or blocks of ice, or banks of frozen
snow--all of which lay scatter over the slope of the mountain.

Considering that it had caught hold on the very first trial, so many
failures were regarded by our adventurers with some surprise.  Had it
never held, there would have been no cause for this; and after so many
attempts, they would have been the more inclined to yield up their plan,
deeming it impracticable.  But the fact of their first success sustained
them in the hope that success might again be obtained; and, in this
belief, they were encouraged to "keep on trying."

Half a dozen additional flights were made, but fortune still declining
to favour them, they desisted from their efforts, leaving the paper-bird
with its breast protruding over the cliff: as if perched there in
preparation for a further flight.

By this time the kite had become sadly damaged--its _plumage_ having
received rough usage by constant trailing over the rocks and sharp
angles of ice.  While up in the air, daylight could be seen shining
through it in several places; and it no longer exhibited that majesty of
flight that had originally characterised it.  It was evident that
repairs would soon be needed; and to discuss this question, as also to
consider the propriety of proceeding to make trial at some other place,
our adventurers, for a time, discontinued their efforts.

All three were standing together, but at several paces distant from the
end of the rope; which they had for the moment abandoned, and which lay
negligently along the ground.

They had not taken the slightest precaution to secure it: for it had not
occurred to them that there was any risk in leaving it loose.

It was only when too late, that they perceived the mistake they had
committed--only when they saw the cord suddenly jerked up from the
ground, as if some invisible hand was lifting it aloft into the sky!

All three rushed towards it at the same instant.  They were too late.
Already the end of the rope was dangling at such a height above their
heads, that even the tallest of them could not touch it with the tips of
his fingers.

Ossaroo leaped high into the air in an endeavour to clutch the string.
Caspar ran to procure a pole which lay near, in hopes of retaining it in
that way: while Karl ran up the ladder that was resting against the
cliff, near which the rope was yet trailing.

The efforts of all three were alike vain.  For a second or two, the end
of the cord hung oscillating above their heads--just sufficiently out of
reach to tantalise them; and then, as if the invisible hand above had
given it another gigantic jerk, it was drawn rapidly and vertically
upward, till it finally disappeared over the crest of the cliff!


CHAPTER FORTY EIGHT.

NO MORE PAPER-TREES!

There was nothing mysterious in the disappearance of the cord.  The kite
was no longer visible on the summit of the cliff.  The wind had carried
it away; and, of course, its rope along with it.

When the first moment of surprise had passed, our adventurers turned
towards each other with glances that spoke something more than
disappointment.  Notwithstanding the number of times that the kite had
failed to fix itself, still it had once taken a fast hold, and it was
but reasonable to suppose it would have done so again.  Besides, there
were other places where the precipice was as low, and even lower, than
where they had made the trials; and at some of these they might have
been more successful.  Indeed, there was every probability that, had
they not lost that kite, they would have been able in due time to have
climbed out of their rock-bound prison by a ladder of rope; but now all
chance of doing so was gone for ever--swept off by a single puff of
wind.

You may be fancying, that the misfortune was not irremediable.  Another
kite, you will be saying, might be constructed out of similar materials
as those used in making the one carried away.  But to say this, would be
to speak without a full knowledge of the circumstances.

The same thought had already passed through the minds of our
adventurers, when they perceived that the kite they were flying was
getting torn and otherwise damaged.

"We can easily make another," suggested Caspar at that crisis.

"No, brother," was the answer of Karl; "never another, I fear.  We have
paper enough left to patch this one; but not enough to make another."

"But we can make more paper, can we not?" urged Caspar, interrogatively.

"Ah!" again replied Karl, with a negative shake of the head, "no more--
not another sheet!"

"But why?  Do you think there are no more daphne trees?"

"I think there are not.  You remember we stripped all there were in the
thicket; and since then, thinking we might need more bark, I have gone
all through the valley, and explored it in every direction, without
meeting with a single shrub of the daphne.  I am almost certain there
are none."

This conversation between the brothers had occurred, long before the
losing of the kite.  When that event came to pass, it was not necessary
for them to repeat it; and, both being thus acquainted with the fact
that it was impossible for them to construct another, they felt that
they had sustained an irreparable loss.

In what direction had the kite been carried off?  Might it not be blown
along the line of cliffs, and tossed back again into the valley?

As there appeared some probability that such a chance might arise, all
three ran outward from the rocks--in order to command a better view of
the precipice, on each side.

For a long time they stood watching--in hopes that they might see the
great paper-bird returning to the scene of its nativity.  But it never
came back; and they became at length convinced, that it never would.
Indeed, the direction of the wind--when they paused to consider it--
rendered the thing not only improbable, but impossible.  It was blowing
_from_ the cliffs, and _towards_ the snowy ridge.  No doubt the kite had
been carried up the sloping acclivity; and had either passed clear over
the mountains, or become lodged in some deep defile, where the wind
could no longer reach it.  At all events, it was certain, that both kite
and cord were lost to them for ever.

"Ach! how very unfortunate!" exclaimed Caspar, in a vexed tone, when
they had finally arrived at this conviction.  "What ill-starred luck we
have, to be sure!"

"Nay! brother," remarked Karl, in a tone of reproval; "do not chide
Fortune for what has happened just now.  I acknowledge it is a great
misfortune; but it is one for which we may justly blame ourselves, and
only ourselves.  By sheer negligence we have lost the kite, and along
with it, perhaps, the last chance of regaining our liberty."

"Yes, you speak truly," rejoined Caspar, in a tone of mingled regret and
resignation.  "It _was_ our fault, and we must suffer for it."

"But are you quite sure, brother Karl," resumed he, after a pause, and
referring to the conversation that had already passed between them--"are
you quite sure there are no more of these paper-bearing trees?"

"Of course," replied the plant-hunter, "I am not positive--though I fear
it is as I have said--that there are no more.  It will be easy for us to
determine the point, by making a complete exploration of the valley.  It
may be that something else might turn up which would answer the purpose
equally as well.  There is a birch-tree indigenous to the Himalaya
mountains, found both in Nepaul and Thibet.  Its bark can be stripped
off in broad flakes and layers, to the number of eight or ten--each
almost as thin as common paper, and suitable for many purposes to which
paper is usually applied."

"Do you think it would do for a kite?" inquired Caspar, without waiting
for Karl to finish his explanation.

"I am sure of it," replied the botanist.  "It would serve even better
than the daphne paper; and had I believed there was a chance of finding
it here, I should have preferred it to that.  But I do not think we
shall find it.  I have observed no species of birch; and I know that
this one, like most of the _Betulaceae_, affects a much colder climate
than there is in this valley.  Likely enough, it grows on the mountains
above; but there it is out of our reach.  Could we reach it there, we
should not need to be robbing it of its manifold envelope.  But let us
not despair," added Karl, endeavouring to appear cheerful; "perhaps it
may be found growing down here; or, if not, we may still find another
grove of the daphne trees.  Let us proceed on and search!"

Karl was far from being sanguine in either conjecture; and it was as
well for him that he was not: for after a minute and careful exploration
of the valley--which occupied nearly three whole days--neither the
wished-for birch, nor the desired daphne trees--nor any other material
out of which a kite might be manufactured--rewarded their search.

It was of no use, therefore, to think any longer of a kite; and the
subject was at length dismissed from their minds.


CHAPTER FORTY NINE.

AEROSTATICS.

It is scarce possible to talk of a paper kite, without thinking of that
other and greater aerostatic contrivance--a balloon.

Karl had thought of it, long before this time; and so had Caspar, just
as long: for the kite had suggested it simultaneously to the minds of
both.

It may be asked why they had not entertained the thought, and
endeavoured to carry it into practical effect: since a balloon would
have been far more likely to have delivered them out of their "mountain
prison" than a paper kite?

But they _had_ entertained the thought--at least, Karl had done so--and
examined it in all its bearings.  Caspar had permitted it to pass out of
his mind, under the impression that _they could not make a balloon_; and
Karl had arrived at the same conclusion; but only from a belief that
they _had not the materials_ with which to make one.  Given the
materials, Karl felt quite equal to the construction of a balloon--a
rude one, it is true; but one which might have served the purpose for
which they required it.

During the days when they had been occupied in making the paper-bird, he
had given his thoughts a good deal to this subject; for, to say the
truth, he had never been very sanguine about the success of the kite
experiment.  He had pondered long and patiently on the subject of
balloons--endeavouring to recall to mind what little he had studied of
aerostatics--and had mentally examined all the material objects within
reach, in the hope of discovering some substance out of which one might
be constructed.

Unfortunately, he had not been able to think of anything that appeared
to be suitable.  The daphne paper--even had it been in abundance--would
not do: for paper of itself, however close in texture, is not strong
enough to withstand the pressure of the outside air--that is, in a
balloon of sufficient size to carry any considerable weight.  But it was
of no use to talk of paper: since there was not enough; and Karl had
given over thinking of a balloon: because there was nothing within reach
likely to serve for its construction.

He knew that that great sphere would require to be air-proof.  He had
thought of the skins of animals; but such of these as might have been
obtained in sufficient quantity, were entirely too thick and heavy to
make the covering of a balloon.  The hemp, of which there _was_ an
abundance, might be woven into a cloth, and then coated over by gum
obtained from some tree; for in the valley were several species of
gum-exuding trees.  But the question was, could they manufacture a cloth
out of hemp that would be light enough when thus coated over?  It was
very doubtful whether they could--at all events they would have to
practise the weaving trade for a long time, before they should arrive at
a sufficient expertness to accomplish such a feat.  The plan was too
unpromising to be seriously entertained; and Karl had dismissed it,
along with the whole subject of the balloon.

That had been previous to the experiment of the kite, and its
unfortunate ending.  But now that all hope from this quarter had been
brought to an end, the balloon once more began to shape itself in his
mind, as well as in that of Caspar; and for the first time they
proceeded to talk over the subject together.

"Cords we could have in plenty," remarked Caspar, "but they'd be of no
use, without the stuff to cover the great globe.  They make it of silk,
don't they?"

"Yes," replied Karl, "silk is the best material for the purpose."

"And why?" inquired Caspar.

"Because it combines the three properties of lightness, strength, and
closeness of texture, in a greater degree than any other known
substance."

"Would nothing else do?"

"Oh, yes; many things would answer to make a balloon, that might carry
up a certain amount of weight.  Even a paper balloon can be constructed
to take up a few pounds--a cat, or a small dog; and people in many
countries have been cruel enough to dispatch such creatures into the
air, not caring what became of them."

"Very cruel indeed!" assented Caspar, who, although a hunter, was far
from having an unfeeling heart.  "Such people should be sent up
themselves in paper balloons."

"Yes, if paper balloons would carry them; which, unfortunately for us,
they wouldn't.  Even if we had an unlimited supply of paper, it would be
of no use to us.  We require something stronger, and more tenacious."

"Can we not think of something?  Let us try, Karl!"

"Ah! dear brother, I have been trying for days, and in vain.  There is
nothing within this valley at all suitable for the purpose."

"Would canvas do?  Have you thought of that?"

"I have.  It would be too coarse and heavy."

"But, with great pains, could we not make it light enough?  We might
choose the finer fibres of the hemp; and spin and weave it with
scrupulous care.  Ossaroo here is a perfect Omphale in his way.  I'll
warrant he could beat Hercules with the distaff."

"Ho! brother!" exclaimed Karl, a little astonished.  "You are quite
classical in your speech this morning.  Where learnt you the history of
Hercules--you who have never seen the inside of a university?"

"You forget, brother Karl, that you yourself have been my instructor in
these classical themes, as you call them.  Though I must tell you that,
with the exception of their occasionally lending a little ornament to my
speech, I have derived not the slightest advantage from them; nor is it
likely I ever shall."

"Well, Caspar," answered the botanist, "I am not going to stand up for
the classics, as you are well aware.  Although I have taught you a
little of their lore, it was when I had nothing to do, and you were
equally idle; otherwise I should have considered that both of us were
wasting time.  You already know my opinions on that subject--which are:
that a knowledge of what is usually termed `the classics' is of about as
much use to a reasoning man as might be an equally profound knowledge of
Chinese _mnemonics_.  The time I have spent in the study of the _dead_
languages has been sheer waste; and all I have learnt wont raise us a
foot higher here.  My knowledge of Jupiter and Juno is not likely to
gain us the means of getting out of our difficulty, no more than my
acquaintance with Mercury will help me to a pair of wings.  So a truce
to classical ideas, and let us see whether scientific ones may not serve
us better just now.  You have a quick invention, brother Caspar; can you
think of anything--I mean anything within our reach--that would make the
air-bag of a balloon?"

"But could you make the balloon, if you had the stuff?" inquired Caspar,
still in doubt whether any other than an experienced aeronaut could
construct so wonderful a machine.

"Pooh!" replied the philosopher, "the making of a balloon is almost as
easy as making a soap-bubble.  Any air-tight bag, filled with heated
atmosphere, becomes a balloon.  The question is, what weight it can be
made to carry--including the materials out of which it may be
constructed."

"But how are you to get the heated air into it?"

"Simply by making a fire under an aperture left open below."

"But would not this air soon become cold again?"

"Yes; and then the balloon would sink back to the earth from the air
inside getting cooled, and becoming as heavy as that without.  Of
course," continued the philosopher, "you are aware that heated air is
much lighter than the ordinary atmosphere; and that is why a balloon
filled with the former, rises, and will continue rising, till it has
reached that elevation, where the rarefied atmosphere is as light as the
heated air.  Then it can go no further, and the weight of the balloon
itself will bring it down again.  A bladder of ordinary air sunk in
water, or a corked bottle, will illustrate this point to your
comprehension."

"I comprehend it well enough," rejoined Karl, rather piqued at being
treated too much _a l'enfant_ by his learned brother.  "But I thought
that, in a balloon, it was necessary to keep a fire constantly burning--
a sort of grate or fire-basket suspended below.  Now, even if we had the
silk to make the great spherical bag, how could we make a fire-basket
without iron?"

"We should not need the fire-basket you speak of.  That is only
required, when you design to keep your balloon some length of time in
the air.  If you only wish to make a short ascent, once filling the bag
with hot air is sufficient; as it would be for us here.  Even if we
wanted a suspended grate, surely, brother, you have enough ingenuity to
get over such a trifling difficulty as that?"

"Well, I'm not so sure that I could.  How would you get over it?"

"Why, by making a common basket, and lining it with clay.  That would
carry fire, as well as a vessel of either cast or wrought iron--at least
sufficient to serve for a short excursion such as we should care to
make.  Now-a-days, fire is not used for inflating balloons.  Inflammable
gas has been found to be far superior for this purpose; but as we have
no such thing in stock, we should have to proceed on the old original
plan--that employed by the brothers Montgolfier--the first inventors of
the balloon."

"You think, then, that the fire apparatus could be dispensed with, if we
could only discover some material that would make the great globe-shaped
bag to contain the heated air?"

"Ay," replied Karl; "think of something to do that, and I promise to
make you a balloon."

Thus challenged, Caspar set his wits to work; and for a long while he
sat in silence, as if buried in some very profound speculation.
Probably, there was no material substance in that valley that did not
pass in review before the retina of his mental vision; and all were
considered in turn.

"It must be light, air-tight, and strong?" asked he, at length, as if
there was something in his thoughts possessing these three requisites.

"Light, air-tight, and strong," answered Karl, simply repeating his
words.

"The two last I am sure of," rejoined Caspar.  "Of the first only have I
my doubts."

"What is it?" asked Karl, in a tone that betrayed his interest in what
Caspar had said.

"Eel-skins!" was the laconic answer.


CHAPTER FIFTY.

THE SKIN BALLOON.

"Eel-skins," said Caspar, repeating the phrase, as he saw that Karl
hesitated before pronouncing an opinion.  "Don't you think they would
do?"

Karl had it on the tip of his tongue to cry out--"The very thing!" but
something withheld him from making this unqualified declaration.

"They might--it is possible they might," said he, apparently debating
the question within himself--"just possible; and yet I fear--"

"What do you fear?" asked Caspar.

"Do you think they would not be strong enough?"

"Strong enough," replied Karl.  "That's not what I fear."

"The air can't pass through an eel-skin?"

"No--not that."

"At the seams, perhaps?  We can stitch them neatly; and then gum them
over at the joinings.  I'll warrant Ossaroo can sew like a shoemaker."

The shikaree could do all that.  Karl knew it.  It was not there the
difficulty lay.

"The weight, then?" pursued Caspar interrogatively.

"Precisely that," answered Karl; "I fear they will be too heavy.  Bring
one, Ossaroo; and let us have a look at it."

The shikaree rose from his seat; and going into the hovel, returned
presently--bringing back with him a long shrivelled object, which any
one could tell to be a dried eel-skin.

There were many like it inside: for they had carefully preserved the
skins of the eels they had caught, induced to do so by a sort of
presentiment, that some day they might find a use for them.  In this
case their prudent providence was likely to prove of service to them.

Karl took the skin; and, holding it out on the palm of his hand,
appeared to make an estimate of its weight.  Caspar watched his
brother's countenance, and waited to hear what he would say; but Karl
only expressed himself by a doubtful shake of the head, which seemed to
show that his opinion was _against_ the eel-skins.

"They might be made much lighter, I fancy," suggested Caspar: "scraping
would do a deal for them; and by the way, why would not boiling make
them light enough?  It would take all the fatty, oily substance out of
them."

"There's something in what you say," rejoined Karl, apparently impressed
by the last suggestion.  "Boiling might render them a good deal lighter.
We can easily try it."

As Karl said this, he proceeded to the boiling spring, and plunged the
eel-skin under the water.  There it was permitted to remain for about
half an hour, when it was taken out; and, after being scraped with the
blade of a knife, was spread upon a rock, under the sun, where it would
soon get thoroughly dry.

They all waited patiently for the completion of this process.  The
result was of too interesting a character to allow of their occupying
themselves with anything else.

In due time the eel-skin had become sufficiently dry, to be submitted to
examination; and Karl, once more taking it up, balanced it upon his
palm.

Tested, even in this inexact fashion, it was evidently much lighter than
before; and, by the gratified look with which the philosopher regarded
it, he appeared to be much better satisfied with its weight.  Still,
however, he was not sanguine: as his words testified.  They were almost
a repetition of what he had said before.

"It may do--it is just possible.  At all events, there can be no harm in
trying.  Let us try it, then."

To say, "Let us try it," meant the same as to say, "Let us make the
balloon."  The others understood that; and of course acquiesced in the
determination.

As there was nothing to interfere with the immediate commencement of the
work, they resolved to set about it at once; and in fact did set about
it without farther delay.

The number of eel-skins on hand, though very considerable, would not be
near enough for covering a balloon; and therefore Ossaroo went to work
with his hooks and lines to catch a few hundreds more.  Karl was able to
tell how many it would take; or he could at least make an estimate
sufficiently exact for the purpose.  He designed a balloon of twelve
feet diameter: for he knew that one of less size would not have power
enough to carry up the weight of a man.  Of course, Karl knew how to
calculate the surface of a sphere whose diameter should be twelve feet.
He had only to multiply the diameter on the circumference; or the square
of the diameter on the fixed number 3.1416; or find the convex surface
of the circumscribing cylinder; or else find four times the area of a
great circle of the said sphere.  Any one of these methods would give
him the correct result.

On making the calculation, he found that a sphere of 12 feet diameter
would have a surface of 452 square feet, within a trifling fraction.
Therefore 452 square feet of eel-skins would be required to cover it.
In other words, that quantity would be required to make the balloon.

As the eels happened to be of large size--most of them being over a yard
in length, and full four inches in average girth--the skin of one when
spread out would yield about a square foot of surface.  Taking large and
small together--and allowing for waste, the heads and tails that would
have to be chopped off--Karl calculated that he would get nearly a
square foot each out of the eels; and that about five hundred skins
would make the balloon bag.  But as they would have to be cut
occasionally with a slant, in order to get the globe shape, perhaps a
few more would be needed; and therefore Ossaroo was to keep his baits in
the water, until the requisite number of eels should be hooked out of
it.

Ossaroo had another department assigned to him besides catching the
fish; and one that took up more of his time: since the baiting of the
hooks, and looking after them, required only his occasional attention.
Spinning the thread by which the skins were to be sewed together, was a
much more delicate operation: since in these both strength and fineness
were absolutely necessary.  But as Caspar had said, Ossaroo was an adept
with the distaff; and several large skeins of the finest twist were soon
turned off from his nimble fingers.

When enough thread had been thus produced, Ossaroo proceeded to making
the cords and stronger ropes, that would be needed for attaching the
"boat"--as well as to hold the balloon in its place, while being got
ready for its ascent.

Caspar's employment was--first, the skinning of the eels; and afterwards
the scraping, boiling, and drying of the skins; while Karl, who acted as
engineer-in-chief, besides giving a general superintendence to the work,
occupied himself in imparting the final dressing to the material, and
cutting it into such shapes, that it could be closely and conveniently
stitched together.

Karl had also made an excursion into the forest, and brought back with
him large quantities of a gum, which he had extracted from a tree of the
genus _ficus_--a sort of _caoutchouc_--which is yielded by many species
of _ficus_ in the forests of the Lower Himalayas.  Karl had gone in
search of this substance, because he knew it would be required for
paying the seams, and rendering them air-tight.

When they had pursued their various avocations for about a week, it was
thought that material enough of every kind was collected and made ready;
and then Ossaroo was set to stitching.  Fortunately, they were provided
with needles: for these had formed a part of the _accoutrement_ of the
plant-hunters--when originally starting upon their expedition.

As neither Karl nor Caspar had any experience in handling such sharp
tools, the sewing had all to be done by Ossaroo; and it took another
full week to accomplish this Sartorean task.

At the end of that time, it was fully accomplished and complete; and the
huge bag was ready to receive its coat of gum varnish.  A day sufficed
for "paying;" and nothing more remained but to attach the "boat," or
"car," that was to carry them aloft in their daring flight into the
"azure fields of air."


CHAPTER FIFTY ONE.

MAKING READY FOR THE ASCENT.

Karl was the only one of the three who knew anything about a balloon, or
the mode of inflating it.  Had it been their intention of navigating the
air, an apparatus would have been required to carry up a fire.  This
Karl could easily have contrived.  A basket of wicker-work, as he had
said, well lined with clay, would have answered the purpose after a
fashion; but as they did not intend to use the balloon for any purpose
beyond making the single ascent to lift them over the cliffs, a
continuous fire would not be required.  The first inflation would answer
that end well enough; and therefore a grate or fire-basket was not
thought of.

The car to carry the passengers--or boat, as it is sometimes styled:
since, for reasons easily understood, it is usually a boat--was quite
another affair; and had it been designed for more than a mere temporary
use, would have taken a considerable time in the making; but for what
they wanted almost anything would serve; and all that they intended
employing was a sort of wicker basket, or deep hamper, suspended by
stout ropes.  This had been already prepared; and only needed to be
attached to the bottom of the air-bag.

In the present case, the "bottom of the bag" is quite a figure of
speech--_lucus a non lucendo_.  Strictly speaking, it had no bottom;
but, where this should have been, there was a round aperture, formed by
a stout hoop of ringall bamboo, to which the skin covering was lashed,
and to which, also, the cords intended to sustain the afore-mentioned
basket, as also the stay-ropes, were to be attached.

The object of this aperture will be easily understood.  It was by it
that the hot air was to be admitted inside the balloon, for the purpose
of inflating it.

And how was this hot air to be obtained?  That was a question which Karl
alone could answer.  Of course, fire was to be the agent for producing
it: but how was it to be got into the bag?  Karl could tell that, and
Karl only; and, now that the time had arrived for trying the experiment,
he condescended to explain to his coadjutors how he meant to proceed.

The bag was to be propped up between tall stakes set in the ground; its
bottomless bottom turned towards the earth, so that the aperture would
be below.  Under this a fire was to be kindled--not, however, until
everything else should be ready; and the hot air rising up into the
aperture would enter the balloon, and cause it to swell out to its full
globular dimensions.  More hot air being admitted, the cooler atmosphere
within would be expelled, the balloon would become lighter than the
surrounding air, and by the simple principle of atmospheric pressure it
would ascend into the air.  It was expected it would do so--it was hoped
it would.

To say the truth, the hopes of the engineer were far from being high--
his expectations anything but sanguine.  He had observed all along,
that, notwithstanding the process employed for lightening the eel-skins,
they were still far heavier than silk; and perhaps, after all, the
experiment might not succeed.  There was another circumstance that had
as much _weight_ on the mind of Karl as the eel-skins; and that was
quite as likely to have a _bearing_ upon the balloon.  He had not
overlooked the fact, that the spot, from which they proposed making the
ascent, was nearly ten thousand feet above the level of the sea.  He
knew that the atmosphere in such a situation would be extremely
rarefied, and that a balloon, which might easily ascend many thousand
feet into the air starting from the level of the sea, would not stir
from the ground if carried to the top of a mountain ten thousand feet
high.  This was the circumstance which preyed upon the spirit of the
young philosopher, and hindered him from entertaining any very sanguine
hopes of success in the experiment they were making.

The philosophical truth had been before his mind from the first, and at
times had almost determined him to abandon the project.  But as he was
not sufficiently acquainted with the laws of aerostation as to be
certain of failure, he had worked on with the determination to seek
success, though it must be acknowledged with but faint hopes of finding
it.

Thus stood matters on the morning when it was finally arranged to launch
their great aerial ship, and ascertain whether it would swim.

All things were made ready at an early hour.  The huge bag was set up
between the supporting stakes the _car_ was attached to it, as also
several ropes to keep the balloon from being carried away; and these
were fastened at their other ends to stout pegs, driven firmly into the
ground; while a little furnace of stones was built underneath to hold
the fire, whose ascending caloric was to expand the balloon, and raise
it into the air.

The fuel out of which this fire was to be made had been already
collected near the spot.  It was not wood, nor faggots of any kind; for
although these might have served after a fashion, Karl was acquainted
with a better material.  He remembered that the Montgolfiers, and other
early aerostats--previous to the introduction of the inflammable gas--
had used chopped straw and wool, and regarded these materials to be the
best substances for inflating their balloons.  Karl had adopted their
idea; and had provided chopped grass as a substitute for the chopped
straw, and in lieu of sheep's wool he had procured a quantity of the
_poshm_ of the ibex, and other animals, that had been killed--the rich
shawl-wool of Cashmere!

The car, which has already been described as a sort of deep hamper, was
not over three feet in diameter.  It was evidently not equal to the
holding of three persons--to say nothing of a large dog--for it is
hardly necessary to say that Fritz was not going to be left behind.  The
faithful creature had too long followed the fortunes of our adventurers
to be abandoned by them now.

But there was not the slightest danger of that.  The dimensions of the
car were large enough for what the "vehicle" was intended to carry,
which was only _one_.

Karl believed that there would be little chance of the balloon having
sufficient power to take up all three of them, their united weight being
over four hundred pounds.  He would be but too contented if one should
be carried aloft; and if that one should succeed in effecting a landing
on the summit of the cliff, it was of no importance what afterwards
became of the aerial ship.  Having completed that one voyage, it might
make another on its own account--either south to Calcutta or eastward to
Hong Kong, if it liked China better.

Do not worry, I wanted my thoughts already so, to know that the Lord
under his side would be done - Damis. Now really, that would be a
curious example in which perishable errors may be forfeited if you do
not know what discipline from this or that truth is to be judged. The
beatings, which a servant of his Lord gets, do not belong in the
law of nature, but in the Civil Law.

When a hired servant, so he rented with his hump. Remember this principle.
Anton. From the civil rights is he? O which must be a nasty right. But I
see it now! The desperate erudition, they can also be easy to beat when
it helps protect.

What I wanted not to give, if I am to all waxy their noses as well
understood as you - O Lord Damis, pity you my stupidity! Damis. Well
well, if your serious, then pick up the work.

It pleased me, the scholarship through my example one to have made
proselytes. I want you to honestly rate my lessons and my support.
Teach you to something, so I promise you, you in the scholarly world and
introduce themselves with a particular works you announce it. Maybe I
take the opportunity to somewhat de Eruditis dianamarce ad literas admissis
or de Opsimathia or de senili studio to write and you will be at
once famous. - But again let's see if I have a lot of your Lehrbegierde
had to promise?

What book did you previously owned?

Anton. It was a very small - Damis.

What then? - Anton. It was so allerliebst embedded with gold on the back
and on the cuts. Where's I put it out? Da! da! Damis.

That did you? that? Anton. Yes, you! Damis. The? Anton. Am I wrong to
come? because it was pretty small - Damis. I myself would not be
able to propose beßres. Anton. The thought 'I feel that it is a
beautiful book should be.

If it seems otherwise such a beautiful rock have? Damis. It is a book
that has not his equal. I did it myself. You see? - Auctor Damide!
Anton. Yourself? Nu, nu, I's always heard that the biological
children in better clothes than the children's stepfather. The evidence
of the fatherly love.

Damis. I have in this book, so to speak, even surpassed. Whenever
I read it again, whenever I learn something new from it. Anton. For
your own book? Damis. You wonder that? - Oh damn! now I remember only,
my God, poor girl! It will not even put in the cabinets (He goes off.)
Anton. For God's sake, where do you go? Damis. What's missing you?
into the cabinet. Have you seen Lisette? Anton. Now I'm lost! - No, Mr.
Damis, no, so I live, it is not indoors.

Damis. You can see they go out? If it continues for a long time? Anton.
I did it, so true I am honest, do not see hereingehen. It's not inside,
just believe me, it is not inside - Fifth appearance Lisette. Damis.
Anton. Lisette. However, she is still inside - Anton. O the Rabenaas!
Damis.

How long did you have kept hidden here? Poor Lisette! That was my
intention at all. Once my father from the room would have been had you
always can go back out. Lisette. I knew not whether I did right. So I
wanted to rather wait until I am the one who had hidden me, even called
forth again - Anton.

For the executioner, of what kind of hiding to talk to? (Softly to Lisette.)
So, you animalcule fine? my Lord has made you even ever been hiding?
Now I know how I should interpret yesterday's slap in the face. You Wrong!
Lisette.

Hush, do not say a word that I had with thee before I, or - you know -
Damis. What you are talking because they are both there together? Shall
I not hear? Lisette. There was nothing, I just told him that he should
be down that if my maiden inquired after me, he could tell which,
I had assumed.

Juliane is suspicious, they probably looked at me, but here if they
needed me. Damis. This is reasonable. DC, Anton, go! Anton. The seriously
ask you, Lisette? Lisette. Of course, continue, let us alone. Damis.
Will you go soon? Anton. Think about it yourself, Damis; when you are
weary of their Geplaudre, and soon even that will happen, who is
it to you because of the help desk to hunt when I'm not there?

Lisette. Wait, I want your blasphemous mouth - Damis. Get unconcerned!
When it falls to me uncomfortable, it is already itself so reasonable
and go. Anton. But just look at a woman in your study, what is your God
say? He can not suffer the vermin. Lisette. Finally I will be a
good time to have office hinausschmeißen? Anton. That would be my
objectives .-- The damn girl! even with the devil, they can ingratiate.
(Geht ab.) Sixth appearance Lisette. Damis Damis. And where were we
before? Lisette. Where were we? in which what I always love to hear
what I am and always prefer to speak in your praise. If it is not
only such a thing would even kitzliche a face to praise! - I can not
do the torture. Damis. But I beteure you again, Lisette: I am not about
to do my praise! I would just like to hear what kind of different for
different persons have considered making a subject. Lisette. Everyone
praised whatever you what it is to find decent Loben believed.

For example, the little fat man with a serious mien, who so rarely
smiles, but when he once begins to laugh, with the belly shook the whole
table on the pile throws - Damis. And who is it? From your description,
Lisette, I can not guess - O it is consistent with the descriptions
shall provide a kitzliche thing! It is not a little about them so
that they, like the first sights that can detect described. About
nothing but I want to laugh more than if I have this and that great
philosopher, true in men who have an entire sect have given their names,
descriptions rather than explanations more often for you. That
makes the good men have more imagination than assessment. The
statement must be viewed in the interior of the things penetrate,
in the description but it is merely the external features, on the
- Lisette.

We come from our case, Mr. Damis. Your Praise - Damis. Yep, just go away,
Lisette. From whom you previously wanted to talk about? Lisette. Depending,
you should because the young man does not know? He bläset always on the
cheeks - Damis. You think perhaps the old councilor? Lisette. Quite, but
his name - Damis.

What lies at the?

- Lisette. "Yes, Mr.

Chrysander," So said the councilman, whose name is not located, "Your son
is Lord even the best councilman of the world, if he only wants to
apply." It is a bright spirit, the He has a fixed tongue, and he has
a deep insight into the state art, and he has a skill, his thoughts on
the delicate paper to which he has a verschlagne attention to the
slightest movements of restless people, and has he: and if he does not
have - o the exercise - the exercise! I know, I initially went
there.

Admittedly, the skill can be such a serious office does not coincide with
the world bring - Damis. The fool! While it is true that I possess all
these skills, with only half of that, I could Geheimter Council,
and not merely - Seventh appearance Anton. Lisette. Damis. Damis. Well,
what do you want to again? Anton. Juliane Mamsell knows now that
Lisette is expected. Are not you only, and it will not surprise us -
Damis.

Who was called back because you come from? Anton. I should probably
just let my Lord? And, it attacked me at once so a fear, such a
Bangigkeit; ears began to ring me and especially the Left - Lisette!
Lisette! Lisette. What wilt thou? Anton (gently to Lisette). What have
you done since both alone What's is that it went on my expense! Lisette.
O you pack - I do not know what the fool wants. Damis. Fort, Anton!
it is high time, you must return to the post office to see. I know not
even where it remains for so long .-- When's soon? Anton. Lisette, come
with! Damis. What do you expect with Lisette?

Anton. And what is it for you? Damis. Ignorant! Anton. Yes indeed,
it is my misfortune that I do not know it. (Softly to Lisette.) Speech
is at least a little bit loud, so I hear what you act - I will
listen - (Come from.)

Eighth appearance Lisette. Damis. Lisette. Let us talk a little gently.
You probably know that it is before the eavesdropper is not secure.
Damis. Yep, you just gently continued. Lisette.

You surely know the Lord Chrysander confessor? Damis. Confessor? am I to
do all such craft scholars know? Lisette. At least he seemed to
know very well. "A good preacher," he fell into the thick Rechtsgelehrsamkeit
word, "Mr. Damis should certainly be. A beautiful statue and a strong
clear voice, a good memory and a fine presentation, and a decent boldness,
and a mature mind, through its Opinions türkenmäßig to know: all these
qualities, I believe in a fairly high grade, when he noticed it. Only
by one point, I am afraid.

I fear, I fear, he is also a bit of the Freigeisterei infected ."--" Oh,
what Freigeisterei? "Cried the already half drunken medico." The free
spirits are brave people! Will he therefore can not cure the sick? If
it goes after me, it must be he is a medico. Greek he can, and is half
Greek medicine.

(By gradually speaks louder.) Of the heart, which belongs to, no one can
give. But the ways; the point of itself if we only practiced for a
while has ."--" Nu, "he remembered an old merchant in the speech,
"it must be with the Lord as well physicians with Scharf judges. When the
head for the first time, so they tremble and quake, but the more often
they repeat the test, the fresher it is. "- And this idea became
a full fifteen minutes of laughter, in a continuing, in a continuing,
even drinking was forgotten about. Ninth appearance Lisette. Damis.
Anton. Anton.

Lord, the Post is now nine clock has not come. I have asked, and you can
see it leave.

Damis. but you have to give us because once again disrupt idiot?
Anton . It is quite dear to me, when I just at the right time had
disrupted. Damis. What do you want with your time right? Anton. I want
to Lisette already clearly explained.

Shall I give her something in his ear saying? Lisette. What will you listen
to me to say? Anton. Only one word. (Sachte.) You think that I have
not obeyed? said you do not: you have not heart enough to do so? but
if you only have until the thing for a while would practice have - O
I have heard everything - short, we are geschiedne people! Du
outrageous, nasty - Lisette. Say only what you want? Damis. Immediately,
I go back out of sight And I did not come back face until I
will call you or to me letters from Berlin bringest! - I can hardly wait.
This makes it the excessive joy!

Although I should say hope, because only those on the Present and the
Future is. But here is the future so certainly than the Present. I
need the language of the prophets, which they classified as
impossible but certainly could be .-- The whole academy would have to
be blind .-- Well, what are you still there? Will you go ? Tenth
appearance Lisette. Damis. Lisette.

As you can see! then praised the people. Damis. Ah, when people praise can
not be better, so they only want to stay even. I am not proud, but yet
so far I can trust without pride: "I want my bride to choose themselves
whether they prefer a doctor of Gottesgelahrtheit or the rights
or the pharmaceutical art to her husband wants.

In all three faculties, I have disputed, in all three, I have - Lisette .
You speak of a bride? marry you really? Damis. If you have already
heard, Lisette? Lisette.

Ohn ways; the point probably because 'some of our home in a marriage
come about? But I imagined it would have never, that you for Juliane would
decide! for Julian! Damis. Mostly I do it to favor the father, based
on the extraordinary way it penetrates into me. I know that my Juliane
not worth it. I alone should such a small thing because, as a
marriage is the father in front of the head encounter?

And I have an idea otherwise, I will be very well. Lisette. Admittedly
Juliane is not worth your, and if only all the good people Mamsell
as yet as I am - Eilfter Anton appearance. Damis. Lisette. Anton (in
front). I can understand people not to leave alone. - Mr Valer asks
if you are in your office? Are you still there, Mr. Damis? Damis. Tell
me, ignorance , did you right now because it is prefixed me uncomfortable
to fall?

Lisette. To listen to him only as Mr Damis. He is not gone - Anton. Yes,
now I should stop now, because it has perhaps gone is not what I hear
and see. Damis. What are we gone? Anton. This you will probably
know. Lisette (gently). Now, Anton, help me, Julian with your Lord
make quite black.

Will you? Anton . egg anyway! Thank you to maybe - Lisette. schweig least
.-- So Necessary Mr Damis, you need to go amiss with Julian. I am sorry
in advance. The whole earth shall bear no woman annoyed rooms - Anton.
Believe it not, Mr. Damis; Juliane is a pretty good kid. You can use
any in the world better off. I wish you luck in advance. Lisette. Truly!
thou must thy Lord to mind very honestly, that him so intolerable
nuisance to the neck like gossip.

Anton. Still more sincere you must be against your Mamsell that thou her
such a good husband, when Mr. Damis will be begrudge. Lisette. A good
husband? Now, truly, a good husband, that's all what they want. A man
who makes everything good - Anton. Ho! ho! everything? Listen, Mr. Damis,
for what you consider Lisette? The reason you probably would like his
own wife?

Everything? ei! under it all, is probably also -? you understand me?
Damis. But seriously, Lisette; you really believe that your maiden quite
angry wife will be? Did they, in fact, a lot of bad qualities? Lisette.
Much? She has it all, you can have, not the exception, which contradict
each other. Damis. Will not you give me a list of them? Lisette. Where
should I start?

- It is silly - Damis. Trifle! Anton. And I say: lies! Lisette. She is
quarrelsome - Damis. Trifle! Anton. And I say: lies! Lisette. She
is vain - Damis. Trifle! Anton. Lie! I say. Lisette. It is not
a hostess - Damis. Trifle! Anton. Lies! Lisette. They will walk
you through excessive state, by constant delight and Schmausereien
to bring all its bit - Damis. Trifle! Anton. Lies! Lisette. You will
care for a herd of children to invite his neck - Damis. Trifle! Anton.
The women do the best on the first! Lisette. But to children, right from
the source are not fetched. Damis. Trifle! Anton. And trifle after the
fashion! Lisette. Trifle? but what do you think because, Mr. Damis? Damis.
I think that is not bad enough Juliane can be. Is it silly? I'm more
wiser, she is quarrelsome? I am more serene, she is vain? I'm more
philosophical mind; vertut they? they will stop when it no longer has
it fruitful? so they may see what they can when they are with me
for the bet to be.

Every time that forever, so it may be the woman with child, the man
through books.

Anton.

But remember you not, that their causes Lisette, have so Juliane
calumniate? Damis. Oh, I certainly remember it. They treat me and it
describes me so perfectly to my taste. It has no doubt concluded that
I Mamsell its just because the room is insupportable woman, wants to
marry. Lisette. Only reason? the only reason why? and I would have closed?
I would have mistaken you for the heads have kept. Do you just -
Damis. This goes too far, Lisette! Traut me no idea to what I have said,
is the fruit of a too sharp reflection.

Yes, it's decided: I want the number of apparently unhappy that scholars
who are married women with evil have multiply. The intent is not
from today. Anton. No, really - but what the devil can not do! Who would
it now be imagined, since it is now to be serious?

I must laugh; Lisette wanted him to deduct from the marriage and gave
him only more eloquently, and I, I wanted him to bereden and would
have subtracted from it soon. Damis. Once should be married. On a good
woman I can not make accounts, so I chose a fairly grim. A woman from
the common type that is neither cold nor hot, neither good nor quite
quite bad is good for a scholar's nothing quite nothing!

Who will be after his death to trouble? Nevertheless, he deserves
it but that his whole house with him immortal remains. Can I have no
wife, once their place in a treatise de bonis Eruditorum uxoribus
finds, I will at least have one with which a busy man his collection
of Malian Eruditorum uxoribus can proliferate.

The Japanese also make
use of the plant as an esculent; and it is, moreover, regarded by them
as sacred to their divinities--the images of which are often represented
seated upon its large leaves.

The flowers of the _Nelumbium speciosum_ when in full bloom, give out a
most fragrant odour--somewhat resembling that of anise; while the seeds,
shaped like acorns, have a flavour equal in richness and delicacy to
that of the finest almonds.


CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE.

AN AQUATIC HARVEST.

It was not upon that occasion that Karl communicated to his companions
all these interesting facts in relation to the great lily.  Many of them
he had made known long before--especially that the seeds of the plant
were eatable; and both Caspar and Ossaroo had often proved to their own
satisfaction that they were something more than eatable--in short, a
great delicacy.

It was from a knowledge of this fact that the thoughts of all three were
now turned upon the lilies--whose huge roseate corollas, no longer seen
glistening above the surface of the water, proclaimed that the "beans"
were ripe, and ready for "shelling."

The three were about starting from the hut to reap this aquatic
harvest--which, judging from the quantity of seed-pods that appeared
above the surface, promised to be abundant.

Each had provided himself with a rush basket--which the shikaree had
woven, during the long winter nights, for other purposes; but as they
were of just the size and shape to hold the Pythagorean beans they were
now to be employed in that capacity.

Both Karl and Caspar had rolled up their trowsers to mid-thigh; so as
not to wet them while wading among the lilies; but Ossaroo, not being
provided with any nether garment entitled to the name of trowsers, had
simply tucked up the skirt of his cotton tunic, making it fast under his
girdle.

In this guise all three proceeded round the shore of the lake, to that
side where they would be nearest the bed of lilies.  The water-hens,
seeing them make their approach, rose from their perch upon the leaves,
and fluttered off to seek a more secure shelter among the sedge.

The aquatic gleaners at once waded in; and commenced picking off the
pods, and shelling them into their rush baskets.  They had been there
before, and knew there was no danger in the depth of the water.

They had nearly filled their respective sacks with the Pythagorean
beans, and were meditating a return to dry land, when a dark shadow
passing over the tranquil surface of the lake--closely followed by
another of similar size and shape--attracted their attention.

All three saw the shadows at the same instant of time; and all
simultaneously looked up to ascertain what sort of creatures were
casting them.  In the sky above they beheld a spectacle, calculated to
inspire them with feelings of a strange interest.

Right above the lake, and also over their heads, a brace of large birds
was circling in the air.  Each was borne up by a pair of huge wings full
five yards from tip to tip; while from the body, between, a neck of
enormous length was extended horizontally--prolonged into a
tapering-pointed beak, in shape like the seed-pistil of a pelargonium.

Their beaks might well have been compared to the pistil of a
pelargonium; or rather the latter should be assimilated to them; since
it is from this species of birds, the flower has derived its botanical
cognomen.

The birds were _storks_.  Not the ordinary _Ciconia_, that makes its
home among the Hollanders--or finds a still more welcome hospitality on
the roof-tree of the Hungarian by the plains of the _Puszta_--but a
stork of far grander dimensions; in short, a stork that is the _tallest_
of his tribe--the _Adjutant_.

On looking up, Karl recognised the species; so did Caspar, and at a
glance.  It required no lengthened scrutiny--no profound knowledge of
natural history, to identify the noted _adjutant_.  It only needed to
have seen him before either in _propria persona_, or in a picture; but
both brothers had seen specimens of the bird, in full flesh and feather,
on the plains of India--in the environs of Calcutta itself.

As to the shikaree, was it likely he should be mistaken about the
character of those winged giants--those tall scavengers he had seen
thousands of times stalking pompously along the sandy shores of the
sacred Ganges?  It was not possible for him, to have a doubt about the
identity of the birds, who were now throwing their shadows over that
lone lake of the Himalayas.  He had no doubt.  The very certainty that
the birds above him were the gigantic cranes of the Ganges--the sacred
birds of Brahma--caused him to utter a sort of frenzied shout, and at
the same time, dropping his "sack of beans" into the water!

He needed not to look at the colour of the birds, to note that they were
brown black above, and white underneath.  The naked vulture neck with
its pouch-like appendage of brick-red hue; the silken feathers of bluish
white under the tail--those precious plumes well-known and worn by the
ladies of many lands under the appellation of _marabout feathers_--all
were recognised at a glance.

Even quicker than either of his youthful comrades had the Hindoo
identified the birds.  A single glance sufficed, and simultaneously with
that glance had the cry fallen from his lips, and the sack of
Pythagorean beans from his grasp.

The birds were flying slowly, and to all appearance _laboriously_: as if
wearied of wing.  They appeared to be in search of some roost on which
to repose themselves.

That they had entered the valley with this intention was made evident a
few moments after: for having made a circuit round the little lake, both
at the same instant ceased to ply their long pinions, and drawing their
wings suddenly in to their bodies, they settled down upon the shore.

The spot upon which they had chosen to alight was the prominence
terminating a little peninsula that protruded out almost to the bed of
lilies, and from which the three waders had themselves descended into
the water.  As the latter now stood knee-deep among the aquatic plants,
they were distant not more than twenty paces from the point of this
peninsula.

The storks, after alighting, stood upon the shore in erect attitudes--
apparently as unconcerned about the presence of our three adventurers,
as if the latter were only overgrown stalks of the Pythagorean bean--
utterly incapable of doing them an injury.


CHAPTER FIFTY SIX.

THE ADJUTANTS.

The brace of gigantic birds, that had thus alighted by the shore of the
little lake, were, to say the least, uncouth creatures; for the whole
ornithological world might be ransacked without finding a greater oddity
than the _adjutant_.

In the first place, it stands six feet upon its long, straight shanks;
though its actual length, measuring from the tip of its bill to the
termination of its claws, is full seven and a half.  The beak, of
itself, is over a foot in length, several inches in thickness, with a
gibbous enlargement near the middle, and having both mandibles slightly
curved downwards.

The spread of a full-grown adjutant's wing is fifteen feet, or five
yards, from tip to tip--quite equalling in extent either that of the
Chilian condor or the "wandering" albatross.

In colour the adjutant may be described as black above and white
underneath, neither [that] being very pure.  The upper plumage is a
dirty brownish black; while the belly and under parts present a dull
white appearance,--partly from an admixture of greyish feathers, but
also from the circumstance that the bird is usually bedaubed with dirt--
as mud from the marshes, where it feeds, and other filth, in which it
seems to take delight.  But for this foulness, the legs of the adjutant
would be of a dark colour; but in the living bird they are never seen of
the natural hue--being always whitened by the dust shaken out of its
plumage, and other excrement that attaches itself to the skin.

The tail is black above and white underneath--more especially the under
coverts, which are of a pure white.  These last are the plumes so highly
prized under the name of "marabout feathers," an erroneous title,
arising through a mistake--made by the naturalist Temminck in comparing
the Indian adjutant with another and very different species of the same
genus--the marabout stork of Africa.

One of the distinctive characteristics of the adjutant, or "argala," as
it is better known to the Indians,--and one, too, of its ugliest
"features,"--is a naked neck of a flesh-red colour the skin shrivelled,
corrugated, and covered with brownish hairs.  These "bristles" are more
thickly set in young birds, but become thinner with age, until they
almost totally disappear--leaving both head and neck quite naked.

This peculiarity causes a resemblance between the adjutant bird and the
vultures; but indeed there are many other points of similarity; and the
stork may in all respects be regarded as a vulture--the vulture of the
_grallatores_, or waders.

In addition to the naked neck, the adjutant is furnished with an immense
dew-lap, or pouch which hangs down upon its breast--often more than a
foot in length, and changing from pale flesh colour to bright red, along
with the skin of the throat.  At the back of the neck is found still
another singular apparatus--the use of which has not been determined by
the naturalist.  It is a sort of vesicular appendage, capable of being
inflated with air; and supposed to serve as an atmospheric buoy to
assist in sustaining the bird in its flight.  The inflation has been
observed to take place under exposure to a hot sun; and, therefore, it
is natural to infer, that the rarefaction of the air has something to do
in causing [the bird to use this organ].  As the adjutant often flies to
a great height, it is possible that this balloon-like apparatus is
necessary to sustaining it in the rarefied atmosphere found at such an
elevation.  The annual migration of the bird over the lofty chain of the
Himalayas might not be possible, or if possible, more difficult, without
this power of decreasing the specific gravity of its body.

It is scarce necessary to say that the adjutant--like all birds of the
family to which it belongs--is a filthy and voracious feeder;
carnivorous in the highest degree; and preferring carrion and garbage to
any other sort of food.  It will kill and swallow live kind--such as
frogs, snakes, small quadrupeds, and birds--the latter not so very small
either: since it has been known to bolt a whole fowl at a single
"swallow."  Even a cat or a hare can be accommodated with a passage down
its capacious gullet; but it will not attempt to kill either one or the
other: since, notwithstanding its gigantic size, it is one of the
veriest cowards in creation.  A child, with a bit of a switch, can at
any time chase the adjutant away; and an enraged hen will put it to
flight whenever it strays into the neighbourhood of her young brood.  It
does not retreat, without first making a show of defiance--by placing
itself in a threatening attitude--with reddened throat, and beak wide
agape, from which latter proceeds a loud roaring, like that of a bear or
tiger.  All this, however, is mere braggadocio; for, on the enemy
continuing the attack, it immediately cools down, and betakes itself to
ignominious flight.

Such are a few peculiarities of the gigantic stork, known as the
_adjutant_ or _argala_.  It only remains to be added, that there are at
least two, perhaps three, other species of storks of very large
dimensions--though not so large as this one--that for a long time have
been confounded with it.  One of these is the _marabou_; which inhabits
the tropical regions of Africa, and which also produces the plumes so
much prized in the world of fashion.  The feathers of the African
species, however, are far less beautiful and valuable than those from
the tail of the adjutant; and it is these last that are really best
known as _marabout feathers_, in consequence of the mistake made by
Temminck, and propagated by the anatomist Cuvier.

Another great stork--differing both from the _argala_ of Asia and the
_marabou_ of Africa--inhabits the Island of Sumatra.  It is known to the
natives as the "Boorong Cambay;" while in the neighbouring Island of
Java is found either a fourth species of these gigantic birds, or the
same that belongs to Sumatra.

It is somewhat singular that such creatures should have remained so long
unknown to the scientific world.  It is not much more than half a
century since travellers began to describe them with any degree of
exactness; and even at the present time their history and habits have
received but very slight elucidation.  This is the more surprising when
we consider that on the banks of the Ganges--even in Calcutta itself--
the adjutant is one of the most common birds--constantly stalking about
the houses, and entering the enclosures with as much familiarity, as if
it was one of the regular _domestics_ of the establishment!

Its services as a "scavenger" procure for it an immunity from
persecution; and it is not only tolerated by the people, but encouraged,
in its advances towards fellowship with them; notwithstanding that at
times it becomes rather troublesome in its attentions to the young
ducklings, chicklings, and other denizens of the farmyard.

Sometimes they are not even contented with such fare as may be found
outside; but have been known to enter the bungalow; snatch a smoking
joint from the table; and swallow it, before either master or servant
could rescue the dainty morsel from between their long and tenacious
mandibles!

When seen in flocks, wading through the water,--with wings outstretched,
as is their custom,--they may be taken for a fleet of small boats.  At
other times, when stalking about over the sandy shores; and picking up
the _debris_ strewed along the banks of the sacred river; they resemble
a crowd of native women engaged in the like occupation.

Ofttimes may they be seen feeding voraciously upon the filthiest carrion
of animals; and not unfrequently upon a human body in a state of
putrefaction--the corpse of some deluded victim to the superstition of
Juggernaut--which has been thrown into the so-styled _sacred_ river, to
be washed back on the beach, an object of contention between _pariah_
dogs, vultures, and these gigantic cranes of the Ganges!


CHAPTER FIFTY SEVEN.

The standing sleepers.

The advent of the adjutants produced a vivid impression on the minds of
all three of our adventurers--more vivid, perhaps, upon Ossaroo than
either of the others.  To him they seemed like old friends who had come
to visit him in his prison; and though it never occurred to the
shikaree, that they could be in any way instrumental in obtaining his
release, still the impression produced was one of a pleasant nature.  He
saw before him two creatures whose forms, however uncouth, were
associated with the scenes of his earliest childhood; and he could not
help a passing fancy, that the pair, that had thus unexpectedly made
their appearance, might be the same old cock and hen he had so often
seen roosted on the branches of a huge banyan tree, that overshadowed
the bungalow in which he was born.

Of course this could be only fancy on the part of Ossaroo.  Out of the
thousands of storks, that annually make their migration from the plains
of Hindostan to the northward of the Himalaya Mountains, it would have
been a rare coincidence if the two that for years had performed the
office of scavengers in the shikaree's native village, should be
identical with those now hovering above his head--for it was while they
were yet upon the wing that Ossaroo had indulged in this pleasant
speculation.  Though scarce serious in his thought--and only
entertaining it for an instant--he was nevertheless gratified by the
sight of the two storks, for he knew they must have come from his native
plains--from the banks of that glorious river in whose waters he longed
once more to wet his feet.

The sight of the huge birds suggested to Caspar a different train of
thought.  As he beheld their immense wings, extended in slow but easy
flight, it occurred to him that one or other of the great creatures
might have the power to perform that task which had proved too much for
the bearcoot; and for which the "kite" had been "flyed" in vain.

"Oh!" exclaimed he, as the idea came across his mind, "don't you think,
Karl, that either of those great creatures would be strong enough to
carry the line aloft?  They look as if they could lift even one of
ourselves to the top of the cliff."

Karl made no reply; though his silence was only caused by Caspar's
suggestion--which he was proceeding to ponder upon.

The young hunter continued: "If we could only catch one of them alive!
Do you suppose they are going to alight?  They look as if they would.
What do _you_ say, Ossaroo?  You know more of these birds than we do."

"Yees, youngee Sahib; ee speakee de true.  Dey go for come down.  You
savey dey make long fly.  Dey both weary on de wing--no able fly furder.
'Sides, ee see, here am de lake--water--dey want drinkee--want eat too.
Dey sure come down."

Ossaroo's prediction was fulfilled, almost as soon as it was uttered.
The birds, first one and then the other, jerked in their spread wings;
and dropped down upon the shore of the lake--as already stated, not over
twenty paces from the spot where the three waders were occupied among
the leaves of the lilies.

The eyes of all three were now directed with a fixed gaze upon the
new-comers,--in whose behaviour they observed something irresistibly
ludicrous.

Almost on the instant of their feet touching _terra firma_, instead of
moving about over the ground in search of food, or striding down towards
the water to drink--as the spectators were expecting them to do--the two
long-legged bipeds acted in an entirely different manner.  Neither of
them seemed to care either for food or drink.  If they did, both these
appetites must have been secondary with them to the desire for rest; for
scarce ten seconds had elapsed after their alighting, when each drew in
its long neck, burying it between the shoulders as in a case, leaving
visible only the upper half of the head, with its huge scythe-shaped
beak--the mandibles resting against the prominence of the breast bone,
and pointing diagonally downwards.

Simultaneous with this movement, the spectators perceived another--
equally indicative of a desire on the part of the birds to betake
themselves to repose.  This was the drawing up of one of their long
fleshless legs, until it was entirely concealed under the loose feathers
of the belly--a movement made by both so exactly at the same instant, as
to lead to the belief that they were actuated by like impulses, by some
spiritual union that existed between them!

In ten seconds more both birds appeared to be asleep.  At all events,
their eyes were closed; and not a movement could be detected in the
limbs, wings, bodies, or beaks of either!

It was certainly a ludicrous sight to see these huge creatures--each
supporting itself on a single stalk, so straight and slender that
nothing but the nicest balance could have ensured their equilibrium; and
this, too, while neither seemed conscious of any danger of toppling
over--of which, indeed, there was not the slightest reason to be afraid.

The Hindoo had been too long accustomed to this sort of spectacle, to
see anything in it worthy of being laughed at.  Not so Caspar--whose
mirth was at once excited to the point of risibility.  The unconcerned
manner in which the storks had come to a stand--along with the
picturesque _pose_ in which they had composed themselves to sleep--was
even too much for the stoical Karl; who at once echoed the laughter
which his brother had inaugurated.

Their united cachinnations rang loudly over the lake--reverberating in
repeated peals from the adjacent cliffs.

It might be supposed that the _fracas_ thus created would have alarmed
the new arrivals: and caused them once more to make an appeal to their
wings.

Nothing of the sort.  The only effect perceptible on either, was the
opening of their eyes, a slight protrusion of the neck, a shake of the
head, an upraising of the long beak, with a quick clattering of its
mandibles--which soon becoming closed again, were permitted to drop into
their original position of repose.

This cool behaviour of the birds only increased the hilarity of the
boys; and for several minutes they remained in their places, giving way
to loud and uncontrollable laughter.


CHAPTER FIFTY EIGHT.

FRITZ AMONG THE FEATHERS.

Their hilarity could not be continued for ever.  Even that of Caspar
came to a termination; though not until his ribs ached with the
agreeable exercise.

As their bean-sacks had been already filled, it was determined that they
should first take them to the hut, and then return to the storks with
the design of capturing them.  Ossaroo was of the opinion, that they
would have no difficulty in effecting this; declaring the birds to be so
tame, that he might walk straight up to them, and throw a noose over
their necks.  This, in all probability, he might have done, had he been
provided with a piece of cord proper for the making of such a noose.
But there was no cord at hand--not even a bit of string--nothing but the
rush baskets filled with the lotus beans.  To obtain a snare, it would
be necessary to make a journey to the hut.

In the minds of our adventurers there was no very clear conception of
the object of capturing the storks: unless it might have been that the
thought, to which Caspar had given speech, was still entertained by
himself and his brother.  That indeed would have justified them in their
attempt to take the birds.

Another idea may have suggested itself--more especially to Ossaroo.  If
nothing else should come of it, there would be some pleasure in holding
the birds in captivity--as pets and companions.  Ossaroo had been
involuntarily contemplating the prospect of a long lonely life in the
solitude of that mountain valley.  With such a prospect even the solemn
stork might be regarded as a cheerful companion.

Stimulated by these thoughts--and some others of a more indefinite
kind--our adventurers came to the determination to ensnare the
_adjutants_!

All three commenced wading out of the lake--in a direction so as not to
disturb the sleepers.  Karl and Caspar--now that they had become
inspired with a design--lifted their feet out of the water, and set them
down again, as though they ere treading upon egg.  Ossaroo sneered at
their over-caution--telling them, that there was not the slightest fear
of frightening the storks; and indeed there was truth in what he
affirmed.

In most countries bordering upon the banks of the Ganges, these birds,
protected alike by superstitious fears and edicts of law, have become so
used to the proximity of man, that they will scarce stir out of their
way to avoid him.  It was possible that the brace in question might have
belonged to some of the wilder flocks--inhabiting the swamps of the
Sunderbunds--and therefore less accustomed to human society.  In that
case there might be some difficulty in approaching them; and it was for
this reason that Ossaroo had consented to adopt the precautions for
their capture which Karl had insisted should be taken.

The truth is, that Karl had conceived a deeper design than either of his
companions.  It had occurred to him--while engaged with his brother in
that laughing duetto--and somewhat to the surprise of Caspar, it had
caused a sudden cessation of his mirth, or at least the noisy ebullition
of it.

The philosopher had become silent and serious; as if the thought had
suddenly arisen, that hilarity under the circumstances was indecorous
and out of place.  From that moment Karl had preserved a mysterious
silence--even refusing to explain it when interrogated by Caspar.  He
was only silent on this one theme.  Otherwise his speech flowed freely
enough--in counsel to his companions--charging both to adopt every
precaution for ensuring the capture of the storks--and with an
eagerness, which puzzled them to comprehend.

A few minutes' walk brought them back to the hut.  It was rather a run
than a walk--Karl going in the lead, and arriving before either of the
others.  The bean-sacks were flung upon the floor--as if they had been
empty and of no value--and then the strings and lines that had been spun
by Ossaroo were pulled out of their hidden places, and submitted to
inspection.

It did not take long to make a running noose, which was accomplished by
the nimble fingers of the shikaree.  Easily also was it attached to the
end of a long stem of the ringall bamboo; and thus provided, our
adventurers once more sallied forth from the hut; and made their way
towards the sleeping storks.

As they drew near, they were gratified at perceiving the birds still in
the enjoyment of their meridian slumber.  No doubt they had made a long
journey, and needed rest.  Their wings hung drooping by their sides,
proclaiming weariness.  Perhaps they were dreaming--dreaming of a roost
on some tall fig-tree, or the tower of an antique temple sacred to the
worship of Buddha, Vishna, or Deva--dreaming of the great Ganges, and
its odorous waifs--those savoury morsels of putrefying flesh, in which
they delighted to dig their huge mattocks of mandibles.

Ossaroo being entrusted with the noose, did not pause to think, about
what they might be dreaming; or whether they were dreaming at all.
Enough for him to perceive that they were sleeping; and, gliding forward
in a bent attitude, silent as a tiger threading his native jungle, the
shikaree succeeded in making approach--until he had got almost within
_snaring distance_ of the unconscious adjutants.

There is many a slip between the cup and the lip.  The old saw was
illustrated in the case of the shikaree while endeavouring to ensnare
the storks; though it was not the snare, but the birds that now
illustrated the adage.

After the attempt had been made, the snare could be still seen in its
place, stiffly projecting from the point of the long bamboo rod; while
the adjutants were soaring in the air, mounting still higher upward,
their slender necks outstretched, their beaks cracking like castanets,
and their throats emitting an angry sound like the roaring of a brace of
lions.

The failure was not to be attributed to Ossaroo; but to the imprudence
of one of his companions--an individual of the party close treading upon
his heels.  That individual was _Fritz_!

Just as Ossaroo was about casting his loop over the shoulders of a
sleeping adjutant, Fritz--who had followed the party from the hut--now
for the first time perceiving the birds, rushed forward and seized the
tail of one of them between his teeth.  So he bade the executioner
just perplexed Vorm String, life to him, took the bandage, the away
from him, and excited the crowds with Ward Trompetenstoß proclaimed,
The Sultan was short and good, As much sinned Aladdin Him to pardon
rested .

This word, full of noise, applause umtönt, poured oil into the angry
waves; The rebel rose after all the house pacifies and reconciles.
But Aladdin, when he was freed, raised to the old hands: "Lord," he asked
flehentlich, "Completing The grace that you dedicated to me, And tell
me, by what crimes deserve 'such I a criminal? "" Oh, do you still do
erfrechen, to do as you would know not? Come, "cried the Sultan, "come
here! Your pride Castle, where it may lie? Zeig 'mir's! I can not
find's more." When Aladdin risen, he let him through the window And
look harsh asked, "What you see there?" The poor believed to choke, when
he saw the empty space. petrifies, he remained motionless stand, was
unable to collect, let alone a word stammeln. "Now speak! Can you lock
your erspähn?" So that strictly researched and hard. "Bekennen, where
it hingekommen And what was my daughter!" "My lord," said Aladdin
uneasy, "Although I can not imagine what has come to pass here, So
swear I to you in my life, I have no part of it! "The Sultan cried,"
You Strolch, surely excuse your boys piece!

I will be glad to abandon the castle, however, give me my child back!
Otherwise let my word to you, despite your head herunterschlagen, as
if a Tannenstrasse block. "" Sir, a period of forty days, Grant to
me! " Aladdin asked. "I should be 'I fall short Verlornes wiederzuerringen,
Mich. entziehn not my punishment." The Sultan said: "Well, let's, I
want you this time vergönnen. but you would at any price can escape the
Rächerarm . sorry, with their main Schlich Aladdin as ejected from
away, and the same sizes, at whose friendship he believed yesterday
to have him followed the foot to bend before him, avoids today returned
his greeting and unloving him back . What could 'he do? Where to turn?
He ran in confused and curly head, around the town from house to house,
from door to door to all ends Durchwandernd without having to
understand, in what intention, asked each abgeriss'nen wrong with
speeches, whether anyone gesehn his palace.

Gar yet some have been affected by, others laughed him out again,
presumably because they thought it was not true in mind. After he was
so tired look with three days herumgeschlendert, Will 'in the city,
where his skill bejammernswert be changed, he no longer dwell, but without
a plan trollte Getting out into the field. Unendlich stood before him
to the world; only aware 'it is not where it should.

"Woe to me I was so bettelarm That my sad lot curse! "So he cried out
in bittrem Harm." If I were the earth and through perseverance pilgrim
every year, Where to find 'my lover again? Far better that the eyelids
Death closes on me forever! "He approached And like a river ', in
order to shorten his agony, to engage in decision despairing over
head into the waves crash.

It was around sunset, the fire ball with flashing Schien last
farewell to him the wave.

A jerk, a start - and he jumped.

The shore at this point was particularly steep, and its rim surrounded
a bare rock band in rough rugged Gefallen, apparently of Springer of
life on a hang And rocks that ring on the finger, he still wore, it
is rubbed. That was his luck because alsobald As the water vapor
condenses, stand erect before him mightily same spirit form Schreck,
Der once it appeared in the tomb, And cried: "I am a servant of the ring.
I stop to is your right; Sag ', thus I can you serve?

"[Illustration: The Spirit leads Aladdin to Africa] Top Aladdin:" O
Spirit, For the second time save me from death and bring 'before the
morning loht, My Castle back to the old site, "The spirit moved"
This bid is not compatible with my reign.

I serve only the ring. You have to keep the spirit of the lamp.
"" Well probably, but if you know where my castle is currently
located, "Aladdin voice," commanding "I you force this ring, which
binds thee: Befördre me immediately Gradaus from here to his new
place!

"Hardly was the sentence pronounced, as it was boosted after the giant
Africa, at that place, Where now the middle of a meadow, the building
stood, and He sat there sänftlich down on the grass. Although it remained
hidden from Aladdin, that he arrived in the interior of Africa was, but
he recovered from all the tortures, all the worries, as he well-known
construction Despite dark night in the star shimmer maintained, even the
front room seal saw his wife to the apartment served, and they
probably slept there already firmly and deeply.

Aufsehn to noise and to avoid violence, he held back, How's it
was hard, so close to happiness until tomorrow morning to be modest.
He stretched from the long torment exhausted, under a palm tree from the
slumber, and the stalks of grass gently rocked him. 14 [Illustration:
E] awakened from sweet bird songs he Hob with gestählten limbs from
camp early, and steered by longing for his joy was his first sight
on the building, it seemed like the new gift.

The Princess, who with grief and a thousand fears night after night in
all of the time found little slumber, was awakened. But who describes
her delight, Since the windows in the beam The sun aufgegangnen just
witnessed her husband lives in bodily form!

first hundred times they alternated Kußhände, greetings Flüsterworte,
then slipped through a small gate, he furtively into their chamber.
understood that the Neuvereinten Of herzten, in the exuberance
umschlungen were endlessly long and hot tears of joy crying in their
reunion intoxication.

Recently, however, broke the tenderness Holden significant exchange
Aladdin and said: "Forgive me, my beloved wife, I have to, eh, we
sue each other, what we experienced in these days, especially after
you remain inconspicuous, the lamp ask the while I pulled on hunting,
Saale was in a locker. "" Ah, "sighed she," was only mildly, I was
so deceived himself. forebodes me a long time that we reached her
this blow.

"top Aladdin "Because I cherish it foolish to do so, lay the blame
on me. But now, we better consider what the injury heals.

So tell me where they hingeraten." As soon as they notified to him, he
cried: "I smell now the roast! the dealer kenn 'ich! This scoundrel,
Ever heard wollt' er destroy me. "They went to it to report how imperceptibly
at night through the air kidnapped morning upon awakening here in
this foreign country findings Africa called, And like the guy with
her cheeky smile as Mr Castle presented.

Zornesfunken Top Aladdin with the eye: "Such Erzhalunken Has never
seen the world.

Say, you do not maybe know where he keeps hidden the lamp?" They
gave the answer: "Well maintaining Could I, under the dress that
he concealed them consistently in your pocket.

Since I'm here, he comes every day to visit some time and submit it
to establish myself unbearably Ekler With homage to torture.

Yes, more, he called for bold, I would choose him for the husband,
because you no longer alive seist.

My father did to you in anger, the head can herunterschlagen. This song,
he always began from the front, although I hate him fervently declared.
The Met him vain delusion that I am on the duration of non-resist
when the sadness around you gradually dismissed. So hab 'ich always
before his cunning and his wickedness gezittert Until today, when
you're with me. "" He should, "cried Aladdin bitterly, "What andres
bloom as he thinks.

Be comforted only! from this evil, nefarious, full confining enemy Werd
'ich hopefully redeem ourselves. What happens, trust me with confidence
to the decision, And you'll see later I come back in disguise
, marvel not. "As soon as he leaves his palace walls, he went across
and met in a palm grove after a short Wandrung a farmer. He asked this
after the way to next town, and whether his dress to go with him he was
ready. The farmer was not inert, for this stranger of his costume
stuff schäbig effort Aladdin And after he gently Geschlüpft was
in the old pieces, step on the path he beschriebnen City preclude
came in.

And wonders' in a grocer, whether a certain Pülverlein To have had.
The Merchants' nodded, said just because the buyer's patched garb
of a proof of poverty seemed, the high price. But when the stranger
does not misplace a piece of gold pulled from the bag, Bracht 'er the
powder and it weighed a lot from him.

On Kam same routes back to the castle Aladdin And said to his wife:
"Listen! needed for my Wagestück Is your advice to me. I implore you
drum, you must follow my advice! Throw yourself into your beautiful
state, Schmücke 'with you and jewelery tighteners, To the kidnapper if
he is approaching, with a warmer greeting receive.

To avoid any suspicion beirrt him, suppose you, as if you forget me, When
you's still so sour, And Lad 'him to dinner. Once he cheekier with
you in comfort, sitting at table, let him kredenzen a cup filled
with wine, in this mischievous Before you powder dispersed, and ask
him politely for you to honor him in a train auszuleeren.

From this request very Is it the wine hinuntertrinken And lifeless
on the floor to fall, Before the draft, he still regretted it. "If
this game is also quite insidious Your occurred, so she promised that
you will do what is necessary. He hid for the rest of the day in a remote
wing of the castle. When the distant hill, the twilight with her gray
tissue slowly overarching, Rief Bedrulbudur their wives, with whose
assistance they began Asc Wonderful to decorate. full of care was
a wonderful dress, and to your delight Adorned with flickering jewelery
. your belt, her braces were just as the frost in their hair tightly
filled with diamonds, And around his neck, the necklace - Welch still
so great princess would have been happy with their estimated?

She looked after the cleaning was completed, your picture in a mirror and
thought to herself: "Where a man lives, the not so much charm dazzled
in front of me had to stretch their arms?"

She rose to this Kuppelsaal gallery, which has a meal for the table stood
with two people. They had not long 'geharrt as punctually at the
usual hour The Zaubrer From occurred and solidifies so much jewelry
in rich league with so much beauty stopped. beatify you gradually hold
him, as if his visit to her love, and did, as if you only seinetwegen
so tempting and beautifully dressed.

Hesitantly he took the place, still no word powerful.

"Friend, you should be the opposite in my mood to wonder," she smiled, "To
hear, like I am now no longer grieve. Because that through my father's
Grimm My husband found his death, which thou hast convinced me. Put
also that I tiefgebeugt With Heart wounds incurable Lament want
'to him constantly, but he would no longer alive.

I give' his Grabesrast And because my shackles broke, am I committed to
comfort me, And when you invite me to guest.

"[Illustration: Aladdin gets the magic lamp back] The Zaubrer formed
exulting in, had won the game, was already in the spirit of the target
wildest desire, thanked faltering And sat down to dinner with her.
How tempting it to him now their eyes are raised, since it seemed
to him no doubt, she had looked at him vergafft and want to get
engaged with him.

An abundant meal was applied, and a slave ranged wine. Even
the princess gave an imperceptible without poured the powder in
Zagen score cup And said: "Wilt thou joyful courage Prepare, then
as wackrer carouser drinking 'on my vine Well this is blood!"

"Yes, you lover you Dear, This is for your benefit and our federal
government! "So he called hochbeglückt and emptied from the cup to
the bottom. After a short wheeze last he fell unconscious from behind.
brought by a servant Kam Aladdin herbeigelaufen. Bedrulbudur As it
umschlang , he said: "Embark on your room, because some still
remains for me to do so, but you succeeded in this."

After they are removed, he lost no time. He tore the dress at the
corpse, pulled the wonderful rich Stolen lamp draus indicates the Ließ
entseelte Fort Jammer image creation of two strong servants out
into the night Gefilde So the vultures his memory, if it's lust
after dining, then Berief in the usual way, the spirit and said:
"Bring 'My Castle immediately to his old job!"

Not yet completed was the Word, as already in the spirit winds Fast
With almost imperceptible enforcement The building was through the
air. 15 [Illustration: D] The Sultan, to the infinite order now his
daughter is gegrämt, War before Verwundrung paralyzed As morning wide
and representational, Returned to the old place to him, The Castle
herübergrüßte.

The sight gave him for serving affliction ample replacement. He had a
horse to saddle, trotted back to the castle, had to speed to his many
children and their lacking tenderness erlabte his father heart .

Then wollt 'er know what unfortunate chaining you were suddenly
snatched from him, and what their life circumstance is to thank.

With scant strokes Narrated by the terrible Black artists, by the
magic power to the castle at night abducted; How shameful of the
depressed They already believed him to be tempted, until her husband
is a success, list to list him obzusiegen.

My father was so happy, And when Aladdin now also add to the room was,
as he put it on his chest and said: "Is it here below the error
exposed.

Forgive me, if Übereilung, My son, I blindly hurt you.

You broke my test pain healing, By me my child free And they have guarded
against disgrace, thanks to 'I give you for all time. "- Celebrations
in the whole country was the return of the young pair.

Verdüsterte your luck no shade. But it is not The last check was it,
the two had to exist. Zaubrer The fact that a life possessed of great
tenacity, War of the powder, when the vultures The Fraß it passed,
in reality only been stunned, by his apparent awoken the next day
and soon recovered.

He swore by Racheglut sparked And vollgepfropft with poison and venom,
he wanted to retaliate against non-stop enthusiasm and fürder not
rust, and drums for the third he began ringing over hill and valley,
the trip to the Far East.

After a full years of Full effort, hardship and danger in the
capital soon arrived, he was a new trick to keep in Umschau term. He
heard it from a pious, elderly miracle perpetrator narrative, which
was Fatime And with simply sublime sense of silent prayer left in
a abgeschiednen Klause.

Through alleys, which he described Schlich it to her little home With
a dark night like a thief, in their urge to poor room, awoke with
the raw shaking terrified, held a dagger to her and said: "Thou
shalt entseelt immediately pale, do not you come under my rule!

"You have to 'leave him her clothes as well as the veil and hood, the
addition consecrated rosary.

Although the robber they showed very submissive, yes, even helpful
to the robbery the hand he offered, Stach it prudent then dead in
front of a mirror Schor away the beard of the cutthroat, threw
himself into his victim's clothes, and when the sun rose up, and
he disguises on the street.

The one said to another: "Look, there goes hand in hand the pious woman,
"And a large crowd surrounded him fully rings And thanks feeling
followed, blessing hegend wishes, according to him in the castle
area .-- When the princess, the throng, From Kuppelsaal herunterlugend,
sentiment and bargain learned that all of these colorful people
Fatime follow the track, whose virtue and holiness have long known
her as the subject of worship And as the example of pious morality,
since she thought that her gezieme, The woman is heraufzubitten.

The supposed Fatime came a messenger, to bring them. The Zaubrer, not on
his victory more doubting, smiled furtively, as he with her erstieg
the hall, And caught after he entered, with such fervor to pray,
that the princess bowed full obeisance.

Schlimme Since you raised with adjusted voice, And just behind veils
glattgeschorenes showed his face, Detected 'And it does not Bedrulbudur
said "Leave me the favor lust Fatime that because you are constantly
on our stove and good religious teachings to give me change."

The abgefeimte Tückebold Stated like that agree; That it was what
he wanted! "A quiet room is available in the castle," was the princess
continued faithful in their emphasis, "And worship your responsibility
you will, without interference. Only me but may you be honest Gestehn,
how you like the castle. "The Zaubrer gave the answer."

Is hardly its equal in the world, And yet, despite the waste of
space And the tastes of the color choice, depresses me that in this
room still lacking something to complete. "" What is it?

"Apparently on their insistence replied the villain:" Forgive
', from this dome must' a bird's egg Des Roch hang. "She asked, where
you probably would. Zaubrer The drauf:" Is this big Gewaltig Roch
and nests only On rugged mountain peaks walls. "She thanked the Council
and led the wrong saint, still unsuspecting, in their own rooms.

[Illustration: Aladdin slay the magician disguised] To back room, the
princess felt now, at the Angel of Zaubrers severally , those shortages,
the unprecedented .-- When they are perceived by an Aladdin ride
her, coming home gradually, it was so strange uneasy that he asked
about the reason.

You need 'him to reveal their desires, And he, when he wants him kund,
gave her his word, to meet him. He went immediately into his chamber
And she rubbed lamp, which was now locked in a tray sure. When the spirit
soared, he said: "You turn to hurry, command 'ich dir.

It is missing We have an egg in the hall of the bird Roch. Here's to
me within three minutes! "Hardly was the word entflohn, as the Spirit
began to be so terrible thunder, For schrei'n to whimper and
moan, that listening to him and Sehn passed And trembling he fell
to the ground.

"miserable," roared the giant, with a clatter, "the margin you have to
thank me for my labor to the torture? bids, I will be on my swing as a
ceiling decoration for his room you bring my own father? Be happy, if
not my thunder blast you and your castle turns into ashes.

I know about your luck, you have not made yourself so you acted. Your
mortal enemy is visiting with you as a guest. He was not killed by
you, no, came into the country in order to revenge, by a crime Ergatterte
The holy Fatime dress, And your wife, he umgarnt, driving to the shameful
commands you to guileless.

So be warned, he wants you meuchlings to the throat. "'s Voice and then
disappeared. Immediately had Aladdin Getting back to the room, where
his wife is amused with a ball game, and ordered one possible 'Fatime
fetch him.

--he no longer doubted that Providence was in the plot; and that
these winged messengers had been sent, as it were, from Heaven itself,
to deliver him and his companions from that prison in which they had so
long been pining.


CHAPTER SIXTY TWO.

CONCLUSION.

The deliverance came at length; though it was not immediate.  Several
months more, of that lonely and monotonous life, were our adventurers
called upon to endure.

They had to wait for the return of the rainy season; when the rivers
that traverse the great plains of Hindostan became brimful of flood--
bearing upon their turbid bosoms that luxuriance, not of life, but of
death, which attracts the crane and the stork once more to seek
subsistence upon their banks.  Then the great adjutant returns from his
summer tour to the north--winging his way southward over the lofty
summits of Imaus.  Then, too, did Karl and his comrades believe that
_their adjutants_ would be guided by a like instinct, and go back to the
R.B.G.--the Royal Botanic Garden of Calcutta.

Karl felt confident of their doing so, as certain almost as if he had
stood on the banks of the sacred stream in the R.B.G. itself, and saw
them descending from their aerial flight and alighting within the
enclosure.  This confidence arose from the remembrance of his having
heard--while sojourning with the Curator--that such had been their habit
for many years; and that the time, both of their departure and arrival,
was so periodically regular, that there was not an employe of the place
who could not tell it to a day!

Fortunately, Karl remembered the time, though not the exact day.  He
knew the week, however, in which his guests might be expected to take
their departure; and this was enough for his purpose.

During their stay in the valley the birds had been cared for, as if they
had been sacred to some deity, adored by those who held them in charge.

Fish and flesh had they a plenty--with Ossaroo as their provider.  Food
and drink, whenever they stood in need of either; freedom from
annoyance, and protection from enemies of every kind--even from Fritz,
who had long since ceased to be their enemy.  Nothing had been wanting
to their comfort; everything had been granted--everything but their
liberty.

This, too, was at length restored to them.

On a fair morning--such as a bird might have chosen for its highest
flight--both were set free to go whithersoever they listed.

The only obstruction to their flight was a pair of small skin sacks, one
attached to the neck of each, and prudently placed beyond the reach of
its mandibles.  Both were furnished with this curiously-contrived bag;
for Karl--as the spare leaves of his memorandum-book enabled him to do--
had determined that each should be entrusted with a letter and lest one
should go astray, he had sent his _despatch in duplicate_.

For a time the birds seemed reluctant to leave those kind companions--
who had so long fed and cherished them; but the instinct that urged them
to seek the sunny plains of the South at length prevailed; and, giving a
_scream_ of adieu--reciprocated by the encouraging shouts of those they
were leaving behind, and a prolonged baying from the throat of the
boar-hound Fritz--they soared aloft into the air; and in slow, solemn
flight ascended the cliff--soon to disappear behind the crest of the
encircling ridge.

Ten days after, on that same cliff stood a score of men--a glad sight to
Karl, Caspar, and Ossaroo.  Even Fritz barked with joy as he beheld
them!

Against the blue background of the sky, it could be perceived that these
men carried coils of rope, pieces of wood, and other implements that
might be required for scaling a cliff.

Our adventurers now knew, that, one or other, or both copies of their
duplicate despatch, must have reached the destination for which they had
designed it.

And the same destination was soon after reached by themselves.  The
Großvezier, already believed he was on his quest targets, track before
excitation sinnberaubt. The court stunned with brains began to whisper,
densely geschart; The sultan frowned and growled in his beard was.All three, amidst a company of delighted deliverers--with Fritz
following at their heels--once more descended the southern slope of the
Himalayas; once more stood upon the banks of the sacred Ganges; once
more entered within the hospitable gates of the R.B.G.--there to renew
their acquaintance, not only with hospitable friends, but with those
winged messengers, by whose instrumentality they had been delivered from
their living tomb, and once more restored to society and the world!

THE END.