Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


The Cruise of the "Nonsuch" Buccaneer

By Harry Collingwood
________________________________________________________________________
An excellent book by this accomplished writer of nautical stories for
teenagers.  The date is 1569.  The young George St. Leger arrives back
from a cruise in the Bonaventure, owned locally in Plymouth, and shortly
after he and his mother are told that his brother has been captured by
the Spaniards, somewhere in the West Indies.

A friendly shipbuilder has a new vessel, the Nonsuch, almost ready to
sail, and he agrees with George that he will finance a voyage in search
of the brother, in return for half of the proceedings of the voyage, for
the Nonsuch has been designed as a fast-sailing buccaneer.

The crew are all local Devon men, so much of the dialogue in the book is
in a strong Devonian accent, still to be heard in the outlying districts
of that beautiful county.

They set off as soon as possible, knowing that the Government might well
requisition the Nonsuch.  There are plenty of adventures and battles,
but eventually the brother is found, but in very dire straits, for he
might have died if found only a few minutes later.

There is an interesting and very revealing episode where we are shown
how the Spanish Inquisition worked.

Makes a very nice audiobook about eleven hours in length.
________________________________________________________________________
THE CRUISE OF THE "NONSUCH" BUCCANEER

BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD


CHAPTER ONE.

HOW GEORGE SAINT LEGER RETURNED FROM FOREIGN PARTS.

The time was mid-afternoon, the date was January the 9th, in the year of
our Lord 1569; and the good town of Plymouth was basking in the hazy
sunlight and mild temperature of one of those delightful days that
occasionally visit the metropolis of the West Country, even in mid-
winter, under the beneficent influence of the Gulf Stream combined with
a soft but enduring breeze from the south-south-east charged with warm
air from the Saharan desert and the Mediterranean.

So mild and genial was the weather that certain lads, imbued with that
spirit of lawlessness and adventure which seems inherent in the nature
of the young Briton, had conspired together to defy the authority of
their schoolmaster by playing truant from afternoon school and going to
bathe in Firestone Bay.  And it was while these lads were dressing,
after revelling in their stolen enjoyment, that their attention was
attracted by the appearance of a tall ship gliding up the Sound before
the soft breathing of the languid breeze.

That she was a foreign-going ship was evident at a glance, first from
her size, and, secondly, from the whiteness of her canvas, bleached by
long exposure to a southern sun; and as she drew nearer, the display of
flags and pennons which she made, and the sounds of trumpet, fife,
hautboy, and drum which floated down the wind from her seemed to
indicate that her captain regarded his safe arrival in English waters as
something in the nature of a triumph.

By the time that she had arrived abreast of Picklecombe Point the
bathers had completely resumed their clothing and, having climbed to the
highest point within easy reach, now stood interestedly watching the
slow approach of the ship, her progress under the impulse of the gentle
breeze being greatly retarded by the ebb tide.  Speculation was rife
among the little group of boys upon the question of the ship's identity,
some maintaining that she must necessarily be a Plymouther, otherwise
what was she doing there, while others, for no very clearly denned
reason, expressed the contrary opinion.

At length one of the party who had been intently regarding the craft for
several minutes, suddenly flung his cap into the air, caught it as it
fell, and exclaimed excitedly as he replaced it on his head:

"I know her, I du; 'tis my Uncle Marshall's _Bonaventure_, whoam from
the Mediterranean and Spain; I'm off to tell my uncle.  'Twas only
yesterday that I heard him say he'd give a noble to know that the
_Bonaventure_ had escaped the Spaniards; and a noble will pay me well
for the flogging that I shall get from old Sir John, if Uncle Richard
tells him that I played truant to go bathing.  But I don't believe he
will; he'll be so mighty pleased to hear about the _Bonaventure_ that
he'll forget to ask how I come to be to Firestone Bay instead of to
schule."

And the exultant lad dashed away toward Stonehouse, accompanied by his
companions, each of whom was instantly ready to help with suggestions as
to the spending of the prospective noble.

The historian of the period has omitted to record whether that worthy,
Mr Richard Marshall, one of the most thriving merchants of Plymouth,
was as good as his word in the matter of the promised noble; but
probably he was, for shortly after the arrival of his nephew with the
momentous news, the good man emerged from his house, smiling and rubbing
his hands with satisfaction, and made the best of his way to the wharf
in Stonehouse Pool, alongside which he knew that the _Bonaventure_ would
moor, and was there speedily joined by quite a little crowd of other
people who were all more or less intimately interested in the ship and
her crew, and who had been brought to the spot by the rapid spread of
the news that the _Bonaventure_ was approaching.

To the impatient watchers it seemed an age before the ship hove in sight
at the mouth of the Pool.  At length, however, as the sun dipped behind
the wooded slopes across the water toward Millbrook, a ship's spritsail
and sprit topsail, with a long pennon streaming from the head of the
mast which supported the latter, crept slowly into view beyond Devil's
Point, to the accompaniment of a general shout of "There a be!" from the
waiting crowd, and a minute later the entire ship stood revealed,
heading up the Pool under all sail, to the impulse of the dying breeze
which was by this time so faint that the white canvas of the approaching
craft scarcely strained at all upon its sheets and yards.

For the period, the _Bonaventure_ was a ship of considerable size, her
registered measurement being one hundred and twenty-seven tons.  She was
practically new, the voyage which she was now completing being only her
second.  Like other ships of her size and time, she was very beamy, with
rounded sides that tumbled home to a degree that in these days would be
regarded as preposterous.  She carried the usual fore and after castles,
the latter surmounting the after extremity of her lofty poop.  She was
rigged with three masts in addition to the short spar which reared
itself from the outer extremity of her bowsprit, and upon which the
sprit topsail was set, the fore and main masts spreading courses,
topsails, and--what was then quite an innovation--topgallant sails,
while the mizen spread a lateen-shaped sail stretched along a sloping
yard suspended just beneath the top, in the position occupied in these
days by the cross-jack.  She was armed with twenty-two cannon of various
sizes and descriptions, and she mustered a crew of fifty-six men and
boys, all told.  Her hull was painted a rich orange-brown colour down to
a little above the water-line, beneath which ran a narrow black stripe
right round her hull, dividing the brown colour of her topsides from her
white-painted bottom which, by the way, was now almost hidden by a rank
growth of green weed.  She carried one large poop lantern, and displayed
from her flagstaff the red cross of Saint George, while from her fore
and main topgallant-mastheads, from the peak of her mizen, and from the
head of her sprit-topmast lazily waved other flags and pennons.  As she
swung into view round Devil's Point the blare of trumpets and the roll
of drums reached the ears of the crowd which awaited her arrival; but
these sounds presently ceased as her crew proceeded to brail up and furl
sail after sail; and some ten minutes later, scarcely stemming the
outgoing tide, she drifted slowly in toward her berth alongside the
wharf.  Ropes were thrown, great hawsers were hauled ashore and made
fast to sturdy bollards, fenders were dropped overside, and the
_Bonaventure_ was very smartly secured abreast the warehouse which was
destined to receive her cargo.

Then, when the ship had been securely moored, fore and aft, her gangway
was thrown open, a gang-plank was run out from the deck to the wharf,
and Mr Richard Marshall, her owner, stepped on board and advanced with
outstretched hand toward a short, stout, grey-haired man who had
hitherto occupied a conspicuous position on the poop, but who now
descended the poop ladder with some difficulty and hobbled towards the
gangway.

The contrast between the two men was great in every way, except perhaps
in the matter of age, for both were on the shady side of fifty; but
while one of them, Mr Richard Marshall, merchant and shipowner, to wit,
was still hale and hearty, carrying himself as straight and upright as
though he were still in the prime of early manhood, the other, who was
none other than John Burroughs, the captain of the _Bonaventure_, moved
stiffly and limped painfully as a result of many wounds received during
his forty years of seafaring life, coupled with a rapidly increasing
tendency to suffer from severe attacks of rheumatism.  And they differed
in dress as greatly as in their personal appearance; for while the
merchant was soberly if not somewhat sombrely garbed in dark brown
broadcloth, with a soft, broad-brimmed felt hat to match, the captain
(in rank defiance of the sumptuary laws then existing) sported trunk
hosen of pale pink satin, a richly embroidered and padded satin doublet
of the same hue, confined at the waist by a belt of green satin heavily
broidered with gold thread, from which depended on one side a long
rapier and on the other a wicked-looking Venetian dagger with jewelled
hilt and sheath, while, surmounting his grizzled and rather scanty
locks, he wore, jauntily set on one side, a Venetian cap of green velvet
adorned with a large gold and cameo brooch which secured a long green
feather drooping gracefully over the wearer's left shoulder.  But let
not the unsophisticated reader imagine, in the innocence of his heart,
that the garb above described was that usually affected by mariners of
the Elizabethan period, while at sea.  It was not.  But they frequently
displayed a weakness for showy dress while in port, and especially when
about to go ashore for the first time after the termination of a voyage.

"Welcome home again, Cap'n John," exclaimed Marshall, grasping the hand
of the sailor and wringing it so heartily that poor Burroughs winced at
the pain of his rheumatism-racked wrist and shoulder.  "I am glad to see
you safely back, for I was beginning to feel a bit uneasy lest the King
of Spain had caught you in his embargo."

"Iss, fegs; and so mun very nearly did," answered the captain; "indeed,
if it hadn't ha' been for young Garge Saint Leger--who, bein' out of his
time, I've made pilot in place of poor Matthews, who was killed in a
bout wi' the Barbary rovers on our outward voyage--he'd ha' had us, sure
as pigs baint nightingales.  But Garge have got the fiend's own gift for
tongues and languages, and the night avore we sailed he happened to be
ashore lookin' round Santander, and while he were standin' on one side
of a pillar in a church he heard two Spanishers on t'other side of that
there same pillar talkin' about the embargo that King Philip was goin'
to declare again' the English at midnight that very night as ever was.
Like a good boy, Garge waited until the two Spanishers had left the
church, and then comed straight down aboard and told me what he'd heard.
At first I didn't put very much faith in the yarn, I'll own to't, but
that there Garge so pestered and worrited me that at last I let mun have
mun's way; and ten minutes afore midnight the _Bonaventure_ was under
way and standin' out o' the harbour.  We managed to get out without
bein' fired upon by the batteries.  But if you'll believe me, sir, they
sent a galley out a'ter us, and if it hadn't ha' happened that the wind
was blowin' fresh from about west, and a nasty lump of a beam sea
runnin', dang my ugly buttons if that galley wouldn't ha' had us!  But
the galley rolled so heavy that they couldn't use their oars to
advantage, while the _Bonaventure_ is so fast as any dolphin with a beam
wind and enough of it to make us furl our topgallants; so we got away."

"And a very smart piece of work, too, apparently," said Mr Marshall.
"I must not forget to thank George Saint Leger for his share in it.  Has
your voyage been a success, Captain?"

"So, so; I don't think you'll find much to complain about when we comes
to go into the figures," answered Burroughs.  "We had a bit of a brush
wi' the rovers, who comed out against us in three ships, during our
outward voyage, but we beat 'em off wi' the loss of only one man--poor
Matthews, as I mentioned just now--since when we've had no call to fire
a single shot."

"Excellent, excellent!" commented the merchant, rubbing his hands.  "Of
course I am very sorry to learn that Matthews was slain; but these
things will happen at sea from time to time.  Well, to-morrow we will
have the hatches off and begin discharging.  While that is proceeding I
must consider what next to do with the ship; for it will be useless to
think of further trade with the Mediterranean while the Spanish embargo
lasts, and Heaven only knows how long that will be."

"Ay," assented Burroughs.  "'Tis a pity that her Grace up to Whitehall
can't make up her mind one way or t'other about this here Spanish
business; whether she'll be friends wi' Philip, or will fight mun.  For
all this here shilly-shallyin', first one way and then t'other, be
terrible upsettin' to folks like we.  But there, what be I grumblin'
about?  'Twont make a mort o' difference to me, because I've made up my
mind as it's time for me to knock off the sea and settle down snug and
comfortable ashore for the rest of my days.  I be that bad wi' the
rheumatics that I've got to get the cabin boy to help me put on my
clothes, and when there be a sea runnin' and the ship do roll a bit I
can't sleep for the pain in my j'ints.  So, Mr Marshall, I may 's well
give 'e notice, here and now, so's you'll ha' plenty of time to look
about 'e for another cap'n."

"Dear me, dear me!  I am very sorry to hear that, Cap'n," exclaimed Mr
Marshall.  "But," he continued, "ever since the declaration of the
embargo I have been thinking what I would do with the _Bonaventure_ in
the event of her escaping from the Spaniards, and I had almost decided
to lay her up until the dispute is settled one way or the other.  Now if
you stay ashore until that time arrives, and take care of yourself,
perhaps you will find yourself quite able to take command of her again
when she next goes to sea."

"No," asserted Burroughs decisively; "I ha' made up my mind, and I'll
stick to it.  The sea's no place for a man afflicted as I be.  Besides,
I ha' done very well in the matter o' they private ventures that you've
allowed me to engage in; there's a very tidy sum o' money standin' to my
credit in Exeter Bank, and there's neither chick nor child to use it
a'ter I be gone, so I might so well enjoy it and be comfortable for the
rest o' my days, and at the same time make way for a younger man.  Now,
there be Garge," he continued, lowering his tone.  "'Tis true that he be
but a lad; but he'm a sailor to the tips of his fingers; he'm so good a
seaman and navigator as I be; he've a-got coolness and courage when they
be most needed; he knoweth how to handle a crew; he've got the gift of
tongues; and--he'm a gentleman, which is a danged sight more than I be.
You might do a mort worse, Mr Marshall, than give he the _Bonaventure_
when next you sends her to sea."

"H'm! do you really think so?" returned the merchant.  "He is very
young, you know, Captain; too young, I think, to bear the responsibility
attending the command of such a ship as the _Bonaventure_.  But--well, I
will think it over.  Your recommendation of course will carry very great
weight with me."

"Ay, and so't ought to," retorted the blunt-spoken old skipper.  "I've
served you now a matter of over thirty years, and you've never yet had
to find fault wi' my judgment.  And you won't find it wrong either in
that there matter o' Garge."

After which the subject was dropped, and the pair proceeded to the
discussion of various matters which have no bearing upon the present
history.

Meanwhile, during the progress of the above-recorded conversation, the
crew, having completed the mooring of the ship, proceeded to furl the
sails which had been merely hauled down or clewed up as the craft
approached the wharf; and when this job had been performed to the
satisfaction of a tall, strapping young fellow who stood upon the poop
supervising operations, the mariners laid down from aloft and, the
business of the ship being over for the day, were dismissed from duty.
As every man aboard the _Bonaventure_ happened to call Plymouth "home,"
this meant on their part a general swarming ashore to join the relatives
and friends who patiently awaited them on the wharf; whereupon the
little crowd quickly melted away.

Then, and not until then, the tall, strapping young fellow upon the
poop--familiarly referred to by Captain Burroughs as "Garge," and
henceforth to be known to us as George Saint Leger and the hero of the
moving story which the writer proposes to set forth in the following
pages--descended to the main deck, uttered a word or two of greeting and
caution to the two sturdy ship-keepers who had already come on board to
take care of ship and cargo during the absence of the crew, and with
quick, springy step, strode to the gang-plank, and so to the wharf,
whither the captain, in Mr Marshall's company, had preceded him.

As he strode along the wharf, with that slight suggestion of a roll in
his gait which marks the man whose feet have been long accustomed to the
feel of a heaving deck, he cast a quick, eager, recognising glance at
the varied features of the scene around him, his somewhat striking
countenance lighting up as he noted the familiar details of the long
line of quaint warehouses which bordered the wharf, the coasters which
were moored ahead and astern of the _Bonaventure_, the fishing craft
grounded upon the mud higher up the creek, the well remembered houses of
various friends dotted about here and there, the heights of Mount
Edgcumbe shadowy and mysterious in the deepening twilight, and the
slopes of Mount Wise across the water; and a joyous smile irradiated his
features as his gaze settled upon a small but elegant cottage, of the
kind now known as a bungalow, standing in the midst of a large,
beautifully kept garden, situated upon the very extremity of the Mount
and commanding an uninterrupted view of the Sound.  For in that cottage,
from three windows of which beamed welcoming lights, he knew that his
mother, and perchance his elder brother Hubert, awaited his coming.  For
a moment he paused, gazing lovingly at the lights, then, striding on
again, he quickly reached the end of the wharf and, hurrying down the
ferry steps, sprang into a boat which he found lying alongside.

"So you'm back again all safe, Mr Garge, sir," exclaimed the occupant
of the boat as he threw out an oar to bear the craft off from the wharf
wall, while young Saint Leger seated himself in the stern sheets.  "I
been here waitin' for 'e for the last hour or more.  The mistress seed
the ship a comin' in, and knowed her, and her says to me--`Tom, the
_Bonaventure_ be whoam again.  Now, you go down and take the boat and go
across to the wharf, for Master Garge 'll be in a hurry to come over,
and maybe the wherry won't be there just when he's ready to come; so you
go over and wait for un.'  And here I be.  Welcome home again, sir."

"Thanks, Tom," answered Saint Leger, "I did not recognise you for the
moment.  And how is my mother?"

"She's just about as well as can be reasonably expected, sir,
considerin' the way that she's been worritin' about you and Mr
Hubert--'specially 'bout you, sir, since the news of the King of Spain's
embargo have been made known," answered the man Tom, who was in fact the
gardener and general handy man at The Nest, as Mrs Saint Leger's
cottage was named.

"Poor dear soul," murmured George; "she will fret herself to death over
Hu and me, before all's done, I am afraid.  So Captain Hawkins has not
yet returned, Tom?"

"Not yet a bain't, sir.  But he've only been gone a matter o' fifteen
months; and 'tis only a year since mun sailed from the Guinea coast for
the Indies, so 'tis a bit early yet to be expectin' mun back.  When he
and Franky Drake du get over there a spoilin' the Egyptians, as one
might say, there be no knowin' how long they'll stay there.  I don't
look to see 'em back till they'm able to come wi' their ships loaded wi'
Spanish gould; and it'll take a mort o' time to vind six shiploads o'
gould," returned Tom.

"And has no news of the expedition been received since its arrival on
the Spanish Main?" asked George.

"Not as I've heard of, sir," answered Tom.  "The last news of 'em was
that they'd sailed from the Guinea coast some time about the end of
January; and how that comed I don't know.  But I expect 'tis true,
because Madam got it from Madam Hawkins, who comed over expressly to
tell her."

"Ah, well, I suppose we shall hear in God's good time," commented
George.  "Back water with your starboard oar, Tom, and pull larboard, or
you'll smash in the bows of the boat against the steps.  So! way enough.
Haul her to and let me get out.  If I am not mistaken there is my
mother waiting for me under the verandah.  Thanks!  Good night, Tom, and
put that in your pocket for luck."

So saying the young man handed Tom a ducat, and sprang out of the boat,
up the landing steps, and made his way rapidly up the steep garden path
toward the house, beneath the verandah of which a female figure could be
dimly seen by the sheen of the lighted windows.  As George Saint Leger
neared the brow of the slope upon which The Nest was built, this same
female figure ran down the verandah steps to meet him, and a moment
later he and his mother were locked in each other's arms.

"My boy, my boy!" crooned Mrs Saint Leger as she nestled in her son's
embrace and tiptoed up to kiss the lips that sought her own--"welcome
home again, a thousand welcomes!  I saw the ship while she was yet
outside Saint Nicholas Island and, with the help of the perspective
glass that you brought me from Genoa, was able to recognise her as the
_Bonaventure_.  And later, when she rounded the point and entered the
Pool, I saw you standing beside Captain Burroughs on the poop, and so
knew that all was well with you.  Come in, my dear, and let me look at
you.  Supper is all ready and waiting, and there is a fine big coal fire
blazing in the dining-room, for I knew you would feel the air chilly
after that of the Mediterranean."

A moment later the pair entered the warm, cosy dining-room, and stood
intently regarding each other by the light of a candelabrum which
occupied the centre of the handsomely appointed table.  And while they
stand thus, with their hands upon each other's shoulders, each
scrutinising the face of the other, we may seize the opportunity to make
the acquaintance of both; for with one of them at least we purpose to
participate in many a strange scene and stirring adventure in those
western Indies, the wonders and fabulous wealth of which were just
beginning to be made known to Englishmen through that redoubtable rover
and slaver, Captain John Hawkins.

Mrs Saint Leger was a small, somewhat delicate and fragile-looking
woman, just turned forty-six years of age, yet, although people seemed
to age a great deal more quickly in those days than in these, and
although, as the widow of one sailor and the mother of two others, she
had known much anxiety and mental stress, she retained her youthful
appearance to a degree that was a constant source of wonder to her many
friends.  Her form was still as girlish as when Hugh Saint Leger proudly
led her to the altar twenty-eight years before we make her acquaintance.
Her cheeks were still smooth and round, her violet eyes, deep and
tender, were still bright despite the many tears which anxiety for her
husband and sons had caused her to shed, and which her bitter grief had
evoked when, some seven years earlier, the news had been brought to her
of her husband's death while gallantly defending his ship against an
attack by Salee pirates.  Her golden-brown hair was still richly
luxuriant, and only the most rigorous search would have revealed the
presence of a silver thread here and there.  And lastly, she stood just
five feet four inches in her high-heeled shoes, and--in honour of her
younger son's safe arrival home--was garbed, in the height of the
prevailing mode, in a gown of brown velvet that exactly matched the
colour of her hair, with long pointed bodice heavily embroidered with
gold thread, voluminous farthingale, long puffed sleeves, ruffed lace
collar, lace stomacher, and lace ruffles at her dainty wrists.

George Saint Leger, aged twenty, stood five feet ten inches in his
stockings, though he did not look anything like that height, so broad
were his shoulders and so robustly built was his frame.  He had not yet
nearly attained to his full growth, and promised, if he went on as he
was going, to become a veritable giant some five or six years hence.  He
had his mother's eyes and hair--the latter growing in short soft
ringlets all over his head--and he inherited a fair share also of his
mother's beauty, although in his case it was tempered and made manly by
a very square chin, firm, close-set lips, and a certain suggestion of
sternness and even fierceness in the steady intent gaze of the eyes.  He
was garbed, like his captain, in doublet, trunk hose, and cap, but in
George's case the garments were made of good serviceable cloth, dyed a
deep indigo blue colour, and his cap--which he now held in his hand--was
unadorned with either feather or brooch.  Also, he wore no weapons of
any kind save those with which nature had provided him.

"Egad! it is good to feel your arms round me, little mother, and to find
myself in this dear old room again," exclaimed the lad as he gazed down
into his mother's loving eyes.  "And you--surely you must have
discovered the whereabout of the fount of perpetual youth, for you do
not look a day older than when I went away."

"Nonsense, silly boy," returned the delighted little lady as she freed
herself from her stalwart son's embrace, "art going to celebrate thy
return home by beginning to pay compliments to thy old mother?  But,
indeed," she continued more seriously, "'tis a wonder that I am not
grey-headed, for the anxiety that I have suffered on thy account,
George, and that of thy brother Hubert, has scarcely suffered me to know
a moment's peace."

"Dear soul alive, I'll warrant that's true," agreed George.  "But,
mother, you need never be anxious about me, for there's not a better or
stauncher ship afloat than the _Bonaventure_, nor one that carries a
finer captain and crew.  We've held our own in many a stiff bout with
weather and the enemy, and can do it again, please God.  And as for Hu,
I think you need fear as little for him as for me, for with Hawkins as
admiral, and Frankie Drake as second in command, with six good ships to
back them up, they should be able to sweep the Spanish Main from end to
end.  It cannot now be very long before one gets news of them, and
indeed, I confidently look forward to seeing them come sailing into
Plymouth Sound ere long, loaded down with treasure."

"God grant that it may be so," responded Mrs Saint Leger.  "Yet how can
I help being fearful and anxious when I think of those daring men
thousands of miles away from home and kindred, surrounded as it were by
enemies, and with nought to keep them but their courage and the strength
of their own right arm?  And where there is fighting--as fighting there
must be when English and Spaniards come face to face--some must be
slain, and why not our Hubert among them?  For the boy is hot-headed,
and brave even to recklessness."

"Ay," assented George, "that's true.  But 'tis the brave and reckless
ones that stand the best chance in a fight, for their very courage doth
but inspire the enemy with terror, so that he turns and flees from them.
Besides, our lads are fighting God's battle against bigotry, idolatry,
and fiendish cruelty as exemplified in the tortures inflicted upon poor
souls in the hellish Inquisition, and 'twould be sinful and a
questioning of God's goodness to doubt that He will watch over them who
are waging war upon His enemies."

"Yea, indeed, that is true," agreed Mrs Saint Leger.  "And yet, so weak
is our poor human faith that there are times when my heart is sick with
fear as to what may be happening to my dear ones.  But here is Lucy with
the supper.  Draw up and sit down, my son.  I'll warrant that the
enjoyment of a good roast capon and ale of thy mother's own brewing will
be none the less for the sea fare upon which thou hast lived of late."

So mother and son sat down to table again for the first time in many
months.  And while they ate George regaled his mother with a recital of
some of the most moving happenings of the voyage just ended, including,
naturally, a detailed account of the brush with Barbary pirates, the
death of Matthews, the pilot, and George's own promotion to the post
thus rendered vacant; to all of which Mrs Saint Leger listened eagerly,
devouring her son with her eyes as he made play with capon and pasty and
good nut-brown ale, talking betwixt mouthfuls and eliciting from his
absorbed audience of one, now a little exclamation of horror at the tale
of some tragic occurrence or narrow escape, and anon a hearty laugh at
the recounting of some boyish frolic and escapade in one or another of
the foreign cities visited in the course of the voyage.  Supper over,
they drew their chairs up before the fire and continued their talk,
asking and answering questions in that delightfully inconsequent fashion
which is possible only between near and dear relatives after a long
separation.  So the time passed quickly until the hour-glass in the hall
marked ten and the maid brought in candles; whereupon, before separating
for the night, mother and son knelt down together and rendered heartfelt
thanks to God for the safe return of the one wanderer and offered up
equally heartfelt petitions for the preservation of the other, as folk
were not ashamed to do in those grand old days when belief in God's
interest in the welfare of His creatures was a living, virile thing, and
when a man's religion was as intimate a part of his daily life as were
his meat and drink.


CHAPTER TWO.

HOW ROBERT DYER BROUGHT NEWS OF DISASTER.

The following morning found George Saint Leger early astir; for the
unloading of the _Bonaventure's_ rich cargo was now to begin, and he
must be there to superintend and do his share of the work.  And be sure
that Mr Richard Marshall and his head clerk were also there to take
note of each bale and cask and package as it was hoisted out of the hold
and carried across the wharf into the yawning doorway of the warehouse;
for while the worthy merchant fully trusted those of his servants who
had proved themselves to be trustworthy, he held that there was no
method of keeping trustworthy servants faithful so efficacious as
personal oversight; he maintained that the man who tempted another to
dishonesty by throwing opportunities for dishonesty in his way, was as
guilty and as much to blame as the one who succumbed to temptation;
therefore he kept his own soul and the souls of his employes clean by
affording the latter as little occasion as might be for stumbling.
Captain Burroughs--his rheumatism more troublesome than ever--was also
present, with his hands full of invoices and bills of lading to which he
referred from time to time for information in reply to some question
from Mr Marshall; and soon the winches began to creak and the main
hatch to disgorge its contents, while a crowd of those curious and idle
loafers who, like the poor, are always with us, quickly gathered upon
the wharf to gapingly watch the process of unloading the cargo.

That process was much more deliberately carried out then than it is in
the present day of hurry and rush, steam and electricity; therefore it
was not until nearly a fortnight had elapsed that the last bale had been
hoisted out of the _Bonaventure's_ hold and safely stored in Mr
Marshall's warehouse.  Mr Marshall had definitely announced his
intention to lay up the ship until the Spanish embargo should be raised.
And it was on that same night that, as George and his mother sat
chatting by the fire after supper, the maid Lucy entered the room with
the intimation that a strange, foreign-looking man, apparently a sailor,
stood without, craving speech with Mistress Saint Leger.

Mrs Saint Leger's apprehensions with regard to the safety of Hubert,
her elder son, temporarily allayed by George's optimism, were quick to
respond to the slightest hint or suggestion of disaster; the mere
mention, therefore, of a man, foreign-looking and of sailorly aspect,
seeking speech with her, and especially at such an untimely hour, was
sufficient to re-awaken all her unformed fears into full activity.  Her
lips blanched and a look of terror leapt into her eyes as she sprang to
her feet, regarding the somewhat stolid Lucy as though the latter were
some apparition of ill omen.

"A sailor, say you, strange, and foreign-looking?" she gasped.  "What
for mercy's sake can such a man want with me at this time of night?  Did
you ask the man his name?"

"No, ma'am, I--I--didn't," stammered the maid, astonished at her
mistress's unusual agitation, and afraid that in omitting to make the
enquiry she had been guilty of some terrible oversight; "he said--he--"

But at this point George intervened.  To him, as to his mother, the
circumstance had at once conveyed a suggestion of ominousness, a hint of
possible evil tidings.  Like his mother, he had risen to his feet as the
thought of what this visit might mean dawned upon him.  But, unlike Mrs
Saint Leger, he was accustomed to act quickly in the presence of sudden
alarms, and now he laid his hand reassuringly upon his mother's
shoulder, as he said soothingly:

"There, there, sit you down, mother; there's nought to be frightened
about, I'll warrant.  Sit you down, again; and I'll go out and speak to
the fellow.  Maybe 'tis but some sneaking, snivelling beggar-man who,
believing you to be alone here, hopes to terrify you into giving him a
substantial alms."

So saying, with another reassuring pat upon his mother's shoulder, the
lad stalked out of the room, pushing the bewildered maid before him, and
made his way to the front door, where Mrs Saint Leger, acutely
listening, presently heard him in low converse with the stranger.  The
conversation continued for a full ten minutes, and then Mrs Saint
Leger's apprehensions were sharpened by hearing footsteps--her son's and
another's--approaching the room in which she sat.  A moment later the
door was flung open, and George, pale beneath his tan, re-appeared,
ushering in a thick-set, broadly-built man of medium height, whose long,
unkempt hair and beard, famine-sharpened features, and ragged clothing
told an unmistakable tale of privation and suffering.

"Mother," said George--and as he spoke his lips quivered slightly in
spite of his utmost efforts to keep them steady--"this man is Robert
Dyer of Cawsand, one of the crew of the _Judith_, Captain Drake's ship,
just arrived from the Indies, and he brings us bad news--not the worst,
thank God," he interjected hurriedly as he noted Mrs Saint Leger's
sudden access of pallor--"but bad enough for all that, and it is
necessary that you should hear it.  On that day he, indeed, began his
retreat, but, under different pretexts, be again stopped, sent couriers
to his secretaries, waited for their return, and sent new couriers
again,--but all in vain, the Divan continued refractory.

At his first audience after his return, the reception Bonaparte gave
him was not very cordial. He demanded active employment, in case of
a continental war, either in Italy or in Germany, but received neither.

When our army of England was already on its march towards the Rhine,
and Bonaparte returned here, Brune was ordered to take command on
the coast, and to organize there an army of observation, destined
to succour Holland in case of an invasion, or to invade England
should a favourable occasion present itself.

The fact is, he was charged to intrigue rather than to fight; and
were Napoleon able to force upon Austria another Peace of Luneville,
Brune would probably be the plenipotentiary that would ask your
acceptance of another Peace of Amiens. It is here a general belief
that his present command signifies another pacific overture from
Bonaparte before your Parliament meets, or, at least, before the New
Year. Remember that our hero is more to be dreaded as a Philip than as
an Alexander.

General Brune has bought landed property for nine millions of
livres--and has, in different funds, placed ready money to the same
amount.

His own and his wife's diamonds are valued by him at three millions; and
when he has any parties to dinner, he exhibits them with great complaisance
as presents forced upon him during his campaign in Switzerland and
Holland, for the protection he gave the inhabitants. He is now so vain
of his wealth and proud of his rank, that he not only disregards all
former acquaintances, but denies his own brothers and sisters,--telling
them frankly that the Fieldmarshal Brune can have no shoemaker for a
brother, nor a sister married to a chandler; that he knows of no
parents, and of no relatives, being the maker of his own fortune,
and of what he is; that his children will look no further back for
ancestry than their father.

One of his first cousins, a postilion, who insisted, rather obstinately,
on his family alliance, was recommended by Brune to his friend Fouche,
who sent him on a voyage of discovery to Cayenne, from which he probably
will not return very soon.

LETTER XL.

PARIS, September, 1805.

My LORD:--Madame de C------n is now one of our most fashionable ladies.

Once in the week she has a grand tea-party; once in a fortnight a grand
dinner; and once in the month a grand ball. Foreign gentlemen are
particularly well received at her house, which, of course, is much
frequented by them. As you intend to visit this country after a peace,
it may be of some service to you not to be unacquainted with the portrait
of a lady whose invitation to see the original you may depend upon the
day after your arrival.

Madame de C----n is the widow of the great and useless traveller, Comte
de C----n, to whom his relatives pretend that she was never married.
Upon his death-bed he acknowledged her, however, for his wife, and
left her mistress of a fortune of three hundred thousand livres a
year. The first four years of her widowhood she passed in lawsuits
before the tribunals, where the plaintiffs could not prove that
she was unmarried, nor she herself that she was married. But Madame
Napoleon Bonaparte, for a small douceur, speaking in her favour,
the consciences of the juries, and the understanding of the judges, were
all convinced at once that she had been the lawful wife, and was the
lawful heiress, of Comte de C----n, who had no children, or nearer relatives
than third cousins.

Comte de C----n was travelling in the East Indies when the Revolution
broke out. His occupation there was a very innocent one; he drew
countenances, being one of the most enthusiastic sectaries of
Lavater, and modestly called himself the first physiognomist in the
world.

Indeed, he had been at least the most laborious one; for he left behind
him a collection of six thousand two hundred portraits, drawn by himself
in the four quarters of the world, during a period of thirty
years.

He never engaged a servant, nor dealt with a tradesman, whose physiognomy
had not been examined by him. In his travels he preferred the worst
accommodation in a house where he approved of the countenance of
the host, to the best where the traits or lines of the landlord's
face were irregular, or did not coincide with his ideas of
physiognomical propriety.

The cut of a face, its expression, the length of the nose, the width or
smallness of the mouth, the form of the eyelids or of the ears, the
colour or thickness of the hair, with the shape and tout ensemble of the
head, were always minutely considered and discussed before he
entered into any agreement, on any subject, with any individual whatever.
Whatever recommendations, or whatever attestations were produced, if
they did not correspond with his own physiognomical remarks and
calculations, they were disregarded; while a person whose physiognomy
pleased him required no other introduction to obtain his confidence.
Whether he thought himself wiser than his forefathers, he certainly did
not grow richer than they were. Charlatans who imposed upon his credulity
and impostors who flattered his mania, servants who robbed him
and mistresses who deceived him, proved that if his knowledge of physiognomy
was great, it was by no means infallible. At his death, of the fortune
left him by his parents only the half remained.

His friends often amused themselves at the expense of his foibles. When
he prepared for a journey to the East, one of them recommended him
a servant, upon whose fidelity he could depend.

After examining with minute scrupulosity the head of the person, he wrote:
"My friend, I accept your valuable present. From calculations, which
never deceive me, Manville (the servant's name) possesses,
with the fidelity of a dog, the intrepidity of the lion. Chastity itself
is painted on his front, modesty in his looks, temperance on his cheek,
and his mouth and nose bespeak honesty itself." Shortly after the Count
had landed at Pondicherry, Mauville, who was a girl, died, in a condition
which showed that chastity had not been the divinity to whom she had
chiefly sacrificed. In her trunk were found several trinkets belonging
to her master, which she honestly had appropriated to herself. His
miscalculation on this subject the Count could not but avow; he
added, however, that it was the entire fault of his friend, who had duped
him with regard to the sex.

Madame de C----n was, on account of her physiognomy, purchased by her
late husband, then travelling in Turkey, from a merchant of Circassian
slaves, when she was under seven years of age, and sent for her
education to a relative of the Count, an Abbess of a convent in Languedoc.
On his return from Turkey, some years afterwards, he took her under
his own care, and she accompanied him all over Asia, and returned first
to France in 1796, where her husband's name was upon the list of emigrants,
though he had not been in Europe for ten years before the
Revolution.

However, by some pecuniary arrangements with Barras, he recovered his
property, which he did not long enjoy, for he died in 1798. The suitors
of Madame de C----n, mistress of a large fortune, with some remnants
of beauty and elegance of manners, have been numerous, and among
them several Senators and generals, and even the Minister Chaptal. But
she has politely declined all their offers, preferring her liberty and
the undisturbed right of following her own inclination to the
inconvenient ties of Hymen. A gentleman, whom she calls, and who passes
for, her brother, Chevalier de M de T----, a Knight of Malta, assists
her in doing the honours of her house, and is considered as her favourite
lover; though report and the scandalous chronicle say that she bestows
her favours on every person who wishes to bestow on her his name,
and that, therefore, her gallants are at least as numerous as her
suitors.

Such is the true statement of the past, as well as the present, with
regard to Madame de C----n. She relates, however, a different story.
She says that she is the daughter of the Marquis de M de T-----, of a
Languedoc family; that she sailed, when a child, with her mother in a
felucca from Nice to Malta, there to visit her brother; was captured by
an Algerine pilot, separated from her mother, and carried to Constantinople
by a merchant of slaves; there she was purchased by Comte de C----n, who
restored her to her family, and whom, therefore, notwithstanding the
difference of their ages, she married from gratitude.
This pretty, romantic story is ordered in our Court circles to be officially
believed; and, of course, is believed by nobody, not even by the Emperor
and Empress themselves, who would not give her the place of a
lady-in-waiting, though her request was accompanied with a valuable diamond
to the latter. The present was kept, but the offer declined.

All the members of the Bonaparte family, female as well as male,
honour her house with their visits and with the acceptance of her
invitations; and it is, therefore, among our fashionables, the 'haut
ton' to be of the society and circle of Madame de C----n.

Last February, Madame de P----t (the wife of Comte de P----t, a relative,
by her husband's side, of Madame de C----n, and who by the Revolution
lost all their property, and now live with her as companions) was brought
to bed of a son; the child was baptized by the Cardinal de Belloy, and
Madame Joseph and Prince Louis Bonaparte stood sponsors. This occurrence
was celebrated with great pomp, and a fete was given to nearly one hundred
and fifty per sons of both sexes,--as usual, a mixture of ci-devant
nobles and of ci-devant sans-culottes; of rank and meanness; of upstart
wealth and beggared dignity.

What that day struck me most was the audacity of the Senator Villetard
in teasing and insulting the old Cardinal de Belloy with his impertinent
conversation and affected piety. This Villetard was, before the
Revolution, a journeyman barber, and was released in 1789 by the mob
from the prison of the Chatelet, where he was confined for theft. In
1791 his patriotism was so well known in the Department of Yonne,
that he was deputed by the Jacobins there to the Jacobins of the
capital with an address, encouraging and advising the deposition
of Louis XVI.; and in 1792 he was chosen a member of the National
Convention, where the most sanguinary and most violent of the
factions were always certain to reckon him in the number of their
adherents.

In December, 1797, when an insurrection, prepared by Joseph Bonaparte at
Rome, deprived the late revered pontiff both of his sovereignty and
liberty, Villetard was sent by the Jacobin and atheistical party of the
Directory to Loretto, to seize and carry off the celebrated Madonna.
In the execution of this commission he displayed a conduct worthy the
littleness of his genius and the criminality of his mind. The
wooden image of the Holy Virgin, a black gown said to have appertained
to her, together with three broken china plates, which the Roman
Catholic faithful have for ages believed to have been used by her,
were presented by him to the Directory, with a cruelly scandalous show,
accompanied by a horribly blasphemous letter. He passed the next night,
after he had perpetrated this sacrilege, with two prostitutes, in the
chapel of the Holy Virgin; and, on the next morning, placed one of
them, naked, on the pedestal where the statue of the Virgin had formerly
stood, and ordered all the devotees at Loretto, and two leagues round,
to prostrate themselves before her. This shocking command occasioned
the premature death of fifteen ladies, two of whom, who were nuns,
died on the spot on beholding the horrid outrage; and many more
were deprived of their reason.

How barbarously unfeeling must that wretch be who, in bereaving the
religious, the pious, and the conscientious of their consolation and
hope, adds the tormenting reproach of apostasy, by forcing virtue upon
its knees to bow before what it knows to be guilt and infamy.

A traitor to his associates as to his God, it was he who, in November,
1799, presented at St. Cloud the decree which excluded all those who
opposed Bonaparte's authority from the Council of Five Hundred, and
appointed the two committees which made him a First Consul. In reward
for this act of treachery, he was nominated to a place in the Conservative
Senate. He has now ranked himself among our modern saints, goes regularly
to Mass and confesses; has made a brother of his, who was a drummer,
an Abbe; and his assiduity about the Cardinal was probably with a
view to obtain advancement for this edifying priest.

The Cardinal de Belloy is now ninety-six years of age, being born
in 1709, and has been a Bishop for fifty-three years, but, during
the Revolution, was proscribed, with all other prelates. He remained,
however, in France, where his age saved him from the guillotine, but
not from being reduced to the greatest want. A descendant of a noble
family, and possessing an unpolluted character, Bonaparte fixed upon
him as one of the pillars for the reestablishment of the Catholic
worship, made him an Archbishop of Paris, and procured him the
rank of a Cardinal from Rome.

But he is now in his second childhood, entirely directed by his grand
vicaries, Malaret, De Mons, and Legeas, who are in the pay of, and
absolutely devoted to, Bonaparte.

An innocent instrument in their hands, of those impious compliments
pronounced by him to the Emperor and the Empress, he did not, perhaps,
even understand the meaning. From such a man the vile and artful Villetard
might extort any promise. I observed, however, with pleasure, that he
was watched by the grand vicar, Malaret, who seldom loses sight of His
Eminence.

These two so opposite characters--I mean De Belloy and Villetard--are
already speaking evidences of the composition of the society at Madame
de C----n's. But I will tell you something still more striking. This
lady is famous for her elegant services of plate, as much as for
her delicate taste in entertaining her parties.

After the supper on this night, eleven silver and four gold plates,
besides numerous silver and gold spoons, forks, etc., were missed.
She informed Fouche of her loss, who had her house surrounded by spies,
with orders not to let any servant pass without undergoing a strict
search. The first gentleman who called for his carriage was His Excellency
the Counsellor of State and grand officer of the Legion of Honour,
Treilhard. His servants were stopped and the cause explained. They
willingly, and against the protest of their master, suffered
themselves to be searched.

Nothing was found upon them; but the police agents, observing the full-dress
hat of their master rather bulky under his arm, took the liberty to
look into it, where they found one of Madame de C----n's gold plates and
two of her spoons. His Excellency immediately ordered his servants to
be arrested, for having concealed their theft there. Fouche, however,
when called out, advised his friend to forgive them for misplacing them,
as the less said on the subject the better. When Madame de C----n heard
of this discovery, she asked Fouche to recall his order or to alter
it.

"A repetition of such misplacings in the hats or in the pockets
of the masters," said she, "would injure the reputation of my house and
company." She never recovered the remainder of her loss, and that
she might not be exposed in future to the same occurrences, she bought
two services of china the following day, to be used when she had mixed
society.

Treilhard had, before the Revolution, the reputation of being an honest
man and an able advocate; but has since joined the criminals of all
factions, being an accomplice in their guilt and a sharer of their
spoils.

In the convention, he voted for the death of Louis XVI. and pursued without
mercy the unfortunate Marie Antoinette to the scaffold.
During his missions in the departments, wherever he went the guillotine
was erected and blood flowed in streams. He was, nevertheless, accused
by Robespierre of moderatism. At Lille, in 1797, and at Rastadt, in 1798,
he negotiated as a plenipotentiary with the representatives of Princes,
and in 1799 corresponded as a director with Emperors and Kings, to
whom he wrote as his great and dear friends. He is now a Counsellor of
State, in the section of legislation, and enjoys a fortune
of several millions of livres, arising from estates in the country,
and from leases in the capital. As this accident at Madame de C----n's
soon became public, his friends gave out that he had of late been
exceedingly absent, and, from absence of mind, puts everything he can
lay hold of into his pocket. He is not a favourite with Madame
Bonaparte, and she asked her husband to dismiss and disgrace him
for an act so disgraceful to a grand officer of the Legion of Honour,
but was answered, "Were I to turn away all the thieves and rogues
that encompass me I should soon cease to reign.

I despise them, but I must employ them."
It is whispered that the police have discovered another of Madame de C n's
lost gold plates at a pawnbroker's, where it had been pledged by the
wife of another Counsellor of State, Francois de Nantes.

This I give you merely as a report! though the fact is, that Madame Francois
is very fond of gambling, but very unfortunate; and she, with other
of our fashionable ladies, has more than once resorted to her charms for
the payment of her gambling debts.

MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF ST. CLOUD

Being Secret Letters from a Gentleman at Paris to a Nobleman in London

BOOK 2.

LETTER I.

PARIS, September, 1805.

MY LORD:--Since my return here, I have never neglected to present myself
before our Sovereign, on his days of grand reviews and grand diplomatic
audiences. I never saw him more condescending, more agreeable,
or, at least, less offensive, than on the day of his last levee,
before he set out to be inaugurated a King of Italy; nor worse
tempered, more petulant, agitated, abrupt, and rude than at his
first grand audience after his arrival from Milan, when this ceremony
had been performed.

I am not the only one who has made this remark; he did not disguise
either his good or ill-humour; and it was only requisite to have eyes
and ears to see and be disgusted at the difference of behaviour.

I have heard a female friend of Madame Bonaparte explain, in part,
the cause of this alteration. Just before he set out for Italy, the
agreeable news of the success of the first Rochefort squadron in the
West Indies, and the escape of our Toulon fleet from the vigilance of
your Lord Nelson, highly elevated his spirits, as it was the first
naval enterprise of any consequence since his reign.

I am certain that one grand naval victory would flatter his vanity
and ambition more than all the glory of one of his most brilliant
Continental campaigns.

He had also, at that time, great expectations that another negotiation
with Russia would keep the Continent submissive under his dictature,
until he should find an opportunity of crushing your power. You may
be sure that he had no small hopes of striking a blow in
your country, after the junction of our fleet with the Spanish,
not by any engagement between our Brest fleet and your Channel
fleet, but under a supposition that you would detach squadrons to
the East and West Indies in search of the combined fleet, which,
by an unexpected return, according to orders, would have then left
us masters of the Channel, and, if joined with the Batavian fleet,
perhaps even of the North Sea.

By the incomprehensible activity of Lord Nelson, and by the defeat (or
as we call it here, the negative victory) of Villeneuve and Gravina,
all this first prospect had vanished. Our vengeance against a nation
of shopkeepers we were not only under the necessity of postponing, but,
from the unpolite threats and treaties of the Cabinet of St. Petersburg
with those of Vienna and St.
James, we were on the eve of a Continental war, and our gunboats, instead
of being useful in carrying an army to the destruction of the
tyrants of the seas, were burdensome, as an army was necessary to
guard them, and to prevent these tyrants from capturing or destroying
them.

Such changes, in so short a period of time as three months, might irritate
a temper less patient than that of Napoleon the First.

At his grand audience here, even after the army, of England had moved
towards Germany, when the die was cast, and his mind should, therefore,
have been made up, he was almost insupportable. The low bows, and
the still humbler expressions of the Prussian Ambassador, the Marquis
da Lucchesini, were hardly noticed; and the Saxon Ambassador, Count von
Buneau, was addressed in a language that no well-bred master ever
uses in speaking to a menial servant. He did not cast a look, or utter
a word, that was not an insult to the audience and a disgrace to his rank.
I never before saw him vent his rage and disappointment so indiscriminately.
We were, indeed (if I may use the term), humbled and trampled
upon en masse. Some he put out of countenance by staring angrily at
them; others he shocked by his hoarse voice and harsh words; and all--all
of us--were afraid, in our turn, of experiencing something worse than
our neighbours. I observed more than one Minister, and more than one
general, change colour, and even perspire, at His Majesty's approach.

I believe the members of the foreign diplomatic corps here will all
agree with me that, at a future congress, the restoration of the
ancient and becoming etiquette of the Kings of France would be as
desirable a point to demand from the Emperor of the French as the
restoration of the balance of power.But he fully recognised, even while planning his scheme, that to
translate it into action would necessitate an expenditure far beyond his
own unaided resources.  True, his mother was very comfortably off,
possessing an income amply sufficient for all her needs derived from the
well-invested proceeds of her late husband's earnings, but George was
quite determined not to draw upon that if he could possibly help it,
although he was well aware that Mrs Saint Leger would be more than
willing to spend her last penny in order to provide the means of
rescuing her elder son from a fate that might well prove to be worse
than death itself.  Therefore the younger Saint Leger began operations
by calling upon Mr Marshall, the merchant and owner of the
_Bonaventure_, and, having first ascertained that that gentleman had
definitely, though reluctantly, decided not to risk his ship in another
Mediterranean voyage so long as the relations of England and Spain
continued in their then strained condition, unfolded a project for an
adventure to the Indies, which, if successful, must certainly result in
a golden return that would amply reimburse all concerned for the risks
involved.  But Mr Marshall had not grown from an errand boy into a
prosperous merchant without acquiring a certain amount of wisdom with
his wealth, and he at once put his finger on the weak spot in George's
proposal by inquiring what guarantee the latter could offer that his
scheme would be successful when a very similar one conducted by such
experienced adventurers as Hawkins and Drake had just disastrously
failed.  He frankly admitted that the young man's scheme was promising
enough, on the face of it, and he also intimated that, as a merchant, he
was always ready to take a certain amount of risk where the prospects of
success seemed promising enough to justify it, but he no less frankly
declared that, while he had the utmost confidence in George's ability as
a seaman, he regarded him as altogether too young and inexperienced to
be the head and leader of such an adventure as the one proposed; and he
terminated the interview by flatly refusing to have anything to do with
it.

Bitterly disappointed at his failure to enlist Marshall's active
sympathy, George called upon some half a dozen other Plymouth merchants.
But everywhere the result was the same.  The adventure itself met with
a certain qualified approval, but the opinion was unanimous that George
was altogether too young and inexperienced to be entrusted with its
leadership.  In despair, George at last called upon Mr William Hawkins,
the father of Captain John Hawkins, to obtain his opinion upon the
project.  Captain John had arrived home a day or two previously, and
young Saint Leger was so far fortunate that he was thus able to obtain
the opinion of both father and son upon it.  As might have been
expected, although these two seamen were friends of the Saint Legers,
they were so embittered by disappointment at the failure of the recent
expedition that they could not find words strong enough to denounce the
scheme and to discourage its would-be leader, and so well did they
succeed in the latter that for an hour or two George was almost inclined
to abandon the idea altogether.  Yet how could he reconcile himself to
the leaving of his brother to a fate far worse than death itself--for
though he had sought to make the best of the matter to his mother, he
himself had no illusions as to what that fate would be--and how could he
face his mother with such a suggestion?  The lad had infinite faith in
himself, He knew, better than anybody else, that he had never yet had an
opportunity to show of what stuff he was made, he candidly admitted the
damaging fact of his extreme youth, but he would not admit to himself
that it was a disability, although others regarded it as such; he had
been a sailor for seven years and during that time he had mastered the
whole of the knowledge that then went to make the complete seaman;
moreover, he was also old for his years, a thinker, and he carried at
the back of his brain many an idea that was destined to be of
inestimable value to him in the near future; therefore, after a long
walk to and fro upon the Hoe, he returned home, disappointed it is true,
but with his resolution as strong and his courage as high as ever.

And here he found balm and encouragement awaiting him in the person of
one Simon Radlett, a shipbuilder, owning an extensive yard at Millbay.

"Old Si Radlett," as he was generally called, was something of a
character in Millbay and its immediate neighbourhood, for, in addition
to being admittedly the best builder of ships in all Devon, he was a bit
of an eccentric, a man with bold and original ideas upon many subjects,
a man of violent likes and dislikes, a bachelor, an exceedingly shrewd
man of business, and--some said--a miser.  He was turned sixty years of
age, and of course had seen many and great changes in Plymouth during
his time, yet, although well advanced in the "sere and yellow," was
still a hale and hearty man, able to do a hard day's work against the
best individual in his yard; and although he had the reputation of being
wealthy he lived alone in a little four-roomed cottage occupying one
corner of his yard, and did everything--cooking, washing-up, bed-making,
etcetera, etcetera, for himself, with the assistance of a woman who
came, for one day a week, to clean house, and wash and mend for him.  He
had known George Saint Leger from the latter's earliest childhood, and
had loved the boy with a love that was almost womanly in its passionate
devotion, nothing delighting him more than to have the sturdy little
fellow trotting after him all over the yard, asking questions about
ships and all things pertaining thereto.

He it was who had presented George with the toy ship that still occupied
a conspicuous position in the latter's bedroom at The Nest, and which
was such a gorgeous affair, with real brass guns, properly made sails,
and splendid banners and pennons of painted silk, that the child had
never cared to have another.  And the affection which the old man had
manifested for the child had endured all through the years, and was as
strong to-day as it ever had been, yet such was Radlett's reputation for
close-fistedness that it had never once occurred to George that he might
possibly be willing to help him, consequently he had not sought him.  No
sooner, however, did the youngster enter the house and discover the old
tarry-breeks in close and animated conversation with Mrs Saint Leger
than his spirits rose; for it had been years since Radlett had so far
presumed as to actually call upon madam, and George somehow felt
intuitively that such an unwonted and extraordinary circumstance was in
some way connected with the realisation of what had now become his most
ardent desire.


CHAPTER THREE.

HOW OLD SIMON RADLETT MADE A CERTAIN PROPOSITION TO GEORGE.

"Well, Garge, my son, so you'm safe whoam again," exclaimed the old
shipbuilder, rising to his feet with outstretched hand, as young Saint
Leger entered the room.  "My word!" he continued, allowing his gaze to
rove over the lad's stalwart frame, "but you'm growed into a reg'lar
strapper, and no mistake; a reg'lar young Goliath of Gath a be, no less.
And you've been a slayin' of a Philistine or two, here and there, so I
do hear" (Mr Radlett was a little mixed in the matter of his Bible
imagery, you will perceive, but he meant well).  "Ay, ay; I've been
havin' a crack wi' old Cap'n Burroughs, since mun comed whoam, and he've
a been tellin' me all about ye.  Garge, I'm proud of 'e, boy--and so be
madam here, too, I'll be boun'--for 'twas I that made a sailor of 'e by
givin' of 'e thicky toy bwoat, a matter o' twelve or vourteen year agone
'tis now.  My goodness me! how time du vly, to be sure.  It du seem to
me only like a vew months ago that I took spokeshave and chisel in hand
to make thicky bwoat, and here you be, a'most a man in years, and quite
a man in experience as I du hear.

"Wi' madam your mother's good leave, I'll ask 'e to sit down, Garge, for
I be comed over expressly to have a talk with 'e.  And, first, let me
say to 'e--as I've already said to madam, here--how sorry I be to hear
of what ha' happened to your brother, Mr Hubert.  But--as I was sayin'
to madam when you comed in--you'll soon have mun out o' Spanish prison
again, for I do hear as you'm arrangin' an adventure expressly for that
purpose."

"I certainly _want_ to arrange such an adventure, if the thing can be
managed," replied George; "but I have got no farther than wanting, as
yet.  I have called upon Mr Marshall, the owner of the _Bonaventure_,
and some half-dozen other merchants, and tried to interest them in my
scheme, but all to no purpose.  They say that I am much too young to be
entrusted with the responsibility of heading such an adventure."

"Too young be danged!" exclaimed Radlett with energy.

"They don't know 'e as well as I do, Garge, or they wouldn't talk like
thicky.  Why, old Cap'n Burroughs told me hisself that if it hadn't ha'
been for you the _Bonaventure_ 'd ha' been in the Spaniards' hands to-
day, and all hands o' her crew, _too.  Too young_?  Rubbidge!  Now, just
you tell thicky plan o' yours to me, and I'll soon tell 'e whether I do
think you'm too young, or not.  And I be an old man; I've seed a good
many strange happenin's in my time, and I've drawed my own conclusions
from 'em; I'm just so well able to form a sound opinion as Alderman
Marshall or any other man to Plymouth.  Now, Garge, you just go ahead,
and when you've a done I'll tell 'e what I do think of your plan, and
you too."

"Well," replied George, "it is simple enough.  My brother was taken
prisoner in the course of a treacherous attack made by the Spaniards
upon a party of peaceful English traders; therefore I take the ground
that his relatives are entitled to demand his release, together with
compensation for any suffering or inconvenience that may have resulted
from the treacherous action of the Spaniards.  I learned, only to-day,
that the Queen has already demanded satisfaction for the outrage from
the Spanish Ambassador.  But we all know what that means.  The
negotiations may go on for years, and the demand may be withdrawn in the
end if by so doing the interests of diplomacy may be served.  Therefore
I do not propose to wait for that--for who trows what may happen to my
brother in the interval?  My plan is this: I intend to go on trying
until I can find somebody sufficiently interested in my scheme either to
advance me the money, or to entrust me with a ship.  Then I will get
together a crew who will be willing to go with me, taking a certain
share of the proceeds of the expedition in lieu of wages--and I believe
I shall be able to raise such a crew without difficulty--and I shall
sail direct to San Juan de Ulua.  Arrived there, I shall make a formal
demand for my brother's immediate release.  And if the Spaniards refuse,
or attempt to put me off by saying that they do not know what has become
of Hubert, I will at once attack the town, take it, and hold it for
heavy ransom.  And if ransom is refused, I will sack the place, taking
every piece of gold or silver and every jewel that I can lay hands upon.
And from there I will traverse the entire coast of the Spanish Main,
attacking every town that promises to be worth while, until I have
succeeded in persuading the Spaniards that it will be to their advantage
to free my brother and deliver him over to me."

"And, supposin' that they should deliver up your brother at the first
town you call at--San Juan de Ulua, I think you named the place--what'll
you do then, boy?" demanded Radlett.

"I shall still require compensation for my brother's seizure," replied
George.  "And," he added, "that compensation will have to be amply
sufficient not only to recompense Hu for his imprisonment, but also to
pay handsomely all connected with the expedition.  It is my intention,
sir, not to return home until I can replace every pig of iron ballast in
my ship with gold and silver."

"Hear to him! hear to him!  Gold and silver, quotha!" exclaimed Radlett,
delightedly.  "And how big's thy ship to be, then, eh, Garge?"

"The biggest that I can get," answered George; "the bigger the better,
because she will carry the more men, the more guns--and the more gold.
I should have liked the _Bonaventure_, if I could have got her, for I'm
used to her, and she is just the right size.  But Mr Marshall will have
nothing to do with me and my scheme."

"Ay, the _Bonaventure_," remarked the shipwright, meditatively.  "Iss,
her be a very purty ship, very purty indeed.  What be her exact tonnage,
Garge?"

"One hundred and twenty-seven," answered George.  "Yes," he agreed, "she
_is_ a pretty ship in every way, and as good as she is pretty.  And
fast!  There's nothing sailing out of Plymouth that can beat her--
although perhaps I ought not to say as much to you, Mr Radlett, seeing
that 'twas Mr Mason, your rival, who built her."

"Never mind vor that, boy, never mind vor that," answered Radlett,
heartily.  "'Tis true what you do say of the ship, every word of it; and
she be a credit to the man who built her, although he do set up to be my
rival.  But 'twont be true very much longer, Garge, for I've a-got a
ship upon my stocks now as'll beat the _Bonaventure_ every way and in
all weathers.  I've a called her the _Nonsuch_, because there's never
been nothin' like her avore.  I drawed out the plans of her shortly
a'ter the _Bonaventure_ was launched, because I couldn't abear to be
beaten by Mason nor nobody else.  And I altered they plans, and altered
'em, and altered 'em until I couldn't vind no more ways of improvin' of
'em, and then I started to build.  And now the _Nonsuch_ be just ready
for launchin', and I'd like you to come over and look at her avore I
puts her into the water."

"Certainly; I will do so with very great pleasure," answered George,
delightedly, for he had a very shrewd suspicion that this invitation
meant more than appeared upon the surface, that indeed--who knew?--it
might mean that the eccentric old fellow was rather taken with his
(George's) scheme, and might be induced to take a very important hand in
it.  "When shall I come?"

"Come just so soon as ever you can, the sooner the better; to-morrow if
you do like," answered Radlett.  "And now," he continued, rising, "I
must be gettin' along, for 'tis growin' late and I be keepin' of you
from your supper.  No, thank'e, madam, I won't stay.  My supper be
waitin' vor me to whoam, and a'ter I've had it I've a lot o' things to
do that won't wait for time or tide.  So good-bye to 'e both.  And you,
madam, keep up your spirits about Mr Hubert; for I'll warrant that
Garge, here, 'll have mun out o' Spanish prison in next to no time."

George was up and stirring betimes on the following morning, and, after
an early breakfast, set out for Mr Radlett's shipyard at Millbay.  He
found the old man busily engaged upon certain papers in the little room
which he dignified with the name of "office"; but upon George's
appearance the old fellow hastily swept the documents pell-mell into a
drawer, which he locked.  Then, pocketing the key, he led the way to the
back door of the house, which gave upon the shipyard, upon passing
through which young Saint Leger immediately found himself in the midst
of surroundings that were as familiar to him as the walls of his own
home.  But he had no time just then to gaze about him reminiscently, for
immediately upon entering the shipyard his gaze became riveted upon the
hull of a tall ship, apparently quite ready for launching, and from that
moment he had eyes for nothing else.  As he came abruptly to a halt,
staring at the great bows that towered high above him, resplendent in
all the glory of fresh paint and surmounted by a finely carved figure of
an unknown animal with the head of a lion, the horns of a bull, the body
of a fish, four legs shaped like those of an eagle, and the wings of a
dragon, old Radlett nudged him in the ribs and, beaming happily upon
him, remarked: "There a be, Garge; that's the _Nonsuch_.  What do 'e
think of her?"

"Upon my word I hardly know," answered George.  "Let me look her over a
bit, Mr Radlett, before you ask my opinion of her.  Is she finished?"

"Finished?" reiterated the old man.  "Iss, sure; quite finished, and all
ready for launching.  Why?  Do 'e miss anything?"

"Why, yes," said George; "I see neither fore nor after castles.  How is
that?"

"Swept 'em both away, lad," was the answer.  "What good be they?  I
allow that they be only so much useless top hamper, makin' a ship crank
and leewardly.  'Tis the fashion to build 'em, I know; but I've thought
the matter out, and I say that they do more harm than they be worth.
Therefore I've left 'em out in the _Nonsuch_, and you'll see she'll be
all the better for it.  But although she have neither fore nor after
castles, she've a poop, and a raised deck for'ard where guns can be
mounted and where, sheltered behind good stout bulwarks, the crew'll be
so safe as in any castle.  Do 'e see any other differences in her?"

"Yes, I do," answered George, as he walked round the hull and viewed it
from different standpoints; "indeed I see nothing but differences.  The
under-water shape of her is different, her topsides have scarcely any
tumble-home, and she has not nearly so much sheer as usual.  Also I see
that you have given her a very much deeper keel than usual.  That ought
to be of service in helping her to hang to windward."

"So 'twill, boy; so 'twill," agreed Radlett.  "You'll find that 'twill
make a most amazin' lot o' difference when it comes to havin' to claw
off a lee shore, all the difference, perhaps, between losin' the ship
and savin' of her.  Then, about the tumble-home, I don't see the use o'
it.  True, it do help to keep the sea from comin' over side in heavy
weather, and keeps the decks dry.  But then it do make the deck space
terrible cramped up, so that wi' guns, and boats, and spare spars and
what not, the crew haven't got room to move.  But you'll see presently,
when you goes aboard, that this here _Nonsuch_ have got decks so roomy
as a ship o' double her size.  And I do hold that they almost vertical
sides o' hern'll make mun ever so much finer a sea boat.  And I've a-
worked out the lines o' mun upon a new principle that, unless I be
greatly mistaken, will make this here _Nonsuch_ such a fast sailor that
nothin' afloat'll be able to escape from mun--or catch mun, if so be
that her have got to run away from a very superior force.  And I be
havin' the sails cut differently, too.  I've thought it all out, and
I've made up my mind that the way sails be cut up to now, they be very
much too baggy, so that a ship can't go to windward.  But I be havin'
all the _Nonsuch's_ sails cut to set so flat as ever they can be made,
and--well, I do expect 'twill make a lot of difference.  And now, Garge,
havin' looked at her from outside, perhaps you'd like to go aboard and
see what she do look like on deck and below."

George having agreed that this was the case, the old man led his visitor
up a ladder reaching from the ground to the entry port.  After the
spacious deck had been duly admired and commented upon the pair entered
the cabins in the poop and below, where again everything proved so
admirable that young Saint Leger found himself quite at a loss for words
in which to adequately express his approval, to the great delight of the
proud designer of the ship.

At length, after a thoroughly exhaustive inspection of the ship, both
inside and out, during which Radlett drew attention to and expatiated
upon the various new ideas embodied in the design, the curiously
contrasted pair retired to the little room which the shipwright called
his office, and there sat down for a chat.

"Well, Garge," exclaimed the old man, as he seated himself comfortably
in a great arm-chair, "now that you've had a good look at the _Nonsuch_,
what do 'e think of her?"

"She is a splendid craft, and a perfect wonder, well worthy of her
name," pronounced George with enthusiasm.  "I should not be surprised to
learn that she inaugurates an entirely new system of shipbuilding.  She
would be the very ship, of all others, for such an adventure as mine;
but I suppose you have built her with an especial view to some
particular kind of service.  Even if you have not, I very much doubt
whether I could raise the money in a reasonable time to buy her.  What
price are you asking for her?"

"She is not for sale, boy," answered the old man with an inscrutable
smile.  "I built her in order to put to the test certain theories o' my
own, and now, before ever she touches the water, I be sure, from the
look of her, that my theories be right.  So I be going to keep her and
use her for my own purposes.  And one o' they purposes be to make money
so fast as ever I can.  I've got neither chick nor child to think about
and take care of, so my only pleasure in life be to build good ships and
make good money with 'em.

"Now, Garge, when I sat listenin' to you talkin' last night, I says to
myself--`There's money, and lots of it, in that there adventure o'
Garge's, if 'tis only worked right.  But it'll want a good leader, and a
good ship; and young as Garge Saint Leger be, I do believe he've a-got
the brains and the courage for it, while I've got the ship.  If I'd a
built the _Nonsuch_ expressly for such an adventure she couldn't ha'
been better suited for it.'  So I comed home and thought the thing over
until I'd made up my mind about it.  Now, Garge, I'm willin' to do this
for 'e.  I'll launch the _Nonsuch_ just as sune as we can get the cradle
builded.  Then, directly that she be afloat, I'll put on a strong gang
o' riggers to get her masts in and rigged and her spars across--the
sails be makin' now, and'll be finished by the time that she's ready vor
'em; and when she's all complete I'll fit her out in ordnance,
ammunition, and weapons of all sorts, and provision her for a year's
cruise, all at my own expense.  You shall have her for your adventure
upon condition that you provide a sufficient crew for her, to my
satisfaction, and that, for the use of the ship and her equipment, I be
to have one half of all the treasure you brings home; the other half to
be disposed of as you thinks fit.  Now, what do 'e say?  Will that
arrangement suit 'e?"

"It will suit me admirably, Mr Radlett, and I agree to your proposal
with a thousand thanks and the greatest pleasure," said George.
"Indeed," he added, "it was precisely such an agreement as I desired to
enter into with Mr Marshall, or some other merchant, but none of them
would listen to me.  And very lucky it is for me that they would not,
for with none of them should I have got such a ship as the _Nonsuch_.
What is her tonnage?"

"Just three tons bigger than the _Bonaventure_, accordin' to her
measurements," answered Radlett, "but she'll have twice so much
accommodation for a crew as Marshall's ship have got; because the
_Bonaventure_ be built for cargo carryin' while the _Nonsuch_ be built
more for fightin' and sailin'.  _Now_ do 'e see?"  And the old fellow
accompanied his explanation with a dig in the ribs that was intended to
convey to George several things that it was best not to discuss too
openly.

Of course George fully understood his companion's meaning, understood--
that is to say--that the _Nonsuch_ had been specially designed and built
with a view to her employment as a freebooter, free-trader--as it was
then euphemistically termed--or a pirate!  But let not the reader be too
greatly shocked at this frank admission.  For in the days of George
Saint Leger piracy was regarded as a perfectly legitimate and honourable
trade--always provided that the acts of piracy were perpetrated only
against the enemies of one's country.  A pirate, indeed, in those days,
was synonymous with the individual who was termed a privateersman at the
time of the Napoleonic wars.  George Saint Leger, although a perfectly
honest and even God-fearing young man, received old Radlett's hint, with
all that it implied, without turning a hair, for it implied nothing
worse than he had contemplated from the moment when he first heard of
his brother's capture.  It was generally agreed, at that time, that it
was not only quite lawful but actually meritorious to make war upon and
spoil the enemy of one's country, and Spain was England's enemy just
then, secretly at all events.  Many people maintained that she was God's
enemy as well, therefore it was deemed doubly meritorious to make war
upon her; so George Saint Leger had not the ghost of a scruple with
regard to his projected raid upon the ports of the Spanish Main.

So the bargain was struck there and then, even to the drafting in
duplicate and signing by both parties of a document setting forth the
several terms and conditions of the agreement.  After this George Saint
Leger departed for home with a light step and a still lighter heart, to
tell his mother the good news.  And she, poor soul, listened to him with
strangely mingled feelings; for on the one hand her heart was racked and
torn with anxiety and fear for her elder son, a captive in the hands of
men whose cruelties to enemies, and especially to so-called heretics,
were even then sending thrills of horror and dismay through the
Protestant world, while her nights were rendered sleepless by the
visions of awful torments, conjured up by her too vivid imagination,
which that son might even then be enduring.  No wonder was it that,
under such circumstances, the one great and paramount desire that
possessed her, to the exclusion of all other things, was the deliverance
of Hubert from the fate which she pictured for him.  Yet, when it came
to the point of consenting to the going of her second son to the rescue
of her first, her very soul sickened within her lest George, instead of
effecting his brother's deliverance, should himself fall into the toils.
For she, like those merchants whom the lad had unavailingly approached,
was convinced that the lad was altogether too young, too immature, too
inexperienced to undertake the responsibility of leading such an
expedition, and if he should fail, her last state would be worse than
her first.  And what hope of success for him dared she entertain at the
very moment when all England was being profoundly stirred at the news of
Hawkins' and Drake's disastrous failure?  If they, seasoned and
experienced mariners as they were, found themselves unable to stand
against the might of Spain, what chance, she constantly asked herself,
would such a mere boy as her George have?  Thus she was swayed by first
one form of terror and then the other until her reason threatened to
give way altogether under the strain, and in sheer desperation she
sought, quite unavailingly, to find distraction in preparing George's
wardrobe for the voyage.  As for George, he saw the terrible struggle
through which his beloved mother was passing, read her every thought,
realised her every fear, and when he was not engaged at the shipyard
with old Radlett, devoted himself strenuously to the almost superhuman
task of allaying those fears, driving them out, and infusing some
measure of hopefulness in their place.  And so energetically did he
strive that at length he actually succeeded in convincing not only Mrs
Saint Leger, but also himself, that the expedition would certainly be
successful and that he would be able to bring home his brother safe and
sound.

Meanwhile, old Si Radlett was nothing if not thorough in his methods,
and, having made up his mind to engage in a speculation that, if
decidedly risky, might yet result in enormous profit to himself, allowed
no grass to grow under his feet.  Every man in his yard was at once
detailed for service on and about the _Nonsuch_, the cradle was built,
and on a certain raw but brilliant morning of early March, Mrs Saint
Leger, well wrapped up in furs, was escorted by George to the shipyard
in Millbay, where she had undertaken to preside at the launch of, and
perform the ceremony of christening, the ship which was to bear one of
her sons across the tempestuous Atlantic to the rescue of the other.

The launch of a ship in those days was a much less ceremonious affair
than it is to-day, yet the piety of the time was so real, and so
intimately pervaded the affairs of daily life, that a short religious
service was deemed as necessary at the christening of a ship as at that
of a child; and accordingly a small platform was erected under the bows
of the _Nonsuch_, where, with Mrs Saint Leger beside him, the vicar of
the church in which old Radlett worshipped every Sunday morning, read
certain passages of scripture, preached a short sermon, and then offered
up special prayers beseeching God's blessing upon the ship.  After this
the spur-shores were knocked away, and to the blare of trumpets and the
roll of drums, Mrs Saint Leger dashed a bottle of wine against the
great cutwater of the gaily bedizened ship as she began to move down the
ways, exclaiming, as she did so:

"God bless the good ship _Nonsuch_ and all who are to sail in her!"  And
she said it not perfunctorily, but from her heart; for the lives and
fortunes of the two who were nearest and dearest to her in the whole
world were irrevocably bound up with the ship.

George did not occupy the platform beside his mother.  As soon as he had
seen her safely placed, he made his way to a point in the yard from
which he could advantageously view the plunge of the ship into "her
native element," and his heart thrilled with joy and pride as he noted
with a keen, appreciative, and understanding eye the manner in which the
hull took the water, the buoyancy with which, after the first deep
plunge, she rose to her bearings and sat upon a perfectly even keel, and
the cleanness with which she divided the water as she drove out toward
the middle of the bay.  Then, too, the craft being farther distant from
him than he had ever before viewed her, he was the better able to
observe the very marked differences in model which Radlett had
introduced into her design, the easier and more flowing lines, the more
graceful shape, the shallower hull, and the absence of those towering
fore and after castles which rendered the ships of those days so
awkward, crank, and uneasy in heavy weather; and he told himself grimly
that with such a ship as that, and with a good strong sturdy crew of
staunch Devonian hearts to back him up, it should not be his fault if he
did not make the word "Englishman" a name of dread from one end to the
other of the Spanish Main.

From the moment of the launch the preparations for the voyage progressed
rapidly, yet not as rapidly as George could have wished, for the time
was one of great difficulty and tension in England; war with France, or
Spain, or both, threatened to break out at any moment; the country was
swarming with spies, and it was therefore of vital importance to the
success of the expedition that the most absolute secrecy concerning it
should be maintained.  It was even necessary that the very existence of
the ship and the fact of her being fitted out should be noised abroad as
little as possible, for, as things then were, in the event of a crisis
arising it was quite upon the cards that the authorities might lay
forcible hands upon the craft and annex her for the service of the
country.  Such a condition of affairs militated very strongly indeed
against extreme rapidity of progress; yet so well did cunning old
Radlett manage that, in spite of everything, the process of rigging the
_Nonsuch_ and preparing her for sea went forward with surprising speed.
It was of course impossible to keep the fact of her fitting-out an
absolute secret from everybody, so when inquisitive people came prowling
about the wharf, asking all sorts of inconvenient questions, old Radlett
gave them to understand, with many nods and winks of mystery, that he
had it in his mind to see what could be done with her in the way of a
trading voyage to the eastern Indies, where, he understood, pots of
money were to be made by those who were willing to take a little risk.

Every day saw a little further progress made, an additional spar raised
into position and secured, a little more added to the complicated maze
of rigging; and meanwhile George, accompanied by Robert Dyer, who had
been hunted up the moment that his services could be made useful, went
hither and thither all over Plymouth and its neighbourhood, day after
day, hunting up desirable recruits, including many of the
_Bonaventure's_ former crew, until in process of time they contrived,
between them, to get together no less than one hundred men, all of them
of the true Devon breed, ready to go anywhere and do anything.  Under
ordinary conditions so large a crew would have found themselves cramped
for room in a ship of the _Nonsuch's_ tonnage.  But the _Nonsuch_ was
not designed for cargo carrying.  She was essentially a fighting ship,
her cargo-space being only about half the capacity of other ships of her
size, the remainder of the hold being fitted to serve as a spacious
'tween-decks, affording accommodation for an even larger crew than
George and her owner had decided was necessary.  And, in addition to the
'tween-decks, there were of course the cabins, plainly but comfortably
fitted up, which included the captain's state cabin in the stern of the
ship, the main cabin, in which the officers would take their meals and
which would be used by them at other times as a council chamber and
general living-room, and cabins for the pilot or sailing master, the
captain of the soldiers, the chaplain, the surgeon, and the purser.

By the time that this formidable crew had been collected together the
_Nonsuch_ was practically complete, so far as rigging and equipment were
concerned, and a week later found her with provisions, water, powder,
and stores of every description on board, as well as her crew, and only
waiting for a fair wind to enable her to go to sea.  It was April, and
after a long spell of bitter north-easters the weather had changed, a
south-westerly wind had set in, with mild, rainy weather, and although
George declared himself ready to go to sea and attempt to beat down-
channel, old Radlett strenuously opposed the idea, upon the plea that it
would be merely a waste of time and a needless risking of the ship.  But
a day or two later a hint was brought to him to the effect that the
attention of the authorities had at last been directed to the _Nonsuch_
and the question of her being taken over by the Government was being
discussed, whereupon the old man withdrew his opposition, and, the
weather falling opportunely calm at the same moment, George took a hasty
farewell of his mother, hurried aboard, gave orders for the lowering and
manning of all boats, and on the afternoon of a certain balmy day of
mid-April, triumphantly towed his ship out to sea until, abreast of the
Mewstone, he fell in with a small southerly air to which he spread his
every sail and so passed out of sight to the westward, while Mrs Saint
Leger, having crossed to Mount Edgcumbe, stood on Rame Head, watching,
until the white sails vanished in the golden haze of evening.


CHAPTER FOUR.

HOW THE "NONSUCH" CAME TO TRINIDAD AND WAS CAREENED THERE.

In these strenuous days of severe competition and universal education,
when there are far more men anxious to obtain responsible positions than
there are responsible positions to be filled, a man often reaches middle
age before he is able to secure a command of the relative importance
conferred upon George Saint Leger when the latter was given the command
of the _Nonsuch_.  But in those days competition was nothing like so
keen as it is to-day, especially among seafarers, where men of education
were comparatively rare.  Such men were only needed to take command of
the ships which were being built to meet the requirements of England's
rapidly expanding trade with "foreign parts," and no sooner was a man
qualified to command than shipowners were glad enough to snap him up.
Also the sum of seafaring knowledge in those days was infinitely less
than it is now.  The art of navigation was, comparatively speaking, in
its infancy, and it was therefore quite possible to produce a finished
seaman in the space of five years, or even less.  Consequently there
were many Elizabethan captains who were little more than boys when they
obtained their first command, the immortal Drake, Saint Leger's
illustrious contemporary, being among them.  Boys began life earlier
then than they do now, and consequently were often occupying positions
of great responsibility at an age when the public school-boy of the
present day is just beginning to think of abandoning his studies in
order to enter upon a career.  Hence it is not surprising that, after
seven years of active sea life, George Saint Leger, young as he was, was
deemed by his old friend Radlett as fully qualified to command what in
those days was considered a very fine ship, and to head an expedition of
very great importance.  True, Mr Marshall, the owner of the
_Bonaventure_, had expressed some doubt as to George being old enough
for the responsibility of command, but he did not know the lad so well
as old Si Radlett did, and had not followed his career with the same
interest; and no sooner was the _Nonsuch_ clear of the channel--which
event occurred on the day following that of her departure from
Plymouth--than the young commander began to justify the confidence which
his new owner had reposed in him.

For, undoubtedly, George Saint Leger was a born seaman.  Not only did he
ardently love the sea and everything connected with it, but he early
developed a faculty of understanding ships, their tackling, and how to
handle them.  Knowledge that some men acquired only slowly and with
difficulty he seemed to grasp intuitively.  The mysteries of navigation
soon ceased to be mysterious to him, and seven years of active sea
experience had taught him all that there was to learn in the way of
handling a crew and training it to work together in such a manner that
its efforts might be employed to the best advantage.  Therefore, once
fairly at sea, he began to sedulously exercise his crew, first in the
work of reducing and making sail, until he had brought them to a pitch
of unsurpassable perfection in that particular direction.  Then he as
sedulously drilled them in tacking, veering, and other manoeuvres.
Finally, he exercised them at the guns, putting them through all the
actions of loading, aiming, firing, and sponging out their weapons--but
without much expenditure of his precious ammunition--until there was
probably no smarter or capable crew afloat than that of the _Nonsuch_.
It must not be supposed that all this was accomplished without
developing a certain amount of friction.  The ship had not been it sea a
full week before her young commander discovered that, despite all his
care, he had picked up a few grumblers and shirkers who failed to see
the necessity for so much strenuous training, but it was just here that
his own personal gifts came to the front.  By dint of argument,
raillery, and--in one or two particularly bad and obdurate cases--
judicious chastisement he finally succeeded in, what is termed in modern
parlance, "licking them into shape."

The usual course to the West Indies in those days was by way of the
Azores and the Cape Verdes, at one or both of which places ships were
wont to renew their supplies of wood, water, and provisions, and from
the last of which mariners shaped a due west course before the trade-
winds.  But, as already hinted, George Saint Leger was a young man of
somewhat original ideas, and geography was one of his favourite studies.
He knew that the direct course from the chops of the channel, was, as
nearly as might be, south-west; therefore he determined to steer a
south-westerly course whenever the wind would permit, instead of
following the usual long route via the Azores and the Cape Verde
islands; but with the assistance of a roughly made globe he had also
puzzled out the fact, not then generally recognised, that in the
latitude of sixty degrees a degree of longitude was only about half the
length of the same degree at the equator, therefore he also determined
to make as much westing as possible at the very outset of his voyage.
And this he was able to do with very satisfactory results, for the light
southerly air which had sprung up and met him when he towed his ship out
of Plymouth Sound not only freshened up into a brisk breeze of such
strength that he could only show "topgallants"--as they were then
called--to it by rather bold "carrying-on," but it lasted a full week,
during which the reckoning showed that the ship--which proved to be
amazingly fast--had sailed a distance of fully twelve hundred miles, or
more than half the distance between England and Newfoundland.  Then a
westerly gale sprang up, which lasted nine days, during which the
_Nonsuch_, under close-reefed canvas, drove southward to the latitude of
Madeira, where the ship encountered calms and light variable winds for
five days before falling in with the trade-winds; after which the
troubles of the voyagers were over.  For thereupon ensued not only a
constant fair wind, but also fine weather, so that the ship sailed on
day after day over a sparkling, gently heaving sea of deepest blue
tipped with tiny creaming foam-caps out of which leaped those marine
marvels the flying-fish in countless shoals as the bows clove the
roaring surges, while overhead the sky daily assumed a deeper, richer
tint of sapphire, out of which the sun, scarcely veiled by the solemn
drifting trade-clouds, shot his beams with ever-increasing ardour.

And then, at dawn of the thirty-first day after their departure from
Plymouth, there was sighted, on the extreme verge of the western
horizon, a small wedge-like shape of filmy grey which Dyer, the pilot,
pronounced to be the island of Barbados, and the crew, weary by this
time of a whole month's gazing upon nothing but sea and sky, swarmed up
on deck at the welcome cry of "Land ho!" and leaned over the bows,
gazing rapturously at the little spot of solid earth as it grew in size
and strengthened in tint.  And lo! as they gazed a cloud formed over the
island, darkening it into shadow.  The underside of the cloud was black
and threatening, and presently its bosom shot forth vivid lightnings,
green, blue, rosy red, and sun-bright flashes of dazzling brilliancy,
the low, deep booming of thunder was heard, and soon the island vanished
behind a violet veil of tropical rain, only to reappear, a quarter of an
hour later, fresh, green, and sparkling in the ardent rays of the tropic
sun.

But as the ship sped on it was seen, to the bitter disappointment of
all, and especially of those who were beginning to suffer from that
terrible scourge of sailors, scurvy, that it was not the intention of
the young captain to call there, and deep murmurings of discontent arose
as the _Nonsuch_ went rolling past the southern extremity of the island,
at a distance of not more than a mile, and it was seen to be covered
with tropical trees glorious in every conceivable shade of green and
gorgeous with many-tinted flowers, for it seemed a very fairy land to
those men, whose eyes were weary of the unending sameness of sea and
sky, day after day, for thirty-one days.  Besides, many of those trees
doubtless bore luscious fruits, and oh! how grateful would those fruits
be to the palates of men dry and burnt with a solid month of feeding
upon salt beef and pork!  George heard the murmurings and saw the black
looks, and called Dyer to him.  Then the two went forward.  Mounting the
topgallant-forecastle, where he could be seen and heard by everybody,
George waved his hand for silence, and presently began to speak.

"Men of Devon," he said, "I perceive that you are disappointed because I
do not intend to touch at yonder island.  And I can well understand your
disappointment, for truly never have I seen a fairer sight than it
presents.  I can tell, by my own feelings, how greatly you would enjoy a
run ashore there.  But, lads, there is a good reason for our avoidance
of that island, and it is this.  God has been very good to us, so far,
in granting us such a splendid passage across the vast Atlantic ocean;
but splendid as that passage is, it has still been long enough to
develop scurvy among us; and at the suggestion of Doctor Chichester, I
have decided, in council, that before making our attempt against the
Spaniards I will put in and give you all a fortnight ashore, both to
regain your health and also to careen the ship and remove the weed which
you have only to look overside to see.  Judging from sight alone, no
better harbourage could we find than that which we have just passed.
But, men, our pilot tells me that the place--which is named Barbados--is
much frequented by the Spaniards, if indeed they have not already taken
possession of it; and we should find ourselves in sorry plight if, while
the ship is hove down, two or three Spanish sail were to appear and
attack us.  Doubtless we should beat them off; but we've not come all
this way to fight just for fighting's sake.  I fight when and where I
choose, and to please myself, not the enemy.  Therefore, instead of
touching at Barbados, where we are liable to attack, we are going two
days' sail farther on, to an island twenty times as big as Barbados,
twenty times as beautiful, and quite safe, because, beautiful as the
island is, the Spaniards have not yet found time to settle upon it.  Mr
Dyer, here, knows the place, and he'll tell you all about it."  And he
stood aside, giving place to the pilot.

"Shipmates," said Dyer, turning to the crowd of eager-eyed men clustered
thickly about the deck below him, "you do all look most terrible
disapp'inted because we'm leavin' thicky island astern, instead of goin'
in and anchorin' before mun.  But though he do look so good and enticin'
he baint quite so good as he do look.  For all about here--and this here
island o' Barbados in partic'lar--I've heard tell be subject to the most
dreadful hurricanes that it's possible for mortal man to imagine, and we
don't want to go in there and have our ship hove half a mile up into the
woods by a storm-wave so that she won't be no more use to us.  Besides
that, as our cap'n have said, the place is used, off and on, by the
Spaniards, and we don't want 'em to come lookin' for us until we be
ready to meet 'em.  So we'm going on a matter o' two days' sail to the
most beautiful island in these here parts, called Trinidad, after the
impious fashion o' the Spaniards, where I knows of a fine, snug little
cove where the ship'll be so safe as ever she was to Millbay, and where
we needn't fear either hurricanes or Spaniards.  There we can take our
ease and enj'y the lovely fruits that the Almighty have provided for the
refreshment of poor sea-worn mariners."

"Then, baint there no Spaniards to Trinidad, Mr Dyer?" demanded one of
the men.

"Not yet there baint," answered Dyer.  "Doubtless in time they'll find
their way there; but at present they'm so eager after gold that they
only settles where gold is to be found.  And there's no gold in
Trinidad, nothin' but harmless Indians, and fruit in plenty--and snakes.
You'll have to be wary and keep a good look out for snakes, when you
gets ashore to Trinidad; but that du hold good of all the Indies."

So the men settled down again to wait in patience for the appearance of
the earthly paradise promised them by Dyer, and, sure enough, the dawn
of the second day after passing Barbados revealed high land on the
larboard bow, serrated in outline, and tree-crowned to its very summit.
As the ship stood on, driven smoothly forward by the good trade-wind,
bringing the saw-like ridges back toward the beam, it was seen that the
land consisted of two islands instead of one, the nearer and lesser of
which is to-day known as Tobago.  But Dyer knew nothing of Tobago,
whereas he had been inside the Gulf of Paria once before; therefore the
_Nonsuch_ held steadily on until Tobago drew out clear upon the larboard
quarter, when a break in the continuity of the land ahead was descried,
and presently this break revealed itself as an opening full ten miles
wide, in the eastern half of which stood three islands--or four, rather,
for upon a still nearer approach it was seen that the middle island was
divided into two by a channel so narrow that at a little distance it
looked as though a man might leap across it.  And upon either side of
the opening, up sprang the land sheer out of the sea to a height of
eighteen hundred feet, steep, and shaggy, with tropical foliage of the
most varied and glorious tints.

Straight for the centre of the passage between the middle and the most
easterly island steered Dyer, and when presently the ship entered the
passage and her sails were almost becalmed by the intervention of the
high land to windward, the amazed seamen found themselves entering a
magnificent land-locked gulf so deep and so wide that they could not
determine the limits of it.  It was not until some time afterward that
they found it to measure some fifty miles deep by ninety miles wide!
And thus they got their first glimpse of the wonderful Gulf of Paria.

Once clear of the passage--now known as the Boca de Huevos--Dyer trimmed
his yards flat and brought the ship as close to the wind as she would
lay, keenly watching the various points and indentations as they opened
out, one after the other, until at length a group of five small tree-
crowned islets opened out clear of an intervening island, when he rubbed
his hands and chuckled delightedly.

"Ah, ah!" he exclaimed, "there a be, there a be!  I was a'most beginnin'
to fear as I'd forgot, or that an earthquake had happened, or somethin'.
But 'tis all right.  You see they five little bits of islands away over
yonder, Cap'n?  Well, they be my landmarks, and as soon as we've stood
far enough on to fetch 'em we'll go about."

As the ship opened out from under the lee of the weather shore it was
found that the trade-wind was piping up briskly athwart the gulf, but
notwithstanding this it was nearly an hour before the _Nonsuch_ had
reached far enough to the southward to enable her to make the islets on
the next tack, and when at length she was hove about it was another full
hour before she glided close past a low point and rounding-to, let go
her anchor in three fathoms, in a snug little cove that looked as though
it had been specially formed for the careening of ships.

The cove was situated within a bay, and was formed by a hook-like
projection of land high enough not only to hide the ship from the view
of any chance voyager who might happen to enter the gulf for
reconnoitring purposes, but also effectually to protect her in the
unlikely event of the trade-wind dying down and giving place to a gale
from the westward.  Moreover, the high land to the eastward so
effectually protected the place from the trade-wind that a perpetual
calm existed in the cove, even when the trade-wind was piping up with
the strength of half a gale a few hundred yards away.  The shore was a
narrow strip of sandy beach, completely submerged at high water, beyond
which lay a space of low, flat ground about half a mile in width,
gradually rising as it receded from the shore, and running up in a sort
of tongue for a distance of about two miles between two lofty, steep-
sided hills, densely covered with trees of various kinds, while the
entire shore, for miles in either direction, was thickly fringed with
coconut trees.  Strangely enough, for some unknown reason, the ground
between the narrow fringe of coconut trees bounding the shore-line and
the base of the hills, was bare of trees, the soil being covered with a
dense growth of guinea-grass, with a few bushes and flowering shrubs
sparsely dotted about here and there--it therefore offered ideal
facilities for camping.

After George and the surgeon, accompanied by Dyer, had gone ashore and
very carefully inspected the place, it was decided at once to unbend the
ship's sails, carry them ashore, and temporarily convert them into tents
for the accommodation of all hands, which would afford the sick an
opportunity to recover their health and strength while the operation of
careening and scraping the ship was proceeding.  This was accordingly
done, and by nightfall the camp was ready for occupation, and the entire
crew, with the exception of an anchor watch, slept ashore that night.

The following day was devoted to the task of transferring to the shore
the whole of the ordnance, weapons, ammunition, and a considerable
portion of the ship's stores, one party attending to this business while
a second party, under George's personal supervision, proceeded to
entrench the camp and otherwise put it into a state of defence, a third
party of half-a-dozen men, under Chichester, the surgeon, exploring the
woods in the immediate neighbourhood in search of fruit, of which they
brought in large quantities, consisting of bananas, mangoes, prickly
pears, _ananas_, custard-apples, soursops, guavas, and a sackful of
coconuts which Dyer showed the men how to open so that they could get at
and quaff the refreshing "milk."  And oh, how delighted everybody was to
find himself in this tropical island paradise, where strange fruits of
the most exquisite flavour were to be had for the mere trouble of
plucking, where the air was fragrant with a thousand mingled perfumes,
where there was a perfect riot of flowers of strange shapes and most
gorgeous colouring to delight the eye, and where humming-birds flashed
hither and thither like living gems in the dazzling, blistering rays of
the sun.  True, there were one or two drawbacks--the heat, for instance,
was terrific in that hemmed-in valley where only a transient breathing
of the trade-wind penetrated at rare intervals; and the men soon found
that paradise still harboured the serpent, for several snakes were seen
and one was killed--a diabolically handsome but most wicked-looking
creature clothed in a skin of greyish black ornamented with a diamond
pattern consisting of lattice-like lines of yellow, and having the flat
heart-shaped head which betrayed its venomous character.  Also there
were innumerable insects and creeping things, notably centipedes up to a
foot in length, whose bite would certainly result in several hours of
excruciating agony which might even terminate in death, and small black
ants which insinuated themselves between a man's clothing and his skin
and tormented him to the verge of madness.  But these things troubled
the men very little, for under Dyer's tuition they soon learned how to
protect themselves against the plagues; and meanwhile the salubrious
air, the luscious fruits, the perfume from the flower-laden woods, and
the many beautiful sights which surrounded them were real things in the
enjoyment of which they forgot all drawbacks.  Thus far, no natives, or
human beings of any sort other than themselves, had been seen the
inference therefore was that the island, at all events that part of it
in which the Englishmen had established themselves, was uninhabited, and
they therefore went about their work without fear of disturbance or
interruption of any kind.

By the end of the week the ship was empty and all ready for heaving
down; and when the men knocked off work on the Saturday night George let
it be known that nothing would be done on the following day, and that
after divine service in the morning all hands would be free for the rest
of the day, and at liberty to amuse themselves as they pleased.
Nevertheless he warned them all not to stray far from the camp, and even
then to keep together in little companies of half a dozen or so, and
also to go fully armed.  For although they had seen no natives thus far,
it was quite possible that the woods might be full of them, watching and
only waiting for an opportunity--when the English were off their guard--
to rush the camp and destroy every one of its occupants.  Accordingly,
on the Sunday, after prayers and an early dinner, those who were bent
upon exploration armed themselves and wandered off up the valley in
small parties in accordance with George's directions.  But the heat was
so intense that few of the men were disposed to ramble very far.  They
had been working hard ever since the arrival of the ship and were more
disposed to spend the day in camp, resting quietly or practising archery
at the butts which they set up.

Seeing this, George, the parson, and the surgeon decided to rig the
quarter boat and proceed on a voyage of exploration eastward in her; and
this they did, arriving, after a beat to windward of some five and a
half miles, off the mouth of a river which seemed to be discharging down
a long and very tempting-looking valley.  There were no natives to be
seen, or any signs of them; therefore, tempted by the possibilities
which the exploration of the river held out to them, they entered and
sailed up it until it shoaled so much and its bed became so obstructed
with rocks that the boat could proceed no farther.  Then it became a
question whether they should adopt the dictates of prudence and return
to the ship, or whether they should risk something by landing and pursue
the further exploration of the river on foot.  Eventually they decided
that as the afternoon was still young, and nothing had been seen that
was in the slightest degree alarming or suggestive of possible danger,
they would take such small amount of risk as was involved in landing and
investigate the course of the river a little farther, the beauties of
the place very strongly appealing to them.  Accordingly they landed,
concealing the boat beneath the foliage of a remarkable tree that
conveniently overhung the stream.

Having cunningly hid the boat and looked carefully to the priming of
their firearms, the adventurous trio stepped ashore, George, with drawn
sword, leading, while Chichester, the surgeon, brought up the rear.
They were compelled to closely follow the course of the stream, since
the woods on either hand were so dense and impenetrable that it would
have been impossible to pass through them, save by hewing their way, and
this was of course not to be thought of.  Besides, it was the river that
they desired to explore, since only by following its banks could
anything be seen of the many strange and beautiful things that
surrounded them; therefore they pressed forward, now on the solid ground
close by the river margin, and now scrambling, ankle and sometimes knee
deep, along the boulder-strewn bed of the stream itself, pausing at
frequent intervals to admire some forest giant dressed in vivid scarlet
blossoms instead of leaves, or another thickly festooned with trailing
creepers gorgeous with blooms of marvellous form and most extravagant
hue, or a graceful clump of bamboo, soaring like gigantic plumes of
feathers a hundred feet into the heat-palpitating air.  Frequently, too,
they halted to watch the motions of some tiny humming-bird hovering like
a living gem over the cup of a flower, or the flight of a gaudily
painted kingfisher or parrot.  A great silence pervaded the woods, for
the trees were for the most part so lofty that the sough of the wind in
their topmost branches was inaudible, and it was the hour when the
insect world indulged in its daily siesta.  Animals there were none to
be seen, but an occasional sudden quick rustle of the grass told them
that snakes were to be watched for and guarded against.

In this fashion the trio proceeded slowly up the river, talking but
little save when one of them in a low voice directed the attention of
the others to some object worthy of notice, until gradually their ears
caught a sound which told them that they were approaching a waterfall;
and five minutes later they sighted it close at hand--and involuntarily
halted, struck dumb and motionless for the moment by the extraordinary
beauty of the picture which lay before them.  The waterfall, the sound
of which had reached them a few minutes earlier, was some sixty feet in
height and about twelve feet wide, the river tumbling vertically down
the perpendicular face of the cliff into a wide basin, the lofty sides
of which were draped with the graceful fronds of giant ferns, the broad
leaves of the wild plantain, crimson-leaved acacias, enormous bunches of
maidenhair, and several varieties of plant and bush, the names of which
were unknown to the trio of gazers, and which were brilliant with
blossoms of the most lovely hues.  The fall leaped out of a kind of
tunnel formed by the intertwined branches of overhanging trees, the
sombre foliage of which was brightened by numerous festoons of flowering
creepers.  But it was not so much the extraordinary fairy-like beauty of
the scene as a whole--the charm of which was further enhanced by the
loveliness of the humming-birds and great butterflies that flitted
hither and thither in the cool, spray-laden atmosphere of the place--nor
the marvellous profusion of new and wonderful flowers of every
conceivable tint that everywhere met the eye, which so powerfully
fascinated the beholder; it was the wonderful, exquisite blue colour of
the water in the basin itself, which, although of crystalline
transparency, receives its marvellous colouring through some freak of
sky reflection penetrating through the branches of the overhanging
trees.  The effect of this wonderful colouring must be seen to be
appreciated.  And it is seen and admired every day by enthusiastic
sightseers, some of whom have journeyed thousands of miles to feast
their eyes upon the beauties of the famous Blue Basin of Trinidad, which
is not very greatly altered now from what it was when those three
adventurous Devonians stood and gazed enraptured upon it, probably the
first white men who ever beheld its magic loveliness.

For a space the trio stood spellbound, silent and motionless; then the
spell relaxed its grip upon them sufficiently to permit of renewed
movement and speech, and they burst into rapturous ejaculations as they
moved forward to gaze again at closer quarters.

"Beautiful! beautiful beyond the power of human mind to imagine, or
human tongue to tell," exclaimed "Sir" Thomas Cole, the ship's chaplain.
said the Antiquary, his brow darkening with wrath.

But Hector stoutly abode the storm; like many a sturdy Celt, he imagined
the honour of his country and native language connected with the
authenticity of these popular poems, and would have fought knee-deep,
or forfeited life and land, rather than have given up a line of
them.

He therefore undauntedly maintained, that Rory MAlpin could repeat the
whole book from one end to another;--and it was only upon cross-examination
that he explained an assertion so general, by adding "At least,
if he was allowed whisky enough, he could repeat as long as anybody
would hearken to him."

"Ay, ay," said the Antiquary; "and that, I suppose, was not very long."

"Why, we had our duty, sir, to attend to, and could not sit listening
all night to a piper."
"But do you recollect, now," said Oldbuck, setting his teeth firmly
together, and speaking without opening them, which was his custom when
contradicted--"Do you recollect, now, any of these verses you thought
so beautiful and interesting--being a capital judge, no doubt, of
such things?"

"I don't pretend to much skill, uncle; but it's not very reasonable
to be angry with me for admiring the antiquities of my own country
more than those of the Harolds, Harfagers, and Hacos you are so fond
of."
"Why, these, sir--these mighty and unconquered Goths--_were_ your
ancestors! The bare-breeched Celts whom theysubdued, and suffered only
to exist, like a fearful people, in the crevices of the rocks,
were but their Mancipia and Serfs!"
Hector's brow now grew red in his turn. "Sir," he said, "I don't understand
the meaning of Mancipia and Serfs, but I conceive that such names are
very improperly applied to Scotch Highlanders: no man but my mother's
brother dared to have used such language in my presence; and I pray
you will observe, that I consider it as neither hospitable, handsome,
kind, nor generous usage towards your guest and your kinsman.
My ancestors, Mr. Oldbuck"--
"Were great and gallant chiefs, I dare say, Hector; and really I did
not mean to give you such immense offence in treating a point of
remote antiquity, a subject on which I always am myself cool, deliberate,
and unimpassioned. But you are as hot and hasty, as if you were Hector
and Achilles, and Agamemnon to boot."
"I am sorry I expressed myself so hastily, uncle, especially to you, who
have been so generous and good. But my ancestors"--
"No more about it, lad; I meant them no affront--none."
"I'm glad of it, sir; for the house of M'Intyre"--
"Peace be with them all, every man of them," said the Antiquary. "But to
return to our subject--Do you recollect, I say, any of those poems
which afforded you such amusement?"
"Very hard this," thought M'Intyre, "that he will speak with such glee
of everything which is ancient, excepting my family. "--Then, after some
efforts at recollection, he added aloud, "Yes, sir,--I think I do
remember some lines; but you do not understand the Gaelic language."

"And will readily excuse hearing it. But you can give me some idea of the
sense in our own vernacular idiom?"
"I shall prove a wretched interpreter," said M'Intyre, running over the
original, well garnished with _aghes, aughs,_ and _oughs,_ and similar
gutterals, and then coughing and hawking as if the translation stuck
in his throat.

At length, having premised that the poem was a dialogue between
the poet Oisin, or Ossian, and Patrick, the tutelar Saint of Ireland, and
that it was difficult, if not impossible, to render the exquisite
felicity of the first two or three lines, he said the sense was to this
purpose:

"Patrick the psalm-singer, Since you will not listen to one of my
stories, Though you never heard it before, I am sorry to tell you
You are little better than an ass"-- 
"Good!

good!" exclaimed the Antiquary; "but go on. Why, this is, after all, the
most admirable fooling--I dare say the poet was very right. What
says the Saint?"
"He replies in character," said M'Intyre; "but you should hear MAlpin
sing the original. The speeches of Ossian come in upon a strong deep
bass--those of Patrick are upon a tenor key."
"Like MAlpin's drone and small pipes, I suppose," said Oldbuck. "Well?
Pray go on."
"Well then, Patrick replies to Ossian:

Upon my word, son of Fingal, While I am warbling the psalms, The clamour
of your old women's tales Disturbs my devotional exercises."
"Excellent!--why, this is better and better. I hope Saint Patrick
sung better than Blattergowl's precentor, or it would be hang--choice
between the poet and psalmist. But what I admire is the courtesy of these
two eminent persons towards each other. It is a pity there should not
be a word of this in Macpherson's translation."
"If you are sure of that," said M'Intyre, gravely, "he must have
taken very unwarrantable liberties with his original."
"It will go near to be thought so shortly--but pray proceed."
"Then," said M'Intyre, "this is the answer of Ossian:

Dare you compare your psalms, You son of a--"
"Son of a what?" exclaimed Oldbuck.

"It means, I think," said the young soldier, with some reluctance,
"son of a female dog:

Do you compare your psalms, To the tales of the bare-arm'd Fenians"
"Are you sure you are translating that last epithet correctly, Hector?"

"Quite sure, sir," answered Hector, doggedly.

"Because I should have thought the nudity might have been quoted as
existing in a different part of the body."
Disdaining to reply to this insinuation, Hector proceeded in his recitation:

"I shall think it no great harm To wring your bald head from your
shoulders--
But what is that yonder?" exclaimed Hector, interrupting himself.

"One of the herd of Proteus," said the Antiquary--"a _phoca,_ or seal,
lying asleep on the beach."
Upon which M'Intyre, with the eagerness of a young sportsman, totally
forgot both Ossian, Patrick, his uncle, and his wound, and
exclaiming--"I shall have her! I shall have her!"

snatched the walking-stick out of the hand of the astonished Antiquary,
at some risk of throwing him down, and set off at full speed to get
between the animal and the sea, to which element, having caught the
alarm, she was rapidly retreating.

Not Sancho, when his master interrupted his account of the combatants of
Pentapolin with the naked arm, to advance in person to the charge of the
flock of sheep, stood more confounded than Oldbuck at this sudden
escapade of his nephew.

"Is the devil in him," was his first exclamation, "to go to disturb
the brute that was never thinking of him!"

--Then elevating his voice, "Hector--nephew--fool--let alone the
_Phoca_--let alone the _Phoca_!-- they bite, I tell you, like furies. He
minds me no more than a post.
There--there they are at it--Gad, the _Phoca_ has the best of it! I am
glad to see it," said he, in the bitterness of his heart, though really
alarmed for his nephew's safety--"I am glad to see it, with all
my heart and spirit."

In truth, the seal, finding her retreat intercepted by the light-footed
soldier, confronted him manfully, and having sustained a heavy blow
without injury, she knitted her brows, as is the fashion of the
animal when incensed, and making use at once of her fore-paws and
her unwieldy strength, wrenched the weapon out of the assailant's
hand, overturned him on the sands, and scuttled away into the sea,
without doing him any farther injury.

Captain M'Intyre, a good deal out of countenance at the issue of his
exploit, just rose in time to receive the ironical congratulations
of his uncle, upon a single combat worthy to be commemorated by Ossian
himself, "since," said the Antiquary, "your magnanimous opponent
has fled, though not upon eagle's wings, from the foe that was
low--Egad, she walloped away with all the grace of triumph, and
has carried my stick off also, by way of _spolia opima._"
M'Intyre had little to answer for himself, except that a Highlander
could never pass a deer, a seal, or a salmon, where there was a
possibility of having a trial of skill with them, and that he had
forgot one of his arms was in a sling.

He also made his fall an apology for returning back to Monkbarns, and
thus escape the farther raillery of his uncle, as well as his lamentations
for his walking-stick.

"I cut it," he said, "in the classic woods of Hawthornden, when I did
not expect always to have been a bachelor--I would not have given it
for an ocean of seals--O Hector! Hector!--thy namesake was born to be
the prop of Troy, and thou to be the plague of Monkbarns!"

CHAPTER TENTH.

Tell me not of it, friend--when the young weep, Their tears are luke-warm
brine;--from your old eyes Sorrow falls down like hail-drops of the
North, Chilling the furrows of our withered cheeks, Cold as our hopes,
and hardened as our feeling-- Theirs, as they fall, sink sightless--ours
recoil, Heap the fair plain, and bleaken all before us.
Old Play.

The Antiquary, being now alone, hastened his pace, which had been
retarded by these various discussions, and the rencontre which had closed
them, and soon arrived before the half-dozen cottages at Mussel-crag.

They had now, in addition to their usual squalid and uncomfortable
appearance, the melancholy attributes of the house of mourning.

The boats were all drawn up on the beach; and, though the day was fine,
and the season favourable, the chant, which is used by the fishers when
at sea, was silent, as well as the prattle of the children, and the shrill
song of the mother, as she sits mending her nets by the door. A few
of the neighbours, some in their antique and well-saved suits of black,
others in their ordinary clothes, but all bearing an expression of
mournful sympathy with distress so sudden and unexpected, stood gathered
around the door of Mucklebackit's cottage, waiting till "the body was
lifted." As the Laird of Monkbarns approached, they made way for
him to enter, doffing their hats and bonnets as he passed, with an
air of melancholy courtesy, and he returned their salutes in the same
manner.

In the inside of the cottage was a scene which our Wilkie alone could have
painted, with that exquisite feeling of nature that characterises his
enchanting productions,
The body was laid in its coffin within the wooden bedstead which the
young fisher had occupied while alive. At a little distance stood the
father, whose ragged weather-beaten countenance, shaded by his grizzled
hair, had faced many a stormy night and night-like day. He was apparently
revolving his loss in his mind, with that strong feeling of painful grief
peculiar to harsh and rough characters, which almost breaks forth into
hatred against the world, and all that remain in it, after the beloved
object is withdrawn. The old man had made the most desperate efforts to
save his son, and had only been withheld by main force from renewing
them at a moment when, without the possibility of assisting the sufferer,
he must himself have perished. All this apparently was boiling in his
recollection. His glance was directed sidelong towards the coffin, as
to an object on which he could not stedfastly look, and yet from
which he could not withdraw his eyes. His answers to the necessary
questions which were occasionally put to him, were brief, harsh, and
almost fierce. His family had not yet dared to address to him a word,
either of sympathy or consolation. His masculine wife, virago as she
was, and absolute mistress of the family, as she justly boasted herself,
on all ordinary occasions, was, by this great loss, terrified into
silence and submission, and compelled to hide from her husband's
observation the bursts of her female sorrow. As he had rejected food ever
since the disaster had happened, not daring herself to approach
him, she had that morning, with affectionate artifice, employed the
youngest and favourite child to present her husband with some nourishment.
His first action was to put it from him with an angry violence
that frightened the child; his next, to snatch up the boy and devour
him with kisses. "Yell be a bra' fallow, an ye be spared, Patie,--but
ye'll never--never can be--what he was to me!--He has sailed the coble
wi' me since he was ten years auld, and there wasna the like o' him drew
a net betwixt this and Buchan-ness.

--They say folks maun submit--I will try."
And he had been silent from that moment until compelled to answer the
necessary questions we have already noticed. Such was the disconsolate
state of the father.

In another corner of the cottage, her face covered by her apron, which
was flung over it, sat the mother--the nature of her grief
sufficiently indicated by the wringing of her hands, and the
convulsive agitation of the bosom, which the covering could not conceal.
Two of her gossips, officiously whispering into her ear the commonplace
topic of resignation under irremediable misfortune, seemed as if they
were endeavouring to stun the grief which they could not console.

The sorrow of the children was mingled with wonder at the preparations
they beheld around them, and at the unusual display of wheaten bread
and wine, which the poorest peasant, or fisher, offers to the
guests on these mournful occasions; and thus their grief for their brother's
death was almost already lost in admiration of the splendour of
his funeral.

But the figure of the old grandmother was the most remarkable of the
sorrowing group. Seated on her accustomed chair, with her usual air of
apathy, and want of interest in what surrounded her, she seemed every
now and then mechanically to resume the motion of twirling her
spindle; then to look towards her bosom for the distaff, although
both had been laid aside.

She would then cast her eyes about, as if surprised at missing the
usual implements of her industry, and appear struck by the black
colour of the gown in which they had dressed her, and embarrassed
by the number of persons by whom she was surrounded.

Then, finally, she would raise her head with a ghastly look, and
fix her eyes upon the bed which contained the coffin of her grandson,
as if she had at once, and for the first time, acquired sense to
comprehend her inexpressible calamity.

These alternate feelings of embarrassment, wonder, and grief, seemed to
succeed each other more than once upon her torpid features. But she
spoke not a word--neither had she shed a tear--nor did one of the
family understand, either from look or expression, to what extent she
comprehended the uncommon bustle around her. Thus she sat among the
funeral assembly like a connecting link between the surviving mourners
and the dead corpse which they bewailed--a being in whom the light
of existence was already obscured by the encroaching shadows of
death.

When Oldbuck entered this house of mourning, he was received by a
general and silent inclination of the head, and, according to the
fashion of Scotland on such occasions, wine and spirits and bread were
offered round to the guests. Elspeth, as these refreshments were
presented, surprised and startled the whole company by motioning
to the person who bore them to stop; then, taking a glass in her
hand, she rose up, and, as the smile of dotage played upon her
shrivelled features, she pronounced, with a hollow and tremulous voice,
"Wishing a' your healths, sirs, and often may we hae such merry meetings!"

All shrunk from the ominous pledge, and set down the untasted liquor with
a degree of shuddering horror, which will not surprise those who
know how many superstitions are still common on such occasions
among the Scottish vulgar.

But as the old woman tasted the liquor, she suddenly exclaimed with a sort
of shriek, "What's this?--this is wine--how should there be wine in my
son's house?--Ay," she continued with a suppressed groan, "I mind
the sorrowful cause now," and, dropping the glass from her hand,
she stood a moment gazing fixedly on the bed in which the coffin of her
grandson was deposited, and then sinking gradually into her seat,
she covered her eyes and forehead with her withered and pallid hand.

At this moment the clergyman entered the cottage. Mr. Blattergowl,
though a dreadful proser, particularly on the subject of augmentations,
localities, teinds, and overtures in that session of the General Assembly,
to which, unfortunately for his auditors, he chanced one year to act
as moderator, was nevertheless a good man, in the old Scottish presbyterian
phrase, God-ward and man-ward. No divine was more attentive in
visiting the sick and afflicted, in catechising the youth, in instructing
the ignorant, and in reproving the erring. And hence, notwithstanding
impatience of his prolixity and prejudices, personal or professional,
and notwithstanding, moreover, a certain habitual contempt for his
understanding, especially on affairs of genius and taste, on which
Blattergowl was apt to be diffuse, from his hope of one day fighting
his way to a chair of rhetoric or belles lettres,-- notwithstanding,
I say, all the prejudices excited against him by these circumstances,
our friend the Antiquary looked with great regard and respect on
the said Blattergowl, though I own he could seldom, even by his
sense of decency and the remonstrances of his womankind, be _hounded
out,_ as he called it, to hear him preach.

But he regularly took shame to himself for his absence when Blattergowl
came to Monkbarns to dinner, to which he was always invited of a Sunday,
a mode of testifying his respect which the proprietor probably
thought fully as agreeable to the clergyman, and rather more congenial
to his own habits.

To return from a digression which can only serve to introduce the
honest clergyman more particularly to our readers, Mr. Blattergowl had
no sooner entered the hut, and received the mute and melancholy
salutations of the company whom it contained, than he edged himself
towards the unfortunate father, and seemed to endeavour to slide in
a few words of condolence or of consolation. But the old man was incapable
as yet of receiving either; he nodded, however, gruffly, and shook
the clergyman's hand in acknowledgment of his good intentions, but was
either unable or unwilling to make any verbal reply.

The minister next passed to the mother, moving along the floor as slowly,
silently, and gradually, as if he had been afraid that the ground
would, like unsafe ice, break beneath his feet, or that the first
echo of a footstep was to dissolve some magic spell, and plunge
the hut, with all its inmates, into a subterranean abyss.

The tenor of what he had said to the poor woman could only be judged by
her answers, as, half-stifled by sobs ill-repressed, and by the covering
which she still kept over her countenance, she faintly answered at each
pause in his speech--"Yes, sir, yes!--Ye're very gude--ye're very
gude!--Nae doubt, nae doubt!--It's our duty to submit!--But, oh dear!
my poor Steenie! the pride o' my very heart, that was sae handsome and
comely, and a help to his family, and a comfort to us a', and a pleasure
to a' that lookit on him!

--Oh, my bairn!
my bairn! my bairn! what for is thou lying there!--and eh! what for
am I left to greet for ye!"
There was no contending with this burst of sorrow and natural affection.

Oldbuck had repeated recourse to his snuff-box to conceal the tears
which, despite his shrewd and caustic temper, were apt to start on
such occasions.

The female assistants whimpered, the men held their bonnets to their faces,
and spoke apart with each other. The clergyman, meantime, addressed
his ghostly consolation to the aged grandmother. At first she listened,
or seemed to listen, to what he said, with the apathy of her usual
unconsciousness.

But as, in pressing this theme, he approached so near to her ear that the
sense of his words became distinctly intelligible to her, though
unheard by those who stood more distant, her countenance at once
assumed that stern and expressive cast which characterized her
intervals of intelligence.

She drew up her head and body, shook her head in a manner that
showed at least impatience, if not scorn of his counsel, and waved her
hand slightly, but with a gesture so expressive, as to indicate
to all who witnessed it a marked and disdainful rejection of the
ghostly consolation proffered to her.

The minister stepped back as if repulsed, and, by lifting gently and
dropping his hand, seemed to show at once wonder, sorrow, and compassion
for her dreadful state of mind. The rest of the company sympathized, and
a stifled whisper went through them, indicating how much her
desperate and determined manner impressed them with awe, and even
horror.

In the meantime, the funeral company was completed, by the arrival of one
or two persons who had been expected from Fairport. The wine and spirits
again circulated, and the dumb show of greeting was anew
interchanged.

The grandame a second time took a glass in her hand, drank its contents,
and exclaimed, with a sort of laugh,--"Ha! ha! I hae tasted wine
twice in ae day--Whan did I that before, think ye, cummers?

--Never since"--and the transient glow vanishing from her countenance,
she set the glass down, and sunk upon the settle from whence she had
risen to snatch at it.

As the general amazement subsided, Mr. Oldbuck, whose heart bled to
witness what he considered as the errings of the enfeebled intellect
struggling with the torpid chill of age and of sorrow, observed to
the clergyman that it was time to proceed with the ceremony.

The father was incapable of giving directions, but the nearest relation
of the family made a sign to the carpenter, who in such cases goes through
the duty of the undertaker, to proceed in his office. The creak of
the screw-nails presently announced that the lid of the last mansion
of mortality was in the act of being secured above its tenant.A thousand thanks, gentlemen," as the
Spaniards surrendered their weapons.  "Now do me the favour to accompany
me; and please remember that any man who attempts to escape will
instantly be shot down."

So saying, George, with his drawn sword in his right hand and his left
resting suggestively upon the butt of one of the pistols that adorned
his belt, led the way toward the little settlement, wondering meanwhile
what could possibly be the explanation of certain whiffs of a singularly
vile and offensive odour which now and then assailed his nostrils when
there occurred an occasional flaw in the trade-wind which was sweeping
briskly over the island.  He might, of course, have asked, but the
thought occurred to him that by doing so he might perhaps be betraying
his ignorance, and so lay himself open to the chance of being misled
upon a matter that might very well be of importance.  A little later on
he was very glad that he had held his peace.

A walk of a few minutes' duration brought the party to the settlement,
whereupon George called a halt and directed three of his men to follow
him into the first house they came to, and the rest to keep a wary eye
upon the prisoners.  The building was a small wooden affair, consisting
of three rooms only, two of which were sleeping apartments, while the
third was furnished with a table, a sideboard, a couch, and a few
chairs, and was evidently used as a sitting-room.  There was nobody in
the house, but upon passing through it to the rear they discovered a
small detached structure, the odours proceeding from which seemed to
suggest that it was being used as a kitchen.  There they found a young
Indian woman bending over a fire and preparing a savoury mess of some
sort; and it was not without difficulty that they at length made her
understand she was a prisoner, and must abandon her cookery and
accompany them.  In like manner they visited all the remaining houses of
the settlement, collecting altogether two white women and some twenty
blacks, as well as a priest, the whole of whom, together with their
other prisoners, they unceremoniously marched to the little church,
locking them therein, and so making prisoners of every soul in the
settlement.  Then, having posted half a dozen men round the church, to
see that nobody broke out, George led the way to the big shed, which was
the most conspicuous building in the settlement.  Entering it, he found
that it was divided into two unequal compartments, the smaller of which
contained a few casks of wine, a few bales of cloth of different kinds,
and a miscellaneous assortment of goods, evidently intended for the use
of the settlers.  Then, passing from this into the larger compartment,
he at once became aware of a faint suggestion of the same peculiar and
offensive odour that had assailed his nostrils while walking up from the
beach, and, looking more closely, he found that it proceeded from an
enormous heap of something piled high against the further wall, which,
upon investigation, he found to be a kind of oyster-shell, the interior
of which was more or less thickly coated with a beautiful white,
iridescent substance.  At once he understood the meaning of everything.
Those shells were shells of the pearl oyster; the settlement was a
subsidiary pearl-fishing station; and the odour which had so offended
him was the odour of decaying oysters laid out to rot in the sun in
order that the pearls might be extracted without injury from the dead
fish.  And it had apparently dawned upon somebody that the shells, as
well as the pearls, possessed a market value, and this was where they
were being stored after being cleansed from the decayed fish.

But if that enormous heap consisted entirely of pearl oyster-shells, as
it unquestionably did, where were the pearls that had been extracted
from them?  George glanced round the sombre interior, lighted by only
one open aperture guarded by a heavily framed shutter, and saw two large
boxes dimly revealed in one shadowy corner of the store.  He strode
across to these, and, flinging them open, stood transfixed with
amazement; for one box--the larger of the two--was three-fourths full of
small pearls of the kind usually known as seed pearls, while the other
was nearly half full of lovely gems of the most exquisite satiny
whiteness, ranging in size from that of a small pea up to beauties as
big as the top of a man's thumb!  What their value might be he had not
the vaguest idea, but there were hundreds of them; ay, possibly a
thousand or more, and he knew instinctively that if he never laid hands
upon another particle of booty, the contents of those two boxes would
pay the whole cost of the expedition and leave a very handsome margin
over for prize money.  The boxes were iron-bound, and were furnished
with stout lids which were capable of being secured by means of strong
padlocks which hung in the hasps, with the keys still in them.  So,
having satisfied his curiosity by closely examining a few of the finer
specimens, George closed and locked both boxes, slipped the keys into
his pocket, and then, going to the door, called to eight of his men,
and, indicating the boxes, instructed the seamen to carry them down to
the boats forthwith.  Then, waiting until he had seen the task
accomplished, he walked to the church door, unlocked and threw it open,
and announced to the prisoners that they were now free to come forth and
proceed about their business, adding that if they would walk down to the
beach after he and his men were gone they would find their swords left
for them upon the sand.  This done, he gave orders for the men to march
down to the boats, himself bringing up the rear.

As George quite expected, the cavalier in gorget and headpiece, who had
met the Englishmen upon their arrival, and who seemed to be the officer
in charge of the settlement, no sooner found himself free than he
proceeded straight to the big shed, entered it, and a moment later re-
appeared and came running after the retiring Englishmen.

"Senor," he cried, as soon as he arrived within speaking distance, "you
have taken our pearls, the proceeds of the entire fishing season up to
the present, and the loss of them will mean to me irreparable ruin.  I
beg you to return them to me, senor, and in acknowledgment of your
courtesy I pledge you the honour of a Spanish gentleman that I will
remain silent as to your visit to this island.  Otherwise I promise you
that I will immediately spread the news of your presence in these
waters, and of your atrocious act of piracy, throughout the length and
breadth of the Spanish Main, with the result that you will be hunted by
every Spanish ship of war in the Caribbean Sea, with consequences to
yourself and your piratical crew which I leave to your own imagination
to picture.  Come, senor, I beg you to think better of this, and to
return the pearls to me.  You will find it pay you far better in the
long run."

"Senor," retorted George, "if I understand you aright, you would buy
back your pearls at the expense of your own countrymen in the various
settlements scattered along the coast, by leaving them unwarned of my
presence in these seas, so that I may have the opportunity to fall upon
them unawares.  If you are sincere in making this proposal, senor
cavalier, you are a traitor to your own countrymen; if not, you have it
in your mind to betray me and my crew.  In either case your proposal
smacks of treachery, and I will have none of it.  Now, mark you this,
senor.  You are at perfect liberty to take whatever steps you please to
warn your countrymen of my presence in the region which Spain arrogantly
claims as exclusively her own.  And you will be doing your compatriots a
service by acquainting them with the reason for my presence here.

"Last year Captain Hawkins, my countryman, had occasion to put into San
Juan de Ulua in distress.  He entered into a solemn covenant and
agreement with Don Martin Enriquez, the new Viceroy of Mexico, whereby
the English were to be permitted to refit their ships in peace, without
let or hindrance from the Spaniards.  Yet, despite this covenant, the
Spaniards most shamefully and treacherously attacked the English at the
very moment when they were least capable of defending themselves, with
the result that many of my countrymen were slain--_murdered_, senor, is
the right word--and many ethers taken prisoners, my brother, Mr Hubert
Saint Leger, among them.  Now, my business here is to rescue that
gentleman, and to exact reparation for his imprisonment and such
hardships and suffering as he may have been called upon to endure in
consequence of the treachery of the Spaniards.  My first act, in
pursuance of this policy, is the seizure of your pearls.  If by any
chance you happen to know anything of my brother's whereabouts, you will
be rendering your countrymen a signal service by imparting such
information to me.  For I intend to carry fire and sword throughout the
Main until I have found my brother and exacted reparation; and when I
have done that, my ravages will cease.  If you can tell me where my
brother is to be found, I will proceed thither direct, and spare your
other towns.  If not, I shall attack each as I come to it.  Now, can you
tell me where I shall be most likely to find my brother?"

"No, senor Englishman, I cannot," answered the Spaniard; "nor would I if
I could.  Your brother is no doubt long since dead, probably at the
hands of the Inquisition.  It is into its hands that heretics generally
fall.  Go your way, senor pirate, go your way to the fate that awaits
you, and do your worst.  I look to have the pleasure of seeing you
publicly burnt alive in the square of one of our cities ere long."  And
the Spaniard turned upon his heel and left George standing there, in a
tumult of feeling too complex for description.  But he did not stand
long, for his men had continued on their way down to the boats, and were
now waiting for him to rejoin them, which he did without further waste
of time.

Upon the arrival of the boats alongside they were at once hoisted in,
after which the two chests of pearls were taken out of them and
carefully deposited below then the anchor was hove up to the bows, and
the _Nonsuch_ once more got under way.  The distance from the island
which they had just left--and which they incontinently called "Pearl
Islet," but which they afterwards learned was named Coche Island--was
not far, being a mere matter of some seven miles and when they arrived
within a mile of the rock-studded coast the ship was kept away before
the wind, and Dyer ascended to the foretop, taking with him a
"perspective glass," or telescope, belonging to George, in order that he
might the better be able to find the harbour of which he was in search.
And after remaining there nearly an hour and a half he found what he
wanted, namely, a low point covered with coconut trees backed up with
thick palmetto scrub, with an opening to the westward of it beyond which
rose three peaks.  This opening was the mouth of the harbour which he
was seeking, and a most unpromising-looking place it was, for there was
white water stretching apparently right across it, showing that the
approach to the harbour was guarded by a reef or bar of some sort.  But
Dyer knew what he was about; he had already been in that harbour once,
and he was aware that somewhere in that barrier, if he could only find
it, there was a channel, narrow, it is true, but nevertheless wide
enough and deep enough to allow the passage of an even bigger ship than
the _Nonsuch_.  And if he wished for confirmation of such knowledge,
there it was before his eyes, in the shape of the upper spars of a ship
showing above the top of the coco palms, the distance apart of the spars
indicating that the craft to which they belonged was at least as big as
the English ship, if not a trifle bigger.

It was not, however, until the _Nonsuch_ arrived immediately opposite
the opening that Dyer was able, with the assistance of the perspective
glass, to pick up the little narrow streak of unbroken water in the
midst of the flashing surf which marked the channel through the reef,
and from his lofty perch he immediately shouted down the necessary
orders to George, who stood aft upon the poop, and who in his turn
repeated them to the mariners, whereupon the ship was brought to the
wind and, under the pilot's directions, headed straight for the passage.
Then Dyer communicated the further information that there was a large
ship lying at anchor in the harbour; upon hearing which Saint Leger,
after demanding and receiving certain further information, gave orders
for the ordnance, great and small, to be loaded, and for the crew to arm
themselves and stand ready for any emergency.

The _Nonsuch_, when brought to the wind, was within two miles of the
shore; a quarter of an hour later, therefore, found her sliding in
through the short, narrow passage of clear water, with the surf pounding
and thundering and churning in great spaces of white froth on either
hand.  Then, suddenly, the commotion receded on the quarters and the
adventurers found themselves in a gulf some eight miles long, running
due east and west, and so narrow that there was only barely width enough
in it for a ship of size like the _Nonsuch_ to turn to windward in it--
as she must do in order to reach the settlement, some three miles to the
eastward, off which the strange ship rode at anchor.  The water inside
this gulf was almost glass-smooth, being to a considerable extent
sheltered from the trade-wind by the high land to the eastward, and
Dyer, still occupying his coign of vantage in the foretop, perceived to
his amazement, that while the spit on the south side of the gulf
gradually widened out as the land trended eastward, the island, at this
particular part of it, was so narrow that the gulf was only separated
from the sea to the northward by a spit so attenuated that he could see
the Caribbean across it less than three miles away.  This narrow
northern spit was also quite low, fringed with coconut palms, and
covered with low, dense scrub, as was the southern spit for a distance
of some two miles, while the land to the east and west of the gulf rose
up in a series of lofty peaks, tree-crowned to their summits, the
vegetation seeming to consist mostly of ceibas, palms, bois immortelles,
bamboo, tree ferns, calabash trees, crimson-hued hibiscus, and other
tropical trees, gorgeous now with multi-coloured blossoms, the whole
presenting a most beautiful and delectable picture as it shimmered under
the rays of the mid-day sun.

But there was one part of the scene which was not quite so delectable,
and that was a spot some three miles up the gulf, where rode at anchor a
race-ship quite as large as, if not something larger than, the
_Nonsuch_.  She was surrounded by boats, to the number of twenty or
more, into which she was discharging cargo which the boats were
conveying to the shore for disposal in certain sheds forming part of a
settlement at least four times as large as that on Coche Island.  It was
a busy scene, some ninety or a hundred men being engaged upon the wharf
and about the warehouses, in addition to those in the boats and aboard
the ship.  Moreover, the _Nonsuch_ was scarcely clear of the channel
through the reef, when the red and gold banner of Spain was hoisted upon
the flagstaff aboard the other ship, and on a flagstaff ashore, which
was of course a polite hint to the new arrival to display her colours in
turn.  There was therefore very little prospect of the English being
able to effect anything in the nature of a surprise, unless they chose
to cloak their real character under a display of false colours, and this
young Saint Leger positively refused to do.  Instead he ordered the
white flag bearing the crimson Cross of Saint George--which was at that
time the ensign of England--to be bent on to the ensign halliards, but
not to be hoisted until he gave the word, since there was no sense in
prematurely alarming the enemy if it could be avoided.

The enemy, however, in this case, promised to be less easily hoodwinked
than their compatriots over on Coche Island; at all events their
suspicions were more readily awakened, for when, after an interval of
about five minutes, the _Nonsuch_ still delayed to show her colours, the
race-ship fired an unshotted gun by way of calling attention to the
invitation implied in the display of her own colours and when this hint
also was ignored signs of intense activity began to immediately manifest
themselves aboard the ship and at the settlement, the boats alongside
the Spaniard hurriedly casting off and pulling for the wharf, while the
race-ship's rigging and yards suddenly grew thick and dark with men
hastening aloft to loose her canvas.

"The Don's goin' to get under way, Cap'n, I du believe," hailed Dyer
from the foretop where he was still perched.  "Do 'e see his men
swarmin' aloft?"

"Ay, ay; I see them," answered George.  "Well, let him come, if so be he
will.  I would rather fight him here than where he is now, where he
could receive the support of his friends.  Do you see any sign of
galleys anywhere about, Mr Dyer?"  Dyer took a long, searching look
through his glass, and at length reported that nothing of the kind was
to be seen.

"Good!" returned George.  "Then our first fight promises to be one of
fair play and no favour--that is to say, if the fellow means to fight
and not to attempt to slip away, which we must take care that he does
not do.  Mr Dyer, you may come down as soon as the Spaniard is fairly
under way, for I shall want you to help me fight the ship.  Now, men of
Devon," he continued, turning to the crew, who had of their own accord
and without waiting for orders gone to their stations, "we shall soon be
fighting our first fight.  Show these haughty Spaniards what you can do,
in such fashion that the _Nonsuch_ shall soon become a name of fear
throughout the length and breadth of the Spanish Main.  Stand to your
ordnance, lads; keep cool; and take good aim."

The _Nonsuch_ had tacked twice, working to windward up the narrow
channel, when Dyer shouted the news that the Spanish ship had apparently
slipped her cable, and was under way, running down toward them; and he
followed up the news by descending the fore-rigging and making his way
aft, where he stationed himself on the poop beside George, in readiness
to supervise the working of the ship while the latter fought her.

The two men had only time to exchange a few hurried words together when
the Spanish ship was seen to windward, coming down toward them under
full sail.  And a gallant sight she looked, with her brightly-painted
hull, her big gilded figure-head and head rails flashing in the sun, her
mastheads and yard-arms bedizened with banner and pennons streaming in
the breeze, and her painted sails bellying and straining at yard and
stay with the warm breathing of the trade-wind.  She was still some two
miles distant, and it would be at least ten minutes before she arrived
within gun-shot.

"Pilot," said George, turning to Dyer, after he had eyed the stranger
carefully, "let the mariners clew up and furl our topgallants.  I
believe we can do without them, by the look of yonder ship, which seems
to be not nearly so fast as ourselves, and there will be the less tackle
for the men to handle when it comes to manoeuvring, and consequently the
more men free to fight."

The order was given; the men sprang to the topgallant halliards and
sheets, cast them off, manned the clewlines and buntlines, and clewed up
the topgallants.  Then a dozen of them--six forward and six aft--leapt
into the rigging, clambered it with the alacrity of squirrels, neatly
furled the sails, and were on their way down again from aloft when the
first gun from the Spaniard boomed out across the still waters of the
channel, to be echoed a little later by the distant hills.  The shot
flew wide, striking the water nearly a hundred fathoms away on the
_Nonsuch's_ lee bow.

"_Now_," cried George, turning to a man who had for some time been
standing by the ensign staff, "you may hoist away and let the Dons see
with whom they are about to fight."  And in obedience to his command the
glorious Red Cross on its white field floated out over the taffrail and
went soaring majestically to the head of the staff, to be greeted with
cheer after cheer by the crew.

The _Nonsuch_ was now on the starboard tack, heading to the northward,
and it looked as though the Spaniard meditated crossing her stern and
raking her at close quarters as she crossed.  To counter this manoeuvre,
therefore, Dyer gave the order "Ready about!" and as the sail-trimmers
sprang to their stations, George shouted an order to the gunners of the
starboard battery to be ready to fire at the word of command.  The men
accordingly blew their smouldering matches vigorously, again looked to
the priming of their ordnance, and held themselves ready to discharge at
the word.  Up swept the _Nonsuch_ into the wind, with all her sails
ashiver in the brisk breeze, and, watching carefully, George gave the
order to fire at the exact moment when the Spanish ship was square
abeam.  The Spaniard discharged her broadside at the same instant, and
immediately succeeding the thunder of the two broadsides those on board
the _Nonsuch_ heard the distant thud of their pounding shot and the
crackling crash of splintering spars; and, looking eagerly in the
direction of the Spanish ship, they saw that they had shot away her
foremast and bowsprit, both of which were in the very act of falling.
So they raised three joyous cheers and fell to loading their pieces
again, while their comrades, who had not yet fired, looked to see where
the Spanish shot had gone.  But, with the exception of two holes in the
_Nonsuch's_ mainsail, and a severed brace dangling from the fore-topsail
yardarm, no damage was discoverable, whereat they cheered again.

The Spanish ship continued to forge ahead on her original course for a
distance of a few fathoms, and then the wreck of her foremast and
bowsprit, towing alongside and still attached to her hull by the
standing and running rigging, dragged her head round to starboard,
whereupon she instantly broached to.  Meanwhile the _Nonsuch_, having
stayed, was paying off on the larboard tack, the relative positions of
the two ships being such that a collision seemed imminent.  George saw
that the situation was such as to demand instant decision, and he
immediately made up his mind what to do.

"Keep her away, Mr Dyer," he commanded, "and run alongside the enemy to
leeward.  Keep your head sail aback to deaden our way, or we shall never
get the grapnels to hold.  Stand by there to larboard to heave your
grappling irons.  Archers and musketeers, discharge me a volley upon the
decks of yonder ship; and, gunners of the larboard battery, be ready to
fire a broadside of ordnance, great and small, into her at the moment
when you feel us touch.  Then, boarders, be ready to follow me."  And he
drew his sword.

The next moment a shower of arrows and musket balls swept the decks of
the stranger with devastating effect, as might be gathered from the
chorus of shrieks and yells of anguish that arose from the deck of the
Spaniard.  An answering volley was instantly returned by the enemy, but
it was wild, straggling, and feeble, bearing eloquent testimony to the
state of confusion that already prevailed on board her, and which did
little harm; and this state of confusion was further demonstrated by the
sight of an officer on her poop waving his sword violently and shouting
orders to which nobody seemed to pay the slightest attention.  A minute
later the hulls of the two ships crashed together, the grappling irons
were thrown at the precise instant that the _Nonsuch_ poured a
destructive broadside into her antagonist, and before the ships had time
to recoil from the impact, George, at the head of some fifty boarders,
leapt from the one ship to the other, and the party proceeded to lay
about them with sword, pike, and musket butt with such fell
determination that after a few seconds' resistance on the part of the
Spaniards the latter flung down their weapons and called for quarter.

George turned to the officer, who had now descended from the poop to the
main deck and was valiantly fighting, single-handed, with his back to
the front of the poop cabins, and cried to him:

"Do you surrender, senor?"

"I will, if you will promise me good _guerra_, senor," replied the
Spaniard, dexterously parrying the thrust of a pikeman and running his
antagonist neatly through the shoulder.

"Then stop, men; hold your hands, and leave this cavalier to me," cried
George, dashing in and striking up the points of the English weapons
that still threatened the Spaniard.  Then, as the men drew sullenly and
unwillingly back, the young captain advanced, with lowered point, and
his left hand held out.  "Your sword, senor," he demanded.  "On the word
of an Englishman, I promise you _buena guerra_."

Whereupon the Don, taking his sword by the point, tendered it, hilt
first, with a bow, to George, who tucked it under his left arm, bowing
in turn as he received it.  And so the _Santa Maria_, fifty tons bigger
than the _Nonsuch_, and carrying even more guns, with a crew which, at
the beginning of the action, had numbered one hundred and thirty, became
the first prize of George's prowess and that of the Devon mastiffs.


CHAPTER SIX.

HOW THEY CAME TO A DESERT ISLAND AND BURIED THEIR TREASURE.

The ships being still held fast together by the chains of the grappling
irons, and driving slowly down the channel before the wind, George first
ordered the _Nonsuch_ to be brought to an anchor; and when this was done
he further instructed Dyer to take steps for the effectual securing of
the unwounded prisoners, and the tending of the wounded on both sides.
Then, inviting the officer who had surrendered to him--and whom he
rightly assumed to be the captain of the prize--to accompany him into
the state cabin of the captured ship, he formally introduced himself as
Senor Don George Saint Leger, an Englishman, and captain of the ship
_Nonsuch_; the stranger returning the compliment by explaining that he
was Senor Don Pasquale Alfonso Maria Francisco of Albuquerque, a servant
of his Most Catholic Majesty, Philip of Spain, and commander of the ship
_Santa Maria_, dispatched from Cadiz by his Majesty to convey munitions
of various descriptions to his Majesty's possessions in the Western
Indies.  And when requested to specify more particularly of what those
munitions consisted, Don Pasquale, etcetera, etcetera, mentioned wines,
cloths, silk, and brocades of various descriptions, salt, leather,
articles of furniture, arms and ammunition, and--he hesitated, whereupon
George gently invited him to complete his enumeration.

"Before I do so, senor," remarked Don Pasquale, "I should like to ask
what you intend to do with my ship, now that you have captured her."

"Assuredly," answered George.  "I had quite intended to tell you, even
if you had not asked for the information.  My purpose in coming to this
part of the world is to seek my brother, who was last year captured by
your countrymen at San Juan de Ulua, when, by order of Don Martin
Enriquez, they treacherously attacked the squadron of the English
admiral, John Hawkins, while he was peacefully refitting his ships,
under an agreement whereby they were to be permitted to do so without
let, hindrance, or interference of any kind.  My brother, Don Hubert
Saint Leger, is still a prisoner in the hands of your countrymen.  My
intention is to secure his release, if he is still alive; and to exact
heavy compensation for his detention--and any discomfort or suffering to
which he may have been subjected; or, if he is dead, to wreak my
vengeance upon his slayers.  Therefore, senor, you will be rendering
your countrymen a service--when I have released you--by informing them
of my purpose, and saying, further, that as soon as I have found my
brother, or had him restored to me, I will hold my hand and leave these
shores; but until then I will ravage the Spanish Main from end to end.
Thus, you--and your countrymen also, I hope--will see that it is to the
interest of every Spaniard in the Indies to find my brother and restore
him to me, alive and unhurt, as quickly as possible.  And do not forget
to lay full emphasis upon the words `alive and unhurt,' senor, because
if he has been slain, or even injured in any way, I will exact such
terrible reparation as shall linger in the memory of Spaniards for many
a long year.  It is in pursuance of my policy of exacting reparation for
my brother's detention that I have captured your ship.  I shall take
from her whatever I may find aboard her that will be of use to me; and,
that done, I shall land you all here on the island of Margarita, and
either sink or burn the _Santa Maria_."

"I presume, senor, from what you say, that you hold a commission from
the Queen of England, and that it is she who has dispatched you upon
your mission of retribution, in revenge for the attack upon her ships at
San Juan de Ulua.  Is that so?" demanded Don Pasquale.

"No, senor, it is not so," answered George.  "The Queen of England knows
nothing of this expedition, which is entirely a private venture of my
own."

"And the senor holds no commission?" continued the Don.

"No commission save what is conferred by this," answered George,
touching his sword.

"Then it would appear that I have fallen into the hands of a common
pirate, senor," remarked Don Pasquale through his teeth.

"If you choose to so regard me," answered George.

"_Bueno_!" remarked the Spaniard.  "Then I shall know what to do.  There
is no question of how I choose to regard you, senor.  You hold no
commission from your Queen, yet you have dared to make war upon the
lieges of his Most Catholic Majesty.  Therefore you are a pirate,
neither more nor less.  And as soon as it pleases you to release me I
shall make the best of my way to the Main, there to warn my countrymen
of your presence upon the coast, and your alleged object.  And you may
rest assured, senor, that within a month from this time every Spanish
ship in these seas will be on the look-out for you.  Your career of
piracy will then soon be cut short; and I shall live in the hope of
seeing you hanged as a warning and example to all other pirates."

"That is as may be," retorted George.  "You may be assured, Don
Pasquale, that I did not enter upon this expedition without a full
realisation of all the risks which it involved.  Let me again impress
upon you the urgency of remembering the words _alive and unhurt_ in
relation to my brother, when you make your report; for if anything has
been allowed to happen to him, I will hold responsible every Spaniard
who falls into my hands.  By the way, was there not something that you
were about to add when you were enumerating the items of your ship's
cargo?"

"There was, senor," answered Don Pasquale, "but I was then under the
impression that I had fallen into the hands of a fellow soldier.  But
now that I find my captor to be merely a common pirate, it is not
consonant with my honour to afford you any further information."

"As you please, senor," answered George, in nowise ruffled by the Don's
reiteration of the term "pirate," which in those days carried nothing
like the opprobrious signification that it bears to-day.  "It matters
not; for I shall cause your ship to be thoroughly searched from stem to
stern before I destroy her.  But as you seem to be imbued with so very
strong an animus against me, I must put you in confinement while your
ship is being searched, lest you should feel tempted to do something
which you would afterwards be sorry for."  "I will," said Lord Glenallan.
"But first let me say, you do injustice to the memory of the gentlest
and kindest, as well as to the most unhappy of women, to suppose she
could make a jest of the honest affection of a man like you. Frequently
did she blame me, Mr. Oldbuck, for indulging my levity at your
expense--may I now presume you will excuse the gay freedoms which
then offended you?

--my state of mind has never since laid me under the necessity of
apologizing for the inadvertencies of a light and happy temper."
"My lord, you are fully pardoned," said Mr. Oldbuck. "You should
be aware, that, like all others, I was ignorant at the time that I
placed myself in competition with your lordship, and understood that
Miss Neville was in a state of dependence which might make her prefer
a competent independence and the hand of an honest man--But I am wasting
time--I would I could believe that the views entertained towards her
by others were as fair and honest as mine!"
"Mr. Oldbuck, you judge harshly."
"Not without cause, my lord. When I only, of all the magistrates of this
county--having neither, like some of them, the honour to be connected
with your powerful family--nor, like others, the meanness to fear it,--
when I made some inquiry into the manner of Miss Neville's death--I
shake you, my lord, but I must be plain--I do own I had every reason to
believe that she had met most unfair dealing, and had either been
imposed upon by a counterfeit marriage, or that very strong
measures had been adopted to stifle and destroy the evidence of a real
union. And I cannot doubt in my own mind, that this cruelty on your
lordship's part, whether coming of your own free will, or proceeding
from the influence of the late Countess, hurried the unfortunate young
lady to the desperate act by which her life was terminated."
"You are deceived, Mr.

Oldbuck, into conclusions which are not just, however naturally
they flow from the circumstances. Believe me, I respected you even when
I was most embarrassed by your active attempts to investigate our family
misfortunes. You showed yourself more worthy of Miss Neville than I,
by the spirit with which you persisted in vindicating her reputation
even after her death. But the firm belief that your well-meant efforts
could only serve to bring to light a story too horrible to be detailed,
induced me to join my unhappy mother in schemes to remove or destroy
all evidence of the legal union which had taken place between Eveline
and myself. And now let us sit down on this bank,-- for I feel unable
to remain longer standing,--and have the goodness to listen to the
extraordinary discovery which I have this day made."
They sate down accordingly; and Lord Glenallan briefly narrated his
unhappy family history--his concealed marriage--the horrible invention
by which his mother had designed to render impossible that union which
had already taken place. He detailed the arts by which the Countess,
having all the documents relative to Miss Neville's birth in
her hands, had produced those only relating to a period during which,
for family reasons, his father had consented to own that young lady as
his natural daughter, and showed how impossible it was that he
could either suspect or detect the fraud put upon him by his mother,
and vouched by the oaths of her attendants, Teresa and Elspeth. "I
left my paternal mansion," he concluded, "as if the furies of hell had
driven me forth, and travelled with frantic velocity I knew not whither.
Nor have I the slightest recollection of what I did or whither I
went, until I was discovered by my brother. I will not trouble you
with an account of my sick-bed and recovery, or how, long afterwards, I
ventured to inquire after the sharer of my misfortunes, and heard that
her despair had found a dreadful remedy for all the ills of life. The
first thing that roused me to thought was hearing of your inquiries
into this cruel business; and you will hardly wonder, that, believing
what I did believe, I should join in those expedients to stop your
investigation, which my brother and mother had actively commenced. The
information which I gave them concerning the circumstances and witnesses
of our private marriage enabled them to baffle your zeal. The clergyman,
therefore, and witnesses, as persons who had acted in the matter
only to please the powerful heir of Glenallan, were accessible to
his promises and threats, and were so provided for, that they had
no objections to leave this country for another.

For myself, Mr. Oldbuck," pursued this unhappy man, "from that
moment I considered myself as blotted out of the book of the living, and
as having nothing left to do with this world. My mother tried to
reconcile me to life by every art--even by intimations which I can
now interpret as calculated to produce a doubt of the horrible tale she
herself had fabricated. But I construed all she said as the fictions
of maternal affection. I will forbear all reproach. She is no more--and,
as her wretched associate said, she knew not how the dart was poisoned,
or how deep it must sink, when she threw it from her hand. But, Mr.
Oldbuck, if ever, during these twenty years, there crawled upon
earth a living being deserving of your pity, I have been that man. My
food has not nourished me--my sleep has not refreshed me--my devotions
have not comforted me-- all that is cheering and necessary to man has
been to me converted into poison. The rare and limited intercourse which
I have held with others has been most odious to me. I felt as if I were
bringing the contamination of unnatural and inexpressible guilt among
the gay and the innocent. There have been moments when I had thoughts
of another description--to plunge into the adventures of war, or to
brave the dangers of the traveller in foreign and barbarous
climates--to mingle in political intrigue, or to retire to the stern
seclusion of the anchorites of our religion;--all these are thoughts
which have alternately passed through my mind, but each required
an energy, which was mine no longer, after the withering stroke I
had received.

I vegetated on as I could in the same spot--fancy, feeling, judgment,
and health, gradually decaying, like a tree whose bark has been
destroyed,--when first the blossoms fade, then the boughs, until its state
resembles the decayed and dying trunk that is now before you. Do you now
pity and forgive me?"
"My lord," answered the Antiquary, much affected, "my pity--my
forgiveness, you have not to ask, for your dismal story is of itself not
only an ample excuse for whatever appeared mysterious in your conduct,
but a narrative that might move your worst enemies (and I, my lord, was
never of the number) to tears and to sympathy. But permit me to ask what
you now mean to do, and why you have honoured me, whose opinion can be
of little consequence, with your confidence on this occasion?"
"Mr. Oldbuck," answered the Earl, "as I could never have foreseen the
nature of that confession which I have heard this day, I need not say
that I had no formed plan of consulting you, or any one, upon affairs the
tendency of which I could not even have suspected. But I am without
friends, unused to business, and, by long retirement, unacquainted
alike with the laws of the land and the habits of the living
generation; and when, most unexpectedly, I find myself immersed
in the matters of which I know least, I catch, like a drowning man, at
the first support that offers. You are that support, Mr. Oldbuck.
I have always heard you mentioned as a man of wisdom and intelligence--I
have known you myself as a man of a resolute and independent spirit;--and
there is one circumstance," said he, "which ought to combine us in some
degree--our having paid tribute to the same excellence of character in
poor Eveline.

You offered yourself to me in my need, and you were already acquainted
with the beginning of my misfortunes. To you, therefore, I have recourse
for advice, for sympathy, for support."
"You shall seek none of them in vain, my lord," said Oldbuck, "so far as
my slender ability extends;--and I am honoured by the preference, whether
it arises from choice, or is prompted by chance. But this is a matter
to be ripely considered. May I ask what are your principal views at
present?"
"To ascertain the fate of my child," said the Earl, "be the consequences
what they may, and to do justice to the honour of Eveline, which
I have only permitted to be suspected to avoid discovery of the
yet more horrible taint to which I was made to believe it liable."
"And the memory of your mother?"
"Must bear its own burden," answered the Earl with a sigh: "better
that she were justly convicted of deceit, should that be found
necessary, than that others should be unjustly accused of crimes
so much more dreadful."

"Then, my lord," said Oldbuck, "our first business must be to put the
information of the old woman, Elspeth, into a regular and authenticated
form."
"That," said Lord Glenallan, "will be at present, I fear, impossible.
She is exhausted herself, and surrounded by her distressed family.
To-morrow, perhaps, when she is alone--and yet I doubt, from her
imperfect sense of right and wrong, whether she would speak out in any
one's presence but my own. I am too sorely fatigued."
"Then, my lord," said the Antiquary, whom the interest of the moment
elevated above points of expense and convenience, which had generally
more than enough of weight with him, "I would propose to your lordship,
instead of returning, fatigued as you are, so far as to Glenallan
House, or taking the more uncomfortable alternative of going to a bad
inn at Fairport, to alarm all the busybodies of the town--I would
propose, I say, that you should be my guest at Monkbarns for this
night. By to-morrow these poor people will have renewed their out-of-doors
vocation--for sorrow with them affords no respite from labour,--and
we will visit the old woman Elspeth alone, and take down her examination."

After a formal apology for the encroachment, Lord Glenallan agreed to
go with him, and underwent with patience in their return home the whole
history of John of the Girnel, a legend which Mr. Oldbuck was never
known to spare any one who crossed his threshold.

The arrival of a stranger of such note, with two saddle-horses and
a servant in black, which servant had holsters on his saddle-bow, and
a coronet upon the holsters, created a general commotion in the house
of Monkbarns. Jenny Rintherout, scarce recovered from the hysterics
which she had taken on hearing of poor Steenie's misfortune, chased
about the turkeys and poultry, cackled and screamed louder than they
did, and ended by killing one-half too many. Miss Griselda made many wise
reflections on the hot-headed wilfulness of her brother, who had
occasioned such devastation, by suddenly bringing in upon them a
papist nobleman.

And she ventured to transmit to Mr. Blattergowl some hint of the unusual
slaughter which had taken place in the _basse-cour,_ which brought the
honest clergyman to inquire how his friend Monkbarns had got
home, and whether he was not the worse of being at the funeral, at a
period so near the ringing of the bell for dinner, that the Antiquary
had no choice left but to invite him to stay and bless the meat.
Miss M'Intyre had on her part some curiosity to see this mighty peer,
of whom all had heard, as an eastern caliph or sultan is heard of by
his subjects, and felt some degree of timidity at the idea of
encountering a person, of whose unsocial habits and stern manners so
many stories were told, that her fear kept at least pace with her
curiosity. The aged housekeeper was no less flustered and hurried in
obeying the numerous and contradictory commands of her mistress,
concerning preserves, pastry and fruit, the mode of marshalling and
dishing the dinner, the necessity of not permitting the melted
butter to run to oil, and the danger of allowing Juno--who, though
formally banished from the parlour, failed not to maraud about the
out-settlements of the family--to enter the kitchen.

The only inmate of Monkbarns who remained entirely indifferent on
this momentous occasion was Hector M'Intyre, who cared no more for an
Earl than he did for a commoner, and who was only interested in the
unexpected visit, as it might afford some protection against his
uncle's displeasure, if he harboured any, for his not attending the
funeral, and still more against his satire upon the subject of his
gallant but unsuccessful single combat with the _phoca,_ or seal.

To these, the inmates of his household, Oldbuck presented the Earl of
Glenallan, who underwent, with meek and subdued civility, the prosing
speeches of the honest divine, and the lengthened apologies of
Miss Griselda Oldbuck, which her brother in vain endeavoured to
abridge.

Before the dinner hour, Lord Glenallan requested permission to retire a
while to his chamber. Mr. Oldbuck accompanied his guest to the Green
Room, which had been hastily prepared for his reception. He looked
around with an air of painful recollection.

"I think," at length he observed, "I think, Mr. Oldbuck, that I have been
in this apartment before."
"Yes, my lord," answered Oldbuck, "upon occasion of an excursion hither
from Knockwinnock--and since we are upon a subject so melancholy, you may
perhaps remember whose taste supplied these lines from Chaucer,
which now form the motto of the tapestry."
"I guess", said the Earl, "though I cannot recollect. She excelled me,
indeed, in literary taste and information, as in everything else; and
it is one of the mysterious dispensations of Providence, Mr. Oldbuck,
that a creature so excellent in mind and body should have been cut off
in so miserable a manner, merely from her having formed a fatal attachment
to such a wretch as I am."
Mr. Oldbuck did not attempt an answer to this burst of the grief which lay
ever nearest to the heart of his guest, but, pressing Lord Glenallan's
hand with one of his own, and drawing the other across his shaggy eyelashes,
as if to brush away a mist that intercepted his sight, he left the
Earl at liberty to arrange himself previous to dinner.

CHAPTER FOURTEENTH
--Life, with you, Glows in the brain and dances in the arteries; 'Tis
like the wine some joyous guest hath quaffed, That glads the heart and
elevates the fancy:
Mine is the poor residuum of the cup, Vapid, and dull, and tasteless,
only soiling, With its base dregs, the vessel that contains it.
Old Play.

"Now, only think what a man my brother is, Mr. Blattergowl, for a wise
man and a learned man, to bring this Yerl into our house without speaking
a word to a body! And there's the distress of thae Mucklebackits--we
canna get a fin o' fish--and we hae nae time to send ower to Fairport
for beef, and the mutton's but new killed--and that silly fliskmahoy,
Jenny Rintherout, has taen the exies, and done naething but laugh
and greet, the skirl at the tail o' the guffaw, for twa days
successfully--and now we maun ask that strange man, that's as grand
and as grave as the Yerl himsell, to stand at the sideboard! and I canna
gang into the kitchen to direct onything, for he's hovering there,
making some pousowdie* for my Lord, for he doesna eat like ither folk
neither--And how to sort the strange servant man at dinner time--I am
sure, Mr. Blattergowl, a'thegither, it passes my judgment."
* _Pousowdie,_--Miscellaneous mess.

"Truly, Miss Griselda," replied the divine, "Monkbarns was inconsiderate.

He should have taen a day to see the invitation, as they do wi' the
titular's condescendence in the process of valuation and sale. But the
great man could not have come on a sudden to ony house in this parish
where he could have been better served with _vivers_--that I must
say-- and also that the steam from the kitchen is very gratifying to my
nostrils;--and if ye have ony household affairs to attend to,
Mrs.
Griselda, never make a stranger of me--I can amuse mysell very weel
with the larger copy of Erskine's Institutes."
And taking down from the window-seat that amusing folio, (the Scottish
Coke upon Littleton), he opened it, as if instinctively, at the
tenth title of Book Second, "of Teinds or Tythes," and was presently
deeply wrapped up in an abstruse discussion concerning the temporality
of benefices.

The entertainment, about which Miss Oldbuck expressed so much anxiety,
was at length placed upon the table; and the Earl of Glenallan, for
the first time since the date of his calamity, sat at a stranger's
board, surrounded by strangers.

He seemed to himself like a man in a dream, or one whose brain was not
fully recovered from the effects of an intoxicating potion. Relieved, as
he had that morning been, from the image of guilt which had so long haunted
his imagination, he felt his sorrows as a lighter and more tolerable
load, but was still unable to take any share in the conversation that
passed around him. It was, indeed, of a cast very different from
that which he had been accustomed to. The bluntness of Oldbuck, the
tiresome apologetic harangues of his sister, the pedantry of the divine,
and the vivacity of the young soldier, which savoured much more of the
camp than of the court, were all new to a nobleman who had lived in
a retired and melancholy state for so many years, that the manners of
the world seemed to him equally strange and unpleasing. Miss M'Intyre
alone, from the natural politeness and unpretending simplicity of
her manners, appeared to belong to that class of society to which he
had been accustomed in his earlier and better days.

Nor did Lord Glenallan's deportment less surprise the company. Though a
plain but excellent family-dinner was provided (for, as Mr. Blattergowl
had justly said, it was impossible to surprise Miss Griselda when her
larder was empty), and though the Antiquary boasted his best port,
and assimilated it to the Falernian of Horace, Lord Glenallan was proof
to the allurements of both. His servant placed before him a small mess
of vegetables, that very dish, the cooking of which had alarmed
Miss Griselda, arranged with the most minute and scrupulous neatness.

He ate sparingly of these provisions; and a glass of pure water, sparkling
from the fountain-head, completed his repast. Such, his servant said,
had been his lordship's diet for very many years, unless upon the high
festivals of the Church, or when company of the first rank were entertained
at Glenallan House, when he relaxed a little in the austerity of
his diet, and permitted himself a glass or two of wine. But at
Monkbarns, no anchoret could have made a more simple and scanty
meal.
The Antiquary was a gentleman, as we have seen, in feeling, but
blunt and careless in expression, from the habit of living with
those before whom he had nothing to suppress. He attacked his noble
guest without scruple on the severity of his regimen.
"A few half-cold greens and potatoes--a glass of ice-cold water to
wash them down--antiquity gives no warrant for it, my lord. This
house used to be accounted a _hospitium,_ a place of retreat for
Christians; but your lordship's diet is that of a heathen Pythagorean,
or Indian Bramin--nay, more severe than either, if you refuse these
fine apples."It was near this spot that, just a year earlier, the
squadron under Captain Hawkins' command had encountered the two
successive hurricanes which had played such havoc with them as to compel
them to run to San Juan de Ulua to refit, with the result that
irremediable disaster had overtaken them; and Dyer, who had looked
forward with considerable trepidation to the time when he would again be
called upon to sail those treacherous seas, was loud in his
thanksgivings for the good fortune which had thus far attended them, for
nothing could be more satisfactory and delightful than the weather which
the voyagers were now experiencing, the only drawback to their content
being an unaccountably heavy sea into which they ran about midnight, and
which Dyer was inclined to regard as the forerunner of the much dreaded
hurricane.  With the passage of the hours, however, the violence of the
sea manifested a tendency to moderate, which caused the more experienced
ones among the crew to arrive at the conclusion that, instead of being
the forerunner of a hurricane, the turbulent sea was merely the
aftermath of one which had very recently blown itself out.

And this conclusion was abundantly verified on the following day, for
about mid-morning a floating object was sighted on the starboard bow
which, as the _Nonsuch_ drew nearer, proved to be the hull of a small
ship, dismasted, floating low in the water, and rolling horribly in the
trough of the sea.  Then, as now, the sight of a ship in distress always
appeals irresistibly to the humanity of the British seaman and no sooner
was the character of the floating object identified than the helm of the
_Nonsuch_ was shifted and she was headed for the wreck.  Shortly
afterwards the Spanish ensign was hoisted half-way up the ensign staff
of the stranger, thus declaring not only her nationality but also that
she was in distress, a fact which was sufficiently obvious to all with
eyes to see.

When the _Nonsuch_ had arrived within about a mile of the heavily
labouring craft, George ordered sail to be shortened, and announced to
his officers his intention to stand by the wreck until the sea should
moderate sufficiently to enable boats to be lowered, when he would take
off the crew, and every preparation was made accordingly.  The English
ship was so manoeuvred as to enable her to pass athwart the stranger's
stern and heave-to close under the lee of the latter; and presently, as
the space between the two craft rapidly narrowed, George was enabled to
distinguish, painted in large letters, the name _Dona Catalina_.
Springing into the weather main rigging of his own ship, the young
commander waited until but a few fathoms separated the two vessels, and
he was able to clearly distinguish the features of the three men who
were clinging desperately to the shattered poop bulwark rail of the
wreck, and then, with his hand placed trumpet-wise to his mouth as he
stood with his back supported by the rigging, he hailed in Spanish:

"Ho! the _Catalina_, ahoy!  Do you wish to be taken off?"

"_Si, Senor, si, si_," answered a short, stout, black-bearded individual
who formed one of the trio on the stranger's poop, "we are full of water
and sinking.  Take us off, for the love of God!  We have pumped until we
can pump no more, our strength being completely exhausted, and the leak
is gaining on us rapidly."

"Very well," returned George.  "I will remain near you until the sea
goes down sufficiently to launch a boat.  Until then you must do the
best you can."

"But, Senor," shrieked the black-bearded one, "if you wait until then it
will be too late.  It will be hours before the sea goes down enough to
permit of a boat being launched, and meanwhile our ship is filling fast.
Cannot you devise some means of taking us off at once?  See how we are
rolling, and how the sea is breaking over us!  Every moment I am in fear
that a heavier sea than usual will strike us and roll our vessel
completely over.  Holy Mother of God!  Do not leave us to drown like
rats in a trap, Senor!"

But by this time the two craft had drifted so far apart that further
speech just then was impossible, and as George descended from the
rigging he gave orders to fill the main topsail and get way on the ship
again.  Then he ascended to the poop and joined Dyer, who was already
there.

"Well, Cap'n, what be us goin' to do?" demanded the pilot, whose
knowledge of Spanish was just sufficient to enable him to gather the
drift of what had passed.  "Shall us wait a bit longer, and chance the
hooker stayin' right side up till the sea do go down a bit more; or
shall us try to launch a boat?  I don't doubt but what, if us watches
carefully and works quickly, we can get a boat afloat and unhooked; but
us couldn't get alongside the wrack to take her people off--they'd have
to jump overside and trust to we to pick mun up.  Then how would us all
get out of the boat a'terwards and get mun hoisted up again?  But it do
surely look to me as though we must do some'at pretty soon, because I
don't believe as that wrack'll last so very much longer.  Look to mun,
how her do roll, and look how the sea do breach her!  There must be tons
o' water a-pouring down into her hold every minute, and--Lard be
merciful--there a goeth.  She be turnin' over now, as I'm a livin'--No,
no; 'tis all right; her be rightin' again, but Cap'n, her can't live
much longer to that rate."

"No," agreed George, who, like Dyer, had been breathlessly watching the
outrageous antics of the waterlogged craft, and had seen how very nearly
she had come to capsizing as the sea flung her up and hove her over on
her beam ends--"I'm afraid she cannot.  As you say, something must be
done if we are to save those poor wretches; but the only thing that I
can think of is to at least make the attempt to launch a boat.  We will
get to windward of the wreck, and then, everything having been
previously made ready, we will lower a boat and--if we can get away
without being stove--run down to the wreck in the `smooth' of the
_Nonsuch's_ lee; get under the lee of the wreck; and her people must
jump overboard, two or three at a time, and trust to us to pick them up.
I will take command of the boat, and as soon as you see us safely under
the lee of the wreck you must fill and keep away, pass to leeward of the
wreck, and heave-to as close to her as you can, when we will come round
under your lee and get the people aboard one at a time by means of a
`whip' from the lee mainyard-arm, trusting to luck for the chance to get
the boat aboard again without smashing her to staves.  Now try her
about, Dyer; I think we ought to be able to fetch well to windward of
her now.  And I believe the starboard quarter boat will be the easiest
to lower and unhook."


CHAPTER SEVEN.

HOW THEY CAME TO SAN JUAN DE ULUA.

Having explained to Dyer his proposed scheme of operations, George left
to the pilot the task of attending to the necessary manoeuvring of the
ship, and, going forward, called for four volunteers to go with him in
the boat to handle her and assist, if it might be, in saving the
unfortunate crew of the Spanish ship.  As he had anticipated, he met
with no difficulty in obtaining a sufficient number of men for his
purpose, four of his old _Bonaventure's_ at once stepping forward at his
call.  Directing these men to follow him, he then returned aft to where
the boat he intended to use hung swinging from the davits and, pointing
to her, instructed his volunteers to enter her, remove the plug from her
bottom to allow all the water to run out of her, and, while this was
doing, pass out the masts, sails, and all other gear not absolutely
required in the execution of the task which the intrepid quintette were
about to undertake.  Then, these things being done, the plug was
returned to its place and driven well home, the oars were unlashed, the
thole pins shipped, the tackle falls well-greased, the coils cast off
the belaying pins, and every preparation made for the delicate operation
of launching.  While these matters were being attended to the young
captain stood looking on, directing the men's movements, and pondering
upon the difficulty which he foresaw in connection with the quick
release of the boat from her tackles as soon as she should become water-
borne.  It was absolutely necessary that this should be infallibly
accomplished at precisely the right instant, otherwise there was the
risk on the one hand of the boat being smashed to staves by being
violently dashed against the side of the heavily rolling ship; or, upon
the other, of her being released at one end only, in which case the
unreleased end of the boat would be lifted high out of the water again
by the counter roll of the ship and her crew all flung into the water.

Suddenly he saw his way clear; the solution of the difficulty had come
to him, and he issued his orders rapidly, for time was pressing, the
_Nonsuch_ had been hove about, and was now bearing down to take up a
position just to windward of the wreck.  First of all, the boat was
temporarily slung by stout ropes from the davit ends; then the tackles
were let go and unhooked.  Next, two stout rope strops were passed
through the ringbolts by which the boat was suspended from the tackles
and one bight passed through the other and secured in place by a well-
greased toggle, or piece of wood capable of being easily and quickly
withdrawn; and finally the bights thus formed were passed over the hooks
of the blocks, the tackles, were boused taut and made fast again, and
the temporary supports were cast off, thus leaving the boat once more
suspended by the tackles.  George explained the device to the men, and
when he was satisfied that they perfectly understood the working of it,
ordered them into the boat, himself following them and stationing
himself at the craft's tiller, when a short wait occurred during which
the _Nonsuch_ was working her way toward the position necessary for the
success of the experiment which was about to be made.

At length the critical moment arrived; the _Nonsuch_ rolled and plunged,
with creaking timbers and groaning yards, up to windward of and some
fifty fathoms distant from the wallowing Spaniard, and, the mainyard
having been backed with perfect judgment by Dyer, came to a standstill
exactly abreast the dismasted hulk, thus affording a lee and
comparatively smooth water in which her boat might make a dash for the
wreck; then, taking advantage of a heavy lee roll, the boat was very
smartly lowered away upon an even keel, and struck the water with a
resounding splash.

"Let go!" yelled George, as he felt the boat take the water, and prompt
at the word the two men who were stationed at the tackles drew the well-
greased toggles, releasing the boat, oars were thrown out, and away
dashed the boat right down to leeward, heading to pass under the stern
of the wreck and come up in the comparatively sheltered water under her
lee.  The passage was but a short one, and some three minutes later the
small craft, tossed buoyantly aloft upon the great foaming surges, had
safely passed under the stern of the _Dona Catalina_ and rounded-to
under her lee.  Then the _Nonsuch_, which had by this time driven down
perilously near to the wreck, filled away again and just managed to
handsomely draw clear.

The three Spaniards were still clinging for their lives to the broken
bulwarks, and as George looked up he caught a momentary glimpse of some
seven or eight other heads peering over the rail down in the vessel's
waist; but there was nothing to indicate that anything had been done by
those on board to help those who were risking their own lives to save
theirs.  There was no time for argument or discussion, however;
therefore George simply hailed the trio on the poop, tersely explaining
that he dared not attempt to lay the boat alongside, and that
consequently those who were anxious to have a chance for life must
simply jump overboard and trust to those in the boat to pick them up.
And at the same time he directed the two bow oarsmen to lay in their
oars and hold themselves ready to pick up those who cared to jump while
the other two oarsmen paddled the boat up as close to the heaving and
staggering wreck as it was prudent to go.

Then ensued a long and heated debate among the Spaniards themselves, not
one of whom seemed to possess the courage necessary to trust himself
even momentarily to the raging sea, during which the crew of the boat
patiently maintained their position within a fathom or so of the
wallowing hulk; but at length some sort of a decision seemed to have
been arrived at, for the short, stout, black-bearded man suddenly made
his appearance at the gangway, grasping a handspike, and, having first
inquired whether those in the boat were ready, and receiving an
affirmative reply, sprang outward, feet foremost.  He struck the water
within less than half a fathom of the boat, vanished beneath the surface
for a moment, and re-appeared, coughing and spitting, still convulsively
clutching the handspike, close enough to enable those in the boat to
instantly seize him by the collar and haul him in over the gunwale, none
the worse for his plunge and dip.  He was at once hustled aft into the
stern sheets, out of the way, and his rescue had been effected with such
absolute promptitude and simplicity that there was now no further
hesitation on the part of those left behind, who, one after another,
presented themselves at the gangway, some provided with handspikes, some
with oars, and one or two with short lengths of planking, or a grating,
and leaped, with the courage of desperation, into the swirling foam, to
the number of just a dozen.  Then, as no more appeared, George inquired
where the remainder were; upon which the black-bearded man, after
counting heads, informed him that all the living had now left the ship,
the rest of the crew having been either killed or washed overboard when
the ship became dismasted.

And now came the most difficult part of the whole undertaking, namely,
getting the boat and its cargo safe aboard the parent ship.  The
_Nonsuch_ was just then about a mile distant from the derelict, hove-to
on the larboard tack, awaiting a signal from George indicating that the
rescue had been effected and that he was now ready to make the great
attempt.  That signal was now made by lashing a handkerchief to the end
of a boathook and waving it wildly in the air; upon seeing which, Dyer,
who had been manoeuvring the ship with the most consummate judgment,
filled upon her and brought her close up under the derelict's lee.
Then, and not until then, George gave the word, and the now heavily
loaded boat, floating deep in the water, headed out from under the
sheltering lee of the derelict, made a dash across the short space of
turbulent surges that separated her from the _Nonsuch_, accomplished the
passage safely, slipped round under the stern of the ship, now once more
hove-to on the larboard tack, and rounded-to in the comparative "smooth"
of her lee.

But now that she was there, how were the people to be got out of her?
For it was just as dangerous to attempt to lay her alongside the
_Nonsuch_ as it had been to make the same attempt with the _Dona
Catalina_.  But Dyer had seen to this; for while the boat had been
absent on her errand of mercy the pilot had ordered a block to be lashed
to the starboard mainyard-arm, a whip rove through it, a boatswain's
chair made fast to the end of the whip, and a hauling line bent on to
the boatswain's chair; and when the boat ranged up under the _Nonsuch's_
lee, there was the whole apparatus dangling in the air, ready to effect
the transfer.  To manoeuvre the boat under it and to lower the chair
into the boat was an easy matter, when all that remained was for a man
to get into the contrivance and be hoisted aloft and hauled into safety.
The transfer of the twelve rescued Spaniards was safely accomplished in
considerably less than an hour; and now all that remained was to hook on
the boat and hoist her up to the davits.  Yes; that was all; but it was
the most difficult and delicate part of the whole undertaking; yet the
seamanship of George and Dyer proved equal to the task, and another
quarter of an hour saw the boat once more safely dangling at the davits,
with scarcely a scratch on her paint to show what a trying ordeal she
had passed through, and the _Nonsuch_ was again speeding away to the
westward, leaving the derelict to her not long delayed fate.

The quarter boat safely hoisted, George at once turned his attention to
his guests.  The black-bearded man, it appeared, was the captain of the
ill-fated _Dona Catalina_, and he introduced himself as simply Captain
Robledo Martinez, without the pretentious prefix of "Don" or anything
else.  Him, George took under his own wing, ordering a cot to be slung
for him down on the half-deck, with a screen of canvas triced up round
it to insure privacy.  The poor fellow, like all the rest of the rescued
Spaniards, had, of course, only the clothes that he stood up in, and
they were dripping wet; but, fortunately, the _Nonsuch_ was well
provided in the matter of slop chests, and Captain Martinez, together
with the other survivors of the _Dona Catalina_, was soon rigged afresh.

It transpired that the Spanish vessel was on her way from Cartagena to
San Juan de Ulua, with despatches to the Viceroy of Mexico, when she
encountered the hurricane that had overwhelmed her, and that, before
being rescued, her crew had been exposed to the full fury of the
elements for twenty-six hours, in momentary expectation that the vessel
would founder under their feet; they were therefore given a warm meal,
and then dispatched below to make up their arrears of rest and recover
from the exhaustion induced by prolonged exposure.

But the conjunction of the names Cartagena and San Juan de Ulua,
casually mentioned by Martinez in his brief conversation with George
before retiring below, set the young Englishman thinking hard.  The
conjunction was suggestive, to say the least of it; for Cartagena was
the city from which the plate fleet convoy started upon its annual long
ocean voyage to Spain, accompanied by the Cartagena contingent of plate
ships, with which it proceeded to Nombre de Dios--regarded as "The
Treasure-House of the World"--to take charge of the ships which
proceeded thence annually, loaded with treasure of incalculable value
for the replenishment of the Spanish coffers; while from thence the
combined fleet was wont to proceed to San Juan, there to be joined by
the ships carrying the Mexican contribution of treasure, of scarcely
less value than that shipped from Nombre.  George Saint Leger had not
been for so many months intimately associated with Dyer, the pilot of
the expedition, and a survivor of the disaster which had overtaken
Admiral John Hawkins at San Juan de Ulua only a year previously, without
hearing all about the twelve large treasure galleons which the Devonians
had found lying defenceless in the harbour of that city when they
arrived there, torn and shattered by such a hurricane as that which had
reduced the _Dona Catalina_ to a waterlogged and sinking hulk, and he
wondered whether perchance it might be his good fortune to find another
such fleet in the harbour upon his arrival there.  If so--well, Admiral
Hawkins had spared the treasure which he found there, for the best of
all reasons, namely, that his own ships were in no condition to engage
in a fight with the shore batteries, which it would be necessary to
silence before he could seize the plate ships, while, on the other hand,
it was imperative that he should enter the harbour to refit, and he
could not do so without the consent of the Spanish authorities;
therefore he had been obliged to sign a convention whereby in
consideration of his receiving permission to refit in peace and without
hindrance, he was to leave the plate ships unmolested.  Hawkins had
scrupulously adhered to his part of the agreement, but the Spaniards had
deliberately broken theirs; and George was determined that now they
should dearly pay for their treachery, if Dame Fortune would but favour
him.  He talked the matter over, first with Dyer, and then they together
discussed it with Basset, the captain of the soldiers, and Heard, the
purser; with the result that it was unanimously agreed among them that
they would make a determined attempt upon the fleet, if it should happen
to be in harbour upon their arrival.

He had bene admitted of the Councell to Kinge James, from which tyme
he continued so obsequious to the Courte, that he never fayled in
overactinge all that he was requyred to do; no acte of power was
ever proposed, which he did not advance, and execute his parte, with the
utmost rigour, no man so greate a tyrant in his country, or was lesse
swayed by any motives of justice or honour; he was a man of no words,
except in huntinge and hawkinge in which he only knew how to behave
himselfe, in matters of State and councell he alwayes concurred in what
was proposed for the Kinge, and cancelled and repayred all those
transgressions by concurringe in all that was proposed against him
as soone as any such propositions were made; yett when the Kinge went
to Yorke, he likewise attended upon his Majesty and at that
distance seemed to have recover'd some courage, and concurred in
all councells which were taken to undeceave the people, and to make
the proceedings of the Parliament odious to all the world; but on
a suddayne he caused his horses to attend him out of the towne, and
havinge placed fresh ons at a distance, he fledd backe to London,
with the exspedition such men use when they are most afrayde, and
never after denyed to do any thinge that was requyred of him, and
when the warr was ended, and Crumwell had putt downe the house of
Peeres, he gott himselfe to be chosen a member of the house of
Commons, and sate with them as of ther owne body, and was esteemed
accordingly; in a worde he became so despicable to all men, that
he will hardly ever in joy the ease which Seneca bequeathed to him:
Hic egregiis majoribus ortus est, qualiscunque est, sub umbra suorum
lateat; Ut loca sordida repercussu solis illustrantur, ita inertes
majorum suorum luce resplendeant.

46.

The object of this letter, the writer went
on to say, was to acquaint His Excellency with the fact of, and reason
for, the delay, that he might not be rendered unduly anxious, through
the non-arrival of the convoy; and to request that on no account should
the plate ships be allowed to proceed to sea until the arrival of the
convoy under the protection of which they were to make the homeward
voyage.  Which meant, as George pointed out to his officers when he
translated the document to them, that upon their arrival at San Juan de
Ulua, they would assuredly find a certain number of plate ships in the
harbour, laden with treasure, and quite defenceless, save for such
protection as the shore batteries might be able to afford.  It was the
chance of a lifetime, _if_ they could but render those shore batteries
innocuous; and an informal council of war was at once held in the great
state cabin of the _Nonsuch_ to decide how this most desirable end might
be achieved.

To start with, Dyer, who was the only man among them who had ever been
in the harbour of San Juan de Ulua, was furnished with pencil and paper,
and commanded to draw a chart of the place, to scale, as nearly as he
could, from memory; and after half an hour's arduous labour--for chart
drawing was not one of Dyer's strong points--he produced a sketch that,
rough as it was, promised to be of the utmost value to the adventurers.
For it showed how, owing to the conformation of the land, Hawkins, with
his small squadron, had, a year ago, been able to keep the whole of the
Spanish fleet from entering the harbour until he had concluded an
agreement with the treacherous Viceroy to permit them to do so; and how
a small, well-found fleet outside might, if not driven off by bad
weather, effectually blockade the port and prevent the escape of all
shipping from it.  Further than that, it disclosed to the more acute
perceptions of George and Basset, the fact, which Dyer's denser
intellect had failed to grasp, that the much dreaded batteries had been
mainly constructed, not so much to defend the place from an attack by
sea, but to render a land attack by Indians practically impossible.  For
if the chart were correctly drawn--and Dyer was very straitly questioned
upon this particular point--it showed that there was a certain spot in
the harbour where, if a ship were moored, she would be sheltered from
the fire of both batteries while at the same time the entire town,
which, after all, was but a very small place, would be fully exposed to
the artillery fire of the ship.  Once completely satisfied upon this
point, Saint Leger and Basset believed they saw their way to the capture
and subjugation of the town, and laid their plans accordingly.

Three days later, shortly after noon, they made the land and, as soon as
Dyer had verified his bearings, hove-to for the night, some ten miles
off-shore and well out of sight of the town, the day being by then too
far advanced to permit of decisive action.  But with the first
appearance of dawn on the following day, sail was made, and the
_Nonsuch_ stood boldly into San Juan de Ulua harbour and came to an
anchor in the spot previously determined upon, where, as Dyer's chart
had indicated, she was safe from the fire of the two batteries which had
been constructed to defend the northern and southern extremities of the
town, which were its most vulnerable points, from a land attack.  Twelve
large plate ships were riding at anchor in the harbour, of which ten
appeared to be fully loaded, while cargo was being actively transferred
from the shore to the other two when the English ship ran in and
anchored between them and the shore.

The appearance of the _Nonsuch_ in the harbour was immediately
productive of something very nearly approaching to panic, both in the
town and on board the plate ships; for she had entered with the cross of
Saint George flaunting from her ensign staff, and the first impression
of the Spaniards was that their dreaded enemy, Drake, had returned; the
bells of the cathedral clanged out a wild alarm; and it was seen that
the crews of some of the plate ships were making hasty preparations to
get under way, with the evident object of attempting to escape to the
open sea.  This last, of course, had to be at once put a stop to;
therefore the moment that the anchor was down, George caused a boat to
be lowered, and, with its crew armed to the teeth, pulled round the
Spanish fleet, hailing each ship belonging to it, and informing the
captains that any ship seen to be getting under way would at once be
fired into and sunk.  This threat, backed up as it was by the display of
the English ship's ordnance, had the desired effect, and there were no
further attempts at flight just then on the part of the plate ships.

George's next act was to send Captain Martinez, of the wrecked _Dona
Catalina_, ashore in one of the _Nonsuch's_ boats, under a flag of
truce.  The captain was handed his dispatches, and was instructed to
either deliver or forward them to the persons to whom they were
addressed; and he was also given a letter addressed to the governor or
chief magistrate of the town, summoning that functionary, together with
twelve of the most influential inhabitants of the place, to a conference
on board the English ship, upon a matter of vital import; the conference
to begin not later than noon that day; the penalty of non-attendance
being the bombardment of the town.  Then, every preparation having been
made to carry into effect the threatened bombardment, the English sat
down and patiently awaited developments.

Half an hour before the expiration of the specified time a large boat,
flying a flag of truce, was seen to leave the wharf, and some ten
minutes later she came up to within a few fathoms of the _Nonsuch_
gangway, when it was seen that, in addition to eight oarsmen, she
carried in her stern sheets thirteen men, most of whom had passed beyond
middle age, while all were, in appearance at least, and so far as dress
was concerned, men of position and substance.

Arrived within easy hailing distance, the oarsmen ceased their efforts
at a sign from the man at the tiller, and an elderly individual, attired
in what might be supposed to be robes of office, rose to his feet and,
doffing his plumed hat, bowed to the little group of officers mustered
on the ship's poop.  Then, hat in hand, he remarked:

"Noble senors, I am Juan Alvarez, the alcalde of San Juan de Ulua, very
much at your service; and in response to your somewhat imperatively
worded letter I and my fellow townsmen have come out to confer with you.
But before we board your ship I should like to ask you just one
question.  I see by your flag that you are English.  Come you in peace,
or in war, senors?"

"That," answered George, stepping forward, "is for you and your fellow
townsmen to decide.  But meanwhile I give you the assurance of an
Englishman who has never yet broken his word to friend or foe, that you
may come aboard without fear, and that when our conference is at an end
you shall all be permitted to return to the shore without molestation--
unless it becomes apparent that hostages are necessary."

The old gentleman bowed and, still with his hat in his hand, ventured
upon a further inquiry.  "And pray, noble senor, who is to determine
whether or not hostages are regarded as necessary?" he demanded.

"I and my officers will determine that point," answered George.  "But,"
he continued, "I give you the further assurance that, should we decide
upon the necessity to retain any of you as hostages, their persons will
be as safe, and they will be treated with as much honour, on board this
ship, as in their own houses--unless treachery of any kind be attempted,
in which case I will hang them at my yard-arms as a wholesome warning to
others."

This statement caused the utmost perturbation to the alcalde and his
companions, as might easily be seen, for they all at once started to
their feet and burst into excited conversation.  But, as is usual in
such cases, there were two or three--of whom the alcalde was one--who
soon obtained an ascendency over the rest, quieting them and themselves
carrying on the discussion; and after some ten minutes of earnest debate
the rest sat down, leaving the alcalde standing alone to propound a
still further question.

"Illustrious senor," he said, addressing himself to George, "my
companions and I feel that, before we proceed further, or place
ourselves altogether in your power, it is very necessary that we should
know what acts you would be likely to construe as treachery on our
part."

"The reply to such a question is not difficult," replied George.  "We
should regard as an act of treachery any attempt on the part of either
of those ships to put to sea; and also any attempt to attack us at
disadvantage and without due warning, such as was perpetrated last year,
in this very harbour, on my countryman, Admiral Hawkins."

This answer was received with much shaking of heads and uplifting of
hands, followed by further eager consultation and debate, which ended at
last by the alcalde putting a further and final question:

"And, in the event of our refusing to board your ship under such
conditions, senor, what will happen?"

"You will be permitted to return to the shore without molestation,"
answered George.  "But," he continued, "as soon as you shall have
arrived and are landed, I shall seize every ship in this harbour; and,
that done, shall proceed to bombard your town until you see fit to
surrender it to me unconditionally!"

More perturbation, more shaking of heads and agitated waving of hands,
followed by further excited discussion lasting for close upon a quarter
of an hour, after which the alcalde, standing in the midst of his
companions and again addressing himself to George, observed:

"Most illustrious senor, we, the alcalde and twelve of the
representatives of the inhabitants of the city of San Juan de Ulua, have
decided to rely upon your assurances, and now declare ourselves ready to
board your ship, there to listen with all deference and attention to
such communication as you may desire to make to us."  Do not treat an
humble subject as an equal, nor suffer Your Majesties, whom Providence
destined to govern a high-spirited nation, to be openly ruled by one
born to obey. I am too dutiful not to lay aside my private vanity when
the happiness of my King and the tranquillity of my fellow
subjects are at stake. I am already too high. In descending a little,
I shall not only rise in the eyes of my contemporaries, but in the opinion
of posterity. Every step I am advancing undermines your throne. In
retreating a little, if I do not strengthen, I can never injure it."

But I beg your pardon for this digression, and for putting the language
of dignified reason into the mouth of a man as corrupt as he is
imbecile.

Do not suppose, because the Prince of Peace is no friend of my nation,
that I am his enemy. No! Had he shown himself a true patriot, a friend
of his own country, and of his too liberal Prince, or even of monarchy
in general, or of anybody else but himself--although I might have
disapproved of his policy, if he has any--I would never have lashed
the individual for the acts of the Minister.

But you must have observed, with me, that never before his
administration was the Cabinet of Madrid worse conducted at home
or more despised abroad; the Spanish Monarch more humbled or Spanish
subjects more wretched; the Spanish power more dishonoured or the
Spanish resources worse employed.

Never, before the treaty with France of 1796, concluded by
this wiseacre (which made him a Prince of Peace, and our Government
the Sovereign of Spain), was the Spanish monarchy reduced to such a
lamentable dilemma as to be forced into an expensive war without a cause,
and into a disgraceful peace, not only unprofitable, but absolutely
disadvantageous. Never before were its treasures distributed among its
oppressors to support their tyranny, nor its military and naval
forces employed to fight the battles of rebellion.
The loyal subjects of Spain have only one hope left. The delicate state
of his present Majesty's health does not promise a much longer continuance
of his reign, and the Prince of Asturia is too well informed to
endure the guidance of the most ignorant Minister that ever was admitted
into the Cabinet and confidence of a Sovereign. It is more than probable
that under a new reign the misfortunes of the Prince of Peace will
inspire as much compassion as his rapid advancement has excited
astonishment and indignation.

A Cabinet thus badly directed cannot be expected to have representatives
abroad either of abilities or patriotism. The Admiral and General Gravina,
who but lately left this capital as an Ambassador from the Court of Spain
to assume the command of a Spanish fleet, is more valiant than wise,
and more an enemy of your country than a friend of his own. He is a
profound admirer of Bonaparte's virtues and successes, and was, during
his residence, one of the most ostentatiously awkward courtiers of
Napoleon the First.

It is said that he has the modesty and loyalty to wish to become a
Spanish Bonaparte, and that he promises to restore by his genius and
exploits the lost lustre of the Spanish monarchy. When this was reported
to Talleyrand, he smiled with contempt; but when it was told to Bonaparte,
he stamped with rage at the impudence of the Spaniard in daring to
associate his name of acquired and established greatness with his
own impertinent schemes of absurdities and impossibilities.

In the summer of 1793, Gravina commanded a division of the Spanish fleet
in the Mediterranean, of which Admiral Langara was the commander-in-chief.
At the capitulation of Toulon, after the combined English and Spanish
forces had taken possession of it, when Rear-Admiral Goodall was
declared governor, Gravina was made the commandant of the troops.
At the head of these he often fought bravely in different sorties,
and on the 1st of October was wounded at the re-capture of Fort
Pharon. He complains still of having suffered insults or neglect
from the English, and even of having been exposed unnecessarily to the
fire and sword of the enemy merely because he was a patriot as well
as an envied or suspected ally. His inveteracy against your country
takes its date, no doubt, from the siege of Toulon, or perhaps, from its
evacuation.

When, in May, 1794, our troops were advancing towards Collioure, he was
sent with a squadron to bring it succours, but he arrived too late, and
could not save that important place. He was not more successful at the
beginning of the campaign of 1795 at Rosa, where he had only time to
carry away the artillery before the enemy entered. In August, that
year, during the absence of Admiral Massaredo, he assumed ad interim
the command of the Spanish fleet in the Mediterranean; but in the
December following he was disgraced, arrested, and shut up as a State
prisoner.

During the embassy of Lucien Bonaparte to the Court of Madrid, in the
autumn of 1800, Gravina was by his influence restored to favour; and after
the death of the late Spanish Ambassador to the Cabinet of St.

Cloud, Chevalier d' Azara, by the special desire of Napoleon, was
nominated both his successor and a representative of the King of
Etruria.

Among the members of our diplomatic corps, he was considered somewhat
of a Spanish gasconader and a bully.

He more frequently boasted of his wounds and battles than of his
negotiations or conferences, though he pretended, indeed, to shine as
much in the Cabinet as in the field.

In his suite were two Spanish women, one about forty, and the other about
twenty years of age.

Nobody knew what to make of them, as they were treated neither as wives,
mistresses, nor servants; and they avowed themselves to be no relations.
After a residence here of some weeks, he was, by superior orders, waylaid
one night at the opera, by a young and beautiful dancing girl of the
name of Barrois, who engaged him to take her into keeping. He
hesitated, indeed, for some time; at last, however, love got the
better of his scruples, and he furnished for her an elegant apartment
on the new Boulevard. On the day he carried her there, he was
accompanied by the chaplain of the Spanish Legation; and told her that,
previous to any further intimacy, she must be married to him, as
his religious principles did not permit him to cohabit with a woman who
was not his wife. At the same time he laid before her an agreement to
sign, by which she bound herself never to claim him as a husband
before her turn--that is to say, until sixteen other women, to whom he
had been previously married, were dead. She made no opposition, either
to the marriage or to the conditions annexed to it. This girl had a
sweetheart of the name of Valere, an actor at one of the little
theatres on the Boulevards, to whom she communicated her adventure. He
advised her to be scrupulous in her turn, and to ask a copy of the
agreement. After some difficulty this was obtained. In it no mention was
made of her maintenance, nor in what manner her children were to be
regarded, should she have any. Valere had, therefore, another agreement
drawn up, in which all these points were arranged, according to his own
interested views. Gravina refused to subscribe to what he plainly
perceived were only extortions; and the girl, in her turn, not only
declined any further connection with him, but threatened to publish
the act of polygamy.

Before they had done discussing this subject, the door was suddenly
opened and the two Spanish ladies presented themselves. After
severely upbraiding Gravina, who was struck mute by surprise, they
announced to the girl that whatever promise or contract of marriage
she had obtained from him was of no value, as, before they came
with him to France, he had bound himself, before a public notary
at Madrid, not to form any more connections, nor to marry any other
woman, without their written consent.

One of these ladies declared that she had been married to Gravina twenty-two
years, and was his oldest wife but one; the other said that she
had been married to him six years.

They insisted upon his following them, which he did, after putting a purse
of gold into Barrois's hand.

When Valere heard from his mistress this occurrence, he advised her
to make the most money she could of the Spaniard's curious scruples.
A letter was, therefore, written to him, demanding one hundred thousand
livres--as the price of secrecy and withholding the particulars of
this business from the knowledge of the tribunals and the police; and
an answer was required within twenty-four hours. The same night Gravina
offered one thousand Louis, which were accepted, and the papers returned;
but the next day Valere went to his hotel, Rue de Provence, where
he presented himself as a brother of Barrois. He stated that he still
possessed authenticated copies of the papers returned, and that he must
have either the full sum first asked by his sister, or an annuity of
twelve thousand livres settled upon her. Instead of an answer,
Gravina ordered him to be turned out of the house. An attorney then
waited on His Excellency, on the part of the brother and the sister,
and repeated their threats and their demands, adding that he would write
a memorial both to the Emperor of the French and to the King of Spain,
were justice refused to his principals any longer.

Gravina was well aware that this affair, though more laughable
than criminal, would hurt both his character and credit if it were
known in France; he therefore consented to pay seventy-six thousand
livres more, upon a formal renunciation by the party of all future
claims.

Not having money sufficient by him, he went to borrow it from a
banker, whose clerk was one of Talleyrand's secret agents. Our Minister,
therefore, ordered every step of Gravina to be watched; but he soon
discovered that, instead of wanting this money for a political intrigue,
it was necessary to extricate him out of an amorous scrape. Hearing,
however, in what a scandalous manner the Ambassador had been duped and
imposed upon, he reported it to Bonaparte, who gave Fouche orders
to have Valere, Barrois, and the attorney immediately transported
to Cayenne, and to restore Gravina his money.

The former part of this order the Minister of Police executed the
more willingly, as it was according to his plan that Barrois had pitched
upon Gravina for a lover. She had been intended by him as a spy on
His Excellency, but had deceived him by her reports--a crime for which
transportation was a usual punishment.

Notwithstanding the care of our Government to conceal and bury this affair
in oblivion, it furnished matter both for conversation in our fashionable
circles, and subjects for our caricaturists. But these artists were soon
seized by the police, who found it more easy to chastise genius than to
silence tongues. The declaration of war by Spain against your country
was a lucky opportunity for Gravina to quit with honour a Court where he
was an object of ridicule, to assume the command of a fleet which might
one day make him an object of terror. When he took leave of
Bonaparte, he was told to return to France victorious, or never to return
any more; and Talleyrand warned him as a friend, "whenever he returned
to his post in France to leave his marriage mania behind him in Spain.
Here," said he, "you may, without ridicule, intrigue with a hundred
women, but you run a great risk by marrying even one."
I have been in company with Gravina, and after what I heard him say,
so far from judging him superstitious, I thought him really impious.
But infidelity and bigotry are frequently next-door neighbours.

LETTER XXVIII.

PARIS, August, 1805.

MY LORD:--It cannot have escaped the observation of the most superficial
traveller of rank, that, at the Court of St.

Cloud, want of morals is not atoned for by good breeding or good manners.
The hideousness of vice, the pretensions of ambition, the vanity
of rank, the pride of favour, and the shame of venality do not wear here
that delicate veil, that gloss of virtue, which, in other Courts,
lessens the deformity of corruption and the scandal of depravity. Duplicity
and hypocrisy are here very common indeed, more so than dissimulation
anywhere else; but barefaced knaves and impostors must always make
indifferent courtiers. Here the Minister tells you, I must have such
a sum for a place; and the chamberlain tells you, Count down so much
for my protection. The Princess requires a necklace of such a value
for interesting herself for your advancement; and the lady-in-waiting
demands a diamond of such worth on the day of your promotion. This
tariff of favours and of infamy descends 'ad infinitum'. The secretary
for signing, and the clerk for writing your commission; the cashier
for delivering it, and the messenger for informing you of it, have all
their fixed prices. Have you a lawsuit, the judge announces to you that
so much has been offered by your opponent, and so much is expected from
you, if you desire to win your cause.

When you are the defendant against the Crown, the attorney or
solicitor-general lets you know that such a douceur is requisite
to procure such an issue. Even in criminal proceedings, not only
honour, but life, may be saved by pecuniary sacrifices.

A man of the name of Martin, by profession a stock-jobber, killed, in 1803,
his own wife; and for twelve thousand livres--he was acquitted,
and recovered his liberty. In November last year, in a quarrel with his
own brother, he stabbed him through the heart, and for another
sum of twelve thousand livres he was acquitted, and released before
last Christmas.
This wretch is now in prison again, on suspicion of having poisoned his
own daughter, with whom he had an incestuous intercourse, and he
boasts publicly of soon being liberated.

Another person, Louis de Saurac, the younger son of Baron de Saurac,
who together with his eldest son had emigrated, forged a will in
the name of his parent, whom he pretended to be dead, which left
him the sole heir of all the disposable property, to the exclusion
of two sisters.

After the nation had shared its part as heir of all emigrants, Louis
took possession of the remainder.

In 1802, both his father and brother accepted the general amnesty,
and returned to France. To their great surprise, they heard that this
Louis had, by his ill-treatment, forced his sisters into servitude,
refusing them even the common necessaries of life.

After upbraiding him for his want of duty, the father desired, according
to the law, the restitution of the unsold part of his estates. On the day
fixed for settling the accounts and entering into his rights, Baron de
Saurac was arrested as a conspirator and imprisoned in the Temple.

He had been denounced as having served in the army of Conde, and as
being a secret agent of Louis XVIII.

To disprove the first part of the charge, he produced certificates from
America, where he had passed the time of his emigration, and even upon
the rack he denied the latter. During his arrest, the eldest son discovered
that Louis had become the owner of their possessions, by means of
the will he had forged in the name of his father; and that it was
he who had been unnatural enough to denounce the author of his days.

With the wreck of their fortune in St. Domingo, he procured his
father's release; who, being acquainted with the perversity of his
younger son, addressed himself to the department to be reinstated
in his property.

This was opposed by Louis, who defended his title to the estate by the
revolutionary maxim which had passed into a law, enacting that
all emigrants should be considered as politically dead. Hitherto Baron
de Saurac had, from affection, declined to mention the forged
will; but shocked by his son's obduracy, and being reduced to distress,
his counsellor produced this document, which not only went to
deprive Louis of his property, but exposed him to a criminal
prosecution.

This unnatural son, who was not yet twenty-five, had imbibed all the
revolutionary morals of his contemporaries, and was well
acquainted with the moral characters of his revolutionary countrymen.
He addressed himself, therefore, to Merlin of Douai, Bonaparte's
Imperial attorney-general and commander of his Legion of Honour;
who, for a bribe of fifty thousand livres--obtained for him, after
he had been defeated in every other court, a judgment in his favour,
in the tribunal of cassation, under the sophistical conclusion that
all emigrants, being, according to law, considered as politically
dead, a will in the name of any one of them was merely a pious fraud
to preserve the property in the family.

This Merlin is the son of a labourer of Anchin, and was a servant
of the Abbey of the same name. One of the monks, observing in him some
application, charitably sent him to be educated at Douai, after
having bestowed on him some previous education.

Not satisfied with this generous act, he engaged the other monks, as
well as the chapter of Cambray, to subscribe for his expenses of admission
as an attorney by the Parliament of Douai, in which situation the
Revolution found him.

By his dissimulation and assumed modesty, he continued to dupe his
benefactors; who, by their influence, obtained for him the nomination
as representative of the people to our First National Assembly. They
soon, however, had reason to repent of their generosity.

He joined the Orleans faction and became one of the most persevering,
violent, and cruel persecutors of the privileged classes, particularly
of the clergy, to whom he was indebted for everything. In 1792 he was
elected a member of the National Convention, where he voted for the death
of his King. It was he who proposed a law (justly called, by Prudhomme,
the production of the deliberate homicide Merlin) against suspected
persons; which was decreed on the 17th of September, 1793, and caused
the imprisonment or proscription of two hundred thousand families.
This decree procured him the appellation of Merlin Suspects and
of Merlin Potence.

In 1795 he was appointed a Minister of Police, and soon afterwards a
Minister of Justice. After the revolution in favour of the Jacobins of
the 4th of September, 1797, he was made a director, a place which
he was obliged by the same Jacobins to resign, in June, 1799.
Bonaparte expressed, at first, the most sovereign contempt for this
Merlin, but on account of one of his sons, who was his aide-de-camp,
he was appointed by him, when First Consul, his attorney-general.

As nothing paints better the true features of a Government than the
morality or vices of its functionaries, I will finish this man's portrait
with the following characteristic touches.

Merlin de Douai has been successively the counsel of the late Duc d'
Orleans, the friend of Danton, of Chabot, and of Hebert, the admirer
of Murat, and the servant of Robespierre. An accomplice of Rewbell,
Barras, and la Reveilliere, an author of the law of suspected
persons, an advocate of the Septembrizers, and an ardent apostle of the
St.
Guillotine. Cunning as a fog and ferocious as a tiger, he has outlived all
the factions with which he has been connected. It has been his policy
to keep in continual fermentation rivalships, jealousies,
inquietudes, revenge and all other odious passions; establishing, by
such means, his influence on the terror of some, the ambition of others,
and the credulity of them all. Had I, when Merlin proposed his law
concerning suspected persons, in the name of liberty and equality,
been free and his equal, I should have said to him, "Monster,
this, your atrocious law, is your sentence of death; it has brought
thousands of innocent persons to an untimely end; you shall die
by my hands as a victim, if the tribunals do not condemn you to the
scaffold as an executioner or as a criminal."
Merlin has bought national property to the amount of fifteen million
of livress--and he is supposed to possess money nearly to the same
amount, in your or our funds.

For a man born a beggar, and educated by charity, this fortune, together
with the liberal salaries he enjoys, might seem sufficient without
selling justice, protecting guilt, and oppressing or persecuting
innocence.

"No, senor, I cannot answer your question categorically at the present
moment," replied the alcalde.  "All that I can tell you, now, is that
some of them died of the wounds which they received in the fight, some
died of disease, and the rest--perished--in the--Inquisition--or linger
still within its walls.  But records, of course, exist from which it
will no doubt be possible to furnish you with all details."

"So," commented George, after another terrible silence, "some perished
in the Inquisition--or linger still within its walls.  Can you tell me,
senor, how they chanced to get into the power of the Inquisition?"

"Certainly, senor," answered the alcalde, with alacrity, believing that
he saw his way to clear himself and his colleagues from blame.  "Upon
their capture, they were naturally at first confined in prison by order
of the military authorities.  From thence some of them--a few--were sent
to the galleys, some--as I just now had the honour to mention to you,
died in prison of their wounds, and the remainder were claimed by the
Chief Inquisitor."

"I see," commented George.  "Yes, I think I begin to understand, and see
my way.  Now, senor, I will furnish you with pens and paper, and you can
proceed to draft the document to which you just now referred, while I
place on record the nature and extent of my claims.  When we have done
that, I will go ashore with you, taking with me a party of armed men,
accompanied by whom I purpose to call at your Inquisition and remove
from thence any Englishmen whom I may find within its walls.  I have
decided to take this step, not only to save time, but also because,
having seen something of your fellow-countrymen in Old Spain, I know the
extreme reluctance with which you would regard any suggestion of mine
that you should bring pressure of any kind to bear upon your own clergy,
therefore I will relieve you of all embarrassment on that score by
personally assuming the responsibility.  It will also probably be
necessary that I should have an interview with the commander of your
military forces, as I presume that he is the official who will be able
to furnish me with the names of the Englishmen captured, with
particulars of the manner in which they were disposed of.  Indeed, upon
second thoughts, I am inclined to believe that he is the man upon whom I
ought first to call; and since I presume that it will be necessary for
you also to call upon him--in the interests of your friends here--we
will make the call together."

So saying George produced writing materials, and, handing a liberal
supply to the alcalde, seated himself at the table and proceeded to
enumerate in writing the several demands which he had already made by
word of mouth, quite undisturbed by the excited discussion which was
proceeding among the Spaniards as to the precise terms in which their
own document should be worded so as to render it as impressive as
possible to those to whom it might be necessary to exhibit it.  His own
work was soon done, and a copy taken for retention and reference, if
needful; and then he sat patiently for nearly half-an-hour until the
hostages' letter had been drafted to their satisfaction, and duly
signed.  Next, having formally handed his written demand to the alcalde,
he invited the latter to follow him out on deck, where, summoning
Basset, the captain of the soldiers, and Dyer, the pilot, he issued to
them certain instructions.  Then, turning to the alcalde, who had stood
by, listening, but understanding nothing of what was being said, George
remarked:

"Senor Alvarez, as you have just seen, I have issued certain
instructions to two of my officers, and they are these.  Don Ricardo
Basset, my military commandant, I have instructed to muster ten of his
soldiers, fully armed and equipped, to accompany me ashore, under him,
as a body guard.  And to Don Roberto Dyer, my lieutenant, I have given
instructions that the gentlemen whom I have considered it necessary to
retain as hostages are to be treated with the utmost possible courtesy,
so long as all matters go well, but that upon the slightest sign or
indication of treachery upon the part of your countrymen, either ashore
or afloat, he is to hang them, one after the other, at those yard-arms,
up there.  Also, he is to keep his guns trained upon the town and, in
the event of none of the landing party returning before sunset, open
fire upon it forthwith.  I have explained these matters to you in order
that you may realise that upon you, and upon the success with which you
are able to impress upon your compatriots the absolute necessity for
complete submission, depends the lives of the hostages whom you are
leaving behind you.  Ah! here comes Senor Basset with his guard; and I
see that the boat is also ready; therefore, as there may be much to be
done between this and sunset, we will go as soon as you are ready,
senor."

Whereupon Don Juan Alvarez, the alcalde of San Juan de Ulua, hurried
back to the great state cabin to reassure and bid farewell to the
hostages, and then, returning to the deck, accompanied George to the
boat, where Basset and his men had already taken their places; and the
party pushed off and headed for the landing place.

Although it was a city, San Juan was, at this period of its history, but
a very small place, of little more than a square mile in area, with only
two streets at all worthy of the name, these two streets traversing each
other at right angles and crossing in the centre of the city, the
junction of the two being at the Grand Plaza, or Square, one side of
which was occupied by the Cathedral, while the other three sides were
given up to the Government and Municipal Buildings.  It was to one of
these last, a large and imposing building with the arms of Spain boldly
sculptured upon its pediment, that the alcalde conducted the little
party of Englishmen, and which he entered alone, after apologising
elaborately for doing so, upon the plea that it would greatly facilitate
matters if he were permitted to first see Don Manuel Rebiera, the acting
Commandant, and explain to him the situation.  George agreed with him
that this might be so, and patiently took up his stand outside, waiting,
in company with Basset and his squad of soldiers, in the shadow of the
building until he should be summoned to enter.  And meanwhile the party
became objects of curiosity and by no means friendly comment to a
rapidly increasing crowd, chiefly of men of the labouring class, who
came to gaze curiously upon the little knot of resolute-looking
Englishmen who returned their gaze so fearlessly, blowing their lighted
matches occasionally and handling their muskets in significant fashion
when the mob showed signs of becoming rather too demonstrative.

At length, after an absence of nearly twenty minutes, the alcalde re-
appeared and, with further apologies, this time for his prolonged
absence, invited George to accompany him into the building for the
purpose of being presented to Don Manuel Rebiera, the acting Commandant.
This gentleman was found installed in a room which partook, in about
equal proportions, of the characteristics of an office and a barrack-
room, with a sentry outside the door, who stolidly saluted the pair as
they passed in.

Captain Rebiera proved to be a typical Spanish soldier of the period,
bluff and hearty, but exceedingly courteous in manner, with, according
to his own account, a profound respect and admiration for the English,
so far as his knowledge of them extended, yet George quickly came to the
conclusion that the good man was suffering from a certain feeling of
soreness at the idea of the city, for the safety of which he was
responsible, being to all intents and purposes in the power and at the
mercy of the exceedingly young man to whom he was introduced.  He
greeted George courteously, yet with a certain suggestion of restrained
antagonism, and then said:

"Senor, my friend, Don Juan Alvarez, has very briefly acquainted me with
the extraordinary circumstances of your visit to our port, and of the
still more extraordinary demands which you have seen fit to make.  Now,
I may as well mention that, so far as those demands are concerned, it
will be quite impossible for me to concede them without first
consulting--"

"Pardon me, Don Manuel," interrupted George, who was already beginning
to suspect a disposition on the part of this individual at least to set
up a system of delay and retardation of proceedings, "I do not think we
need enter upon a discussion of my demands as a whole just now.  The
object of my visit to you is to obtain a list of the names of the
Englishmen who fell into your hands last year as a result of your
unprovoked attack upon the squadron of my countryman, Admiral Hawkins,
and a statement of what has become of them.  I presume you can furnish
me with this information, can you not?"

"No doubt--yes, no doubt I can," replied Don Manuel, with deliberation.
"A search of the records should certainly enable us to discover the
information which you require; but of course it will take time.  Still,
I think I may promise you that in a week from now--"

"A week!" exploded George, "_A week_!"  Then he turned to the alcalde,
and, calming himself with an effort, said: "Senor, I am afraid that your
friend Don Manuel, here, does not realise the urgency of this matter, or
the extreme seriousness of the situation.  I want the information asked
for, _now, at once_, within the hour at least.  Will you have the very
great goodness to make this clear to him?"

Whereupon the alcalde drew Don Manuel away into a far corner of the room
and, with every evidence of extreme agitation, addressed himself
earnestly to the soldier for some five minutes or more, at the end of
which the pair returned to where George was standing by the table,
fidgeting with his sword-hilt.  The arguments and remonstrances of the
alcalde seemed to have been effective, for upon their return Don Manuel
said:

"I crave your pardon, most noble senor; I certainly did not understand
that the matter was anything like so urgent as it appears to be.  I beg
that you will be seated, senor, and I will do my best to have the
information found for you forthwith."

Then, as George seated himself, the acting Commandant rang a bell, in
response to which a messenger appeared, to whom he gave certain
instructions, whereupon the man vanished, and Don Manuel, taking a chair
on the opposite side of the table to that at which George was sitting,
began a somewhat constrained conversation upon indifferent subjects,
which was interrupted by the appearance of a servant with wine and three
handsome cups of chased silver.  Saint Leger, however, coldly but
courteously declined refreshments of any kind; he resolved that he would
do nothing which could by any possibility be construed into either tacit
consent to methods of delay or an acceptance of proffered friendship; he
was there as an enemy and an avenger, and he was determined to keep this
fact prominently to the fore; consequently the constraint rapidly grew
until, so far as Don Manuel at least was concerned, it became
unendurable, and, rising, he begged that his visitors would excuse him,
upon the plea that he desired to expedite matters by personally
directing the search for the required information.

And apparently the stimulus of his presence was successful, for after an
absence of about a quarter of an hour he returned, bearing in his hand a
book between the pages of which slips of paper had been inserted to mark
the positions of certain entries.

"There," he exclaimed, in a tone of satisfaction, as he laid the book
upon the table and opened it, "by a stroke of singular good fortune,
senor, we have been able to at once lay our hands upon the record which
will furnish you with the information you require.  Here, for instance,
is the first entry, giving the names of the Englishmen who were captured
upon the occasion to which you refer.  They number forty-three, and
their names are as follows."  He proceeded to read out the names of the
unfortunate ones, among which occurred that of Hubert Saint Leger--"a
namesake of your own, senor," commented Don Manuel.  "Was he, perchance,
a relative of yours?"

"He was my brother, senor," answered George, tersely.  "Read on, if you
please."

The end of the list was soon reached; and then George said: "I am
obliged to you, senor.  Now, in the first place, I must trouble you for
a copy of that list, with a statement opposite each name setting forth
the manner in which that person was dealt with."

"Certainly, senor," answered Don Manuel, politely; "that information
also I believe we can afford you.  If you will permit me I will summon
my clerk to prepare the list you require."

George bowed his acquiescence; the clerk was sent for; and after about
an hour's work the list was completed and handed to the young
Englishman, who took it and, having glanced carefully through it, said:

"I am obliged to you, Don Manuel.  I see that, of the forty-three
prisoners taken, ten died of their wounds, in prison; seventeen, of whom
my brother was one, were sentenced to the galleys, and sixteen were
claimed by your Inquisition.  Can you afford me any further information
with regard to the seventeen who were sentenced to the galleys; as, for
example, the name of the galley to which each man was consigned, and
where those galleys may be looked for at the present moment?"

"No, senor," answered Don Manuel, "I regret to say that I cannot.  They
were all put on board a ship called the _San Mathias_, and sent in her
to Nombre de Dios, where, if you will hear more of them, you must e'en
go and enquire."

"I thank you, senor," answered George quietly, ignoring a certain
suggestion of insolence in the other's concluding remark.  "And now, as
to the sixteen who were surrendered to the Inquisition.  What can you
tell me concerning them?"

"Nothing, senor," answered Don Manuel, at length displaying some signs
of uneasiness.  "When the Holy Office claims a man, that man disappears
from the public ken, generally for ever; or if he is seen again it is
only when he figures in the _auto-da-fe_, dressed in a San Benito.
Pardon, Senor Capitano, but this is a matter upon which I can afford you
no information, and which I must absolutely refuse to discuss with you,
or anyone."

"Very well," said George, "be it so.  But I suppose you will have no
objection to inform me whereabout the Inquisition building is to be
found?"

"Where it is to be found?" reiterated Don Manuel.  "Why assuredly--.
But stay.  What is your object in requiring that particular bit of
information, senor?"

"Merely that I have business there, a call to make," answered George,
imperturbably.

"Business! a call!" reiterated the soldier.  "Surely, senor, it is not
possible that you, a heretic, intend to force your sinful way into the
presence of the holy fathers, and to--to--.  Saints and angels!  I will
be no party to such a blasphemous proceeding.  If that be your
intention, senor, seek your information elsewhere; I will not imperil my
soul by assisting, in ever so indirect a manner, an act of sacrilege."

"As you will, senor," answered George, calmly.  "But I would have you
remember that by delaying me in the performance of the task which I have
undertaken, you are jeopardising the city and all in it.  If I am
delayed--"

"Pray say no more, noble senor," interrupted the alcalde.  "There is
nothing to be gained, Don Manuel, by withholding from the illustrious
Adelantado the information which he seeks; for if you will not give it,
others will.  And--a word in your ear, senor.  If anything should happen
to these Englishmen while they are in the city, their comrades will most
fearfully avenge themselves upon us.  They have left us no room to doubt
what will happen in such a case, and they are the kind of men who will
carry out their threats to the very last letter.  Therefore, see to it,
my friend, that steps are taken to prevent your soldiery from
interfering with or molesting them in any way.  For, should anything
untoward happen, you will be held responsible.  Now, I have warned you.
See to it!"

"_Bueno_! senor alcalde, you are my superior, and since those are your
orders, I will obey them," answered Don Manuel.  "Nevertheless," he
continued, "if the Commandant were well enough to take the command, I
know what he would do.  He would arrest and imprison these audacious
strangers, and defy their comrades to do their worst.  Moreover, senor,
I should not like to be in your shoes when the news of this disgraceful
business reaches the ears of his Excellency the Viceroy."

And, so saying, he bowed with exaggerated politeness to George and the
alcalde, and with a fierce twist of his moustache strode swaggeringly
out of the room.


CHAPTER NINE.

HOW GEORGE VISITED THE HOLY INQUISITION AT SAN JUAN.

"A good man, in many respects; a very excellent man, indeed," observed
the alcalde, nodding toward the door by which Don Manuel had just
quitted the apartment, "and admirable in the position which he occupies.
As a soldier merely, he is all that one could possibly desire, brave to
recklessness, and an admirable leader.  But after all he is only a
soldier fighting is his trade, but he knows nothing whatever about
diplomacy; he does not understand that there is not only a time when men
should fight but also a time when, if they are wise, they should
forbear.  It is a fortunate thing for us all, illustrious senor, that I
and not he happens to be in authority at the present juncture; and I beg
that you will not permit his cavalier-like behaviour to influence you in
the slightest degree.  And now, noble Capitan, if you have quite
completed your business here, I will point out to you the way to the
Inquisition, for time is pressing, and I am most anxious that no
untoward accident shall occur to interfere with or delay your business
in San Juan.  And--I know not what may be the nature of your errand with
the Holy Office, but, if I may be permitted to offer a suggestion, I
would very strongly advise--nay more, I would most earnestly entreat--
that you do nothing to wound the religious susceptibilities of the
inhabitants, who regard the Inquisition, and all connected with it, with
the utmost veneration and dread."

"Probably with even greater dread than veneration, eh, Don Juan?"
remarked George, as he took up his hat and prepared to follow the
alcalde out of the building.

"Possibly, senor; possibly," replied the alcalde, with reservation, as
he led the way.

Nothing more was said until the pair reached the street and rejoined
Basset and his little band of armed men, who stood placidly facing a
crowd of nearly a hundred men principally composed of the more lawless
and ruffianly element which is to be found in the lower quarters of
every city.

The alcalde regarded this sullen-looking, but as yet merely passively
hostile crowd for some moments with an expression of considerable alarm
and misgiving; then, moved by the urgency of the occasion, he waved his
hand to claim attention, and made a little speech in which he first
rebuked the gathering for its discourtesy to the visitors by standing
gaping at them as though they were so many wild beasts, after which he
commanded them to disperse, warning them at the same time to interfere
with the strangers at their peril, informing them that he would very
severely punish any person who should dare to do so, and at the same
time reminding them that the said strangers, though few, were trained
soldiers, fully armed, who would themselves be quick to avenge the
slightest interference or insult.  He stood there until the last of the
surly, scowling ruffians had moved slowly and unwillingly away, their
movements finally hastened by the emergence of a party of soldiers from
another wing of the building, and then, when they had all vanished, he
furtively indicated to George the way to the Inquisition, and hurriedly
removed himself from the scene.

The Inquisition was situated at a distance of some ten minutes' march
from the Grand Plaza, and proved to be, when the party of Englishmen
reached it, an extensive forbidding-looking, prison-like structure built
of massive masonry, and apparently strong enough to withstand anything
short of an attack by ordnance.  The entrance consisted of an archway
some twelve feet wide fitted with a pair of enormously thick iron-
studded oaken doors, in one of which was a small wicket fitted with a
grille.  An iron chain, with a hand grip attached to its lower
extremity, depending from a hole in the wall, indicated the means of
communication with the interior, and this George tugged at violently,
with the result that a loud bell immediately set up a furious clanging
somewhere in the interior of the building.  After an interval of nearly
a minute this summons was replied to by a hooded friar who, having drawn
the slide of the grille, peered out through the opening and querulously
demanded to know who it was who raised such a clangour, and what was his
business, to which George, who was the only person visible from the
aperture of the grille, replied that he was a stranger who had urgent
business of a strictly private nature with the Father Superior.
Whereupon the slide of the grille was sharply closed, and the party
faintly heard the shuffling footsteps of the friar receding.

After an absence of nearly ten minutes the friar re-appeared at the
grille, with a demand to be informed of the stranger's name and the
precise nature of his business with the Holy Father, to which George
replied that it was useless for him to give his name, since it was quite
unknown to the Father Superior, and that his business was not only most
urgent but was for the Holy Father's ear alone, and that it was
imperative that he should be admitted without an instant's unnecessary
delay.  A further and somewhat longer wait then ensued, and Basset was
strongly urging the desirability of an attempt to burst the wicket open
when the friar appeared for the third time and, shooting certain heavy
bolts on the inside of the wicket, flung it open.  To push his way in
was for George the work of but a moment, when, to the dismay and
indignation of the gatekeeper, he was instantly followed by eleven
soldiers, armed to the teeth.

"The keys!" exclaimed George, to Basset.  "Take his keys from him, lock
the gate, and station two men here as sentries, with orders to allow no
one to leave the building.  That is well," as his orders were obeyed.
"Now, the rest of you, follow me.  Lead the way, old man, to the
quarters of the Father Superior; I must see him forthwith.  Are you the
keeper also of the keys which give access to the cells?" to the friar
who had admitted them.

"No," answered the cowering creature.  "The gaoler carries those.  But
what would you with them, thou man of violence?  No one is permitted to
enter the cells without the permission of the Father Superior."

"Lead me to him, then," repeated George.  "Captain Basset," he
continued, "I will take two men with me.  Take you the remainder and
secure every door giving access to the exterior of this building.  No
man must on any account be allowed to leave it, for if that should
happen, they will raise the inhabitants of the town upon us, and there
will be bloodshed, which I wish to avoid, if possible.  Now, sir," to
the friar, "lead the way."

While Basset marched off the remaining half-dozen of his men to execute
George's order, the latter, accompanied by two soldiers, followed his
unwilling guide into the main building and down a long corridor to a
door, at which the friar knocked with a trembling hand.

"Enter!" responded a voice in Spanish, whereupon George, gently pushing
his guide aside and beckoning the two soldiers to follow him, threw open
the door and passed into the apartment.  It was a large and very
handsomely furnished room, containing a table, sofa, several lounging
chairs, and a large book-case, full of books, facing the two wide and
lofty windows which lighted the room and which looked out upon a
spacious, beautifully kept garden.  On one wall hung a large crucifix,
the cross made of ebony while the exquisitely carved figure of the
crucified Christ was of ivory, fastened to the cross with golden nails,
while the crown of thorns which encircled the drooping head was also
made of gold.  Two large pictures, one of which represented the Descent
from the Cross, and the other the Entombment, hung on either side of the
crucifix; and the opposite wall was occupied by a very large and
beautiful painting depicting the Apotheosis of the Virgin Mother.

At the entrance of the three armed men a tall and dignified figure clad
in priestly garments rose from the table and, with a ringer inserted
between the pages of a book which he had been reading, haughtily
demanded, in Spanish:

"Who are you, sir; and what is the meaning of this unseemly--this
audacious--intrusion upon my privacy?"

George replied to this question by asking another.  "Am I right," he
demanded, "in supposing you to be the Right Reverend Father Superior of
this institution?"

"And if I am, what then?" demanded the other.

"Only that you are the man I happen to want," replied George.  "I am an
Englishman," he continued, "and the captain of a ship which holds this
city at her mercy.  I and my companions have come all the way from
England to avenge the most foul and treacherous attack made by your
Viceroy upon a fleet of English ships in this harbour, last year; and,
incidentally, to call you, sir, to account for your treatment of certain
of the prisoners taken upon that occasion, who were delivered into your
hands.  I have here--"

"But--but--" interrupted the Father Superior--for such was the
individual upon whose privacy George had so unceremoniously intruded--"I
do not understand.  Why have you been permitted to come here?  Where are
our soldiers, and what are they doing--?"

"Have I not already explained that the town is at my mercy?" interrupted
George in his turn.  "What further enlightenment do you need?  As to
your soldiers, they dare not interfere with me, for my ship's guns
command the town, and my crew have orders to destroy the place if any
attempt is made to resist me.  Now, I have a list here"--drawing it from
his pocket--"containing the names of sixteen men who, I am told, were
claimed by this Inquisition; and my business with you is to demand an
account of them.  Where are they, and what have you done to them?"

"How, in the name of all the saints, can I possibly answer your
question, senor, unless you furnish me with the names of the men you
refer to?" demanded the priest, with a valiant attempt to brazen the
matter out, but there was a quaver in his voice which betrayed that he
was beginning to feel anxious, if not actually apprehensive, concerning
the outcome of this astounding business.

"There is the list, senor," answered George, laying the document on the
table.  "Take it, I pray you, and let me have an instant reply to my
demand."

The Father Superior took the list and ran his eye over it, ponderingly.
Then he laid it down again and said:

"Senor Englishman, I cannot possibly answer your question offhand, for I
do not tax my memory to recollect exactly how every person who enters
the walls of this building has been dealt with.  But if you will suffer
me to ring for my secretary I have no doubt that, with his assistance, I
can furnish you with the information you require."

"By all means," assented George; and the Father Superior thereupon
turned to the wall and jerked a bell rope.  A slight interval followed,
and then a very frightened priest entered.

"Holy Father," he began, "the building is in the possession of armed
men--" and then, catching sight for the first time of George and the two
soldiers, who were standing somewhat in the shadow, he stopped short, at
the same time making the sign of the Cross.

"Yes, proceed, Fray Matthew," exhorted the other.  "You were saying that
the building is in the possession of armed men.  What else?"

"They have taken the gaoler, your Eminence, locked him in one of his own
cells, and are now liberating the prisoners including one whom they have
taken out of the very torture chamber itself."

"Is this true, senor?" demanded the Father Superior.  "And, if so, is
this sacrilege being committed by your orders?"

"I know not whether that man's story is true or not," said George, "but
I think it exceedingly probable; and, if so, it is certainly being done
by my orders.  As to the sacrilege of the thing--" the young man
shrugged his shoulders expressively.

The Holy Father also shrugged his shoulders, as though to say--"Well, if
you are struck dead, don't blame me; it will only be what you richly
deserve."  Then he turned to Fray Matthew.

"Fray," he said, "bring me hither the book containing the record of
persons admitted to the Inquisition during the past year, with
particulars of the manner in which they have been dealt with."

The priest, with another frightened glance at George and the two stolid-
looking soldiers, hurriedly retired; and as he vanished through the
doorway the Father Superior coolly turned his back upon the Englishman
and, sauntering to the nearest window, stood gazing contemplatively
through it into the garden, which, George observed, was all ablaze with
tropical flora.  And there he remained, taking not the slightest notice
of his self-invited visitors until, after an absence of some ten
minutes, the Fray returned, bearing two enormous books under his arm,
the which he laid upon the table.  Then, sauntering back to the table as
leisurely as he had left it, the Holy Father took up the list which
George had handed to him, considered it for a moment, opened one of the
two books which had been brought to him, referred to an index, and then
turned over the pages of the book until he found the one which he
wanted.  Then he ran his finger down a column, paused, and looked up.

"Here," he said, looking up and addressing George, "is the entry
referring to the first man on your list.  It states that, after having
been put to the question in various ways, he died, on--such a date, in
his cell."

"Thank you," said George.  "Now, before we go any farther, I must ask
you to kindly explain exactly what you mean when you speak of a man
being `put to the question.'"

For the first time the Father Superior exhibited distinct symptoms of
uneasiness.  He hesitated perceptibly, and at length replied:

"The expression refers to certain means which are adopted in extreme
cases when, for instance, the subject displays great obduracy, to
persuade him to renounce his heresy, accept the canons of the true
faith, and humbly sue for admission into the bosom of the Catholic
Church."

"But that only partially answers my question," retorted George.  "You
speak of `certain means which are adopted in extreme cases.'  What,
precisely, is the nature of those means to which you refer?"

The Holy Father's uneasiness visibly increased, and he began to fence
with the question.

"I take it," he said, after some consideration, "that you, my son, are a
heretic, otherwise you would not be ignorant of the meaning of the
expressions which I have used.  That being the case, it seems necessary
for me to explain that the Holy Inquisition is an institution which has
been established for the especial purpose of saving the souls of
heathens and heretics, even at the expense of their bodies, if need be.
The human soul is of infinitely greater value than the human body; and
it has been found that physical pain exerts a most beneficent influence
upon those obdurate ones who evince a disinclination to accept the--
the--"

"Thanks," interrupted George; "I will not trouble you to go on, for I
think I now clearly understand what putting a person to the question
means.  It means, does it not--in plain, unvarnished language--the
infliction upon an individual of such excruciating, such diabolical,
torment that in most cases the individual will agree to anything you
choose to suggest, will accept any kind of doctrine you choose to thrust
upon him, rather than submit to further tortures?"

"Well--of course--that is putting the matter very, very crudely,"
admitted the Father Superior; "still, regarding the statement broadly,
it is--well--in the main--very nearly true.  But there is this to be
said, this very important--"

"Quite unnecessary, I assure you," interposed George.  "The broad fact
is that you convert by means of bodily torment; and in some cases--
where, as you say, `the subject displays great obduracy,' the torment is
so extreme and so protracted that the unhappy wretch dies under it.  Is
not that so?"

"Yes--if you choose to so put it," answered the Father Superior, "that
is so.  But again I must protest against the extreme crudity, the--"

"And," interrupted George, "this poor unfortunate fellow, the first on
my list, is one of those who so died, is he not?"

"Really, senor," protested the Holy Father--"you--you--are not--are not
giving--this matter--quite--quite fair--"

"Answer me, senor, without equivocation; did, or did not this man, of
whom we are now speaking, die as the result of your hellish torments?"
rapped out George, suddenly becoming exasperated and heavily smiting the
table with his clenched fist.

"Reverend Father," here interposed Fray Matthew, who could scarcely
articulate because of his chattering teeth, "I pray you give me leave to
retire.  The violence of this heretic, this man of blood, frightens me."

"No," answered George, before the other could speak.  "Being here, you
will remain.  It is possible that I may need you to supply me with
information which your superior may be unwilling or unable to give.
Now, senor"--turning to the Father Superior--"answer me."

"Then--since you insist," replied the Father Superior, "I can only reply
that the man certainly did die as the result of being put to the
question."

"Very well," returned George, taking up the list and making a note upon
it.  "Now, as to the next one?"

And again the long, tedious process of question and equivocation was
gone through, over and over, until every name upon the list had been
dealt with, when it finally appeared that, of the sixteen unhappy
Englishmen who had become involved in the meshes of that terrible
institution, the Holy Inquisition, no less than six had been burnt alive
at the stake in the last _auto-da-fe_, seven had died miserably as the
result of the torments to which they had been subjected, and a poor
residue of three only still languished in their cells!

"And," demanded George, when he had studied and fully digested the
details of this terrible list--"who is responsible for this tremendous
accumulation of ghastly human suffering and these hellish murders?
You?"

"No, thank God! not I," asserted the Father Superior, now trembling for
his life, and with all his recent arrogance completely evaporated.  "I
am merely the Head of the strictly ecclesiastical section of the
institution; I have nothing whatever to do with the proselytising, which
is undertaken by, and is entirely in the hands of, the Grand Inquisitor
and his assistants."

"And where," asked George, "are these people to be found?"

"They are probably in--the--the--room--where--in which--persons are put
to--to--the question," was the stammered reply.

"Ah!" exclaimed George.  "I presume you mean the place which the fray,
here, has more briefly designated as the `torture chamber.'  Very well;
I must see the place, and also the Grand Inquisitor and his assistants;
I have something very important to say to those--'m--people.  Lead the
way, reverend senor, if you please."  Then, turning to the two armed men
who guarded the door, he added--"Take charge of these two men.  For the
present, they are prisoners."

The Father Superior possessed a certain knowledge of English, for as the
last words passed George's lips the terrified ecclesiastic quavered:

"Prisoners, senor?  Prisoners?  What--what--do you mean?  How dare you
interfere with my liberty?  This is downright, rank sacrilege; and if
you dare to treat any of the inmates of this institution--and especially
any members of the Holy Office--otherwise than with the utmost
deference, you will--will--suffer severely for it."

"Pray lead on, senor," retorted George, waving the agitated man toward
the door.  "Surely you must realise by this time that the institution
and all within it are in my power.  And I am what you please to term a
`heretic'; the thunders of your Church have no terrors for me; I regard
you and your associates merely as men who have been guilty of certain
most atrocious crimes, and I am here for the express purpose of
punishing the guilty ones."

The Father Superior evidently realised that, after this, there was no
more to be said, and, between the two men-at-arms, and closely followed
by the shivering fray, he accordingly passed out of the room and down a
long corridor, into another, until a small door was reached, which, with
evident fear and reluctance, he at length threw open, disclosing a most
remarkable scene.

The chamber thus revealed was a very large and lofty one, lighted by
three large windows set high in the wall and heavily grated outside.
And although the windows were all wide open, the atmosphere was
oppressively close, and it was also charged with a very peculiar odour,
evidently arising in part at least from the fumes of an ignited charcoal
brazier, containing several curious-looking iron instruments thrust deep
into its glowing heart.  Immediately under the windows, and running the
entire width of the chamber, was a platform or dais, some three feet
high, the front portion of which was occupied by a long table, behind
which were ranged nine chairs, the middle chair being of a much more
ornate character than the rest, the carving of it being ecclesiastical
in character, and upon the table, before each chair, was a supply of
paper, pens and ink.  The dais was a wooden structure, and was carpeted
with black material; the tablecloth also was black, with the sacred
monogram I.H.S. above a cross and surmounted by a crown of thorns
embroidered upon it in silver thread.  The floor of the remaining part
of the chamber was flagged with paving slabs, and was bare, while the
walls and ceiling were coloured black.  In the centre of the wall behind
the dais, between two of the four windows, hung an enormous crucifix,
the figure of the Redeemer, very finely carved in wood and realistically
painted in the colours of nature, being life-size.  At the end of the
room opposite the dais was an engine or machine which even those who had
never seen such a thing before might easily have identified as a rack;
and there were four chairs, two on either side of the room, of such
elaborate and sinister construction that there could be no question as
to their being designed for the purpose of inflicting various kinds of
ingenious and exquisite agony upon the unhappy occupants; while, in
addition to these there was an instrument which clearly betrayed itself
as a specimen of the notorious "boot."  Hung here and there upon the
walls were other curious-looking instruments, the uses of which were not
so readily determinable; and there were also a number of suggestive and
sinister-looking ropes and pulleys depending from the ceiling.

Such a room, so furnished, could not possibly fail to fix the attention
of any person entering it for the first time, even in the character of a
mere spectator, and George Saint Leger gazed about him for quite a
minute with a feeling of keen curiosity that rapidly changed to mingled
horror and anger as he began to recognise the character and purpose of
the several objects that met his gaze; and then he turned to its
occupants; for although, in order to present a clear and unconfused
picture of the chamber, only its inanimate contents have thus far been
referred to, the room was by no means empty of human occupants.  On the
contrary, in addition to those who had already entered, immediately
inside the door, one on either side of it, stood two of Basset's men-at-
arms, with drawn swords and cocked pistols in their hands, while the
nine chairs on the dais were occupied by nine motionless figures
completely shrouded in garments of black cloth, wearing upon their heads
a curious pointed head-dress, also of black cloth, which completely hid
their heads and faces, but in which two holes were cut for them to see
through.  Seated in one of the torture chairs, but with the torturing
apparatus now thrown out of gear, was a most dreadful-looking object
bearing the semblance of a terribly emaciated man, worn to mere skin and
bone by privation and suffering, clad in rags, his hair and beard long
and unkempt, his skin and features white and bloodless, his eyes dim
with anguish, the sweat of keen protracted agony still pouring out of
him, while three ruffianly-looking men clad in scarlet ministered to him
under Basset's supervision.  A fourth figure in scarlet lay motionless
upon the nagged floor, his attitude proclaiming that death had suddenly
overtaken him, while a blue-rimmed puncture in the centre of his
forehead, from which blood still trickled, told clearly enough the
manner of his death.

For a long minute young Saint Leger gazed about him with fast increasing
horror as he realised the diabolical purpose of the several engines that
met his eye; then, gaspingly, he spoke.

"So!" he ejaculated.  "This is the chamber in which you torture your
fellow creatures until in their agony they are fain to say whatever it
pleases you that they should say, even to denying their faith, is it,
senor?"

"Nay, senor," answered the Father Superior, "say not that it is _I_ who
do these things.  I have already repudiated all responsibility for what
happens in this chamber.  It is the Grand Inquisitor and his Assistant
Inquisitors who reign supreme here.  There they sit; ask them."

George stalked across to the middle of the chamber, and wheeled about,
facing the row of nine motionless figures occupying the chairs.

"I mean to do so," he said, tersely.  Then, addressing the nine, he
said:

"Senors, I have somewhat to say to you.  But, first of all, be good
enough to remove your hoods, that I may see your faces.  I like not to
talk with men whose features are hidden from me."

For a moment there was silence in the room, broken only by the low
murmurings of Basset, who was speaking to the unfortunate "subject" in
the chair.  Then the figure occupying the middle chair on the dais rose
to his feet and, stretching forth a long bony arm which projected to
beyond the wrist from the loose sleeve of his black robe, said:

"Depart, presumptuous youth!  Go hence quickly, and take those misguided
men, thy minions, with thee, lest I call down the wrath of Holy Mother
Church upon thy sacrilegious head--and theirs.  Who art thou, that thou
should'st dare to--"

"Reverend senor," interrupted George, unceremoniously, "a fig for you
and your sacrilege"--and he snapped his fingers contemptuously.  "The
wrath of thy Holy Mother Church has no terrors for me, though--
understand me--I can respect any man's religion, so long as he is
sincere, and so long as he is willing to respect that of others and
permit them to worship God in their own way.  But, enough of this; I am
not here to discuss theological questions, but to right a great wrong
and to avenge fiendish crime and cruelty perpetrated in the sacred name
of Him whose effigy hangs upon yonder cross behind you.  Therefore I say
once more, uncover, and let me see your faces--unless indeed you prefer
that we should lay our sacrilegious hands upon you and remove your head-
coverings ourselves!"

"The Saints forbid!" ejaculated the Grand Inquisitor in horror.
"Anything rather than that!"

Then, turning to his companions, right and left, he added--"Uncover, my
Brothers, since this heretical Englishman will have it so.  It is not
meet that we, the pillars of the Holy Catholic Church, unworthy though
we be, should submit to insult and indignity at the hands of a pack of
godless Lutheran dogs."  And, so saying, he seated himself and proceeded
to remove his own head-covering, disclosing lean, ascetic features,
cold, cruel, and domineering, crowned by the monk's tonsure.  At the
same time the others did the same, and with very similar result, the
dominant expression of the faces thus disclosed being that of cold,
stern ruthlessness, tempered, it must be confessed, in some cases, with
very evident signs of fear.

"So! that is better," commented George.  "Now, senors," he continued, "I
am not going to make a long business of my talk with you, for we have
already wasted far too much time in this accursed building.  I have but
a few questions to ask; and you will do well to answer them briefly and
to the point.  This chamber, I perceive, is what is usually termed in
the outside world, `the torture chamber'; and I gather that it is here
you subject those whom you stigmatise as heretics to unspeakable
torments for the purpose of compelling them to forswear themselves and
embrace your religion against their will.  Now, which of you is
responsible for the hellish suffering that goes on from time to time
within these four walls?"

"Since you insist upon our replying to your insolent questions,"
answered the Grand Inquisitor, contemptuously, "know, young man, that
none is more responsible than another.  We whom you see seated here are
appointed by our Order to promote the honour and interest of the Church
of which we are most humble and unworthy members, by winning souls to
her, and converting the heathen and heretics generally to the true
faith.  We have various methods of doing this.  In the first instance we
use teaching, persuasion, exhortation; and sometimes these methods
suffice.  But when they fail--as they do sometimes, in the case of the
contumacious, there is a blessed power in bodily suffering which, loath
as we are to employ it, we force ourselves to resort to, convinced that,
by saving the soul at the cost of the body, we are doing a righteous and
merciful thing.  But even in inflicting suffering we are merciful, for
we regulate the amount and quality of the suffering by the extent of the
contumacy of the subject, making it light and transient at the first,
and only increasing it in sharpness and duration when we find the other
insufficient.  And in all cases the character of the punishment is the
subject of long and anxious deliberation, in which we all join, and no
punishment of any kind is ever inflicted until we all--I and my eight
Brothers here--are agreed as to its expediency, character, and amount.
Also we are always present upon such occasions, in order that the
punishment may be stopped upon the instant that conversion takes place."

"I see," said George.  "Are you all agreed"--addressing the assistants,
"that what your Grand Inquisitor has stated is the exact truth?"

"_Si, si_; yes, we are all agreed," came first from one and then
another, until all had spoken.

"Then," continued George, "I am to take it that you are all alike
equally responsible for what is done in this chamber?"

It was evident that a large proportion of the Assistant Inquisitors were
inclined to jib at the word "responsible"; but the young Captain
insisted upon each man giving a categorical reply to the question; and
in the end, stimulated further by the stern looks of the Grand
Inquisitor, they all replied in the affirmative.

"Very good," commented George.  "Now, I have but one other question to
ask.  Is it you, as a body, who condemn certain of your victims to the
hideous fate of being burnt alive in the _auto-da-fe_?"

Even the Grand Inquisitor, hitherto in a great measure blinded by his
bigotry, and his absolute faith in the sanctity of his office and the
complete protection which it afforded him, blanched at the directness
and significance of this last question; but still, unable even now to
fully realise the awful danger in which he stood, he gave a somewhat
rambling and excusatory reply which, however, was a full admission of
responsibility for the deed with which George charged him and his
associates.

"Good!" said George; "you have now afforded me all the information which
I desired to obtain.  All that remains for you, senors, is to make your
peace with God as best you can; for I have constituted myself the
avenger of all the accumulated agony that the walls of this chamber and
the stones of the Grand Plaza have witnessed; and within the next half-
hour _you die_!"


CHAPTER TEN.

HOW THE PLATE SHIPS SOUGHT TO ESCAPE FROM SAN JUAN.

"We die?" reiterated the Grand Inquisitor, now at last fully awakened to
the tremendous gravity of the situation.  "And pray, senor, at whose
behest do we die?"

"At mine, most reverend senor," answered George, simply.  "Have I not
yet succeeded in making that clear to you?"

"That means, then, that you intend to murder us?" demanded the Grand
Inquisitor, with pale, tremulous lips.

"Senores," replied George, in a tone of finality, "it matters not to me
how you choose to designate your impending execution.  Call it murder,
if the expression affords you any satisfaction.  _I_ call it an act of
stern justice, the richly merited punishment due to a long series of
atrociously inhuman crimes committed by you, if not actually with your
own hands, at least by your orders.  Such crimes as you and your
associates have most callously and cold-bloodedly committed under the
cloak of religion deserve a far more severe punishment than the mere
deprivation of life, and if I were constituted like yourselves I should
make that deprivation of life a long, lingering agony, a slow death of
exquisite torment, such as you have inflicted upon countless victims;
but torture is indescribably repugnant to the mind of an Englishman,
therefore I intend to carry out the death-sentence which I have passed
upon you, as mercifully as possible, by causing you to be shot--with one
exception, that exception being in the case of the Grand Inquisitor,
whom I purpose to hang, as an example to others.  And I have taken upon
myself the terrible task and responsibility of execution, for the simple
reason that there is no other who will do so; and justice _must_ be
satisfied.  And now, having said all that there is to be said, I leave
you all to prepare for death as best you may."  Whereupon, the young
man, with stern, set face, turned away and walked over to Basset, who
was still doing what he could to alleviate the sufferings of the latest
victim to the Inquisition's merciless methods of conversion.

"Well, Basset," he said, indicating the unfortunate individual in the
chair, "whom have we here?  He looks to me something like an
Englishman."

"So he be," answered Basset.  "He says his name be Job Winter, and that
he was one of the crew of Admiral Hawkins' ship, the _Minion_.  He've
been in this hell upon earth since last August, and all that time they
fiends in human form up there," indicating the occupants of the dais,
"have been trying their hardest to make a good Catholic of him.  And
this is how they've been doing it.  Look to mun."  And very gently and
tenderly the soldier disclosed certain horrible and blood-curdling
injuries very recently inflicted, together with a number of healed and
half-healed scars which bore eloquent testimony to a long period of
dreadful torment.  So frightful was the sight that both the beholders
fairly reeled under the horrible qualm of sickness and repulsion induced
by it, and if anything further was needed to confirm the young Captain
in his full determination to make an example of the Inquisitors, he
found it in the revolting spectacle before him.

"My poor dear man," he said, his voice quivering with compassion, "what
you must have suffered!  But, cheer up; we are Englishmen and Devon men,
like yourself, and one of our purposes in coming here was to deliver you
out of the hands of these Spanish devils, and we'll do it, too.  We've a
good surgeon aboard our ship, and you shall be in his hands this very
day, please God.  Are there any more of you in this place?"

"He doesn't know, poor soul," answered Basset, interposing, "but I do;
there be two more Englishmen that we've found in the cells; and they'm
almost so bad as this man.  We found 'em safely locked up; but they'm
out now and being taken care of by our men."

"Can they walk?" demanded George.

"A few yards, perhaps," surmised Basset, "but not so far as the wharf."

"Then they must be carried," decided George.  "And these men,"
indicating the scarlet-garbed individuals, whose business it evidently
was to actually carry out the fiendish commands of the
Inquisitors--"shall help to do it.  I dare say we can find all the
additional help we need somewhere in this building.  I will go out and
see to it; and, meanwhile, you will remain here and see that none of
these persons escape."

"Ay, ay," responded Basset, "I'll take care of that, trust me.  I don't
think there'll be any trouble, after the example I made of that fellow,"
pointing to the prostrate figure on the paved floor.  "The rascal
presumed to dispute my authority when I came in here and told everybody
that they were prisoners, and--there a be!  No, I don't think there'll
be any more trouble."

Whereupon George passed from the terrible chamber with its fearful
evidences of the dreadful lengths to which misguided fanaticism will
occasionally carry men, even in the cause of religion, and proceeded to
busy himself in making all the arrangements necessary for the
comfortable conveyance of the three unfortunate victims of Inquisitional
cruelty down to the ship.

The thing was done!  Righteously, or unrighteously, it was done at last,
and the little party of stern, inflexible-visaged Englishmen emerged
from the Inquisition building of San Juan de Ulua grouped protectively
round the three litters in which lay the quivering, emaciated, anguished
bodies of their fellow-countrymen, delivered, against all hope, from a
fate a thousand times worse than any ordinary kind of death, while
within the gloomy, forbidding walls of the building they left behind
them nine corpses as a warning and example that, even in that far-off
land, Englishmen might not be tortured to death with impunity.  It was a
terrible demonstration of crude, primitive justice; and whether or not
it was as effective in inculcating a lesson as it was intended to be, it
is now impossible to say; but one thing at least is certain, that from
that time forward there is no record of any Englishman having ever been
received into the Inquisition at San Juan.

The party reached the ship unmolested, although they naturally attracted
a great deal of attention during their passage through the streets.  How
it would have been with them during that short march if the inhabitants
of the city had been aware of the terrible tragedy which had just been
enacted within the walls of the Inquisition can never be known, possibly
it might have resulted in a still more terrible tragedy in the streets,
with far-reaching results upon the city itself, but Saint Leger believed
that he had taken every possible precaution against such an occurrence.

As events proved, however, there was one precaution which he had omitted
to take; he should have insisted upon the arrest by the alcalde of Don
Manuel Rebiera, the acting Commandant, upon that individual's display of
hostility at the termination of their interview with him; and this
George had not done.  Now, Don Manuel was both a bigoted Catholic and a
Government official.  He was one of those who held that the Church--and
in his case the term included every individual belonging to the Church--
could do no wrong; even the atrocities of the Inquisition, which many
devout Catholics secretly reprobated, were to him perfectly justifiable,
and the institution itself as sacred as the cathedral; and the suspicion
aroused within him by George's question as to the whereabouts of the
building--that this little band of autocratic, domineering heretics
meditated an invasion of its sacred precincts, possibly with the
intention of perpetrating some act of violence therein, and in any case
desecrating it by their intrusion--stirred his fanatical religious
rancour to boiling point, while the fact that those same heretics held
the town--a possession of his Most Catholic Majesty--at their mercy, was
not only as great an offence from his patriotic point of view, but he
also felt that it inflicted a deep stain upon his honour as a Spanish
soldier, which he was resolved to wipe out, if possible.

These feelings he had wit enough to understand he must conceal from
George and the alcalde, and he contrived to do so pretty successfully;
but the effort only caused them to gall and rankle the more intolerably,
and when, at the termination of his interview with them, he quitted
their presence with a certain scarcely veiled hint of insolence in his
manner, he was in the throes of a perfect frenzy of anger and
humiliation; in the precise frame of mind, in fact, as that of the man
who, forgetting everything but his own grievances, is ready to commit
any crime, however atrocious, in order to avenge himself and salve his
wounded feelings.  Too often, unhappily, reflection does not come until
it is too late, and the crime has been perpetrated, and Don Manuel's
first impulse was to muster his soldiers, follow after the Englishmen,
and slay them, if possible, before they should reach the Inquisition
building.  But as he hurried toward the barracks with this fell
intention, he realised that what he meditated was impossible; before he
could muster his soldiers and put them upon the track, the Englishmen
would have reached their goal; and once within the massive walls of the
building, they would be safe.  But there was no reason, he told himself,
why they should not be attacked as they came out--and here his
meditations came to a sudden halt.  There _was_ a very good reason,
which was that, even if his meditated attack should prove successful,
only a paltry dozen of Englishmen would fall, and their comrades would
remain to wreak a terrible retribution, in the course of which he, among
others, would have to pay the full penalty.  No, that would not do at
all; it was not that Don Manuel Rebiera was a coward; very far from it;
but with the speed of thought he pictured to himself the happenings that
must inevitably follow the perpetration of an act of such base treachery
as he meditated; he saw in imagination the execution of the hostages--
among whom, he suddenly remembered, were one or two very dear friends of
his own; the bombardment of the town, with the concomitant slaughter of
women and children as well as men; the exasperation of the citizens at
the author of the deed which had brought such a frightful calamity upon
them, and his own arrest and summary execution.  No; that would not do;
he was not in the least afraid to face death in fair fight, but to be
arrested by his own countrymen, handed over by them to the hated
English, and publicly hanged by the latter from one of the yard-arms of
their ship--No; he could not face that ignominy.

Then what was to be done--for something he was determined to do?  He
somehow found his way back to the private room in his quarters, and
there, flinging himself into a chair, set himself to think.  And
gradually from out the chaos of his thoughts there emerged an idea, a
plan, a mad, desperate plan that, if successful, would mean the
destruction or capture of the _Nonsuch_ and every Englishman aboard her,
which was what Rebiera wanted; while, if it failed--!  But it must not,
should not fail; no, he would see to that.  So presently he took pen and
paper, and proceeded to jot down his plan of campaign, altering its
details here and there as he went on, until finally he had evolved a
scheme that commended itself to him as eminently satisfactory.  Then he
proceeded to jot down a number of names of persons whose co-operation it
was necessary to secure; and, this done, he called for an orderly, who
forthwith proceeded to ride hither and thither about the city, calling
at this house and that and leaving instructions that the persons whom he
named were to present themselves without fail at the Commandant's office
at a certain hour, namely, four o'clock in the afternoon, which just
gave the Commandant nice time to complete his plans before the arrival
of the persons whom he had summoned to meet him.

And in due time, with very commendable punctuality, those persons turned
up and were ushered into the Commandant's private office.  There were
some thirty of them in all, and when the whole of them were present Don
Manuel proceeded to address them, at first in quick, tense tones, which
gradually changed to the fiery, impassioned language and gestures
characteristic of an invocation.  For a man of his parts he was rather
an able orator, moreover he was more profoundly stirred than, probably,
he had ever before been in the whole course of his life.  It is not to
be greatly wondered at, therefore, that before he ended he had wrought
his audience up to almost as high a pitch of ferocity and enthusiasm as
himself; and when at length he reached his peroration and concluded by
making a certain demand, the men who had hitherto sat listening to him
sprang to their feet with one accord and vowed, by all they held sacred,
that they would obey him and perform his behest, or die in the attempt.
And they were all resolute, determined men, too, of the seafaring class,
who looked as though they might be safely counted upon to keep their
word; wherefore, as soon as their excitement had subsided sufficiently
to permit of a return to business, Don Manuel drew toward him a bundle
of documents which he had already prepared, and which were, in fact,
temporary commissions, and distributed them, one to each man present.
Then, selecting a particular memorandum from a number which were lying
upon his desk, and referring to it for guidance from time to time, he
proceeded to give specified instructions to each person, who, having
received them, at once rose and bowed himself out, by which arrangement
the party gradually dissolved and left the building one man at a time,
thus reducing to a minimum the chances of attracting undue attention.

The afternoon was well advanced when at length George Saint Leger and
his party returned to the _Nonsuch_, and handed over to Jack Chichester,
the surgeon, the three human wrecks whom they had rescued from the
clutches of the Inquisition, with special instructions that no pains
were to be spared, no trouble to be regarded as too great, nothing that
the ship contained too precious for the mitigation of their suffering
and, as all hoped, their ultimate restoration to something approaching
as nearly as might be to perfect health.  It was pitiful to witness the
almost incredulous joy and transport manifested by the unfortunates at
finding themselves once more in the midst of their fellow-countrymen,
and especially of men who spoke in the accents of that beloved Devon
whose scented orchards, winding lanes, swelling moors, and lonely tors
they had utterly despaired of ever again beholding.  But they were
sturdy fellows, too, and even broken down as they were, with their
strength sapped and their courage almost quelled by long months of
protracted agony and privation, they quickly recovered spirit when once
they found themselves outside the gloomy precincts of the Inquisition
building; and though, despite the utmost precaution and the most tender
care in getting them out of the boat and up the ship's lofty side, the
pain they suffered in the process must have been excruciating, they made
light of it, declaring, with a laugh that moved those who heard it to
tears--so hollow and pathetic was it--that such pain was less than
nothing compared with the awful long-drawn-out torments to which they
had almost grown accustomed!

And if the three rescued Englishmen were glad to find themselves once
more, against all hope, delivered from the power of their tormentors,
and comparatively safe under the shelter of the glorious Cross of Saint
George, the hostages who had most unwillingly remained on board the
English ship to insure the good faith of their countrymen--in which, if
the truth must be told, they had no very profound belief--were scarcely
less so when they saw the little party of adventurers return in safety
from their desperate errand; for that return meant that one great danger
at least had been safely passed, and surely now they might rely upon the
citizens of San Juan to do nothing foolish.  So they plucked up heart of
grace, and became quite cheery and affable with the Englishmen until
Heard, the purser, rather maliciously reminded them that the matter of
the indemnity still remained unsettled and that many things might happen
before the citizens consented to part with such an enormous sum of
money.  And the hostages would have felt very much more disconcerted at
his remark than they actually were, had they dreamed that the Englishman
was speaking truer than he knew.

By the time that the excitement attendant upon the safe return of the
Captain and his escort had begun to simmer down a little, night had
fallen, and those who were not on duty began to think of retiring to
rest, for the day had been a long and rather trying one to all hands,
and especially so to those who had been of the shore-going party.  But
George did not forget, nor would he allow anyone else on board to
forget, that the ship was in a hostile port, surrounded on all sides by
enemies; and that although, for the moment, a truce prevailed, nobody
could possibly say how long that truce might last, or at what moment it
might be broken.  He reminded his compatriots that the harbour of San
Juan de Ulua, where they now lay, was the scene of that act of
stupendous treachery which it was a part of their business to avenge; he
pointed out that it was the very people who now surrounded them who had
perpetrated that act of treachery and were therefore quite capable of
perpetrating another if they believed that they saw the opportunity to
do so successfully, and he drew their attention to the fact that
although, thank God, they had a sound ship under them, they were very
much fewer in numbers than those who were the victims of the tragedy of
a year ago, and were consequently at least as tempting a mark as those
others had been; and finally he issued his commands that the same
watches should be maintained as though the ship were at sea, and that
the utmost vigilance should be observed by the look-outs and especially
by the officers, that the ordnance should be kept loaded, that no man
should lay aside his arms, even to sleep; and that, lastly, if any craft
or boat of any kind were seen to be approaching the ship during the
hours of darkness, she was to be first challenged, and then fired upon
if she did not immediately reply.

The night fell dark and overcast, with a brisk easterly breeze and
occasional heavy rain squalls, taxing the vigilance of the look-outs to
the utmost, and causing young Saint Leger to frequently quit his cabin
to personally assure himself that his instructions were being carried
out in their entirety.  But nothing in the slightest degree suspicious
was observed until shortly after three o'clock in the morning, when
Dyer, the pilot, whose watch it then was, suddenly presented himself at
the door of George's cabin with the startling intimation that two of the
plate ships, if not three, seemed to have slipped their cables and were
getting under way.  "There baint a light to be seed aboard any of 'em,"
he reported, "and it's so dark as Tophet, but I be certain sure that two
of they ships is settin' their canvas, and there be another that, to my
mind, be adrift."

"But how can that be, when we have the officers of the ships aboard
here?" demanded George as he sprang from his cot and followed Dyer out
on deck.

"Don't know, I'm sure," answered Dyer; "but it's a fact that some of 'em
be gettin' under way."

As the pair emerged from the poop cabin, they were met by Drew, the
boatswain, who reported:

"There be four of 'em on the move now, Cap'n; and I baint at all sure
but where there's one or two more of 'em makin' ready for a start,
though the light be that bad--"

"Mr Dyer," interrupted George crisply, "let our cable be buoyed, ready
for slipping, and call all hands, if you please, to fighting stations.
Also, let the sail-trimmers be sent aloft to loose the canvas.  We will
get under way at once.  It is too dark for me to see anything just now,
coming directly from the lighted cabin, but I'll take your word for it
that things are as you say.  Evidently, there is treachery afoot again,
somewhere; and it will never do to allow any of those plate ships to
escape.  Rather than permit that to happen, I'll sink them!"

Thereupon there ensued on board the _Nonsuch_ a brief period of intense
but almost silent activity, during which the severely strict discipline
which Saint Leger had imposed upon his crew amply justified itself, for
every man exactly knew his station and the duty which the exigencies of
the moment demanded of him, and did it without the need of a single
superfluous order.  "It wasna," she replied, "till Lady Glenallan had
communicated this fause tale, that she suspected ye had actually made
a marriage--nor even then did you avow it sae as to satisfy her whether
the ceremony had in verity passed atween ye or no--But ye remember,
O ye canna but remember weel, what passed in that awfu' meeting!"

"Woman! you swore upon the gospels to the fact which you now disavow."

"I did,--and I wad hae taen a yet mair holy pledge on it, if there had
been ane--I wad not hae spared the blood of my body, or the guilt
of my soul, to serve the house of Glenallan."

"Wretch! do you call that horrid perjury, attended with consequences yet
more dreadful--do you esteem that a service to the house of your
benefactors?"
"I served her, wha was then the head of Glenallan, as she required me
to serve her. The cause was between God and her conscience--the manner
between God and mine--She is gane to her account, and I maun follow.
Have I taulds you a'?"
"No," answered Lord Glenallan--"you have yet more to tell--you have
to tell me of the death of the angel whom your perjury drove to
despair, stained, as she thought herself, with a crime so horrible.
Speak truth-- was that dreadful--was that horrible incident"--he
could scarcely articulate the words--"was it as reported? or was it
an act of yet further, though not more atrocious cruelty, inflicted
by others?"
"I understand you," said Elspeth. "But report spoke truth;--our
false witness was indeed the cause, but the deed was her ain distracted
act. On that fearfu' disclosure, when ye rushed frae the Countess's
presence and saddled your horse, and left the castle like a fire-flaught,
the Countess hadna yet discovered your private marriage; she hadna
fund out that the union, which she had framed this awfu' tale to
prevent, had e'en taen place.

Ye fled from the house as if the fire o' Heaven was about to fa' upon it,
and Miss Neville, atween reason and the want o't, was put under sure ward.
But the ward sleep't, and the prisoner waked--the window was open--the
way was before her--there was the cliff, and there was the sea!--O,
when will I forget that!"
"And thus died," said the Earl, "even so as was reported?"
"No, my lord. I had gane out to the cove--the tide was in, and it flowed,
as ye'll remember, to the foot o' that cliff--it was a great convenience
that for my husband's trade--Where am I wandering?--I saw a white
object dart frae the tap o' the cliff like a sea-maw through the mist,
and then a heavy flash and sparkle of the waters showed me it was a
human creature that had fa'en into the waves. I was bold and strong, and
familiar with the tide. I rushed in and grasped her gown, and drew
her out and carried her on my shouthers--I could hae carried twa sic
then--carried her to my hut, and laid her on my bed. Neighbours cam and
brought help; but the words she uttered in her ravings, when she
got back the use of speech, were such, that I was fain to send them
awa, and get up word to Glenallan House.

The Countess sent down her Spanish servant Teresa--if ever there was a
fiend on earth in human form, that woman was ane. She and I were to
watch the unhappy leddy, and let no other person approach.--God
knows what Teresa's part was to hae been--she tauld it not to
me--but Heaven took the conclusion in its ain hand. The poor leddy! she
took the pangs of travail before her time, bore a male child, and
died in the arms of me--of her mortal enemy! Ay, _ye_ may weep--she was
a sightly creature to see to--but think ye, if I didna mourn her
then, that I can mourn her now? Na, na, I left Teresa wi' the dead
corpse and new-born babe, till I gaed up to take the Countess's commands
what was to be done. Late as it was, I ca'd her up, and she gar'd
me ca' up your brother"--
"My brother?"
"Yes, Lord Geraldin, e'en your brother, that some said she aye wished
to be her heir. At ony rate, he was the person maist concerned in
the succession and heritance of the house of Glenallan."
"And is it possible to believe, then, that my brother, out of avarice to
grasp at my inheritance, would lend himself to such a base and dreadful
stratagem?"
"Your mother believed it," said the old beldam with a fiendish laugh--"it
was nae plot of my making; but what they did or said I will not say,
because I did not hear. Lang and sair they consulted in the black wainscot
dressing-room; and when your brother passed through the room where I
was waiting, it seemed to me (and I have often thought sae since syne)
that the fire of hell was in his cheek and een. But he had left some
of it with his mother, at ony rate. She entered the room like a woman
demented, and the first words she spoke were, Elspeth Cheyne, did you
ever pull a new-budded flower?' I answered, as ye may believe, that
I often had. Then,' said she, ye will ken the better how to blight the
spurious and heretical blossom that has sprung forth this night to disgrace
my father's noble house--See here;'--(and she gave me a golden
bodkin)--nothing but gold must shed the blood of Glenallan.

This child is already as one of the dead, and since thou and Teresa
alone ken that it lives, let it be dealt upon as ye will answer to me!'
and she turned away in her fury, and left me with the bodkin in my
hand.--Here it is; that and the ring of Miss Neville, are a' I hae preserved
of my ill-gotten gear--for muckle was the gear I got. And weel hae I
keepit the secret, but no for the gowd or gear either."
Her long and bony hand held out to Lord Glenallan a gold bodkin,
down which in fancy he saw the blood of his infant trickling.

"Wretch! had you the heart?"
"I kenna if I could hae had it or no. I returned to my cottage without
feeling the ground that I trode on; but Teresa and the child were
gane-- a' that was alive was gane--naething left but the lifeless
corpse."
"And did you never learn my infant's fate?"

"I could but guess. I have tauld ye your mother's purpose, and I ken
Teresa was a fiend. She was never mair seen in Scotland, and I have heard
that she returned to her ain land. A dark curtain has fa'en ower the
past, and the few that witnessed ony part of it could only surmise
something of seduction and suicide.

You yourself"--
"I know--I know it all," answered the Earl.

"You indeed know all that I can say--And now, heir of Glenallan, can you
forgive me?"

"Ask forgiveness of God, and not of man," said the Earl, turning away.

"And how shall I ask of the pure and unstained what is denied to me by
a sinner like mysell?

If I hae sinned, hae I not suffered?--Hae I had a day's peace or an
hour's rest since these lang wet locks of hair first lay upon my pillow
at Craigburnfoot?--Has not my house been burned, wi' my bairn in the
cradle?--Have not my boats been wrecked, when a' others weather'd the
gale?

--Have not a' that were near and dear to me dree'd penance for my
sin?--Has not the fire had its share o' them--the winds had their
part--the sea had her part?

--And oh!" she added, with a lengthened groan, looking first upwards
towards Heaven, and then bending her eyes on the floor--"O that the earth
would take her part, that's been lang lang wearying to be joined
to it!"
Lord Glenallan had reached the door of the cottage, but the generosity of
his nature did not permit him to leave the unhappy woman in
this state of desperate reprobation. "May God forgive thee, wretched
woman," he said, "as sincerely as I do!--Turn for mercy to Him who
can alone grant mercy, and may your prayers be heard as if they were
mine own!--I will send a religious man."
"Na, na--nae priest! nae priest!" she ejaculated; and the door of the
cottage opening as she spoke, prevented her from proceeding.

CHAPTER THIRTEENTH.

Still in his dead hand clenched remain the strings That thrill his father's
heart--e'en as the limb, Lopped off and laid in grave, retains,
they tell us, Strange commerce with the mutilated stump, Whose
nerves are twinging still in maimed existence.

Old Play.

The Antiquary, as we informed the reader in the end of the thirty-first
CHAPTER, [tenth] had shaken off the company of worthy Mr.
Blattergowl, although he offered to entertain him with an abstract of
the ablest speech he had ever known in the teind court, delivered by the
procurator for the church in the remarkable case of the parish of
Gatherem.
Resisting this temptation, our senior preferred a solitary path, which
again conducted him to the cottage of Mucklebackit. When he came in front
of the fisherman's hut, he observed a man working intently, as if to
repair a shattered boat which lay upon the beach, and going up to him
was surprised to find it was Mucklebackit himself. "I am glad," he
said in a tone of sympathy--"I am glad, Saunders, that you feel
yourself able to make this exertion."
"And what would ye have me to do," answered the fisher gruffly, "unless
I wanted to see four children starve, because ane is drowned?

It's weel wi' you gentles, that can sit in the house wi' handkerchers
at your een when ye lose a friend; but the like o' us maun to our wark
again, if our hearts were beating as hard as my hammer."
Without taking more notice of Oldbuck, he proceeded in his labour; and
the Antiquary, to whom the display of human nature under the influence
of agitating passions was never indifferent, stood beside him,
in silent attention, as if watching the progress of the work. He observed
more than once the man's hard features, as if by the force of association,
prepare to accompany the sound of the saw and hammer with his usual
symphony of a rude tune, hummed or whistled,--and as often a slight
twitch of convulsive expression showed, that ere the sound was uttered,
a cause for suppressing it rushed upon his mind.

At length, when he had patched a considerable rent, and was beginning
to mend another, his feelings appeared altogether to derange the power
of attention necessary for his work.

The piece of wood which he was about to nail on was at first too long;
then he sawed it off too short, then chose another equally ill adapted
for the purpose. At length, throwing it down in anger, after wiping his
dim eye with his quivering hand, he exclaimed, "There is a curse either
on me or on this auld black bitch of a boat, that I have hauled up
high and dry, and patched and clouted sae mony years, that she might
drown my poor Steenie at the end of them, an' be d--d to her!"
and he flung his hammer against the boat, as if she had been the intentional
cause of his misfortune. Then recollecting himself, he added, "Yet what
needs ane be angry at her, that has neither soul nor sense?--though I
am no that muckle better mysell. She's but a rickle o' auld rotten deals
nailed thegither, and warped wi' the wind and the sea--and I am a dour
carle, battered by foul weather at sea and land till I am maist as
senseless as hersell. She maun be mended though again the morning tide--
that's a thing o' necessity."
Thus speaking, he went to gather together his instruments, and attempt to
resume his labour,--but Oldbuck took him kindly by the arm. "Come, come,"
he said, "Saunders, there is no work for you this day--I'll send down
Shavings the carpenter to mend the boat, and he may put the day's work
into my account--and you had better not come out to-morrow, but
stay to comfort your family under this dispensation, and the gardener
will bring you some vegetables and meal from Monkbarns."
"I thank ye, Monkbarns," answered the poor fisher; "I am a plain-spoken
man, and hae little to say for mysell; I might hae learned fairer
fashions frae my mither lang syne, but I never saw muckle gude they
did her; however, I thank ye. Ye were aye kind and neighbourly, whatever
folk says o' your being near and close; and I hae often said, in
thae times when they were ganging to raise up the puir folk against the
gentles--I hae often said, neer a man should steer a hair touching
to Monkbarns while Steenie and I could wag a finger--and so said Steenie
too.

And, Monkbarns, when ye laid his head in the grave (and mony thanks
for the respect), ye, saw the mouls laid on an honest lad that likit
you weel, though he made little phrase about it."

Oldbuck, beaten from the pride of his affected cynicism, would not
willingly have had any one by on that occasion to quote to him his
favourite maxims of the Stoic philosophy.

The large drops fell fast from his own eyes, as he begged the father, who
was now melted at recollecting the bravery and generous sentiments
of his son, to forbear useless sorrow, and led him by the arm towards
his own home, where another scene awaited our Antiquary.

As he entered, the first person whom he beheld was Lord Glenallan.
Mutual surprise was in their countenances as they saluted each
other--with haughty reserve on the part of Mr. Oldbuck, and
embarrassment on that of the Earl.

"My Lord Glenallan, I think?" said Mr. Oldbuck.

"Yes--much changed from what he was when he knew Mr. Oldbuck."
"I do not mean," said the Antiquary, "to intrude upon your lordship--I
only came to see this distressed family."
"And you have found one, sir, who has still greater claims on your
compassion."

"My compassion? Lord Glenallan cannot need my compassion. If Lord Glenallan
could need it, I think he would hardly ask it."
"Our former acquaintance," said the Earl--
"Is of such ancient date, my lord--was of such short duration, and was
connected with circumstances so exquisitely painful, that I think we may
dispense with renewing it."
So saying, the Antiquary turned away, and left the hut; but Lord Glenallan
followed him into the open air, and, in spite of a hasty "Good
morning, my lord," requested a few minutes' conversation, and the favour
of his advice in an important matter.

"Your lordship will find many more capable to advise you, my lord, and
by whom your intercourse will be deemed an honour. For me, I am a man
retired from business and the world, and not very fond of raking
up the past events of my useless life;--and forgive me if I say, I have
particular pain in reverting to that period of it when I acted like a
fool, and your lordship like"--He stopped short.

"Like a villain, you would say," said Lord Glenallan--"for such I must
have appeared to you."
"My lord--my lord, I have no desire to hear your shrift," said the
Antiquary.

"But, sir, if I can show you that I am more sinned against than sinning--
that I have been a man miserable beyond the power of description, and
who looks forward at this moment to an untimely grave as to a haven
of rest, you will not refuse the confidence which, accepting your appearance
at this critical moment as a hint from Heaven, I venture thus to
press on you."
"Assuredly, my lord, I shall shun no longer the continuation of
this extraordinary interview."
"I must then recall to you our occasional meetings upwards of twenty
years since at Knockwinnock Castle,--and I need not remind you of
a lady who was then a member of that family."
"The unfortunate Miss Eveline Neville, my lord; I remember it well."
"Towards whom you entertained sentiments"--
"Very different from those with which I before and since have
regarded her sex. Her gentleness, her docility, her pleasure in the
studies which I pointed out to her, attached my affections more
than became my age though that was not then much advanced--or the
solidity of my character.
But I need not remind your lordship of the various modes in which
you indulged your gaiety at the expense of an awkward and retired
student, embarrassed by the expression of feelings so new to him,
and I have no doubt that the young lady joined you in the well-deserved
ridicule--it is the way of womankind. I have spoken at once to the
painful circumstances of my addresses and their rejection, that
your lordship may be satisfied everything is full in my memory, and
may, so far as I am concerned, tell your story without scruple or
needless delicacy."He gazed slowly round at the quaking company for some moments in
silence, and then said:

"Well, senores, you were yesterday convinced of the ability of your
countrymen to keep faith with an honourable enemy, or I suppose you
would not have consented to guarantee their fidelity with your lives.
What think you of them now?"

"Ah, noble senor," exclaimed one of them--a certain Don Martin de
Sylva--"be merciful, I pray you, and do not hastily wreak upon us, who
are innocent, the vengeance so justly provoked by the act of another.
This is not the treachery of a whole community, senor, believe me, but
is the deed of some mad zealot--and, by all the Saints!  I believe I can
name him, too," he suddenly broke out, wheeling eagerly round upon his
fellow hostages and excitedly addressing them.  "What say you, senores;
does not the whole complexion of this unforgivable outrage point your
suspicions almost irresistibly toward one particular man?  Are we to
believe that our worthy alcalde is capable of imperilling the lives of
his fellow townsmen, as ours have been imperilled this night, by an act
of such base, wanton betrayal as all this amounts to?  I say no, most
emphatically; for, apart from every other consideration, what would he
gain by it?  No; this is the deed of a man anxious to curry favour at
any cost with the Viceroy--who, we know, hates the English, and justly
fears them, too, after his atrocious act of last year; and what man so
anxious to win favour in that direction as--I say it with deliberation,
senores--Don Manuel Rebiera, the acting Commandant of the military
forces?  That, in my humble opinion, noble Capitan, is the man whom we
have to thank for this latest outrage; and I think--nay, I _hope_--
that--Heavens!  I wonder whether the alcalde will have the courage--or,
rather, the _power_--to arrest him, Don Manuel having the soldiery at
his back."

"I had an interview with Don Manuel Rebiera, yesterday," remarked
George; "and I feel bound to admit that I observed a certain something
in his manner which to some extent justifies your suspicion of him.  But
whoever may be the person responsible for last night's--or, rather, this
morning's--proceedings, I most fervently hope, for your sakes, senores,
that he will be speedily found and delivered into my hands; for I tell
you that somebody will have to pay very dearly indeed for them.  I shall
do nothing rashly or hastily, senores--you may reassure yourselves upon
that point--but an act of basest, foulest treachery has been
perpetrated, and retribution must follow.  If you can in any way,
whether by suggestion or otherwise, assist me to lay my hands upon the
culprit, or culprits, I strongly advise you to do so, for your own
sakes; for, failing the actual guilty parties, _you_, senores, are the
persons who will have to pay the penalty."  And, so saying, George
passed on and into his own cabin, leaving the hostages almost as
profoundly perturbed as before.

Meanwhile, Basset, acting under Saint Leger's instructions, had caused a
boat to be lowered and manned by a strong crew, fully armed, and in her
had proceeded to board the plate ships, one after the other, with the
view of ascertaining who had been in command during the futile effort to
take them to sea, also to arrest those persons, whoever they might be,
and bring them aboard the _Nonsuch_.  This task occupied fully two
hours; so that it was drawing well on toward breakfast time when at
length the boat returned, bringing with her seven men--the remainder
having somehow contrived to effect their escape to the shore--who
admitted having been in temporary command of the ships during the night.
These men George questioned immediately upon their arrival; when the
suspicion given expression to by one of the hostages an hour or two
earlier, was fully confirmed; the prisoners asserting that their written
orders--which they produced in confirmation of their story--had been
given them on the previous afternoon by Don Manuel Rebiera, the acting
Military Commandant of the town and the representative of the Spanish
Government; those orders being to get the ships under way at a certain
hour, with the twofold object of escaping to sea, if possible, and of
enticing the English ship to follow them into the open, where she would
be exposed to the fire of the batteries, when it was hoped that she
would be destroyed, and the remnant of her crew captured.  Upon
receiving this information George at once sat down and wrote a letter to
the alcalde, informing him of what had transpired, and demanding the
immediate arrest and surrender of the acting Commandant, the penalty for
non-compliance with the command before noon, being the bombardment and
sack of the town.  This letter he entrusted to one of the hostages--
chosen by lot--who forthwith left the ship in a shore boat which had
been called alongside, promising that he would leave no stone unturned
to secure submission to the English Captain's demands.  Then all hands
went to breakfast.

Meanwhile, with the strengthening of daylight it was discovered that the
_Nonsuch_, upon returning to the roadstead after her pursuit of the
plate ships, had brought up so close to the spot where she had slipped
her buoyed anchor, that the cable could be recovered by the simple
process of running out a warp to it; and this was therefore the first
job undertaken when breakfast was over, the second anchor being at the
same time weighed and secured; after which there was nothing to be done
but to wait until noon--or the arrival of a reply from the alcalde.

It was, however, not necessary to wait for noon; for about half-past ten
o'clock a boat was seen approaching the _Nonsuch_ from the shore; and
when she presently drew near enough to permit recognition of the faces
of those in her it was seen that the alcalde was her solitary passenger;
and very shortly afterwards she ranged up alongside the English ship,
and Don Juan Alvarez climbed the side ladder in an evident state of
profound trepidation.  He brought momentous news, to the effect that it
had indeed been Don Manuel Rebiera who had taken upon himself to arrange
the whole affair of the preceding night; and that when at daylight he
had discovered how completely his scheme for the destruction of the
English ship had failed--and had also realised, it is to be presumed,
all that his failure involved, the terrible retribution that the English
would be certain to exact, and the whole responsibility for which must
rest upon his shoulders--the unhappy man had retired to his private
office in the Government building, and, after writing and signing a
document acknowledging himself to be the sole culprit, had shot himself
through the head.  To this piece of news the alcalde added the further
information that the soldiers, some eight hundred in number, infuriated
at the suicide of their chief, and the terrible affair of the previous
day at the Inquisition, for both of which occurrences they held the
English equally responsible, were practically in a state of mutiny, and
were parading the streets, fully armed, loudly announcing their
intention to kill any Englishman who dared to leave the shelter of his
ship and venture ashore.  Further, it appeared that the citizens, about
equally alarmed at the violence of feeling displayed by the soldiers,
and the fear that the town would be bombarded in reprisal for the
outrage perpetrated by Don Manuel, had taken refuge in the cathedral and
the various churches, where, under the leadership of the priests, they
were offering up especial prayers for protection and deliverance.

"Very well, senor alcalde," said George, when that official had
completed his report; "you have made the state of affairs ashore
sufficiently clear for all practical purposes.  Now, touching the matter
of the indemnity which I have demanded, what has been done with regard
to that?"

"Nothing--definite--so far--I regret to say," answered the alcalde,
haltingly.  "Of course," he continued, "I have discussed the matter with
Don Manuel Rebiera, the late acting Commandant; but I found him
exceedingly difficult and untractable to deal with.  When I first
broached the subject to him, I regret to say that he immediately fell
into a most violent rage, and declared, with quite unnecessary vigour,
that he would have nothing whatever to do with the payment of any
indemnity, however small; and when I pointed out to him that the lives
of twelve of our most important and valued citizens hung in the balance,
and might very possibly be sacrificed unless he displayed a very much
larger measure of pliability--well--I will not offend your ears, most
illustrious Capitan, by repeating his exact words, but I may tell you
they were to the effect that he would rather every hostage were hanged,
and the town itself laid in ruins, than suffer the humiliation of being
compelled to pay an indemnity for an action which he, personally,
regarded as perfectly righteous and justifiable.  On the whole, senor, I
am inclined to think that it is just as well for all concerned that Don
Manuel is dead; for I am convinced that, had he continued to live, he
would have proved an insuperable bar to every kind of negotiation, and,
quite possibly, have precipitated a further catastrophe.  For he was a
Government official, and was possessed, in a very marked degree, of all
the arrogance, the tyrannical, overbearing manner, the blind,
intolerable pride, and the immeasurable contempt for everybody and
everything not official, that so strongly characterises the
representatives of Government in these territories.  Yet, on the other
hand, his death places me in a dilemma from which I can see no way of
extricating myself; for the Commandant is so ill that it is impossible
for me to discuss business with him; I dare not act upon my sole,
unsupported authority; and if I have understood you aright,
_illustrissimo_, you will not give the time necessary to communicate
with the Viceroy.  So what am I to do?"

"I quite recognise the difficulty of your position, Don Juan," answered
George; "and perhaps the simplest way will be for us to act entirely
upon our own initiative, and so relieve you of all responsibility in the
matter.  Therefore, if you will kindly excuse me, I will leave you for a
little while, and will discuss the situation with my officers.  And
while I am absent, you will have an opportunity to talk matters over
with these worthy gentlemen, your fellow-citizens, who are in the
unfortunate position of being hostages for a good faith that has been
wantonly broken.  Perhaps when I return you may find yourselves able to
make a proposal, or at least offer a suggestion."

Having said which, the young Englishman bowed to his involuntary guests,
and went out on deck, where he invited Basset and Heard to accompany him
to the poop for the purposes of a consultation.  That same consultation
proved to be but a very brief affair; for George opened it by clearly
explaining to his fellow adventurers the distinctive features of the
situation, as it then existed, and giving his own views as to the manner
in which it might best be met; whereupon his companions at once agreed
to his suggested course of procedure, daring though this was, and the
conference, if such it might be called, broke up, having lasted less
than a quarter of an hour.  Then, while Basset and the purser resumed
the duties upon which they had previously been engaged, Saint Leger
returned to the state cabin to announce to the anxious alcalde and his
companions the decision which had been arrived at.

"Well, senores," he remarked cheerfully, glancing round at the expectant
faces so eagerly raised to his, as he entered the cabin, "I have
discussed with my officers the difficulty which confronts us all, and we
have resolved upon a course of action which I trust will be acceptable
to you.  We have come to the conclusion that it is not the inhabitants
of San Juan who are responsible for the occurrences of last night; and
therefore it would be unjust for us to punish them, through you, for
what happened.  Therefore if nothing further of an untoward character
occurs during the stay of the _Nonsuch_ in your harbour, your own lives
are safe, and your town will be spared by us--."  Here a sigh of
profound relief floated round the cabin, accompanied by a little stir as
the hostages' tense attitudes relaxed and they settled themselves into
more comfortable positions.  "But," continued George, "the fact remains
that a daring and treacherous attempt to effect our destruction was made
last night, as of course you are all fully aware; and that attempt must
be very severely punished, and ample compensation exacted.

"Now, it is perfectly clear, from what your respected alcalde has told
us, that the outrage--for I can call it nothing less--was instigated by,
and carried out under the direction of, an official representative of
the Spanish Government; therefore, since that official has placed
himself beyond the reach of punishment, the Government of which he was a
representative, and on behalf of which we are to assume he acted, must
pay the penalty.  Fortunately for you and us, who are the parties most
intimately concerned, the means whereby your Government can be most
severely punished, and an ample penalty paid, lie close to hand, in the
plate ships at present in your harbour; and it is our intention to avail
ourselves of that circumstance by confiscating the whole of the treasure
now on board them; and I have accordingly issued orders that they are to
be brought alongside this ship, one after another, and the treasure
removed with all expedition from their strong rooms to our own.  In this
way your Government will be the only loser, your own lives and property
will be spared; and we trust that the plan will consequently commend
itself to you.  The only feature of the plan which may perhaps be
distasteful to any of you is that I shall feel myself compelled to keep
Don Juan Alvarez, your worthy alcalde, as well as yourselves, a prisoner
until the transfer has been effected; and I do this solely because he
happens to be the only person among you who wields any authority, and it
may possibly be necessary for him to exercise that authority from time
to time, in order to restrain the crews of the various ships from
causing trouble.  Now, senores, what think you of my plan?"

For a few moments dead silence reigned in the cabin, the fact being that
the Dons were literally smitten speechless by the paralysing enormity of
the proposed insult and injury to the dignity of that Government which,
in their eyes, was only a shade less sacred than the Church, and their
first emotion was one of overwhelming indignation against those whose
colossal insolence and audacity rendered them capable of such an
overwhelmingly humiliating proposal.  But the offence to their national
pride was quickly swamped by considerations of their own personal
safety, and as one man they soon came to the conclusion that anything--
yes, _anything_, even the humiliation of their king, was better than the
sacrifice of their own lives and the destruction of their own property
which would be involved in a retaliatory bombardment and sack of the
town.  If the Government chose to leave San Juan de Ulua in so
defenceless a condition as to render such an outrage possible, then let
Government suffer the humiliation and the loss!  Such were, in
substance, the dominant thoughts in the minds of the alcalde and his
fellow prisoners; and at length, perceiving that none of the others were
willing to speak, one, Don Martin de Sylva, the oldest as well as the
most prominent and important of the hostages, rose to his feet and said,
slowly and impressively:

"Senor Capitan, you have asked for our opinion of your most astounding
proposal; and I will give you mine, which I put forward as my own
exclusively, and which I do not pretend to advance as in the slightest
degree representative of those of my companions.  In the first place, I
must be permitted to remind you that, although one of the avowed
purposes of your visit to our city is to avenge and exact compensation
for an attack upon your countrymen in our harbour, last year, which we
all deplore and deprecate, you have as yet offered us no proof of your
authority for such action, which, for all that we know, may have been
taken actually without the knowledge of those who are legitimately
entitled to regard themselves as the injured parties; therefore I think
you must acknowledge that it is not surprising if we and our Government
have been slow to recognise your claims.  You may have been duly
accredited by Her Majesty the Queen of England to exact the reparation
which you demand; but, if so, I think you ought to have submitted your
credentials when you made your claim, and that claim, I venture to
suggest, should have been made in proper diplomatic form, instead of
being, as it was, a mere threat.  But if you hold no credentials from
Her Majesty, and your authority is self-imposed, the conduct of which I
complain is quite comprehensible, and although it may be in the highest
degree irregular I am prepared to admit that it is not altogether
unjustifiable, since I understand that your own brother was, and indeed
still is, a sufferer from the attack upon Admiral Hawkins' fleet.  Your
claim on his behalf I am willing to admit is not outrageously
unreasonable, and I deeply regret that it was not immediately _met_ and
promptly discharged.  The most unfortunate feature of the whole affair
is of course the action which that misguided and over-zealous fool,
Rebiera, took during the early hours of this morning.  That action
completely disarms us and perhaps--I only say _perhaps_--justifies you,
in a measure, in the stupendous demand which you are now making.  For my
own part, I have no hesitation in expressing the opinion that, as
reparation only, your demands are excessive and far beyond all
reasonable bounds.  But if they are intended--as I gather they are--to
be regarded also as a wholesome chastisement of our Government for an
act of treachery on the part of one of its officials, then I have
nothing further to say.  You have the power to exact what terms you
please, and if you choose to exercise that power, we have not the means
to prevent you.  For myself, all I can say is that I am very grateful to
you that you have been so fair-minded as to admit the innocence of
myself and my fellow hostages in connection with an affair over which we
have had no control, yet for which you might, had you so chosen, have
exacted our lives as a penalty."  Having thus delivered himself, the old
Don bowed gravely and resumed his seat.

"Thank you, Don Martin," answered George, good-humouredly.  "I asked for
an opinion, and you have given me yours, frankly and fearlessly; and I
imagine, from the expression of approval which I seem to read upon your
compatriots' faces, that their opinion coincides with your own pretty
closely.  Well, be it so; naturally, you and I regard this whole matter
from two very different points of view.  Now, what says your worthy
alcalde?  Is he willing to exercise his authority over the crews of the
ships, if necessary, in order to avert further trouble and
complications?"

The alcalde rose to his feet and bowing, with the native grace of the
high-bred Spaniard, to George, replied:

"Assuredly I will, senor; for the power is in your hands, and you can
enforce obedience if you see fit.  And anything will be preferable to
the useless slaughter which I foresee would inevitably result from
ineffective and ill-advised action on the part of our mariners.  To
avoid that deplorable waste of life, therefore, I am prepared to
intervene, should the necessity unhappily arise.  At the same time,
senor, I feel it due to myself to join my protest to that of my friend,
Don Martin de Sylva, and, I think I may add, the rest of us here
present, against what I cannot avoid regarding as the tremendously
excessive penalty which you are about to impose in retaliation for the
ill-judged action of one man, who has already paid with his life for his
mistake."  And therewith Don Juan resumed his seat, to the accompaniment
of approving murmurs from his companions.

"Very well, then," said George, composedly; "that matter is also
settled.  And now, senor, I think it will be advisable that you should
accompany me out on deck, and hold yourself ready to act, if required;
for, from the sounds which reach me, it would seem that the first of
your ships is being hauled alongside; and your intervention may
therefore be needed at any moment."

As it happened, however, no intervention on the part of the alcalde was
required; possibly his presence on the poop of the _Nonsuch_ beside
George, where he could be distinctly seen by everybody, may have
exercised a wholesome restraint upon the Spanish crew; or the sight of
the entire crew of the English ship, mustered on deck, armed to the
teeth, the gunners standing by their ordnance with lighted matches, may
have had something to do with it; be that as it may, the Spanish seamen
offered no resistance when it became apparent that the English were
about to transfer the treasure from the plate ships' strong rooms to
their own; nay more, they even assisted in the transfer, when commanded
to do so, although it must be confessed that they worked with sullen
countenances, and many muttered threats and grumblings.

There were twelve plate ships in the harbour, of which number ten were
fully loaded; but when it came to inspecting the strong rooms of these
ships it was found that all twelve of them had received their full
complement of treasure, consisting of silver bars, gold bricks--each
separately sewn up in its casing of hide, as transported from the
mines--and one large chest of pearls, the proceeds of the whole previous
year's fishing in the adjacent waters.  The gold and silver also
represented a whole year's produce of the mines; and so enormous was the
quantity of the precious metals that its transfer to the _Nonsuch_
occupied six entire days; while, when at length the task was completed,
the _Nonsuch_, stout ship as she was, floated the deeper by a good five
strakes!

The work was completed on a certain day, about an hour after sunset; and
at the very urgent request of the alcalde and his friends the hostages,
George arranged to leave the port forthwith; for although no actual
demonstration had been made against the ship, news had come off from the
shore, from time to time, to the effect that the whole town was seething
with indignation at the sight of such an enormous amount of treasure
being seized by the hated English, while the soldiery were going about
the streets breathing fire and slaughter and doing their utmost to
incite the town folk to unite with them in a determined effort to
recapture the treasure and annihilate the English pirates; while, as the
time went on, it became perfectly evident that only the fear of
bombardment restrained the civilians from entertaining the proposal;
and, even so, the alcalde was in a perfect agony of fear lest, despite
all the efforts of his friends ashore, some rash act on the part of the
soldiery and the rougher element among the civilians, should yet
precipitate a catastrophe.  Such is now his tender conscientiousness, that
he was among those who were the first to be married again by some Cardinal
to their present wives, to whom they had formerly been united only by
the municipality. This new marriage, however, took place before Madame
Thuriot had introduced herself to the acquaintance of the
Imperial Grenadier Rabais.

LETTER XXX.

PARIS, August, 1805.

MY LORD:--Regarding me as a connoisseur, though I have no pretensions but
that of being an amateur, Lucien Bonaparte, shortly before his disgrace,
invited me to pass some days with him in the country, and to assist him
in arranging his very valuable collection of pictures--next our public
ones, the most curious and most valuable in Europe, and, of course, in
the world. I found here, as at Joseph Bonaparte's, the same splendour,
the same etiquette, and the same liberty, which latter was much
enhanced by the really engaging and unassuming manners and conversation
of the host. At Joseph's, even in the midst of abundance and of
liberty, in seeing the person or meditating on the character of the host,
you feel both your inferiority of fortune and the humiliation of
dependence, and that you visit a master instead of a friend, who
indirectly tells you, "Eat, drink, and rejoice as long and as much as
you like; but remember that if you are happy, it is to my generosity you
are indebted, and if unhappy, that I do not care a pin about you." With
Lucien it is the very reverse. His conduct seems to indicate that by
your company you confer an obligation on him, and he is studious to remove,
on all occasions, that distance which fortune has placed between him
and his guests; and as he cannot compliment them upon being wealthier
than himself, he seizes with delicacy every opportunity to chew
that he acknowledges their superiority in talents and in genius as
more than an equivalent for the absence of riches.

He is, nevertheless, himself a young man of uncommon parts, and, as
far as I could judge from my short intercourse with the reserved Joseph
and with the haughty Napoleon, he is abler and better informed than either,
and much more open and sincere. His manners are also more elegant,
and his language more polished, which is the more creditable to him
when it is remembered how much his education has been neglected, how
vitiated the Revolution made him, and that but lately his principal
associates were, like himself, from among the vilest and most vulgar
of the rabble. It is not necessary to be a keen observer to remark
in Napoleon the upstart soldier, and in Joseph the former low member
of the law; but I defy the most refined courtier to see in Lucien
anything indicating a ci-devant sans-culotte. He has, besides, other
qualities (and those more estimable) which will place him much above
his elder brothers in the opinion of posterity. He is extremely
compassionate and liberal to the truly distressed, serviceable to those
whom he knows are not his friends, and forgiving and obliging even to
those who have proved and avowed themselves his enemies. These are
virtues commonly very scarce, and hitherto never displayed by any other
member of the Bonaparte family.

An acquaintance of yours, and--a friend of mine, Count de T-----,
at his return here from emigration, found, of his whole former fortune,
producing once eighty thousand livres--in the year, only four farms
unsold, and these were advertised for sale. A man who had once been his
servant, but was then a groom to Lucien, offered to present a memorial
for him to his master, to prevent the disposal of the only support
which remained to subsist himself, with a wife and four children. Lucien
asked Napoleon to prohibit the sale, and to restore the Count the
farms, and obtained his consent; but Fouche, whose cousin wanted them,
having purchased other national property in the neighbourhood,
prevailed upon Napoleon to forget his promise, and the farms were
sold.

As soon as Lucien heard of it he sent for the Count, delivered into his
hands an annuity of six thousand livres--for the life of himself,
his wife, and his children, as an indemnity for the inefficacy of
his endeavours to serve him, as he expressed himself. Had the Count
recovered the farms, they would not have given him a clear profit of
half the amount, all taxes paid.

A young author of the name of Gauvan, irritated by the loss of parents
and fortune by the Revolution, attacked, during 1799, in the public
prints, as well as in pamphlets, every Revolutionist who had obtained
notoriety or popularity. He was particularly vehement against Lucien,
and laid before the public all his crimes and all his errors, and
asserted, as facts, atrocities which were either calumnies or merely
rumours. When, after Napoleon's assumption of the Consulate, Lucien
was appointed a Minister of the Interior, he sent for Gauvan, and said
to him, "Great misfortunes have early made you wretched and unjust, and
you have frequently revenged yourself on those who could not prevent
them, among whom I am one. You do not want capacity, nor, I believe,
probity.
Here is a commission which makes you a Director of Contributions in
the Departments of the Rhine and Moselle, an office with a salary
of twelve thousand livres but producing double that sum. If you
meet with any difficulties, write to me; I am your friend.

Take those one hundred louis d'or for the expenses of your journey.
Adieu!" This anecdote I have read in Gauvan's own handwriting, in a
letter to his sister. He died in 1802; but Mademoiselle Gauvan, who is
not yet fifteen, has a pension of three thousand livres a year--from
Lucien, who, has never seen her.

Lucien Bonaparte has another good quality: he is consistent in his
political principles. Either from conviction or delusion he is still
a Republican, and does not conceal that, had he suspected
Napoleon of any intent to reestablish monarchy, much less tyranny,
he would have joined those deputies who, on the 9th of November, 1799,
in the sitting at St.
Cloud, demanded a decree of outlawry against him. If the present quarrel
between these two brothers were sifted to the bottom, perhaps it would
be found to originate more from Lucien's Republicanism than from
his marriage.

I know, with all France and Europe, that Lucien's youth has been very
culpable; that he has committed many indiscretions, much injustice, many
imprudences, many errors, and, I fear, even some crimes. I know
that he has been the most profligate among the profligate, the most
debauched among libertines, the most merciless among the plunderers,
and the most perverse among rebels. I know that he is accused of being
a Septembrizer; of having murdered one wife and poisoned another;
of having been a spy, a denouncer, a persecutor of innocent persons
in the Reign of Terror.

I know that he is accused of having fought his brothers-in-law; of
having ill-used his mother, and of an incestuous commerce with his own
sisters.

I have read and heard of these and other enormous accusations,
and far be it from me to defend, extenuate, or even deny them.

But suppose all this infamy to be real, to be proved, to be
authenticated, which it never has been, and, to its whole extent,
I am persuaded, never can be--what are the cruel and depraved acts
of which Lucien has been accused to the enormities and barbarities
of which Napoleon is convicted?

Is the poisoning a wife more criminal than the poisoning a whole
hospital of wounded soldiers; or the assisting to kill some confined
persons, suspected of being enemies, more atrocious than the massacre
in cold blood of thousands of disarmed prisoners?

Is incest with a sister more shocking to humanity than the well-known
unnatural pathic but I will not continue the disgusting comparison.
As long as Napoleon is unable to acquit himself of such barbarities and
monstrous crimes, he has no right to pronounce Lucien unworthy to be
called his brother; nor have Frenchmen, as long as they obey the former
as a Sovereign, or the Continent, as long as it salutes him as
such, any reason to despise the latter for crimes which lose their
enormity when compared to the horrid perpetrations of his Imperial
brother.

An elderly lady, a relation of Lucien's wife, and a person in whose
veracity and morality I have the greatest confidence, and for whom he
always had evinced more regard than even for his own mother, has repeated
to me many of their conversations. She assures me that Lucien deplores
frequently the want of a good and religious education, and the tempting
examples of perversity he met with almost at his entrance upon the
revolutionary scene. He says that he determined to get rich 'per fas aut
nefas', because he observed that money was everything, and that most
persons plotted and laboured for power merely to be enabled to gather
treasure, though, after they had obtained both, much above their desert
and expectation, instead of being satiated or even satisfied, they
bustled and intrigued for more, until success made them unguarded
and prosperity indiscreet, and they became with their wealth the easy
prey of rival factions. Such was the case of Danton, of Fabre d'Eglantine,
of Chabot, of Chaumette, of Stebert, and other contemptible wretches,
butchered by Robespierre and his partisans--victims in their turn to
men as unjust and sanguinary as themselves. He had, therefore,
laid out a different plan of conduct for himself. He had fixed upon
fifty millions of livres--as the maximum he should wish for, and
when that sum was in his possession, he resolved to resign all
pretensions to rank and employment, and to enjoy 'otium cum dignitate'.
He had kept to his determination, and so regulated his income that; with
the expenses, pomp, and retinue of a Prince, he is enabled to make
more persons happy and comfortable than his extortions have ruined or
even embarrassed. He now lives like a philosopher, and endeavours
to forget the past, to delight in the present, and to be indifferent
about futurity. He chose, therefore, for a wife, a lady whom he loved
and esteemed, in preference to one whose birth would have been a continual
reproach to the meanness of his own origin.

You must, with me, admire the modesty of a citizen sans-culotte, who,
without a shilling in the world, fixes upon fifty millions as a reward
for his revolutionary achievements, and with which he would be satisfied
to sit down and begin his singular course of singular philosophy.
But his success is more extraordinary that his pretensions were
extravagant.
This immense sum was amassed by him in the short period of four years,
chiefly by bribes from foreign Courts, and by selling his protections
in France.

But most of the other Bonapartes have made as great and as rapid
fortunes as Lucien, and yet, instead of being generous, contented,
or even philosophers, they are still profiting by every occasion to
increase their ill-gotten treasures, and no distress was ever relieved,
no talents encouraged, or virtues recompensed by them. The mind of their
garrets lodges with them in their palaces, while Lucien seems to ascend
as near as possible to a level with his circumstances. I have myself found
him beneficent without ostentation.

Among his numerous pictures, I observed four that had formerly belonged
to my father's, and afterwards to my own cabinet. I inquired how much
he had paid for them, without giving the least hint that they had been
my property, and were plundered from me by the nation. He had, indeed,
paid their full value. In a fortnight after I had quitted him, these,
with six other pictures, were deposited in my room, with a very polite
note, begging my acceptance of them, and assuring me that he had but
the day before heard from his picture dealer that they had belonged
to me. He added that he would never retake them, unless he received an
assurance from me that I parted with them without reluctance, and at
the same time affixed their price. I returned them, as I knew they were
desired by him for his collection, but he continued obstinate.

I told him, therefore, that, as I was acquainted with his inclination
to perform a generous action, I would, instead of payment for the
pictures, indicate a person deserving his assistance. I mentioned the
old Duchesse de ------, who is seventy-four years of age and blind; and,
after possessing in her youth an income of eight hundred thousand
livres--is now, in her old age, almost destitute.

He did for this worthy lady more than I expected; but happening, in his
visits to relieve my friend, to cast his eye on the daughter of the
landlady where she lodged, he found means to prevail on the simplicity
of the poor girl, and seduced her. So much do I know personally
of Lucien Bonaparte, who certainly is a composition of good and bad
qualities, but which of them predominate I will not take upon me to
decide. This I can affirm--Lucien is not the worst member of the
Bonaparte family.

LETTER XXXI.

PARIS, August, 1805.

MY LORD:--As long as Austria ranks among independent nations, Bonaparte
will take care not to offend or alarm the ambition and interest of
Prussia by incorporating the Batavian Republic with the other provinces
of his Empire. Until that period, the Dutch must continue (as they
have been these last ten years) under the appellation of allies,
oppressed like subjects and plundered like foes.

Their mock sovereignty will continue to weigh heavier on them than
real servitude does on their Belgic and Flemish neighbours, because
Frederick the Great pointed out to his successors the Elbe and the
Tegel as the natural borders of the Prussian monarchy, whenever the
right bank of the Rhine should form the natural frontiers of the
kingdom of France.

That during the present summer a project for a partition treaty of
Holland has by the Cabinet of St. Cloud been laid before the Cabinet of
Berlin is a fact, though disseminated only as a rumour by the secret
agents of Talleyrand. Their object was on this, as on all previous
occasions when any names, rights, or liberties of people were intended
to be erased from among the annals of independence, to sound the
ground, and to prepare by such rumours the mind of the public for another
outrage and another overthrow. But Prussia, as well as France, knows
the value of a military and commercial navy, and that to obtain it good
harbours and navigable rivers are necessary, and therefore, as well as
from principles of justice, perhaps, declined the acceptance
of a plunder, which, though tempting, was contrary to the policy of the
House of Brandenburgh.

According to a copy circulated among the members of our diplomatic
corps, this partition treaty excluded Prussia from all the Batavian
seaports except Delfzig, and those of the river Ems, but gave her
extensive territories on the side of Guelderland, and a rich country
in Friesland.

Had it been acceded to by the Court of Berlin, with the annexed
condition of a defensive and offensive alliance with the Court of
St.

Cloud, the Prussian monarchy would, within half a century, have been
swallowed up in the same gulf with the Batavian Commonwealth and
the Republic of Poland; and by some future scheme of some future
Bonaparte or Talleyrand, be divided in its turn, and serve as a
pledge of reconciliation or inducement of connection between some
future rulers of the French and Russian Empires.

Talleyrand must, indeed, have a very mean opinion of the capacity of the
Prussian Ministers, or a high notion of his own influence over them, if
he was serious in this overture. For my part, I am rather inclined
to think that it was merely thrown out to discover whether Frederick
William III. had entered into any engagement contrary to the interest
of Napoleon the First; or to allure His Prussian Majesty into a
negotiation which would suspend, or at least interfere with, those
supposed to be then on the carpet with Austria, Russia, or perhaps
even with England.

The late Batavian Government had, ever since the beginning of the present
war with England, incurred the displeasure of Bonaparte.

When it apprehended a rupture from the turn which the discussion
respecting the occupation of Malta assumed, the Dutch Ambassadors at St.
Petersburg and Berlin were ordered to demand the interference of these
two Cabinets for the preservation of the neutrality of Holland, which
your country had promised to acknowledge, if respected by France.
No sooner was Bonaparte informed of this step, than he marched troops
into the heart of the Batavian Republic, and occupied its principal
forts, ports, and arsenals.

When, some time afterwards, Count Markof received instructions from his
Court, according to the desire of the Batavian Directory, and
demanded, in consequence, an audience from Bonaparte, a map was
laid before him, indicating the position of the French troops in
Holland, and plans of the intended encampment of our army of England
on the coast of Flanders and France; and he was asked whether he
thought it probable that our Government would assent to a neutrality
so injurious to its offensive operations against Great Britain.

"But," said the Russian Ambassador, "the independence of Holland has
been admitted by you in formal treaties."
His eyeballs gleamed as his gaze went out searching to
its utmost confines the small space of illuminated water, apparently
without result, for he presently began to move slowly aft, pausing for a
short space of time in the foot of the fore-rigging, outside which he
passed.  Then, as he paused and the light grew steady, the two men on
the poop caught wavering glimpses of a long line of very faintly lighted
figures leaning over the larboard rail, from the after extremity of the
forecastle to the fore end of the poop, all eagerly scanning the
gleaming, oil-like surface of the water, while here and there one
pointed as though he believed he saw something.  But although both
George and Dyer were straining their eyesight to the utmost they could
find nothing to reward their search, nay, even although at that moment a
flicker of sheet-lightning gleamed for an instant along the north-
western horizon.  But the ship was at that moment swung with her head to
the south-west, consequently the lightning was on the wrong side of her
to afford any assistance.  Moreover, it was no sooner come than it was
gone again, yet not so soon but that George, and perhaps half a dozen
others, raising their heads at the momentary illumination of the sky,
saw, suspended overhead, an enormous mass of black, impending cloud,
with jagged, ragged edges so wonderfully suggesting rent and tottering
rocks about to fall upon and crush the ship and all in her, that quite
involuntarily he uttered a low cry and cringed as though to escape an
expected blow.  And at that precise moment, as the young captain cowered
and crouched, he felt a slight movement in the stagnant air about him,
very much as though a great wing had swept immediately over his head so
close that it had all but touched him, indeed he believed that it--
whatever it might have been--_had_ actually touched him, for unless his
imagination had begun to play tricks with him he could have sworn that
he felt the cap on his head move as though it had been grazed by some
passing object.

"What was that?" he gasped, starting back from the rail over which he
had been leaning, and flinging up his hand to his head.  "Dyer, did you
see or feel anything?"

"I saw the sky for a second, if that's what you mean; and I don't at all
like the look o't; I've never see'd a sky quite like that avore--"
answered Dyer.

"No, neither have I," interrupted George; "and I like the look of it as
little as yourself.  I believe it means that a hurricane is brewing.
But I was not referring to the sky.  At the moment when that gleam of
lightning came I fancied that I felt something sweep through the air
just above my head, and--"

"Hush! hark! what be that?" interrupted Dyer in his turn, placing a
restraining hand on George's arm as he spoke, and in the silence that
ensued there came to their ears from behind them a low, intermittent,
grating sound, like--like what?  Well, as much like some rough substance
being slowly dragged over the poop rail, immediately behind them, as
anything to which they could compare it.

"Who be you, and what be 'e doin' there?" demanded Dyer, dashing across
the deck.  But he was just too late, for a moment before he reached the
rail the sound ceased, and he found nothing.  But the horrible odour--
something between putrid fish and decaying seaweed--was stronger than
ever.

"You, bo's'un, haul up thicky lantern and bring un along here, quick,"
yelled Dyer.  "Whatever 'tis that's raising this here smell, 'tis
alongside the ship, and 'tis _alive_!  And come up here, half a dozen o'
you men down there in the waist--and bring axes wi' ye."

The boatswain quickly hauled up his lantern, and, accompanied by some
ten or a dozen of the bolder spirits among the crew--the latter having
hastily armed themselves with axes and pikes from the racks--hurried up
to the poop, and a few moments later George and Dyer were curiously
examining with the aid of the lantern's feeble light certain fresh
excoriations on the poop rail which looked as though they might have
been produced by a large and very coarse rasp forcibly drawn over it,
while the men with pikes and axes crowded close up behind them, peering
eagerly over their shoulders.  They were still thus engaged when there
suddenly flashed up over the rail a long slim, snake-like object, the
precise nature of which it was impossible to determine in the intense
darkness only faintly dissipated by the inefficient light of the
lantern, and while all hands stood gaping dazedly at it the thing curled
in over the rail, lightly touched the boatswain upon the chest, and
instantly with a lightning-like movement coiled itself tightly about his
body, encircling his arms and shoulders.

The man gave vent to a yell of dismay as he felt the coil of the
horrible thing tighten round him, and the next instant screamed, in a
voice hoarse and sharpened by terror:

"He've a-got me!  He've a-got me and 's dragging of me overside!  Hold
on to me, dear souls, and don't let mun take me.  Oh!  I be goin'--he'm
squeezin' the very life out o' me--save me, shipmates, save--"

_Crunch_!  George had snatched an axe out of the hand of one of the
paralysed seamen near him and, exerting all his strength, had brought it
down upon the writhing, straining thing where it crossed the stout
timber rail of the poop, with the result that the keen blade had
completely severed the thing, and the boatswain, with some eight or nine
feet of the creature still clinging to his body, and the three men who
had seized him in response to his terrified cries, went reeling backward
from the rail and fell together in a heap upon the deck, taking the
lantern with them, which was smashed and extinguished by the fall.  At
the same moment a terrific commotion arose in the water alongside,
George received a violent blow which swept him off his feet and flung
him heavily to the deck, and two men shrieked out the startling news
that the thing--whatever it was--had got them and was dragging them
overside, while confusion reigned supreme, not only on the poop, where a
general stampede ensued, but also down on the main deck, where men were
hastily arming themselves in defence from--they knew not what.  And the
sickening odour which had first announced the presence of the creature
arose with redoubled strength, pervading the ship from end to end.

For perhaps five or six minutes the confusion and panic aboard the
_Nonsuch_ was of a character to defy description; men rushed, yelling,
hither and thither in the darkness, colliding with each other and
screaming under the impression that the convulsive embrace of their
shipmates was the encircling grip of the unknown monster, heavy blows
resounded here and there upon the deck, as though a giant cable was
threshing the planking, causing the ship to quiver from stem to stern,
the two men actually caught in the coils of the creature were shrieking
horribly as they clung with tenacious grip to the rail over which they
were being inexorably dragged; and over all rose the voice of Dyer
calling for more lanterns.

Then suddenly there came a final despairing shriek from the two
unfortunate men as they were dragged overboard, carrying with them a
length of the stout rail to which they had been desperately clinging,
the smashing blows upon the deck ceased, together with the turmoil in
the water alongside, and presently four men came hesitatingly along the
deck, carrying lighted lanterns.  With still greater hesitation they at
length permitted themselves to creep up the poop ladder, when the first
object revealed by the light of their lanterns was the senseless body of
the boatswain, his arms and shoulders still encircled by a snake-like
object of light brownish-grey colour.  The poor man had apparently
swooned with terror, or, perhaps, the revulsion of feeling from it when
he felt the sudden relaxation of the awful drag upon his body; and near
him sat the captain upon the planks, bareheaded, his cap having fallen
off, and somewhat ruefully rubbing his aching head where it had come
into violent contact with the deck.  He looked dazed, and, upon being
questioned by Dyer, admitted that he believed he had been momentarily
stunned by his fall.  And all about him were wet sinuous marks upon the
deck which sufficiently accounted for the furious banging sounds that
had been heard, and which also conclusively demonstrated that the young
captain had experienced an almost miraculous escape from the violent
blows which had rained on the deck all round him.

The first thing done was to set about the restoration of the boatswain,
and this task was undertaken by Chichester, the doctor, while Dyer,
assisted by two of the men who had come aft with the lanterns, proceeded
to free the senseless body from the curious serpent-like thing that
still enwrapped it.  And when this was presently done, not altogether
without difficulty due to muscular contraction, Dyer stood for some
moments thoughtfully and somewhat doubtfully regarding the object by the
light of the lanterns.  Then he bent down and began to handle it,
turning it over on the deck and spanning its girth with his two hands.
Finally he straightened himself up and, with the outer extremity grasped
in his hand, turned to George and observed:

"Now I know what 'tis, though I'd never ha' believed it if I hadn't seen
it wi' these here two good eyes o' mine.  'Tis the arm of a cuttle-fish;
that's what 'tis, and nothin' else.  Feel to the skin of un, cap'n, and
look to the suckers o' mun.  I've see'd exactly the same sort o' thing
caught by the fishermen over on the French coast about Barfleur and
Cherbourg, and I've heard that the things--squids, they calls 'em--
actually attacks the boats sometimes and tries to pull the men out o'
them; but they was babies--infants in arms--to this here monster.  I've
knowed 'em wi' arms so much as ten or twelve foot long, but the arm that
this belonged to must ha' measured all o' forty foot, and maybe more.
Bring along a couple of they lanterns, two of you, and let's see if the
brute be still alongside."

The men received the order with visible trepidation, and were none too
ready to execute it; but at length Dyer, who was certainly not lacking
in courage, snatched a lantern from one of the men, threw the coils of
the main topgallant brace off the pin, bent the lantern to the end of
it, and climbing into the mizen rigging, lowered it over the side until
it hung close to the surface of the water.  But there was nothing to be
seen; and it was now noticed that the exceedingly offensive odour which
had recently pervaded the ship was no longer perceptible, apart from
that which emanated from the severed tentacle, which was promptly hove
overboard.  Then the hands were mustered and the roll called, when it
was found that two of the crew were missing, and there could no longer
be a shadow of doubt that two of the ship's company had actually been
dragged off the deck and drowned, if not devoured by the creature!

But the crew of the _Nonsuch_ were not allowed much time wherein to
dwell upon this amazing tragedy, for scarcely had the boatswain been
restored to his senses and conveyed below to his hammock to recover from
the shock of his terrible adventure, when a low, weird, moaning sound
suddenly became audible in the air all about the ship, the canvas of the
close-reefed topsails, which had been flapping monotonously with the
heave and roll of the ship, shivered and slatted violently for a moment,
and a gust of hot wind from the north-west swept wailing over the ship
and was gone.  Then with equal suddenness a flash of vivid lightning
rent the sky low down in the northern board, and presently, coincidently
with the muttered booming of distant thunder, another blast of hot wind
struck the ship and swept away to the southward in the wake of the
first.  Then, almost before the sound of the second blast had died away
in the distance, there again arose those strange moaning and wailing
sounds in the air, seemingly right overhead, louder and more prolonged
this time, and accompanied by queer shuddering rustlings of the topsails
and momentary scufflings of conflicting draughts of air about the decks.
These conflicting draughts finally resolved themselves into a series of
fitful gusts from the northward, which happily lasted long enough to
enable her crew to get the _Nonsuch's_ bows round, pointing to the
southward, and then, with a screaming roar, the gale rushed down upon
the ship, out from due north, and amid the yelling and piping of the
wind, and the angry hiss of maddened waters suddenly scourged into
white, luminous foam, with the spindrift flying over her in blinding,
drenching showers, the ship gathered way and fled southward like a
frightened thing.

The hurricane--for such it was--blew with appalling violence for exactly
twelve hours, during which the _Nonsuch_ scudded dead before it under
close-reefed topsails, with the canvas straining and tugging until
opinion became divided as to whether the cloth would part company with
the bolt-ropes, or whether, being new and strong, it would uproot the
masts and drag them bodily out of the ship, especially when the crest of
a sea swept roaring and foaming away ahead of her, and her way was
checked as she settled back into the trough.  Luckily, neither of these
things happened, for if the canvas was new, so too was the good stout
hemp rigging, which had, moreover, been set up afresh fore and aft,
aloft and alow, after the careening of the ship in that snug little
Trinidad creek; consequently, although the masts bent like fishing-rods
and groaned ominously from time to time in their partners, everything
held, and the ship emerged from the unequal struggle not a penny the
worse, although it must be admitted that her rigging had been stretched
to such an extent that when at length it was relieved of the strain by
the cessation of the gale, it hung loosely in bights that caused the
worthy boatswain to shake his head and mutter to himself.

When at length the gale broke and the wind, veering as it fell,
gradually worked round until it once more became the trade-wind, blowing
out from about due east, the ship had accomplished the record run of her
existence up to that date, Dyer's reckoning showing that the craft had
averaged twelve knots throughout that mad, desperate race, and that it
had swept them to within three hundred and twenty-five miles of their
destination.

Late in the afternoon of the second day after the cessation of the gale,
land was sighted ahead, and Dyer, having hurried aloft and carefully
studied the features of the coast stretching athwart the ship's bows, at
length announced with great satisfaction that Nombre de Dios lay
straight ahead.  Then George and he retired to the main cabin, where, in
conjunction with the other responsible officers of the ship, they held a
council, at which it was ultimately determined to take the ship into a
small creek, some twenty miles to the eastward, which Drake had
discovered when in those waters the year previously; there make all
preparations for a boat attack upon the town during the night of the
following day, capture Nombre, and then propose, as ransom, the
surrender of Hubert Saint Leger, and any other Englishmen that might be
in the hands of the Spaniards.  The project was a sufficiently daring
one, for Nombre de Dios had at that time the reputation of being the
Treasure-house of the World, since to it was brought across the isthmus,
from Panama, all the treasure of Peru, for shipment to Spain, therefore
it would almost certainly be well guarded by soldiers.  On the other
hand, however, probabilities favoured the assumption--which, as we have
already seen, was correct--that the plate ships would by this time have
sailed from Nombre on their homeward voyage, in which case, since there
would be no treasure to guard, the vigilance of the authorities might be
somewhat relaxed, and a surprise might reasonably be expected to result
in success.  Also it was hoped that from the creek which the adventurers
proposed to enter, the party might be able to get into touch with the
terrible tribe of Cimarrones--or Maroons, as the English called them.
This tribe originated in a number of African negroes who, some eighty
years previously, had escaped from their Spanish masters and taken to
the "high woods," or virgin forest, where, having taken to themselves
wives from among the neighbouring Indians, they had in process of time
grown into a formidable tribe, having one mission in life, and one only,
namely, to harry the Spanish settlements generally, and to destroy, with
every circumstance of the most refined and diabolical cruelty, every
Spanish man, woman, or child who might be so unfortunate as to fall into
their hands.  Dyer knew something of these terrible blacks, having
already met them in Drake's company; he knew that they were ever to be
found lurking in the immediate vicinity of the half-dozen or so Spanish
settlements established on the isthmus, and believed that it might be
possible to obtain valuable information from them concerning the
condition of Nombre, and perhaps even to secure their assistance in the
contemplated attack upon the town.  But when he suggested this last
proposal, George and the others at once vetoed it from motives of policy
and humanity, arguing that if the Cimarrones were permitted to gain
access to the interior of the town, there was no knowing what barbarous
excesses they might indulge in, which would necessitate the English
making common cause with the Spaniards to protect the latter, and so
convert the friendly feeling of the Cimarrones for the English into
deadly enmity, which was a consummation to be carefully avoided.

The creek which Dyer proposed to enter proved to be so small, when at
length the _Nonsuch_ arrived in it, that, anchored as nearly as might be
in its centre, there was only barely enough room to allow the vessel to
swing clear of the banks when riding to a very short scope of cable.  It
was so late when the adventurers arrived in this miniature harbour that
the fast-fading light showed but little of the surroundings save the
fact that the place was completely land-locked, and was so hemmed-in on
all sides by lofty trees of the virgin forest that, even moored as she
was to a single anchor and a short scope of cable, the ship might ride
there safely in practically all weathers, while the lofty trees
effectually screened her presence both seaward and landward.  The canvas
was hastily furled, and then the crew went below to supper, with the
understanding that after supper they would be permitted to turn in and
take a long night's rest.  But they were warned that, secluded and cut
off as the place appeared to be, it was not without its dangers, and
they must hold themselves prepared to turn out and fight for their lives
at a moment's notice, while a strong and alert anchor watch must be
maintained all through the night.

Not that there was much danger of an attack from the Spaniards, for
close as the creek was to the port and town of Nombre, it was still
sufficiently distant to render observation of the presence of the
English ship more than doubtful.  No, it was of the Cimarrones that Dyer
was apprehensive, for if by any chance the presence of the ship in the
creek should be prematurely discovered by these, an attack by them upon
her would be more than likely to follow.  For so deadly was the hatred
borne by these savages for the Spaniards that, to find a few of the
latter isolated and apparently at their mercy was quite sufficient
inducement to the former to attack them.  And so ignorant were the
Cimarrones that they could scarcely discriminate between an Englishman
and a Spaniard, and were equally ready to attack either--both being
white--on the general principle that it was better that the innocent
should suffer than that the guilty should escape.  Yet Drake had already
proved that they bore no hatred to white men, as such, for he had been
in touch with them during the previous year, and had found them quite
disposed to be friendly when once it had been satisfactorily
demonstrated that the English were not Spaniards and were, like
themselves, the enemies of the Dons.  The great thing, of course, was to
get into touch with the savages and to establish friendly relations with
them before they should find and attack the English.

A sharp look-out was therefore maintained on board the _Nonsuch_
throughout the hours of darkness, but the night passed uneventfully,
except for the frequent recurrence of certain mysterious sounds
emanating from the woods, which Dyer privately informed George were
produced by monkeys or a prowling jaguar, and which, innocent enough in
themselves, were yet sufficiently uncommon to keep the watch broad awake
and on the alert; and at length the dawn of a new day came stealing to
them over the tree-tops, and, with it, the dissipation of their
apprehensions.

As soon as it was light enough to see, the crew, refreshed by a whole
night's rest, went to breakfast; immediately after which they turned to,
under the supervision of Basset and the boatswain, to make every
necessary preparation for the boat attack upon Nombre de Dios, while
George and Dyer, armed to the teeth, were put ashore and went in quest
of the Cimarrones.

The young captain caused himself and the pilot to be landed upon the
western extremity of the small sandy beach which, fringed with coconut
palms, half encircled the creek, and bidding their small boat's crew
push off a spear's cast from the shore and there hold themselves in
readiness to dash in to the rescue, if necessary, upon hearing the blast
of the captain's whistle, proceeded to walk slowly round the cove,
carefully examining the surface of the sand, as they went, in quest of
footprints to serve as a guide, while Dyer at frequent intervals raised
his hands trumpet-wise to his mouth and gave utterance to a peculiar,
penetrating wailing cry which the pilot asserted was a call used by the
Cimarrones to summon their comrades.

When they had traversed about two-thirds of the length of the beach
certain marks were discovered in the fine, yielding sand, which, they
decided, were prints of naked feet, several days old, and, carefully
following these, they at length discovered a narrow but tolerably well
defined footpath leading from the shore into the heart of the high
woods.  This they at once proceeded to follow, George leading the way
with his drawn sword in his right hand and a musket in his left, while
Dyer, close behind him, assiduously repeated his mysterious call at
frequent intervals.

At a distance of but a few yards from the beach the sombre shadow of the
woods was so deep that the explorers at first found it exceedingly
difficult to trace the footpath in the subdued light, but in the course
of a few minutes their eyes grew accustomed to the gloom and they were
able to perceive something of their more immediate surroundings.  They
found themselves hemmed-in on every hand by giant tree trunks, dimly
revealed in the green twilight which penetrated with difficulty the vast
overarching masses of foliage, the space between the enormous trunks
being choked with undergrowth of a thousand varied forms, conspicuous
among which were immense ferns towering high above their heads, while
above these, and drooping in many cases right down to the ground, was an
inextricable maze and tangle of lianas, or "monkey rope," intertwined
with which were countless festoons of flowering creepers, the mingled
perfumes of which were almost overpowering in their pungency.  Long
pliant twigs thickly studded with needle-sharp thorns constantly
protruded across the path, menacing their faces and tenaciously
grappling their clothing, so that they had to halt at almost every other
step to free themselves; and frequent quick rustlings among the long
tangled herbage underfoot warned them of the presence of many hidden
creeping things, some at least of which, as Dyer grimly suggested, were
certain to be snakes or some other kind of venomous creature.  The truth
of this was very soon afterward rather unpleasantly demonstrated, for as
George was battling with an exceptionally thick tangle of thorns which
obstructed his way, he suddenly felt beneath his right foot a thick,
cable-like something that yielded and squirmed beneath his tread, and
like a flash there came a fierce hiss instantly followed by a sharp blow
upon his boot.  He at once realised that it was a snake upon which he
was treading, and had enough presence of mind to throw his whole, weight
upon his right foot, thus pinning the reptile firmly to the ground.  The
blows upon his boot were repeated some half a dozen times before he was
able to clear away the herbage about his feet, when he found that he was
standing upon the body of a most ugly and repulsive-looking snake about
five feet long, thick in the body, blunt tailed, of a dark olive green
colour, variegated with irregular blotches of darker tint, and having
the broad, flat, heart-shaped head that marked it as a venomous species.
It was striking fiercely but rather ineffectually, because of its
constrained position, at his boot, while its tail part was coiled
tightly about his boot leg.  A quick and lucky stroke of his sharp
sword-blade whipped off the cruel head, and then, stooping down, George
saw that his boot had been several times partially punctured by the long
poison fangs.  Fortunately for him he had, at Dyer's suggestion, donned
a pair of long sea boots of thick leather which had become hardened by
frequent washings of salt water, and thus the fangs had failed to
penetrate, to which fact he undoubtedly owed his life.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

HOW THE ENGLISHMEN TOOK NOMBRE DE DIOS.

For fully two miles the adventurers pursued their devious course through
the tropical forest, sometimes groping their way cautiously through the
deep green twilight, and anon almost blinded by a sudden glare of
dazzling sunshine, as they emerged into an open space caused either by
fire or a windfall, and all the time Dyer kept up the curious cry, at
frequent intervals, which was the call of the Cimarrones.  And all the
time, too, they were accompanied by a constantly increasing company of
monkeys of various kinds who, led no doubt by curiosity, went swinging
and springing from branch to branch beside and above the pathway,
exchanging strange cries which, Dyer averred, were remarks upon the
personal appearance of the strangers, uttered in monkey language!

Nor were monkeys and snakes the only inmates of the forest, for they had
scarcely progressed a quarter of a mile beyond the spot where the snake
had been encountered when a great creature like a long-legged cat, but
standing over thirty inches high at the shoulder, suddenly emerged from
the tangled underwood and halted abruptly, staring at the approaching
strangers for a few seconds before, with an angry snarl, it bounded out
of sight down the path.  It was not easy to detect its colour and
markings in that dim light, but its shape stood out clear and sharply
denned against the brilliant sunlight streaming down into a windfall
just beyond, and Dyer pronounced it to be a jaguar.  Then, a little
farther on, they had just sighted the glint of water between the trees
some distance away on their left front, when a heavy crashing was
suddenly heard among the underbush, and a moment later a creature about
the size of a half-grown calf was glimpsed trotting heavily towards the
water.  As in the case of the jaguar, its colour could not be
distinguished, but its shape was very remarkable.  Dyer compared it to a
pig with exceptionally thick legs and a peculiar, elongated snout; and
that was about as near as he could reasonably be expected to get to it.
It subsequently became known to natural historians as the tapir.

It was about a quarter of an hour afterwards that an answering cry to
Dyer's signal shout was first heard, and some five minutes later, as the
two Englishmen emerged from the gloom of the forest and entered a
natural clearing of about fifteen acres in extent, they were suddenly
confronted by six big, stalwart blacks, who barred their further
progress with threatening spears of most formidable appearance.  These
men seemed to be a cross between the African negro and the Indian of
Central America, for they were somewhat lighter of colour and slighter
of build than the negro, while their black hair hung down to their
shoulders in crisp curls.  They were naked, save for a skin apron girt
about their loins; and by way of ornament they wore necklaces composed
of the teeth and claws of animals and the beaks of birds strung upon
thin strips of hide.  They also all wore bits of bone thrust through the
lobes of their ears.

The individual who appeared to be the leader of the party addressed the
two white men in a somewhat thick, throaty tone of voice, but in
language of which the Englishmen were quite ignorant, the only thing
that was at all clear being that it was a question of some sort that he
was propounding.

"Speak you to un, cap'n," said Dyer.  "I don't understand their lingo,
but I think most of 'em understands Spanish.  Cap'n Drake could always
make hisself understood."

The six blacks gazed intently at Dyer as he spoke, apparently striving
to gather some conception of the meaning of his words, and George
noticed that at the mention of Drake's name they all started, while two
or three of them murmured to each other, "Drake--Drake--_El Draque_?"
questioningly.  He at once jumped to the conclusion that Drake's name
was familiar to them, and promptly acted upon the assumption.

"Yes," he said in Spanish, "we are friends of _El Draque_.  Do you
remember him?"

"_Si, senor_," answered the leader of the party eagerly, also in a
mongrel kind of Spanish which George was able to comprehend without very
much difficulty.  "Yes, we remember _El Draque_, the great white chief
and the enemy of our enemy the Spaniard.  Is he here again?"

"No," answered George, "I regret to say that he is not; the Great White
Queen needed his services, so he could not come.  But I have come in his
stead to punish the Spaniards for their treachery to him last year, and
I want some information concerning Nombre de Dios.  Can you give it me?
You are Cimarrones, are you not?"

"_Si, senor, si_," answered the black; "we are Cimarrones; and perhaps
our chief may be able to tell you what you wish to know about Nombre.
Will you come to our village?  It lies yonder."

And, indeed, in the far corner of the clearing George could now
distinguish a small village consisting of about thirty low huts huddled
together in the bordering shadow of the next belt of high timber.  The
path from the wood zigzagged across the clearing, winding here to avoid
an enormous stump, and there to pass round a fallen tree--for the
Cimarrones were far too lazy to attempt what they regarded as the
unnecessary labour of clearing away obstacles--but trending generally
toward the conglomeration of huts in the far corner of the clearing.

The village of Lukabela--so named after its chief--did not favourably
impress George Saint Leger, when the little party presently reached it.
It was the young Englishman's first introduction to actual savagedom,
and the filthy condition of the huts and their surroundings, the lean
and hungry look of the pack of snarling village dogs which rushed out to
meet them, red-eyed with semi-starvation and ferocity, and with bared
fangs, ferocious as wild beasts and only restrained from attack by the
presence of the native escort, and the overpowering reek of many mingled
forms of dirt and decay which pervaded the place, were in the last
degree repulsive to the somewhat fastidious young man.  But this was
only a first impression, and it quickly yielded to one of admiration
when, as the villagers poured out of their huts to learn the cause of
the unwonted excitement of their dogs, George noted with appreciative
eyes the splendid physique of the men and women who constituted its
inhabitants.  They were of mixed breed, ranging from the robust, full-
blooded African negro to the slimmer and slighter figure of the Central
American Indian with long, straight, black hair and copper-coloured
skin.  But these were the extreme types; the majority were a mixture of
the two races, and the mingling of African and American blood appeared
to have had a beneficent effect upon both, the product being an
individual of less bulky frame perhaps than his negro progenitor, but
lithe, active, supple, and apparently of tireless endurance, superior in
intelligence, courage, and good looks to either of the extremes.

The appearance of the two white men, escorted by half a dozen of their
own tribe, but apparently not as prisoners, was productive of tremendous
excitement among the villagers, to whom such an occurrence was almost
unique, for they had only known it to occur once before; but the
excitement soon became passive when the leader of the party who had
found George and Dyer explained in a few words that the strangers were
Englishmen and friends of _El Draque_, and that they had landed from a
big canoe, in which they had crossed the Great Water, in order to obtain
certain information concerning the city of Nombre.

The tale was scarcely told when there emerged from a hut somewhat larger
than the others an individual who, in addition to the apron round his
loins, wore a cloak composed entirely of feathers of the most varied and
beautiful colours, worked into a sort of pattern, and a coronet made of
wing and tail feathers bound about his brows.  This was of course
Lukabela, the village chieftain, and as George beheld the man coming
forward attired in all his finery, he more than suspected that Lukabela
had purposely delayed his appearance in order to gain time for the
assumption of those symbols of his rank.

Lukabela, petty chieftain of the Cimarrones, was certainly a very fine
and imposing figure of a man, as tall as George, with a body and limbs
that might have been modelled by a Greek sculptor, and a rather small
head.  His features were well shaped, his expression keenly intelligent,
indomitably resolute, fearless, and somewhat haughty, and there was a
certain hardness about the chiselling of his mouth that suggested
cruelty.  But he listened gravely, yet with a certain restraint, as
George explained to him in Spanish the object of his and Dyer's inland
journey; and when, in the course of his explanation, George mentioned
that _El Draque_ was a personal friend of his, Lukabela's reserve
vanished, and he cordially invited the two Englishmen to enter his hut
and partake of his hospitality.  Oldbuck then took up the subject of
Ossian, Macpherson, and Mac-Cribb; but Lord Glenallan had never so much
as heard of any of the three, so little conversant had he been
with modern literature. The conversation was now in some danger of
flagging, or of falling into the hands of Mr.

Blattergowl, who had just pronounced the formidable word, "teind-free,"
when the subject of the French Revolution was started--a political
event on which Lord Glenallan looked with all the prejudiced horror of
a bigoted Catholic and zealous aristocrat. Oldbuck was far from carrying
his detestation of its principles to such a length.

"There were many men in the first Constituent Assembly," he said, "who
held sound Whiggish doctrines, and were for settling the Constitution
with a proper provision for the liberties of the people. And if a set
of furious madmen were now in possession of the government, it was,"
he continued, "what often happened in great revolutions, where
extreme measures are adopted in the fury of the moment, and the State
resembles an agitated pendulum which swings from side to side for some
time ere it can acquire its due and perpendicular station. Or it might
be likened to a storm or hurricane, which, passing over a region, does
great damage in its passage, yet sweeps away stagnant and unwholesome
vapours, and repays, in future health and fertility, its immediate
desolation and ravage."
The Earl shook his head; but having neither spirit nor inclination
for debate, he suffered the argument to pass uncontested.

This discussion served to introduce the young soldier's experiences; and
he spoke of the actions in which he, had been engaged, with modesty,
and at the same time with an air of spirit and zeal which delighted the
Earl, who had been bred up, like others of his house, in the opinion
that the trade of arms was the first duty of man, and believed that to
employ them against the French was a sort of holy warfare.

"What would I give," said he apart to Oldbuck, as they rose to join
the ladies in the drawing-room, "what would I give to have a son of
such spirit as that young gentleman!--He wants something of address and
manner, something of polish, which mixing in good society would soon
give him; but with what zeal and animation he expresses himself--how
fond of his profession--how loud in the praise of others--how modest
when speaking of himself!"
"Hector is much obliged to you, my lord," replied his uncle, gratified,
yet not so much so as to suppress his consciousness of his own mental
superiority over the young soldier; "I believe in my heart nobody
ever spoke half so much good of him before, except perhaps the sergeant
of his company, when was wheedling a Highland recruit to enlist with
him. He is a good lad notwithstanding, although he be not quite the hero
your lordship supposes him, and although my commendations rather attest
the kindness than the vivacity of his character. In fact, his high spirit
is a sort of constitutional vehemence, which attends him in everything
he sets about, and is often very inconvenient to his friends. I saw him
to-day engage in an animated contest with a _phoca,_ or seal (_sealgh,_
our people more properly call them, retaining the Gothic guttural _gh_),
with as much vehemence as if he had fought against Dumourier--Marry,
my lord, the _phoca_ had the better, as the said Dumourier had of some
other folks. And he'll talk with equal if not superior rapture of the
good behaviour of a pointer bitch, as of the plan of a campaign."
"He shall have full permission to sport over my grounds," said the Earl,
"if he is so fond of that exercise."
"You will bind him to you, my lord," said Monkbarns, "body and soul: give
him leave to crack off his birding-piece at a poor covey of
partridges or moor-fowl, and he's yours for ever--I will enchant
him by the intelligence.

But O, my lord, that you could have seen my phoenix Lovel!
--the very prince and chieftain of the youth of this age; and not destitute
of spirit neither--I promise you he gave my termagant kinsman a _quid
pro quo_--a Rowland for his Oliver, as the vulgar say, alluding to the
two celebrated Paladins of Charlemagne."
After coffee, Lord Glenallan requested a private interview with the
Antiquary, and was ushered to his library.

"I must withdraw you from your own amiable family," he said, "to involve
you in the perplexities of an unhappy man. You are acquainted with the
world, from which I have long been banished; for Glenallan House has
been to me rather a prison than a dwelling, although a prison which
I had neither fortitude nor spirit to break from."
"Let me first ask your lordship," said the Antiquary, "what are your own
wishes and designs in this matter?"
"I wish most especially," answered Lord Glenallan, "to declare my luckless
marriage, and to vindicate the reputation of the unhappy
Eveline--that is, if you see a possibility of doing so without making
public the conduct of my mother."
"_Suum cuique tribuito,_" said the Antiquary; "do right to everyone.
The memory of that unhappy young lady has too long suffered, and I think
it might be cleared without further impeaching that of your mother,
than by letting it be understood in general that she greatly
disapproved and bitterly opposed the match. All--forgive me, my lord--all
who ever heard of the late Countess of Glenallan, will learn
that without much surprise."
"But you forget one horrible circumstance, Mr.

Oldbuck," said the Earl, in an agitated voice.

"I am not aware of it," replied the Antiquary.

"The fate of the infant--its disappearance with the confidential
attendant of my mother, and the dreadful surmises which may be drawn
from my conversation with Elspeth."
"If you would have my free opinion, my lord," answered Mr. Oldbuck, "and
will not catch too rapidly at it as matter of hope, I would say that
it is very possible the child yet lives. For thus much I ascertained, by
my former inquiries concerning the event of that deplorable evening,
that a child and woman were carried that night from the cottage at the
Craigburnfoot in a carriage and four by your brother Edward Geraldin
Neville, whose journey towards England with these companions I
traced for several stages.

I believed then it was a part of the family compact to carry a child whom
you meant to stigmatize with illegitimacy, out of that country where
chance might have raised protectors and proofs of its rights. But I
now think that your brother, having reason, like yourself, to believe
the child stained with shame yet more indelible, had nevertheless
withdrawn it, partly from regard to the honour of his house, partly
from the risk to which it might have been exposed in the neighbourhood
of the Lady Glenallan."
As he spoke, the Earl of Glenallan grew extremely pale, and had nearly
fallen from his chair.--The alarmed Antiquary ran hither and thither
looking for remedies; but his museum, though sufficiently well
filled with a vast variety of useless matters, contained nothing
that could be serviceable on the present or any other occasion.

As he posted out of the room to borrow his sister's salts, he could not
help giving a constitutional growl of chagrin and wonder at the various
incidents which had converted his mansion, first into an hospital for a
wounded duellist, and now into the sick chamber of a dying nobleman.
"And yet," said he, "I have always kept aloof from the soldiery and the
peerage. My _coenobitium_ has only next to be made a lying-in hospital,
and then, I trow, the transformation will be complete."
When he returned with the remedy, Lord Glenallan was much better. The
new and unexpected light which Mr. Oldbuck had thrown upon the
melancholy history of his family had almost overpowered him. "You
think, then, Mr.
Oldbuck--for you are capable of thinking, which I am not--you think,
then, that it is possible--that is, not impossible--my child may yet
live?"
"I think," said the Antiquary, "it is impossible that it could
come to any violent harm through your brother's means. He was known to
be a gay and dissipated man, but not cruel nor dishonourable; nor is
it possible, that, if he had intended any foul play, he would have
placed himself so forward in the charge of the infant, as I will
prove to your lordship he did."
So saying, Mr. Oldbuck opened a drawer of the cabinet of his ancestor
Aldobrand, and produced a bundle of papers tied with a black ribband,
and labelled,--Examinations, etc., taken by Jonathan Oldbuck, J.
P., upon the 18th of February, 17--; a little under was written, in a
small hand, _Eheu Evelina_! The tears dropped fast from the Earl's eyes,
as he endeavoured, in vain, to unfasten the knot which secured these
documents.

"Your lordship," said Mr. Oldbuck, "had better not read these at
present.
Agitated as you are, and having much business before you, you must
not exhaust your strength.

Your brother's succession is now, I presume, your own, and it will be
easy for you to make inquiry among his servants and retainers, so as to
hear where the child is, if, fortunately, it shall be still alive."

"I dare hardly hope it," said the Earl, with a deep sigh. "Why should
my brother have been silent to me?"
"Nay, my lord, why should he have communicated to your lordship the
existence of a being whom you must have supposed the offspring of"--
"Most true--there is an obvious and a kind reason for his being silent.

If anything, indeed, could have added to the horror of the ghastly
dream that has poisoned my whole existence, it must have been the
knowledge that such a child of misery existed."
"Then," continued the Antiquary, "although it would be rash to conclude,
at the distance of more than twenty years, that your son must needs be
still alive because he was not destroyed in infancy, I own I think you
should instantly set on foot inquiries."
"It shall be done," replied Lord Glenallan, catching eagerly at the hope
held out to him, the first he had nourished for many years;--"I will
write to a faithful steward of my father, who acted in the same
capacity under my brother Neville--But, Mr. Oldbuck, I am not my
brother's heir."

"Indeed!--I am sorry for that, my lord--it is a noble estate, and the
ruins of the old castle of Neville's-Burgh alone, which are the most
superb relics of Anglo-Norman architecture in that part of the
country, are a possession much to be coveted. I thought your father had
no other son or near relative."
"He had not, Mr. Oldbuck," replied Lord Glenallan; "but my brother adopted
views in politics, and a form of religion, alien from those which had
been always held by our house. Our tempers had long differed, nor did
my unhappy mother always think him sufficiently observant to her. In
short, there was a family quarrel, and my brother, whose property was
at his own free disposal, availed himself of the power vested in
him to choose a stranger for his heir. It is a matter which never
struck me as being of the least consequence--for if worldly possessions
could alleviate misery, I have enough and to spare. But now I shall
regret it, if it throws any difficulty in the way of our inquiries--and
I bethink me that it may; for in case of my having a lawful son of my
body, and my brother dying without issue, my father's possessions
stood entailed upon my son. It is not therefore likely that this heir,
be he who he may, will afford us assistance in making a discovery which
may turn out so much to his own prejudice."
"And in all probability the steward your lordship mentions is also
in his service," said the Antiquary.

"It is most likely; and the man being a Protestant--how far it is safe
to entrust him"--
"I should hope, my lord," said Oldbuck gravely, "that a Protestant may
be as trustworthy as a Catholic. I am doubly interested in the Protestant
faith, my lord. My ancestor, Aldobrand Oldenbuck, printed the celebrated
Confession of Augsburg, as I can show by the original edition now in
this house."
"I have not the least doubt of what you say, Mr. Oldbuck," replied the
Earl, "nor do I speak out of bigotry or intolerance; but probably
the Protestant steward will favour the Protestant heir rather
than the Catholic--if, indeed, my son has been bred in his father's
faith--or, alas! if indeed he yet lives."
"We must look close into this," said Oldbuck, "before committing
ourselves. I have a literary friend at York, with whom I have
long corresponded on the subject of the Saxon horn that is preserved
in the Minster there; we interchanged letters for six years, and have
only as yet been able to settle the first line of the inscription. I
will write forthwith to this gentleman, Dr. Dryasdust, and be particular
in my inquiries concerning the character, etc., of your brother's heir,
of the gentleman employed in his affairs, and what else may be likely
to further your lordship's inquiries. In the meantime your lordship
will collect the evidence of the marriage, which I hope can still be
recovered?"

"Unquestionably," replied the Earl: "the witnesses, who were formerly
withdrawn from your research, are still living. My tutor, who solemnized
the marriage, was provided for by a living in France, and has
lately returned to this country as an emigrant, a victim of his zeal
for loyalty, legitimacy, and religion."
"That's one lucky consequence of the French, revolution, my lord--you
must allow that, at least," said Oldbuck: "but no offence; I will act
as warmly in your affairs as if I were of your own faith in politics and
religion. And take my advice--If you want an affair of consequence
properly managed, put it into the hands of an antiquary; for as
they are eternally exercising their genius and research upon trifles,
it is impossible they can be baffled in affairs of importance;--use
makes perfect--and the corps that is most frequently drilled
upon the parade, will be most prompt in its exercise upon the day of
battle. And, talking upon that subject, I would willingly read to your
lordship, in order to pass away the time betwixt and supper"--
"I beg I may not interfere with family arrangements," said Lord Glenallan,
"but I never taste anything after sunset."
"Nor I either, my lord," answered his host, "notwithstanding it is
said to have been the custom of the ancients. But then I dine differently
from your lordship, and therefore am better enabled to dispense
with those elaborate entertainments which my womankind (that is, my
sister and niece, my lord) are apt to place on the table, for the display
rather of their own house-wifery than the accommodation of our wants.
However, a broiled bone, or a smoked haddock, or an oyster, or a slice
of bacon of our own curing, with a toast and a tankard--or something or
other of that sort, to close the orifice of the stomach before going
to bed, does not fall under my restriction, nor, I hope, under your
lordship's."
"My no-supper is literal, Mr. Oldbuck; but I will attend you at your
meal with pleasure."

"Well, my lord," replied the Antiquary, "I will endeavour to entertain
your ears at least, since I cannot banquet your palate. What I am about
to read to your lordship relates to the upland glens."
Lord Glenallan, though he would rather have recurred to the subject of
his own uncertainties, was compelled to make a sign of rueful civility
and acquiescence.

The Antiquary, therefore, took out his portfolio of loose sheets, and
after premising that the topographical details here laid down were
designed to illustrate a slight essay upon castrametation, which had
been read with indulgence at several societies of Antiquaries, he
commenced as follows: "The subject, my lord, is the hill-fort of
Quickens-bog, with the site of which your lordship is doubtless
familiar--it is upon your store-farm of Mantanner, in the barony of
Clochnaben."
"I think I have heard the names of these places," said the Earl, in
answer to the Antiquary's appeal.

"Heard the name? and the farm brings him six hundred a-year--O Lord!"
Such was the scarce-subdued ejaculation of the Antiquary. But his
hospitality got the better of his surprise, and he proceeded to read his
essay with an audible voice, in great glee at having secured a patient,
and, as he fondly hoped, an interested hearer.

"Quickens-bog may at first seem to derive its name from the plant
_Quicken,_ by which, _Scottice,_ we understand couch-grass, dog-grass,
or the _Triticum repens_ of Linnaeus, and the common English monosyllable
_Bog,_ by which we mean, in popular language, a marsh or morass--in
Latin, _Palus._ But it may confound the rash adopters of the more
obvious etymological derivations, to learn that the couch-grass
or dog-grass, or, to speak scientifically, the _Triticum repens_ of
Linnaeus, does not grow within a quarter of a mile of this castrum
or hill-fort, whose ramparts are uniformly clothed with short verdant
turf; and that we must seek a bog or _palus_ at a still greater distance,
the nearest being that of Gird-the-mear, a full half-mile distant. The
last syllable, _bog,_ is obviously, therefore, a mere corruption of the
Saxon _Burgh,_ which we find in the various transmutations of _Burgh,
Burrow, Brough, Bruff, Buff,_ and _Boff,_ which last approaches
very near the sound in question --since, supposing the word to have
been originally _borgh,_ which is the genuine Saxon spelling, a slight
change, such as modern organs too often make upon ancient sounds, will
produce first _Bogh,_ and then, _elisa H,_ or compromising and sinking
the guttural, agreeable to the common vernacular practice, you have either
_Boff_ or _Bog_ as it happens. The word _Quickens_ requires in like
manner to be altered,--decomposed, as it were,--and reduced to its
original and genuine sound, ere we can discern its real meaning. By
the ordinary exchange of the _Qu_ into _Wh,_ familiar to the rudest
tyro who has opened a book of old Scottish poetry, we gain either
Whilkens, or Whichensborgh--put we may suppose, by way of question, as
if those who imposed the name, struck with the extreme antiquity
of the place, had expressed in it an interrogation, To whom did this
fortress belong?'--Or, it might be _Whackens-burgh,_ from the Saxon
_Whacken,_ to strike with the hand, as doubtless the skirmishes near a
place of such apparent consequence must have legitimated such a
derivation," etc. etc. etc.

I will be more merciful to my readers than Oldbuck was to his guest; for,
considering his opportunities of gaining patient attention from a person
of such consequence as Lord Glenallan were not many, he used, or rather
abused, the present to the uttermost.

CHAPTER FIFTEENTH.

Crabbed age and youth Cannot live together:-- Youth is full of
pleasance, Age is full of care; Youth like summer morn, Age like
winter weather; Youth like summer brave, Age like winter bare.

Shakspeare.

In the morning of the following day, the Antiquary, who was something
of a sluggard, was summoned from his bed a full hour earlier than his
custom by Caxon. "What's the matter now?" he exclaimed, yawning and
stretching forth his hand to the huge gold repeater, which, bedded
upon his India silk handkerchief, was laid safe by his pillow--"what's
the matter now, Caxon?

--it can't be eight o'clock yet."
"Na, sir,--but my lord's man sought me out, for he fancies me your
honour's valley-de-sham,--and sae I am, there's nae doubt o't, baith your
honour's and the minister's--at least ye hae nae other that I ken
o'--and I gie a help to Sir Arthur too, but that's mair in the way
o' my profession."
"Well, well--never mind that," said the Antiquary--"happy is he that is
his own valley-de-sham, as you call it--But why disturb my morning's
rest?"
"Ou, sir, the great man's been up since peep o' day, and he's steered
the town to get awa an express to fetch his carriage, and it will be
here briefly, and he wad like to see your honour afore he gaes awa."

"Gadso!" ejaculated Oldbuck, "these great men use one's house and time
as if they were their own property. Well, it's once and away.

Has Jenny come to her senses yet, Caxon?"
"Troth, sir, but just middling," replied the barber; "she's been in
a swither about the jocolate this morning, and was like to hae
toomed it a' out into the slap-bason, and drank it hersell in her
ecstacies--but she's won ower wi't, wi' the help o' Miss M'Intyre."

"Then all my womankind are on foot and scrambling, and I must enjoy
my quiet bed no longer, if I would have a well-regulated house--Lend
me my gown.

And what are the news at Fairport?"
"Ou, sir, what can they be about but this grand news o' my lord," answered
the old man, "that hasna been ower the door-stane, they threep to
me, for this twenty years--this grand news of his coming to visit
your honour?"

"Aha!" said Monkbarns; "and what do they say of that, Caxon?"
"'Deed, sir, they hae various opinions.

Thae fallows, that are the democraws, as they ca' them, that are again'
the king and the law, and hairpowder and dressing o' gentlemen's wigs--a
wheen blackguards--they say he's come doun to speak wi' your honour
about bringing doun his hill lads and Highland tenantry to break up
the meetings of the Friends o' the People;--and when I said your
honour never meddled wi' the like o' sic things where there was like
to be straiks and bloodshed, they said, if ye didna, your nevoy did,
and that he was weel ken'd to be a kingsman that wad fight knee-deep, and
that ye were the head and he was the hand, and that the Yerl was to
bring out the men and the siller."
"Come," said the Antiquary, laughing--"I am glad the war is
to cost me nothing but counsel."
"Na, na," said Caxon--"naebody thinks your honour wad either fight
yoursell, or gie ony feck o' siller to ony side o' the question."
"Umph! well, that's the opinion of the democraws, as you call
them--What say the rest o' Fairport?"
"In troth," said the candid reporter, "I canna say it's muckle
better.
Captain Coquet, of the volunteers--that's him that's to be the new
collector,--and some of the other gentlemen of the Blue and a' Blue
Club, are just saying it's no right to let popists, that hae sae
mony French friends as the Yerl of Glenallan, gang through the
country, and--but your honour will maybe be angry?"
"Not I, Caxon," said Oldbuck; "fire away as if you were Captain
Coquet's whole platoon--I can stand it."
"Weel then, they say, sir, that as ye didna encourage the petition
about the peace, and wadna petition in favour of the new tax, and
as you were again' bringing in the yeomanry at the meal mob, but
just for settling the folk wi' the constables--they say ye're no a
gude friend to government; and that thae sort o' meetings between
sic a powerfu' man as the Yerl, and sic a wise man as you,--Od they
think they suld be lookit after; and some say ye should baith be
shankit aff till Edinburgh Castle."
"On my word," said the Antiquary, "I am infinitely obliged to my
neighbours for their good opinion of me! And so I, that have never
interfered with their bickerings, but to recommend quiet and moderate
measures, am given up on both sides as a man very likely to commit
high treason, either against King or People?--Give me my coat,
Caxon--give me my coat;--it's lucky I live not in their report.
Have you heard anything of Taffril and his vessel?"
Caxon's countenance fell.--"Na, sir, and the winds hae been high,
and this is a fearfu' coast to cruise on in thae eastern gales,--the
headlands rin sae far out, that a veshel's embayed afore I could
sharp a razor; and then there's nae harbour or city of refuge on
our coast--a' craigs and breakers;--a veshel that rins ashore wi'
us flees asunder like the powther when I shake the pluff--and it's
as ill to gather ony o't again.And when that has been done I
shall have the honour to explain to your Excellency the precise nature
of the business which has brought me to Nombre."

Don Sebastian bowed smilingly, displaying a very fine set of even, white
teeth, of which he was quite pardonably proud.  This, however, was
merely a habit, for he was not thinking of his teeth just then.  What he
was thinking was that it was an atrocious misfortune that the city of
which he had the honour to be Governor should have been selected for
attack by these truculent English, who were no doubt bent upon avenging
the reverse of their fellow-countrymen at San Juan during the previous
year.  But if this were the case, why had they not attacked San Juan,
instead of coming to Nombre to make trouble and bring about his ruin?
For the statement which this great hulking boy captain had just made to
him showed clearly enough that he and his party could not be driven out
of Nombre without desperate fighting, accompanied by tremendous loss of
life and ruinous destruction of property, if indeed it could be achieved
at all, with a garrison of less than one hundred and fifty men, fifty of
whom constituted the garrison of the shore battery and were now
prisoners, if the young Englishman spoke the truth, which Don Sebastian
did not doubt.  No, clearly, fighting was not to be thought of,
excepting possibly as a very last resource.  But he, Don Sebastian, was
a man of the world, a man of mature experience in the ways of diplomacy,
and surely far more than a match, in this respect, for the simple-
looking lad who stood there staring at him so solemnly.  Yes, diplomacy
was undoubtedly the way out of this unfortunate scrape; the Englishman
must be made to realise that the capture of Nombre was a stupid mistake,
out of which neither honour nor profit was to be gained; and once
convinced of this, he would perhaps withdraw himself and his forces
peaceably.  These thoughts flashed through Don Sebastian's brain while
George was still speaking; and by the time that the latter had finished,
His Excellency had formulated his plans and was ready to reply.  Hence
his benignant smile, which was intended to suggest also a tinge of
sarcasm and incredulity.

"Senor," he said, "I will not be so presumptuous as to suggest the
slightest doubt of your own conviction that the city of Nombre de Dios
is absolutely at your mercy.  But you must pardon me if I decline to
share that conviction.  I know the strength and courage of the troops
who constitute our present garrison, and, without for a moment casting
the slightest reflection upon the strength or courage of your own
people, you must permit me to believe that, should we unhappily be
driven to resort to force of arms, we could drive you and yours into the
sea.  But I trust," he continued hastily, in response to a certain gleam
in George's eye that had not escaped his notice, "we may not be forced
to the adoption of any such extreme measure.  For I may as well inform
you at once that if you have come hither with any thought of pillage,
you are too late; the plate fleet left here nearly two months ago with
the year's accumulations of treasure, and our treasure-house is at the
moment absolutely empty, as I am prepared to prove to you by taking you
to it, if you doubt my word.  And, this being the case, I trust it will
not be difficult for us to come to some amicable arrangement by which
you may be induced to quit Nombre without the resort to measures on
either side which could only result in unnecessary and much to be
deplored bloodshed."

"Senor," answered George, with a deep bow--he was rapidly becoming as
punctiliously courteous of manner as the Spaniards themselves--"I am
charmed and delighted to find you so readily prepared to adopt a
reasonable and friendly attitude in the face of existing circumstances.
I accept unreservedly your statement as to the emptiness of your
treasure-house, and will certainly not put you to the injurious
necessity of proving it by conducting me thither to satisfy myself upon
the point; and I do this the more readily since my visit to Nombre has
no reference whatever to what you are pleased to term pillage.  No; my
object in coming hither was of a quite different kind; and if I have
taken possession of Nombre it is merely in order that I might enjoy the
advantage of being in a position to drive a bargain with the authorities
of the town, should I unhappily find them less amenable to reason than
your Excellency seems disposed to be."

This was excellent, very much better than Don Sebastian had dared to
hope; these English were not bent upon plunder, it would appear; and,
that being the case, he cared very little what else their object might
be; it would be strange indeed if he, a master of the art of diplomacy,
could not get rid of them without a fight, and so not only avoid a
severe reprimand from the Viceroy, but also perhaps earn his hearty
commendation.  Don Sebastian's spirits rose; the imbroglio was but a
petty thing after all; and in imagination he already pictured not only
the peaceful but the friendly departure of the English, and himself
receiving the compliments of the Viceroy upon the tactfulness of his,
Don Sebastian's, management of the affair, which might easily be
represented as being infinitely more serious than it really was.
Therefore he bowed to George more deeply and smiled at him more
expansively than ever as he replied:

"Senor Englishman, I am gratified beyond all power of expression to find
in you so amicable a disposition, and I feel certain that whatever may
be the occasion of the visit with which you have honoured us, neither
you nor I, nor the citizens of Nombre, will have the smallest reason to
regret it.  But perhaps, senor, it has escaped your memory that you have
not yet enlightened me as to that occasion?"

"No," answered George; "oh! no, it has not.  I shall come to that
presently.  But, meanwhile, time is passing, and I should like you to
take those steps I spoke of just now to prevent a collision between your
troops, or the citizens, and my people.  For I warn your Excellency that
if fighting is once permitted to begin it will be exceedingly difficult
to stop it, and before that happens you may find the greater part of
your city in ruins.  Therefore I beg that you will not lose a moment in
adopting the measures which I suggest.  When that is done it will be
time enough for us to talk together about the business which has brought
me hither."


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

HOW THE GOVERNOR OF PANAMA TREATED DON SEBASTIAN'S REQUEST.

The imminence of the danger indicated by the young Englishman appealed
so powerfully to Don Sebastian that he acted upon the suggestion which
accompanied it without further delay, excusing himself to George for
temporarily withdrawing himself, and assuring the young man that not a
moment should be lost in taking every possible precaution to prevent a
collision between his own countrymen and the English.  But he had not
been absent longer than twenty minutes when he re-appeared, in a state
of dismay, to explain that the messengers whom he had dispatched in
various directions were returning, one after another, with the
intimation that they had been turned back by the parties of Englishmen
who were holding the Grand Plaza, who would not permit them to leave the
Square; also they had brought with them the news that from the sounds
which had met their ears, they judged the city to be in a state of
complete turmoil, and fighting imminent.

Now, it happened that the first of these two contingencies had been
entirely overlooked by George, who felt a good deal disturbed also by
the thought that fighting might yet begin despite all his precautions;
he therefore directed Don Sebastian to collect his messengers, and when
this had been done, in the course of a very few minutes, the young
English captain himself went forth with them to the several points in
the Square at which they sought egress, and personally instructed the
various parties of his men to allow the messengers to pass.  Then,
having seen them all safely out of the Square, noted for himself the
signs of disturbance and panic which seemed to everywhere prevail
throughout the city, and issued certain additional instructions to his
own men, George hastened back to Government House, where he found Don
Sebastian anxiously awaiting his return.  He explained to the Don the
state of affairs at that moment existing, so far as he had been able to
ascertain it, expressed the opinion that bloodshed might yet be averted,
and then proceeded to unfold to the Governor the precise nature of the
business that had brought him and his men to Nombre de Dios; that
business being of course the liberation of his brother and such other
prisoners as still remained in the hands of the Spaniards.

"I have already had the honour of explaining to your Excellency," he
said in conclusion, "that I am not here with a view to pillage; I have
exacted from San Juan what I regard as fair and just pecuniary
compensation for the Viceroy's treachery to my friends, Hawkins and
Drake, while they lay in the harbour of that city, a year ago; and, as I
have already pointed out, I have only seized Nombre in order that I may
be in a position to drive a bargain with you.

"Now, I learned from the authorities at San Juan de Ulua that, of the
Englishmen who fell into their hands upon the occasion just referred to,
seventeen--of whom my brother was one--were sentenced to the galleys,
and shipped on board a vessel named the _San Mathias_, bound to this
port.  Now, senor, your city is in my hands, and it is in my power to
sack it, if I will.  But I am prepared to hold the city to ransom upon
ridiculously advantageous terms to you; those terms being simply that,
in return for the surrender of those seventeen Englishmen into my hands,
safe and sound, I will withdraw my men, and retire from Nombre, leaving
the city itself and the property of its inhabitants untouched."

Don Sebastian gasped.  "Senor," he exclaimed, throwing out his hands
appealingly, "how shall I say it?  How shall I make you understand and
believe that you have asked practically the only thing that it is out of
my power to grant?"

"Why?  What do you mean?" demanded George, in his turn.  "Out of your
power to grant?  I do not understand your Excellency.  Do you mean to
tell me that those seventeen men are dead?  That your accursed
Inquisition has claimed them?  Or--what do you mean?"

"I mean, illustrious senor, that not one of those men now remains in
Nombre.  They doubtless came here, since the authorities of San Juan say
so, but--stay now--let me think--yes--if those men ever arrived here
there will doubtless be a record of their arrival, and yes, I seem to
recall some of the circumstances, but the multiplicity of my duties as
Governor of the city renders it difficult to--.  With your permission,
senor, I will summon my secretary; he will doubtless be able to throw
some light upon the affair."

"Pray do so at once, senor," answered George.  "It was solely to gain
intelligence of the whereabouts of those men and to secure their release
that I came to Nombre; and if you cannot at least afford me some
assistance, I am afraid that it will be a bad thing for your city."

"But, noble senor," remonstrated Don Sebastian, "you will surely not
hold Nombre responsible--"

"For the disappearance of those men?" interrupted George.  "Indeed I
will, then, your Excellency, unless you can afford me satisfactory
evidence as to what has become of them."

"Permit me, senor," said Don Sebastian, and smartly struck a small hand
bell on the table.  An attendant almost instantly appeared, to whom the
Governor said peremptorily:

"Find Senor Montalvo, and say that I desire his immediate presence in
this room."

Some five minutes later a smart, dapper-looking young Spaniard entered
and, bowing low, requested to know his Excellency's pleasure.

"Senor Montalvo," said Don Sebastian, "about a year ago a ship named
the--" he hesitated and looked inquiringly at George.

"The _San Mathias_," prompted George.

"Exactly, the _San Mathias_," continued the Governor, "is said to have
arrived here from San Juan de Ulua, bringing from thence seventeen
Englishmen, prisoners, who were sentenced to the galleys--"

"Yes, your Excellency," interrupted the secretary.  "I perfectly
remember the circumstances, for it occurred while you were temporarily
laid up with fever, and I transacted the whole of the business connected
with it."

"Ah!" exclaimed his Excellency, with an air of relief.  "Then that
sufficiently accounts for my very imperfect recollection of the
affair"--with a glance at George to direct the latter's attention to the
explanation.  "Proceed, Senor Montalvo," continued the Governor; "tell
us all that you know concerning the matter."

"Certainly, your Excellency," answered the secretary.  "With your
Excellency's permission I will fetch the official records, containing
the full and complete account of the affair."  And, bowing deeply to Don
Sebastian and George, he hurried away, and presently returned with an
exceedingly bulky volume under his arm.  This he placed on the table,
opened it, referred to an index, and then turned up the required entry.

"Yes," he said, "here we have it: `December 7th, 1568.  Arrived from San
Juan de Ulua, the ship _San Mathias_, Juan Pacheco, master, having on
board seventeen Englishmen captured during an unprovoked attack upon the
plate fleet lying in San Juan harbour, and--'"

"That is a lie," broke in George.  "The English ships were the attacked,
not the attackers.  But--go on."

"--Harbour," resumed the secretary, reading, "`and sentenced by the
Military Commandant to the galleys for life.  Their names are as
follows--'"

"Stop," interrupted George again, and, fumbling in his pocket, he
produced a document--the one that Don Manuel Rebiera had furnished him
with upon the first day of the _Nonsuch's_ visit to San Juan--and
carefully unfolded it.

"Now, proceed with your reading, senor, if you please," he said to the
secretary.

The secretary read out the names of the seventeen English prisoners,
which George found to agree with those recorded in his list.  When the
secretary came to the last name he paused for a moment.

"Yes," assented George, "those names appear to be correct.  Now, the
first thing that I wish to know is--what became of those men?"

"They were confined in the prison here for the space of just one month,"
answered the secretary, "during which communication was made to the
Governor of Panama, stating the circumstances of the case, and
requesting to know whether he could apportion the prisoners among the
galleys stationed at his port, as there are no galleys attached to
Nombre.  The reply was in the affirmative, and on January 8th of this
present year the prisoners were dispatched to Panama in charge of the
escort which had just brought over a consignment of treasure.  The
officer in command of the escort gave his receipt for the persons of the
prisoners, and--that is all that we here in Nombre know about them."

That was all that they there in Nombre knew about them!  And it was to
obtain this trifling scrap of information that the English adventurers
had resorted to such extreme and highhanded action as actually to
capture one of the most important cities on the Spanish Main, and were
now holding possession of it by the skin of their teeth, in the face of
overwhelming numbers, by sheer downright audacity and arrogance of
demeanour!  Young Saint Leger smiled inwardly as the amazing character
of the anti-climax began to force itself upon his notice; and, being a
lad with a keen appreciation of humour, it was with difficulty that he
conquered an almost irresistible inclination to laugh aloud while he
reflected upon the situation.  By an effort of will, however, he
conquered the desire to indulge in untimely mirth--for he fully realised
that he and his followers were standing upon the crumbling brink of a
volcano, and said, with an air of great dissatisfaction and annoyance:

"That is all you can tell me about them!  But, senor, this is really
most unsatisfactory.  For all practical purposes I am no wiser than I
was when I left Saint Juan.  This information will not materially assist
me to find and procure the release of my unfortunate fellow-countrymen.
I am afraid I must ask you to offer me a suggestion.  You must remember
that I am here to avenge and obtain satisfaction for the treacherous
treatment of my countrymen last year, by your King's representative, the
Viceroy of Mexico; and, whatever hardship, or suffering, or loss his
Most Catholic Majesty's lieges in this country may be called upon to
endure at my hands, in my determination to obtain satisfaction for that
outrage, they must lay to the door of his Excellency Don Martin
Enriquez.  Therefore, for your own sakes, I look to you to assist me in
every possible way.  I have explained to you the nature of my business
here, which, I repeat, is to procure the immediate release of those
seventeen unfortunate Englishmen, unjustly doomed to life-long servitude
in your galleys.  How is it to be done?  I look to you for suggestions."

Don Sebastian shrugged his shoulders, and stared helplessly at his
secretary; and the latter, recognising the nature of the appeal conveyed
by his chief's eyes, folded his arms, sank his chin upon his chest, and
proceeded to stalk meditatively to and fro the length of the room.  His
meditations continued for close upon ten minutes, then, as George began
to manifest symptoms of growing impatience, Senor Montalvo flung up his
head with the triumphant air of one who has solved a difficult problem,
and said:

"It appears to me, Excellency, and most noble Adelantado, that the only
thing to be done is for your Excellency to address a letter to the
Governor of Panama, explaining the situation, and requesting his help to
determine the present whereabouts of the prisoners, entrust that letter
to a reliable and intelligent messenger, who fully understands all the
circumstances of the case, and let him confer with his Excellency Don
Silvio as to the steps necessary to secure the satisfaction of the
English senor's demands."

The Governor considered the matter for a few seconds, and then turned to
George.

"There is a suggestion for you, senor, and a very excellent one, I think
I may permit myself to say.  How does it commend itself to you?"

"How far is it from here to Panama, and how long will it take your
messenger to traverse the distance?" demanded George.

"By the Gold Road the distance is a trifle over forty miles, and a well-
mounted messenger can cover it in six hours," answered Don Sebastian.

"So that if he were dispatched at once he could execute his mission, and
be back here in Nombre to-morrow evening?" suggested George.

"_Madre de Dios_!  Is the man mad?" ejaculated Don Sebastian, throwing
up his hands.  Then he turned hastily to George.  "Ten thousand pardons
for my involuntary exclamation," he apologised; "but I fear you scarcely
realise what travelling in this country means.  Upon his arrival in
Panama, my messenger would imperatively need rest, and by the time that
he has refreshed himself it will be too late to see the Governor.  Then,
to-morrow, it may be nearly or quite mid-day before he can obtain
audience of his Excellency; and by the time that the conference is over
and my messenger has secured the required information, it will be
altogether too late for him to start upon the return journey.  Thus I do
not think we can possibly expect him back before the afternoon of the
day after to-morrow.  You agree with me, senor, I am sure."

"No, senor, I do not," retorted George.  "I can see no cause at all for
such delay.  Upon his arrival in Panama, let your messenger proceed at
once to the Governor's house and demand an immediate interview.  Let him
explain that the matter is in the last degree urgent and pressing, and
let him take whatever further steps may be necessary to secure prompt
attention.  And then let him transact his business.  There will be
plenty of time for him to rest and refresh himself when that is done.
And to-morrow, if everything has been satisfactorily arranged, he can
start at dawn, and be here again shortly after mid-day."

"_Carramba_!  With all submission, senor, what you propose is
impossible.  No man could possibly do it," exclaimed Don Sebastian,
throwing up his hands.

"But why not, man, why not?" persisted George.

"Why not?" reiterated the Governor.  "Because, senor, it would kill him,
in this climate."

"It would certainly not kill an Englishman; but, of course, I don't know
about a Spaniard," retorted George.

Senor Montalvo hastened to intervene.  "Pardon, Excellency," he
remarked, bowing to the Governor, "but since the matter appears to be of
such extreme urgency, permit me to undertake the mission to the Governor
of Panama.  Having been privileged to be present at this interview with
the English Adelantado, I think I may venture to say that I clearly
understand the several points in the rather delicate negotiation which
it is proposed to open with his Excellency Don Calderon, and can
probably conduct it as successfully as any other available person.  And
I shall also do my utmost to execute my task with all possible
diligence, ignoring fatigue for the time being and until my task has
been accomplished."

"Very well," replied Don Sebastian, with evident relief.  "I am greatly
obliged to you, Senor Montalvo, for your offer, which I accept.  And
now, while I prepare my communication to Don Silvio, you had better go
and make ready for your journey.  The whole of my stable is entirely at
your service, but if you will permit me to advise, I think you could not
possibly do better than take Josefa, the black mule.  She will carry you
easily and rapidly as far as Venta Cruz, where you will leave her, and
proceed for the remaining half of the journey upon another animal,
picking up Josefa again upon your return.  Now, be off with you, and get
ready; and by the time that your preparations are complete, my letter to
Don Silvio shall be ready."

"Now, senor," he continued, seating himself at a table and drawing
writing materials toward him as soon as the secretary had vanished,
"what am I to say to Don Silvio?  Kindly state your full requirements,
and I will see what can be done toward satisfying them."

George pulled out his list of prisoners, and laid it beside Don
Sebastian on the table.

"My requirements," he said, "are very simple.  All that I ask is the
immediate release and delivery to me of the seventeen Englishmen whose
names are inscribed on that document."

"The _immediate_ release?" reiterated his Excellency.  "But, senor, with
all submission, to demand that may well be to demand the impossible.  If
I may be permitted to express an opinion, I should say that there is
scarcely the remotest probability that any of the men here enumerated
are still within the jurisdiction of the Governor of Panama.  I have not
a doubt that every one of them has, long ere this, been apportioned out
among the various galleys belonging to the port, and in all likelihood
every man is at this moment somewhere at sea.  The utmost that Don
Silvio will probably be able to do will be to indicate the name of the
galley to which each man has been condemned, and perhaps to state, in a
few cases, the present approximate locality of the galleys."

"You think so?" returned George, an ominous frown gathering upon his
brow.  "Then, all I can say, Don Sebastian, is that if the Governor of
Panama can do no more than that, it will be disastrously unfortunate for
you and your city!"

Don Sebastian became visibly paler as he stirred uneasily in his chair,
regarding the young Englishman questioningly and in silence for a few
moments.  Then he said:

"Senor, pardon me if I say that I scarcely understand you.  You surely
cannot mean that you will hold this town responsible for your inability
to obtain possession of the men you seek?"

"You are mistaken, senor, if you imagine any such thing," retorted
George.  "I hold _every_ Spaniard on the continent responsible for the
safety and well-being of those men.  It was by Spanish treachery that
they are at this moment living in hell upon earth--for I know something
of what life as a galley-slave means--and I am going to employ every
possible means at my disposal to bring pressure upon you and your
fellow-countrymen to right the wrong that has been done.  Therefore, I
beg that, in communicating with the Governor of Panama, you will make it
clear to him that, to save Nombre from sack and destruction, he must
exhaust his utmost powers to secure the speedy release of those men."

"But, senor--" began Don Sebastian, remonstratingly.

"Not another word, senor," interrupted George, determinedly.  "What I
have said, I have said.  Tell Don Silvio that I hold the shore battery,
and that, therefore, Nombre de Dios is absolutely at my mercy.  Tell him
also that I am holding you, among others, as a hostage to secure
ourselves from interference or attack by soldiery or civilians, and, in
short, make it clear to him that if those men are not speedily
surrendered to me, the Spaniards will have to pay dearly for them in
blood and treasure.  Now, please proceed with the preparation of your
communication to Don Silvio, for time is flying."

Whereupon, Don Sebastian, clutching his locks with his left hand, took
pen in his right, and proceeded, with a great deal of difficulty, to
draft a letter setting forth in cold black and white the critical state
of affairs then existing in Nombre, and urgently entreating the Governor
of Panama to leave no stone unturned to find and surrender the seventeen
Englishmen, on account of whom all this fuss and pother was being made,
lest worse come of it.  The Don was not a particularly fluent
correspondent, but he grew almost eloquent when he strove to impress
upon his fellow-governor the inexorable determination displayed by the
young English captain, and he wound up by quoting two or three Spanish
proverbs to the effect that of two evils it was always best to choose
the lesser, and that it was folly to cut off one's nose to spite one's
face, these being intended to support Don Sebastian's contention that it
would be better to surrender the Englishmen and forego one's righteous
desire to revenge oneself upon them, rather than that a Spanish town
like Nombre de Dios should be subjected to the horrors of sack and
pillage.  The fair copy of the letter, after the draft had been
submitted for George's approval, was still in process of being written
when Senor Montalvo, booted and spurred, and otherwise dressed for the
road, made his appearance.  The letter, however, was finished at last,
signed, sealed with the official seal, and handed to the secretary, who,
a minute later, mounted upon Josefa, the black mule, went clattering out
of the Grand Plaza, _en route_ for Panama.

"Now," said Saint Leger, when the important business of the letter to
the Governor of Panama had been satisfactorily disposed of, "with your
Excellency's approval we will all retire to the shore battery, where I
propose to concentrate my forces until a reply arrives from his
Excellency of Panama.  I noted, when leaving, that the guns of the
battery effectually command the town, therefore, by holding the battery
I shall hold the town also; moreover, by withdrawing my men to it, there
will be the less likelihood of collisions between my people and your
countrymen.  I must trouble your Excellency to accompany me, and to put
up, for a few days, with somewhat rougher quarters than you are
accustomed to; but we will make things as comfortable as we can for you,
and you may take with you any three of your servants whom you would wish
to accompany you.  If you will kindly issue any orders that you may wish
to give, we will go at once."

It was in vain that Don Sebastian begged to be excused from accompanying
his captors to the battery, in vain that he alternately protested,
represented, promised, and almost threatened; George turned a deaf ear
to everything that the poor man found to say and half an hour later saw
the whole party which had held the Grand Plaza marching in good order
through the streets toward the battery, with the Governor and his three
servants, the latter bearing heavy loads of his Excellency's baggage, in
the centre of the solid phalanx.  By that time the townspeople had
recovered from their first panic, and had almost settled down again into
their normal condition, the shops were nearly all open, excitement was
rapidly subsiding, and the citizens were mostly going about their
business pretty much as usual; the English, therefore, experienced no
inconvenience or interruption during their march, and in due time
reached the battery, the gates of which were thrown open to receive
them, and closed and bolted again after they had all entered.

The first thing was for the newcomers to get breakfast, for which they
were all--with, perhaps, the exception of the Governor--by this time
quite ready.  Then, at the conclusion of the meal, George accompanied
Basset round the battery upon a tour of inspection, during which the
latter pointed out what he had done, and was still doing, to strengthen
the defences of the place; and the young captain was greatly gratified
to see that a few hours' more work would render the place practically
impregnable to assault, and that all that they then need fear was a
protracted siege, which, however, did not enter into the Englishmen's
calculations.

The entire party from the _Nonsuch_ were now housed in the battery, for
Basset had no sooner secured possession of the place than, very wisely,
he hailed the men who had been left in the boats to take care of them,
directing them to beach their craft under the battery walls, moor them
securely, remove all gear, and convey it and themselves into the battery
forthwith, which they did, this arrangement rendering both them and
their boats absolutely secure from interference.

By mid-afternoon Basset's plans had all been carried out, and the
battery placed in a thorough state for effective defence; and now all
that remained was to await with patience the return of Senor Montalvo
from Panama with the results of his mission.  George had estimated that
with due diligence on the part of the secretary, it should be possible
for him to execute his mission in time to be back in Nombre by the
afternoon of the following day; but Don Sebastian was not so sanguine;
he knew the Spanish propensity to procrastinate, and he also knew that
Don Silvio Calderon, the Governor of Panama, was not the man to permit
himself to be hurried, particularly in the interests of other people;
also he knew, a great deal better than George, how many difficulties
stood in the way of securing the speedy release of prisoners from the
galleys, even under the most favourable circumstances.  He therefore did
all that he could, by representation, to prepare his captors for a
certain amount of delay; consequently when the next day passed without
bringing any sign of the secretary's return, nobody was very greatly
surprised or disappointed.

But it was not until four full days had passed, and the afternoon of the
fifth was well advanced, that Senor Montalvo, hot, dusty, travel-
stained, and weary, re-appeared; and when Don Sebastian had twice
perused the letter of which the secretary was the bearer, it was
perfectly evident, from the expression of dismay upon his Excellency's
countenance, and his muttered ejaculations of "Fool! thrice-sodden
fool!--pig!--obstinate mule!" and other uncomplimentary expressions,
that the secretary's mission had not been brilliantly successful.  On
the contrary, it soon developed that the errand had proved an utter
failure, for after an hour's earnest and anxious converse and discussion
with Senor Montalvo, Don Sebastian approached George, and, with every
evidence of the utmost distress, handed him the reply of the Governor of
Panama to read.

The letter was brief and to the point.  It opened with a pithy but
pungent expression of Don Silvio's opinion of the capacity of a Governor
who could permit his city to be captured and held by a handful of
English pirates; then proceeded succinctly to refuse to accede to any of
those pirates' demands; and wound up by saying that if the garrison and
citizens of Nombre were such fools as to allow themselves to be
surprised, they must take the consequences, whatever they might be.
But, Don Silvio concluded by saying, if the city of Nombre were sacked
by the English, the citizens might console themselves with the assurance
that they would be amply avenged, for he (Don Silvio) was dispatching
every soldier in Panama to the assistance of Nombre, and if, upon their
arrival, any English were found in the city, they would be exterminated
with the utmost promptitude!

Like Don Sebastian, George read this precious effusion of a pompous,
consequential, pig-headed official twice before commenting upon it.
Then he turned to the secretary and said:

"Senor, are you cognisant of the contents of this letter?"

"I believe so, in a general way, Illustrissimo," answered Senor
Montalvo.  "Of course," he continued, "I have not read the communication
itself, but I was able to pretty well gather from Don Silvio's remarks
when I explained my mission to him what was the nature of the reply he
intended to make to Don Sebastian's request."

"Describe Don Silvio to me," demanded George.

"He is a man somewhat above medium height," replied the secretary, "of
rather striking appearance, dark complexioned, sallow, hasty and
irascible of temper, has a very exalted opinion of his position and
dignity, is very impatient of anything in the most remote degree
approaching to dictation, and has a profound belief in his own judgment,
and in his qualifications generally for the post which he occupies.  He
is of opinion, for example, that had he been Governor of Nombre, you and
your followers would never have succeeded in establishing yourselves in
the city."

"I see," said George.  "Yes, I think from your description I can form a
tolerably accurate picture of the man.  Is he a man of his word?"

"As how, precisely, Senor Captain?" demanded the secretary.

"Well," explained George, "in this letter he announces his intention to
dispatch every soldier at his disposal in Panama to the relief of this
city.  Do you think he will really do so?"

"Undoubtedly, senor," was the answer.  "I was present when Don Silvio
issued the order, and when I left Panama the soldiers were already
mustering for the march."

"And how many soldiers do you suppose are available for this service?"
demanded George.

"Five hundred cavalry, and twelve hundred foot soldiers, with six
batteries of horse artillery," was the startling reply.

It was a reply for which young Saint Leger was wholly unprepared; it
startled him, while at the same time it inspired him with a most
audacious idea.  He carefully controlled his features, however, quite
conscious of the fact that both Don Sebastian and his secretary were
intently watching him, and proceeded with his questioning in the same
level, quiet tones as before.

"And when do you think we may look for the arrival of those soldiers?"
he asked.

"The cavalry may arrive at any moment," answered Senor Montalvo, "while
as for the artillery and the foot soldiers, they should be here by to-
morrow's noon."

"Ah!  I thank you, senor, for the frankness with which you have replied
to my questions," said George.  "This news is important and unexpected;
I must ask you to excuse me, gentlemen, while I retire to confer with my
officers.  What you, Senor Montalvo, have told me may possibly
necessitate an alteration of my plans."  And, so saying, the young
Englishman bowed to the two Spaniards and left them, going out to find
Basset and Dyer, that he might communicate to them the momentous news as
to the dispatch of the soldiers from Panama, and also to broach to them
the audacious project that had just suggested itself to him.

The three Englishmen conversed together earnestly and eagerly for the
best part of an hour, while they paced to and fro upon the parapet of
the battery, well out of earshot of anybody else; and at length they
came to a certain decision which they at once proceeded to put into
effect, George going off to rejoin the Governor and his secretary, while
Basset and Dyer hastened to muster their respective forces, and put into
effect the preliminaries of the plan which they had agreed upon.

When at length Saint Leger rejoined Don Sebastian and Senor Montalvo, he
found his guests--or prisoners, they scarcely knew which to consider
themselves--awaiting his return in a state of anxiety and perturbation,
which they took no pains to conceal.  Prominent in their minds was
George's threat to sack and burn the city in such an eventuality as had
just arisen, and they had already seen enough of the young man to
convince them that he was quite capable of carrying out his threat.
There was but one hope for them, they felt, and that lay in the
suggestion artfully put forth by Senor Montalvo, that the cavalry might
be expected to arrive at any moment.  This statement was the result of a
sudden and brilliant inspiration which had come to the secretary while
George was questioning him.  As a matter of fact, Senor Montalvo felt
tolerably certain that the cavalry could not possibly arrive until the
morrow, but it had suddenly occurred to him that if he stated this, it
would show the English that there was still time for them to sack the
town, while by stating that a considerable body of troops might be
momentarily expected to arrive he hoped to frighten the insolent
strangers into immediate abandonment of the town, without waiting to
sack it.

And he had every reason to congratulate himself that his ruse had been
successful, for George's first words when he returned to the room
occupied by the two Spaniards were:

"Your Excellency, the news which Senor Montalvo has brought from Panama
has caused me to very materially modify my plans.  When you were
preparing your dispatch to his Excellency the Governor of Panama, I gave
you to understand that in the event of Don Silvio's refusal to entertain
my proposals, I would sack and destroy the city of Nombre de Dios.  But
since then I have had time for reflection; I have come to recognise that
it would be unfair of me to visit Don Silvio's obstinacy too severely
upon you and your town; moreover, I am in hopes that by further
correspondence with him he may be brought to see the desirability of
saving you and Nombre by a merely nominal sacrifice on his part;
therefore, after consultation with my officers, I have decided to spare
Nombre for the present, and to withdraw from it in order to afford you
time for further negotiations with Don Silvio.  But before withdrawing I
intend to take the precaution of destroying this battery, so that upon
my return I shall, at least, not have it to contend with.  And,
understand me, your Excellency, I shall return again, but not until the
soldiers now expected have been withdrawn from the town.  That must
certainly happen soon, and when it does you may expect to see me back,
for I shall find means to learn everything of importance that happens in
Nombre.  And when I next come, my visit will be a final one; for unless
you are then prepared to hand me over the seventeen prisoners I have
asked for, I will not leave one stone of Nombre upon another.  You will
kindly remain here until I am ready to evacuate the battery, when you
will be free to return to Government House."


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

HOW THE ENGLISHMEN MARCHED ACROSS THE ISTHMUS TO PANAMA.

As Saint Leger quitted the room Senor Montalvo gave vent to a chuckle of
delighted self-gratulation, much to the surprise, and somewhat to the
annoyance, of his Excellency, Don Sebastian Salvador Alfonso de
Albareda, Governor of the city of Nombre de Dios.

"Senor Montalvo," he said austerely, "you are surely forgetting
yourself.  I see nothing at all in that truculent young Englishman's
threat that is in the least degree calculated to excite the risibility
of anyone whose misfortune it is to be a dweller in this god-forsaken
city of Nombre de Dios.  Not even its name seems to protect it in the
slightest degree from the sacrilegious violence of these Lutheran dogs.
Pray explain yourself, senor."

"Ten thousand pardons, your Excellency," exclaimed Montalvo, still
grinning delightedly.  "It was not so much the Englishman's threats at
which I was amused--although I think we may perhaps permit ourselves to
smile at them, too; what I was chiefly amused at was the stroke of
genius by which I have fortunately been able to save our city from sack
by those pestilent English to-day."

"You--you have saved Nombre from being sacked to-day?" exclaimed Don
Sebastian.  "Still I fail to understand you, senor."

"Did you not observe, your Excellency, that, in reply to a question by
the young English pirate, I mentioned that the cavalry from Panama might
be expected to appear here at any moment?  That was a little slip of the
tongue on my part, the result of a happy inspiration.  Had I replied
truthfully I should have said that the cavalry could hardly by any
possibility arrive until some time to-morrow; and the result of that
reply would in all probability have been an instant order by that young
English dog to sack the city, which work might easily be accomplished
before the appearance of the cavalry upon the scene.  But did you mark
the expression of Senor Englishman's face when I said that the cavalry
might be expected at any moment?  It was terror, your Excellency--terror
and consternation!  And the result is an order for the instant
evacuation of this battery and the retreat of the English from the town.
That youngster at once recognised that if the cavalry were close at
hand there would be no time to sack the town: he and his people would be
caught and exterminated to a man.  Hence his magnanimous resolve to
spare us for the time being.  _Now_ does your Excellency understand?"

"Ah! yes; of course I do, and I beg your pardon for my hasty rebuke,
Montalvo," exclaimed Don Sebastian, seizing his companion's hand and
shaking it heartily.  "_Caramba_! that was a brilliant idea of yours
about the cavalry, and it has had the effect that you foresaw; the
rascally Englishmen are much too anxious regarding the safety of their
own skins to think of plundering the town now; and, please the Virgin,
in a few hours we shall be well rid of them, and I shall have escaped
getting into very serious trouble--thanks to you, Montalvo.  You have
placed me under a very heavy obligation, my friend, and I shall not
forget it.

"But there is still the future to be thought of.  It is true that we
have escaped by the skin of our teeth for the moment, Montalvo; for the
moment only.  But if I am any judge of character, that English
_muchacho_ will return, as he threatened he would; and then what are we
going to do?"

"Sufficient unto the day is the evil, your Excellency," answered
Montalvo, "and we shall have time enough to think of that when these
dogs have gone.  Did you notice what the boy captain said?  He will
return again, but not until the soldiers now expected have been
withdrawn from the town.  Well, it must be your care, Excellency, that
the soldiers shall not be withdrawn from Nombre until the patience of
these English pirates has become thoroughly exhausted, and they have
taken themselves off elsewhere--precisely where they go is a matter that
need not concern us so long as it is sufficiently far from Nombre.  And
while we are enjoying the protection of the soldiers it must be our
business to so strengthen the defences of the town that--_Madre de
Dios_! what is happening now?"

The worthy secretary might well exclaim, for his illuminating discourse
was at this moment broken in upon and interrupted by a series of
deafening explosions of so violent a character that they set the very
walls of the building trembling.  They were caused by the bursting of
the cannon mounted in the battery, and the blowing-up of the defences
which Basset had devised and caused to be constructed with so much
labour, and the destruction of which Saint Leger had ordered as a
preliminary to his abandonment of the place.  The Governor and his
secretary had scarcely recovered from the consternation engendered by
those alarming explosions when George appeared with the information that
they were now free to leave the battery and return to Government House
whenever they pleased; and the two Spaniards were still painfully
scrambling through and over the debris of the destroyed defences, on
their way back to the town, when they saw the Englishmen jump into their
boats and push off from the beach.

It was long after sundown on that same day when the anxious watchers on
board the _Nonsuch_, anchored in that tiny unsuspected harbour, heard
the roll and splash of oars sounding from the seaward of them, and were
soon afterward greeted with a hail which told them that their comrades,
as to whose safety they were beginning to feel somewhat anxious, were
returning; and a few minutes later the boats were alongside and a
general reunion had taken place.

In fact, the lion-hearted lady had not heart to look herself in the face
for the last twenty years of her life; but we nowhere learn that she
quarrelled with Holbein's portraitures of her youth, or those of her
stately prime of viraginity by De Heere and Zucchero.

He who has "neither done things worthy to be written, nor written
things worthy to be read," takes the trouble of transmitting his
portrait to posterity to very little purpose.

If the picture be a bad one, it will soon find its way to the garret;
if good, as a work of art, it will perpetuate the fame, probably the
name, indeed, of the artist alone.
These are the _obscurorum virorum imagines_ which, as Walpole said,
"are christened commonly in galleries, like children at the Foundling
Hospital, _by chance_"--Q. Rev.

* * * * *

LOSING A SHOE AND A DINNER.

As Ozias Linley, Sheridan's brother-in-law, was one morning setting
out on horseback for his curacy, a few miles from Norwich, his
horse threw off one of his shoes.

A lady, who observed the accident, thought it might impede Mr. Linley's
journey, and seeing that he himself was unconscious of it, politely
reminded him that one of his horse's shoes had just come off. "Thank you,
madam," replied Linley; "will you then have the goodness to put
it on for me?"

Linley one day received a card to dine with the late archbishop of
Canterbury, who was then bishop of Norwich. Careless into what hole
or corner he threw his invitations, he soon lost sight of the card,
and forgot it altogether."Well," he explained, "the matter stands thus: A year
ago, as you may have heard, certain of my countrymen, among whom was
your friend El Draque, were treacherously attacked in the harbour of San
Juan de Ulua, and several of them were killed or wounded, while a number
of others--among whom was my elder brother--were taken prisoners.  Of
these last, all have been accounted for in one way or another save
seventeen who, I learn, were sent from San Juan to Nombre, and from
Nombre to Panama, where I am given to understand they were put aboard
the galleys, to end their lives toiling at the oars.

"Now, I and my companions have crossed the Great Water for the express
purpose of finding and rescuing my brother--and incidentally his English
fellow prisoners--from the Spaniards; and, accordingly, we first went to
San Juan, where I learned that the seventeen survivors of the attack had
been sent to Nombre.  Therefore from San Juan we came to _Nombre_, where
I learn that the seventeen were sent to Panama.  At my request the
Governor of Nombre sent a message to the Governor of Panama, informing
the latter that Nombre was in my possession, and that I required the
surrender of the seventeen English prisoners as ransom for the town.
But the Governor of Panama, instead of finding and returning the
Englishmen, has dispatched every soldier from Panama to Nombre, to drive
us out of the city.  Learning this, and knowing that it would be
impossible for us to hold Nombre in the face of the overwhelming force
that was being sent against us, I decided to quit the city; but I
accompanied the announcement of this determination to the Governor of
Nombre with certain threats of return which I believe will cause him to
retain those soldiers--the whole garrison of Panama, you understand--in
Nombre for a full month, or perhaps longer.

"Panama, you will perceive, is thus left defenceless; and it is my idea
to at once make a dash across the isthmus, seize the biggest, or at
least the most formidable, ship in the harbour, exact from the Governor,
by threats or even force, if possible, full information respecting the
galleys aboard which the Englishmen have been shipped, and then go in
search of them until I have found them and liberated my countrymen.

"You can help me in this project, if you will, in the following manner.
My ship lies at anchor in the little cove of which you know, not far
from here.  I shall be obliged to leave her there, since I intend to
take my entire company with me; and I propose to leave her in your
charge.  I shall dismantle her, stowing her spars, sails, gear and
ordnance below, and roofing her over with a thatch of palm leaves to
protect her hull from the sun and weather, and if you will lend me a few
of your people, they will be helpful in that part of my work.  Then,
when that is done, you can further help me by furnishing me with a guide
who will lead me to Panama, and by lending me either mules or men who
will help me and my people to transport across the isthmus such stores
and ammunition as it will be necessary for us to take with us.  Will you
do this?"

"Senor," exclaimed Lukabela, "we Cimarrones live but to wreak our
righteous vengeance upon the Spaniard.  We are his enemies; and you,
too, are his enemies; therefore in any attempt of yours which has for
its object the spoiling of the Spaniard we are your natural allies, and
you may command our help to any extent which you may deem needful.  I
can place fifty men at your service; and if these be not enough I can
increase the number to five hundred in the course of a week if you care
to wait so long."

"A thousand thanks!" said George.  "Your fifty men will no doubt prove
ample, for I do not anticipate that there will be any fighting to do,
except at sea, and for that my own men will be sufficient.  When can I
have your men to assist me aboard the ship?"

"I will bring them to you within the hour, senor, if that will suffice,"
answered Lukabela.

"Thanks," answered George, "that will do most admirably.  And now, that
matter being settled, I will return at once and make all the necessary
preparations.  The boats shall be waiting to convey you aboard the ship
in one hour's time."

And therewith he and his party rose and, bidding Lukabela a temporary
farewell, hurried back to the _Nonsuch_, where preparations were at once
made for the dismantling of the ship prior to the adventurous expedition
across the isthmus.

That day and the one that followed it were days of strenuous labour
indeed, not only for the crew of the _Nonsuch_, but also for their black
allies, who turned up on the beach in full strength, and with most
commendable punctuality, under Lukabela, and were promptly taken aboard.
For there was a very considerable amount of heavy work to be done:
sails were to be loosed and dried, unbent, rolled up and stowed away
below; yards and topmasts to be sent down, scraped and thoroughly
greased before they, too, were stowed below; gear unrove, overhauled,
made up in coils and labelled; the ordnance dismounted, and, in short,
the ship dismantled to her three lower masts, and every movable thing
stowed away out of reach of covetous hands--for George felt that it
would be unwise to trust his black allies too far or too implicitly.
Then every anchor and cable belonging to the ship was used to moor her
securely, for it was impossible to estimate how long she would have to
lie there at the mercy of the elements.  And all this had to be done in
a small land-locked cove, hemmed-in on every side by high, densely-
wooded land, where the trade-wind could not penetrate, and where the
land and sea-breezes were represented by merely fitful breathings of
suffocatingly hot air drifting by at infrequent intervals.  And this,
too, with a blazing sun almost immediately overhead; for it was now mid-
August, and the cove lay almost immediately under the ninth parallel of
north latitude.

Then, when all this was done, there was the fixing up of the framework
for a roof or awning of palm-leaf thatch for the protection of the deck
and hull of the ship from the sun's rays; but Lukabela assured George
that there was no need to delay the departure of the expedition until
the roof had been thatched, for he undertook that the women of his
village, who were, according to him, experts in the art of thatching,
should attend to that part of the business.

The evening of the second day witnessed the completion of the
preparations for the Englishmen's daring descent upon Panama; and within
an hour after sunrise on the following day the entire party, with fifty
Cimarrones under Lukabela, and a train of twenty mules, also furnished
by the Cimarrone chief, mustered on the beach of the little secret cove
and made their final preparations for the march.  These merely consisted
in loading the indispensable baggage of the party upon the mules; and as
this work was performed by the deft hands of the Cimarrones, twenty
minutes sufficed for the accomplishment of the task, when the expedition
at once started, taking the way, in the first instance, toward
Lukabela's village.

Until the adventurers reached the village the march was accomplished in
a very loose and happy-go-lucky fashion, half the Cimarrones leading the
way, with the Englishmen following in small chattering parties of twos
and threes as the path through the bush would permit, while the mule
train, in charge of the other half of the Cimarrones, brought up the
rear.  But with their departure from the village silence and strict
military discipline became the order of the day, because although
Lukabela was going to lead them, not by the Gold road, upon which they
would be liable to encounter travellers at any moment, but by a devious
and secret path, known only to the Cimarrones, they would still be
passing through the enemy's country, and would be liable to detection
unless the utmost caution was observed.  Therefore the order of march
was thus arranged: In the lead went, as guide and scout, fully armed
with bow and spear, the Cimarrone who of the whole tribe was most
intimately acquainted with the route which was to be followed.  Then, in
single file, distant from each other about fifty yards, went five other
Cimarrones in the track of the leader, their duty being to watch for and
transmit to the main body any signals which the leader might make.
Then, some fifty yards in the rear of the rearmost of these five,
marched twenty Cimarrones whose duty it would be to make a stand should
the enemy by any chance appear in force, while the main body retired
upon the nearest defensive position.  Fifty yards to the rear again
followed the aforesaid main body, consisting of half the Englishmen, the
mule train, and the other half of the Englishmen, while the remainder of
the Cimarrones constituted the rear guard.

The route lay almost entirely through dense, lofty forest, and wound
hither and thither in the most bewildering fashion; for in addition to
the giant trees which constituted the forest proper, there was a vast
quantity of thick, tangled undergrowth, through which a man might indeed
have forced his way with difficulty, but which was absolutely impassable
for laden mules; therefore it was necessary to follow the sinuosities of
the thinner parts of the jungle where a few occasional strokes of a
machete were all that were required to enable the laden animals to pass.
Under such circumstances progress was necessarily slow, and also
fatiguing; but the Englishmen forgot not only the snail-like nature of
their progress, but also the oppressive heat and fatigue of the march,
for they were now in a new and wonderful world, more strange and
beautiful than anything that the most fanciful imagination among them
had ever pictured.  To men like themselves, seamen, accustomed day after
day, for months at a time, to the sight of the open sky, the boundless
sea, the invigorating breath of the salt wind, and the feeling of a
heaving deck beneath their feet, it was a novelty to be trudging upon
firm ground along a forest path, enveloped in the mystery of soft green
twilight, with dense masses of foliage overhead shutting out all sight
of the sky except at infrequent intervals, their horizon bounded by the
leafy brake within arm's reach of them on either hand, and to breathe
the hot, close atmosphere of the woods, pungent with many strange
odours; to listen to the silence of the forest, accentuated rather than
broken by the sounds of their passage, and the low singing hum of
innumerable myriads of invisible insects; to start as a sudden whirr of
wings directed their attention to some brilliant plumaged bird seen for
an instant flashing athwart their ken like a living gem and then
vanishing they scarcely knew whither; to behold the countless strange
forms and curious colours of the flowers that sprang beneath their feet
or hung in festoons from the lofty branches overhead; to hear the
mysterious sounds that occasionally came to them from the forest on
either hand; and to slake their thirst by devouring the strange but
luscious fruits indicated by their friends the Cimarrones and partaken
of at first doubtfully and with extremest caution.  And it was only when
they suddenly emerged from the forest gloom into some brake open to the
sky, and halted for a moment until their eyes grew accustomed to the
dazzling daylight, that they were able to realise how intense that gloom
had been.  But the novelty of the journey was not all pleasurable, for
apart from the breathless, oppressive heat, and the annoyance caused by
the pertinacious attacks of mosquitos, gnats, and other fiercely
stinging insects, there was a certain element of danger, as was
manifested by the frequent low warning cry raised by a Cimarrone, of
"_Culebra, culebra; guardarse_!"  (snake, snake; beware!)

It was close upon noon when, after a gentle ascent of about four hours'
duration, followed by a somewhat steeper descent of rather less than
half that time the expedition emerged from the forest and found itself
in a small, open, grassy space, bordered on the one hand by the high
woods and on the other by a small stream of crystal clear water flowing
over a gravelly bed; and here Lukabela gave the welcome announcement
that he proposed to call a halt for two hours in order that men and
animals might rest and refresh themselves during the hottest part of the
day.  Accordingly arms were piled, armour put off, and most of the
Englishmen indulged in the unwonted luxury of a fresh water bath, while
the faithful Cimarrones--or Maroons, as some of the mariners began to
call them--unloaded the mules, watered them, and then hobbled them to
feed upon the rich, short grass, lighted a fire, cut down sweet, balsam-
like boughs and built little arbours with them in the shadow of which
their white friends might sleep.  And when, after a refreshing bath and
a still more refreshing sleep, the Englishmen were awakened about two
o'clock, behold! those faithful and indefatigable allies the Cimarrones
had provided a delicious hot meal for their delectation, consisting of
the choicest portions of two freshly-killed deer, which, having been
first wrapped in clay, were afterwards baked in the embers of the fire,
thus completely retaining all the natural juices of the meat and
rendering it incomparably delicate, tender and tasty.  Then, the meal
finished, the Cimarrones--always the Cimarrones--produced certain dried
golden-brown leaves, which they deftly fashioned into _cigarros_ for the
delectation of themselves and such of the Englishmen as were adventurous
enough to test the seductive effects of tobacco; and when the _cigarros_
had duly been done justice to the mules were rounded up, loaded, the
order of march arranged, and the journey resumed.

The afternoon march was, in all essential respects, similar to that of
the morning, and continued until about five o'clock in the evening, when
another open, grassy glade, very similar to that of the noontide halt,
was reached, and here Lukabela announced his intention of halting for
the night.  Then occurred a repetition of the principal events of the
previous halt, except that after the Englishmen had bathed to their
satisfaction they found a hot meal awaiting them without the preliminary
of the two hours' sleep.  As before, the meal was followed by
_cigarros_, accompanied by a little desultory conversation; but this did
not continue long, for the Englishmen, at least, were dead weary with
their unwonted labours, and one after another they stretched themselves
out where they sat and, careless of the saturating dew, at once sank
into dreamless slumber, surrounded by their faithful allies, four of
whom kept watch over the sleeping camp until another day dawned.  And so
the march continued day after day with little variation, sometimes
climbing upward and at other times descending, but on the whole the
tendency was distinctly to rise.

Toward the close of the third day, and in a still more marked degree
during the fourth day of their march, the breaks in the forest became
more frequent, and of greater extent, occasionally permitting them to
get a glimpse of their more immediate surroundings, when it became
apparent, as might indeed be judged by the up-and-down character of the
way which they had already traversed, that they were in the midst of
hilly country, a dip in the forest occasionally revealing a blue peak
breaking the sky-line in the far distance.  And when they halted at mid-
day on the fourth day it was in a glade that formed part of the very
crest of a mountain spur, so that, even as they partook of their mid-day
meal they were able to look out over a vast extent of country both ahead
of and behind them.  In the latter direction they saw mile after mile of
undulating woods stretching away into the distance, the outline
gradually softening and the infinite variety of green tints gradually
merging into filmy grey; and beyond it the Caribbean shimmering beneath
the tropic sun; while ahead of them, to the south-east, and almost
within a stone's throw, as it seemed, rose a lofty ridge, which Lukabela
informed George was the backbone of the range, from the summit of which
could be seen Panama and that--to Englishmen--almost fabulous ocean, the
Southern Sea, the very existence of which the Spaniards were guarding as
a priceless secret.

But, near as that ridge looked from their mid-day camping-place, it was
not reached until the evening of the fifth day of their march; and then,
after toiling up a steep slope for half an hour, the party topped it,
and a sudden shout of exultation burst from their throats as, standing
in a little glade, they looked out over the tree-tops of the intervening
forest and saw first another but much lower ridge, with a mountain
valley between it and them, and beyond that ridge, and only some ten
miles distant, the white towers and buildings of Panama nestling beside
a river which discharged into its harbour, the harbour itself dotted
with a few ships, and beyond it again the great, boundless, mystic
Southern Sea, at the sight of which George and his crew, like the pious
Christian mariners that they were, incontinently fell upon their knees
and gave God thanks, vowing at the same time that by His grace they
would sail those waters until they had recovered the lost ones of whom
they were in search--or had fearfully avenged their death.

And now it became necessary to exercise the most extreme caution, for,
so far as was known, there were no Indians within twenty miles of
Panama, save a few "tame" ones who had been permitted to establish
themselves within some four miles of the city, and who made a living by
growing vegetables and fruit and rearing poultry for the Panama market;
the country all round about within a radius of a dozen miles or so had
therefore come to be regarded as practically as safe as the streets of
the city itself, and hawking parties were of frequent occurrence among
the magnates of Panama.  And to encounter one of these parties would be
to inevitably give the alarm to the citizens, which, strong as the
English felt themselves to be, was a consummation to be carefully
avoided; wherefore, having gazed their fill upon the glorious prospect
before them, the party retired along the way by which they had come,
until they reached a spot where they had already decided to camp; and
there they spent the night.  The journey down into the plain was
accomplished on the following day with the utmost circumspection, not
only because every step which they now took led to the danger of
detection by some party of sportsmen, or solitary fowler, but also
because the "tame" Indians had to be reckoned with; and it was known
that these were in the habit of wandering far up the slopes of the
Cordilleras in search of game and of the fruit that grew wild in rich
abundance in certain of the woods.  Moreover, the time had now arrived
when a definite plan of action of some sort must be determined upon,
since this would largely influence the manner of their approach to the
city and their subsequent actions.  Therefore as soon as the party had
once more topped the ridge upon which they had stood entranced for half
an hour during the previous evening young Saint Leger called a halt and,
flinging himself down upon the grass, produced his perspective glass--or
telescope, as we now call the much improved instrument--and with its
assistance subjected the town and roadstead to a prolonged and careful
examination.  The result of this examination, and of a conference with
his officers which was simultaneously conducted, was that the resolution
was made to capture a certain caravel which was seen to be riding at
anchor in the roadstead and which appeared to be the best suited to
their requirements of any of the ships then in sight; and, having
secured possession of her, to threaten the town with destruction by her
guns until all the information required from the Governor had been
abstracted from him; after which the only thing remaining to be done
would be to sail in search of the galleys containing the English
prisoners, and capture them when found.  It was an audacious scheme, for
Panama was the biggest and most important city on the continent at that
time, and, apart from the question of soldiers, the citizens alone if
they chose to arm themselves and fight were sufficiently numerous to
overwhelm the English; but George had by that time learned to gauge the
courage of the American Spaniard pretty accurately, and he felt that the
undertaking which he had planned, although difficult, was by no means
beyond his power to accomplish.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

HOW THEY TOOK THE GREAT GALLEON.

In order to obtain possession of the caravel which George had marked
down as his prey, boats were necessary, since the vessel lay at anchor
in the roadstead, instead of alongside the wharf; and to obtain boats it
would be necessary to enter the city.  But Panama, like Nombre and San
Juan, and indeed all the Spanish settlements in America, was fortified
on the landward side as a protection against the incursions of the
savages who, gentle enough when the white man first came among them,
soon had their most ferocious and bloodthirsty instincts fully aroused
by the heartless cruelty and treachery with which the Spaniards quickly
began to treat them; to enter the city from its landward side was
therefore impossible for the English without at once betraying
themselves and something of their purpose.  The only alternative,
therefore, was to gain an entrance from the water; and the problem was
how to do this without betraying themselves and putting the inhabitants
on their guard.

At first the difficulty seemed to be insurmountable, but George Saint
Leger was one of those who refuse to acknowledge anything as impossible;
and at length, when the party had halted at mid-day behind the very last
screen of timber between them and the city, he believed he had
discovered the answer to his problem.

It has been said that Panama stood not only on the shore of the ocean
but also on the left bank of a small stream which, taking its rise
somewhere among the adjacent mountains, discharged itself into the
waters of the harbour, and when once it had come to be recognised that
the approach of the party must be made by water, it was upon this stream
that George concentrated his attention.  It was but an insignificant
affair as to width, and to all appearance shallow, but just before it
reached the city it widened out to about sixty yards across; and while
the young captain was studying it through his perspective glass, during
the mid-day halt, he perceived a few boats and canoes plying hither and
thither upon that portion of it which flowed past the town.  Also, while
he was watching, his attention was attracted to two figures in the plain
below; and by bringing his glass to bear upon them he was able to
distinguish that the leading figure was a Spaniard carrying what
appeared to be a hawk upon his wrist, while the individual who followed
him was either an Indian or a negro, he could not distinguish which, but
he saw that this person was carrying something suspended from a pole
over his shoulder, which looked like and doubtless was a bunch of dead
birds.  The pair walked straight to the margin of the stream, about
three-quarters of a mile above the city, the stream being at that point
about twenty yards wide, and when the Spaniard reached the margin he
halted, turned and said something to his follower, at the same time
pointing to the ground, whereupon the black carefully deposited the pole
and its burden upon the ground, then stooped low, and allowed the
Spaniard to seat himself astride upon his shoulders.  Then, rising to
his feet with his burden, the black stepped into the stream, waded
across, deposited the Spaniard upon the bank, and, as the latter strode
off towards the town, returned, picked up his load, waded across again,
and followed the footsteps of his master.  Now, there was nothing _very_
remarkable about this, but there were _two_ points connected with it
which attracted George's notice, one of them being that when the black
stepped into the stream with his master upon his shoulders, a single
stride sufficed to carry him into water deep enough to submerge him to
his waist, and that depth was maintained all the way across until within
about two yards of the bank.  The other point which George considered
worthy of note was that about a hundred yards below the point where
those two persons had crossed the stream, there grew a clump of bamboos
sufficiently large to screen the entire party from observation, if they
could reach it undetected by people in the town.  He called Lukabela to
him, told him what he had seen, explained the scheme that had developed
in his mind while watching the passage of the two men across the stream,
and finally indicated the clump of bamboo, asking whether there was any
possibility of reaching it after dark without being detected.  The
Cimarrone thereupon studied the features of the country below and around
him long and intently, and at length answered in the affirmative,
pointing out the route which it would be necessary to follow, and then,
after a little further pregnant conversation, the two rose and returned
to where the rest of the party lay _perdu_.

In conversation with Lukabela, George had already learned from the
Cimarrone that, from information derived by the latter from certain
runaway slaves, the citizens of Panama were somewhat addicted to the
keeping of late hours, as late hours were counted in those days, that is
to say, the more gay and pleasure-loving of the Panamans rarely thought
of seeking their couches before midnight; Saint Leger, therefore,
determined to remain where he was until that hour in order that his
arrival in the city might be deferred until its roysterers were all
safely in bed and asleep; also, there was in all probability a somewhat
strenuous time before the Englishmen, and some unlikelihood as to when
they might reckon upon another night's undisturbed rest; upon his return
to camp, therefore, George issued an order that every man was to compose
himself to rest and get as much sleep as possible, the only breaks in
these periods of rest being at the appointed meal times.  But the young
captain had by this time become wise in the art of warfare, consequently
he took the precaution to protect his camp from surprise by throwing out
strong pickets of Cimarrones in every direction from which surprise
could possibly come; and, this done, the expedition composed itself to
rest.

It was about five o'clock in the evening that George was awakened by a
light touch upon his shoulder, and, springing up, he found Lukabela
bending over him with his finger to his lips.

"What is it, chief?" demanded George in a whisper.

"Come and see," replied the Cimarrone in an equally guarded tone of
voice; whereupon George arose and, led by the black, noiselessly quitted
the sleeping camp and made his way to a small knoll in the open,
commanding a fairly comprehensive view of the city and roadstead.

As the pair crept cautiously to the summit of the knoll and peered over
it, Lukabela pointed with his finger and murmured "Behold!"  And,
looking in the direction toward which the chief was pointing, George
beheld a noble and stately galleon standing in toward the anchorage with
ensigns and pennons flying from her mastheads, and with a large galley
acting as escort to her.  The galleon was an exceptionally large vessel,
being, as Saint Leger estimated, of fully five hundred tons measurement.
She showed a double tier of ordnance, besides sakers, falcons,
falconettes and serpentines on her poop and fore and after castles.  She
was painted a deep golden yellow, with broad white bands along her two
tiers of gun ports, and there was, in accordance with the Spanish
fashion of the times, a tremendous amount of decorative gilding about
her bows and quarters; her sails also were decorated with paintings,
though what subjects were represented it was impossible to distinguish
at that distance.

"A plate ship, loaded with silver from Lima, without a doubt," whispered
Lukabela.  "I saw her appear round yonder headland about half an hour
ago, and I thought you would be interested."

"I am," replied George emphatically, bringing his glass to bear upon the
craft, and he watched her as she gradually drifted in toward the
anchorage, while Lukabela kept a look-out to guard against their being
surprised by passers by.

Slow and stately the great galleon crept toward the roadstead, impelled
by the dying sea-breeze, and at length, as the wind dropped altogether
and the waters of the bay became a flawless mirror reflecting the
gorgeous tints of a flaming sunset, she dropped her ponderous anchor
about half a mile from the shore; her gaily painted sails were slowly
clewed up and furled; the galley went alongside and received several
richly dressed persons from the galleon, including some three or four in
full suits of armour, and then pushed off and pulled toward the quay,
churning the placid waters of the bay into foam with the long, regular
strokes of her sixty oars, finally ranging up alongside and mooring to
the wharf, when the passengers from the galleon and some twenty other
persons, who were probably the officers of the galley, landed and
disappeared among the streets of the city.

Then George Saint Leger arose from his place of concealment among the
long grass at the summit of the knoll, thinking deeply, and made his way
back to the camp, accompanied by the Cimarrone chief.  As they entered
the camp George turned to his black companion and said:

"My thanks to you, Lukabela, for arousing me.  The sight you showed me
was well worth looking at.  Please God, before twelve hours are past
that ship and her cargo shall be mine; ay, and the galley too.  For who
knows but that somebody aboard her may be able to give me news of my
brother."

The great bell of Panama cathedral was booming out the hour of midnight,
and its sonorous strokes came floating slowly and subdued by distance to
the camp of the English adventurers as the sturdy band, having partaken
of a hearty supper, formed up into marching order prior to leaving their
place of concealment.  A strong scouting party of Cimarrones had been
thrown forward in advance to guard against surprise, and as George
completed his inspection of weapons and equipment the cry of a nightjar
coming from the extreme distance and repeated ever nearer by the line of
scouts told that the way was clear and that the column might begin its
advance.

There is no need to describe, step by step, the sinuous passage through
the long grass of that band of intrepid adventurers toward the clump of
bamboos which was to be their rallying point; they knew that danger
encompassed them on every hand, and that the most trivial accident might
result in their premature discovery and, possibly the ruin of all their
plans, yet they pressed forward steadily and unflinchingly, trusting
implicitly in the wisdom of their leaders and the sagacity of their
black allies, and in about three-quarters of an hour arrived safely at
the point for which they were aiming, without the occurrence of the
slightest disconcerting incident of any description.

Here, completely screened from observation by the sheltering clump of
bamboos, the blacks at once proceeded to unload the pack mules and stack
their loads in close proximity to the river bank.  And while this was
being done, George, Dyer, and twelve of the most reliable of the
Englishmen calmly laid aside their weapons, armour, and all clothing,
and at a signal from their captain, crept crouchingly round the shoulder
of the bamboo clump to the river margin where, after heads had been
counted to see that none was missing, the whole party noiselessly
entered the water, waded out to mid stream, and then, following their
leader, proceeded to swim silently and with deliberation toward the
city.  There was a moon, in her first quarter, shining brightly almost
directly overhead, which afforded ample light for the party to see where
they were going, while a soft mist hung over the river and the low
ground about the city, which to a certain extent concealed their
movements.

George was careful not to hurry himself or his followers, for, in the
first place, they were a full quarter of an hour earlier than they
expected, and he did not wish to reach the city until he could be
reasonably sure that its inhabitants were all abed and asleep, and in
the next place he was anxious to conserve his own and his followers'
strength as far as possible, knowing that many heavy demands would be
made upon it before long; he therefore paddled very quietly along,
hardly exerting himself at all and allowing the current to carry him
cityward.  Thus the hour of one boomed out from the cathedral while they
were still a quarter of a mile from the inner extremity of the quay for
which they were aiming.

At length, however, drifting for the most part, and only swimming a
stroke or two occasionally to guide themselves, they reached the
extremity of the wharf, where they found a flight of steps at which they
landed.  Here, in obedience to an order from George, the remainder of
the party crouched well below the level of the quay, while their leader
cautiously climbed the steps to reconnoitre.  A single glance sufficed
to show that the whole length of the quay in sight--nearly half a mile--
was deserted, while not a light was to be seen in any direction.  This
latter circumstance, however, was presently accounted for by the fact
that all the buildings facing the wharf were evidently warehouses, for
the most part one-storey buildings with broad verandahs reaching out
before them, undoubtedly for the purpose of protecting the workers from
the terrific heat of the mid-day sun.  Now, however, under the moon's
rays, those verandahs, many of them cumbered with bales and cases of
merchandise, cast a deep, almost opaque shadow, of which George
instantly determined to avail himself; therefore, beckoning to his
followers, he made a dash across the staring moon-lighted quay to the
nearest verandah, and in less than three minutes all hands were huddled
in the deep shadow of a pile of bales.

Thus far all had gone well, they were actually in the city of Panama,
with never a soul a penny the wiser; and George felt that, having
accomplished so much, it would be strange indeed if he could not carry
the whole of his plans to fruition.  But, great as their peril had been
already, that peril had, after all, been merely that of discovery; now
it was infinitely greater, for there they were, fourteen naked
Englishmen, unarmed save for a knife which each carried in a sheath
strapped to his waist, in a hostile city where, if they should be
caught, they might be certain of either the galleys--or worse still--the
Inquisition.  Meanwhile, however, there seemed little immediate fear of
either as George peered out from his hiding-place and intently scanned
the length of the quay.  As has been said, not a single living thing was
visible, but there were several craft moored alongside, small vessels
mostly, such as coasters, fishing craft, and lighters; but probably a
portion at least of the crews of these craft lived and slept aboard
them, and a restless man coming up on deck for a breath of fresh air at
an inopportune moment might suffice to ruin everything.

Cautiously George emerged from his place of concealment, flitted across
the width of the quay, and peered over its edge.  He looked down upon
three clumsy, half-decked fishing craft, apparently deserted, but quite
unfit for his purpose.  Beyond them was a tier of heavy lighters moored
three abreast, with nobody aboard them, and beyond them a small coasting
craft with hatches on, and her cabin and forecastle doors, as well as
her skylights, closed.  Nobody aboard her, certainly.  Glancing around
him, and signalling his unseen companions to follow him up, he ran along
the edge of the quay until he had passed the coaster, when he found
himself close to several tiers of lighters, all moored three abreast,
beyond which were two small coasters, moored one outside the other, then
more lighters, and a whole crowd of fishing craft.  Swiftly George sped
along past these, glancing continually about him to assure himself that
he was unobserved and that his people were following him, and at length
he came to where a large caravel was lying moored to the quay, with all
her boats in the water alongside her.  Here was what he wanted at last,
and pausing but an instant to beckon his companions, he sprang from the
quay into the vessel's main rigging, and from thence noiselessly made
his way to her deck.  Less than half a minute later his thirteen
companions stood beside him.

Collecting his followers round him with a wave of his hand, Saint Leger
rapidly issued his instructions.  Don't worry; you are going to sleep.

Lie on your back, open your eyes wide, look up as if you were trying to
see your eyebrows, hold your eyes open this way ten to twenty seconds,
then close them slowly. Repeat this several times. Soon the sandman
will come.

Concentrate your mind on auto suggestion like this: "I am going to
sleep--sound heavy, restful, peaceful sleep. My eyelids are getting
heavy--heavy. I am going to close them and go to sleep."
Don't try counting imaginary sheep jumping over fence rails. Don't count
numbers. It is a bad habit.

If these suggestions do not help you the first night say, "All
right, my brain was too active, so then tomorrow I will let down a
bit."

Next night eat one or two dry crackers, chew them slowly, masticate them
thoroughly until you can swallow easily.

This little food will draw the blood pressure from the brain and help
you to go to sleep.

Drive out business and worry thoughts. Think faith and courage
thoughts.

MISTAKES
Not the Making But the Repeating, Is Your Danger

To live down the past and erase the errors, live boldly the present.

Do not chastise or condemn yourself for mistakes you have made; you are
not alone; everyone has made missteps, has hurt others, has wronged
himself.

Everyone has had trouble, reverses and misfortune; it's the plan of things,
and these things come to give us experience and correct our future acts
by the knowledge of how to avoid errors and wrongs.

Yesterday is dead; forget it. Face about; live today; be busy, be active,
be intent on doing right and accomplishing things worth while.

The world's memory is short. A misdeed, an error, a wrongful act on
your part may set busy tongues wagging today and you may suffer from
calumny and criticism. Of course your errors will be magnified and your
wrongs enlarged beyond the truth; that's the penalty you pay.

Lies are always added to truth in telling of one's misdeeds. Be brave;
weather the storm, it will soon blow over. Tomorrow the world will
forget.

You've suffered in your own conscience; that's all the debt you can pay
on the old score.

Now, then, get busy with the glorious opportunity today presents. Don't
make the same mistake again.

There are no eyes in the back of your head; look forward.

Don't worry by envying the other fellow and comparing his good deeds with
your mistakes; you only see his good. He has had troubles and made
mistakes too, but you and the world have forgotten them.

If every man's sins were printed on their foreheads the crowds you pass
would all wear their hats over their eyes.

I'm trying to comfort you, and slap you on the back and tell you you are
just human and all humans make false steps.

The patriarchs in the Bible made mistakes, but they got in the fold.

History has perpetuated their names. Their lives on the whole were worth
while. It's the sum total of acts that count.

TOMORROW
A Little Analysis of Our Relation to Eternity

One man says the present is everything, the eternity is nothing.

The other man says eternity is everything, present is nothing.

I believe the real truth is, both are man's chief concern, and neither
is all truth.

In this matter the general rule I have so often pointed out will
harmoniously apply; that rule is, avoid extremes.

Those who believe that the now, the present, is the all important thing
in man's life have the fashionable or favorite point of view.

Man definitely knows much about the present, he knows much about life.

He is in the midst of life--it pulsates all around him and in him.

We know positively that the law of compensation is inexorable in its
demands for right and positive in its punishment of wrong.

We know that on this earth kindness, love, occupation, help, truth, honor
and sympathy are investments which bring happiness today. You get your
pay instantly when you have done a helpful act and you get your
punishment instantly when you have done a hurtful act.

That there is a future most of us agree, because good sense and logic
points to that sane and reasonable conclusion.

So be it, with a belief in the future estate, it is reasonable
to assume that our acts and lives in the present estate will have influence
on our future estate.

We know positively of today, and the happiness we can get from good
deeds done today.

If we will have power in the future to look back to today's acts, well
and good, if today's acts are worth while.

The other view that eternity is everything and the present is nothing
is the antiquated view, the narrow view; the, I might say, illiterate
view.

That view warps the present life; it calls for present self-chastisement,
present gloom, present sorrow and present misery.

It takes the tangible definite today, calls it nothing, and accepts the
intangible unknown eternity as everything.

It trades the definite for the indefinite. It calls life a bubble, a
vapor, a shadow. In fact, it makes gloom on today's sunshine and
puts its believers into a purgatory; a dismal unhappy punishment
antechamber where man exists and waits peeping out of his cell windows
for a little imagined view of eternity.

He waits and endures the unpleasant interval, steeled against definite
pleasures and evident life of today, and worried into an intoxicated
colored belief in the expected happiness of the undefined future.

He refuses to think of definite life of today and spoils the thought of
those who do.

He is a blockade to progress, a disagreeable part of life's picture.

He gets no happiness in the today which is in his hands, he loses this
opportunity during his definite existence, and lives on future hopes
in a future state which no man today knows what it will be.

Both theories as ultimate beliefs are wrong, yet each has some truth in
its conclusion.

By taking the words eternity and present and saying both means
everything, we avoid extremes and form a truth that is rational,
and harmonious to good reason.

The man who says present is all does so because he is an utilitarian.
He acts on the definite and refuses to believe in the abstract.
Anything that is outside the sphere of his vision and action is of
little concern to him.

The man who says eternity is all, wastes opportunity, example and warps
himself into a miserable hermit.

Life is irrevocable.

Every act in our life is placed, set, and fixed.

Every act goes in the record book of yesterday and it cannot be
changed.

Acts that hurt others will rebound and hurt us. Deeds that helped
others will rebound and help us. This much is certain.

There is a future, I believe that. There is a God, I believe that.

Just what the future is, and just what God is, I do not know in perfect
detail.

Reward for good and punishment for bad, is part of God's plan, and I am
conscious of this truth.

I know that justice prevails in this life, and this life is what I am
living now.

If I live and act today in what I sincerely believe is in tune with God's
purpose, I shall in my future estate benefit by those acts.

If I live and act today, disregarding all around me, selfishly catering
to personal purpose, believing that eternity is everything and present
is nothing, I am passing definite opportunity to do good now, for a hope
of personal reward in an eternity, the which is indefinite as to what
it shall be.

I shall therefore strive to do, and to be, right; to be kind, helpful,
cheery and smiling now, for the reward such acts bring now.

And I shall doubtless have as good a record and passport to the
future as the man who suffers now and lives only upon his selfish hope
of the future.

His is fear thought, mine is faith thought, in the all wise, all powerful,
all seeing, all right Ruler of the universe, who gave me my life, my
brain, my reason, which I am trying to use, as nearly as my limitations
will allow, to helping myself and helping others to smile, to be
happy, to be serene, to be confident, to be competent, to be
useful.

This is as I see it. I wouldn't do what I do, think what I think or act
as I act unless I were sincere.

Below all this is charity, which means you have the unquestioned right
to do and to be what your best thought and conscience tells you
to do and to be.

Nevertheless it is well to reason with one another on the subject of the
now and the tomorrow of our existence for it is a universal subject
on which all men must make a decision.

SINCERITY
Do Not Accept Sincerity as Proof of Truth

"I believe in him because he is so sincere."
You've heard that, haven't you? I never could understand why a sensible
person would use such logic.

Sincerity is no evidence of truth. The Hindu mother is sincere who throws
her babe to the crocodiles, but her sincerity is no proof that by this
sacrifice she is sure of her salvation.

The Christian Scientist is sincere in the belief that medicines do not
cure diseases. The doctor is equally sincere that medicines will cure
disease.

The Theosophist is sincere, the Atheist, the Agnostic, the Christian, the
Pagan, the Mohammedan, the Buddhist, the Sun-worshipper, the Republican,
the Democrat, the Progressive, the Prohibitionist, the Brewer, all these
are sincere in their beliefs. And as these beliefs are different, it
is common sense to say that no one creed, sect, belief, branch, dogma
or system, is all truth.

It is true every channel or avenue we meet in life's travel has some
truth, but it is not for you or me to assume that we are the sole
possessors of wisdom and the real discoverers of all truth.

We must not take the conclusions we arrive at and expect to force the
world to accept without protest our rules for conduct, our methods
for living, our practices for morals, or our beliefs, for their
guide.

Converts to new doctrines, new issues, new cults and to the old
ones, too, are made largely because the ambassadors or proselyters
seem so fervid and sincere in expounding what they claim is the
definite truth.

The believers in a cult or code of ethics are auto hypnotized, their
visions are narrowed.

By focusing their thought on their special belief they bring together
sophistry, arguments, examples and so-called proof that gives them facility
in arguing the case or expounding their doctrine.

You can make no gain to try to argue with a Christian Scientist. You ask
for concrete rules, definite answers and other proofs than their
flat statements, and you are told you have not the understanding, that
your attitude is not in the right plane, and that the truth cannot
be shown you.

You are told to have faith, belief, to eliminate antagonism, and to study
"Science and Health" and you will receive the divine spirit and see the
light.

The Scientist is sincere; he shows you "Science and Health" with a
lot of testimonials in the back to prove that Christian Science cures
disease. Every patent medicine, every science, every system of healing
has testimonials by the hundreds.

Scientists say there is no disease, no material, that we are only
spirit or soul, or thought; that we are not matter but mind. That
health is truth and disease is error. They deny disease yet "Science
and Health" and the midweek experience meetings have testimonials
of disease cured by Christian Science.
There is much truth in Christian Science. People are helped by it,
people are sincere in their belief in it, but that Christian Science
is all truth, all powerful, all right, all sufficient, cannot be
proven.
What about the people who have gone hence before Christian Science
was ever heard of?
The theological religion today, the practices and beliefs, differ
from the vogue of fifty years ago.
If the Protestant religion be all truth what became of our religious
ancestors who died before Martin Luther found the truth?
I have no quarrel with the Christian Scientist, the Protestant, the
Roman Catholic, the Buddhist, or the Mohammedan. I must be generous
and broad enough to say others have the right to think and be
sincere. All sciences have truth, but no science, sect, cult, dogma,
or creed is ALL truth.
Sincerity may be satisfaction and necessary for the possessors of
that sincerity, but that your sincerity in your belief must be
accepted by me as proof that I should believe as you do, is, I
believe, the place where I have the undoubted right to say, "I
reserve the right to my own conclusions and I am unjust to myself
if I force myself to accept your viewpoint without full belief
myself that you are right."
So, then, because a person is sincere in a belief that is contrary
to your conscientious belief, do not be disturbed or swerved from
common sense analysis or convinced against your better judgment.
No one possesses all the truth. It is for you and me to do our plain
duty as we see it, to do the best we can each day in act and thought
and word.
We can pretty much agree on the simple essential truths which are
proven. That is, being honest, truthful, kind, lovable, sympathetic,
cheerful, doing good, helping one another and doing things worth
while.
If we agree on these things and do useful work and think helpful
thoughts, we are doing our duty.
Theories, arguments and studying too deeply on bootless systems,
codes, beliefs, cults, isms, or doctrines, is a waste of time.
When we can here and now derive definite benefits from doing the
simple and helpful things and acting and thinking the simple practical
cheer thoughts, it is not necessary or good for us to waste time
on spiritualism or theoretical beliefs that cannot be proved to our
own selves satisfactorily.
We are asked to believe these strange, impractical, unnatural
beliefs, because of the sincerity of others. It's better to do, and
to be the thing we can ourselves measure, understand and sincerely
believe.
There are hundreds of strange beliefs and spiritual systems, each
claiming to be all powerful, all right. If any one is all truth
then all the others are all wrong.
The bigot who assumes he is the sole possessor of truth, the cult,
sect, ism, or science that claims to possess all truth, and the
exact rules for the world to obey, should be classed with those
other misguided men and religions which burned human beings who
dared to doubt their right to the possession of all truth.
God never gave his approval to any one man-made religious sect.
God is the universal good power; man often tries to interpret God's
idea to his own selfish narrow vision.

PILLS
The Man Who Has a Pill for Every Ill
How often we see the pill fiend. In his vest pocket he has a small
apothecary shop, a collection of round paste-board boxes and little
bottles.
Every little while he dopes himself. If his stomach is on a strike
he pops in a pill. If his head aches he takes a tablet. If he sneezes
he takes a cold cure pill.
When anyone around speaks of a pain or ache he hands the person a
pill.
The pill eater is a hypochondriac and very likely his doctor knows
it.
The salvation is that the doctor probably gives him harmless stuff
in pill form. The patient doesn't know this and it's like a rabbit's
foot or a piece of pork rubbed on a wart; it satisfies the mind and
nature makes the cure.
Often, however, the pills are not innocent; the pill fiend buys the
tablets and pills direct from the druggist. The headache tablet is
most likely one of the coal tar drugs like acetanilid, and that is
positively harmful when taken too often.
There are times to take pills, in cases of emergency, when you can
shock nature with a poison and bring a wholesome reaction.
These times are rare, and the doctor should be the sole judge as
to when they are necessary.
Exercise, diet, correct habits of living will prevent congestion
and illness that cause pain.
The pill habit is nothing less than a drug habit, and the drug habit
positively weakens the system.
The headache tablet does not cure the headache, it only stops the
pain; the evil is still there. The headache is merely nature's
signal that something is out of whack.
Headaches are generally caused by the stomach, eye strain, or
neuralgia; the latter in turn is caused by too much uric acid in
the system.
Eat fruit, drink plenty of water, and that will flush the system
and stop stomachic headache.
See the optician if it's eyes. If you have frequent headache in the
forehead, very likely it's the eyes, even though you do not suspect
it.

If it's neuralgia, get a corrective diet list from the doctor.
I know scores of men and women, too, who take pills enough to kill
a person. Their systems have been educated up to it; they are
saturated with poison.
And the worst of it is they never get well while taking the pills;
it is only a temporary deadening of the pain.
Then there are many who take pills to make them sleep. That's a
crime.
It's murder in slow degrees for they are surely shortening their
lives by this poison dope pill habit.
Mark this: Nature, and Nature alone, effects cures and it's in very,
very few instances that a poison pill can be used to advantage.
You can keep well by getting good air, good water, good sunshine,
good food, good exercise, good rest, good cheer and good thought.
That is what I call my golden prescription, and it will do wonders
for you, and every doctor will tell you so.
Pills kill, if you keep up the habit. There are no two ways about
it. I say positively and knowingly, that this pill habit is absolutely
life shortening.
Don't try to argue; the evidence is unshakable on this point.George's mind was therefore now at rest, so far as
matters of the greatest importance were concerned; he therefore
concluded his inspection and returned to the deck, easy in mind and
greatly elated at the wonderful success which had thus far attended his
bold dash upon Panama.

The new day was heralded by the sudden appearance of a fleet of some
seventy or eighty fishing-boats and canoes coming out of the harbour and
hastening toward the fishing grounds in the offing.  Several of these
small craft passed quite close to the galleon, and the sight of them
inspired George with an idea.  Making his way from the poop down into
the grand saloon, he rummaged about until he found writing materials,
when he sat down at the table and after some consideration penned the
following letter:

"On board the galleon _Cristobal Colon_.

"August 19th, in the year of Our Lord 1569.

"To his Excellency Don Silvio Hermoso Maria Picador

"Calderon,

"Governor of the City of Panama, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

"Illustrious Senor.

"On the fourth day of this present month I arrived at the city of Nombre
de Dios upon a mission the purpose of which was to secure the release of
seventeen Englishmen who were last year made prisoners in the course of
a treacherous and unjustifiable attack upon the fleet of Admiral Hawkins
while, in pursuance of an agreement between himself and His Excellency
Don Martin Enriquez, the Viceroy of Mexico, he was refitting his ships.

"I have traced those seventeen prisoners in the first instance from San
Juan de Ulua to Nombre de Dios; and upon my arrival at Nombre I was
informed by His Excellency Don Sebastian de Albareda, the Governor of
the city, that they had been dispatched to Panama.  Whereupon, at my
request, Don Sebastian was so obliging as to address a letter to Your
Excellency, informing you of the purpose of my visit, and requesting you
to take whatever steps might be necessary to secure the immediate
release of those seventeen Englishmen and their surrender to me.

"In due course Don Sebastian received your reply to his letter, and that
reply he permitted me to read.  From it I regretfully learned that Your
Excellency categorically refused to accede to Don Sebastian's most
reasonable request, notwithstanding the fact that the city of Nombre was
then in my hands and at my mercy, and that, for all you knew to the
contrary, your refusal would involve it in all the horrors of sack and
destruction.

"Your Excellency, I am not so inhumane as to punish the innocent for the
faults of the guilty, therefore since Don Sebastian had obviously done
everything in his power to further the success of my mission, and had
failed, not through his own fault but because of your obstinacy, I
spared Nombre, and determined to try what personal persuasion might
effect with yourself.  Accompanied by my followers, I set out for
Panama, where we arrived last night.  And in the early hours of this
morning I took the first step toward reaching satisfactory terms with
Your Excellency by capturing the _Cristobal Colon_, now riding at anchor
in Panama roadstead.

"No doubt Your Excellency is well acquainted with the galleon and the
possibilities which she affords to a determined captain backed by a
strong and courageous crew.  If, however, Your Excellency chances to be
ignorant as to those possibilities--which I can scarcely believe--her
captain, who, as I understand, is at present in your city, will
doubtless inform you that her armament is sufficiently powerful and
complete to destroy Panama in the course of a few hours.  To prevent any
such unpleasant contingency as that, I therefore have to request that
Your Excellency will do me the honour to visit me on board the ship
before the hour of noon this day, to treat with me respecting the
immediate surrender of the seventeen Englishmen already referred to.

"Failure to comply with this request will be followed by an immediate
bombardment of the city, greatly as I shall regret the unnecessary
sacrifice of life and property.

"I kiss Your Excellency's hands and feet,--

"And have the honour to be

"Your Excellency's most humble and obedient servant,--

"George Saint Leger."

Having read over this letter and _come to_ the conclusion that it pretty
clearly expressed all that he at that moment desired to say to the
Governor of Panama, George made a further rummage of the cabin and,
having at length found a sheet of paper large enough for his purpose, he
took a pen and, dipping the feather of it in ink, proceeded laboriously
to print upon it, in Spanish, a proclamation to the citizens of Panama,
informing them that he, George Saint Leger, having certain differences
to settle with His Excellency the Governor of the city, had, as a
preliminary, captured the _Cristobal Colon_, to which ship he had
summoned the Governor, before the hour of noon, for the purpose of a
conference; and that, failing obedience on the Governor's part, the city
would be bombarded.  He therefore exhorted all citizens who were anxious
to escape the horrors of a bombardment to use their influence with the
Governor in order to persuade him to attend on board the galleon before
the hour named.

This done, the young captain extinguished the lamp, the rays of which
were already being dimmed by the daylight pouring down through the
skylight and in through the side ports, and ascended to the poop to take
a look round.  As he stepped out on deck through the companion he
perceived that the weather had again changed; the dark clouds which had
been sweeping athwart the sky while he and his followers were making the
passage from the shore to the ship had vanished, leaving a sky of deep,
rich, stainless blue, brightening into clear primrose to the eastward
over the summits of the sierras which stood out purple, sharp, and
clean-cut against the delicate yellow that was changing, even as he
looked, to a clear, warm orange before the approach of the risen but as
yet invisible sun.  The fresh breeze of a few hours before had dwindled
away to a mere breathing, while inshore it had fallen a flat calm,
leaving five small craft--probably bound for the Pearl Islands, some
forty miles to the southward and eastward--idly swinging upon the low
ground swell in the midst of the reflected image of the town and the
hilly country behind it.  A few pale blue wreaths of wood smoke were
rising straight up into the clear morning air here and there over the
roofs of the houses, showing that the early cup of chocolate was already
in course of preparation for the luxury-loving Panamans, or possibly it
might indicate that the working portion of the population were preparing
their breakfast; and, peering through his perspective glass, George
could see that the quay was already the scene of a considerable amount
of animation.  Its greatest heat is stated at nearly 45 degrees above
the temperature of the air in which the plant was growing.

_Iceland_ is perhaps the most deplorable spot on the world's map. "Not
very long ago it counted at least 100,000 inhabitants. Depopulated by
time, which has more than once introduced frightful pestilence,
there are now not half that number. Their occupation is that of shepherds
and fishermen, for the bitterness of the climate makes all agricultural
labours vain or unproductive. They are scattered over the wide wastes
of the country, far distant, in huts and farms, and it was only in
1787 that any portion of the population was gathered into towns, if towns
may be called the two spots where a few families have their abode
together."George now turned his attention to matters nearer at hand, and allowed
his gaze to wander over the galleon's spacious decks.  They were
disgracefully dirty, speaking of the lax discipline that had been
permitted to prevail by the easy-going officers of the ship, and he gave
a sharp order which presently brought all hands on deck, considerably
refreshed, as he could see, by even the short spell of rest which they
had enjoyed.  Scrubbing brushes, mops, and buckets were searched for and
found; and a few minutes later the decks were undergoing such a vigorous
process of cleansing as they had not known for many a day.  Then, as the
planking rapidly dried in the hot rays of the sun, the baggage which the
adventurers had brought with them across the isthmus was unpacked and,
as the hour of eight boomed out from the Cathedral, Saint George's Cross
was run up on the ensign staff of the galleon!  A few fishing-boats were
by this time returning to the harbour, and one of these George hailed
and ordered alongside.  The crew were negroes, and they gaped in open-
mouthed astonishment as they passed through the entry port and beheld
the decks alive with lithe, active seamen, florid-faced beneath the
bronze of their skins, and most unquestionably foreigners.  They
hazarded no remarks, however, nor--to do them justice--did they exhibit
any very great amount of alarm; they were doubtless slaves, animated by
a whole-hearted hatred of their Spanish masters, and if the truth could
been have arrived at they were probably by no means sorry to find that
so fine a ship had fallen into the hands of men who were obviously
enemies of the hated Spaniard.  Happy the creature of sense and passion
who has always with him that self which he could take pleasure in
contemplating! Happy--to pass graver considerations--the fair one whose
countenance continues as youthful as her attire! When Queen Elizabeth's
wrinkles waxed deep and many, it is reported that an unfortunate master
of the mint incurred disgrace by a too faithful shilling; the
die was broken, and only one mutilated impression is now in
existence.
Breakfast over, the sail-trimmers, under the boatswain, were sent round
the decks to inspect and acquaint themselves thoroughly with the running
rigging of the galleon, some of which was rove and led in a fashion
different from that in vogue in English ships of the time, in order that
they might know exactly where to lay their hands upon any required
halliard, sheet, tack, brail, or downhaul in the darkest night; and
while this was being done the guns' crew, under Barker, the gunner,
carefully overhauled all the ordnance, great and small, and satisfied
themselves that every piece was ready for immediate service.  This done,
the ordnance was loaded with a full powder charge, and a considerable
quantity of shot of various kinds was sent up on deck, ready for
immediate use; for George knew not how his message might be received by
the Governor, and he was determined to be prepared for anything and
everything that could possibly happen.

While these things were being done, Dyer the pilot, for want of
something better to do, amused himself by studying the city generally
through George's perspective glass; and after he had done so pretty
thoroughly he approached his young captain with a suggestion.

"Cap'n," he said, "while you've been busy wi' Barker, there, about the
ordnance, I've been starin' at the town through thicky glass o' yours,
and the thought have comed to me that if we're goin' to be obliged to
bombard, we're anchored in the wrong place.  We ought to be lyin'
somewhere over there, a bit more to the east'ard, and a li'l bit closer
inshore.  So far 's I can make out, there's a gurt wide street runnin'
right down to the shore yonder, just in a line wi' thicky big white
house atop of the hill; and if we was anchored in line wi' thicky
street, our shot 'd sweep un from end to end and, unless I be greatly
mistaken, would play havoc wi' some of they big buildin's, the tops of
which you can see over t'other houses, and which I thinks may be
Gov'ment buildin's of some sort--ay, and I be right, too, for, look 'e
there, dashed if they ain't hoistin' the Spanish flag upon the biggest
of 'em now."

George took the glass and carefully studied the buildings indicated by
Dyer, and soon came to the conclusion that the pilot was correct in
surmising them to be Government buildings, for as Dyer had said, there
was the golden flag of Spain floating from a flagstaff surmounting the
most imposing of the group, which was undoubtedly Government House.  But
why had the flag only just now been hoisted?  Had the fact any
significance, or was it merely due to the neglect or forgetfulness of
some subordinate official?  For it was now close upon ten o'clock, and
if the flag was hoisted daily, as of course it should be over a
Government building, it ought to have been hoisted nearly two hours ago.
And if the Spaniards had grown into the lazy habit of not hoisting it
every day, why had they taken the trouble to do so on this particular
morning?  Was it done to indicate the defiance of George's threat?--for
the latter had no doubt that his letter had by this time reached Don
Silvio's hands.

He considered the matter for a few moments, and presently came to the
conclusion that if the hoisting of the flag was intended to convey Don
Silvio's defiance, it could do no harm to reply to it by shifting his
berth to a spot more convenient than the present one for the purpose of
a bombardment; he had very little doubt that the significance of the
movement would be fully understood not only by Don Silvio, but also by
the townsfolk generally; and he held the belief that in dealing with an
antagonist it is always well to make it clear to him at the outset that
you are in deadly earnest and mean every word you say.  He had known
cases where quarrels had assumed a most serious and irreconcilable form
simply because each party had believed the other to be pretending to be
more in earnest than he really was.  Therefore, since the men were now
doing nothing particular and it would be an advantage to them to acquire
a working knowledge of their new ship as early as possible, George
issued an order for the canvas to be loosed and the cable to be hove
short preparatory to getting the galleon under way.

This was done with very commendable celerity by the men, considering
that they were quite new to the ship; and in about twenty minutes the
great hempen cable was "up and down," and the sail-trimmers were sent to
the sheets and halliards to sheet home and hoist away.  Five minutes
later the anchor was out of the ground and the _Cristobal Colon_ was
adrift and canting.

It was at this moment that Basset, the captain of soldiers, who had in
turn been amusing himself with George's glass, shouted:

"Do 'e see that.  Captain?  Thicky galley that we passed in harbour last
night, her be comin' out.  Do 'e think she'm comin' to attack we?"

"Maybe," answered George.  "I can't tell.  But whether she be or not, we
must be ready for her.  For she must not be allowed to escape.  "Only
of losing sight of horse, man, and money," again replied the gaberlunzie.

"Does you know dat you make one gentlemans out to be one great rogue?"

"Mony gentlemen," replied Ochiltree, "can make that out for themselves--
But what's the sense of quarrelling?--If ye want to gang on, gang
on--if no--I'll gae back to the gude ait-straw in Ringan Aikwood's barn
that I left wi' right ill-will e'now, and I'll pit back the pick and
shule whar I got them."
Dousterswivel deliberated a moment, whether, by suffering Edie to depart,
he might not secure the whole of the expected wealth for his own exclusive
use. But the want of digging implements, the uncertainty whether, if he
had them, he could clear out the grave to a sufficient depth without
assistance, and, above all, the reluctance which he felt, owing to the
experience of the former night, to venture alone on the terrors of
Misticot's grave, satisfied him the attempt would be hazardous.
Endeavouring, therefore, to assume his usual cajoling tone, though
internally incensed, he begged "his goot friend Maister Edie Ochiltrees
would lead the way, and assured him of his acquiescence in all such an
excellent friend could propose."

"Aweel, aweel, then," said Edie, "tak gude care o' your feet amang the
lang grass and the loose stones. I wish we may get the light keepit in
neist, wi' this fearsome wind--but there's a blink o' moonlight at
times."

Thus saying, old Edie, closely accompanied by the adept, led the way
towards the ruins, but presently made a full halt in front of them.

"Ye're a learned man, Mr. Dousterdeevil, and ken muckle o' the
marvellous works o' nature--Now, will ye tell me ae thing?--D'ye believe
in ghaists and spirits that walk the earth?--d'ye believe in them, ay
or no?"
"Now, goot Mr. Edie," whispered Dousterswivel, in an expostulatory tone
of voice, "is this a times or a places for such a questions?"
"Indeed is it, baith the tane and the t'other, Mr. Dustanshovel; for I
maun fairly tell ye, there's reports that auld Misticot walks. Now
this wad be an uncanny night to meet him in, and wha kens if he
wad be ower weel pleased wi' our purpose of visiting his pose?"
"_Alle guten Geister_"--muttered the adept, the rest of the conjuration
being lost in a tremulous warble of his voice,--"I do desires you
not to speak so, Mr.

Edie; for, from all I heard dat one other night, I do much believes"--
"Now I," said Ochiltree, entering the chancel, and flinging abroad
his arm with an air of defiance, "I wadna gie the crack o' my thumb for
him were he to appear at this moment: he's but a disembodied spirit,
as we are embodied anes."
"For the lofe of heavens," said Dousterswivel, "say nothing at all neither
about somebodies or nobodies!"
"Aweel," said the beggar (expanding the shade of the lantern), "here's the
stane, and, spirit or no spirit, I'se be a wee bit deeper in the grave;"
and he jumped into the place from which the precious chest had
that morning been removed.

After striking a few strokes, he tired, or affected to tire, and said
to his companion, "I'm auld and failed now, and canna keep at it--time
about's fair play, neighbour; ye maun get in and tak the shule a
bit, and shule out the loose earth, and then I'll tak turn about
wi' you."

Dousterswivel accordingly took the place which the beggar had
evacuated, and toiled with all the zeal that awakened avarice,
mingled with the anxious wish to finish the undertaking and leave
the place as soon as possible, could inspire in a mind at once
greedy, suspicious, and timorous.

Edie, standing much at his ease by the side of the hole, contented
himself with exhorting his associate to labour hard.

"My certie! few ever wrought for siccan a day's wage; an it be but--say
the tenth part o' the size o' the kist, No. I., it will double its value,
being filled wi' gowd instead of silver. Od, ye work as if ye had
been bred to pick and shule-- ye could win your round half-crown
ilka day.

Tak care o' your taes wi' that stane!" giving a kick to a large one
which the adept had heaved out with difficulty, and which Edie
pushed back again to the great annoyance of his associate's
shins.

Thus exhorted by the mendicant, Dousterswivel struggled and laboured
among the stones and stiff clay, toiling like a horse, and internally
blaspheming in German.

When such an unhallowed syllable escaped his lips, Edie changed his
battery upon him.

"O dinna swear! dinna swear! Wha kens whals listening!--Eh! gude guide
us, what's you!
But in the present case there appeared to be some
hesitation with regard to the adoption of this mode of attack, and
George soon came to the conclusion that the galleon's cargo--the nature
of which he had not yet found time to investigate--must be so enormously
rich that the Spaniards were unwilling to risk its loss by ramming her.
Certainly they did not at the moment appear to contemplate such a
manoeuvre, for instead of pulling with all their strength, in order to
get good way upon the galley, so that she might strike an effective
blow, the slaves were doing little more than just give her steerage way.
And seeing this, George suddenly determined upon a bold step.  To cross
a galley's bows was, under ordinary circumstances, simply to invite
disaster, but noting the apparent hesitation of the galley's captain,
Saint Leger determined to risk it in the present case; therefore, first
signing to the helmsman to keep the ship away a trifle more, he turned
to his crew and shouted: "Gunners, depress the muzzles of your pieces
sufficiently to sweep yonder galley's deck, and fire just so soon as you
can be sure to hit her.  I am going to risk crossing her bows.  Archers,
stand ready to discharge your shafts.  And let the waits play up `Ye
gallant sons of Devon.'  If so be that there are any English among the
galley-slaves, 'twill hearten the poor souls up a bit to know that some
of their own countrymen be close at hand."

And therewith the waits--some half a dozen instrumentalists--launched
forth with an air that was at that time as familiar to every Devon man
as his own name, though it is nearly if not quite forgotten now.  Ten
seconds later, every man on the galleon's decks, from George downward,
was shouting the fine old song at the top of his voice, the melody going
far out over the water and causing the haughty Dons on the galley's poop
to stare in amazement.

Almost at the same instant the galley's culverin spoke again.  This time
the piece was aimed to hit, and it did so, piercing the galleon's
larboard poop bulwark and passing so close to George's head that he
distinctly felt the wind of it, while a big splinter from the bulwark
not only knocked off his steel headpiece, but also scored his scalp so
shrewdly that in a moment he was almost blinded by the blood that
streamed down into his eyes.  The force of the blow caused him to
stagger for a moment, and three or four men stationed at the smaller
ordnance on the poop rushed toward him, fearing that he was badly hurt.
But with a smile he ordered them back to their stations as he wiped the
blood out of his eyes with his kerchief, and the next instant a loud
twanging of bowstrings told that the archers had got to work.  A final
glance at the galley showed George that her oarsmen were still pulling
slow and that there was ample room for the galleon to cross her bows; he
therefore signed to the helmsman and the great ship went surging past,
while her ordnance, great and small, belched forth a perfect tornado of
bullets, nails, jagged fragments of iron and what not upon the deck of
the devoted craft.  When the smoke cleared away it was seen that the
oars were drooping motionless in the water, and that of all that great
crowd who a moment earlier stood upon her deck, scarcely a paltry dozen
still remained upright.  That terrific storm of missiles had most
effectually done its work.

On the after deck but one solitary officer, clad in a complete suit of
splendid armour, and with the hilt of his broken sword in his hand,
stood among a heap of slain, and, seeing him, George sprang up on the
rail of the galleon and hailed him:

"Do you surrender, senor, _a buena guerra_?" he demanded.

"What else can I do, senor, seeing that you have slain the whole of my
crew with your infernal broadside?" he demanded.  "Yes, senor," he
continued, "I surrender the ship, but I am disgraced for ever, and I
will not increase my humiliation by becoming your prisoner."

And therewith he calmly walked to the side of the galley and
deliberately sprang overboard, sinking instantly, of course.

The Cruise of the "Nonsuch" Buccaneer--by Harry Collingwood


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

HOW GEORGE FOUND HIS BROTHER.

"So much for Spanish pride!" muttered George to himself as he gazed
thoughtfully at the little ring of foam and the few bubbles which alone
marked the spot where the officer had disappeared.  Then he stepped down
off the rail and gave orders for the galleon to be hove-to.

Next came the order to "Out boats"; and when four of them had been
lowered and brought to the gangway, George instructed Basset to take
command of one, the boatswain of another, the armourer of the third, and
announced his intention to himself command the fourth, leaving Dyer, the
pilot, in temporary command of the ship.  Every man told off to go in
the boats of course went armed to the teeth, for the galley-slaves were
known to be, as a rule, desperate characters, and George was already
beginning to feel not a little puzzled as to how he was to deal with
this batch, now that he had them.  A few strokes of the oars sufficed to
carry the boats alongside the galley, the long sweeps of which had
meanwhile been laid in, and in another moment the Englishmen had
scrambled up the craft's low sides and stood upon her deck.

She was a vessel of about forty tons measurement, very long and shallow
in proportion to her beam, with full deck forward and aft, and narrow
wash-boards on either side connecting the two, the remainder of her
being open, the open portion protected from the sea by coamings all
round about a foot high.  And down in this open portion of the vessel
were the galley-slaves, naked as the day they were born, and each
chained to the bench upon which he sat.  A gang-plank ran fore and aft
of this space along the centre line of the ship, for the accommodation
of the boatswains, usually two in number, whose duty it was to
continually walk fore and aft, while the ship was under way, keeping a
watchful eye upon the slaves, and stimulating them to exert themselves
to the utmost, when working the sweeps, by free and unmerciful
application of the whip to their naked bodies.  The slaves were kept
chained to their benches for days, and often for weeks, at a time; they
toiled, ate, drank, and slept thus chained; and their condition and that
of the interior which contained them may therefore be left to the
imagination of the reader.

A moment's glance along the galley's deck sufficed to reveal to the
Englishmen the devastating effect which that single broadside of
langrage had wrought upon the unfortunate craft's crew.  It had been
fired at such close range that the missiles had only spread just
sufficiently to include the entire range of the deck in its destructive
sweep, and as the new arrivals gazed in amazement at the deep scores
ploughed in the deck planking by the storm of iron and lead, running in
a general direction fore and aft, and so close together that in some
cases it was scarcely possible to lay a finger between them, the wonder
was not that so many of the crew had been smitten down, but that there
were any survivals at all.  A glance down into the well, however,
revealed the fact that the slaves, seated well below the level of the
deck, and further protected by the stout coamings, had escaped almost
scot-free.

Hastily directing Basset to see to the securing of the few unhurt
prisoners, and to separate the wounded from the dead, George ran along
the wash-board to the after deck and from this descended by a short
flight of steps to the gang-plank running fore and aft the length of the
well.

"Are there any Englishmen aboard this galley?" he demanded.

"Ay, that there be; eleven of us--or was, avore you fired upon us,"
answered a voice.  "I'm afeared you've a-killed one or two of us down
here, but what do that matter so long as you've a-comed to deliver the
rest of us out of this here floatin' hell, as, thanks be to God
Almighty, you have, I do suppose."

"You are right, lad, we have," answered George, cheerily.  "And who may
you be?" he continued, a slight twang of his Devonshire dialect creeping
into his speech in his excitement.

"I?  Why I be Joe Cary, to Plymouth; and I was took a year ago at San
Juan de Ulua, along wi' some others, when we put in there, under Admiral
Hawkins, to refit.  We've--"

"Tell me, quick, man," interrupted George.  "Do you know anything of the
whereabouts of a Mr Hubert Saint Leger, who was with Captain Drake in
that affair?"

"Do I know anything about Mr Saint Leger?" repeated Cary.  "Ay, sure I
do.  Why, he's one o' us here aboard this galley.  'Twas he that--Hi!
Mr Saint Leger--Mr Saint Leger--what's come to 'e?  Here be a vine
brave Devonshire lad askin' about 'e.  He's for'ard, sir, on the
larboard side, the fourth bench ahead o' this here one that I be sittin'
on."

There was no response to Cary's call, so George quickly turned and,
striding along the gang-plank, reached the fourth bench, upon which sat
three men, the middle one of which was supporting the senseless form of
his neighbour nearest the gang-plank.  Peering down, in the semi-
darkness, George beheld in the senseless one a lean, muscular figure,
his naked body brown with long exposure to the sun and weather, covered,
as were the rest, with a growth of short hairs and, also as were the
rest, with innumerable long cicatrices, some white and evidently the
result of wounds inflicted long ago, but most of them of comparatively
recent date, showing how mercilessly the boatswains were in the habit of
plying their whips.  But in the case of the man whom George was then
gazing upon, those more or less ancient scars were almost obliterated by
the blood which was still oozing from some thirty or more long slashes
across the back, shoulders, loins and arms of the senseless one, whose
features were almost hidden by a great, unkempt black beard and
moustache already touched with grey, as was the touzled mop of black
hair upon his head.  Yet, through it all, as George's eyes grew
accustomed to the twilight gloom of the place, he was able to recognise
the features of his brother Hubert, obscured as they were with hair,
dirt, and sweat.

"Is he dead?" he demanded of the man who was supporting him.

"Nay, senor, I think not," answered the man.  "I believe he has but
swooned under the merciless flogging inflicted by that demon yonder,
whom your shot have slain and so perchance saved from a better merited
death."

"And why did he flog this man so mercilessly?" demanded George in a tone
of terrible calmness.

"Because," answered the man, "it was Hubert, here, who, when he heard
the music from your ship, shouted to us that you were English, and that,
if we would stop rowing, you would take the galley and set us all free."

George raised his head above the combing and shouted to the armourer:
"Miles, come down here at once with your hammer and chisel.  There is a
man here--several men--whom I wish to release from their fetters."

"Senor," interposed the man who was supporting Hubert's senseless form,
and who seemed to guess what George required, "if you will feel in the
pocket of that dead boatswain's doublet, you will find the key to unlock
our chains."

"Thanks," responded George as he bent over the dead boatswain; and a
minute later he had unlocked the chain which confined his brother's body
to the bench, and was calling to another man to help him to carry it up
on deck.

"Senor--senor, are you not going to release us also?" demanded Hubert's
comrade, as George turned away to arrange for the dispatch of his
brother to the galleon.

"In good time, _amigo_, in good time," answered George.  "A little
patience is all you now need.  I will return to you later."

With infinite care Hubert's body was lowered into a boat and dispatched
to the galleon, with an imperative order from George to the surgeon to
treat his patient gently and do his utmost for him.  For I darenae
bide wi' you till day."
"Ye maun let us bide till our feathers dry, For the time of our
trial's drawing nigh.

A voice will call at the hour eleven, An' a naked sword appear in
heaven!

"There's an offering to make, but not by men, On altar as white as the
snow of the glen-- There's a choice to be made, and a vow to pay, And
blood to spill ere the break of day."
"O, tell me, beings of marvellous birth, If ye are twa creatures of heaven
or earth?
For ye look an' ye speak, I watnae how-- But I'm fear'd, I'm fear'd,
little burdies for you!"
"Ye needna be fear'd, for it's no our part To injure the kind and the
humble heart; And those whose trust is in heaven high, The Angel of God
will aye be nigh.

We were twa sisters bred in a bower, As gay as the lark an' as fair as
the flower; But few of the ills of this world we proved, Till
we were slain by the hands we loved.

Our bodies into the brake were flung, To feed the hawks and the
ravens young; And there our little bones reclined, And white they
bleach'd in the winter wind.

Our youngest sister found them there, And wiped them clean wi' her
yellow hair; And every day she sits and grieves, And covers them
o'er wi' the wabron leaves.

Then our twin souls they sought the sky, And were welcome guests in the
heavens high; And we gat our choice through all the spheres What lives
to lead for a thousand years.

Then humble, old matron, lend us thine aid, For this night the choice
is to be made; And we have sought thy lowly hearth For the last advice
thou giv'st on earth.

Say, shall we skim o'er this earth below, Beholding its scenes of joy and
woe; And try to reward the virtuous heart, And make the unjust and the
sinner smart?

Or shall we choose the star of love, In a holy twilight still to move;
Or fly to frolic, light and boon, On the silver mountains of the moon?

O, tell us, for we hae nane beside!
Our daddy's gane, and our mammy's a bride.

She is blitliely laid in her bridal sheet, But a spirit stands at her
bed feet.

Ay, though she be laid in her bridal bed, There is guiltless blood
upon her head; And on her soul the hue of a crime, That will never
wash out till the end of time.

Advise, advise! dear matron, advise!
For you are humble, devout, and wise.

We ask a last advice from you-- Our hour is come--what shall we do?"

"O, wondrous creatures, ye maun allow I naething can ken of beings like
you; But ere the voice calls at eleven, Go ask your Father who is in
heaven."
Away, away, the burdies flew Aye singing, "Adieu, kind heart, adieu!
They that hae blood on their hands may rue Afore the day-beam kiss the
dew.

There's naught sae heinous in human life As taking a helpless baby's
life; There's naething sae kind aneath the sky As cheering the heart that
soon maun die."

The morning came wi' drift an' snaw, And with it news frae the bridal-ha',
That death had been busy, and blood was spilt, May Heaven preserve us
all from guilt!

They tell of a deed--Believe't who can?
Such tale was never told by man; The bridegroom is gone in fire and
flood, And the bridal-bed is steep'd with blood!

The poor auld matron died ere day, And was found as life was passing away;
And twa bonny burdies sang in the bed, The one at the feet, the other
the head.
Now I have heard tales, and told them too, Hut this is beyond what
I could do; And far hae I ridden, and far hae I gane, But burdies
like these I never saw nane.

_Fraser's Magazine._
* * * * * 

ELLISTON AND THE ASS' HEAD.
Elliston was, in his day, the Napoleon of Drury-lane, but, like the
conqueror at Austerlitz, he suffered his declensions, and the Surrey
became to him a St. Helena. However, once an eagle always an eagle;
and Robert William was no less aquiline in the day of adversity
than in his palmy time of patent prosperity. He was born to carry
things with a high hand, and he but fulfilled his destiny. The
anecdote which we are about to relate, is one of the ten thousand
instances of his lordly bearing. When, the season before last, "no
effects" was written over the treasury-door of Covent-garden theatre,
it will be remembered that several actors proffered their services
_gratis_, in aid of the then humble, but now arrogant and persecuting
establishment. Among these patriots was Mr. T.P.George was greatly affected at the sight of his brother lying there
stretched out upon the pallet, with his head resting upon a pillow
supported by his arms, and unable to move his body in the least without
suffering excruciating agony.  But, terrible as Hubert's plight was, he
still had spirit enough to make light of it when his brother, kneeling
down by the side of the pallet, bent over him and tenderly kissed him on
the brow.  He smiled happily up into George's face and, with an effort
that must have been torment to him, freed his right hand and grasped
that of his brother as he murmured:

"You only fired that broadside just in time to save me, old chap.
Another half-minute, and that fiend of a boatswain would have killed me.
I won't ask you now how you happened to find me, that must wait until
you have more time to talk and I more strength to listen; moreover, that
splendid fellow Chichester has been telling me a bit of the story while
he was dressing my wounds.  But one thing you must tell me, Georgie.
How is the dear mother?"

The fact that George had nothing but good news to communicate to his
brother seemed to cheer the latter amazingly, and caused him to so far
forget his fearful injuries that he went on asking question after
question until Chichester felt constrained to intervene and imperatively
insist that the young captain should go on deck and leave his brother to
get a little urgently needed rest.

As George ascended to the poop, almost dazed with the good fortune which
had enabled him to so unexpectedly deliver his brother from a life that
was one long torment, his ears were greeted with the cries of the
mariners shortening sail; and a few minutes later the galleon's anchor
was dropped in the new berth for which the ship had been making.  The
sails were furled, the decks cleared up, ropes coiled down, and every
preparation made for the expected visit of the Governor.  And shortly
afterward a large boat, pulling twelve oars, with an awning spread over
the stern sheets, and with the Spanish flag floating from an ensign
staff set up in the stern, was seen coming out of the harbour and
heading toward the _Cristobal Colon_.

Twenty minutes later she ranged up alongside, and a party of ten
Spaniards, dressed most extravagantly in the height of the prevailing
mode, proceeded to climb with more or less difficulty the lofty side of
the galleon, where, as they passed in through the entry port, they were
received by George at the head of his officers.  The contrast in
appearance between these popinjays, arrayed in silks and satins of the
most costly description, with splendid jewels round their necks, on
their fingers, and in their ears, their oiled, curled, and perfumed
locks surmounted by jaunty little caps of silk or velvet decorated with
beautiful feathers secured in place by gem-set brooches, and the sturdy
Devon lads, attired mostly in perfectly plain armour not altogether
guiltless of rust, beneath which showed their well-worn clothing, was a
striking one indeed, but there was a stern, business-like look on the
faces of the Englishmen that promptly checked any disposition to sneer
on the part of the Spaniards.

The visitors were of course received with every manifestation of the
most elaborate courtesy on the part of the English, and there was a
tremendous amount of bowing and scraping on the galleon's quarter-deck
before even a word was spoken.  Presently, however, a tall, dark
Spaniard, of about forty years of age, his handsome features marked with
an expression of considerable resolution, stepped forward and said, with
a bow:

"Senores, I am the Governor of Panama.  Who among you is Senor George
Saint Leger?"

"I am he, at Your Excellency's service," answered George, with a
corresponding bow.

"_You_?" ejaculated the Governor, incredulously.  "Why, you are only a
boy.  Where is your leader?  It is he with whom my present business is
concerned."

"Your Excellency," responded George, "I have the honour to be the
captain of the company you see about you."

"Ten thousand pardons, senor!" exclaimed the Governor, bowing low.  "I
trust that you will magnanimously forgive my hasty expression of
surprise.  I ought to have remembered that in your gallant nation age
does not necessarily count, and that among you are many very young men
who are doing work that fills us of maturer years with astonishment,
admiration and envy.  Again I crave your pardon for my exceedingly
stupid mistake.  It is you, then, senor, who addressed this letter to
me?"  And he drew forth from a wallet at his belt George's letter to
him.

"Even so, Your Excellency," acknowledged George.

"And in it you say that you wish to treat with me for the release of
seventeen Englishmen sent here as prisoners from Nombre de Dios.  Very
well, senor; I am prepared to treat with you upon that matter; but it
must be upon certain conditions.  And the first of those conditions is
that you unconditionally surrender this ship to her captain and
officers, whom I have brought with me in order that they may receive her
at your hands."

"Your Excellency, the condition you name is an impossible one, not to be
considered for an instant.  Let us dismiss it, and pass on to the next,
if there be a next," answered George calmly.

"Next?" reiterated the Governor, a trifle tartly, "of course there is a
next--several of them, indeed.  But it is useless to speak of them until
this, perhaps the most important of them all, is settled.  Upon what
grounds do you assert that my first condition is impossible, senor?  You
have secured possession of her by craft and in a manner which, if I may
be permitted to say so, amounts simply to piracy.  Our countries are not
at war, senor.  Then by what right do you seize a Spanish ship and,
worse still, refuse to surrender her to her lawful owners, the
representatives of His Most Catholic Majesty of Spain?"

"Ah!" returned George, with a great appearance of simplicity, "now there
Your Excellency puzzles me.  I can't exactly tell you by what right I do
this, and have done a good many other things on the north side of the
isthmus; but it is by the same right that justified Don Martin Enriquez,
His Most Catholic Majesty's Viceroy of Mexico, when he attacked the
fleet of Admiral Hawkins while he was refitting his ships in the harbour
of San Juan de Ulua, last year."

For a few moments the Governor looked--and was--decidedly "taken aback."
He could find no satisfactory reply to George's argument, for the
sufficient reason that none such existed.  But presently he pulled
himself together and said:

"The occurrence to which you have referred, senor, was a most deplorable
blunder on the Viceroy's part; but I had no hand in it, and I must
refuse to be held responsible for it.  You must yourself surely admit
that it would be unjust in the extreme to make me answerable for the
actions of a man over whom I have no control whatever."

"Oh, yes," retorted George, "I quite admit that; and it is not in your
personal capacity, but merely as a Spaniard, that I am holding you and
all Spaniards responsible for that outrage.  And I hold Spaniards
generally responsible for it, senor, for the reason that no attempt has
been made by any Spaniard to right the wrong that was done.  Yourself,
for example, when invited to do what you could to rectify the matter, as
far as might be, by releasing seventeen Englishmen unlawfully captured
during the commission of the `blunder,' curtly refused to take any steps
whatever.  Hence my presence here, and my capture of this ship.  Need I
say any more?"

It was necessary for George to say a great deal more before he succeeded
in bringing the stiff-necked Don to reason, and in the process of doing
so he told His Excellency a few home truths that first sent that
functionary into a towering passion and then turned him sick with fear;
but at length Don Silvio was brought to see the futility of kicking
against the pricks, and finally he gave in with a good grace, the more
readily when he learned that eleven out of the seventeen men demanded
had already been taken out of the captured galley; he agreed with George
that it was scarcely worth while to expose a number of important cities
to the horrors of bombardment and valuable ships to the risk of capture
for the sake of detaining half a dozen Englishmen in captivity; he
therefore at length struck a bargain with the relentless young captain
that, in consideration of the latter undertaking to abstain from further
molestation of Spanish life and property, he, the Governor of Panama,
would forthwith take the necessary steps to have the six Englishmen, or
as many of them as happened to be still alive, immediately released and
handed over to their own countrymen, signing a document to that effect.
"What was your trade in your youth?" continued the Earl.

"A soldier, my lord; and mony a sair day's kemping I've seen. I was
to have been made a sergeant, but"--
"A soldier! then you have slain and burnt, and sacked and spoiled?"
"I winna say," replied Edie, "that I have been better than my
neighbours;--it's a rough trade--war's sweet to them that never tried
it."
"And you are now old and miserable, asking from precarious charity
the food which in your youth you tore from the hand of the poor peasant?"

"I am a beggar, it is true, my lord; but I am nae just sae miserable
neither. For my sins, I hae had grace to repent of them, if I might
say sae, and to lay them where they may be better borne than by me;
and for my food, naebody grudges an auld man a bit and a drink--Sae I
live as I can, and am contented to die when I am ca'd upon."
"And thus, then, with little to look back upon that is pleasant or
praiseworthy in your past life--with less to look forward to on this
side of eternity, you are contented to drag out the rest of your
existence?
Go, begone! and in your age and poverty and weariness, never envy
the lord of such a mansion as this, either in his sleeping or waking
moments --Here is something for thee."
The Earl put into the old man's hand five or six guineas. Edie would
perhaps have stated his scruples, as upon other occasions, to the
amount of the benefaction, but the tone of Lord Glenallan was too
absolute to admit of either answer or dispute. The Earl then called
his servant--"See this old man safe from the castle--let no one ask
him any questions--and you, friend, begone, and forget the road
that leads to my house."This done, the visitors were entertained on board the galleon to an
impromptu luncheon, which, as it was prepared by the Spanish cook,
released from the limbo of below for the occasion, and as the viands and
wines were drawn from the ship's stores, was done ample justice to.
Then George, accompanied by Basset, went ashore with the Governor and
his followers, to be present at an investigation which was to determine
the whereabouts of the six Englishmen whose release was in question, and
who were ultimately found to have been drafted to a galley named the
_Tiburon_, which, after considerable further research, was discovered to
be then stationed at Port Lima.  The next business was the preparation
of an order to the Governor of Lima to immediately release the six
Englishmen "named in the margin" and return them to Panama without
delay; and before returning to the ship George had the satisfaction of
witnessing the departure of a dispatch boat with the order on board.

On the following day the Spanish crew of the _Cristobal Colon_ were
released and sent on shore; and, this done, all tension between the
Spaniards and the English was immediately relaxed, the Spaniards, with
their high-flown ideas of chivalry, vying with each other in showing the
utmost cordiality and attention to their whilom enemies; so that, on the
whole, George and his officers, to say nothing of the men, were given a
fairly pleasant time during their sojourn at Panama, in return for which
they, among other things, assisted materially to extinguish a fire which
one night broke out in the city and, for a time, threatened to lay the
greater part of it in ashes.

It is used because it so easily lends itself to a seeming clever way
to create a laugh.

Humor of the clean sort is a rare gift. Humor may easily descend to low
comedy by use of ridicule, and often the audience does not differentiate
between low comedy and rare humor.

The masses will laugh when the comedian on the stage hits his friend with
a club; that sort of fun-making satisfies adults who have children's
brains and such brain-constructed people will also laugh at jokes which
ride on ridicule. But you who read these lines are worthy of better
things; that's why you are reading this book. If, in my audience there
are those who have the ridicule habit, I want to arouse you to a better
sense of humor than you can get by the employment of ridicule and
sarcasm.

I don't want you to descend to the level of the grouch. The slide-down
is so easy, the climbing back and up from the depth is so very
hard.

Ridicule and sarcasm are cheap, slapstick methods to produce fun. They
leave a sting many times when you are not aware of it.

When fighting whiskey, sin, corruption or evil hosts, then use burning
ridicule and caustic sarcasm to sizzle and destroy the things that need
to be destroyed.

Now I've told you, and next time you find yourself using ridicule or
sarcasm to provoke mirth remember you are toying with a habit-forming
practice that is likely to get the best of you unless you stop and
stop now.

THE WIFE
She Is Your Partner, Don't Cheat Her

A wife is either a partner or an employee. If a partner, she has a right
to the fifty-fifty split on profits; if an employee she is entitled
to her wages.

A thrifty husband is commendable, but a show-me-what-you-did-with-that-money
husband should be punished by being sentenced to attend pink teas,
afternoon receptions, and to match samples at the dry goods
store.
Married folks must be on the partnership basis, or there's sand in
the gear box.
Give the wife the check-book; let her pay the bills; tote fair with
her; show her and give her just what your income affords, and what
economic and wise administration warrants; she'll cut the cloth to
fit the garment.
When the husband questions every turn, every move, every cent, the
wife feels like a prisoner or a slave. Wives will do good team work
when they are broken to double harness with their husbands.
Women are generally raised without any requirements of economy;
they are pretty birds, and used to preening and smoothing their
plumage and looking pretty.On the last day of the
year they sailed past Trinidad, joyfully recognising its lofty heights
and its three distinct entrances to the gulf as they passed; and on the
evening of January 15th, 1570, they entered the hidden harbour near
Nombre, where they had left the _Nonsuch_, and found her apparently not
a penny the worse for her five months' sojourn there.  For Lukabela, the
Cimarrone chief, had so scrupulously fulfilled his promise to look after
the ship that a party of twenty men had been camped on the beach for the
past five months, and had every day visited her and thoroughly soused
her deck and upper works with water.

Immediately upon the arrival of the _Cristobal Colon_ in the cove, a
messenger was dispatched to Lukabela with the news; and within a couple
of hours he appeared on board to personally welcome his friends upon
their return.  George at once concluded an arrangement with the chief
for the supply of a strong gang of men to assist in refitting the
_Nonsuch_; and on the following day the work was energetically begun,
and so strenuously carried forward that ten days later the vessel was
ready for sea.  All that now remained was to suitably reward the
Cimarrones for their services, and this George did upon so lavish a
scale that Lukabela there and then vowed to hold himself and his tribe
henceforth at the service of any and every Englishman who might visit
those waters.  The Englishmen were then divided into two parties
proportionate to the tonnage of the ships, George resuming the command
of the _Nonsuch_, while he put Hubert--now completely recovered, and a
strong, robust, handsome man once more--in command of the galleon.  This
made both ships very short-handed, but it was the only arrangement
possible, for during their voyage round from Panama the cargo of the
galleon had been overhauled, and found to be so enormously rich, and of
such great bulk, that it was deemed unwise to entrust it and the rest of
the treasure to a single ship; therefore on a certain glorious January
morning all hands went to work to unmoor both ships, and by mid-day they
were clear of the cove and heading north for the treasure island, which
they reached five days later.  But during that five days' voyage it had
become so clear to all that both ships must be thoroughly cleared of
weed before the voyage across the Atlantic was undertaken, that they
decided to careen them before proceeding further.  This was accordingly
done, the work occupying all hands for three months; but when it was
done both craft were fit in every respect to battle with the spring
gales which they knew awaited them.

Finally, they sailed from the treasure island on the fifth day of May,
1570, and working their way to the north-east between the islands of
Cuba and San Domingo, hit the Gulf Stream, which swept them to windward
as they struggled northward against the north-east trade-wind.  This
proved to be the most tedious and wearisome part of their passage; for
upon clearing the trades they were fortunate enough to run into a
succession of strong westerly winds, before which they went foaming and
rolling across the Atlantic at a merry rate, arriving in Plymouth Sound
within two hours of each other, on the afternoon of the twenty-seventh
of July, 1570, to the joy of everybody concerned, after an absence from
home of just over fifteen months.

The partition of the treasure was immediately proceeded with; and so
enormous was its amount that even the lowest grade of mariner received
sufficient to render him independent in a modest way for the remainder
of his life, while as for George, he was--after old Simon Radlett, the
owner of the _Nonsuch_--easily the richest man in all Plymouth, his
share being sufficient not only for his own needs but also for those of
his brother Hubert, with whom he insisted upon an equal division,
despite the energetic and long-continued protests of the elder brother.

For a time there was a possibility that George's exploits on the Spanish
Main and at Panama might involve him in serious trouble with the Queen;
indeed he and old Simon Radlett were summoned to London to give an
account of themselves.  Luckily, however, for them, the Catholics were
at the moment making themselves obnoxious in the matter of conspiracies
in favour of Mary, Queen of Scots, while Philip of Spain was also out of
Elizabeth's favour; consequently Her Majesty was just in the right mood
to be favourably impressed by the straightforward story which George had
to tell; and his account of the doings of the Inquisition at San Juan de
Ulua, and the atrocities practised upon the galley-slave prisoners, as
witnessed by himself, excited such lively sympathy in the Queen's breast
that, instead of sending them to the Tower, as they at one time more
than half-expected, she knighted them both and sent them back to
Plymouth happy in the full assurance of her most gracious favour.

THE END.