A PAGAN OF THE HILLS

by

CHARLES NEVILLE BUCK

Author of

  "The Call of the Cumberlands,"
  "The Battle Cry,"
  "When Bearcat Went Dry," Etc., Etc.

Frontispiece by George W. Gage


[Frontispiece: Sometimes, in these days, she went to a crest from which
the view reached far off for leagues over the valley.]


New York
W. J. Watt & Company
Publishers
Copyright, 1919, by
W. J. Watt & Company


A PAGAN OF THE HILLS


CHAPTER I

"It's plum amazin' ter heer ye norate thet ye've done been tradin' and
hagglin' with old man McGivins long enough ter buy his logs offen him
and yit ye hain't never met up with Alexander.  I kain't hardly fathom
hit noways."

The shambling mountaineer stretched himself to his lean length of six
feet two, and wagged an incredulous head.  Out of pale eyes he studied
the man before him until the newcomer from "down-below" felt that, in
the attitude, lay almost the force of rebuke.  It was as though he
stood self-convicted of having visited Naples without seeing Vesuvius.

"But I haven't been haggling with Mr. McGivins," he hastened to
remonstrate.  "On the contrary we have done business most amicably."

The native of the tangled hills casually waved aside the distinction of
terms as a triviality and went on: "I hain't nuver heered tell of no
man's tradin' in these hyar Kentucky mountains without he haggled
considerable.  Why thet's what tradin' denotes.  Howsomever what
flabbergasts me air thet ye hain't met up with Alexander.  Stranger, ye
don't know nothin' about this neck o' the woods a-tall!"

Parson Acup, so called for the funereal gravity of his bearing and
expression, and Brent the timber-buyer, stood looking down from
beetling cliffs rigidly bestowed with collossal and dripping icicles.
To their ears came a babel of shouts, the grating of trees, long
sleet-bound but stirring now to the thaw--the roar of blasting powder
and the rending of solid rock.

Brent laughed.  "Now, that you've fathomed the density of my
ignorance," he suggested, "proceed to enlighten me.  Upon what does
this Alexander rest his fame?  What character of man is he?"

"Wa'al, stranger, I've done always held ther notion thet we folks up
hyar in these benighted hills of old Kaintuck, war erbout the
ign'rantest human mortals God ever suffered ter live--but even us knows
erbout Alexander.  Fust place he hain't no man at all.  He's a
gal--leastwise, Alexander was borned female but she's done lived a plum
he-life, ever since."

"A woman--but the name----"

"Oh, pshaw!  Thar hain't nuthin' jedgmatic in a name.  Old man McGivins
he jest disgusts gals and so he up and named his fust born Alexander
an' he's done reared her accordin'."

Brent arched his brows as his informant continued, gathering headway in
the interest of his narrative.  "Old man McGivins he's done read a
lavish heap of books an' he talks a passel of printed wisdom.  He
'lowed thet Alexander wa'nt no common man's name but thet hit signified
a hell-bustin' survigrous feller.  By his tellin', ther fust Alexander
whaled blazes outen all creation an' then sot down an' cried like a
baby because ther job he'd done went an' petered out on him.  Ter me,
thet norration savers right strong of a damn lie."

Brent nodded as he smilingly replied, "I've read of that first
Alexander, but he's been dead a good many centuries."

"Long enough ter leave him lay an' ferget about him, I reckon," drily
observed the parson.  "Anyhow atter a spell Old Man McGivins had
another bornin' at his dwellin-house an' thet time hit proved out to be
a boy.  His woman sought ter rechristen ther gal Lizzie or Lake Erie or
somethin' else befittin petticoats.  She 'lowed thet no godly man
wouldn't hardly seek a woman in wedlock, ner crave fer her to be ther
mother of his children with a name hung on her like Alexander Macedonia
McGivins."

Brent's eye twinkled as he watched the unbending gravity of the other's
face and since comment seemed expected he conceded, "There seems to be
a germ of reason in that."

"Then ther boy commenced growin' up, lazy-like an' shiftless,"
enlightened the parson.  "Ther old man 'lowed thet hit wouldn't hardly
be no fallacy ter name him Lizzie or Lake Erie, but he swore on a hull
stack of Bibles thet he aimed ter make a man of ther gal."

Suddenly the speaker broke off and his brow clouded.  Following the
apprehensive direction of the frowning eyes as one might follow a
dotted line the man from the city saw a young mountaineer
surreptitiously tilting a flask to his lips in the lee of a huge
boulder.  Palpably the drinker believed himself screened from view, and
when he had wiped the neck of the flask with the palm of his hand and
stowed it away again in his breast pocket he looked furtively about
him--and that furtiveness was unusual enough to elicit surprise in this
land where men drank openly and made moonshine whiskey and even gave it
to their small children.

"Since ther time of corn drappin' an' kiverin'," said the Parson,
slowly, "Bud Sellers hain't teched a dram afore now.  Hit don't
pleasure me none ter see him startin' in afresh."

"He's been working hard," suggested the timber buyer tolerantly.  "I've
watched him and he never seems to tire.  Maybe he felt the need of a
stimulant."

But Acup growled.  "When Bud leaves licker alone thar hain't no better
boy nowhars.  When he follers drinking he gits p'izen mean right down
to ther marrer in his insidest bone.  Folks calls him ther mad-dog
then.  Ef these men finds out he's drinkin', they'll quit work an'
scatter like pa'tridges does when they sees a hawk flutterin' overhead."

The loose-jointed giant turned on his heel and left Brent standing
alone.  Snow after snow had fallen this winter and frozen tight, heaped
high by blizzard after blizzard until all the legendary "old fashioned
winters" had been outdone and put to shame.  Then without warning had
come some warm breath across the peaks bringing January rains on the
heels of zero frigidity and thaws of unprecedented swiftness.  While
the "spring-tide" was to have been an agency of safe delivery for the
felled timber this premature flood threatened to be a lawless one of
devastation.  Brent had rushed up here from the city driven by anxiety
as to the logs he had contracted to buy--logs which the oncoming flood
threatened to ravish into scattered and racing drift.  He had found old
man McGivins toiling without sleep or rest; racing against the
gathering cohorts of a Nature turned vandal, and into the fight and
stress he had thrown himself and all his energies.

That there was even the slimmest of chances to save the poplar, was a
fact due to a peculiar conformation of the levels there, and to
exceptional circumstances.

"Gin'rally we just rolls ther logs down hill when we cuts 'em an' lets
'em lay thar whar they falls in ther creek beds," McGivins had
explained.  "Afore ther spring tide comes on with ther thaws an' rains,
we builds a splash dam back of 'em an' when we're ready we blows her
out an' lets 'em float on down ter ther nighest boom fer raftin'.  Ef a
flood like this comes on they gits scattered, an' we jest kisses 'em
good-bye.  Thet's happenin' right now all along these numerous small
creeks."

But McGivins had cut his timber near a river that could float not only
loose logs but rafts, and in a small lake-like basin hemmed in by
cliffs and separated by a gorge from the river he had gathered them and
bound them into three large rafts.  Only such a stage as came with the
"tide" would convert the gorge into a water-way out, and only then wen
the great dam built across it had been dynamited.

Now came this flood, infinitely more powerful than the ordinary rise of
spring.  The dam was threatened and must be strengthened and raised
higher.  If it gave way, he too must "kiss his logs good-bye."

As the city man speculated on the odds against him Old Man McGivins
himself materialized at his elbow.  His lips were tight-set and his
brow was furrowed.  For him the situation savored of impending tragedy.
These trees had been reluctantly felled from a virgin tract of forest
heretofore unscarred by the axe, and they had been his long-hoarded
treasure.  He had held on to them much as a miser holds to his savings
because he loved them.  Even when Brent had offered a good price,
running well into thousands, he had wrestled with himself.  When the
axes had rung and the saws whined through the scarlet and golden
autumn, it had almost seemed to him that he was executing living and
beloved friends.  Now an inimical force of Nature threatened to rob him
of them and of his remuneration as well.  Yet as he stood there, with
the sweat and grime of his labor drying on his forehead, his brooding
eyes held a patriarchal dignity of uncomplaining courage.

"All these hyar men air my neighbors, Mr. Brent," he said with a manner
of instinctive courtesy.  "They hain't a-workin' fer wages but jest ter
kinderly convenience me--I reckon we're both of us right smart beholden
to 'em."

The city man acquiescently nodded his head but he was thinking chiefly
of the calm patience and the tireless strenuousity with which McGivins,
himself, was battling against calamity.

"They are friends of yours," he answered.  "They realize that your loss
will be heavy if----"  He broke off there and the other went on.

"Hit'll mighty nigh cripple me ef we don't save 'em.  I've done held on
ter thet timber fer a long spell of years an' I sorrers ter part with
hit now.  But thar's a right weighty mortgage on my land an' hit's held
by a man thet don't squander no love on me at best."

Brent gritted his teeth.  He had heretofore known only in the
indirectness of theory the sudden capriciousness of mountain weather;
storms that burst and cannonade without warning; trickling waters that
leap overnight into maddened freshets.  Now he was seeing in its
blood-raw ferocity the primal combat between man and the elements.

With a troubled brow Parson Acup returned and addressed McGivins.
"Aaron," he said bluntly, "right numerous fellers air threatenin' ter
quit us and we kain't spare a single hand."

The old man flinched as if under a blow from a trusted hand.  "What fer
does they aim ter quit?" he demanded.

"Bud Sellers has started in drinkin' licker, an' a'ready he's gittin'
malignant.  Ther Martin boys an' ther Copelands an' others beside 'em,
'lows thet they ain't seekin' no heedless trouble and hit's more
heedful-like fer 'em ter go on home an' avoid an affray.  Ef they stays
on hit's right apt to end in blood-lettin'."

McGivins drew himself to a more rigid erectness.  "Go back an' tell
them boys thet I needs 'em," he ordered.  "Tell 'em ef they don't stand
by me now, I'm ruint.  I'll send Bud away ef thet's all thet's frettin'
'em."

"I wouldn't counsel ye ter cross Bud jest now," advised Acup, but the
other laughed under his long beard, a low angry laugh, as he turned on
his heel and, with the man from the city following him, started in
search of the troublemaker.

Bud was found at last behind the great hump of towering rock.  The
place, walled in by beetling precipice, was beginning to darken into
cloister-dim shadows.  Bud's back was turned and he did not hear the
footfall of the two men who had come upon him there.  He knew that when
once he succumbed to the thirst it meant a parting with reason and a
frenzy of violence.  But when the first savor of the fiery moonshine
stuff had teased his palate and the first warmth had glowed in his
stomach it meant surrender to debauch--and already he had gone too far
to fight the appetite which was his ruin.

Now he stood with the flask to his lips and his head bent back, but
when he had drunk deep he turned and saw the two figures that were
silently observing him.

His eyes were already blood-shot and his cheeks reddened.  The motions
of his lithe body were unsteady.  With a shamefaced gesture the young
man sought to conceal the flask under his coat, then a fickle change
came to his mood.  His head bent down low like a bull's and his
shoulders hulked in a stiffening defiance.

"Spyin' on me, air ye?"  The question rasped savagely from his
thickened lips.  "Well, damn ther pair of ye, spies desarves what they
gits!  I'm a free man an' I don't suffer no bull-dozin' from nobody."

He lurched forward with so threatening an air that Brent stepped a
little to the side and instinctively his hand went to the coat pocket
where he carried a pistol.  But Bud ignored him, focussing his
attention upon the mountain man to whom he had come in friendship and
service for the stemming of a disaster.  He came with a chin out-thrust
close to the older and bearded face.  Truculence and reckless bravado
proclaimed themselves in the pose, as he bulked there.  "Wa'al," he
snarled, "ye heered me, didn't ye?"

But McGivins had not altered his attitude.  He had not given back a
stride nor moved his arms.  Now he spoke quietly.

"I'm sore grieved to see you comin' ter this pass, Bud," he said.  "We
all knows what hit means every time.  I'm obleeged ter ye fer what
ye've already done--an' I'll ask ye, now, ter go on home afore ye
drinks any more whiskey--or starts any ruction amongst my neighbors."

"So thet's hit, air hit?"  Bud rocked a little on his feet as he stood
confronting the steady challenge of Aaron McGivins.  "So ye lets a man
work slavish fer ye all day, and then starts in faultin' him ef he
takes a drink at sun-down.  Well damn ye, I don't aim ter go nowhars
tell I'm ready an' ambitious ter go--does ye hear thet or does I hev
ter tell ye again?"

With a very deliberate motion McGivins lifted one arm and pointed it
towards the west--that way lay the nearest boundary of his tract.

"I've done asked ye plum civil ter go, because ef you don't go other
fellers will--fellers thet's wuth somethin'.  Now I orders ye ter get
offen my land.  Begone!"

What happened next was such a tumult of abruptness that Brent found
himself standing inactive, not fully grasping the meaning of the
situation.  From Bud came a roar of anger as he lunged and grappled
with the bearded elder, carrying him back in the onslaught.  With a
belated realization, Brent threw himself forward but just as his hand
fell on the shoulder of Bud Sellers he heard a report, muffled because
it was fired between two savagely embraced bodies.  The lumber buyer
had seen no weapon drawn.  That had been the instinctive legerdemain of
mountain quickness, which even drink had not blunted.  As he wrenched
Bud back, the wounded figure stood for a moment swaying on legs that
slowly and grotesquely buckled into collapse at the knees until Aaron
McGivins crumpled down in a shapeless heap.

Bud Sellers wrenched himself free with a muscular power that almost
hurled Brent to the ground, and the pistol fell from his hand.  For a
moment the young assailant stood there with an expression of dismayed
shock, as though, in his sleep, he had committed a crime and had
awakened into an appalled realization.  Then, ignoring Brent, he
wheeled and lunged madly into the laurel.

Figures came running in response to the alarm of pistol report and
shouting, but old man McGivins, whom they carried to the nearest
bonfire, feebly nodded his head.  Parson Acup was bending over him and
when he rose it was with a dubious face.

"I fears me thet wound's mighty liable ter be a deadener," he said.

Then the wounded man lifted a trembling hand.  "Git me over home," he
directed shortly, "An' fer God's sake, boys, go forward with this work
till hit's finished."


CHAPTER II

Through the tree tops came a confusion of voices, but none of them
human.  A wind was racing to almost gale-like violence and with it came
the inrush of warm air to peaks and valleys that had been tight-frozen.
Between precipices echoed the crash of ice sliding loose and
splintering as it fell in ponderous masses.  Men sweating in the glare
of collossal bonfires toiled at the work of re-inforcing the dam.

They had been faithful; they were still faithful, but the stress of
exhaustion was beginning to sap their morale; to drive them into
irritability so that, under the strain of almost superhuman exertion,
they threatened to break.  Brent was not of their blood and knew little
of how to handle them, and though Parson Acup was indefatigable, his
face became more and more apprehensive.

"Ef we kin hold 'em at hit till ther crack of day, we've got a right
gay chanst ter save them big sticks," he announced bluntly to Brent
near midnight.  "But hit hain't in reason ter expect men ter plum kill
themselves off fer ther profit of somebody else--an' him likely ter be
dead by termorrer."

"Could McGivins have kept them in line himself?" demanded Brent and the
Parson scratched his head.  "Wa'al he mout.  Thar's somethin' masterful
in thet breed thet kinderly drives men on.  I don't know es I could
name what it air though."

Then even as he spoke a group of humanity detached itself from the
force on the dam and moved away as men do who are through with their
jobs.  They halted before Acup and one of them spoke somewhat
shame-facedly: "I disgusts ter quit on a man in sore need, Parson, but
us fellers kain't hold up no longer.  We're plum fagged ter
death--mebby termorrer mornin'----"

He broke off and Acup answered in a heavy-hearted voice: "So fur as
this hyar job's consarned most likely thar won't be no termorrer.  Old
man McGivins lays over thar, mebby a-dyin' an' this means a master lot
to him----"

"If it's a matter of pay," began Brent and left his suggestion
unfinished.  A quick glance of warning from Acup cautioned him that
this was a tactless line and one of the men answered shortly, "Pay
hain't skeercely ergoin' ter hold a man up on his legs when them legs
gives out under him, stranger."

"No, Lige, pay won't do it, but upstandin' nerve _will_--an' I knows
ye've got hit.  Ef anybody quits now, they're all right apt ter foller
suit."


At the sound of the first words, Brent had pivoted as suddenly as
though a bolt had struck him.  They came in a voice so out of keeping
with the surroundings, so totally different from any he had heard that
day, that it was a paradox of sound.  In the first place it was a
woman's voice and here were only sweating men.  In the second, although
full and clear as if struck from well cast bell metal, it had a rich
sweetness and just now the thrill of deep emotion.

In the red flare of the bonfire that sent up a shower of sparks into
the wet darkness, he saw a figure that brought fresh astonishment.

The woman stood there with a long rubber slicker tight-buttoned from
collar to hem.  Below that Brent saw rubber boots.  She stood with a
lance-like straightness, very tall, very pliant, and as he stared with
a fixity which would have amounted to impertinence had it not been
disarmed by amazement she looked past him and through him as if he were
himself without substance.

Then she took off the heavy Nor'wester that had shaded her face, and
the firelight fell on masses of hair deeply and redly gold; upon
features exquisitely modeled, in no wise masculine or heavy, yet full
of dominance.  Duskily-lashed eyes of dark violet were brimming with a
contagious energy and her rounded chin was splendidly atilt.  A
sculptor might have modeled her as she stood, and entitled his bronze
"Victory."

Her coloring too was rich, almost dazzling, and Brent thought that he
had never seen such arresting beauty or such an unusual though
harmonious blending of feminine allurement--and masculine spirit.
Though in height she approached the heroic of scale, the first summary
of impression which he drew from feature and coloring was "delicately
gorgeous."

The girl vouchsafed him no attention of any kind but remained silent
for a moment with her eyes raining so resolute a fire that those of the
exhausted workers kindled into faint responsiveness.

Then the vibrant clarity of the voice sounded again--and the voice too
had that strangely hypnotic quality that one felt in the glance.  "You
boys have all worked here hour on hour, till ye're nigh dead.  My paw
an' me are already powerful beholden to ye all but----"  She paused and
under just such an emotion the ordinary woman's throat would have
caught with a sob and her eyes would have filled with tears.  It was
not so with Alexander.  Her note only softened into a deeper gravity.
"But he lays over thar an' I mistrusts he's a-dyin' ternight.  He
wouldn't suffer me ter tarry by his bed-side because he 'lowed thet you
boys needed a man ter work along with ye in his place.  If ye quits now
all the labor ye've done spent goes fer naught."  She paused a moment
and then impulsively she broke out: "An' I couldn't hardly endure ter
go back thar an' tell him that we'd failed."

As she paused the hollow-eyed men shuffled their feet but none of them
spoke.  They had given generously, prodigally even, of their effort and
it had not been for hire.  Yet under the burning appeal of her eyes
they flushed as though they had been self-confessed malingerers.

"But as fer me," went on Alexander, "I've got ter git ter work."

She unbuttoned and cast off the long rubber coat and Brent felt as if
he had seen the unveiling of a sculptured figure which transcended
mediocrity.  A flannel shirt, open on a splendidly rounded throat,
emphasized shoulders that fell straight and, for a woman unusually
broad, though not too broad for grace.  She was an Amazon in physique
yet so nicely balanced of proportion that one felt more conscious of
delicate litheness than of size.  As her breath came fast with
excitement the fine arch of her heaving bosom was that of a Diana.
Belted about a waist that had never known the cramp of stays, she wore
a pair of trousers thrust into her boot tops and no man there was more
unself-conscious.

The exhausted men stirred restlessly as they watched her go down to the
dam, and one of those who had dropped to a sitting posture came
lumberingly to his feet again.

"I reckon I've got my second wind now," he lamely announced.  "Mebby
thar's a leetle mite more work left in me yit atter all," and he
started back, stumbling with the ache of tired bones, to the task he
had renounced, while his fellows grumbled a little and followed his
lead.

Throughout the day Brent had felt himself an ineffective.  He had done
what he could but his activities had always seemed to be on the less
strenuous fringe of things like a bee who works on the edge of a honey
comb.

Now as the replenished fire leaped high and the hills resounded to an
occasional peal of unseasonable thunder the figure of the woman who had
assumed a man's responsibility became a pattern of action.  Want you
take the olive tree - I do not want to take any olive. On the contrary.
Curro tell you: here in this pile of money, is there not only in
banking?

Currito looked, and replied: - There is no doubt. - How do you explain -
asked D. Luis - who hit a game that is in the bank against the same -
things are explained - Currito responded - saying: copo! - Well, copo
- said D.

Luis going to count -; going the codend and the net in this king of
spades, which will make sure your partner before your enemy epiphany
three.

The Count who had all their movable capital in banking, was afraid
of them committed of that sort, but had only accept. Case is fortunate
in that the common people are unhappy loves to play but the opposite
seems more true statement. When it goes good, go for everything, as
if the misfortune comes. The county was pulling charts, and not
leaving any three.

His excitement was great, even if you conceal. Finally, discovered
by the king of the pint glasses, and stopped. - Pull You - said the
captain. - There is no why. The king of drinks. Damn! The band I
was robbed. Collect your money. The Count threw the deck with rage on
the table. D. Luis took all the money and sleep with indifference.
After a short silence, spoke to the Count: - Band I need to give
you the retribution. - I do not see the need. - I think that
gentleman!.

.. - This rule does not end the game - found D. Luis -. That rule, it
would be best to save the job of playing. - You Give me the retribution
- said the count, regardless of reasons. - Sea - said D. Luis -. I
want to be generous.

The Count returned to the deck and was ready to throw new size. - Alto
there - said D. Luis -; let before.

Where is the money of the new banking you? Count was embarrassed
and confused. - You do not have money - answered - but I think
over my words.

D. Luis then, with an accent grave and rested, he said: - Sir Count, I
would have no objection to trust the word of a gentleman and become
his creditor, if not temiese almost lose their friendship and I conquered,
but since this morning saw the cruelty with which you dealt with some
friends of mine who are creditors, I do not blame you for the same
offense. No more missing but I voluntarily incur the wrath of you,
giving money, I do not pay, not paid, but with injuries, which due
to Pepita Jiménez.

Thus the fact that it was true, the offense was greater. The count was
lívido cholera, and stand ready to come to blows with the college, said
in a voice changed: - You lie, deslenguado!

I'm going to pull my hands, son of the great ... This latest insult,
reminding D.

Luis lack of birth and fell on the honor of the person whose memory it
was more beloved and respected, not has just made, I can not reach their
ears. D.

Louis, above the table that was between him and the Count, with
stunning agility and wisdom and strength, the right arm held out,
armed with a reed or stick flexible and flexible, and crossed the face
of his enemy, raised to a bruised welt point. There was no cry, no
denuesto or subsequent uproar. When you start the hands, often silent
language.

The count would go on to shatter Luis if he could, but the view had
a great return from that morning, and then in favor of D.

Luis. The captain, the doctor until Currito, and more encouragement,
contained the count, and struggle fiercely competing for disengaged.
- Let me free, let it mate - I said. - I do not try to avoid a
duel -- said the captain -.

The duel is inevitable.

Just not here as luchéis two ganapanes. Missing my presence
as if decorum fight. - That come weapon - said the Count -. I do not
want to delay the launch or a minute ... In the event ... here. - You
want to squabble scabbardfish - said the captain. - All's well -
responded D. Luis. - Bring me the makers - said the Count. Everyone
spoke in hushed voices so as not to hear anything on the street.

They kept the casino, who slept on chairs in the kitchen and the yard,
never to awaken. D. Luis chose to witness the master and Currito. The
Count, the two outsiders. The doctor was to do her job, and fly
the flag of the Red Cross. It was still night. It agreed on the
battlefield that room, before closing the door. The captain went to his
house and brought the swords at the moment, below the layer that
was to hide. We know that D. Luis was not holding a gun in his life.
Fortunately, the count was not more skillful in fencing, but had never
studied theology or thought to be a cleric. The conditions of mourning
have been reduced to once the saber in hand, each of the two
fighters did what God gave him to understand.

It closed the door of the room. The tables and chairs were set aside
in a corner to clear the ground. The lights were placed in an appropriate
manner. D. Luis and the count took off jackets and Levites, were in
shirtsleeves and took up arms. There were witnesses to one side. In a
sign of the captain, began the combat. From two people who did not know
to stop the fight or defend itself should be brief, and it was.

The fury of the count, hold for a few minutes, it exploded and blinded.
It was rugged, had an iron fist, and shook the rain from saber cuts
without a warrant or concert. Played four times for D. Luis, fortunately
always flat.

Hurt his shoulder, but not injuring him. Was necessary to force all
of the young theologian demolished to avoid the tremendous shock and
pain of bruises. Still he played the Count for the fifth time in D.
Louis, and gave the left arm. Here was the wound edge, but jealously.
The blood of D. Luis began running in abundance. A little away from
content, the count charged with more anger, to hurt again: almost got
under the sword of Luis.

This, rather than prepare to stop, dropped the sword with verve and a
stab at getting the head count. The blood came out with a vengeance
and spread to the forehead and ran on the eyes. Stunned by the coup,
took the count with his body on the floor. The whole business of battle
was a few seconds. D. Luis had been serene, like a stoic philosopher,
whom the hard law of necessity compels them to such a conflict, so
contrary to their customs and way of thinking, but not well looked
at his opponent on land, covered in blood, and died, D. Luis felt a
great anxiety and fear that give it a heartbreak. He, who is not believed
capable of killing a sparrow, it had just killed a man. He, who was
still determined to become a priest, to be a missionary, to be
minister of the Gospel and nuncio, had five or six hours, had
committed or was accused of having committed at any time all crimes
and of having violated all the commandments God's law.

Had not been mortal sin that is not contaminated. Its purposes are
perfect holiness and heroic first had vanished. Purpose of a
sanctity its easier, comfortable and _burguesa_, then faded. The
Devil disrupted their plans. On a whim and it could even be a Christian
Philemon, for it was not good beginning for the idyll of perpetual
rip the head of a neighbor sablazo. The status of D. Louis, after the
turmoil of all that day was that of a man who has cerebral fever.

Currito and the master, each one hand, grabbed it and drove home. *
* * * * D. Pedro Vargas got up shock when told that his son was
injured. He went to see him, examined the wound and bruises of the
arm, and saw that did not care, but gave the cry in heaven, saying he
was going to take revenge for that offense, and will not be reassured
to know that the set, and that D.

Luis was able to take revenge for it, despite its theology. The doctor
came soon after to heal D. Luis, and predicted that in three
or four days was Don Luis to go on the street, as if such a thing. Count
hand, had for months. His life, however, no danger. Had returned from
her faint, and had asked him to lead his people, not a league far more
than the place where these events went. Carricoche had sought a lease
and he was taken, going in company with his servant and the two
strangers who helped him witness. For the four days of launch, it
actually met the forecasts of the doctor, and D. Luis, but
bruised by the blows and the wound still open, was in a state of
leaving and promising a full restoration on a very short time.

The first duty that D.

Luis thought he needed to fulfill, as it gave him high, he was confessing
to his father his love affair with Pepita and declare their intention
to marry her. D. Pedro had not been to the area or had been used
but in caring for their child during illness. Almost always at
his side and accompanying mimándole with singular affection. In the
morning of June 27, after leaving the doctor, D. Peter was left alone
with his son, and then so difficult to confession D. Luis took place
as follows. * * * * * - My Father - said D. Luis - I do not I fooling
you any longer. Today I will confess my faults to you and discard the
hypocrisy. - Boy, if confession you do, the better you call the father
vicar. I am very holgachón approach, and absolve you all, without my
acquittal for you worth anything. But if you want to entrust some
deep secret to your best friend starts, you hear. - What I have to
entrust to you is a serious lack of mine, and I am ashamed ... -
So you have no shame with your father and say without rebozo. Here D.
Luis, becoming very red, and with visible embarrassment, said: - My
secret is that I love ...

Pepita Jiménez, D. and her ... Pedro interrupted his son with a laugh
and continued the sentence: - And that she is in love with you, and
that evening the night of San Juan were in fresh talks with her until
two o'clock, and that she looked up the count with a haul of Genazahar
you have broken the head. Well, son, bravo secret trust me. No dog or
cat in the place that is not already aware of everything. The only
thing that seemed to hide the duration of the symposium was until
two o'clock, but a gypsy buñoleras you saw out of the house and did
not stop until the entire bug life. Pepita also does not conceal anything
more, and done well, because it's the disguise of Antequera ...

Since you're sick Pepita comes here twice a day, and another two or
three times to send Antoñona namely your health, and if you have
not come to see you, because I have opposed so you do not fuss.

The confusion and the rush of D. Luis rose point when he heard
his father tell the whole story in terse compendium. - What a
surprise - he said - what a surprise you will have been to! - No
surprise, or wonder, boy .

In the place you know things are only four days ago, and truth be
told, your transformation has stunned. Look at the Take it and kill him
groping silent, watching the cat dead and santurrón, people exclaim,
with what has come to break away!

The vicar father, especially, has been turulato. Junctions still being
done, considering how much work in the vineyard of the Lord on the night
of 23-24, and how varied and diverse were your work. But I do not got
the shock news, unless your wound.

The old feel the grass grow. It is not easy to fool the chickens
recoveros. - It's true: I wished to deceive you I've been a
hypocrite!

- Do not be silly: I do not mean by motejarte. I say this to give me
insightful tone. But speaking frankly, my boast is unmotivated.

I know point by point the progress of your love affair with Pepita,
for more than two months, but because I know your Uncle Dean, who
write your impressions, I was involved throughout.

Hears the accusing letter from your uncle, and hear the answer I gave
him, very important document that I have saved minuta. D. Pedro out
of the pocket and some papers read as follows: _Carta of deán_ .--
"My dear brother: I feel in your soul that you have bad news, but I trust
God to be patient and suffering concederte enough so you do not
acibare and angry too.

Luisito I write, a few days ago, strange letters, where he discovers,
through the exaltation of his mystique, a very earthly and sinful
inclination towards some viuditas, pretty, naughty and coquetísima,
in that place.

I had cheated here, believing firmly's vocation Luisito, and I'm
flattered to give it to the Church of God, a priest wise, virtuous and
exemplary, but the letters have been referred to destroy my dreams.
Luisito is there more male poet who truly pious, and the widow,
to be the skin of bars, you will pay with little to do.

Although I am writing to Luisito warning to flee from temptation,
and be assured that I will fall into it.

Pesarme this should not, because if you miss it and be gallant and
cortejante better is that its poor condition is discovered early
and not become a clergyman.

I would not, therefore, serious objections to Luisito continue there,
and was tested and analyzed in the crucible and touchstone for such
love, so that the reagent was viuditas through which the gold was
discovered their virtues clerical or low league with the gold is
mixed, but stumbled into the pitfall that the widow, was to become
faithful contrast, it is your intention and I do not know if your
love. happen then chestnut dark that your son becomes your rival.

This would be a monstrous scandal, and to save time, I write today, so
that, claiming anything, send or bring to Luisito here, the sooner
the better.

"Don Luis I listened in silence and with eyes low. His father continued:
- A letter from the Dean replied as follows: _Contestación_ .--
'Brother dear and venerable spiritual father: I give you a thousand
thanks for the news and send me your tips and alerts.

List price although I confess my blunder on this occasion. Vanity
cegaba me.

Pepita Jiménez, who came from my son, I was so gentle and loving showed
me the promised happy. Your letter has been necessary to make me
realize. Now I understand that, having been humanized to make many feasts
and dancing in front of the water, did not look me in the naughty
Pepita but the father of theologian beardless.

Do not deny it: I am a bit distressed and mortifies this disappointment
in the beginning but then I reflected all due to the maturity and
my mortification and grief became my joy. The kid is excellent. I have
taken much affection from being me.

I separated from him and he gave you to get educated, because my life was
not very exemplary, and in this town, so this and other reasons, had
been raised as a savage.

You were beyond my expectations and even my desires, and only recently
learned from a Luisito Father of the Church.

Having a child saint had flattered my vanity, but I had sense to stay
without an heir of my house and name, give me that beautiful
grandchildren, and after my death to enjoy my property, they are
my glory, because I purchased with ingenuity and labor, and not
doing fullerías and scams.

Maybe it was the persuasion that I had no choice, that Luis would
catechize the Chinese, the Indians and the Little Monicongo, I decided
to get married to prolong my inheritance. Naturally I put my eyes in
Pepita Jiménez, which is not like the skin of Barabbas think, but
a creature remonísima more blessed to the heavens and more passionate
to flirt.

I have such a good view Pepita that if she returned to sixteen
years and a mother imperative that the violent, and I have eighty
years as D.

Gumersindo, that is, if I saw death and doors, to take Pepita by women
to smile at me as if the death of my guardian angel who had taken human
body, and to leave my position, my wealth and my name.

But neither has Pepita and sixteen years, but twenty, and is not
subject to the saga of her mother nor I have eighty years, but
fifty-five.

I'm at the worst age, because I start to feel tired damaged, with a bit
of asthma, a lot of cough, rheumatic pain and many other alifafes,
but, damn I want to die.

I think that in twenty years or I will die, and as he took a Pepita
twenty-five calculates the disastrous future that awaits you with this
long-lasting. After a few years of married me would have hated,
despite how good it is. Because it's good and did not want discreet,
no doubt, accepted by her husband, despite the insistence and stubbornness
with which I have proposed. How much I appreciate it now! The tip of
vanity was hurt by his neglect to consider that as dull, if not love me,
love my blood was my son's clothing.

If you do not want to be cool and lush ivy link to the old trunk, and
rotting, climb up it, I think, to ascend to renew the tender and green
and flower bud. God bless you and prosper both these loves. Far from
taking the boy again, we retain here, even by force if necessary. I
decided to conspire against his vocation. With dreams and married him.
I'm going to renovate contemplating a gentle couple, united by love.

And when I get a few kids? Instead of going as a missionary and bring
Madagascar to Australia or India or the number of newcomers, with a span
of cards, such as Tizna black, or yellow like the estezado and owl
eyes Could it be better to preach Luisito at home, and I get plenty
of catecumenillos a blond, smiling, with eyes like those of Pepita,
and cherubim angels appear?

Catechumens who brought me from there, it must be a respectable
distance so they do not infect me, and they here for me to smell
the roses paradise, and would get on my knees and play with me and
kiss me, and call me grandpa, and I would pat the bald, which I have.

What do you want? When I was in my place, not thinking of the home
delight, but now I'm so close to old age, if I am no longer there,
as I do not cenobitic, I expect that I will be pleased in the role of
Patriarch. And do not understand that I will confine myself to expect
the nascent courtship rennet, but I have to work so that rennet.

Following your comparison, which transforms it into a crucible Pepita
and Luis Metal, I seek or have sought or bellows and a torch useful,
to help fan the flames so that the metal melts soon.

This torch is Antoñona, mother Pepita very lizard, very quiet and very
affecting its owner. Antoñona is already with me, and I know that she
is dead Pepita loves.

We agreed that I should continue to turn a blind eye and giving me
no understanding of anything.

The father vicar, who is the soul of God, always in the clouds, I served
as much as Antoñona without alerting him, because everything is back
to talk with Luis Pepita, Pepita and Luis, so that this excellent Sir,
with each leg in half a century, has become oh miracle of love
and innocence!

messenger dove in with the two lovers who are sending their Requiebros
and finesse, ignores both.

Powerful combination of natural and man must give an infallible result.
You tell him to give you part of the wedding to come and do it, or
send your blessing to the bride and groom and a good gift. "Thus ended
D. Peter read his letter, and looking back to D. Luis, who saw Mr
Luis had been listening with eyes full of tears.

The father and son were a tight hug and very long. * * * * * Per month
just from this conversation and reading, held the wedding in D. Luis
Vargas and Pepita Jiménez.

Fearing that Mr Dean would tease her brother too much with the mysticism
of Luisito had gone empty, and knowing also that his role would be
somewhat successful in the place where everyone would say that was
bad hand to make saints, gave a pretext for its occupation and
refused to come, but sent his blessing and some great earrings like
this for Pepita.

The father was vicar, then, like married with D.

Luis. The bride is very well decorated, all seemed fine, and worthy of
the trocar sackcloth and disciplines. That night was D. Peter a great
dance in the courtyard of his home and adjacent rooms. Reared and
gentlemen, nobles and laborers, ladies and ladies and girls of the
place, attended and mingled in him, as in the first age of the
dream world, I do not know why callers of gold.
It was the sudden
relaxing of nerves that had been held taut to the snapping point.  With
a step suddenly grown unsteady she made her way to a chair by the
hearth and sat gazing fixedly at the dying embers.

She had not let herself hope too much, and now a sudden rush of
repressed tears threatened a flood like the one which had come outdoors
from the broken tightness of the ice.

But she felt upon her the critical eyes of the neighbor women and
refused to surrender to emotion.  After a little period of respite she
let herself out of the door into the rain that had begun falling with a
sobbing fitfulness, and went through the starkness of the woods.

Back of the house was the "spring-branch" of which she had spoken as a
gauge to the stage of the flood.  By some freakish law of
co-ordination, which no one had ever been able to explain, that small
stream gave a reading of conditions across the ridge, as a pulse-beat
gives the tempo of the blood's current.  One could look at it and
estimate with fair accuracy how fast and how high the river was rising.
When a rotting stump beside the basin of the spring had water around
its roots it meant that the arteries of the hills were booming into
torrential fury.  When the basin overflowed, the previous maximum of
the river's rise had been equaled.  It was overflowing now.

Alexander stood for a moment gazing with widened and terrified eyes.
She had now no time to lose.  The lapping waters of a tiny brook were
calling her to prompt and hazardous action.  She fell to her knees and
clasped her hands in a clutch of desperation.  "God, give me strength
right now ter ack like a man," she prayed.  "Hit seems like ther fust
time I'm called on, I'm turnin' plum woman-weak."

Then she rose and pressed her pounding temples.  It was not the fear of
a runaway river that held her in a tormenting suspense of indecision,
but the hard choice between leaving her father or fulfilling a duty to
which he had assigned her in his stead.

When she opened the door of the house again she saw an agitated figure
kneeling beside the bed.  For all its breadth of shoulder and six feet
of height; for all its inherited stoicism that had stood through
generations, it was shaking with sobs.

As Alexander came into the room her brother rose from his knees with
pallid cheeks and woebegone eyes.

"Who shot him?" he demanded in a tense voice.  "These hyar folks won't
tell me nuthin'."

The girl repressed an impulse of satirical laughter.  She knew that Joe
McGivins would storm and swear vengeance upon the hand that had been
raised to strike his father down and that beyond hysterical vehemence
his indignation would come to nothing.  He would believe himself
sincere and in the end his resolution would waste away into
procrastination and specious excuses.

"Whoever shot him, Joe," she replied, maintaining the complimentary
fiction that she must temporize with his just wrath, "Paw he's done
exacted a pledge thet neither of us won't seek ter avenge ther deed.
Hit's a pledge thet binds us both."

Even while his temples were still hot with his first wave of passionate
indignation, Joe McGivins felt that a bitter cup had passed from him.

"Joe," said the girl in a low voice, "I wants thet ye heeds me clost.
Ef we fails ter save this timber hit'll jest erbout kill Paw.  Ef ther
dam busts loose, somebody's got ter ride them rafts."

The boy's face paled abruptly.  He was a handsome youth, outwardly cut
to as fine a pattern of physical fitness as his sister exemplified, but
in his eyes one found none of her dauntlessness of spirit.  Hurriedly
Alexander swept on.

"I aims ter go back over thar right now.  He's got ter be kept quiet
an' so I dastn't tell him what I seeks ter do.  I hain't fearsome of
leavin' ye ter watch after him.  I knows ye kin gentle him an' comfort
him even better'n I could do hit myself."

She thrust out her hand, boy fashion, and her brother clasped it.  Five
minutes later she stood looking down on her father's closed eyes,
listening to the easy breathing of the man in the bed.

On the floor at her feet lay the pack which she meant to take with her,
a rifle leaned against a chair and a pistol was slung in a holster
under her left arm-pit--Alexander was accountred for her venture.


Brent watched her swinging down the slope with an easy, space-devouring
stride.  He had begun to think she would be too late; more than half to
hope she would be too late.  If she arrived on time there was, of
course, no turning back.  It should be recorded to his credit that no
man had guessed at his inner trepidation.  But the sullen swell of the
thundering waters had beaten not only on his ears but on his heart as
well--and dread had settled over him like a pall.

Immeasurable power was lashing itself into a merciless fury.  Boundless
might was loosening into frenzy.  He had seen the misshapen wreckage of
houses and barns ride by, bobbing like bits of cork.  He had seen the
swirl of foam that was like the froth of a vast hydrophobia.

The men who had volunteered stood braced and ready at the long sweeps
with which, fore and aft, they would seek to hold the course.

He hanged habits, I amuse myself, I'm in the prime of mocedad and I
enjoy it. - Come on, I'm glad - interrupted the count - but careful,
boy, that if the flower is delicate and can fade defoliated early. -
I will take care of it myself - retorted D.

Luis -. I see a play. I feel inspired. You size. Do you, count, which
would have driven me to joke - would joke, huh? You! has dined strong!
- I dined what has given me the win. - Respondonzuelo becomes the boy.
- I do what I want. - ...-- vote will count said, and felt coming
storm, when the captain was made and peace was restored completely. -
Ea - said the count, relaxed and friendly - you desembaúle and try
the dinerillos fortune.

Don Luis sat at the table and pulled out all his pocket money. His
look calmly finished the count, because they almost exceeded that
amount to the bank that he had, and figured that would earn the
rookie. - There must be very hot head in the game - said D.

Luis -. I seem to understand. I put money into a letter, and if you
leave the letter, I win, and if it goes the other way, you win -
That's right, buddy, you have an understanding male. - Well, it
is best that I have not only the understanding male but also the
will, and all in all, far from being a male, as are so many out
there. - Well if you come and if you draw Alicante chatterbox!

Don Luis was silent: he played a few times and had such good fortune,
which almost always won. Count started charging. - If I plucked the
boy - he said - God protects the innocent. While the Count is
amostazaba, D. Luis felt fatigue and boredom and wanted to finish once.

Through the breach fell the
ponderous weight of a river left unsupported.

First, the inrush flung the rafts backwards against the banks, and then
the churning whirlpool which was developed sent them spinning madly
outward.  The rafts jammed together and trembled with a groaning
shudder.  They wavered and undulated like cloth and that nearest the
gorge lunged outward, dashed against one wall of precipice, caromed off
and ground against the other.  About the edges, it had gone to
splinters but the core still held.  The second raft, by some miracle,
rode through without collision to ride tilting about the curve into the
channel proper.  Brent saw, through dazed and uncertain eyes, figures
bending to long poles.  He felt such a sickening sensation as a man in
a barrel may experience at the moment of going over the crest of
Niagra.  Through it all he felt rather than saw the figure of a girl in
man's clothing standing at the center of the raft, poised with bent
knees against shock; and with a Valkyrie fire in her eyes.

A half hour later the man from town drew a freer breath.  It was still
a wild enough ride, but after the lurching dash out of the cauldron, it
seemed a peaceful voyage.  Now down the center of the river they swept
at tide-speed.  At either end of each raft men bent to the sweeps in
the task of their crude piloting.  Tree tops brushed under them as they
went and far out on either side were wide-reaching lagoons that had
been high ground three days ago.

Alexander herself was standing a little apart and Brent was of a mind
to draw her into conversation but as he approached her he decided that
this was not the time to improve acquaintanceship.  Her air of
detachment amounted to aloofness and Brent remembered that she had,
weighing upon her, the anxiety of her father's condition.

Jase Mallows, however, just then relieved from duty at the steering
sweep, was less subtle of deduction.  With his eye on Alexander, whose
back was turned to him, he jauntily straightened his shoulders and gave
his long mustache a twirl.  Brent thought of the turkey-gobbler's strut
as, with amused eyes, he watched the backwoods lady-killer.  Jase had
heard many of the old wives' tales of Alexander and thought of her as
one, ambitious of amorous conquest, may think of a famous and much
discussed beauty.  Had she been another woman, Jase would before now
have gone over to the house on a "sparking" expedition, but Old Man
McGivins had discouraged such aspirations--and his daughter had been no
less definite of attitude.  Here, however, he had the girl on neutral
ground and meant to seize his opportunity.

So he strolled over to her with an ingratiating smile.

"Aleck," he began in the drawling voice which he himself rather
fancied, "we hed a right norrer squeak of hit back thar didn't we?"

There should have been discouragement in the coolness of the glance
that she turned upon him, but Jase had the blessing of self-confidence.

"Ye war thar yerself--ye ought ter know," said Alexander curtly.  Then
she added, "An' don't call me Aleck--my name's Alexander."

Jase Mallows reddened to his temples.  There had been moments, even in
the straining activity of these hours, for him to boast to his fellows
that it would be interesting to watch the progress of his campaign for
the affections of Alexander.  Now they were watching.

So Jase laughed awkwardly.  "Wa'al, thet's reasonable enough," he
handsomely conceded.  "A gal's got a rather es ter what name she's ter
be called by an' ef she's es purty es you be she kin afford ter be
high-headed too."

Alexander stood looking the man over from head to foot as though
studying a new species--possibly a species of insect-life.  Under that
embarrassing scrutiny Jase fidgeted his hands.  Eventually he drew out
a flask and having uncorked it he ceremoniously wiped the bottle's
mouth with the palm of his hand.  "Let's take a leetle dram ter better
acquaintances," he suggested.  "Thet thar's licker I wouldn't offer ter
nobody but a reg'lar man.  Hit's got a kick like a bob-tailed mule."

With features that had not altered their expression, the girl reached
out her hand and accepted the bottle.

She held the thing before her, looking at it for a moment, then with a
swift gesture tossed it sidewise into the river.

Jase Mallows bent forward and his face flamed, but his anger seemed a
tame and little thing to the wrath that leaped from calm to blazing
eruption in the woman's eyes.

"Whilst we're aboard this hyar raft," Alexander announced with an
utterance that cut like a zero wind, "I'm boss an' I aims fer men ter
stay sober.  Ef thet don't suit you--go ashore."

"How?" inquired Jase with a heavy irony and Alexander replied shortly,
"Thet's yore business."

She turned on her heel and walked away leaving the discomfited Lothario
staring after her with so malign an anger that the men within ear-shot
stifled their twitters of amusement and pretended to have overheard
nothing.


CHAPTER V

As Alexander passed him, Brent did not miss the suppressed fury in her
eyes or the disdainful tilt of her chin.  Her bearing was that of a
barbaric princess, and a princess of meteorically vivid beauty.  There
had been a deliberate purpose in the clear carrying tones with which
she had repulsed Jase Mallows.  He had been the first man to make
advances, because he was the boldest, but for all her guise of
unconsciousness she had seen the passion smoulder in the eyes about her
and later others might become emboldened unless they were discouraged
by a clear precedent.  Heretofore her father's stern repute had
safeguarded her.  Now she was dependent upon herself alone.

Down the yellow river swept the two uninjured rafts and the one that
carried a fringe of raggedness.  For the most part the men were busy
with sweep and pike-pole fending off the cumbering drift and clearing
the whirlpools where hidden reefs threatened destruction.  There were
sharp turns and angles too, where the yellow water roared into fretful
and vehement menace.  With night-fall the heights seemed to draw in and
huddle close and the dirge of flood and wind mounted into a heavier
timbre.

Fires leaped into fitful radiance.  Banjos and "dulcimores" came out of
hiding and sounded plaintively over the waste of waters.  Scraps of
almost mediaeval life showed out in thumb-nail sketches between the
sooty shadow world and the red flare of the bonfires.  Voices were
lifted into weird minors and lugubrious tunes, recitative, of sad love
themes--and these were, of course, addressed to Alexander.  She joined
no group, but sat with her hands clasped about her updrawn knees and
her gaze ranging off into distance.  The carmine and orange
illumination played upon her color of cheek and hair and eyes and when,
unconsciously her face fell into a reflective quiet and her lips
drooped with a touch of wistfulness, the allurement of her beauty was
arresting and undeniable.  Brent fell to wondering what life could hold
for her.

The time must come, he thought, when a beauty like that in a land of
plain and drudgery-enslaved women, must bring for her something like a
crisis.  She was twenty-one and unawakened, but that the men about her
should long allow her to remain so was as unlikely as that a
pirate-crew would leave treasure unfought for.  A rising tide of human
passion about her seemed as inevitable as this actual flood had
been--and perhaps as swift of coming.

But if the amorous selections of that crude minstrelsy made any
impression upon her, she gave no indication.  Before the songs ended
she withdrew to the rude shelter that had been fashioned for her and
wrapped herself in her blanket.  But the pistol holster lay close to
her hand.  When she rose at day-break they had turned out of the stream
upon which they had embarked into the broader river that it fed and
about them floated a wavering mass of ice from broken gorges above.

Brent shivered and dabbed grudgingly with cold water at the face upon
which a stubble of beard had begun to bristle.  But the girl carried an
icy bucket into her shack and reinforced its forward wall with blanket
and rubber coat, not as a protection against the knife-edged sharpness
of the air but against prying eyes.  Then she bathed unhurriedly and
fastidiously.

When she emerged the bloom of her cheeks and the luster of her thick
hair would have been the envy of a boudoir where beauty-doctors have
done their utmost.  And that day too, save for the smouldering eyes of
the discomfited Jase Mallows, the wolf-like pack treated her with a
cautious deference of bearing.

When at the end of two days the water was dropping as rapidly as it had
risen, Alexander announced, "I reckon we've got a right gay chanst now
ter put in at ther Coal City boom, hain't we?"  And several heads
nodded assent.  Brent noticed that Jase Mallows' face wore a smile
which did not altogether escape malignity, and at the first opportunity
he inquired: "What were you smiling about, Mr. Mallows, when they spoke
of Coal City?"

The backwoods dandy scowled and gave back the churl's response, "Thet's
my business."

"Certainly," Brent acceded coolly.  "You don't have to answer me.  I
didn't suppose it was a matter you were ashamed to talk about."

Mallows bent with a truculent narrowing of his lids and an outthrust
chin, but observing that the city man was in no wise cowed by his
scowls he amended his attitude.  Two days before Brent would have been
more cautious of offending this man, whose exploits had run, sometimes,
to violence, but a subtle transformation had begun in him.  A new
disdain for personal risks had caught fire from that flaming quality in
the woman.

"Hev ye ever seed Coal City?" inquired Mallows, and when the other
shook his head, he continued in a lowered voice.  "Wa'al hit's a right
rough sort of place.  Hit's a coal minin' town with only one
tavern--an' things goes forward thar right sensibly similar ter hell on
a hot night.  With ther flood holdin' up ther mines hit's apt ter
kinderly out-do hitself jest now."  He paused a moment then capped his
prediction with an added detail.

"Thar'll be plentiful drunkenness an' harlotry thar.  Alexander
couldn't speak civil ter me, but I war jest a studyin' erbout how well
she's goin' ter like Coal City."


When the rafts were safe in the boom.  Brent looked about for Mallows,
but Mallows was already gone.  Alexander herself was among the last to
start along the ill-lighted and twisting street that climbed along, the
broken levels of the town toward the tavern.  It was, at best, a
squalid village and a tawdry one.  Now it was to boot a wholly
demoralized town, cut off from the other world by inundated highways
and the washing out of its railroad bridge.  The kerosene street lamps
burned dully and at long intervals and high up the black slopes a few
coke furnaces still burned in red patches of inflamed and sullen glare.

Brent had dropped out of sight, meaning to follow the girl as an
unofficial body guard.  Knowing her impatience at gratuitous services
of protection he made no announcement of his purpose, but fell in
behind the light of the lantern she carried and followed her in the
shadows.  When he had gone only a little way, he had the vague feeling
that someone else was following him so he halted and wheeled suddenly.
After peering vainly through the murk, he told himself that he was
letting his imagination play him tricks but the disquieting impression
of soft footsteps padding along behind him he could not dispel.

Before they had readied the main street and the disreputable pile which
was the tavern, sounds of lewd and raucous voices floated out--a chorus
of profane and blatant roistering.

The houses along the way presented faces utterly blank and devoid of
life.  Brent would have wondered at that, had he not had his brief talk
with Mallows.  Now he understood.  Respectable folks had withdrawn to
shelter behind barred doors and tightly shuttered windows until such
time as the unleashed element of outlawry should evacuate the town.
The law-abiding were, in effect, undergoing a siege and avoiding the
ill-lighted streets.

But the light at the court-house square was relatively bright and as
Brent crossed in front of the squat and shadowy bulk of the old
jail-house--empty now, though it should have been full--he made out a
figure hastening about him in a circuitous fashion at a dog trot as
though bent on arriving at the hostelry first.  That, then, must have
been the presence he had felt at his back, and a fresh alarm assailed
him.  It was the figure of Bud Sellers.

When at last Alexander had gone up the several steps that led to the
closed door of the tavern, and stood for a moment, evidently hesitating
with disgust for the babel within, Brent drew back into a convenient
shadow and looked anxiously about for the other figure.  It had
disappeared.


That hostelry was the property of one D. W. Kelly, a huge and unclean
lout of a man and the establishment was as wholesome a place as a bear
pit, and no more so.

It was not with complacency that the landlord saw his house given over
to the destructive caprices of a drunken and uncontrollable mob.  He
had no means of freeing himself of his guests.  When his slatternly
wife had complained: "Them miners an' loggers jest louzes up a body's
house," he had wagged his head dejectedly and spread his great
black-nailed hands.  "If that's ther wu'st thing they does hit'll be a
plum God's blessin'," he replied.  "Ther law p'intedly fo'ces a
tavern-keeper ter sleep an' eat man an' beast--ef so be they kin pay."

Now the motley crew was in unchallenged possession--and would remain in
possession until the river went down and fords were once more passable.
That a reign of terror would prevail so long as they tarried in town,
in no wise dampened their own exuberance of spirit.

Two or three traveling salesmen had been marooned here, but since the
beginning of this saturnalia they had not been in evidence beyond the
thresholds of their own rooms.

There was no bar at D. W. Kelly's tavern and none was needed, since
every man was duly and individually provisioned and since even in these
flood times a dollar left unwatched on a certain stump up the mountain
side would cause a jug to appear mysteriously in its place.

But since there was no bar, the great room whose door opened directly
upon the porch had been commandeered as a wassailing hall.  Here the
entering guest must run the gantlet of the rollicking horde before he
could attain the more peaceful harbor of his own quarters.

About a red hot stove hung a crew of as dirty and disorderly men as
ever came out of coal mine or lumber camp.  King Henry. Sympathisirt
How is the weather with the Verliehrenden, because of the profit ends
is nasty good. (The trumpets resound.) (Worcester and Sir Richard
Vernon occur.) King Henry. As well, Milord of Worcester. It is not
fine, that you and I to such a walk together to come. You have
betrayed our trust, we have peace genöthigt our comfortable
clothes drops, and our old limbs in steel hard to squeeze, it is
not well done, Milord, it's not well done.

What is your attitude? Will you return to the sphere of obedience
back sweep, worinn her so beautiful and natural light from you
Gabet, and no longer a meteor bloated, a sign Seyn furchterwekendes
miracle, a harbinger of doom for even ungebohrne time? Worcester.
Vergönnet I heard, Mr finished my field, what myself betrift, you can
'I like to put up the rest of my life in peace zuzubringen: I
versichre that I confirm the date of this public breach had not sought.
King Henry. You have not searched for him, Sir ? Where is it? Falstaff.
He found the rebellion in its respective way, and as he lifted it to
just. Prinz Heinrich. Still, Schmeerbauch quietly. Worcester. It
pleased your majesty, your favorable Blik by me and my home contact,
and yet I must remind you, Gracious Lord, that we are your first and
greatest friends were. To euertwillen I broke my times in Richards
Marshal rod and tears day and night, to go against you, and your
hand to kiss, at a time because of their power and prestige war't
far below me, and I, my brother , and his son were there, with their
threat to your homeland you einsezten again.

Your schwurt us to Doncaster schwur't their oath of these, it would
have no intentions against the state, and verlangtet nothing more than
your right angefallnes the Siz of Gaunt, the Herzogthum of
Lancaster; hiezu we swore our Beystand you: But since in short
time the Glük like a Plazregen on you herabregnete, and both our
Hülfe than the favorable circumstances of time, the absence of the
king, the reckless abuse of a government which Bedrükungen which
it had erlidten, and the harsh winds of the king in Ireland so long
zurükhielten that throughout England for Todt gave him, you are
united to make great, you knew this combination of advantages flow
to operate so well that you, your oath to Doncaster uneingedenk,
the top government itself played into your hands; machtet and now
it's us who you were nurtured, just as the thankless brood of Gukguks
the sparrow makes her bemeistert out of our nest, and wuchset, we
geäzt, to such a size, that our love itself, for fear to be devoured,
not erkühnen was allowed to come close to you, but with timid wings
we had our security except euerm search history, and our security
alone is the cause that we genöthigt has us in this way to unite
against you and means to used to it by witnessing unfriendly,
dangerous attitudes, and Verlezung us your zugeschwornen promises
us against you, even in the hands of you.

King Henry. These things have you put on paper freylich on Marktpläzen
ausruffen, and the Canzeln reading, to a color of rebellion
anzustreichen, making reckless heads dizziness and poor Malcontenten,
which only the general misery gedeyhen can angelokt want.

And when has it ever riot in such water, to his cause stress or
desperate beggars gemangelt that after a period of confusion and
disruption starve? Prinz Heinrich. Beyden In our troops is some
soul, for this trozige pay lenges Theuermann is. Tell euerm nephew,
the Prince of Wales to unite with the whole world praise of Henry
Percy: Bey my hopes!

(this current endeavor Bey gesezt page,) I do not think that a Brave,
unerschroknerer and tapfrerer young man in the world as he lived, he,
by nature seems to have spawned, the memory of the former hero
in our age to be renewed. Betrift As for me, to my shame I say's,
I have my life with no edeln That means, and he is entitled to me
the name of a knight unworthy to hold, as I hear that he's does.

But before his Majesty declared "I am here, I am satisfied that it
is all his advantages glorious name on my serve, and erbiete me to
beyder Theile blood to save in a single fight my Glük with him to try.
King Heinrich.

And we Sezen enough confidence in you, Prince of Wales, Erbieten your
good name, so infinitely many points you like to stand in the way - No,
good Worcester, no, we love our people and we love even those who are
on your Page nephews have lured leave, and they want to accept our
angebotne grace, he and she and her, and everyone who he likes Seyn,
Seyn again my friend, and I will of his Seyn.

Diss says euerm nephews, and report back to me what he wants thun. If
he is not the goal, so watch sharp chastisement at my side, and they
will take office thun. Hiemit reverts back, we want IZT by no answer
beunruhiget Seyn, our offer of is noble, it is considered good.

(Worcester and Vernon go from.) Prince Henry. It will not be accepted
Bey my life!

Dowglas and Hot-Track beyde are too proud to turn away from a world in
arms to Schreker. King Henry. So having each leader to his Plaz.
Once we have their answer, we want to attack the thun; and God sey on
our side as our cause is just! (You go from.)

Zweyte Scene. (The Prince and Falstaff stay back.) Falstaff. Hal,
if thou me Meeting in unicellular see, so sey so well and put me
right so it is a friendly service - Prince Henry.

Den you nobody, as a Colossus afford kan.

Say your prayers and live well. Falstaff.

I want 'it would be bed time, Hall, and everything would be vorbey.

Prince Henry. How? Thou art the sky to your death, guilty, and you
must pay for it once.

Falstaff. IZT But not, and it should Seyn'm sorry if I have him in front
of my date paid. What brauch 'ich so hasty to Seyn as he requested me
not?

Well, what does the thing for the honor of asking me - Quite, and if I
am so honored and I am asking, how then? Kan me the honor of a leg
ansezen? No. Or an arm? No: Or can they told me the pain of a wound take
away? No: The honor goes not to the surgery? No: What then is the
honor?

One word: What is the word of honor? Air. Who has them? The poor Jak,
who died in midweek. Feel it then? No. Hear it? NO. It is therefore not
included in the senses? Not in the sense of a Todt. But she lives
etwann with the living? No, that makes her the envy not. I ask
nothing of it, honor is nothing more than a coat of arms gemahlter
Schilt in a coffin, and here ends my Catechismus.

(He goes anyway.) Third Scene. (Turns Percys in stock.) (Worcester and
Vernon to join. ) Worcester. Oh no, my nephew must be the kind offer
of the king does not know, Sir Richard. Vernon. And it's all the
best, he know 'it. Worcester. Then we all would be lost. It is impossible,
it can not Seyn that the king keep his promise to return to our
friend Seyn he will never marry, and soon enough funds have found
our new crimes to blame for this bestraffen them.

One never einschlummernder suspicion, so long as we live a hundred eyes
on us spähende stapled hold, because we do not dare Verrätherey more
than a fox, which, he is very tame, and so friendly with him bypasses,
but always has a residual angebohrnen Tüken from its reserves. We want
to look like we wanted, Frölich düster or so würd 'we resent ausgedeutet
be short, we would be like the oxen in the stable, the better fed,
the closer to death.

My nephew offense could still be forgotten, his ways; the point, the
excuse of youth and blood zustatten; be Beyname Hot-Track giebt him
already a privilege, and you write him all the Bey on behalf of
the choleric temperament, which he mastered, and I and his father
would have to atone for his sin.

We could have misled him, würd 'it hot, and we as the source of all
that would pay for everything. Let him, my dear cousin, nothing from
the offer of the king know that it might go as it pleases. Vernon.
Tell him what you do for good, I want to reaffirm it. Here's your
nephew.

Fourth Scene. (Hot Track and Dowglas to the former.) Hot Track. My uncle
is back again Sezt the Lord of Westmorland in Freyheit. Uncle,
giebt what's new? Worcester. The king is determined to at a meeting to
arrive. Dowglas. So we want to him by the Lord of Westmorland call out.
Hot-Track. Dowglas Lord, go and tell him das Dowglas.

I want, and with pleasure. (Dowglas geht ab. ) Worcester. The king did
not seem inclined to forgive. Hot-Track. Batet about her? The God
prevent! Worcester. I told him quite lenient by our act, by its
gebrochnen oath, and he knew no better help than that his perjury
by a zweyten läugnete.

He calls us rebels, Verräther, and threatened trozig us after the earlier
sharpness to punish.

(Dowglas comes back.) Dowglas. Armed you, Milord, armed you, I have a
Brave King Henry Ausfordrung rise in the teeth; Westmorland, who was
being held hostage here, it contributes to him, and he can now no
different than they quickly get back again.

Worcester. The Prince of Wales came out before the king, and invited
you to Zweykampf out nephew. Hot-Track. Wollte the sky, we would
trade beyde out alone, and no one today would bring short Athem, than
I and Harry Monmouth! Tell me, tell me how he spoke of me? That
he disdainfully?

Vernon. No, on my soul! In my life heard 'I do not bescheidnere
lenge, a brother of the others could not politely ask if it is a mere
exercise weapons, in order to play a knight would thun. He testified
all respect to you that a man can call, raise euern Werth with a
princely tongue, and spoke of euern merits as a chronicle, and what
in the That a sign of a princely Gemüths was that he spoke with
Schaamröthe of himself, circuitry and its evil was admitted with a
youth decency, which seemed to prove that his soul better than the
other masterful Seyn could when he wanted.

Here he held inn, but let me tell the world if it the envy of this day
to survive, so England has never been a better hope of obsessed,
so much the Ausschweiffungen darkened his youth they have. Hot-Track.
Cousin, I think you're Thorheiten in his love, and I've never heard
of a prince, the wildness ausgelassenste so far had.

But he sey what he wants, eh night it is, I want him as a soldier with a
hug bewillkommen that he is under my courtesy will shrivel. Zun weapons
hurtig! And her Cameraden, and friends, even considering what you
have to have tuna, since I know the gift of eloquence is not, not
geschikte am, your blood by my response to erhizen.

Fifth Scene. (A messenger to the former.) messenger. Milord, here are
letters for Eu. Graces. Hot-Track. IZT I can not read them. O my
friends, we have a short time to live, and this short time of one
ignoble minutes to waste, would be too long.

We survive this day, so we live to kings to come, we die, it's
not a pretty death, if kings must die with us? (A messenger else.)
Messenger. Gracious Lord, the King is in the suit. Hot track. I thank
him that he had me in my Mährchen interrupts, because talking is
not my thing.

Only Diss, each Thue his best. And here I have a pull Schwerdt, the
steel I, at this perilous day, with the best blood that I can find,
will stain.

Now, (Esperanza) Percy * and rükt from, let all the merry sounds
of war instruments, and Bey this music, let us embrace each other,
because I wanted the sky to the earth Sezen that some of us the
time did not see each other again so bewillkommen.

(They embrace and go. The trumpet can be heard.) (ed * Diss was, according
to Hall's Chronicle Bl 22, the word on the attack in Percy's army.
Pope.) Sixth Scene. (The king with his army; bläßt to attack you.)

(Hereafter occur Dowglas and Sir Walter Blunt on.) Blunt. Who art
thou, that thou me everywhere so come in the way? What are you
looking for honor to me thereof? Dowglas.

Wisse because my name is Dowglas, and I follow thee deßwegen so
because they try to say, you seyst a king. Blunt. They tell you the
truth. Dowglas.

The Lord of Stafford has already paid for it, that it looks like you,
because I felt it was because that was thee, King Harry, so he has
this Schwerdt an end.

And so it should thun you, then it would be that you caught me want to
give. Blunt. I'm not born to me shows you übermüthiger Scot, and you
should find a king that Stafford's death will be avenged.

(They fight , Blunt is.) (By Hot occurs on track.)

Hot Track.

Dowglas O, thou wouldst have to be so Holmedon ment under, never
hätt I have a Scots won. Dowglas. Everything is done, everything gained
Todt ligt the king here ! hot track. Where? Dowglas. Here. Hot-Track.
This, Dowglas? No, I know his face too well, a brave knight, it was
that his name was Blunt; it bears only a defense like the king.

Dowglas. Ah! thou nonsense! to Theuermann you have a title borrowed
bought. Why, you said to me, you seyst a king? Hot track. The King has
many who go into his clothes. Dowglas.

So I want my Bey Schwerdt, kill all of his clothes, his entire wardrobe,
Stük for him until I Stük even for you. Hot-Track. In and out, our
people hold so well that we can promise the victory. (They go
from.)

Siebende and eighth Scene. (Falstaff and Prince Henry.) (Falstaff redt
memme in a tone a little with himself, the prince comes to the
demands his sword from him, Falstaff hergeben not want him as long
as Percy still alive, and offers the Pistol to his prince, by the
Prince of the Hulfter wants to pull out, he pulls a bottle out with
Sect; a loud laughter from Paradise bewillkommt this good idea, and
the intention of this scene is reached.)

Ninth Scene. (trumpets and Feldgeschrey, excursions, and the king, the
prince, Lord John of Lancaster and the Earl of Westmorland occur.)
King Henry.

I pray thee, Harry, pull 'you back, you have too much blood,
Lord John of Lancaster, do you deal with him. Lancaster. No sooner,
Gracious Lord, I also up the blood. Prinz Heinrich. I ask Eu.
Majesty, endure, our wish to distance our friends in confusion Sezen.
King Henry. I will, Milord of Westmorland, leads him into his tent.

Westmorland. Come, Milord, I want you to carry your tent. Prinz
Heinrich. Mich. lead, Milord ?

I need your Hülfe not. The sky prevent that a Nadelrize the Prince of
Wales from such a field as it is, will drive, where so many noble
men in their blood unicellular crush, and the triumphant rebel to
her death spread.

Lancaster. Athmer We are here for too long ; come, cousin of
Westmorland, in this way ligt our duty to heaven's sake, come.

Prinz Heinrich. Beyme heaven, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster; I thought
not that thou lord of such a spirit seyst; else loves' ich dich
as a brother, John, but now lieb 'ich dich as my own soul. King Henry.
I saw him the Lord Percy with a Muth Spize the offer that I am from
such a young warrior was not hypothesis.

Prinz Heinrich. O, This boy has passion for all of us. (They go from.)
(King Henry remains Dowglas occurs.) Dowglas.

Again a king? They grow like Hydra's heads. I'm Dowglas, all the
decay of this color - Who are you, here the person of a king wants?
King Henry. The King himself, Dowglas, the warm bedaurt that you have
so many shadows of his offense, eh du 've found him. zween I have sons
who you and Percy on the entire battlefield advice, but because
you have me so glüklich fall into the hands, I will take with you;
vertheidige you!

Dowglas.

I'm afraid you're just a Phantom, and yet you are wearing in That
like a king, but you're my, I am sure who you are, and so I want you to
win. (They fight, by the king is in danger, the Prince of Wales about
this.) Prince Henry. Lift your head to make you not worthy Scot, or
thou shalt never again do not lift the spirits of Scherley, Stafford
and Blunt are in my arms, the Prince of Wales ists, you dräut, and never
promises what he does not pay. (They fight, Dowglas flees.) Munter,
Gracious Lord! How is Your Majesty? Sir Nicolas Gawsey has to Hülfe
geschikte, and Clifton has also done. I just want to Clifton.
King Henry.

Athmer Stay and a Augenblik. You have my respect verlohrne bought again,
Harry, and by this noble rescue proved that you my life is not
indifferent.

Prinz Heinrich. O God! that the biggest injustice to me, ever said
that I wish euern death. Wär 'so, I would have just Dowglassens
dräuende alone hand over you can, it would end faster than your poison
all of the world, and euerm the son verrätherische have trouble saving.
King Henry. IZT you rush to Clifton, and I will to Sir Nicolas
Gawsey. (The King is from.) Tenth Scene. (Hot Spur, the Prince of Wales.)
Hot track. As I see, so you're Harry Monmouth. Prince Henry. You speak
as if I my name verläugnen wanted. Hot-Track.

My Nam is Harry Percy. Prinz Heinrich. So I see a very valiant rebel
of the name carries. I'm the Prince of Wales, and think not, Percy,
longer beside me at the Price of Honor to jostle.

Zween stars can not run her in a sphere and keep a can in England no
double kingdom for Harry Percy, and for the Prince of Wales Theilen.
Hot-Track. Also would it not, the hour has come to one of us beyden
must make an end, and wanted the sky, thy name in the war wär 'IZT as
big as mine.

Prince Henry. It will become bigger, we are always distinguished from
each other, and I want all these burgeoning honor of your Chamber pflüken
to a wreath for my forehead to make it. Hot-Track. I can so you no
longer hear brag. (They fight.) (Falstaff comes about.) Falstaff.
Bravo, Hall, drauf los, Hall! Sa Hey, here you will find no child's
play, which I can tell you. (Dowglas occurs, and disputes with
Falstaff, who immediately falls to the ground as if he Todt sey; Dowglas
goes off, and the prince met the Percy down.) Hot Track.

O Harry, thou hast robbed me of my fame; the loss of life hurts me
less than all the proud title, which thou hast abgewonnen they wound
my soul deeper than your Schwerdt my flesh, but the soul is a
Sclavin of life, and life is a game of Glüks - O I could propheceyen
when the cold hand of death, not on my tongue would be, well, Percy,
thou art dust, for a dish - (He dies.)

He
had been actuated in his attempted hazing of Alexander by Jase Mallows,
who thought her pride should be humbled, yet sought to accomplish that
end vicariously in order that the doors of future conquest might not be
closed against himself.  Lute's undertaking had not been a success and
he sought his bed, sodden and bloodshot of eye.  He was nursing grudges
of varying degrees against Jase Mallows, Alexander, Halloway and
finally against Bud Sellers.

He kicked off his brogans and as he leaned to blow out the light, he
stumbled, sprawling headlong and carrying the lamp down with him.  For
a moment he lay where he had fallen, too dazed and befuddled to rise,
but presently he clambered up, his eyes wide and terrified, for his
rising was Phoenix-like--mantled in flame.  With incredible swiftness
the flimsy coverings of his bed had burst into a crimson glare and even
his clothing was afire.

Beating out the flame that licked his shirt, he abandoned the rest and
fled, howling like a madman.  The thing which D. W. Kelly had feared
had come to pass and the frame building was doomed to its gutting.

So frequently of late had ungodly bellowings and outcries broken the
fitful rest of this house, that for a brief space, Lute's howls of
alarm failed to carry their true significance.  Some guests, startled
out of their sleep, had the impulse rather to keep their doors tight
shut than to open them, and through the tinder-like dryness of the
place the flames roared up the boxed-in stairway as through a flue.

Bud Sellers heard the yells of the fugitive Lute, and before he had
time to investigate, saw the stairhead vomiting smoke and fire.  As he
dashed for Alexander's room, another door opened through which Halloway
and Brent ran out, carrying their shoes and coats.

"Let me in," shouted Bud, hammering on the panels.  "Ther house is
burnin' down an' ther steps is cut off."

At first there was no response, but at last the door swung in.  It
framed Alexander, clothed in shirt and trousers--but barefooted, and
holding a pistol in her hand.

At the sight of Bud Sellers her face grew pallid.

"You!" she exclaimed with white-hot anger.  "My paw lays over thar with
yore bullet in his breast--an' ye comes runnin' hyar ter me fer a way
ter git outen danger!"

The three men were crowding to the door but she stood barring it and
she did not give back an inch.  In deliberation she went on.  "He laid
a pledge on me not ter avenge him.  Ef hit warn't fer thet, I'd kill ye
whar ye stands."

"Fer God's sake, Alexander!"  The mountaineer's voice was shrill with
excitement.  "Kill me if ye likes--but don't tarry.  I come ter warn
ye.  Ther winder's ther only way out--an' thar hain't no time ter lose."

As if in corroboration, the first puff of brown smoke eddied through
the open door.  At first it came idly, driftingly, as if it had nothing
to do with haste.  Halloway pushed both Sellers and Brent ahead of him,
and followed them in, slamming the door behind him.

"Talk outside," he commanded sharply.  "Don't waste life-and-death
minutes in this hell-trap!"

Alexander gazed absently as though unable to readjust her trend of
thought so swiftly, then she said, quietly enough: "Thar's ther winder.
Go through hit ef ye likes."

As for herself she turned to the task of tying up her pack of
belongings with what seemed to the frenzied men insufferable
deliberation.

"This is the third floor," snapped Halloway whose head was already
thrust out of the window gauging possibilities of escape.  "We'll have
to tear up sheets and make a rope of them."

Brent leaped promptly to the task but Alexander looked at the huge body
which blocked the window frame and a smile curled her lips.  "You on a
rope o' sheets!"  She even laughed.  "Ye mout es well entrust yourself
ter a strand of flax thread!"

Through the floor licked a tongue of flame.

"Kain't you men jump--an' catch ther limb of thet thar sycamore," she
added.  "Hit hain't fur away--an' thet's how I'm aimin' ter leave
myself."

Halloway turned an eager gaze upon the girl and even in the press of
moments he remembered the role he was playing.  "I reckon," he
suggested, "I'd better lead off--ef thet flyin' limb holds me, it'll
hold ther balance of ye."

What was genuinely in his mind was to be there to catch her if she
missed her grip, but to forestall objection he thrust his body through
the opening, measured the distance with a brief glance and launched
himself outward.  To use that fire escape one must catch the branch,
and hold it without slipping, while he swung and groped with his feet
for another limb below.

For Halloway the matter was done without doubt or wavering.  It must be
so done or result in a three-storied drop, but when he turned and
looked back, bracing himself to catch Alexander, he saw her turn again
into the room, out of his range of vision.  He could see Brent and Bud
vociferously arguing with her and then she reappeared and lifted her
pack and rifle over the sill.  As she played out the improvised line of
bedding her eyes were angry and Halloway guessed that it was because
the two men had refused to leave without waiting for her.  Eventually
when the room showed red beyond the frame she slipped through, poised
herself as the man had done, and came outward as smoothly as an
exhibition diver.  She landed so close to Halloway that her hands
clasped over his own and her breath fluttered against his cheek.  For a
fraction of an instant, he thought she might fail to hold her grip and
one arm swept around her pressing her close to him.  Even when he knew
that she was safe he did not release her and his veins were pounding
with the wild exaltation of contact.

Somewhat pantingly but coolly she commanded: "Move back.  Give me room
ter stand on--them others kain't foller whilst we're blockin' ther way."

Halloway had forgotten the others, and when Bud Sellers jumped, the
last of all, it was only just in time.  A shower of sparks puffed out
of the window and inside sounded a crash of collapsing timbers.

"Well, where do we go now?" inquired Brent a quarter of an hour later
and the girl turned on her heel.  "As fer me," she replied, "I'm goin'
back ter my rafts of timber.  I've done had a lavish of this town."

"May we go too?" inquired Halloway.  "We hain't got no roof over us
neither--now."

"I reckon ye kin all come save only----" she paused a moment and added
in hardened voice, "save only ther man thet sought ter slay my paw."

Bud's head drooped.  He was still sweating, for when he left the sill,
the place had been a furnace, but he said nothing, and instantly
Alexander wheeled again and spoke impulsively.

"I've got ter crave yore pardon, Bud," she exclaimed.  "Paw said he
didn't hold no grudge ergin you nohow.  An' I reckon ye've done sought
right slavish ter make amends ternight."


CHAPTER VII

From down there at the boom as the blackest hours of the night passed,
Halloway and Brent sat rubber-coated on the raft watching the inflamed
redness that was wiping out all that end of the village.  The
age-seasoned frame houses there huddled close enough for the hot
contagion to sweep them with typhoon speed and they went up in spurts
like pitch barrels.  The wind was high enough to romp ruthlessly with
spark and blaze, until even the effort at fire-fighting had been
abandoned.  Happily the bluster had settled to a constant gale out of
the south-west and the fire-tide rolled with it to the edge and not the
core of the town and when it lapped at the reeking woods it hissed out
in defeat.

Alexander had withdrawn to her improvised shack and wrapped herself in
her blanket.  Brent gazed with a sort of hypnotized intentness on the
wildness of the picture before him--an orgy of fire, wind and water.
Through the wet mountains the wind shrieked and buffetted until ancient
trees, made brittle by long freezing, went down.  At his back, beyond
the boom, sounded the dirge of the swollen waters running out.  That
was like the wail of a maniac exhausted by his ravings.  The stage was
dropping as rapidly as it had risen.  Ahead, tossing a mane of smoke
and a spume of spark, reveled the demoniac spirit of Fire.  Brent
shuddered but Halloway struck a match just then for his dead pipe under
the protection of his coat lapel and in the brief flare Brent saw that
his eyes were agleam, feral and animal-like, and that his lips were
wolfishly drawn back from his teeth.

"This is elemental!" Halloway burst out suddenly.  "I glory in it.
I've been sitting here drunker than any moonshine guzzler back there at
that tavern to-night.  Drunk on the wild wine of the elements--drunk
from the skulls of Valhalla.  Great God, I love it!"

Brent rose at last and sought refuge under the insufficient roof of one
of the shacks, for a down-pour had come with the wind and in key with
all the extravagance of the night's mood, it was a cloud-burst.

The city man tossed restlessly and once looking out across the stretch
of the rafted logs, he saw a single figure stripped to the skin in the
sheeted down-pour of cold rain.  He saw it only when the lightning
flashed with the spectral effect of beauty.  It stood straight with
back-flung shoulders and head upturned into the rain like some wild
high-priest of storm worship.  When a flare, brighter than the others
limned the whole prospect into a dazzling instant, the features burst
into clarity with eyes glowing like madness, and lips parted in wild
exaltation.

"He'll have a chill before morning," growled Brent, but his
astonishment at the hardihood of such a shower-bath would have been
more severely taxed had he been able to see behind the screening walls
of Alexander's shack.

For if the colossal man standing there as God made him, reveling in the
sluicing of icy sheets of water, was a picture for a painter's delight,
the figure of the woman, sheltered from any eye, but likewise stripped
to the flesh was one almost as heroic and far lovelier.  Alexander too,
was availing herself of that strong tonic which would have brought
collapse to a weakling.  She stood tall, beautiful, a Diana with her
wet and flowing hair loosed about her white shoulders and her bosom
rising and falling to the elation of the storm-bath.

The hurricane passed in the forenoon of that day leaving the ridges wet
and inert, with the dejection of spent violence, but from gray clouds
that hung in trailing wisps along the upper slopes a steady rain sobbed
down.  After breakfast Bud Sellers who had after all not availed
himself of Alexander's permission to spend the night on the raft, came
aboard and diffidently approached the girl.

He wore a hang-dog air but in his eyes was that same wistfulness of
unspoken worship.  Brent knew that he was trying to explain to
Alexander his torture of self accusation because of the disaster born
of his moment of drunken frenzy.

The girl stood looking at him, entirely oblivious to the devotion that
was clear-writ in his eyes.  While he talked she accorded him a
hearing, but with lips tight pressed and the unforgettable picture in
her mind of the stricken man who might even now be dead.  He might have
passed, with the pain of uncertainty clouding his last moments as to
the success or failure of her venture.

With that burden on her heart it was difficult to listen to apologies
and explanations.  She knew that Bud would have burned his body to a
crisp last night if need be in the effort to save her from a similar
fate, but that only irritated her.  She had not called for help.  She
had not needed help and this rush of volunteers to her rescue was,
after all, only a denial of the principle for which she so militantly
fought; the postulate that when she played a man's game she wished to
be treated as a man, asking no favors.

Brent and Halloway overheard a little of what was said, for the two
voices rose in inflection, under the urge of his earnestness and her
feeling.

"I don't act pi'zen mean when I'm sober, Alexander--an' I strives not
ter drink, knowin' full well thet hit plum crazes me--  Hit don't seem
like no common thirst--  Hit comes on me like a plague and hit masters
me ther same as spells or fits----.  God, He knows I'd es lief hev
raised my hand ergin my own daddy, ef I hed one, es erginst yore paw--I
war frenzied."

"I don't know what made ye do hit, but I knows what ye done, Bud," said
Alexander and her rich voice trembled under the tautness of her effort
at control.  "Ef a man kain't holp goin' mad like a dog--an' seekin'
ter slay folks, I reckon he----"  It was on her tongue to say that he
ought to pay the mad-dog's penalty but she checked herself shortly and
went on with less cruelty, "I reckon he's a right dangerous sort of
feller ter hev 'round."

"All I asks, Alexander," he pleaded, "air thet ye gives me ther chanst
ter make amends.  Ef I feels ther cravin' masterin' me ergin, I'll go
ter town an' git ther police ter lock me up in ther jail-house an' keep
me thar, tell I comes back ter my senses."

"Hit hain't a thing ye kin handily make amends fer," she reminded him,
"but I've done pledged myself ter let hit go unavenged and I knows too,
thet I'm beholden ter ye fer last night.  None-the-less----"  The color
paled from her cheeks and she shook her head.  "None-the-less until I
gits back home--an' knows whether my paw is livin' or dead----" her
words came very slowly and with an effort, "I kain't say thet thar
won't be black hatred in my heart erginst ye."

Unfortunately, the measure would lead to Malaga, and by Santafé Loja
crossing the Sierra Nevada, starting almost at midnight, and the
shadows were so thick in those nights of spring rains, the countryside
that we had to be veiled by the darkness.

So we crossed the entire length of the "Vega" does not enjoy its wonderful
landscape around, or even look to the overall structure of the historic
Santafé, villa figures that only about 4000 inhabitants today, sitting
among the orchards and farmhouses á margin Jenil left, like an old
midwife who works quietly with his spinning wheel, in the shade of
a patio of orange trees in bloom.

A lack of sleep and the interior landscape of the measure gave us a
bizarre distraction. We went with a German Jew, young, robust, regular
tea, petulant, talkative and a singular voraciousness, who had been
staying in Granada in the same background as us.

Complained bitterly that the famine had passed, the poor quality of
food (and what our background was the most famous of Granada), and
no good reason, because it is against all humanity that kept
hotelkeepers Spanish travelers with their abhorrent dishes cooked
chickpeas.

German had the curious all pockets full of oranges and biscuits, and
three hours until he surrendered the dream, not suspended its gastronomic
exercises.

His hobby was to want to go through a _turista_ English original,
which was known throughout the world ( with the exception of some
continents) who loved the pretty girls had made great strides French,
Italian, Circassian, Spanish, etc.., and was preparing to embark
on a trip to Australia _recreo_ no doubt to continue his life in
Polynesia Caesar of the daughters of Eve.

But that is the case by requesting information on the regions he had
visited had no reason at all, explaining his ignorance thousand
subterfuges. Although he spoke English well, his way of speaking in
Spanish and French showed the southern German accent, as his face
revealed to the Israelite. We had our reasons for believing that the
race belonged to another industrial partner diligence, talking to
_comisionista_ hordelés until the pockets, without prejudice to the
elbows. Among the many benefits that go with the railways and telegraph
should be counted as first-order quasi-voyageur_ Abolition of _commis
or commissions, the most detestable scourge that can give a traveler.

The telegraph and part steam-wagon, in fact, make it almost unnecessary
to send these lobsters to seek placement in other markets for
products manufacturing.

In Italy, in Spain and other countries in Europe, where the railways
are still in their beginning, the emissary _Comisionista_ France,
England, Belgium or Germany is firm or with any consistency.

So in Barcelona, Valencia and the Andalusian cities I had found this
pest in all the hotels or inns. The agent (especially as neither
the French) is able to discredit his country, anywhere, using their own
resources. ignorant, fatuous, vulgar, kitschy often cause headaches
to charlatan, he is everywhere in defeating those who have candidly
admitted his company.

An exception to this rule is a prodigy. Among more than forty met at
a bearable Spain. Our German Jews began as soon succumbed to his
nationality, since, for fun, we did many charges to the United Kingdom,
German and was declared not to accept responsibility. I pretended that
I had very recalcitrant views and told that it was a horror to
admit the Jewish Rothschild in the British Parliament, because that race
did not deserve any fucking consideration. Then jumped as a rough spring,
angry and terrible, as if the whole race had to speak by the mouth
of him, and confessed to a Jewish evangelism we all started an
explosion of laughter.

I had no difficulty in convincing that I had no concern for race or
religion, and that his estimated as one of the most beautiful, energetic
and tenacious of the world, and one that contributed more for the
power work and the feeling of brotherhood, to the progress of
civilization. Corrido and the Azores _turista_ former English is
arrellanó in their corner and manducó three oranges and six biscuits,
through compensation, the largest gathering. The next day, in
Malaga, _infraganti_ caught him at the hotel, presented to a merchant
all his collection of boxes with samples of goods, and although
it was held on the achievements of women, confessed that their
journeys had been made cosmopolitan rather than a English _turista_
but by a strong German Jew, the home agent HB & C ª e Manchester.

It was six o'clock when we reached Loja, after the first cut throats or
soft inflections of the Sierra-Nevada. Except for Switzerland, I
have not seen anything but quaint, small class enchanting landscapes
of freshness, that table surrounding Loja. It is a city quite
considerable, since it has more than 17,000 inhabitants, about 45 km
far from Granada and 56 from Malaga. Its agricultural products
are generally of Andalusia, but is notable for its manufacture of
cloth and paper.

It is the country par excellence of the water, delicious and enormous.
Not only have more than two hundred public and private, but
to arrive at centuries now, at its end, more than 5000-fold.

The population, ugly, uneven, graceless, sad and rather dirty, makes a
strange contrast to alderredores. Located on two hills separated by
Jenil, with most of its mass on the left bank, is dominated almost
everywhere by the foothills of the Sierra, and offers a delightful
view towards a large portion of the Vega of Granada.

The sun just beginning to produce snow on its peaks primarily reverbs,
a wide swath of mist fall under the neighboring hills in half, leaving
the outstanding overdraft with its huge granite boulders, and low
hills, the city and the deep and tortuous Vallecitos Jenil of fresh,
green, flowery, crammed with factories and mills, orchards and primary
groups and rows of poplar trees and white enhiestos. The earth seemed
to rejoice, greeting the sun and his admirable Andalusian sky with a
concert of harmonies and a delicate aromas of voluptuous
evaporation. After Loja, the road continues to climb by between
snails and well-cultivated beautiful hills toward the heart of the
Sierra.

The Colombian traveler that travels the roads that cut the Spanish
Sierras, could only smile with contempt, to remember that there
are lazy fatalistic in Colombia believe that the Andes have condemned
the isolation of many inhabitants of mountainous regions of the New
World.

Seeing what has been achieved in terms of railways and highways in regions
of the Alps and the Pyrenees Mountains of Spain, I said: 'No, the
Andes, far from being obstacles, they are the most prodigious gift
God has given to the New World, and people who can be the most
successful use of the land.

With the will and money _todas_ regions of the Andes are likely to
admit as many roads and railways may need social movement. "In the midst
of this ocean of naked mountains, hills capricious, high plains and
small cliffs and huge, without moving any risk of prosecution by
an excellent road.

It seems at every moment, just around a sharp bend, you will care to save
a cliff jumping off a hill to another, as is the rugged terrain. This
is going to surprise surprise.

I have not seen anything so _romántico, _ so harshly beautiful and
sad as those low plains of the Sierra-Nevada, which seem desiccated
lake beds of many centuries ago.

Upon entering the _recinto_ one of these flats, rooms vastísimos emerald
pavement between colossal walls of iron and tin, it is believed that
there is no way out ahead. The vegetation is a poetic sadness, because
the whole floor is covered with plantations of wheat and other
cereals or legumes, on whose carpet is out of step in stretch, big,
bleak and majestic, these oaks green life in Spain calls _alcornoques_
whose branches produce cork.

These trees are very numerous there, as in all alti-Spanish plains of
the Sierras, and are subject to a relatively large trade. Nature,
which man anticipating inventory as a second bottle _vientre_ to save
the wine, the village has _alcornoques_ land on the plains above the
slopes where it grows the generous vine.

If all that _alcornoques_ vegetating in the world to produce even
_corchos !_... At these round tables simple vegetable stand
in complete moles great circle of granite and ink look more unique, all
rugged, rough, with wrinkles and huge cracks - Cinderellas and some
opaque, some color with a bright tin sad, others black or brown -
presents the most unusual lighting and shadows, as the inclination
of the sun, and rounded at the tops and already extravagant peaks in
truncated cones or needles, or in circular rows and Dentelles
imitate that great iron crowns.

And on top of these bare-headed and surprisingly these moles without any
visible stratification, descuellan perpendicular to the distance,
like lamps of silver and diamond slopes of the sky, soaring domes and
ridges interspersed by glaciers in the Sierra. That is one of supreme
beauty, which the artist invites contemplation and defy description ....
The _ventas_ had happened (and certainly that I would not mind "of
some tortilla made with rancid oil, as used in Spain, which took
me from the jaws and palate over a week), had left the center of
the Sierra, and beginning to descend from a huge hill and hills
Seedling prodigiously complicated and intertwined.

The region of the oaks was over, and crossed the foot of the inclined
planes and where a very broad culture of the vineyard. Amounts to saying
that bajábamos the neck of the bottle (the _corcho_) your belly
drunk (the _uvas_) We understand how great is the production of
vineyards in the province of Malaga, a spot almost any given
arrugadísimo by bare mountains, just to see that even in the most
outstanding ridges and deep slopes and more rugged the land is
covered with vineyards.

Suddenly, a return to the top bend, the horizon was opened to our view,
without any eminence to stop the immense panorama . Amazement beauty
that awaits us!

Basically the valley and the coastal city of Malaga; later glowing
deserts of the Mediterranean closer to two continents in the
distance, visible only with the aid of glasses, the blue mountains
of Africa, vague, choppy and confusing, towards the coast of Tetuan,
and all covered by a beautiful clear blue sky and illuminated by
an almost tropical sun, the magnificent African sun!

That is, is admired in supreme rapture and then with great rapture, but
does not describe .... I felt that my heart beats on an eminence
of the Andes, in the presence of an ocean-pampa .... * * * * * Under
the artistic point of view and the intellectual, Malaga is a city of
little interest.

There does not reign but industry and commerce, and historical memories
are revealed only in relation to the time of the Arabs or Moors,
in the general structure of the city, some traditional arts, but
many curious features of little importance and especially in the
sea and sky.

Indeed, the sea and sky from Malaga to believe every moment in Africa,
the atmosphere, bathing with hot flashes the Spanish coast, is a link
between these two half-continents greet from the top of their Rocky
Mountains above the Mediterranean. The valley that lies in Malaga,
framed between the sea and the last spurs of the Sierra, is very
small. Spread on the coast in a circumference of 20 kilometers,
extends to the west by the hills between cords in a very narrow valley
that ply the _Gundalhorce_ small river that crosses the plain a
short distance from the city, and _Guadalmedina_, that divides,
working on running a bed of sand, and that variable is given to the
excessive flooding of depression or their banks anchas beaches.

The plain is a beautiful garden view from the mountains that dominate
Malaga. They not only grow thousand fruit trees, vines and all the opulent
productions of the fertile Andalusia, but the cotton is harvested, the
lot of snuff and cochineal, thrives and grows sugar cane, and could
believe that is planted on a piece of the African soil. On the
side of the east coast extends in a straight and narrow lines curve
and capricious, in the direction of Velez-Malaga and Motril.

North and follow the complicated buttresses dominate the Sierra-Nevada,
and west are thousand eminent hedgehog all land in the direction of
Cadiz, on the line of the Sierra de Ronda, where the most amazing
geological formations as well as considerable social curiosities.

Ronda has a reputation as a very strange little town in the province of
Malaga. If this has a population of 451,406 inhabitants (the seventh
in Spain in that order), its active capital is 94,289, including
their Egido.

Malaga is one of the great centers of liberalism in Spain, including
Madrid, Barcelona, Seville, Cadiz and all the cities social movement
active.

Whenever you trade, industry or political action leading to a strong
social vitality, the popular sentiment is tilted towards freedom
and progress.

Conservatism does not have its strengths in Spain but in cities where
there is immobility and silence. Malaga alderredores of the gardens
contain many beautiful and valuable estates, where houses are a remarkable
elegance, and some artistic wealth.

In Guadalhorce valley there are beautiful sea of orange and lemon
plantations that recall the primordial de la Huerta de Valencia. It
is incredible that the consumption of fruit and Europe acidic and
aromatic essences of those forests of lemon trees.

At around the orchards, gardens and farms and factories in the valley,
there are amphitheaters cut into the hills full of vineyards. The
richness and variety of these vineyards is amazing (compared to
the difficult terrain), because not only is a huge production of
white wines, reds and oranges, more or less aromatic and pleasant,
whose fame is universal, but is get plenty of those famous special
grapes to prepare exquisite _pasas_.

I have to say, gift of the popular adage that job cost me to drink
good wine and get good at Malaga raisins.

Almost one third of the city consists of new construction, in generally
excellent, very attractive for its many balconies and lattice or
flown cabinets, green or blue, its marble floor, big iron trellis, its
cheerful and its rooftop lookouts oriental style.

In the new streets are clean and spacious, many large hotels and
cafes, one can see the comfort and pleasure, and it is not true
in cities like material inside Spain.

The famous _Alameda_ is a wonderful street-walking, where there is an
abundance of giant trees, fountains, statues and canapés granite between
two rows of elegant buildings.

Similarly, buildings that dominate the docks or the upcoming port,
relay the progress of good taste and vitality of the maritime
cities.

But the bulk of the city, old, is an incomprehensible maze of streets
in the first time, dark, very narrow, often dirty, some reaching an
incredible degree of filth. There constructions capricious, extravagant,
barbarian on any weight, half-Moorish, half-Spanish, whose moles
stirring constantly, to the narrowness and crushed without pity, a
large and active population of the most heterogeneous. The
elegant and beautiful Malaga (women are very nice there in large
numbers) walks visiting the rich stores and shops of fashion and
curios, shaking with a grace inimitable choice of ebony, sandalwood
or nacre with graceful ornaments and rich landscape, and seduced
by the grace of her walk, but got rid decent.

And no less striking for its picaresque _dejos_ and the air ...
Malaga minor - between the guy who _manola_ and _griseta_ -- dressed
in brightly colored fabrics, with heads uncovered, lively and
provocative, winking eye to dangerous skill, pink and brown, round
and tempting as a ripe bunches of grapes that produce pink to the
country.

At the same time, tingling in Streets swarming with coarse and brutal
workers, dressed in abandonment of seafarers of all nations in the
bustle does not die commission á hunting customers, dealers worried
delivered exclusively to the fever of speculation, of soldiers of
yellow, somewhat idle, to vivanderas highway and making a racket
all the devils, some semi-majos style and toreros matamoros, and
crooks of all ages always abounding in the market towns, with its
accompanying large ragged beggars that are inevitable in almost all
Spanish cities.

The great movement of Malaga does not stem solely from their strong
wine and other articles of its agriculture, for significant values.
Malaga is by its position and nature of the terrain throughout the
province and the neighboring port bound for Granada, Jaen, and parts
of the districts of Cordova, and people who take the side of the
Round as of Velez-Malaga .

Apart from these reasons to centralize a large trade, Malaga is an
industrial or manufacturing production rather important and well
mixed.

There are many manufactured silk and red, some sugar, various
fabrics, hats, machines and objects casting, soaps, pickles, pottery,
etc.., - Is working a thousand objects of art, as beautiful fans,
plaster busts and very sensitive other curiosities of hand - and is
preparing an extensive fruit and distillation.

Malaga is, without dispute, the second commercial city of Spain,
Barcelona is just as superior. Malaga, so rich in industries, trade and
so strong in the production of wine [4], is a poor city of monuments.

The only one that deserves attention, and still end up surrounded by
sad and diminished streets, is the cathedral. Belongs to the
Renaissance style, comprising of the order, and though its facade
is a very remarkable, its magnificent tower and good taste
is itself a monument.

Inside the temple, made up of three beautiful buildings, it is really
great for their general forms, but no details of their artistic
value, on what makes paintings and sculptures, and there is no
nobility in architectural terms.

Ceilings should be exempted from the ships that are very beautiful,
entirely of stone and with great relief, and the vast central choir,
which has seating in rich wood carvings, and two whose bodies are
colossal much merit.

The view offered by the Overview of Malaga is superb, when viewed from
the heights where they are contiguous to the fort _Alcazaba_, kept
half ruined, and the ruins of the ancient castle of _Gibralfaro_,
Moruna work that was located at higher elevation and communicated
with that strong.

Said Viper, "There might be neck-stretching too if too many tongues
make talk.  Jess will have the boys ready at the place soon in the
morning.  They will wait for orders there."

"At the place!"  Halloway in his counterfeited sleep cursed to himself.
If instead of those indefinite words the point had been named he would
have gained something tangible.  He knew now however beyond a doubt
that both operators were conspirators and he had gleaned one comforting
assurance--the plans contemplated no joining of forces until to-morrow.
Those at the far end were still uninstructed.  If it came to a race
to-night that gave a better chance.

Then Viper cut off and Wicks, with a sigh of boredom, settled back in
his chair once more and gave himself over to silence.

Finally Halloway stirred out of his slumber and stretched himself.

"I reckon," he admitted shamefacedly, "I must hev fell asleep.  That
damn fire broke up my rest last night."  With which comment he
slouched, still sleepily, out of the place, rubbing his eyes as he
went, with ham-like fists.

At the rafts he found Bud Sellers, and a round dozen men of Bud's
selection.  Looking them over, Halloway privately approved.  There was
not an eye in the number that was not hawk-clear; or a figure that was
not nail-hard.  These were fellows cut to a pattern of action, but even
in their excellent average, one stood out with an individualism which
immediately struck the observer.

He was introduced as Jerry O'Keefe, but Halloway would not have needed
the name, once he had seen the lazy challenging twinkle in the
gray-blue eyes, to spot him as a man of Irish blood.  O'Keefe had need
to look up to meet the glance of the giant, but that was for him
unusual.  Into most eyes he looked down, for when he stood in his socks
he was six feet two inches of hard-bitten sinew and man-flesh.

"Where's Brent?" asked Halloway, and Bud Sellers, whose manner had
fallen into the stillness of one chafing against delay, replied
tersely, "He hain't come back yit."

Soon, though, he arrived, and by now the west was reddening toward
sunset.

In a situation calling for absolute parsimony in the economy of time it
would have meant moments salvaged for the trio of men, who must act as
commanders of the rest, to have gone at once into a discussion of the
results of their several investigations.  Yet that was impossible,
since for Halloway to tell his story to both would mean revealing his
knowledge of telegraphy.  So while he and Brent talked first alone, Bud
Sellers stood apart, and into that fertile soil of mountain suspicion
crept a vague questioning as to why full confidence was denied him--a
suspicion which was later to bear fruit.

When he had been told all, save of Halloway's eavesdropping, he made
his own report.

"Myself, I hain't found out much, save thet I've got ther men ready,
an' thet I seed Lute Brown talkin' with Jase Mallows a spell back."

It was arranged that half of the force should proceed at top speed to
Crabapple post office and mobilize there; that Halloway himself should
push through to Viper and eavesdrop on the telegraph key, and that the
others should loaf about Coal City watching the suspects and gleaning
what information they could.  The men of the last named contingent were
to play hounds on the heels of the plotters and seek to follow them
without being discovered.

While the three were still in council at one end of the raft, Bud came
suddenly to his feet and his jaw dropped in amazement.  There striding
down the bank to the boom, with a face as freshly pink as a wild rose,
was Alexander herself, with her pack on her back.

She saw the gathering of men, some with faces that were unfamiliar to
her, and halted to inspect them.  Into her eyes came something like a
smoulder as though in resentment of unwarranted trespassing, then
seeing Bud and Halloway and Brent she came aboard and demanded curtly,
"What be all these men doin' hyar?"

For an instant no one responded to her question.  The reaction of
unexpected relief from driving anxiety left them wordless.  Finally
Brent laughed nervously.

"It would appear that they are here for no reason whatsoever," he said,
"though a few minutes ago we thought it a matter of life and death."
Her nonplussed expression was sufficiently full of interrogation to cue
a fuller explanation and Brent embarked upon the summarized recital of
what they had discovered.

Alexander's eyes widened into amazement, and she caught one lip between
her white teeth.  She stood very straight and indignant, and the men
acknowledged to themselves that she had never seemed so beautiful
before, nor so militant.

"So they aimed ter lay-way me," she murmured incredulously and Halloway
made prompt answer.  "Yes, and ye mighty nigh walked right into th'ar
dead-fall.  Don't ye see now how plum reckless yore plan is?  Whar was
ye at anyhow?"

The girl impatiently tossed her head.  "I fared out a leetle way ter
see how ther roads looked," she said.  "I wanted ter mek sure that I
could get a daybreak start in the morning.  I hain't nobody's sugar ner
salt that I kain't stir abroad without meltin', be I?"

"We saw that your pack was gone too--and we 'lowed----" began Halloway,
but she interrupted him with a curt explanation.  "Thet shack war
leakin' like a sieve.  I didn't aim ter hev all my belongin's mildewed
an' rusted--so I left 'em at ther store."

"This crowd kin see ye through without mishap, I reckon.  We've done
planned hit all out."  That contribution came from the giant who seemed
to have become general spokesman but the young woman stood silent and
absorbed; a delicate pucker between her brows, and the violet pools of
her eyes cloud-riffled.  At last she announced firmly, "I'm beholden
ter all of ye but I've got ter study this matter out by myself.  I'll
come back hyar in a little spell an' tell ye what decision I've done
reached."

"As for getting a daybreak start," Brent observed as she turned away,
"You can't get into the bank until it opens."

Once more she had overlooked the unfamiliar complications of financial
usage.

Jerry O'Keefe had been lounging with the other recruits of Bud's
gathering, looking river-ward until the sound of voices, whose words he
could not distinguish, brought him lazily around.  As he stood when the
first view of Alexander broke on his vision, so he remained--immovable.
The low and bantering laughter of his companions for his rapt
statuesqueness, fell on deaf ears.  His lips parted and his eyes held
as under hypnotism.

Jerry stared with a craned neck at Alexander McGivins until slowly his
body came round to an easier posture, but upon his steady and unmoving
fixity of eye, the rest of him moved as upon an axis.  Into the
gray-blue irises came a live kindling and with seeming unconsciousness
of those about him, he said solemnly, "Afore God, I aims ter wed with
thet gal!"


Alexander had strolled outward along a bluff, leaving the town at her
back, because she wanted to think without interruption.  In her home
over yonder across the broken ridges her father might be lying, anxiety
ridden--or he might be already dead.  An obsession of haste spurred her
with the roweling of suspense and with the companionship of her
troubled thoughts she walked on and on.

When at length she turned she had decided certain matters, and in the
growing dusk she met a man who smilingly accosted her and halted in her
path.  It was Jase Mallows and she confronted him with a high head and,
in remembrance of his swaggering impertinence, spoke imperiously.

"I don't want ter hev no speech with ye, Jase, now ner never, but I
owes ye wages fer ther wuck ye done on them rafts.  Come ter ther bank
termorrer at openin' time and I'll pay ye off."

The mountaineer's face fell into a scowl of resentment.  To be rebuffed
was galling enough.  To be relegated to a servile status was
unendurable, yet he refashioned his expression at once into a smile.

"Thar hain't no tormentin' haste, Alexander," he assured her evenly.
"Any time'll do--any time at all, but I'm leavin' town ternight."

"Suit yerself," she answered with calculated curtness and would have
gone on but he fell into step with her and dropped his voice into so
earnest a _timbre_ that despite her dislike for him she listened.

"Alexander--hit hain't none of my business--an' I knows ye're mad at me
but yore paw an' me dwells neighbors--an' I'm goin' ter forewarn ye
about somethin'."

"Alright," the voice was frigid.  "Go ahead.  Everybody's forewarnin'
me right now."

"I've done heered thet this Brent party air a mighty slick customer.
Don't give him no undue lee-way ter fleece ye.  Ther man Halloway,
thet's hangin' around him's a pretty desperate sort too, by ther repute
folks gives him.  When ye settled up accounts with thet outfit, ye
kain't skeercely be too heedful.  I'd either make 'em give me cash
money--or else hev a lawyer 'round ter see thet everythin's alright."

"My paw," declared the girl indignantly, "he's got full trust in Mr.
Brent an' so hev I."  She dismissed him with a glance under which his
own bravado wilted and he made no further effort to walk at her side.
But in the gathering dusk, the wet desolation about her seemed to creep
into Alexander's heart.  With so many charges of foul play floating
about, of whom could she feel certain?  Then the answer came.  There
was, perhaps, only one.  So long as he remained sober, Bud Sellers
would remain dependable.  From the bank overlooking the boom she called
his name and when he had leaped to respond, she led him out of hearing.

"Bud," she said tensely.  "Ye knows how heavy-hearted with dread I be
about my paw.  Ye knows thet when I left him I wasn't no ways sure I'd
ever lay eyes on his livin' face ergin.  I ain't sure now."  Her voice
threatened to break and to control it she pitched it into a harder
tone.  "Ye knows, too, who's fault thet air."

He answered very low and very miserably.  "Yes, I knows full well--an'
I've done been in torment--ever since."

"Ef he's still alive an' gits well----" she went on, "thar won't be no
grudge atween us.  Ye says ye seeks ter make amends.  Ye knows what hit
means ter him whether I gits thet money back safe or not."

"Yes, I knows thet too."

Alexander laughed a little bitterly.  "I've jest been forewarned thet I
kain't trust nuther Brent ner Halloway.  I hain't sayin' I believes
hit; I reckon hit's sheer slander--but----"  All unconsciously a note
of pathos crept into her voice, the pathos of one who must fight alone
against unseen forces.  "But, how am I goin' ter tell, fer dead sure,
who I kin trust?"

Sellers remembered that all he knew of the robbery plot was
hearsay--that his informants had excluded him from a part of their
consultations.  An ugly possibility took vague shape in his mind, but
his answer was brief.

"Ye kin trust me 'twell hell freezes."

Alexander nodded.  "Ye're ther one man I ought ter hev a blood-hatred
erginst--an' yit, so long es ye stays sober, I knows what ye says air
true."

Suddenly she laid both her hands on his shoulders and under her touch a
tremor raced through his arteries.  The mountains seemed to grow
unsteady.  "Ye're ther only man hyar I kin plum, teetotally depend on.
When the bank opens termorrer, I wants ye ter be thar.  I don't want ye
ter go with me on ther trip back home.  I hain't goin' ter suffer
nobody ter do that--but thar's a thing I may need ye ter do."

"Es God's lookin' down on us, ef a man kin do hit----" he swore in an
emotion-shaken voice, "hit'll be done."

Later that evening Alexander announced her decision and from it she
refused to depart.  As soon as she could transact business at the bank
the next day she would set out on a hired mule, with the money in her
saddle-bags.  She would tolerate no escort, because one person could
travel secretly where several could not.  However when she had
progressed a certain distance she would turn the mule back.  The only
reason for its use, at all, would be to make it appear that she was
going by the route which the robbers assumed.

Then, depending upon a woodcraft which she trusted, she would swing out
at a circle on foot, holding to the laurel thickets and pass, not
through but around and above the Gap, which seemed the logical place
for a holdup.  She consented that her assembled body-guard should, if
they insisted, push on and mobilize at Viper, where if suspicious
circumstances warranted, they might be near enough to take emergency
action.  If she came through safely to Perry Center, she would be
secure in the house of a kinsman and from there on would have little to
fear.

At ten o'clock the next morning Alexander came out of the bank,
followed by Bud Sellers, who carried his own saddle-bags over his arm,
as if he too contemplated a journey.  Brent, in order to avoid the
appearance of too close a participation in her affairs, did not
accompany her--nor was Halloway anywhere in evidence.

As the girl went out to where her hired mule stood hitched, various
observers along the ragged street noted that her rifle was strapped
under the saddle skirt in such a way that it could not be speedily
loosened.  They also watched as, with no pretense of concealment, she
stuffed into her saddle-hags a parcel done up in heavy brown paper, and
made conspicuous by the bank's red sealing wax.  Then, still scornful
of evasion, she mounted and rode away as straight-shouldered and
militant a figure as Jeanne d'Arc herself.

Bud Sellers, looking after her from the door of the bank, was gloomy of
countenance beyond his wont.


CHAPTER IX

As the mule ambled along the mired streets of the wretched hamlet there
were eyes following its course that masked an interest beyond the
usual.  If certain men who had attended yesterday's caucus still loafed
inactively about the sidewalks, it was not because they were
indifferent to possible developments, but in obedience to a settled
plan.  Last night a party had set forth ahead.  Its members were now
stationed at appointed posts in spots so lonely and so silent that one
might have passed them at a stone's throw without suspecting their
presence.  They had gone singly and by different ways--at the start.
Others had come to cooperate from Viper and the net was spread with
meticulous care and completeness.  For communication and signaling the
voices of forest things were available; the caw of the crow in the
timber, the bark of the fox in the thicket, the note of those birds
that the winter had not driven south.

Alexander's journey would not have been easy, had she ridden with no
prize to safeguard.  There were washouts and quicksands; treacherous
fords and shelving precipices to be encountered, but here was a fortune
guarded only by a woman whose recklessness led her toward disaster.

"She's plum askin' fer hit--beggin' fer hit," grinned Lute Brown who
with a single companion strode along a wet and tangled trail shortly
after sunrise.  "An' I reckon she'll get hit."

Soon after Alexander had taken her departure those interested in town
also began drifting toward the outbound trail.  There must be, for
every campaign, a rear-guard as well as an advance.

But the three to whose earnest advice the young woman from
Shoulder-blade had turned a deaf ear, had not been content to accept
dismissal--or inactivity.  Halloway and Sellers knew that the dangers
of which she made little could not be blinked at and they dared not
trust to luck nor rely solely upon her dauntlessness to see her through.

As for Halloway he had left Coal City under cover of the dawn's
twilight, while the white fog of mountain mornings still veiled the
world.  He had gone on foot since, with his tireless strength, he could
so travel across the "roughs" at better than a mounted pace and be less
cumbered.  His destination was the telegraph office at Viper.  Jerry
O'Keefe and a handful of others were to mobolize inconspicuously
there--though they were to remain seemingly disconnected and await his
instructions.  Brent was to come on later and in his command, though
not in his immediate company, were to be Bud Sellers and several more.

The chief difficulty, of course, lay in communication.  It was rather a
matter of groping in the dark, and the only plan which had seemed
feasible had been to divide the intervening country into zones and to
arrange outwardly innocent signals which should designate the locality
in which it might become imperative to gather and strike.  Telephones
were few, and those that existed purely local in radius, but since
mining properties were dotted over the terrain there were, here and
there, scattered "talkin' boxes."

By neither telegraph nor 'phone would it be practicable to talk
frankly, but Halloway meant to learn what he could, and Brent was to
call him up from time to time--if he could.  His inquiries would be
couched in questions as to possible purchases of timber for next
season's cutting and the germ of the reply would be suggestions of
locations--which he would understand.

Alexander rode on alone and the ways were, at first, as deserted as
though they had never been fashioned for human usage.  Between Coal
City and Viper lay a distance of ten miles but they were zig-zag and
semi-perpendicular miles with torrential waters to be forded.  She
meant to ride only about four of them before abandoning her mule for
the detour on foot.  But when she had left the town only a little way
two horsemen came up behind her.  She knew neither of them, and they
were immature boys, with the empty and vacuous faces of almost
degenerate illiteracy.  They seemed unarmed but since it was vital to
Alexander's scheme to ride unwatched it became important to have them
either go ahead or to distance them.  Accordingly she urged her mule
into a lumbering canter and when a turn of the road had been reached
slowed down only to discover with a backward glance that the others had
galloped too, and were still close in her rear.  Crossing a brook, she
paused to let her mule drink and they passed her slowly, staring with
the unabashed fixity and hanging jaws at the unaccustomed sight of a
woman riding astride in the clothing of a man.  Then they went forward
at a snail's pace.

Alexander could feel no degree of security until the timber masked her
course and whether by intent or accident, these chance fellow wayfarers
had become a definite menace.  So, fretting at the delay, she waited
there for some time, and when she made the next turning, she saw them
waiting with no apparent purpose in life save to pass and repass her.

She rode by again, this time with an angry coloring of her cheeks and
shook her lazy beast into a trot.  Behind her trotted the two.

Eventually the girl drew rein, squarely and belligerently confronting
the troublesome though inoffensive looking pair.

"Hain't I got a license ter travel ther highway without bein' follered
an' bedeviled," she demanded angrily, and the two youths seemed at
first too abashed for speech.  One of them, who was an almost albino
blond, flushed to the roots of his pale hair.

"I reckon hit jest chanced thet-a-way," he stammered.  "We kinderly
happens ter be travelin' ther same direction, an' goin' ther same rate,
thet's all."

"Well don't let hit chanst thet way no more!"  Her eyes were flaming
now with a blue light like burning alcohol.  "You choose yore gait an'
let me choose mine.  Take ther road or give hit, either way."

The second lad had found his tongue by this time and he elected to use
it truculently.

"This high-road's public property, I reckon," he announced.  "A man kin
ride as he sees fit."

Alexander could not afford to parley and the suspicion was strong upon
her that the twain were less guileless than their seeming.  She flashed
out a revolver and issued an ultimatum.  "I warns ye both now.  I'm
agoin' ter stand right hyar long enough ter count a hundred.  If either
one of ye's in sight at ther end of thet time, I'm ergoin' ter begin
shootin'.  Ef I sees ye ergin naggin' round me from now on, I'm goin'
ter begin shootin' too,--an' shoot ter kill."

She meant it, and after a questioning glance they knew that she meant
it.  With some grumbled incoherence, they went on.  They even went at a
gallop, and Alexander saw them no more.  But perhaps even after that
they saw her.


Halloway came early into the hamlet of Viper, bedraggled with travel.
He knew that among the men about him must be at least several
accomplices to the conspiracy which he sought to defeat.  He had been
in Coal City for only a few days past and never in Viper until now; so
until someone drifted in who remembered his interference at the tavern
he would not necessarily be recognized as having any connection with
Alexander's affairs.  Indeed he had been seen with her so little that
he might altogether escape association with her in the minds of these
fellows.  On the other hand any stranger would in all probability be
held under unremitting surveillance and he must therefore proceed with
extreme caution.

Jerry O'Keefe was lounging about the streets, gossiping with
acquaintances, but when Halloway passed him and brushed his shoulders,
neither gave any sign of recognition and Halloway brought up at last,
though with seeming aimlessness, at the telegraph office.

There, besides the man who sat at the key, he discovered three others,
all of unfamiliar mien, but he gathered from the scowls which they bent
on him that he was something less than welcome.  Palpably the present
occupants of that small room preferred to remain uninterrupted in the
discussion of such matters as might arise, yet they did not wish to
manifest open or undue anxiety to a stranger.

"Howdy, men," began the new arrival affably as he stood towering over
the telegraph operator.  Then looking down at that person he added with
awkward, back-country diffidence: "Stranger, be ye ther feller thet
works thet thar telegraph?"

The seated man looked up and nodded.

"I promised a man by ther name of Brent back thar in Coal City ter
kinderly see ef anybody along ther road I come hed any timber they
sought ter sell."  The giant still spoke with a hulking shyness.  "I
hain't l'arned nothin', because I come through soon in ther mornin' an'
ther roads was empty, but I reckon I'd better send him a message ter
thet effect."

Halloway noticed that, as he talked, the other men watched him narrowly
though, as he glanced in their direction, they fell at once into a
semblance of carelessness.  The operator grunted, as he shoved forward
a blank with the instructions, "write out your telegram."

Halloway modestly thrust back the paper.

"I kin write--some----" he said, "but not skeercely good enough fer
thet.  I 'lowed I'd get ye ter do hit fer me.  Just say I haven't
heered of no timber fer sale.  His name's Will Brent an' mine's Jack
Halloway."

As the seated man grudgingly scribbled, the newcomer lounged lazily
nearby, but just as the man at the key was about to begin sending, his
instrument fell into a frenzied activity.  Halloway thought that the
other loiterers, who were really no more genuinely loitering than
himself, made a poor showing of indifference, and that their attitudes
betrayed their eagerness of waiting for whatever was coming over.

Finally the electric chatter ended.  The seated man had cut in once or
twice with questions, and at the end he rose from his chair, not with a
regularly transcribed message, but with a few hastily jotted notes on a
sheet of paper in his hand.

Impulse had brought him to his feet but he stood hesitant, bethinking
himself of the presence of the interloper, and Halloway broke in with a
drawling inquiry pitched to a stupid inflection.

"Did ye send my message, Stranger?  Did they say he war there?"

The operator flung him a churlish glance and a short answer.  "Thet
office was busy," he said.  "They didn't hev no time ter take your talk
jest now."  Then with exaggerated carelessness he turned to one of the
other loungers.  "Joe, ef ye'll come inter ther baggage room, I'll see
ef thet express parcel o' yourn's in thar.  I think hit came afore ther
high-water."

"I reckon," murmured Halloway disappointedly, "I'll hev ter wait a
spell an' see kin I git my man later on," and making that observation
he settled into his chair with a seeming of permanent intent.

Meanwhile, in the privacy of the baggage room, the station-agent was
whispering excitedly to his companion.  The man in his chair beyond the
door could of course hear no word of that hurried conference, but after
all he had no need to do so.  He had read its essence at first hand
from the wire and it had run about like this:

"She driv two of our fellows back with a pistol when they sought to
follow her, but she left her mule and turned into the timber five miles
this side of Coal City."

Halloway had congratulated himself that to this extent at least
Alexander had succeeded, but his pleasure had been short-lived for the
operator here at Viper had flashed back the interrogation, "What then,"
and the other--who Halloway figured must be cutting in from Wolf-Pen
Gap--rapped out the disquieting reply:

"They're combin' ther timber fer her.  Have your boys there head her
off at the mouth of Chimney-pot Fork in case she circles round the Gap."

A detail which might prove important struck Halloway as he listened.
He had recognized the sending from the other end as a man may recognize
a speaking voice.

It had been years since he had himself operated a key; but like many
adept telegraphers he could distinguish not only the dots and dashes of
the code, but also the individual peculiarities of their rapping out.
Now he would have been willing to take oath that the hand which had
sent this news was the same quick, sure hand that he had watched at
work yesterday.

That would indicate that Wicks had either deserted his post at Coal
City, or left it in charge of a relief man, and that he had come to
Wolf-Pen to operate a disused key nearer the scene of action.

Through the open door of the telegraph office Halloway, now burning
with impatience, could see Jerry O'Keefe strolling aimlessly along the
sidewalk a half a block away.  Jerry too was waiting for instructions
and ready, once he had received them, to lead his own force out, with
that light in his eye that had dwelt there when he first saw Alexander.

Halloway rose, yawned, and stretched himself.  As he did so his hands
almost brushed the ceiling.

"I reckon," he asserted, "I won't tarry no longer.  Mebby I'll come
back again."  But before he had reached the threshold the operator and
his companion stood looking on from the baggage room door.  Even
unlettered Machiavellis must have their flashes of inspiration,
premonition, "hunch," or whatever you may choose to call it.  Suddenly,
into the telegrapher's consciousness flashed the suspicion that in the
departure of this unknown observer lurked some hidden menace.  In what
that danger lay he was all at sea but it was a thing he felt and upon
which he acted.  The knight of the ticker jerked his head and raised a
hand, and before Halloway's own arms had descended from the heights to
which his yawn had stretched them, he found two pistols squarely
presented to his broad chest, and heard a voice instruct with
unmistakable finality, "Keep them hands up!"

Keeping them up, Halloway could still see across the shoulders of his
captors the distant figure of Jerry O'Keefe but with him he could not
communicate.

As he stood, rapidly thinking, it occurred to him that his strength and
agility might perhaps even yet avail him.  With a lunge he might carry
down the two armed figures and escape, but before undertaking that he
turned his head for a backward glance and decided against the
experiment.  Besides the Station Agent stood the third fellow, also
with a drawn and leveled weapon.

The Operator spoke again somewhat nervously.  He had acted so
strenuously on pure impulse and not without a certain misgiving.  Now
he felt the need of some explanation.

"Boys, when that instrument ticked a while back," he mendaciously
asserted, "hit was ther town marshal at Coal City talkin'.  He
described this man an' said he was wanted thar fer settin' ther hotel
on fire day before yesterday.  We hain't got no choice but ter hold
him."

Going to the drawer of his desk the speaker produced a pair of
handcuffs and rattled them as he explained, "Ther revenue man left
these hyar.  Put 'em on him, Joe."

With the two pistols still pressed close Halloway slowly lowered his
wrists and submitted to the indignity of their shackling.  Had any
human possibility of a break for freedom presented itself he would have
embraced it, but the three guns had the look of business and the three
faces back of them were flinty with purpose.

As the locks snapped into the grooves of the bracelets the telegrapher
commented in sardonic afterthought.

"Ther revenuer fergot ter leave ther key.  I don't know how we'll ever
git them things loose ergin."

They led him at once back into a dark corner of the baggage room and
bestowed him there in a chair, where with a revolver against his
temple, they gagged him and lashed him by waist and legs.  His hands
being sufficiently manacled they did not bind further.


Alexander had, when she came to a place which was rocky enough to leave
no footprints, slipped from her saddle, taken her rifle and saddle-bags
from their fastenings and disappeared into the timber.  The mule she
knew would sooner or later be recognized and returned to the stable,
but she did not want it recognized too promptly so she led it with her
into the woods and turned it loose well up on the mountain side.  From
that moment she disappeared with a completeness which attested her
woodcraft.  It was as though she had been and then had ceased to be.
The way she elected to go followed the crests, since it is better when
"hiding-out" to look down than to be looked down upon.

The sodden woods gave a quieter footing than had they been frosty and
brittle underfoot, but even had it been otherwise she had the art of
silent movement.

She knew that sooner or later her ruse would be discovered by the
watchers of the conspiracy, but she asked only two hours of freedom.
After that she would be as difficult to find as the rabbit that has
gained the heart of the briar patch.

Once lying high up on a sheer and poroused precipice, she had seen a
party of horsemen ride by, far below, and she laughed inwardly to
herself, guessing at their purpose and object.

She came eventually to the sharp spur where that particular stretch of
ridge ended in a precipitous break.  That meant that she must for
awhile go down to lower and more perilous levels.  This was the final,
dubious stage of her journey and with it behind her, she would feel
that she had won through to security.

Because she was young and strong enough to laugh at fatigue and bold
enough to find a certain joy in recklessness, her spirits began to
mount.  There are huntsmen who will tell you that the wily and
experienced fox comes to relish the chase more keenly than the pack
which courses him.  Alexander went on with a smile in her eyes.

But when she had gone down into the cloistered shadows of the valley
her spirits descended too and when she slipped through the thickets and
reached a certain point, something like despair tightened about her
heart.  Across the line of her march boiled a freshet which might as
well have been a river.  To swim it with her impediments was impossible
and though it might carry her dangerously close to the road which she
sought to avoid, she had no choice.  She must follow it until a
crossing developed.

As a woodsman, Alexander acknowledged few peers but this was to her,
unfamiliar country.  She was moreover pitting her skill against one who
was her equal if not her superior, and who knew every trail and by-way
hereabouts.  He was a youth with a vacuous, almost idiotic face, whom
she had that same day encountered.  He had left her sight, but had
never been too remote to follow or gauge her course and what he learned
he relayed to others.  In due time he had known without going further
just where she must bring up--for he knew the condition of that
stream--and its crossings.

The girl came, in due course, upon a broken litter of giant boulders,
each the size of a small house, which lay scattered where at last the
water grew shallow.  She could even make out a point where one might
cross dryshod by leaping from rock to rock.

It was in a fashion a place of mystery and foreboding, for each of
those titanic rocks, with its age-long smoothness and greenness was a
screen whose other side might harbor things only to be guessed.  There
one must risk an ambuscade, trusting to one's star, and Alexander
loosened her pistol and shifted her saddle-bags to her left shoulder
and her rifle to her left hand.

Then she started forward---and one by one left the boulders behind her
until she came to the last.  As she rounded the final shoulder of
sandstone her hand was knocked up and her pistol fell clattering.

Her ambuscaders had known a thing which she had not--that for all the
roomy freedom of the woods she must come out at last through this one
passage--as wine must come out through the neck of the bottle.

About her closed a tightly grouped handful of men whose faces were
masked and whose bodies were covered by the uniformity of black rubber
coats.

Alexander did not surrender tamely.  With the strength and the
desperation of a tigress she gave them battle, until the sheer force of
their numbers had smothered her into helplessness.  Her coat was ripped
and her shirt hung in tatters from one curved shoulder before they
pinioned her and silenced her lips with a bandage.

After that they blind-folded her and carried her up and down hill,
twisting beyond all chance of guessing the course, to a place where the
air was cool with that freshness of quality that characterizes a
cavern.  There they stood her upright and removed the bandage.

About her was a flare of torches and the grotesque play of shadows
between the grotto-like walls of an abandoned coal mine.  About her too
ranged in the spectral formality of masked faces and black rubber
coats; of peaked hats with low turned brims, stood the circle of her
captors.

"Now, Alexander McGivins," proclaimed a deep and solemnly pitched
voice, "ye stands before ther dread an' awful conclave of ther order of
ther Ku-Klux; ther regulators of sich as defies proper an' decorous
livin'.  We charges ye with unwomanly shamelessness an' with ther
practicin' of witchcraft."


CHAPTER X

For a moment as she turned observant eyes about the walls of the place
to which she had been brought, Alexander almost hoped that the
astonishing statement of the spokesman was a true one--that in store
for her, instead of robbery and possible outrage, lay only the judgment
of the punitive clan.  Such punishment might be brutally severe but she
could face it in such fashion as would vindicate her claim of playing a
man's game in a man's way.

So she stood there meeting the eyes that glared at her through the slit
masks with a splendid assumption of scorn and defiance.  She was keyed
to that mood which makes it possible for martyrs to acquit themselves,
even at the stake, with a victorious disdain.

Through this section of the mountains there had never been, since
reconstruction days, any survival of the Ku-Klux in a true sense, but
now and then, as in all wild and violent countries, sporadic
"regulations" occurred in which masked men took a faltering law into
their own less faltering hands.  Sometimes it was a bastard Ku-Klux in
the original meaning of the term, a Vigilance Committee operating
against abuses which the law failed to check.  Oftener it was a
masquerade behind which moved designs of personal hatred and vengeance.
Sometimes the wife-beater or the harlot was punished.  Sometimes the
stronger enemy persecuted the weaker.

While Alexander waited for the next development, her captors prolonged
the silence in order that the suspense of unguessed things should sap
her courage.

The entrance through which they had come showed only as a darker spot
in the shadowed vagueness of a far wall of rock, but there was a
squareness about it which suggested a mineshaft.  The walls themselves
were streaked with black seams of coal and dug into tunnels that led in
unknown directions.

The place was lighted by several lanterns of feeble power and a number
of pine torches, and between the spot where they had stationed her and
the crescent of dark figures that stood as silent accusers and judges,
ran a trickling rivulet of water.  At that detail Alexander smiled, for
she knew that it was part and parcel of the absurdity contained in the
allegation of witchcraft.  The black art is powerless, by mountain
tradition, to cross running water.

A bat fluttered zig-zag about the place brushing her cheek, but
Alexander was not the sort of woman to be frightened by a bat.

When the calculated silence had held for perhaps five full minutes, the
standing men meanwhile remaining as motionless as though they were
themselves carved from coal, Alexander spoke.

"Why don't ye say somethin'," she demanded.  "I've got friends thet'll
be s'archin' these hills fer me right vigorous ef I don't git ter Viper
in good time."

It was a bold and provocative speech, but it failed to tempt the silent
men out of the pose they had assumed.  They knew the effect of
protracted silence and impending danger to sap even an assertive
courage and for five other minutes they stood wordless and motionless.
Only their shadows moved under the torch-light, wavering fitfully from
small to large, from light to dark like draperies in a wind.

Finally the man at the center who appeared to exercise a sort of
command moved a step forward and raised both hands.  The others lifted
high their right arms and in a sepulchral voice the spokesman demanded,
"Does ye all solemnly sw'ar, by ther dreadful oath ye've done tuck,
with yore lives forfeit fer disloyalty or disobedience, ter try this
wench on ther charge of outragin' decorum--an' practicin' ther foul
charms of witchcraft?  Does ye all sw'ar ter deal with her in full an'
unmitigated jestice despite thet she s'arves Satan with a comely face
and a comely body?  Does ye all sw'ar?"

The raised hands, with a unanimous and solemn gesture, fell over the
hearts of the questioned and then came aloft once more, still as if
with a single nerve impulse.  In a unison out of which no separate
voice emerged sounded the reply: "We does!"

Alexander laughed, but it must be confessed that that was pure bravado.
She knew that on the backwaters of many creeks were cabins where simple
folks invoked charms against witchcraft and did so with genuine dread.
She knew that many others, less candid, laughed at old superstitions
yet acknowledged them in their hearts.  In her case the witchcraft
charge was of course a cloak for subterfuge, but it was a jest which
might bear bitterly serious results.

"Alexander McGivins," began the spokesman afresh, "we charges ye with
these weighty matters; thet ye glories in callin' yoreself a
he-woman--refusin' ter accept God's mandate an' castin' mortification
on yore own sex by holdin' on ter shameless notions.  We charges ye
with settin' ther example of unwomanly behavior before ther eyes of
young gals, an' we aims ter make a sample of ye.

"We furthermore charges ye with practicin' witchcraft; with castin'
spells an' performin' devil's work."  He wheeled and demanded suddenly;
"Number Thirteen, I calls on ye ter step forward an' testify.  How does
witches gain thar black powers?"

The answering voice, was plainly disguised, and it came with the
lugubrious quality of calculated awesomeness.

"By compact with Satan."

"Number Thirteen, how is sich-like compacts made?"

"Thar's ways an' ways.  A body kin go up ter a mounting top fer nine
nights an' shoot through a kerchief at ther moon, cussin' ther Almighty
each separate time, an' ownin' Satan fer master."

"Number Thirteen, what powers does Satan give these hyar sarvants of
his'n?"

"They gains ther baleful power ter kill folks with witch balls, rolled
tight outen ther hair of a cow or a varmint.  By runnin' a hand over a
rifle gun they kin make hit shoot crooked.  They kin spell a houn' dog
so thet he back-tracks 'stid of trailin' for'ards.  They kin bring on
all manner of pestilence an' make cows go dry an' hosses fling their
riders.  They kin----"

"Thet's enough, Number Thirteen," announced the spokesman.  "Thet's a
lavish of evil.  How kin they be hindered from this deviltry?"

"Thar's means of liftin' spells, but nothin' save death hitself cures
ther witches."

"Number Thirteen, how does ye go about hit, ter slay a witch?"

"By shootin' with a silver bullet run outen a mould thet's done been
rubbed with willow-sprigs."

"Number Thirteen, in the event of need, hev ye got sich a bullet hyar?"

"Each one of us hes got one."

Once more the apparent head of the clan turned to the girl.  "Woman,
air ye guilty or not guilty?"

"I reckon," suggested Alexander coolly, "ye'd better ask Number
Thirteen.  He 'pears ter know 'most everything."

But the spokesman declined to be lured by frivolous taunt from his
vantage ground of solemnity.  He turned his head and gravely inquired:
"Number Thirteen, how does ye det'armine ther guilt of a witch?"

"Ef a preacher comes nigh, she kain't help turnin' her back."

"I reckon we hain't skeercely got no preacher handy ter test her with,"
interrupted the master of ceremonies drily, and the other went on.

"Ef she stays hyar 'twell midnight a sperit in ther guise of a black
cat'll appear ter do her biddin'."

On the ground lay the saddle-bags and the rifle; as yet unmolested.
Before they had loosened the blindfold from her eyes she had been
subjected to the needless indignity of bound wrists and now she was
entirely helpless.

Her coat hung on her tattered during the struggle and her flannel shirt
had been rent until both garments sagged from her shoulders, leaving
bare the white curves of their flesh.  The circle had fallen silent
again.  It remained silent for a half hour, then the man who had acted
as chief inquisitor drew aside that other whom Alexander knew only as
Number Thirteen, and, apart, they conferred in lowered voices.  In the
manner of these two, the captive recognized indications of anxiety.
Palpably some detail of their plans had gone awry and that miscarriage,
whatever its nature, was troubling their peace of mind.  Had she
understood more fully it would likewise have troubled her.

[Note 32: It is likely that Rodrigo de Triana and Juan Rodriguez, also
sang said land, were, themselves.] CARABELAS GIRL Vicente Yanez Pinzon,
captain of Palos. John Child, Master of Moguer. Pedro Alonso Niño,
pilot of Palos. Bartolomé Roldán, pilot of Palos. Diego Martín Pinzón,
the old Palos. Francisco Pinzon, of Palos. Francisco Child of
Moguer.

Bartolomé Pérez. Gutiérrez Pérez, of Palos. Juan Ortiz, of Palos. Alonso
Gutierrez Querido, of Palos. Pedro de Lepe. Alonso Morales. Andres
de Huelva, boy. The classes and categories that are mentioned in the
papers are: Captain, Master, larger pilot, pilot, observer, scribe,
physical, more sheriff, sheriff , petty officer, sailor, squire,
boy, Paje and under the title _oficiales of nao_, carpenter, caulk,
cooper, despensero, Lombardero and trumpet.

Those who were satisfied with the strength of the Spanish island where
finaron; Diego Arana, Governor. Pedro Gutiérrez, Lieutenant. Rodrigo
de Escobedo, Lieutenant. Maestre Alonso, physical. Diego Lorenzo,
sheriff. Luis de Torres, interpreter. Lope, caulk. Lequeitio Sunday.
Jacome the Rich, Genovés. Pedro de Lepe. Alonso Morales. Andres de
Huelva. Francisco de Huelva.

Repeat forever in history. The three voyages undertaken Admiral arouse
interest not so alive as the first, as were many people who
accompanied him would also be difficult to gather the names of main
even.

He had to leave Cadiz on September 24 1493 a fleet of 17 vessels,
of which 3 are loaded ratchet great food and accoutrements; 2 naos,
a _Marigalante_ named in that tree the insignia of command, and 12
caravels .

Embarked on the number of distinguished officials Pedro Margarit, Alonso
Valencia, Gómez Tello, Ginés de GORBAL, Alonso de Ojeda, Juan de
Luján, Pedro Fernandez Coronel, Bernal Diaz de Pisa, Alonso de
Carvajal, Sebastian de Olano, Melchor Maldonado, Alvaro Acosta,
Francisco de Peñalosa, Pedro de Las Casas (Friar Bartolomé's father),
Dr.

Diego Alvarez Chanca, the testing of metals Fermín Cadoo, the
apostolic delegate Buyl Bernal Fr., Fr Roman Pane, Fr John Tisín
Fr Diego Marquez, Juan de la Fr ...

Hurt happily arrived at the port of Navidad in Spanish,
dispatched to return to the Admiral of Castile 12 ships commanded
by Antonio de Torres, the brother of the prince's mother D. Juan,
the largest pilot But Alonso Niño and quedóse with five other boats
to meet the needs that occur. With three caravels _San Juan_ appointed,
_Cordera_ and _Niña_ (the first trip), began the recognition of the
islands Jamaica and Cuba, in May 1494, and testimony have raised
the notary Fernan Perez de Luna, known to iban á exploration of the sea
50 men, whose names were written [33], notándose the masters
of Child Cristóbal Pérez, Alonso Perez Roldan and Alonso Medel,
pilots of Child and Francisco Pérez Bartolomé, and teacher letters
of Juan de La Cosa . [Note 33: _Colección of Viajes_ de Navarrete, t.
I.]

Columbus returned to Spain in 1494 in the said caravel _Niña_, accompanied
by another for being the first built in the new land was called
_The India_.

Iban in company with 220 Europeans. For the third voyage, launched
in 1498, enlisted 4 ships over 100 tons and 2 caravels. Dispatched
directly to the Spanish, from the Canary Islands, three of the ships,
commanded by Pedro de Arana, the brother of Doña Beatriz Enriquez, Alonso
Sanchez de Carvajal and Juan Antonio Colombo, his relative. With a
ship and two caravels made the discovery of the Continent of Paria
and Orinoco mouth, so of great service during the illness suffered
by captain Pedro Terreros.

Dolorosísimo was returning, coming in 1500 under the heading of
registration, with irons, the same his brothers Bartholomew and Diego
_Gorda_ the caravel, whose owner was maestre and Andrés Martín de la
Gorda, and the master Alonso Vallejo. He had to escort the caravel
_Antigua_ which had led to the Spanish Commander Bobadilla. The fourth
and last voyage of Admiral role is complete in 1502, he formed the counter
and Diego de Porras conserved [34].

Columbus chose four vessels Gavia which suited his purpose to recognize
costs and shoals, the largest not exceeding 70 tonnes or less than 50
down. In round numbers say her letters in the fleet that assembled 140
men, 148 appear in the role not cut yourself, the advance of Mr
Bartholomew, his brother, and D. Fernando, his son. In summary. [Note
34: Navarrete, _Colección of Viajes_, t. I.] The caravel captain won
nine thousand maravedís freight a month, was captain Diego Tristan
bears more pilot, master, boatswain, physical, Cooper, caulk, carpenter,
Lombardero 2, 2 trumpets, 14 ratings, 4 squires, boy 20, in total 52
people, including the Admiral and his son. _Santiago_ The caravel,
Captain Francisco de Porras, maravedís earned ten thousand a month, 47
men composing the crew in total.

_Gallego_ The vessel was chartered at a rate of 8333 maravedís;
mandábalo Pedro de Terreros, carrying 27 men, captain to Paje.
_Vizcaino_ The vessel chartered by 7000 maravedís, Bartolomé de FIESC
governed, crew 25 men. Grand total, 151. 31 died during the campaign,
huge figure, which rises from 20 per 100.

Porras Write to the sails of the caravel was: 2 master candle tree with
a couple Bonet. 1 ensures a master ratchet Bonete. Mizzen sail 1. 1
candle GAVI. The monthly pay of seafarers was [35]: A 2500 Captain
maravedís.

A pilot 2000 - A sailor 830 - A boy 730 - Paje A 530 - [Note 35: Relation
of Navy, which met in Cartagena for the day of Oran, in the month of
March 1509 .-- _Archivo of Simancas._] Missed four ships on the
coast of Veragua two in Jamaica and the other, the chartered the
Admiral Two more Spanish island embarking on the master Diego
Rodriguez with 25 of their colleagues.

The Adelantado D. Bartholomew came in second, reaching Sanlúcar de
Barrameda on November 7 of 1504. You do not forget that the mortal
remains of the great vessels and seamen were still made two trips
across the Atlantic and the sea of the Antilles.

According to Garibay [36], when do Virreina María Toledo was his
last year the Spanish island 1544, took the bones of his stepfather
and husband, bury them in the chapel of the cathedral church of
Santo Domingo. Reposaron there until the peace treaty of Basle, the
island ceased to be Spanish. Authorities then agreed to take the
Christopher D.; with extraordinary pomp accompanied him to the
vessel which bore the significant casual coincidence _The name Descubridor_
and transhipped in the port of Ocoa _San Lorenzo_ the ship before
the end of the year 1795, led them to Havana, with the honors that
were due admiral, lieutenant general of the Navy D.

Gabriel de Aristizabal. [Note 36: F. Hard _Nebulosa of Colón_, pages
222 and 223.] [Illustration: CESÁREA FERNÁNDEZ DURO.] [Illustration]
instrument in COLÓN served on his travels The apparatus is used
to estimate the speed of the spacecraft, named by Spanish
sailors _Corredera_ not become widespread until the late seventeenth
century, but before they had been tested several mechanisms.

D. Ammonium Gaztañeta still writing [37]: "I can not stop saying how
few fundamentals are amid some knowledge of sailing as a ship sails
away, with some becoming judicial astrologers, only stick to their
conjecture, without More foundation that only look at the foam that
leaves the ship with his movement ... There are others that just throw
away with a piece of stick or splinter in the bow of the ship, somewhat
distant, and then, so it matches the chip with it, walk to the
stern as the chip, this makes the fact of: " if I walked on land
according to here, I could walk in one hour would be '; and this
speech sets the path that makes the navigation.

There are other signals that make the cost of measures, and then throw
a stick for the bow, and matching the first signal starts to count,
and as they were and continue to draw arrive, make the conjecture of
walking a ship.

"[Note 37: _Norte of navegación_, Seville, 1692.] Knowledge of the
properties of the vessel and the trial of the experienced men on the
force of winds and other accidents, was in fact what is used to
calculate the progress and what Columbus had to go to dare to
penetrate into the Atlantic, losing sight of the stern off the
Canary Islands.

From the beginning it clearly shows her diary, pointing to August 8
1492 "which was among the pilots of the three caravels where diverse
views, and yours truly came out more ', and repeated in the successive
two accounts have been proposed that, by one of the league unless
he was" in case the trip Luengo would not be scaring people or faint.

"Mucho confident in its approach and its authority to impose upon
the pilots, as well as he could appreciate the speed of the caravels
routine, and should know better properties vessels in their membership
that would have previously sailed. The purpose of leagues unless it
was contrary to the rule noted that the Spaniards, by calculating the
longest path in order not to encounter the hazard of land, especially
at night.

Therefore we adopted it, bearing in mind it may still influence
over the imagination, to make way for a parallel with the difference
in latitude affect it.

"Lester West (taught disciplines) is not any height because the pole
(Contino going this way) or below or rises but at a party in another and
so the West Leste navegare, the account of his journey is at its
discretion, considering what the ship can go depending on weather
and ship and cargo are "[38].

[Note 38: Medina - _Regimiento of navegación_, Seville, 1563.]

This is a 1. st September wrote D. Christopher: "Here the pilots found
their points; the _Niña_ was 440 miles from the Canaries, the _Pinta_
420; the _Santa María_ just 400, and 1. October again say:" the _Santa
María_ the pilot was now dawning that had wandered from the island of
Hierro here 578 miles away, the account less than Admiral show
people were 584, but the real trial that was saved and 707.

"The final count was so close to the truth, which sighted the island
Guanahaní after thirty-three day journey and a journey of some of my
leagues, in a letter outlining the defeat of modern, error is not
small, considering the time and elements that have the caravels,
but today all surprising advances.

On the return journey it was more, and for directions to the Northeast,
requiring assessment of departure from the meridian, for the storms
that made it difficult to estimates of the march. On February 10 1493
and Journal says: "In the letter or casting caravel point [39] and
Vicente Yáñez Ruiz Sancho pilots and Child But Alonso Roldán, and
they all spent too much ahead of the Azores, in the East, by his
letters, and none took surfing to the North Island of Santa Maria,
the approaches of all the season of the Azores, would soon be in
front and five leagues in the region of the island of Madeira or
Porto Santo.

But the Admiral was very deviated from its path, while far behind hose,
because tonight it was the island of Flores in the north and east
Nafe was in demand in Africa and passed to windward of the island
of Timber the North side.

This hose were nearer Castilla quel Admiral leagues with 150. He says
that through God's grace be desque land will know who was more
certain.

"[Note 39: _Punto of calls to this fantasía_.] Eight days later,
reached the island, why was pleased with the confidence placed in
Forecasts: "He says that he had been en route and had some very good
letter, although it was somewhat forward. Diz and pretended to have gone
over that way unreasonable for the pilots and _quedar señor_ of
that defeat to India, _como in fact queda_, because none of them
brings her path, so none can be sure of its defeat. " á faked going to
walk less because people are not discouraged; pretended to walk round
the corner more unreasonable for the pilots, if this statement is the
board that made the Kings in the letter he wrote from Jamaica,
saying that he alone would be able to say where Veragua and back
to the coast, can not fail to recognize, as we will not be accused
of being pedantic writer Rodolfo German Cronauer, some immodesty.

Perhaps he felt severe Girava in those days teniéndole by _gran
mediocre sailor and cosmographo_ [40] Mr. Gelcich, director of the
Nautical School of Lusinpíccolo, now estimated more equitably excellent
pilot skills, talents that stand out in the Journal of navigation
that serves as a test, but the facts show that while not much beyond
the knowledge and less on practice with peers letter was to be no
easy _desatinar_ pilots such as finches, The Thing, But Child and
many more as they were exploring the New World to move from
authoritarian took precautions to collecting the letters, paths,
views, and descriptions that did, only _por be lord of the camino_
thus reached the end, he regrets that it is discovered _hasta tailors
castellanos_.

[Note 40: _Dos books Cosmographia nuevamente_ compounds by Hieronyma
Girava, Tarragona. Milan, 1556.] Let us now see what means nautical
astrologers have to differentiate themselves from the judicial to
whom D.

Antonio de Gaztañeta straight satire of the principle. As much as those
who have erroneously believed that the caravels were small craft of Palos
covered, so many are wrong in assuming the needle is guided by
primitive floating referred to the Laws of Item and the works of
Raymond Lulio.

The needle was sailing during the fourteenth century two of the
most important changes that together constitute the current
provision, namely the style of a vertical support on which you can
rotate freely within the mortar, and placing it in the suspension
of two concentric circles; simple but admirable inventions useful
addition to the character which distinguishes them, bearing the
stamp of true genius [41].

So the built in Mallorca Jaime Ribes, before directing the Academy of
Sacred that the infant was called D. Enrique; well used by the Portuguese
and Spanish vessels in navigating the mine in Africa and the
career of Flanders, one of the causes of its progress. [42] [Note
41: D.

Francis P. Márquez. _Discurso Read before the Royal Academy of Ciencias_,
Madrid 1875.] [Note 42: Lulio Gyraldi Gregory, author of the book in
which Ferrara spent Ercules East, entitled _De re nautica_, Basle 1540,
said that the Spanish and Portuguese using this needle have extended
knowledge of the world.] Colon in his hand gave testimony to the improved
use of the needle in the Mediterranean in the letter to the Spanish
island in January 1495 addressed to the King and which has retained the
P . Houses [43]. [Note 43: _Historia of Indias_, t. I, chap. III, pp.
48.]

"I happened (he wrote) that the king Reynel that God has sent me to Tunisia
to turn the galeaza _Fernandina_ and was already on the island of San
Pedro in Zerdeña, told me that they were a Saetía with this galera two
ships and a ratchet, so that people would change me, and decided not
to continue the journey, except as otherwise return to Marseilles by
ship and more people. I saw that art could not without some force
his will, given its demand, _y moving out of the di aguja_ while
sailing anochecía and one day the sun rise was within the Cape
Carthagine, taking them all for Admittedly, we went to Marseilles ...

"Not a chance to examine whether such a simple procedure, used by Jules
Verne on one of his novels, it is easy to fool ratings war with a view
of the stars and even with the wind just had to learn the true path,
or researchers to import straight to D. Christopher the story: what is
the purpose is clear and present advantage is that the rose was attached
to the needle and hid their turns on the style, without which he
could not imagine the trick.

The oldest letters that Majorcan is known as the painted _rosa náutica_
and thirty-two winds as it was fixed on the needle touched the magnet,
as it took in the Columbus caravels and style with the Juan de la Cosa
drew on his famous map.

What and other evidence was given to the Journal referred to Columbus,
the primary document in our research. On September 9 record observation
notes which were marked in pink half of the divisions, or 5 by 5
degrees.

On 17 and 30 July, states that the pilots repeatedly marked the Polaris
and the sun to be on the horizon. Details of the construction
of the instrument does not have either of those days seems to
have been published since the Pedro Medina said the teacher in his
Preface _Regimiento_: "Seeing that I was in Spain making longer
voyages than any other part of the world and for so long by the sea
escripta had almost nothing to alert them to the navigation would,
I took great desire to write ...

I have composed this book. "Before they had done Martín Fernández de
Enciso [44] and Francisco Falero. [45] [Note 44: Geographia _Suma
of dealing with all items and provinces of the world, especially
India, and deals extensively Art marear ..._, Seville 1519.]

[Note 45: _Tratado Esphera and the Art marear ..._, Seville 1535.]
"Am tied . . . up . . . here," spelled out the dots and dashes from the
baggage-room.  "If you understand, scrape chair on floor."  Brent
shifted his seat noisily.

"She . . . is . . . caught. . . ."  There was a pause there.

"In God's name, how is he doing it?" Brent questioned himself, while
inside, bound to his chair, with cuffed wrists, Halloway went on
sending--rapping with a pipe stem between parted rows of strong teeth.

"She is held . . . in mine-shaft . . . back of Gap. . . ."

The pressure of concentrating on that faint, but infinitely important
sound, and the need of maintaining a semblance of weary dullness was
trying Brent's soul.  He thanked Heaven for the taciturnity of his
companions.

"Get there . . . with all men possible . . . as for me----"

Brent came suddenly and noisily to his feet for just then the operator
appeared in the doorway and it would not do for these sounds to
continue after his coming.

"Well, here comes the man I've been waiting for," he announced loudly,
and once more the clatter in the baggage-room became the random of rats
at play.  "I wanted to ask you if you had any message for William
Brent, from a man named Halloway," he inquired, still speaking as if
against the wind, and, receiving a brief negative, he turned toward the
outer door.

An exit under such circumstances is always difficult.  To curb the urge
of haste, to remain casual under lynx-like eyes, these are not untrying
tasks.  Any slip now and he might be in the same durance as Halloway
himself--and when he breathed the outer air it was with a deep-drawn
sigh of relief for delivery out of peril.

When he had established connection with O'Keefe and had given him the
main facts, withholding, however, his sources of information, he said:
"We must get Halloway free before we start."

"Like hell we must!" exploded Jerry.  "So long es he lays thar they'll
figger they've done fooled us an' beat us.  Ef we take him out, thar'll
be men in ther la'rel all the way we've got ter go, pickin' us off in
ther dark."

"You're right," assented Brent, "but he's been there all day, I guess."

"Wa'al then a leetle more hain't goin' ter hurt him none."

Fifteen minutes later, leaving separately but timed to come to a
rendezvous near the point of attack a good dozen men were on the trail
to the Gap.

Through wet and chilly thickets O'Keefe led Brent at a gait that made
his heart pound.  There was a battle-joy in the mountaineer's eyes and
in them too, was something else inspired by certain dreams of the girl
he had seen only once and whom he had told himself he meant to marry.

Over broken gulches, along precipitous paths he led the way buoyantly
and now and then he broke into low almost inaudible crooning of an
ancient love song.


Vainly the crew of highwaymen in the mine awaited the arrival of the
seeming rescuer who was to take their captive off their hands and
relieve them of the necessity of murder.  It had been understood that
Jase was to employ only a few attackers in the accomplishment of this
knightly deed.  Few men could be spared from other duties, and the
smaller the force which he led to victory the more lustrous would be
his glory of achievement.  There was to be a great deal of shooting and
shouting through the narrow entrance to the place--and the exaggerating
echoes of the rocky confines would multiply it into a convincing din of
battle.

The alleged Ku-Klux clansmen would fight their way out, leaving their
prisoner behind--and in the confusion--but not until then--the
saddle-bags would disappear.

It was all very simple, and prettily adjusted, but the difficulty was
that Jase had failed to arrive and the act was lagging without its
climax.

He failed because of unforeseen events.  Pending the cue for his
entrance he and his fellow heroes were being employed as sentries
guarding the approaches to the place against invasion by outsiders.

Jase himself had for several hours been lying as flat as a lizard under
a matted clump of laurel on the edge of a cliff, overlooking a ford
which could not be rapidly crossed.  His function was to see to it that
no one passed there whose coming might prove an embarrassment.

The rawness of the air caused his bones to ache and his muscles to
cramp, but he had been steadfast.  He was playing for high stakes.
Finally two horsemen had appeared--and they were two who must not pass.
One of them was Brent and the other was Bud Sellers.

So Jase had opened fire and Bud had returned it--returned it and fled.

That left the sentinel with a result half successful and half
disastrous, and made it necessary for him to make a hurried short-cut
to another point past which Brent must shortly ride.  There he would
finish the matter of disputing the road.

Mallows drew himself out of his cramped ambuscade and started for his
new point, to the completion of his business--but before he had taken
many steps a sudden and violent distress assailed him.  He pressed his
hand to his side with a feeling of vague surprise and it came away
blood-covered.  He stopped and took account of his condition--and found
himself shot in the chest.  In the excitement of the moment he had not
felt the sting, but now he was becoming rapidly and alarmingly weak.
He stumbled on, but several times he fell, and each time it was with a
greater burden of effort that he regained his feet.  He clamped his
teeth and pressed doggedly forward, but the ranges began to swim in
giddy circles and a thickening fog clouded his eyes.  When he dropped
down next time he did not rise again.

As night fell in the mine the temper of the men there became
increasingly ugly.  Some had recourse to the flasks that they carried
in their pockets, and as their blood warmed into an alcoholic glow,
their eyes, through the slits in their masks, began dwelling on
Alexander's beauty of figure and face with a menacing and predatory
greed.

Alexander McGivins was in the most actual and imminent of conceivable
perils.

The girl's hands were no longer bound.  When the commander of the group
had realized that her imprisonment was not to terminate so shortly as
had been planned he had been magnanimous to the extent of freeing her
wrists, but he had granted her no further extension of freedom.

The girl had given them no satisfaction of weakening nerve, but in her
heart she kept hidden a qualm as the time lengthened and a number of
the men went on drinking their fiery moonshine.

The pack was growing restive, openly restive now, and after yet another
council among the more important bandits, the leader came over and made
an announcement.

"Ther Clan aims now ter discuss yore case amongst themselves.  We air
goin' ter leave four men hyar ter keep watch over ye whilst we're
away--an' them four has orders ter kill ye if ye seeks ter escape."

He raised his hand above his head, and wheeling, marched out through
the shaft's opening, while behind him, trailing in single file and dead
silence, trooped all the henchmen save the four left on guard.
Alexander noted with a certain degree of satisfaction that the
saddle-bags were not removed by those who departed.

[Illustration: From the letter drawn by Funny Benincasa (Ancoma 1482).]
Tan detained as the review was to chart the early treaties and
disciplines of factory ships that are manifested in the proportions of
the glass and the rigging, styling of member, the link material,
nails, giving place to the works of Diego Garcia de Palacio and
Juan Escalante de Mendoza between all published or unpublished has
announced that Mr.

Fernandez Duro in his _Disquisiciones náuticas_. As á materiel,
weapons and effects have been clarified several relationships and
day trips royal military, united by the same school, in conjunction
with inventory that is part of the naos, artillery, crew salaries,
rations, orders, duties and powers .

[Illustration: In the fifteenth century engravings.] [Illustration: Part
of the table in the church of San Pedro de la Villa de Zumaya, representing
a naval battle, painted in 1495.] but the main thing missing, or what
diligence will not succeed in any way. In the ruins of buildings in
remote date is always something that helps build the idea of factory
materials are dispersed to at least mark the hand that gave
them a way: of the vessel, where they soon perish is gone with the
subject the notion of their preparations.

Among the branches of archeology is the most obscure and difficult on
the sailing. [Illustration: High-relief of an altar dedicated to St.
Nicholas (patron of sailors) in the church of the holy in Towns and
carved from 1480 á 1503.] If, however, the Commission presumed to have
reached the success they longed for, can attest to the good hope that
individuals have attempted to reconstruct components of a type
close to the glorious ship that links the two halves of the universe
world.

Scrutinized by the sample are accompanied by some special studies
of Mr. Fernández Duro, and the interpretations, difficult to pen of
Mr. Monleón has revived the spirit of artists from other ages and
demonstration of the scrupulousness with which the Commission has
proceeded in acquiring information and news relevant to their subject,
see here the complete interview made by the Hon.

President of the Archaeological Board, and the answers given by the
member and speaker of the same and Mr. Fernandez Duro Monleón, which
were by all the other gentlemen approved. _Interrogatorio By the Hon.
Mr Casimiro Bona, Inspector General of Engineers, the Navy prior
to the calculations of the ship "Santa Maria." CASCO _ 1.

Main dimensions, length, beam, strut, or drafts and displacement tonnage
of the ship. 2. Forms of the limbs and heart. 3. Portas, portholes
for light, and their coamings hatch. 4.

Accommodation and details of the interior layout. 5. Sizes and shapes
of the keel, codaste, the stem and sleep. 6.

Species that formed the frame costillaje, whether single or double,
and between them and how clear was the massive funds. 7. Distribution
of trace of shell, and how willing the seams of the liner. 8. How
willing the inner or if you just had palmejares. 9.

Layout of the deck and the plane, beams, sleepers, gunwale, tapas,
entremiches means beams, etc.. How all this was prepared and what
were the dimensions of these parts. 10.

Thick lines and the crane or width of Linking; height of panties frames,
if he sobrequilla and what were its dimensions. 11. Thickness of the
lining, and if he tapes, what was its bulk. 12. Bulárcamas if he or
sobreplanes interior and exterior, ready iban how and what were its
dimensions. 13.

Dimensions of shell casings or engaged, and if the seams of these were
horizontal curvature, ie if they were double curvature or if they
were, as now, curves diametral plane parallel to the plane of the
vessel. 14. Provision of ores and nails of the exterior and interior
linings and casings. 15.

Now she was trapped and
there was no conceivable possibility of escape.  At the touch of
unclean fingers she had seen red and struck out--and the rest had
followed as an avalanche follows a slipping stone.

At last when the breathless stillness could no longer be borne, she
cautiously stooped and raked her hand back and forth until it came in
contact with a loose stone.  She must force those silent antagonists to
some sort of action so she tossed the missile outward and as it struck
with a light clatter, a waiting pistol barked and Alexander's own
roared back at the tiny spurt of flame.

Instantly, too, three others spoke, aimed at her flash and she heard
the spatter of lead against stone nearby.  In the confined space the
fusillade bellowed blatantly, and slowly diminishing echoes lingered
after the firing itself ceased.  Then once more the silence which was
more trying than gunnery settled.

Slowly an idea dawned in the girl's mind, and strengthened into
conviction.  If the main group who had trailed out with torches had
been anywhere nearby, that crescendo of noise must have recalled them
in hot haste.  That they had not come back must indicate that they had
never meant to return.  They had permanently departed, leaving her in
the hands of a quartette selected as a robbing party, and an execution
squad.  With that realization the matter resolved itself into a new
phase.  She would eventually be murdered here in this rat-hole unless
she could, one by one, shoot to death the four unseen men who were her
companions there.  Four enemies stood between herself and freedom--and
four cartridges were left in her weapon.

At last she crept cautiously out and made her tedious way to the center
of the place again.  She must do something and the audacious plan born
of necessity involved the need of a light.  If her hand felt flesh
instead, her pistol was ready.

But after much noiseless groping she came upon the overturned lantern
and she had encountered nothing else.

Back in the lee of the rock she boldly struck a match, kindled the
wick--and still as she reached up and set the thing on the boulder's
top the unbroken silence held.

She had hoped to draw their fire and account for some of them at least,
but now as she peeped cautiously out she found to her astonishment that
except for herself the cavern was empty.

She also became sure of another thing.  Her saddle-bags were gone.

She came out then and having repossessed herself of her rifle took up a
position well to one side of the shaft's opening where anyone who
entered must pass her muzzle, but she did not venture into the passage
itself because she was sure that that way lay an ambuscade.

Then, beside the sickly illumination within, she recognized a new waver
of kerosene rays from beyond the entrance.

There was no sound, except that of very stealthy feet, and the light
came slowly.

Alexander hastened hack to her rock, holding close to the walls of the
cavern as she went, then ensconcing herself there, almost invisible in
the shadow, she waited with parted lips and a cocked rifle.


CHAPTER XII

Time had hung heavy on Jack Halloway's hands after he had heard Brent
announce his departure.  The chair scraped on the floor, had been his
only assurance that the other had understood him and that might, within
possibility, have been a coincidence.  Still Brent's promptness in
cutting him off on the arrival of the operator had seemed a hopeful
sign indicating team-work.

Halloway had declared himself a man who took joy in the savage strain
which that civilization had failed to quench out of his nature.  Now
that strain was mounting into volcano stirrings presaging an eruption.
If he could free himself there would ensue a tempest of wreckage about
that railroad station such as Samson brought down between the pillars
of the temple--but no chances had been taken in his binding.

He did not relish the thought of being left there over night, yet he
strongly doubted whether they would venture to take him out on the
streets in the sight of possible friends.

He fell to wondering what they would do with him.  Except in extremity,
they would hardly murder him out of hand, and yet to explain to him why
they had treated him so hardly, would be a delicate matter.  But the
answer lay in the operator's total freedom from suspicion that his
captive had read the wire.  So far as that backwoods Machiavelli
divined, there was no link establishing himself with the conspiracy to
rob, and when the time came he thought he could clear his skirts by a
simple means.

Night had fallen when at last the prisoner heard the door open and saw
the Agent enter, accompanied by the two gunmen who had been his
companions that morning.  They came with a lantern and the telegraph
man held a heavy rasp in his hand.  Halting before the bound figure, he
spoke slowly and with a somewhat shamefaced note of apology.

"I reckon I've got ter pray yore forgiveness, Stranger," he began.  "A
right mean sort of mistake 'pears ter hev took place--but hit war one I
couldn't help without I defied ther law."

"How's thet?" demanded Halloway shortly, and his informant went on.

"When thet message come from ther town marshal at Coal City, he warned
us 'Violent man--take no chances.'  Thet's why we fell on ye so severe
an' tied ye up so tight."

"Wa'al," Halloway was schooling his demeanor warily into the middle
course between a too ready forgiveness and a too bellicose resentment,
"wa'al what air ye cravin' my pardon fer, then?"

"We've done heered ergin from Coal City--an' ther town marshal says
thet hit war all a fool mistake--thar hain't no sufficient grounds ter
hold ye on.  He bids me set ye free forthwith."

"Go on, then, and do hit.  I've done hed a belly-full of settin' here
strapped ter this cheer."

But the operator hesitated.

"Afore I turns ye loose, I'd like ter feel plum sartin thet ye hain't
holdin' no grudge."

Halloway knew that, should he seem easily placated, he would not be
believed, so he spoke with a voice of stern yet just determination.

"So holp me God, I aims ter demand full payment fer this hyar day--but
I aims ter punish ther right man.  Ye says ye only acted on orders from
an officer, don't ye?"

"Thet's true es text."

"All right then, ye hain't ther man I'm atter, ef that's so.  Mistakes
will happen.  As ter ther other feller, I kin bide my time fer a spell.
I reckon my wrath won't cool none."

The Station Agent heaved a sigh of relief.  "Hit's a right unfortunate
thing," he declared sympathetically.  "I've been studyin' erbout hit
an' I said ter myself, 'what ef some enemy of his'n sent both them
messages?'"

This seemingly innocent suggestion was by way of discounting the future
when Halloway learned that the town marshal knew nothing of the matter.

The operator bent and unfastened the binders about the ankles and
waist.  That left only the handcuffs, and when he came to them once
more a note of apologetic anxiety crept into his voice.

"Ther key ter them things is lost," he deprecated.  "Ther best I kin do
fer ye air ter file ther chain.  Ye kin stick yore hands in yore
pockets, though, an' nobody won't see 'em."

"Thet's good enough fer ther present time," assented Halloway.  "Ef
ye'll loan me thet file, I'll git 'em off myself--later on."

So while the giant stood with outstretched hands, the other filed
through a link at the middle of the chain, and together the four men
left the baggage room and went into the outer office.  Its door was
closed but Halloway, who walked ahead, laid a hand on the knob and
paused to inquire, without rancor, "I reckon ye aims ter give me back
my gun, don't ye?"

The operator promptly produced the weapon from the drawer of his table
and Halloway made no examination to see whether it came back to him
full-chambered or empty.

He had his own guess on that score, but he wished to appear
unsuspicious just now, so he thrust the thing into its holster.

Then deliberately he turned the key in the door and that was, for a
time, his last deliberate act.  Seizing the fellow who stood nearest
him, he swung him forward and held him as a partial shield before his
own body.

"Thar's three of ye hyar," he announced in an abruptly ominous voice,
"and one of me.  Ef any man makes a move ter draw a gun, I aims
straightway ter break this feller's neck.  Don't let no man move from
where he stands at!"

Astonishment enforced a momentary obedience, save that the man upon
whose shoulders the gigantic hands lay--not as yet heavily--attempted
to squirm away.  Iron-like fingers bit into his flesh and, wincing with
a smothered yell of pain, he stood trembling.  Halloway passed one hand
over his hostage's shoulder and drew the pistol from its holster--then
he sent the fellow spinning from him like a top, and covered the
others, who huddled close together.  "Yore guns--grip-fust--an'
speedily," he directed, in that still voice that carried terror, and
brought immediate obedience.

"Ye promised us--thet ye wouldn't hold us accountable," whined the
operator, and Halloway laughed, as he unloaded the captured pistols and
tossed them into a corner.

"What I promised war not ter visit no revengeance on ther wrong
fellers," he corrected.  "Never mind how I knows hit--but I does know
thet no message ever come from ther Coal City town marshal.  Ther one
that did come told about a plot ter lay-way an' rob a woman--an' ther
three of ye war in on hit."

The terror of the unaccountable and wholly mystifying situation held
them now in its paralysis.  In no conceivable way could he have learned
these things--yet he knew them and fears crowded as they wondered what
else he might know as well.

But Halloway allowed them little leisure for abstract reflection.

"I've done throwed away them guns.  I reckon ye knows whether mine's
loaded or not--I don't.  Now ther four of us air going ter hev a leetle
frolic, right hyar an' now--a leetle four-cornered fight--jest fist an'
skull fashion."

He walked across and locked the baggage-room door, though it was
shuttered from the outside, and dropped the key within his pocket.

"Come on boys, let's start right in," he invited.  "Fer yore own sakes
hit's kinderly a pity ye couldn't git these irons offen me . . .
they're right apt ter scar somebody up."

They knew that to get out they must fight their way out--and after all
there were three of them.  Flinging a heavy chair above his head, the
quickest-witted of the trio hurled himself forward to the attack.

From Halloway's eyes shot bolts of Berserker battle-lust, and from
under the down-sweep of the clubbed missile he glided as a trout slips
away from a startling shadow.  Before that assailant had recovered his
equilibrium, Halloway had seized him up as a grown man might seize a
small child and hurled him headlong at the operator, so that the two
went down in a tangle of writhing bodies.

The third had not been idle and as Halloway straightened and wheeled,
he met the cyclonic lunge of a snarling adversary with a lifted and
wickedly gleaming dirk.

As the knife flashed down, the dodging Goliath felt its sting in his
left shoulder--but only with a glancing blow which had been aimed at
his throat.  Blood was let but no great hurt done save that it roused
him to a demoniac fury.  The embrace in which the wielder of the blade
was folded was like the snapping of a bear-trap and, not slowly but
almost instantly, its victim dropped his weapon and hung gasping with
broken ribs and stifled lungs.

Halloway cast him aside and wheeled again with lowered head, for two
men were at him afresh with whatever things of weight came to their
hands.  Neither dared pause and desperation had endowed them with a
strength as unwonted and exaggerated as that which his frenzy brings to
a maniac.

The fallen figure lay quiet enough, but the remaining three swept in
tempestuous chaos about the place.  The table was wrecked--the
furniture shattered--all were bleeding and panting in sob-like
brokenness of breath.

Two bore the brand-like marks of handcuffs; the other a great welt
across the forehead, left there by the large file, but at the end one
figure straightened up--his task ended--and behind him lay three that
would not soon be ready to fight again.  Then, unlocking the door,
Halloway let himself out into the night.

He paused on the platform and drew a long breath and after that,
plunging his hands deep into his pockets, he strolled along whistling.
But when he had come to the edge of the town and the road toward
Wolf-Pen Gap, he broke into a run.


Alexander had stood waiting for a while at the edge of the rock,
wondering who these men might be who were approaching with such an
extremity of caution.  Once more she was called on to endure the
heart-chill of suspense, but when finally two figures slipped through
the shaft-mouth with cocked rifles thrust out before them that tautness
of nerve eased into relaxation.  One of them--palpably nervous--was
Will Brent.  The other, with eyes agleam and an eagerness keyed for
battle, was Jerry O'Keefe.

Yet as both took in the narrow and seemingly deserted area between the
coal-seamed walls, their faces became heavy with disappointment.  Other
men followed them until eight or ten had crowded into the cavern, and
very dejectedly Brent said, "We're too late.  They've been here and
gone."

Alexander, peering silently over the top of her rock, missed the face
of Bud Sellers, the one man she had wholly trusted.  She told herself
that to suspect Brent or O'Keefe was ungenerous, yet out of her recent
viscissitudes an exaggerated instinct of caution had been born, and she
waited to judge the complexion of affairs before she revealed herself.

Jerry's engaging face grew vengefully dark as he turned toward Brent
and spoke apprehensively.

"Ther place stinks with burnt gun-powder!  Does ye reckon she showed
fight--and they hurt her?  Afore God, men, ef thet's true, I aims ter
do some killin' my own self--I hain't nuver seed her but oncet--but I
aims ter wed with thet gal!"

Then with a laugh that pealed through the place and brought them all
around startled, Alexander emerged from her concealment.

"I almost feels sorry thet they didn't finish me--ef thet's ther fate
thet's in store fer me," she announced.

Her eyes squarely met those of Jerry O'Keefe, and he reddened
furiously, but at once Brent began asking and answering questions and
in that diversion of attention the young mountaineer found escape from
his discomfiture.  The rescue party had encountered none of the men who
had so recently vacated the mine.  Outside the woods were "masterly
wild and la'relly" and poroused with cavernous crags.  The conspirators
had evidently scattered and melted from sight as bees melt into a
honeycomb.

But Alexander's face grew again serious and pained as she gave her most
important information.  "You men come a leetle too late.  I driv 'em
off--but them thet went last tuck my saddle-bags away with 'em."

Brent's only response to that was a brief gesture of despair.  So after
all the plotting, the counterplotting, the dangers and hardships; after
all her own gallant efforts, the girl had lost the game.

He looked at her as she stood there repressing under a stoical
blankness of expression, emotions which he thought must sum up to a
worm-wood bitterness of spirit.

"We're wasting time here," he announced after a brief and painful
pause.  "They can't have gone far--we must comb these woods."

But Alexander shrugged her shoulders.

"Thar hain't no possible way of runnin' 'em down ternight," she said.
"They've scattered like a hover of pa'tridges thet's been shot at, an'
whichever one's got them saddle-bags is in safe hidin' afore now.  I've
got one more plan yit, but hit's fer termorrer.  Let's go back thar an'
sot thet Halloway feller free."

On careful examination it appears rational manufacturing method, forming
the first bore of the cylinder with staves or bars of iron, 6 cm. thick,
covered with sleeves of 12 cm. too thick and from 55 to 65 in length,
and covered by a union and another hoop wrapped with 5 cm. thick and
20 wide.

The strengthening of the mouth are stretched at the top forming a
ridge parallel to the axis and determined by the additional hoop wrapped
in two-thirds, with two rings. _con Of these pieces had servidor_ plate
or chamber and also closed butt, taking into If the plug cap á,
soldiers hurt hammer.

The provision of the cooker was then next to the plane of the cylinder
head, ending up in a small cup of 18 mm. amplitude. Trim the cap had
to have this piece 1m, 430 long. We used pieces of server outdoors
because having two and three are charged separately, was the fastest
shot, of the preferred stock closed below deck batteries. Diego Garcia
del Palacio explained the cause in his _Instrucción náutica_,
writing: "All the pieces are served with open houses must be on
deck, because if they are below, the smoke that is within sight to
the deals that serve them. [ Illustration] For these and so that
the verses be put on the stern and bow canopies and closed, which
are cylinder head, casting the smoke through the mouth, down ...»[
22] [Note 22: According to Mr.

EA release of Captain D'Alberti, from the bottom of the port of Genoa had
been shut out two Lombard, who was charged by the mouth, similar to
those described here: one is 1m, and 11 long 0m, 09 in diameter at the
mouth: the other 1m, 12 and the same caliber.]

The whole point is difficult to determine the shape and construction of
the assembly, according to the account extract from the years 1505 and
were called by then _corueñas_.

This is one of the most obscure among the investigations pertaining
to the former artillery: there is nothing historically found so far,
as the drawings in place and pieces of the campaign in many cases
replace the lack of descriptions, can not see how will be placed inside
the ship such Lombard. The speech must be guided by analogy with the
square and mounts as vague indications of that is the ratchet _The
Charente_ they had some pieces _con ruedas_.

That García de Palacio said: "The Tern nao portañuelas its two spans
in Table bisagrones for their cerrallas and abrillas when appropriate,
and sides of each two iron argollones strong, and a hook near the
stump, and the rings to put their gear Zalla parts, and the butt
rings á each of its retained so long as it is necessary to back the
piece, noting that one is shorter than the other, to take back the
piece and inside the mouth, held by the short half-back is long and
stern forward so that the Lombardero tornalla able to load without
the portañuela you can do damage.

"As the construction is almost a century after the time of Columbus'
caravels and longer pieces of stumps and portañuelas square serves only
as a fact of progress in certain details had been: but in the
absence of others, and tested against what is known mounting artillery
site and campaign helps conjecture is especially useful for knowledge
of hardware and guarnimientos the palanquin and truss with two arms,
_corto and largo_.

For logical presumption had to be mounted or the lombarda interrelated
on a solid piece of wood on that in the medium cane, had lowered
the rise place at the top of the cylinder head. Sit on two boards
back and forth long enough to give, as a base, and greater stability
to the whole so that the base not being in continuous contact with
the deck of the ship, space is no longer possible and easy to make
strong of lashing out or making the rope lombarda and heal a body,
and tesarlas or strengthened as required to maintain the exercise
restraint.

Well corueña could be achieved with the front axle with a small piece
wheels, but wheels are another advancement is not likely to be found in
circulation in the caravels, since as a new and rare thing it was noted
years later.

Clear is that this provision could not be changed in the pointing
task, and had to be shot rasando water, as the Portuguese chronicler
Garcia de Resende, however, remains as it was the short range and
therefore used artillery only as a preliminary approach, such afuste
to meet its purpose, serving the shooting of the ball of stone,
which has the effect of wood on the sides spoke Firrufino Julius Caesar
and Columbus gave the same idea at the time mentioned above, counting
how spent projectile weak piece of his ship dead.

Justifica while the immobility of lombarda in assembly, because it opened
sluices square sides. A circular opening of slightly larger
diameter than the mouth of the piece was enough to fire over and protected
the servants against small arms rounds. The way to load the parts in
bulk powder was introduced with a spoon, indicated in the following
Royal Charter, which recommends the replacement of the Indian artillery
wrought iron for the bronze. [23] [Note 23: _Colecc. of docum.
ined. of Indias_, t.

XXXI.] "The King .-- Commander couple, our general supplier of our
artillery. Because the island is Spanish needed some pieces of
artillery, which I command you viéredes questa then, in that
fagais facer cibdad of Malaga sacabuches five cannon and a mason who has
_una villa oxa lantern (?) _ Set in the attacker to attacking him, and
ducientas and fifty stones for him, and two stones ducientas falconet
and lead, and a mold for azofar falconet, _E linterna_ the other
barrel, and is particularly good because Yerro metal then there
dapna to cabs of soil moisture, the quale ansi date with all their
gear, the entregareís our officers of the House of Recruitment
living in Seville, or whose power ovier.

E command to Juan de Soria, my counter artillery, are yearning FAGA then
deliver his letter of payment, or who oviere power, as are rescebidos.
When the town of Medina del Campo on 30 September 1504 years .--
I .-- For the King commanded the King, Gaspar de Gricio.

'The falconet or be fixed in the side pieces that amount to current
draft fast, were of iron, such as Lombard, manufactured in the same
manner, differing in the smaller size in throwing projectiles
formed as iron coated with lead and not taking cure because revolved
horizontally and vertically on stump on finished pinzote fork, had
in the rear frame or a frame with wedge to secure the server, Raber
and was handling it with the Lombardero.

No need to rebuild these discretionary items, as there are in the
Artillery Museum in Madrid two authentic copies from the bottom of
the sea and first described in _Museo of Spanish antigüedades_. One
of them is 70-gauge and 23 mm thick in the curb, the bullet would weigh
1500 grams iron seal.

The other is 45 mm in size and the ball must not weigh more than
360 grams. In the last staves are 5 mm, 17 sleeves and hoop wrapped 40.
The length of the rod is 750 mm in the frame, toward the axis 250 of
the 340 Raber, so the total length reaches 1m, 340 [24]. Caravels and
naos that large or small bore artillery, proving the _Memorial_ Columbus
went to the Kings in 1498 by listing the things he needed, saying
[25]: "It is more necessary for the navy that they like for people
there resident Ansy arms Lombard for Navy, and spears and swords
and daggers and crossbows and crossbows for madexuelas and warehouse
for crossbows.

"[Note 24: falconet have been drawn almost equally from the bottom
of the ports of Santander and Alicante Barcelona, and as news of Mr.

Captain EA D'Albertis, three other very similar in all copies have
been found in the ports of Genoa and Rapallo, two of them
have 1m, 33 and 0m in length, 04 diameter, the other only 1m in
length.]

[Note 25: Original at the Academy of History, gift of General San
Román.] on the fourth voyage of discovery of the Indies there is
an official in the accounts of Rodrigo de Narvaez preserved in
Simancas [26], the important foundation of what will grounds, this
heading: "Data .-- A charter date of March 20 was fought 1502 years
in the Rodrigo de Narváez butler's Artillery ribadoquines two of
their Highnesses and 24 quintals of powder that gives val º X
Columbus Admiral for the trip which is to meet, which was freed by
a writ of thesorero A.

Morales of eighth time in Seville March 8 1502. "[Note 26: Accounting,
1. ª época, núm. 613. Copies of Mr. Aparici, 1847.

Consignment 13, núm. 21.] With the experience of what happened to
the ship _Santa Christopher D.

María_ wanted smaller vessel carrying on this trip that was to be the
exploration of Earth-shore firm and, as mentioned in P. Houses bought
four ships GAVI Incidentally, the largest of which did not exceed
70 barrels or less than 50 down.

The two ribadoquines delivered by the foreman of the artillery
pieces Malaga would not only be armed with four ships, because in
that case was the excessive amount of 24 quintals of gunpowder that
they gave, that is why designing with These two pieces are more and
better weaponry regular artillery iron caravels would, at the request
of Admiral.

Consigna the priest of the Palaces, chronicler of the Catholic Kings,
to discuss the war with Portugal and battle of Toro [27 ], the
Duke of Villahermosa, was then (1475) who got the first _ribadoquines_
in Castile. For the site and have merged into Ponferrada and Zamora
Benavente, by knowing the accounts of the treasurer Ruy López de
Villalobos (1486) have commissioned the casting teachers Peter and John,
on condition of paying for each one that came out clean and good,
undergoing the test shots of two 1000 maravedís, being responsible for
firewood, charcoal, mold and other necessary things, _excepto
copper and estaño_.

Cast 17, and went so well that the price they paid 1500 maravedís. [28]
[Note 27: Cap. XVIII.] [Note 28: _Memorias historic city of Zamora_,
Tome II, p. 105.]

They were as light bronze pieces ribadoquines recently adopted terms
of which items are discovered in the accounts of expenditures made
for that site, namely banks ribadoquines paid to carpenters.

Timber carved elm ax to them. Maroma. tin sheet to measure ribadoquines.
Dados iron balls ribadoquines. Two cars and two pairs of oxen that were
six ribadoquines.

Shortly after that Artillery was applied to the defense of places: the
inventories that they have the butler delivered in 1501, with other
pieces, to the strength of a Bermiliana quintales ribadoquín weighing
2 and 1 and 10 pounds arroba.

For Buñol of 1 ribadoquín e 2 arcabuches who weighed 18 pounds and 3
quintals of metal.

Adra For 2 ribadoquines e 2 arcabuches weighing 5 and 2 quintales arrobas
and 10 pounds. Lanjarón For the 1 and 2 sacabuches that ribadoquín 2
and 3 weighed quintales arrobas and 1 lbs.

The relations of the following year of 1502 make a distinction
_Ribadoquines San Migueles_; ribadoquines with stumps; ribadoquines
kids, and even say that Master Christopher, founder, gave 19
ribadoquines _ochavados_ 14 ribadoquines _redondos_ and molds balls
to them. arcabuches or sacabuches were, it seems, marketing pieces,
smaller and more modern that ribadoquines.

No relation to the Admiral, but his successor in the government
of the island the first Spanish words, found on the next ballot,
worthy of notoriety. [29] [Note 29: Simancas, copies of Mr. Aparici
published by Arantegui, I II, pp. 175.] "The King and Queen .-- Rodrigo
de Narváez, steward of our artillery. We will send you to the
DEIS and entreguis Commander of Lares, our governor of the Indies, or
the person with your letter quel embyare, twenty and four _sacabuches
of metal_ [30] and powder and ball is needed for them and for
fifteen espingardas send it to another party, and also you quality
molds and other appliances that is needed to make such bullets,
which is to bring all the Indies, and take his letter of payment,
or person asymismo send and to which this is command that you
rescibido in mind what you asy dieredes and entregaredes, which you
send to hagades, settlement is our charter the Commander Martyn San
Mossèn our supplier and supplier of the artillery and Joan de Soria
della accountant and giving them their parescer stress on the backs
of our card above things that give them debais.

[Note 30: We have already seen that in some accounts are named _arcabuches_
also _hacabuches_.] date in the city of Granada in 31 days of
August, 501 years I the King .-- .-- .-- As I commanded the Queen of
King and the Queen, Gaspar de Gricio. "When Columbus came to the port
of the toilet on the fourth trip, after recognize the costs and Mosquito
Veragua, he harassed the Indians, osando reach near the ships, which
were with the board on the ground. Admiral sent to terrorize _lombardas_
without throwing ball, but the noise is more troublemaker, mocking
the appeal.

D. Fernando Colon, eyewitness, says that, given her too daring for
espantallos, pull the Admiral sent some _lombarda_ occasionally, and
they responded with shouts, with their sticks in the branches
of trees, making threats and showing no fear of the sound or
the sound of _lombardas_, thinking that they should be as dry lightning
thunder, no more cause for horror, and that it did not have so much
pride, nor underestimate the Christians, who once commanded tirase a
_lombarda_ against a gang of people who were on board and a
apeñuscada Cerrito, giving dello through the ball, which made
cognocer mockery that was also thunder and lightning, so that by
then even after the mountains dared not peep.

Registrar that the caravels that had pieces of the two highest caliber
ribadoquines delivered by Narváez, because they were not included
in the general name of Lombard, as applied to large. caravels That
all rode some states of the same book Fernando Colon, saying that
suffer temporary coast Veragua 'thunder were so wild and thick that
the thought of a ship that fired the other _The artillería_ demanding
relief, as it sunk.

"The newspaper referred to Columbus on the first trip, as mentioned
espingarda hand weapon by which the crew of the caravels, but had to
be very little, not being then widespread. The army contingent
of 6,000 men who left Seville for the war in Grenada had only 400
espingarderos, the Brotherhood of the Holy body of men whose position
was selected on the security roads and depopulated, was one for
every ten espingarda .

Anyway, to join with the 17 ships which took the Admiral's second
trip carrying 1,500 men, was ordered by writ given in Barcelona May
23 1493, it delivered 100 and 100 crossbows espingardas, resulting
in even smaller proportion.

Hállanse these weapons drawn and described in the treaties of military
art and clothing in question, there are copies in the Royal Armory,
and for espingardas have other information of interest, the choir stalls
of the Cathedral of Toledo, a work executed in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

There are carved espingarderos in office. Espingarda had a short barrel
with flared mouth, subject to long wooden box. Cargábase stick with
carrying gunpowder in bulk and bottled iron bullets in bag. Was
holding the shot aim with the left hand and applied with a wick at the
other ear. Mentions also referred turquescos daily bows that shot
arrows, as opposed to crossbows, they threw rockrose. As Admiral spear
used to kill the monster iguana whose skin showed a return in Spain
as a rare thing, there is evidence, which is not necessary, that with
very sharp spears and swords [31] Most of the fighting people. All
inventories of the time and have more offensive weapons for these
species in distinct classes named _lanzas manesgas_, _lanzas largas_,
_chuzos or picas_, _romañolas_, _guadañas_, etc. In addition to the
hundreds who entered throwing, like darts, Virot and bars aguzado.
[Note 31: Columbus Encouraging the simplicity of the Indians of
the Lucaya said taking the swords by the blade and cut the hands.]

[Illustration] As defensive breastplates were made from back and
bib, cap, gorguerinas and various other pieces of harness; buckler
painted with real currency and Pavese with the same insignia.

The last served as defense and ornament to cover the edges, and from them
comes the name of Pavese conserved naval vocabulary, applying it now
to cover the coisa also placed defensive parapet. In the accounts
given Pedro Ruiz and Juan Perez de Tolosa purchases of Biscay in the
year 1502 for the day of Mazalquivir, cited above, there is the
curious details of arms, armor include Swiss, each with a garrison
and piastron the left arm and helmet and Barbot, no knuckles, costing
610 maravedís, breastplates of leather cordobanes dates, and are
held safe and warm springs, each at 485 mrs.; Echizen crossbows
with two pulleys each ropes and their belts and put their ropes and
all the gear needed to be at 480 mrs.; spears hands locked steel
irons, with their iron regaton 250 mrs. dozen; darts with their
irons and made their fans, 50 mrs. dozen, large and small steel
pins, 5 mrs., bolts, etc.. etc.

Compared with those elements that, after four centuries, has at its
disposal the Navy, will seem little, but which cost a huge amount
of maravedís now! CESÁREA FERNÁNDEZ DURO. [Illustration] THE CREW NAO
'SANTA MARIA' AND caravels' PAINT 'AND' GIRL 'WITH NEWS BRIEFS PEOPLE
AND VESSELS IN TRAVEL Columbus Jerome Cardano, mathematician of
the sixteenth century, reform of the suspension of the needle
nautic, said that celebrating Columbus is holding a not only enhance
a male lineage, nor to praise a city or a kingdom, is to proclaim
the glory of a human benefit from its discovery.

Being the navigator, to whom that glory is synthesized, the West
Indies, a squadron of three governing ships crewed by surfers who
were with him were thrown to rip the veil of the Ocean, in the accompanying
risks, work and privation, to touch and be touched all share in
the outcome of the Homeric; everyone reaches at the consideration
that the solidarity that poetic feeling of the people established
in the adage 'He who loves the flower loves the leaves of your
surroundings.

"Thus with repeated efforts have sought to find out the names of those
in the port of Palos embarked on the three ships, achieving very
little, because with the loss of the papers of the time, most have
been obscured.

Don Martin Fernandez de Navarrete in his published _Colección Travel
descubrimientos_ list of forty individuals who had been sent from
the Archivo de Indias, understood as the expression of the heading,
which read Spanish on the island died, the ones that left Colon on
the strength of Christmas after the sinking of the Captain and,
therefore, that she had gone first Europeans to their fertility
blood recently trodden earth.

This belief has been reproduced many times the relationship will
be inserted in the book entitled _Colón and Pinzón_ with additions of
other names later discovered, and are sculpted into the monument erected
in Madrid to the glorious memory of Admiral; but now registering
bundles of Archivo de Indias in Seville in search of documents
necessary for the purpose of the Centennial, the archivist has found
Mr Francisco Javier Delgado certain entries in the books _Cuenta
and razón_ belonging to the Treasury of the Casa de la Contratación
that cover the years 1503 to 1515, which necessarily have to change
those views, as items are paid to widows or heirs of ten, stating
repeatedly in each of them 'died in India between the thirty-seven
( well in some games in other states and thirty-eight) that when
the Spanish first discovered the island, leaving the Admiral Columbus
and the second trip he went to the people found dead, apparently
by his Highness's payroll. "

He would have become a figure
trusted there, too--but how different your life would have been.  There
would have been schools and--well, many things that you have never
known."

"I hain't hankerin' fer none of them things," she said.  Then with a
sudden paroxysm of sobs that shook her afresh, she added, "All I wants
is ter hev him back ergin!"

But Brent was thinking of things that could mean little to her because
she lacked the background of contrast and comparison.  He was seeing
that beauty and that personality in the social life of official
Washington; seeing the triumph that would have been hers--and wondering
what it would have meant to her in the balance of contentment or
unhappiness.

Of course had Aaron McGivins begun his political career young enough,
every trace of mountain illiteracy would long ago have been shed away
by the growing girl.  As for her blood, there is in all America no
other so purely Anglo-Saxon.

"I rather think it's a pity he didn't go," Brent mused aloud.  Then he
added, "Now that he's--not with you any more--Alexander, there is
something you must let me say.  You've never thought about it much, but
you have such a beauty as would make you famous in any city of the
world.  Men will come--and they won't be turned back."

For the first time since Aaron's death the old militant fire leaped
into her eyes and her chin came up as she flared into vehemence.

"Like hell they won't be turned back!"

But Brent smiled.  "You think that now, but Alexander, nature is nature
and there must be something in your life.  You've played at being a man
and done it better than many men--but men can marry women, and you
can't.  Along that road lies a heart-breaking loneliness.  Sometime
you'll see that, since you can't be a man, you'll want to be a man's
mate."

She shook her head with unconvinced obduracy.

"I knows ye aims ter give me kindly counsel, Mr. Brent, but ye're plum
wastin' yore breath."

The man rose.  "After all, I only came to say good-bye," he told her.
"You aren't going to keep men from loving you.  I know because I've
tried to keep myself from doing it--and I've failed.  But this is
really my message.  If you do change your ideas, for God's sake choose
your man carefully--and if you ever reach a point where you need
counsel, send for me."


Along Fifth Avenue from Washington Arch to the Plaza, Spring was in the
air.  Trees were putting out that first green which, in its tenderness
of beauty, is all hope and confidence.  With the tide of humanity
drifted Will Brent, whom business had brought from Kentucky to New
York, but his thoughts were back there in the hills where the almost
illiterate Diana, who knew nothing of life's nuances of refinement and
who yet had all of life's allurements, was facing her new loneliness.

He reached a bookstore and turned in, idly looking through volumes of
verse, while he killed the hour before his appointment.  His hand fell
upon a small volume bearing the name of G. K. Chesterton, and opening
it at random he read those lines descriptive of the illuminated
breviary from which Alfred the Great, as a boy, learned his spiritual
primer at his mother's knee:

  "It was wrought in the monk's slow manner of silver
      and sanguine shell,
  And its pictures were little and terrible keyholes of
      Heaven and Hell."


Brent closed the covers with a snap.  "That's what my memories of it
all come to," he mused, "'--little and terrible keyholes of Heaven and
Hell.'"

But that evening he went to dine with Jack Halloway at his club which
looked out across the Avenue and the Park.  He had written to Halloway
in advance of his coming and by wire had received an invitation couched
in terms of urgency not to be denied.

This was not Appalachia but Manhattan yet, when Halloway met him, Brent
could but smile at life's contrasts.  The huge fellow rose from his
chair to greet him, as splendid a physical thing as human eyes could
look upon.  There was no stubble now on the face that seemed cast in
smooth bronze.  In lieu of that calculatedly slovenly disguise which he
had affected in the hinter-land, he was immaculate in the fineness of
his linen and the tailoring of his evening clothes.  But as he held out
his hand, he drawled, "Wa'al, stranger, how fares matters back thar on
Shoulder-blade?"

Brent sketched briefly the occurrences that had taken place there; the
death of Old Aaron and the fact that Jerry O'Keefe had been trying to
sell his farm near Coal City in order, he surmised, that he might take
up his abode nearer the McGivins' place.

Talk ran idly for a time, then Halloway rose and stood towering in the
Fifth Avenue window.  Across Park and Plaza the sky was still rosy with
the last of the afterglow.  Under the loftily broken roof-lines of the
great hotel multitudinous window panes were gleaming.  Over it all was
the warm breath of spring.

The big man's hands, idly clasped behind his back, began to twitch and
finally settled into a hard grip.  His shoulders heaved and when he
spoke there was a queer note in his voice.

"See the rhododendron over there in the park?  Soon now it will be in
flower--not only _that_ rhododendron but----"  He ended it abruptly,
and then broke out, low-voiced but tense.  "This atmosphere is stifling
me--God!  It's horrible--

  "Send your path be straight before you,
  When the old spring fret comes o'er you,
  And the Red Gods call to you.'"


Into Brent's tone came something almost savage.

"I know what you're thinking.  Quit it.  It won't do!"

Slowly Halloway turned.  For a moment his fine face was drawn with
actual suffering.  Then he added:

"You're quite right, Will, it won't do.  But it's hard to forget--when
one has seen a comet.  Touch that button if you don't mind.  It's time
for the cocktails."


CHAPTER XIV

Have you seen Spring come to the mountains?  Have you felt the subtle
power on the human heart, of trance-drugged impulses awakening in
plant, in animal, in humanity; in the deep hard arteries of the ancient
hills themselves?  Winter there is grim and bleak beyond the telling.
In far separated cabins, held in the quarantine of mired roads, men and
women have lived, from hand to mouth, sinking into a dour and
melancholy apathy.

But when Spring comes, the gray and chocolate humps of raggedness are
softly veiled again with tender verdure and a song runs with the caress
of the breeze.  It is a song relayed on the throats of birds.  The
color of new flower and leaf and of skies washed clean of brooding
finds an echo in man and womankind.  When the dogwood blossom,
everywhere, breaks into white foam upon the soft billows of woodland
green, and the sap stirs--then the old and crabbed bitterness of life
stands aside for the coming of Love.

If one be young and free, one feels, admittedly or subconsciously, the
deep tides that sing to sentiment and the undertows that pull to
passion.

About the lonely house of Alexander McGivins the woods were burgeoning
and tuneful.  Stark contours of landscape had become lovely and
Alexander, preparing for the activities of "drappin' and kiverin'" in
the steep corn-fields, felt the surge of vague influences in her bosom.

Joe McGivins had carried a stricken face since Old Aaron's death.  He
looked to his sister, as he had looked to his father, for direction and
guidance and though he worked it was as a hired man might have worked,
patiently rather than keenly and without initiative.

But keeping busy failed to comfort the empty ache in Alexander's heart
because in the grave over yonder lay all that had filled her world, and
though she would have fought the man who suggested it, there were times
when her lovely lips fell into lines of irony, and when she
half-consciously felt that her playing at being a man had been a bitter
and empty jest.  She had only forfeited her woman's rights in life, and
had failed to gain the compensation of man's.

Once or twice when on the high road, she passed youthful couples,
love-engrossed, she went on with a wistfulness in her eyes.  For such
as these, life held something, but for her, she was sure in her
obduracy of inexperience, there was no objective.

If the truth be told, the "spring-tide" was welling in the channels of
her being, as well as in the rivulets of the hills, and the changes
that had come to her were near to bearing fruit.

That space of little more than a week, when she had left her home--a
home which had also been a world with its own laws and environment--had
brought her into contact with other views.  Her father's death had left
the house no longer the same.  Two independent souls, with strong
views, may succeed in fashioning their own world, and she and her
father had been two such.

One left unsupported may fail, and now she was alone--for Joe hardly
counted.

Ever since she had been old enough to think at all, she had been
inordinately proud of "being a man," and profoundly contemptuous of the
women about her whose colorless lives spelled thraldom and hard
servitude.

That long fostered and passionately held creed would die hard.  She
would fight herself and whomsoever else challenged its acceptance--but
insidious doubts were assailing her.

So to all outward seeming Alexander McGivins was more the "he-woman"
than ever before, but in her inner heart the leaven of change was at
its yeasty work.

"I've got ter be a man," she told Joe, who mildly objected, even while
he leaned on her strength.  "Now thet paw's gone, I hev greater need
then ever ter stand squ'ar on my own two feet."

The youth nodded.  "I reckon ye're right," he acknowledged, "but folks
talks a heap.  I'm always figgerin' thet I'm goin' ter hev ter lick
somebody erbout ye.  I wouldn't suffer nobody ter speak ill of ye when
I war present."

Alexander looked steadily at the boy.  "I'm obleeged ter ye, but I'll
do my own fightin', Joe," she told him calmly.  "I'll even make shift
ter do some o' your'n, an' yit----"  She paused a moment and he
inquired, "Wa'al, what's on yore mind, Alexander?"

"An' yit," she went on more slowly and thoughtfully, "I'd be mighty
nigh willin' ter prove ther cause of ye gittin' in one or two good
fights--ef hit couldn't be brought ter pass no other way."

"Paw always counseled peace, ef a feller warn't pushed too fur," he
alleged in defense of his pacific attitude.

"So does I.  But Joe, hit's jest on yore own account thet I'd like ter
see ye show more sperit.  Folks talks erbout _you_ too.  I know what
blood ye've got, commandin' blood--an' ef ye got roused up onc't hit'd
mek a more upstandin' man of ye.  I knows hit's a lie, but I've heered
ye called ther disablest feller on Shoulder-blade!"

A touch of contempt stole into her voice as she added, "An' yore paw's
only son!"

He went away somewhat sulkily, but she had ignited in him a spark of
needed torture.  Bred of a fighting line, the acid of self-scorn began
eating into his pride, and when a few days later he halted at a wayside
smithy, which was really only a "blind-tiger," and came upon a drinking
crowd, the ferment of his thoughts developed into action.

Sol Breck was sitting with his back turned as the boy strolled in and
it chanced that he was talking about Alexander.  The girl herself with
her square sense of justice, would have recognized his comments as
crude jesting and would have passed them by unresented.

But Joe had been bitterly accusing himself of timidity and he needed
sustenance for his waning faith in his own temerity.  It was
characteristic of him that he should pick an easy beginning, as a timid
swimmer seeks proficiency in shallow water.  Sol Breck had the
unenviable reputation of one who never declined battle--and never
emerged from one crowned with victory.  Joe hurled at him the challenge
of the fighting epithet and after a brief but animated combat had him
down and defeated.  Then he returned home with a swelling breast, and
just enough marks of conflict upon his own person to bear out his
report of counsel heeded and resolution put to the touch.

Alexander listened without interruption to the end, for Joe had told
her all but the name of his adversary and the exact words that had
precipitated battle.

But when the narrative came to its conclusion she inquired quietly,
"What did he say erbout me?"

"Oh, hit wasn't so much what he said es ther way he said hit," was
Joe's somewhat shame-faced reply.  "Ef hit hed been erbout any other
gal, I reckon I mout of looked over it."

"What was it?"  The demand was insistent.

"He jest 'lowed that if 'stid of warin' pants an' straddlin' hosses,
ye'd pick ye out an upstandin' man an' wed him, thar mout come ter be
some _real_ men in ther fam'ly."

The girl's face crimsoned.

"I thought ye said hit war me ye fought erbout, Joe."

"I did say so, Alexander."

"An' ye didn't see no aspersion thet called fer a fight--in ther way
them words teched _you_?"

That phase of the matter had not occurred to Joe at all.  He was used
to being overlooked.

"He warn't thinkin' erbout me," he lamely exculpated.  "I reckon he hed
hit in head thet I hain't quite twenty-one yit."

For a while Alexander stood looking at him with a slowly gathering
tempest of anger in her eyes, under which the boy fidgeted, and finally
she spoke in that ominously still manner that marked moments of dang'er.

"What he said erbout me war true enough--an' ef ye admits what he all
but said erbout you--thet ye hain't no man--then _thet's_ true too."

The boy was crestfallen and a little impatient now.  He had come to
recount an achievement which had plumed and reappareled a limping
self-respect and he had expected congratulation.

"What's ther use of faultin' me by mincin' words?  I licked him, didn't
I?  Set hit down ter anything ye likes."

Neither the information contained in the Journal on September 17,
1492, nor the reflections of the Admiral during the third trip, which
mentions no consideration, even more, no surprise and care of
pilots and sailors, unless decisive proof that even then no one had
noticed the change.

The trial of Don Martin departs from both accuracy and to presume
that "the ingenious Admiral tried to dispel the fears of his people
explaining how a specious cause of the phenomenon."

Not to the satisfaction of the people writing the Journal, that
secret that recorded accounts of the two leagues and the purpose
of the pilots _desatinar_.

What we scored the September 17 reflects the impressions of that time
was to make the polar star, corroborating the 30 second recording
made of the same month of September on the same terms: "At dusk,
the needles noruestean quarter, and sun are with just the star: it
seems that the star does move like the other stars, and hands always
ask the truth.

"This means that printing repeated imperfect observations made at
dawn, he did doubt the truth that marked during night variation of the
needle and the new induced error of assuming that the star around the
center describe a circle of more than 12 degrees (_una great cuarta_).
continued observations on other trips, is now coming to understand the
Indeed, although not yet in an absolute way, thinking that Navarrete
concerns without having studied, literally says: "When I sailed
from Spain to the Indies, then ruling in one hundred leagues from
the west of the Azores mudamiento great in heaven and in the stars
...

Fault in the north of Austria, said passing the one hundred miles, then
in the hands of marear _que FASTA then Northeast noruestean quarter
of all entero_ wind, and that is there to mobilize in that line
like someone transposed a slope ...

"I could not discover the change in Columbus because the needle was
discovered long ago [50], which it warned or discovered, as well
as pilots and sailors, being the first who crossed the ocean, is
the change in the needle is not constant, that is not the same in
all places of the earth, which is beyond the Azores in a line of
Austro Septentrion a magnetic meridian, after which the needles are
diverted from the Northeast (variation in 1492 had in Spain, known
for Columbus and all the crew) to the northwest, and this change
inexplicable that Columbus wanted to enter into vain, was what the
pilots concerned.

[Note 50: Winsor, _Cristopher Columbus_, pp. 200. The variation of the
needle, observed in 1269 by Peregrini was clearly marked on the
letter of Andrea Bianco 1436.]

Such was the confusion of the Admiral, who wrote among other species
[51]: "Failure was dark in there that I North Star High 5 degrees,
and then the guards were over head, and after midnight the star
failed high 10 degrees and sun, that the guards were on their feet,
15 ', had to call attention , and Peter Martyr Angleria picked
objections of writing [52]: 'Refer the Admiral about the difference
pole certain things (copy the previous paragraph), that seem to go
against the feelings of all astrologers loa, lightly touch the .

'It is known that the one thing that Star sailors called tramontana
is not the point of the arctic pole on which turns the shaft of
the heavens, and this is known easily, if they leave the stars, to
such a hole small, and if at the last vigil, when the aurora hide
view for the same hole, you find that site has moved.

But as can happen in the first twilight of the evening rise in that
region (Paria) 5 degrees in June, and the stars withdraw by sunlight
coming, rises 15 degrees, taking the same quadrant, not understand,
and the reasons he gives I am not happy with the whole nor in part,
as they said he had surmised that the orb of the earth is not spherical,
but in its roundness, being brought up, got up a spine of so that
did not take the form of a ball or an apple, like other feelings,
but the slope of a pear tree and the Paria region is occupied by
the eminence that (the nipple writes Admiral) is closer to heaven .

[Note 51: The mass ratio of the third voyage.] [Note 52: Dec. I, lib.
VI, chap. IV, translated by Mr. Torres Asensio.] Not worth that
gave Fernandez de Navarrete discuss whether sailors after Columbus
discovered the variation of the needle attached to the Admiral, had
hand books Enciso (1519), in Falero (1535), most above , which went
on the phenomenon [53].

"Kain't a feller kinderly come broguein' in hyar, without some special
business brings him?"

Alexander felt that she had been unneighborly, but in her memory the
things that Brent had said to her had become a sort of troublesome
refrain.  "Men will come and they won't be turned back."  She
remembered, too, her own hot retort, "Like hell they won't!"  It was in
the spirit of that retort that she answered.

"Ef ye hain't got no business hyar, ye hain't got no business hyar, an'
thet's all thar air ter hit."

"Mebby ye're ther business yoreself, Alexander," he suggested and there
was a persuasive quality in his voice.

"I'm my own business, nobody else's."

In this mood that had troubled her of late, Alexander was very
combative.  She was not willing to surrender her code--not willing yet
to be treated as a woman.

"I heers tell thet ye've moved over hyar, bag an' baggage--an' ef I kin
help ye out any way, I'll seek ter convenience ye outen a sperit of
neighborness."  She spoke in that extra-deliberate fashion that went
before a storm, and as she stood there with her head high, and her eyes
undeviatingly meeting his, she had the beauty of a war-goddess.  "But
when ye hain't got no matter of need, don't come."

Jerry had no intention of being lightly repulsed.  His purpose of
courtship had become his governing law but he had learned much of this
Amazonian woman and had set himself, not to an easy conquest, but to a
hard campaign.  The man who, merely to be near one woman, sells a river
bottom farm that he had nursed into something like prosperity and who
takes on rocky acres in its stead, has shown, by his works, the
determination of his spirit.

Now, the humorous eyes riffled with a quiet amusement.

"I didn't say thet I come without business, Alexander.  Mebby I hain't
stated hit yit."

"Then ye'd better state hit.  Ye don't seem ter be in no tormentin'
haste."

O'Keefe thought that "tormentin' haste" in his position would be fatal
and yet the streak of whimsey that ran through him brought a
paradoxical answer.

"My hearth's cold over thar.  I come ter borry fire."

He was watching her as he spoke, and now that he no longer stood under
the disadvantage of comparison with Jack Halloway he was no mean figure
of a man.  One could not miss the fine, if slender, power of his long
and shapely lines from broad shoulder to tapering waist.  His hair
curled crisply and incorrigibly and he bore himself with a lazy sort of
grace, agile for all its indolence.  Alexander could not be quite sure
whether the eyes were insolent or humble.  When he had stated his
mission of "borrowing fire" he had used a quaint phrase, eloquent of a
quainter custom.  It had to do with that isolated life in a land where
until recently matches were rare and when the hearth fire died one had
to go to the neighbor's house and hasten back with a flaming fagot for
its relighting.

"Ye don't seem ter hev ther drive of a man borryin' fire.  Why didn't
ye ask Joe.  I heers him in thar."

"Hit's _goin' home_ not _comin'_ thet a man's got ter hasten with his
fire," he reminded her.  "I didn't ask Joe because--he hain't got ther
kind of fire my heart needs, Alexander."

So her suspicion was true!  He had been speaking, not literally, but in
the allegory of a suitor and her gathering wrath burst.

"Then I hain't got hit fer ye nuther.  Let yore h'arth stay cold, an'
be damned ter ye--an' now begone right speedily!"

With pure effrontery the young man laughed.  Into his voice he put a
pretense of appeal, as he calmly stuffed his pipe with tobacco crumbs.
"Alexander ye wouldn't deny a man such a plum needcessity es fire,
would ye?" he questioned, though even as he said it he drew from his
pocket a box of matches and struck one.

So he had made deliberate and calculated sport of her!  Her anger saw
in his presence itself only the insult of the first attack from those
men who "would not be turned back," and once more the rage in her came
to its boiling-point.

She wheeled and went into the house and when she came out her face was
pale to the lips and her brows drawn in a resolute pucker, while in her
hands she carried a cocked rifle.

"Down yonder lays my fence-line," she autocratically told the man who
had continued standing where she had left him, and whose seeming was
still unflurried.  "I've got a license ter say who crosses hit.  Ye've
done sought ter make sport of me, an' now I commands ye ter cross ther
fence an' begone from hyar."  She paused a moment because her breath
was coming fast with passion.  "I warns ye nuver ter put foot on this
farm ergin--I aims ter see thet ye don't--an' when ye starts away don't
tarry ter look back, nuther."

Slowly Jerry O'Keefe nodded.  One ordered from another's house must
obey, but the twinkle had not altogether faded from his eyes and there
was nothing precipitate in his movements, albeit the rifle was at ready
and the girl's deep breast was heaving with unfeigned fury.

"All right," he acceded, "I'm goin' now but es fer not lookin' back, I
wouldn't like ter mek no brash promises.  You're hyar an' hit mout
prove right hard ter keep my eyes turned t'other way.  I'm an
easy-goin' sort of feller anyhow, an' I likes ter let my glance kind of
rove hyar an' thar."

Her hands trembled on the gun and her voice shook into huskiness.
"Begone," she warned.  "I kain't hold down my temper much longer."

"An' es fer comin' back," Jerry continued blandly, "some day you're
ergoin' ter _invite_ me back.  Anyhow, I reckon I'd come, because
thar's somethin' hyar thet'll kinderly pulls me hither stronger then
guns kin skeer me off."

The girl sat there on her doorstep with her rifle across her knees and
halfway to the fence-line Jerry paused and looked back.  The rifle came
up--and dropped back again as Alexander belatedly pretended that she
had not seen him.  At the stile O'Keefe paused to turn his head again.
He even waved his hat, and this time she looked through him as through
a pane of glass.

But when she had been sitting broodingly for a long while, the cloud
slowly dissipated from her face.  In her eyes a twinkle of merriment
battled with the fire of righteous indignation, and at last she even
laughed with a low pealing note like a silver bell.

"He's an impudent, no-count devil," she said, "but he's got right
unfalterin' nerve, an' thar's a mighty pleasin' twinkle in his eyes."

Not long after that Alexander made a journey to a nearby town, but
since it was one near the railroad she went in woman's attire, paying a
new deference to public opinion which she had heretofore scorned.  She
was busily occupied there all day and her mission was one of mystery.


CHAPTER XV

The earliest manifestations of spring had ripened into a warmer
fullness.  Everywhere the rhododendron was bloom-loaded, and the
large-petaled flower of the "cucumber tree" spread its waxen whiteness.
Hill-sides were pink with the wild-rose and underfoot violets and the
dandelions made a bright mosaic.

Again Alexander was approaching her door with her face set toward the
sunset and again she saw before her own house the figure of a man who
loomed tall, and who for a brief space remained a featureless
silhouette against the colored sky.

She hastened her step a little, resolved that this time she would teach
Jerry, in an unforgettable fashion, that her edicts of banishment were
final and that they could not be lightly disobeyed--but this time it
was not Jerry.

Indeed she had realized that almost immediately and her heart had
missed its beat.  The man was Halloway himself and he was looking in
another direction just then, so he did not see the fleet, yet instantly
repressed eagerness that flashed into and out of her eyes.  It was a
self-collected young woman, with a distinctly casual manner who crossed
the stile and confronted her visitor.

As he turned and saw her, he started impulsively forward, but recovered
himself and also adopted the matter-of-fact demeanor, which she had,
herself, assumed.

"Howdy, Jack," said the girl carelessly.  "I didn't know ye war
hyarabouts.  I'd jest erbout forgot ye altogether."

"I reckon thet would be a right easy thing ter do," he handsomely
admitted, then each having indulged in the thrust and parry of an
introductory lie, they stood there in the sunset, eying each other in
silence.

But Alexander recognized a transformation in the man's appearance, and
if she seemed tepid of interest, the semblance belied her throbbing
pulses.  Halloway was too accomplished an actor to have abandoned his
pose or makeup.  He must remain in character and dress the part, but he
had used a consummate skill in doing so.  In every detail of clothing
he remained the mountaineer, yet there was no longer any trace of the
slovenly or unclean.

He was close shaven and trim of hair.  His flannel shirt, still open on
his throat, was of good quality.  The trousers that were thrust into
high laced boots were not so new as to attract undue attention, but
they fitted him.  The note of carelessness was maintained--but with
artistry to accentuate the extraordinary effect of physique and
feature.  He was eye-filling and rather splendid.

Alexander felt that some recognition of this metamorphosis was expected
of her, but she had no intent of admitting the true force of its
impression.

"Hit's a right smart wonder I knowed ye a-tall, ye've done spruced up
so," was the dubious compliment with which she favored him after a
deliberate scrutiny.  "I hain't nuver seed ye with yore face washed
afore."

"I 'lowed I'd seek ter make a killin' with ye," he bantered easily, and
she sniffed her simulated disdain.  They had moved together up the
steps of the porch, and he stood there looking at her, quelling the
up-rush of admiration and avid hunger in his eyes.  Then she said
curtly, for in these days she was always on the defensive, and meant to
be doubly so with him whom she secretly feared, "Ye're in ther house
now.  Ef ye wants ter mek a killin' with me, tek off yore hat.  Don't
folks hev no manners whar ye comes from?"

Halloway shook his head, not forgetful that one playing a part must
remain in character.

"I don't tek off my hat ter no man," he replied, stressing the final
word ever so lightly.

"I'm a man when I wants ter be, an' when I wants manners I aims ter hev
'em," she declared, but her visitor stood, still covered, in her
presence, and after a moment she said curtly--yet rather breathlessly,
"Wait hyar," and turning, disappeared into the house.

Floods begin slowly with trickles, but they break suddenly with
torrents.  A flood had seized Alexander at that moment.  Perhaps she
did not herself pause to recognize or analyze her motive.  She merely
acted on an impulse that had come with an onsweep of conscious and
subconscious tides.  It was a motive that had to do with her activities
that day when she had gone to the nearby town.

Halloway remained there, frankly puzzled.  Unless she was like himself
acting, her interest in his arrival was pallid and lukewarm.  He had
counted much on appearing suddenly before her at his best--and the
impression seemed to have been negligible.

Where had she gone?  He asked himself that question several times
during the considerable interval of his waiting.  The sunset was coming
to its final splendor behind mountains that were ash of violet.
Through the blossom-laden air stole a seductive intoxication that
mounted to his head.  The voices of the Red Gods had mastered him, and
he had come.

Then he saw a vision in the doorway, and his senses reeled.

Alexander stood there as he had never seen her before.  She was in a
woman's dress, very simple of line and unadorned.  But her beauty was
such as could support and glorify simplicity.  Indeed it required
simplicity as a foil for its own delicate gorgeousness.  The lithe
slenderness of her figure was enhanced by the transformation.  Her long
hair hung in heavy braids that gave an almost childlike girlishness to
her appearance.  Alexander, he thought, was wholly delectable.

But as he stared at Alexander she flung him look for look and commanded:

"Now, tek off your hat."

He tossed the thing away from him, and hesitated for a moment gazing at
her while his eyes kindled, then with an inarticulate sound in his
throat and no other word, he sprang forward and caught her to him, in
arms that would not be denied.

Alexander made no struggle.  It would have been futile to match even
her fine strength against the herculean power of those arms--and
suddenly the girl felt faint.

For that unwarned and tumultuous conduct on the part of the man she had
been totally unprepared and it was as though the wave of amazement
which swept over her had left her gasping; bereft of both nerve-force
and breath.  But other waves were sweeping her too, so that she of the
ready and invincible spirit for the moment rested inert in Halloway's
arms as her brain reeled.  In one way she was dazed into
semiconsciousness.  In another way, she was so staringly wide awake as
she had never before been in life.  She had thought of this man with
feelings that she had neither named to herself nor analyzed, but the
unadmitted sex call of the strong man to the strong woman had sounded
like a bugle note through her nature.  Now while the beginnings of an
indescribable fury stirred within her, she none the less thrilled to
his embrace with a flooding of her heart under which she almost
swooned.  While she felt his kisses on her temples, her cheeks and her
lips, she had no power of speech or protest.

To Jack Halloway, it seemed that this non-resistance was unconditional
surrender and through him in a current of fluid fire, ran the fierce
ecstasy of victory.

But after a little Alexander straightened up and the pliant softness of
her body stiffened in his arms.  She pushed against his shoulders with
steady hands.  They were not struggling hands but firm and definite of
meaning, and Halloway released her.  He released her readily as a man
may who can afford to be deferential in his moment of victory.

But when she was quite free, she stood unsteadily for a moment and then
stepped back and leaned against the wall of the house.  Her hands
pressed against the weather-boarding with outspread fingers.  Out of a
white face she looked straight before her with eyes preternaturally
wide and full of dazed wonderment.

At first there was no resentment, no denunciation.  The girl only
leaned there with parted lips and heaving bosom and that fixed gaze
which, for all its rigid tensity, seemed groping.

It was not as the individual that she now thought of Jack Halloway but
of the terrifying and unexplained force that he had awakened in
herself; the force of things that she never until now realized.

Halloway did not speak.  He bent a little toward her, looking at her as
his own breath came fast.  At first he did not even marvel at the
stunned, groping blankness of the unmoving features.

He had known that when she awoke it would be with the shock of latent
fires set loose.  Now it was a time to go very gently with her, until
she found her footing in fuller comprehension again.

Then the girl said so faintly that he could hardly hear her:

"Thet's ther fust time thet. . . ."  She broke off there.

"I know it, Alexander.  I couldn't stay away.  I had to come!"

He took a step forward with outstretched arms but she lifted a pleading
hand.

"Don't," she said.  "I've got ter think . . . go away now."

And triumphantly confident of what would come out of her meditation, he
turned and picked up his hat and left her standing there.  He might
have talked to her of passionate love, he told himself, to the end of
time and it would have meant nothing.  Instead he had brought her face
to face with it--and now there was no need of talk.

Jack Halloway had meant it when he admitted to Brent in New York that
it would not do to give rein to his thoughts of Alexander.  They were
all lawless thoughts of a love not to be trammeled by the obligations
of marriage.

If he hated the civilized world at times, there were other times when
he could not live without it, and into its conventionalized pattern,
Alexander could never fit.  She was not civilized enough or educated
enough to take her place there at his side, nor was she pagan enough to
come to him without terms or conditions.  So he had resolved to stay
away, and put her out of his mind and in that determination he failed.
Now he had flung away all heed.  He had held her in his arms and
consequences could care for themselves!

But when he had left the porch and Alexander had begun to grope her way
out of the vortex of confusion, that small figment of wrath that she
had known she should feel and yet had so far failed to feel, began to
grow until it engulfed and merged into itself every other element of
her reflections.

She had been scornful when Brent questioned her ability or her
permanent wish to repulse suitors, and yet after only two had come, she
no longer knew her own mind.  But she told herself with a solemn
indignation, she at least wanted to make her own terms.  She had no
intent of being swept off her feet by the masterful whim of a man who
had never pleaded.  Yet that was the thing that had just occurred.

Slowly the stunned eyes in the waxen white face became less wonder-wide
and began to smoulder with outraged realization.  She rose with the
fixed determination that before the sun set, she would kill Halloway or
compel him to kill her.  One of them must die.  But her own ideas of
fairness challenged that edict.  If she had the right to assume such a
ground, she should have taken it without any instant of faltering.  She
should never have acknowledged an impulse of thrill while she was
close-held in his arms.  She had let him think that she had not
resented it, and she was as much to blame as he.

So when Halloway came back the next morning with the glow of eagerness
in his face, he found a very quiet girl waiting to receive him, and
when he would have taken her in his arms she once more put out that
warning hand, but this time with a different expression of lip and eye.

"Stop," she said.  "Me an' you hev got ter talk together."

"Thet suits me," he assured her.  "Thar hain't nothin' else I'd ruther
do--save ter hold ye in my arms."

"I reckon ye knows I've done took oath thet no man could ever come on
this place--sparkin'."

"I war right glad ter hev ye say that--  Hit kept other fellers away,
an' any man thet hit _could_ skeer off wasn't hardly wuth hevin' round
nohow.  But thet war afore ye fell in love with me."

"Fell in love with ye?"  She repeated the words after him still in that
even somewhat puzzled quiet which was, for her, almost toneless.  "Jack
Halloway, when ye went away from hyar yestiddy evenin' an' I'd sat thar
fer a full measured hour an' thought, I 'lowed thar warn't a soul on
earth ner in hell thet I hated so much as you.  I'd done med up my mind
ter kill ye afore I laid down ter sleep."

There was an implacability about this new manner, that disquieted the
man a little, but he said gravely:

"Them feelin's jest comes about because what ye felt yestiddy war all
new ter ye.  Hit's nat'ral enough, but hit won't endure."

She went on ignoring his protestations.  "Ther only reason I _didn't_
kill ye, war thet I'd done _let_ ye . . . an' I hated myself next es
bad es you.  Folks tells me thet I hain't always goin' ter want ter
turn men back.  Mebby thet's true."

"Ye knows full well a'ready, thet hit's true," he declared vehemently.

"Be thet es hit may, no man's ter wed me without he wooes me fust, an'
no man hain't never goin' ter lay a hand on me without I consents.  Now
I aims ter try an' fergit erbout yestiddy--an' you'd better fergit hit
too."

The man's eyes broke into vehement challenge.  "So long es thar's life
in me I won't fergit hit!"

"I reckon ye'd better heer me out," she reminded him with an ominous
note and he nodded his head, waiting, while she continued.

"Yestiddy I seemed crazed--but terday I hain't.  Ye 'pears ter be right
sartain thet I loves ye.  I don't know, but I either loves ye or I
hates ye like all hell.  Ef I loves ye I kain't kill ye--an' ef I hates
ye thar's time enough."

"But Alexander, you do love me!  I know----"

"Wa'al, I don't--an' thet's a right pithy point ter my manner of
thinking!  Ye're a right masterful sort of feller, an' ye likes ter
plow yore way through life gloryin' in yore strength an' forcin' your
will on weaker folks."  She paused an instant then added significantly:
"But I'm a right masterful sort of woman myself--an' I hain't ter be
nowise driv.  Ef you an' me kain't consort peaceable I reckon we'll
jest erbout rake hell afore we finishes up our warfare."

As he looked at her his admiration was flaming.  Possibly it was best,
just now, to advance slowly.

"I'm willin' ter wait," he conceded slowly.  "Ye're wuth hit."

"Ye says I loves ye.  If I finds thet out fer myself, in due course
I'll wed with ye.  Ef I don't, I won't, but----"  Her voice broke so
suddenly out of the quiet plane in which it had been pitched, that her
climax of words came like a sharp thunder clap on still air.  "But ef
ye seeks ter fo'ce me, or ef ever ergin ye lays a hand on me or teches
me, 'twell I tells ye ye kin, afore God in Heaven, one of us has got
ter die!  An' I won't never be with ye unarmed, nuther."

Halloway did not judge it a good time to mention that her allusion to
marriage left a rather wide territory of debate open.  One thing at a
time seemed enough and more than enough.

Alexander had not asked him in, and he inquired calmly: "Now thet ye've
stated yore terms an' I've done agreed ter 'em, hain't ye goin' ter
invite me in?"

"No," she said shortly.  "I makes ther laws in my own household.  Ye
air goin' away an' ye hain't comin' back hyar fer one week.  I aims ter
be left alone fer a spell now.  Ef them terms don't suit ye, ye needn't
come back at all."

And in that week of reprieved decision Alexander took her life to
pieces and searchingly examined it, item by item.  Some strange
reactions were taking place in the laboratory of her life.  She was no
more seen in breeches and boots.  How willing the needle of course and
if you wore ballestillas for astronomical observations. 26. How had
the helm and his cane, if it is handled directly by hand or by guardines
and how they worked. 27.

If Beques wore, how they were and how iban installed. 28. Which
means bilge available in the event of a leak. 29. If you had to gate
and scale the bulwark Tojin or to climb to the upper deck. 30.

What kind of small boats had, what their size and whether iban hung
on davits or block mounted on the cover. 31.

If Garrison had tables for rigging firm, bracers and curves in-band
and davits for cutwater tacks of most ratchet. 32.

What kind of furniture and utensils wearing, such as stove, bunk
beds, mattresses, coys, chairs, banks, boxes, packaging supplies,
watercolor, etc.. 33.

How were the bullets, how the charges were prepared and how estiva
were on board. 34.

What number of men reflected the strength and how long it takes for
food and water sources.

RIGGING 1. Many clubs and whether they had or had not to fall towards
the bow or stern. 2.

If the bats were in one piece and if fogonaduras wearing layers to keep
out the water inside the vessel. 3.

If topmasts wore for candles or just high gallop or extensions of mast
above the rigging of encapilladuras firm. 4. How were these encapilladas
rigging and were used for mustaches and lanyard Tesar the obencadura.
5. If the tables wore flechastes rigging the shrouds and carried
sotrozos and purse line for the near strangulation encapilladura. 6.
If cacholas and carrying sticks and cross beams or how willing
this part of the rigging. 7. If subject to cross topmasts were used
obenquillos Tesar and if they can not twist or cross the cofas
sewn used entrenched in their lower extremities to the rigging
sotrozos firm. 8.

If you wore crude, bradales, flyers and stays. 9. What sort of gear
used in each suit and how it was Guarnido. 10.

If the cock of the round wore on Peñoles pockets for escotines of
candles immediately above them. 11. How was the cock and how these
were suspended and subject to the sticks, that is, if carried halyard
with gear, crowns, straps and logs. 12. If the topping lift
wore prepared in a manner similar to those of today. 13. If the
understanding of Latinas OSTS wore ruffles encapilladas to the penalty
and if the car is operated by the same means that are used now. 14.
If you had to cock and feedlot or feedlot sobrecebadera alone and it was
hard to arritranco ó ó Raca that allowed runs along the bowsprit
or the boom. 15.

If the jib boom carried. 16. If the square sails carried Bolinas and
tacks and sheets as at present and if the shape was rectangular or
trapezoidal. 17. If these candles wore girdles or sheaths, and in
the headline and gratil falls. 18.

If you took the scale and curls arranged in bands now are used or if
wearing hats. 19. If the border were passed by pot or otherwise. 20.
If the firm empuñiduras iban Garruchos sewn to the headline, and relied
on their laps in Tojin yards. 21. If using strips of curls. 22. If
palanquin used for loading and chafaldetes square sails and Vehicle for
the other. 23. If used or Briol briolines in round candalizas in
Latinas. 24. If the sails wore cloths ready now, and how wide they
were, and if carried batideros and sobresanos to prevent the
throat-slitting of the candles. 25.

How iban wooded flags and insignia. 26. If the guarnimientos blocks
were used in the rigging and cuadernales splice forms and similar to
current levels, ie, cappuccinos for escotines; basket or palanquin
for chafaldetes, etc.. Etc.. 27. If the Blanket of the firm and rigging
work was like now and whether it involved, whether sealed or aforraban
rigging the dead in the same way as now used. 28. If the cock of the
round wore guardamancebos or marchapiés and stirrups. 29. How is the
passing arm, and if the cock wearing brazalotes. 30. If the boom or
bowsprit carried lashings, mustache and winds. _Respuesta Given
by Mr. Fernández Duro and Monleón._ CASCO 1. Reunidas the few
references that were found on the ships that Christopher Columbus led
and consulted the works of shipbuilding more immediate in time,
be surmised that the dimensions of _The Santa María_ should be:
Quilla = 34-1/2 Elbows = 69 feet villages 0m, 19m == 28, 92.

Length in flowering to 9 feet. Deck Length == 42 cubits 84 feet.
Manga outside lining members 13 and 26 feet elbows == == 7m, 34. Puntal
12 feet 6 elbows == == 3m, 36. The cornerstone was measured from the top
of the sobrequilla to the underside of the central plank of the
cover.

Launch forward from the vertical of the outer edge of the deck of the
stem, 11 feet 5-1/2 == elbows. aft, from the outer edge of the yoke at
the foot of codaste 2-1/2 == 5 feet elbows. Beam or width of the yoke
and mirror afterdeck == 8 cubits 16 feet. Rasel stern high in the codaste
4-1/2 cubits == 9 feet. Rasel bow, from the lower edge over external
roda == 5 cubits 10 feet. Openwork 4-1/2 half cubits == 9 feet.
Idem 5 elbows == maximum 10 feet. Idem least 6 feet 3 elbows ==. Provides
information on a particular importance to the Journal of Columbus
On his first trip since January 10 says that in 1493 _The Pinta_
entered a river which had _dos bar fathoms agua_, ie 12 feet.

_The Holy María_ was deeper. The displacement can be estimated at 200
to 240 metric tons, because most of the authors, notably Juan de Escalante
say the ships of the Admiral were little more than 100 tonnes and not
reach 200. The indication that some have believed concerning tonnage,
is the most likely of the burden that the ship could carry, and
assuming that this would not exceed the last male or 150 barrels
of Cantabria and this figure composed of 0, 35 of the total
displacement, assuming that the weight of the hull and rigging aloft
with amounted to 0.6, the anchors, gear, food and water sources
would amount to 0.05, would be: Offset == 0 + 0.35 d, 6 d 'd + 0.5
"or, load 150 + 257143 + 21429 == 428,572 barrels, and barrel as
the male equivalent then to 2 pipes 27-1/2 arrobas as Escalante,
Palace and Veitia, or is 632 kg per tonne, is 270,858 kilograms,
which divided by 1,000 metric ton today, giving a displacement of
271 tonnes. 2.

In the drawings as well as construction of the treaties cited warns
that the extremities were filled, but a lot of vacuum in the stern,
asleep formed on a design whose form indicates the attachment. cuaderno
The teacher was very flat from the waterline down a bit and closed
mouth.

The plan would be about 12 feet without chipping dead, because it is
not invented until 1601, during the time of innovation Diego
Brochero D. 3..

I did not have doors or hatches of light rather than on the pacifier,
or upper house aft. The coamings of the hatches were very low, and
these are completely closed with solid quarters in bad times. 4. There
is no news that there was more accommodation than the stern, the soothers,
and it provides details on the special study entitled _The life
Colón_ of the caravels, which accompanies this report. 5.

The size and shapes of pieces of construction specified in specification
separately and are plotted in the following 6.. The frames were simple
in the naos of little note; soon as the clear width of one and the
solid was sometimes with masonry to serve as ballast fixed. 7.

It expresses the distribution of traces in the specification of
dimensions.

The seams were simple and many vessels were covered with cover-boards
table 8.. To the seventeenth century did not begin to put the lining
inside: only wore palmejares 9.. See the specifications and drawings
attached size 10.. Ditto, ditto 11.. Ditto, ditto. 12. They had
bulárcamas and sobreplanes: see drawings dimensions and specifications.
13. There are no details to answer this question with certainty: it is
assumed that the seams were on the curve as the original system. The
size range in these specifications. 14. Juan Escalante of the discuss
the recommended iron nails of Biscay with the exception of the wooden
bars that used the nations of the North, adding that the bronze is the
best, but more expensive. It certainly was used recently. Must _The Holy
María_ taken to the iron easier, given that its construction
was lightweight and economical. 15. They had very thick lids gives
form bordón outgoing. castles in bow and stern was formed in a
castellated table to defend archers or emblazoned Pavese hosts of
combatants, which came after the Pavese. 16.

They had cherries at the foot of mast and its associated cabillero
bagpipes and to affirm the ropes to maneuver. The museum is a model
of naval ship , guaranteed authenticity, signed in the year 1523 and
has been studying these and many other details that can not be
seen in the drawings and by omitting insignificant commentators of
shipbuilding. 17. windlass carried forward in the center or to one side,
to leave more space in the opposite to placement of Batel. Escalante
said that also served in their time of winches, and if necessary
levaban with real gear. 18.

Two were in the bow escobenes large lead-lined, with the outer lip
and two aft Gatera for passage of the elbow.

As the mooring cables of hemp were not needed nor estopores jaws.
Dábase back to cable or bollards in the Duotone and secured with pineapple
painters. To fire the anchors had no special mechanism: servíanse out
of a simple past by Chicote argáneo which is lowered. 19. They were
the anchor or anchors very long cane, thin arms, nails triangular, very
large stocks of wood with the edges ochava, hoop wrapped iron,
or by lashing out. The argáneo circular, large, lined with heart or
tissue that is not cool to rozara cable. Escalante recognized rule
that the ship was carrying 100 tonnes of anchor cables and 10 quintals
of another 10. It is also written that the ships carried two
or four anchors ordinary, according to his habit, and another couple
called _fornaresa_ forward and _esperanza_ Anclote of _atoar_ or a spy.
For the reasons Batel and canoe. The fornaresa should take 16
to 18 quintals of weight, the reasons of Batel arrobas 6 and 4 of
the boat.

The two anchors on the bow iban ordinary; fornaresa the inside, the
hatch against the foot of ram, about to use it if necessary. 20. They
had serviolas, davits, trigger, or anything equivalent to the service
of the anchors. 21. Up with the casting of Penola cock ratchet and insured
with the gift. 22. They used two types of ballast, and a constant and
fixed amalgamated thick stone mortar or cement, the other variable
to replace the cargo, which consisted of sand, gravel or boulder
as offering his hand.

Also iron ingots were used as ballast fixed, but it was not as
common as stone. 23 and 24.

See special study entitled _Armamento of the caravels of Colón_,
insert in this report. 25. See also _Instrumentos study that used in
their viajes_ Col. 26. The rudder was straight, wide blade of which
is closer to the top two tiers.

The bulk of codaste was the same on the inside that iban males and
flared on the outside, with the wedge-shaped horizontal section. See
the list of dimensions. Are handled by embedding the cane head. Guardines
usually were not needed but if poníanse heavy seas or high winds
rices.

Sometimes a simple mechanism governed from the awning. For details
of the plans. 27. Beques carried on the bow consisting of a pierced
labia. See _The study life in carabelas_. 28. Bombs were made of
wood. See the same study. 29.

Not caring much for the convenience to have scales outside of the ship
as it lowers the board are satisfied with making the necessary Tojin
on the side. 30. Batel and took canoe. The first was the length
measured from the leakage of the awning to the castle afrizada: the
capacity was calculated so that 50 boats could load the ship which
is to say that the ship bow 200 tons, had to endure 4 Batel.

He had filled the bow and the bow strong and close. Under this rule, the
Batel of _The Santa María_ be 30 feet in length, 9 in breadth: 1-1/2
mainstay of 7 banks of oars parel.

The third boat was smaller, the final bow, the stern flat and wide in
order to tend to it or weigh anchor if necessary. 31. The naos of the
habit of wearing only _The Santa María_ tables garrison in the mast,
supporting the bulárcamas.

The bracers cutwater had no curves or bands or davits-Amur. In the
sculptures of the church of San Nicolás de Burgos these details are
fully charged. 32. See special study of life in _The carabelas_. 33.

See study on _Armamento_. 34. There is no certainty about the number
of crew members by disagreement of the writers of the time. Seems
more acceptable for a total of 120 led the three caravels, of which
90 seamen.

María_ In _The Santa going 60 in all, 10 employees and 50 crew.
Has been written bearing food for a year and seems a lot. Columbus
wrote in the Journal only leaving Palos _muy sufficiency of
mantenimientos_, checking the result of having reached the cake, with
other items for return trips. You can guess that shipped food
and water for six months how much was in the barrels and pipes. See
special study of the crew.

RIGGING 1. Is shown by various documents, including the Journal of the
Admiral, the ships of the expedition had three main styles. The
couple, in candela or slightly tilted toward the stern, had high length
of the keel over the bow of the launch, at least. Piece was very thick
and was reinforced in reat elbow elbow.

Sometimes it was the gallop or mastelerillo spliced by another piece
of the layer of iron or hoop wrapped with rope lashings. As a single
stick of performance and progress (the other served primarily to
the government) is assured and reinforced with care.

_The To Santa would María_ from 2 to 2-1/2 feet in diameter fogonadura
and 1 to 1-1/2 in the head, below the encapilladura. The ratchet,
slightly tilted forward measured soon half the total length of the
largest and third less thick, sometimes not taking no gallop down
to the keel, with the cockpit on the main deck. The mizzen, something
was dropped back slightly less than the ratchet with a gallop and was
in his cockpit the awning. more than three vertical poles wore nao
the bowsprit, one fifth lower than the mizzen in length; engallado
and very sharp at the tip. 2.

Wearing layers of fabric in fogonaduras to keep out the water inside
the vessel. 3.

This is the topmast was ordinarily stick to the body and therefore
should rather be called a gallop. 4. Encapilladuras were very simple
and tesábanse the shrouds with mustaches and lanyard.

The model of the naval museum and sculptures of the church of Burgos
provide teaching these individuals as well as all of rigging, rigging
and maneuvering so that there is no need to run. 5.

The tables of rigging the mast had flechastes in the ratchet and mizzen
had not because the subject of the suits was estrellera equipment. 6.
They had cacholas sticks; bastábales a highlight that encapilladuras
supported.

In the largest cat had COFA circular or cup-shaped, held in two
or four cross beams or cross canecillos with the ends and supported in
the highlight of the head of the club, passing above the encapilladura,
which was covered by the cat .

It was lined with wooden frames and painted leather; circumference
should be equal to the mouth of the ship, and she threw darts in combat,
Venables and stone. It reflected the candle GAVI. 7. Were not used
for unnecessary obenquillos or so powerful. 8. Ensured the mast with 6
to 8 thick shrouds; gear with two crowns, two crude for canter and two
stays. 9.

Mast in a sailing decamp treo Name box and papahigo whose surface was
increased at will by sewing footrope one or two hats.

On top of this candle was GAVI, with a trapezoidal central drop equal
to the width of its gratil, which was the breadth of the boat and pujamen
somewhat less than the greater of gratil. The candle would ratchet block
equivalent surface to a quarter of the bigger hats; cock measuring 1-1/2
times the manga.

Both Halloway and Jerry avoided the issue
that might spring from such a situation.  They met on the high-road
with a full seeming of their old accord, but perhaps the semblance was
an empty shell--or fast becoming one.  There was a tacit understanding
between them that certain evenings at Alexander's house belonged to
each.

In Jerry's good-natured, whimsical eyes there had settled of late an
unaccustomed gravity and since he was level-headed enough to recognize
in Halloway a man who loomed brightly above others, his fear of him as
a rival was genuine.  It was O'Keefe's way to walk boldly and evenly
through life, but a strong and tireless man will flinch in his gait
from the hurt of a stone-bruised foot, and with Jerry the stone bruise
was about the heart--which is worse.  But it was more in the casual
meeting than by the formal call, that O'Keefe conducted his courtship.
He had a genius for materializing on the scene at the exact moment when
he could perform some simple service, and of meeting Alexander by
studious coincidence when she least expected him.

There was none-the-less the constant danger of a flareup because
Halloway always bore himself with entire politeness yet with a courtesy
which did not escape a sort of indulgent patronage; as though the
serious thought of rivalry was absurd.

One day Bud Sellers came by the house.  It was after he had been in
jail and Alexander, who was standing on her porch, invited him in.
Slowly and somewhat dubiously he accepted the invitation.

"I hain't seed ye fer quite a spell, Bud," began the girl smilingly,
and with a brick red flush he answered.  "Hit took holt on me ergin,
Alexander.  Hit war jest actually a-burnin' me up."

She did not ask what he meant by "it."  She knew full well and she did
not reproach him.  She only inquired, "What happened, Bud?"

"I kep' my pledge ter yer, though."  He spoke gruffly, because the
sight of her was burning him up too, with another kind of thirst.  "I
went an' hed myself jailed.  I reckon hit won't hardly master me ergin
fer a spell."

Alexander felt a lump rising in her throat.  Since her awakening she
had not missed the meaning of that look in his eyes.  Slowly and
candidly, she asked: "Bud, war hit on account of me?  War ye frettin'
over me--not a-keering?"

Sellers looked up in astonishment.

"How did ye know?" he demanded.  "I hain't nuver breathed no word ter
ye erbout keerin'.  I knowed full well hit warn't no manner of use."

"I'm a woman, now, Bud," she reminded him.  "A woman don't need ter be
told some things."

"I knowed hit warn't no use."  He only repeated the words, dully, and
Alexander laid a hand on his trembling arm.

"Bud, Bud," she exclaimed self-accusingly.  "I wisht I'd stayed a man.
I don't seem ter do nothin' at this woman-game but jest stir up
trouble.  I loves ye right dearly, Bud, but hit's ther same fashion
thet I loves my brother Joe--an' I reckon--that hain't what ye're
a-seekin'."

But Bud drew back his shoulders and spoke with a brave assumption of
restored cheerfulness.

"I'm a-seekin' whatever I kin hev," he staunchly declared.  "More'n
anything else, 'though, I'm seeking ter see ye happy."  He paused then
with a forced smile that, for all his effort, was stiff-lipped, and
said slowly, "I reckon hit'll be either Halloway or Jerry . . . they're
both right upstanding men."

"Sometimes I thinks hit won't be nobody," she declared.  "I'd done been
raised up a boy so long thet since I turned back into a gal ergin, ther
only thing I've been plum sartain of air thet I hain't been sartain of
nuthin'.  Sometimes I thinks a heap of Jerry, but more times Jack
Halloway seems ter pintedly sot me on fire."


Jerry was tramping along the high-road, whistling an old ballad of
lugubrious tune when a sharp turn brought him face to face with Jase
Mallows.  Jerry himself was for passing on with a brief salutation, but
the other halted him and fell into voluble talk.

Jase complained that his wound had left certain after-effects which
still gave him trouble.

"Hit's hell ter pay, when a law-abidin' man kain't travel ther highway
withouten he's shot down like I was thet night," lamented Mallows
virtuously.  "I misdoubts ef I ever feels plum right inside me ergin.
I wisht I knowed who thet feller war."

"Mebby he mistook ye fer somebody else," suggested Jerry.  "Thet war
ther same night them highwaymen sought ter lay-way Alexander--thar war
right smart shootin' goin' on hyar an' thar."

"Did ye ever gain any knowledge of who them fellers war?"  Mallows
sought to couch his question in the manner of interest for the wrongs
of another, but just a shade too much eagerness on his own part marred
the effect.

Jerry smiled.  He had caught that note and it piqued his curiosity, so
with mountain secretiveness he became cryptic in his response.  "Wa'al,
mebby we hain't tellin' all we knows--jest yit.  Mebby we're kinderly
bidin' our time for a leetle spell."

It was not a comprehensive announcement.  It was nine-tenths inspired
by a spirit of teasing gossip-hunger into fuller revealment, but it
happened to start a train of serious thought in the hearer.

Jase had recently returned from Coal City, and there he had talked with
men who were watching with alarm the possibilities of an impending
trial.  The man who had shot his neighbor over a fence-line dispute was
to face his prosecutors at the next term of court, and if he talked too
much, large and portentous results might ensue.

The Commonwealth would know nothing of its potential leverage on the
accused unless Halloway, O'Keefe or Alexander broke silence, and it
followed that their silencing was highly important.

Through Jase's thoughts ran, in a threatening refrain, the words,
"Mebby hit won't be long now."

So Jase saddled his mule that evening, despite the misery which was the
relic of his wounding and started back to Coal City to convene a
committee of ways and means.


CHAPTER XVII

The mail came irregularly to Shoulder-blade creek, but even irregular
deliveries may bring bad news.  Halloway received a letter, one day,
containing a summons which he could not disregard.  He had spoken
contemptuously to Brent of money-grubbing, but his inflated wealth
carried certain responsibilities which even he acknowledged.

He was perfectly willing that his world should see in him an
incorrigible scoffer at moral conventions.  He rather enjoyed being the
object of maternal warnings to young daughters, but in financial
affairs no stern moralist could have been more observant of rigid
integrity, and in that, as in other things, he reversed the usual
order.  The business involved in the letter does not concern this
narrative save in so far as it called him in peremptory terms away from
Alexander and, at that, he fumed sulphurously.

He had, for the present, one more evening with her and he meant to make
the most of it.  If there was in him any power of hypnotism, and he
still believed there was, he meant to exert it to the full.

Even in midsummer, there are chill nights in the mountains, and as he
approached Alexander's house he thought gratefully of the fire that
would be burning on her hearth.

She was sitting alone when he entered, by a small table, sewing, and
she did not rise to welcome him.  Lamp and firelight mingled in an
orange and carmine glow that fell softly upon her.  For a moment, as
Halloway, pausing just inside the door, gazed at her, that adventurous
hunger that fed upon her beauty became a positive avidity.  Perhaps
because he was leaving her, her beauty seemed what no earthly beauty
is--absolute.

"Alexander," said Halloway slowly, "I've got ter go away fer a spell,
an' I hates hit--I hates hit like all torment!"

She looked quickly up, and his narrow scrutiny told him that she had
given ever so slight a start and that into her eyes had come a quickly
repressed disappointment.

"I'll miss ye, Jack," she said simply.  "What business calls ye away?"

That was an expected question and its answer was ready.

"I've done heired me a small piece of property from an uncle, way
acrost ther Verginny line, an' I've got ter fare over thar an' sign
some papers or do somethin' ter thet amount."

"How long does ye 'low ter be gone?"

He shook his head moodily.  "Hit's a long journey through ther roughs
an' I don't know how much time I'll hev ter spend over ther business,
but I reckon ye knows thet I won't tarry no longer then need be."

"Don't hasten unduly on my account," she coolly counseled him.  "I'll
strive ter mek shift somehow ter go on livin'."

The man had taken a chair near her and was bending forward, almost, but
not quite, touching her.  Now he rose and his voice trembled.

"Fer God's sake, Alexander, don't belittle me ner mek light of me
ternight.  I kain't endure hit.  Heven't ye got no idee how master much
I loves ye?  Don't ye see thet ther two of us war made fer each other?
I don't aim ter brag none--but ye knows I'm ther only man hyar-abouts
thet understands ye--thet holds ye in full-high appreciation!"

He paused and she inquired calmly, "Air ye?"

"Ye knows hit!"  He was talking tumultuously with the onrush of that
dynamic spirit which drove him and gave him power.  He stood there with
his coat open over his magnificent chest, and his eyes alight with the
forces that made him exceptional.

"Ye knows thet _you_ hain't no every-day woman nuther.  Ye knows thet
ther like of yore beauty hain't been seed afore in these hills--not in
mortal feature ner in ther blossomin' woods ner in ther blue skies over
'em all!"

Again he paused, and even while he adhered to a crude vernacular, there
was, in the cadence of his voice, a forceful sort of eloquence.  In the
latent intensity of his personality dwelt a sheer wizardry which few
women could have withstood.

"Hev ye ever seed a comet in ther heavens?" he abruptly demanded and
without waiting for a reply swept rapidly on.  "Well ye're like ter a
comet, Alexander.  Every star thet shines out thar ternight is hung
high up in heaven an' every one is bright.  But when a comet goes
sweepin' acrost ther skies, with a furrow of light trailin' along
behind hit--we plum fergits them leetle stars--hit's like they'd all
been snuffed.  Hit's ther same way with you, Alexander.  Deep down in
yore heart thar's powerful fires a-burnin' thet no weak man kain't
satisfy.  When I looks at ye I clean fergits every other star that ever
shone--because I've done seed _you_."

Once more Alexander began to feel that old uncertainty of reeling
senses.  His intonations were caresses.  His eyes were beacons, and she
took a tight hold on herself--for despite the hypnotic spell that he
was weaving about her, a voice within her cautioned, "Be steady!"  That
indefinable ghost of suspicion stirred and troubled her.

"An' so sence I'm ther comet amongst them numerous small stars," she
observed with an even voice, though her pulse beat was far from
regular, "ye 'lows thet I'd ought ter belong ter _you_?"

He ignored the teasing brightness of her eyes; a light of defensive
disguise.

"I 'lows thet hevin' oncet seed ye, an' loved ye, I hain't nuver goin'
ter be satisfied with no lesser star."

The fire had leaped up and the room had grown warm.  Halloway, in his
impetuous fashion, ripped off his coat, flinging it to the floor, and
stood with his great shoulders and chest bulking mightily beneath his
flannel shirt.

Under the hurricane sweep of his love-making the girl from time to time
closed her eyes in an effort to hold to her waning steadiness.  This
was one of those occasions when the fire in her responded to the fire
in him; when she felt, with a sense of deep misgiving, that she could
not resist him.

"Alexander," said the man, abruptly, dropping his voice from its
impetuous pitch, to a more quiet and yet more ardent quality, "Ye
'lowed oncet thet I shouldn't never tech ye withouten ye said I mout.
I've done obeyed ye--but now."  He slowly extended both arms and stood
upright in gladiatorial strength and compelling erectness.  "But now
ye're a-comin' inter my arms--of yore own accord--because we was made
fer one another."

Again her lids came down over the girl's eyes and her fingers tightly
gripped the chair-arms for support.  Something in her heart was driving
her irresistibly into those outstretched arms and something
else--though that was growing weaker, she thought--kept whispering its
warning, "Steady!  Go steady!  This is a spell but it isn't love."

She heard the hypnotic voice again.  "Ye're a-comin' inter my arms,
Alexander--ye're a-comin'--now!"

Her glance, ranging in desperation, fell on his coat at her feet, and
with the instinct of grasping at any pretext, for a moment of thought
and reprieve, she exclaimed:

"Give me thet coat, Jack!"  Having breathlessly gone that far, she was
able to finish with greater self-command.  "Ther linin's in sheer rags.
I kin be mendin' thet wust place by the sleeve thar--whilst ye talks."

"The coat kin wait," he declared.  Her line of defense was bending now,
under the weight of his onslaught, and it was no time for trivial
interruption, but Alexander leaned forward and picked the thing up.

She had not yet begun to sew--her fingers lacked the needful
steadiness--but she was making a pretense of studying the torn lining.
She must avert her gaze from him for a moment or the tides that he was
lashing about her would lift and carry her on their outsweep.

Then suddenly she gave a violent start, and from her lips explosively
broke the one word, "Jack!"

He knew that she was under a strained tension of emotion, and though
the way she had flashed out that word was a marked contrast with her
past attempts to seem controlled, he construed it as an evidence of
final surrender to her feelings.  She was already very pale and so she
turned no paler, but in that moment something had happened to
Alexander.  Some thought or instinct or fact had brought her up
short--transformed her out of weakness into strength, and when she
spoke again it was with the self-containment of one who has been near
the cliff's edge but who has definitely drawn back.

"I hed hit in head ter ask ye a question," she announced, slowly, "but
I've done decided not ter do hit.  This thread hain't suited ter ther
job.  I'll git me another spool."

She rose from her chair, and dismayed at the astonishing swiftness of
her changed mood, Halloway took an impulsive step toward her.  His arms
were still receptively outstretched, but suddenly he felt that attitude
to have become absurd.  An altered light shone in her eyes now, and it
was unpleasantly suggestive of contempt.  [Note 1: In the United States
of America Captain Fox in Italy Captain D'Albertis EA; in Portugal
Lieutenant López de Mendoza, in Austria the Director of the Naval
School Lusimpíccolo Mr.

Gelcich have made interesting studies. ] [Note 2: Two booklets with
illustrations of important, Mr. Monleón released after appearing in
that journal in May and November 1891. Subsequently condensed this work
in the journal entitled _The Centenario_.] So, the thought of HM
Government that Spain, for its glorious traditions and by the
unrivaled feat performed with your banner, rather than another
nation it satisfy the desire of all helping the Ministry of the
Navy universal solemn celebration of the Centennial with the
reconstitution of a fifteenth-century ship, which so faithfully and
exactly how it fits, to the unforgettable _Santa semblance María_,
captain of daring and a distinguished navigator who discovered the
New World; copy tangible nautical architecture of its time and the
elements that shows the spirit of our past were used to explore and
publicize the figure together with the dimensions of the world.

He created for that purpose the said Ministry, Order of SM, a Board
chaired General of the Navy engineers D. Casimiro Bona and composed of
Captain D. Cesareo Fernandez Duro, artist Rafael Monleón mentioned
above, acting as secretary of the frigate Captain D.
Emilio Ruiz del Arbol, it was the Secretariat of the Military Ministry
and guarantee success in non-technical questions, asked the Academy
of History competition of the two members of the study, being
appointed Messrs.

D. Aureliano Fernandez-Guerra, and D. Juan de Dios de la Rada y Delgado.
This Board presented Mr. Monleón speaker, plans, models and memory [3]
which had been preliminary, and that principle is accepted without
prejudice to discuss issues obscure or difficult, of which made Mr.

President General interrogation. Successive sessions were determining
the main dimensions of the vessel and its intimate relationship,
in accordance with the practices and provide written notice that there
is, the size or tonnage of the lines determining the internal
division, until it should mueblaje lead, and taking in charge of Mr.

Bona calculations of stability, with the other construction, rigging
and sail area, for scrupulousness had to redo and repeat with the
Reformed supplying intelligence laborious and error and by the lack
of secure data .

[Note 3: Head _Restauración hypothetical caravels Colón_ by Christopher
D. Rafael Monleón. Madrid. Imprenta Marine, 1891, 8. º, 22 pp. As for
the study of the Board threw a few copies.] Mr. Minister Marina
benevolently welcomed the report reasoned and plans of the Board,
it being satisfied with their jobs; ordered separately from the
training budget for works on the concept of facilitate the arsenals
of the State had no material direct application to ships of modern
construction and that the Board of the Centennial funds to facilitate
the payment of other accessories and accoutrements that would not
have in stock.

Formulating the comprehensive plan in the bill, was approved by the
co bodies. The time was pressing, because these procedures would be
consumed in the month of April and although sufficient for the
essential investigations by said Board, and dissolved, many points
in implement provided, needs both leadership optional inspection
artistic and archaeological consultation to assist in the physical
work of rebuilding.

This effect was created in Real issued the order that the Minister of
Marine, Mr HE José María de Beranger 21 of the same month, an executive
committee, to commission the project, together with a marine engineer
with authority enough to clarify and resolve any questions or indeed
difficulties occur, as well as to invest the amount delivered by
the Board of the Centennial with the regulatory justification.

Compusiéronla, Captain D. Cesareo Fernandez Duro, Chairman, Deputy
vessel 1.

First class officer and Secretary of the Ministry D. Francisco Cardona,
the restorer of naval museum D. Rafael Monleón Counter ship and
D. Francisco Gomez Súnico, Secretary, and Chief Engineer of designóse
to 2. Nd class D.

Leopoldo Bridge to manage the construction. The keel of the ship _Santa
María_ settled in grades Arsenal of the Carraca April 23.

[Illustration] Other than the trips that were assumed by Mr. Cardona,
who since the beginning of the works represented in the department of
Cadiz to the Executive Commission with the utmost discretion, based
on the willingness of higher authorities, he promoted the work
quickly and correctly.

Mr. Bridge to identify with the idea, I fully understand the special
nature of the factory which is in the modern style, with high
criterion has to harmonize the professional standards with the need
to give the building character of the times, in the service of the
ancient practices of the newest advances in science.

Such was their activity, such enthusiasm and morale of teachers and
workers under his command in the workshops of the Arsenal, the June
26, the sixty-three days of work axes, the hull of the new _Santa
María_ glided on eels from the stands at the stern sinking salty
waves and floating gracefully, greeted by the audience, with a mean
draft of 1 meter 47 that was precisely calculated. arborlarla missing
and rigging, to meet external and internal decoration , arming it
with artillery, to conclude the details, for which both operators
are struggling in the laboratories, there styling tables, painted
furniture here, besides sewing sails, painted shields, spears
groomed, with unusual amalgam of stonecutters who were bullets
marble of blacksmiths forging Fanal stern, old admiral insignia;
imaging of removing warheads Oak, polishing and grading of adjusters
and astrolabe ballestilla, and all the lords went repeated, Puente,
Cardona and Monleón, until it came time satisfactory to see the
ship flying colors embanderada in the Bay of Cadiz, is to go to
Palos to sail and at the time met the fourth one hundredth anniversary
in the real _Santa María_ did.

It is new construction, as you said, reproduction as it is after an
interval of four centuries, ruled that the ship Christopher Columbus in
his first trip to the unknown lands of the West, situated on the road
and Catay Cipango that he was seeking. The differences can be observed
in the modern, the need for alternatives have been introduced without
affecting the essential nature voluntarily archaeological
explained: first, by the practices in the work by hand, by employing
the tools of work, procedures of the industry, so different now
to the Middle Ages, and second, because the speed of business,
forcing the urgency of the deadline have been executed, had not
consented to the scrutiny and care in that petty it is not safe
release.

Mide new _Santa María_ [4] length of 22.60 meters, 7.80 in breadth,
of the master strut 4.10; toldilla at 8.20, 4.90 in the castle.

It weighs 127.57 tons. [Note 4: In the time of Columbus and was much
later in shipbuilding by elbows, the unit equivalent to 2 feet
castellanos or two-thirds of the beam of Burgos, and then said.

Ásta Being on official to the underground equivalent to 0, m 8359, the
practice can be estimated elbow 1 == 0.56.] saving as soon as
possible the professional nomenclature, we can say that the helmet
is short, wide and very high compared to currently navigating.

It is very full of money, with few outlets for water, completely
flat and convex curves below. The ends have considerable launch, being
drenched enough to move a lot and withstand the enormous weight of
_castillos_ in the sides there is a _pantoque_, the board is
altered.

_cintas_ Wide _cintones_ are stern and bow ligand and other members
External reinforcements _bulárcamas_ called the cement in the vertical
direction.

The bow is full and rounded, the stern and _de escudo_ completely
flat, as before stated, with wide aperture _lemera_ named above
_yugo_ main where it enters the tiller.

Two other smaller circular openings, corresponding to the bow
(_escobenes_) serve to make way for the armarras of _codera_. The rudder,
wide shovel, because little water out of the boat as you said, and
greatly enhanced in all its parts, works with the horizontal pole
from the battery, below the _tolda_.

_Santa María_ not have more than one deck between it and the winery is
a series of _baos to aire_ on that if necessary to the comfort
or feel the burden planks forming _falso sollado_. Bow is made of the
accoutrements _pañol_; aft pantry.

On deck giving access to the cellar and two large _escotillas_ two
_escotillones_ the lockers. Above the deck, from the center of the
boat aft, you run another call with _tolda_ Hatch and scale of communication
between them.

On the sheet was lifted _chupeta_ or _chopa_, accommodation of the
commander, and his cover is named _toldilla_.

Below the canopy is quite off the deck and in the sheltered area outdoors
to accommodate the officers and sailors to sleep, although they
took advantage the shelter of the castle from the bow, which is
moving much, it seems as suspended over the sea.

They are the three propeller rig _árboles_, _mástiles_ or vertical
poles, _mayor_, _trinquete_ and _mesana_ with candles or round
cross in the first two, namely: _papahigo_ or _treo_ two _bonetas_
and _gavia_ the largest; _trinquete_ only in his name.

The stern has _mesana latina_, in addition to the _bauprés_, another
suit leaning over the bow, is the _cebadera_. All these sails are trimmed
to the way they used to be handled, as well as _mástiles_ and cock or
_entenas_. The former assures the highest eight _obenques_ banda
by two _coronas_ and _brandales_ and two _estais_, _mayor_ and
_galope_. The ratchet does not need more than two per banda _estrellera_
gear and _estai_, like the mizzen, so I have no table as the largest
garrison, nor _bigotas_ or _acolladores_ [5], as the mast and
performance the other government.

[Note 5: The officers of the garrison while its cadenotes are
reinforced, the whiskers were contained in almonds, but for lack of
time had been used a few circular now being made, considering the
difference of low significance. ] The cock was also copied
_guarnimento_; _drizas_ double; _amantillos_ quadrupled, with
_motones_; _brazolotes_ and _brazas_, _troza_ and _racamento_.

Candles are not _rizos_; increases the surface _papahigo_ with bands
that are named _bonetas_ stitched _relinga_ the lower half of _bazadas_,
pasándolas by _ollaos_ ú eyes open in both canvas and marked by
tens with a letter to no doubt in the correspondence, these letters
being GFAP traditions they want to say piously _Ave Maria Gratia
Plena_. [6] [Note 6 to the transaction said _empalomar_ (splicing)
the Bonete.]

The mizzen handled _ostas_ in _pena_, _borriquetes_ in _car_ and _caza
escota_ that goes out of the stern, the _cebadera_ runs along the
_botalón_ and oriented with the square sails _brazas_ and _escotas_. It
would be pointless to explain the ropes of _laboreo_ easily conceived
that the marine should do that the appropriate equipment is inventoried
_The Santa María_ by Columbus in the same type into your _Diario_
[7]: 'sales became very loving and I had all my sails of the ship,
with two _mayor Bonete, ratchet and sailing and GAVI cebadera_,
Batel and stern.

"[Note 7: On Wednesday, October 24, 1492.] [Illustration] The new ship
has, as one of two boats: the first on _batel_, big boat, which
rarely went taken on board by the length of the length measuring
afrizada the castle and told the flight, ie fifteen cubits, with
seven banks for oars parel.

Calculábase that his ship could load in fifty boats. The second vessel
_chalupa_ or, better boat boat, stern wide and flat, with five banks to
parel oars, got inside the ship to leave port. [8] [Note 8: When
you say the maneuver proverbial sailors 'canoe inside, outside
friend. "] In addition empacho deck, where the cooker is cooked
with wood, barrels with drinking water, Lombard, wood and respect
for the equipment needed on hand.

While the former is tied with four ships anclas small eight to
twelve quintales been found buried in the arsenal of the two Carraca
forged at least the end of the sixteenth century and in the same
way at the time of Columbus, [9] had no difficulty in using the
Commission, even exceeding the size and proportion, leaving them
in the state in which appeared, ie, retaining the stamp of its
antiquity, while placing new traps wood missing, has only been
re-built, according to drawings and rules of the time, or _fornaresa_
the anchor of hope.

[Note 9: Abona anchor line like the recently discovered on the island
of Santo Domingo, near Fort Christmas, on the site where the real
_Santa María_ sank, thus it was acceptable to you.]

Like two arms holding the captain of _lombardas_ closed chamber, the
battery, below the canopy, and six _falconetes_ in _regalas_ high
castles. These pieces have been built in the workshops of the arsenal
of artillery Carraca, under the leadership of Lieutenant-Colonel D.

Manuel Ramos-Izquierdo, by the same method used in the fifteenth century
that elsewhere in this report is explained, resulting in such
perfection, that have the patina of the years, it confused with
the old.

Tiran _pelotas_ stone two pounds of weight, are mounted on marine cure,
of which bodily as well as those of Lombard and Mr. Monleón falconet
made using the data above. [Illustration: Nao bearing the flag.]
Idea for of small arms have been provided in the House and the
battery panoplies composed of breastplates, cap, swords, spears,
pikes, axes and arms dealing, buckler, crossbows, bags Virot, works
bullets, bottles and fireworks espingardas.

There is no record of the number of each, but that it would bear all
of the crew of the ships of Columbus, and had no lack of guarantee
that by then, were the knights and squires of the expedition.

The costumes are outlined in two watercolors, works of Mr. Monleón, which
has in view not only types of pilots, cabin boy and other men of the
sea, but also people from weapons of mesna and sleeping with their
bizarre harness [ 10].
The elder's face fell a little.

"Thet's a far question," he acknowledged, "but we couldn't skeercely
tutor hit no otherwise--an' we keeps thet lever fastened with a chain
an' padlock."

"But how erbout ther rope," persisted O'Keefe, and the older man
explained.  "Sometimes we has ter nail up loose planks inside thet
runway, an' when we does a feller lets hisself down on thet rope."


In a week, the midsummer term of the High-court would convene and the
case of the man who had wounded his neighbor would be called for trial.

The activities of possible informers became again a pregnant danger to
the erstwhile Ku-Klux operators and again a squad of men with rifles
set out to cope with the situation.

Halloway had slipped away for the time being, but the movements of
Jerry and Alexander had been duly watched and reported.  It did not
altogether please the men charged with this new duty to operate about
Perry Center.  They would have preferred the wilder territory adjacent
either to Shoulder-blade creek or to Coal City, but the thing must be
accomplished and all matters are relative.  If Perry Center lay in a
smoother country it was still mountain country and wild enough if one
were careful.

On an evening gorgeously alight with a full moon, Jerry came to the
McGivins' house as was his custom.  These were times when he did not
have to consider sharing the right of way with a rival, and he was
availing himself of his undisputed respite.

Shadows of deep purple-blue lay everywhere like velvet islands in the
silver flood of the moon's radiance.  Through the timbered slopes came
the soft cadences of the night's minstrels--the voices of frogs and
katydids and the plaintive call of the whippoorwills.

Alexander had been deeply reflective as she sat with her lovely chin
resting on one hand, listening to the low-pitched voice in which her
lover was pleading his cause.

"I kain't be sure--not yit," was her uncertain response to all his
argument.

They saw a shadow fall across the lighted doorway at their backs, and
heard the somewhat disturbed voice of Warwick McGivins.

"I've got ter go over thar ter ther wheat elevator, I reckon.  I kain't
find ther key nowhars an' I mistrusts I left hit in ther door when I
war weighin' up wheat this evening; I'll jest leave ther two of ye hyar
fer a spell."

Jerry rose obligingly to his feet.  "I reckon my legs is a few y'ars
younger than yourn," he announced cheerfully.  "I'll jest teck my foot
in my hand and light out fer over thar.  Hit hain't but a whoop an' a
holler distant nohow."

"Hit's a right purty night," volunteered Alexander, in a voice of vague
restlessness.  "I don't kinderly feel like settin' still.  I'll go
along with ye, Jerry."

The young man's eyes brightened delightedly.  It had been a strain on
his innate courtesy to surrender so much of his moonlight evening with
Alexander, and now he had his reward.  There had been an unrest in her
eyes to-night--yet somehow he had felt her nearer to him in thought,
and his bruised feelings were stirring into fresh hope.

Together they started out, and under the spell of the night's
graciousness one of those silences that seem a bond of sympathy fell
between them.

The way led for a while along the high road, then turned off into the
woods, where the rhododendron was massed thick.  Here there was more of
the velvet shadow and less of the direct moonlight, but through the
open spaces that, too, fell in filtering patterns of platinum
brightness.

Once Jerry halted abruptly and stood listening, then he went on again.

"I heered hit too," said Alexander understandingly, for in the hills
one pauses to question unexplained sounds in the night time.  "I reckon
hit war some varmint stirring."

The route they had taken led along the margin of the bluff, and when
they were close to the elevator, walking single file, with Alexander in
the lead, the serenity broke with the malignant sharpness of a barking
rifle.

Jerry heard the whining flight of the bullet that had missed his head
by inches, and as though in obedience to a single nerve impulse, both
the girl and the man fell flat to the better concealment of the ground,
and edged back into the sootily shadowed laurel.

"We've got need ter separate," whispered Jerry, with his lips brushing
her ear.  "I aims ter git inside ther elevator--and hold 'em off.  You
hasten down over ther cliff an' work back ter ther house.  I reckon
hit's me they wants, but I'll endure 'twell ye brings help."

Without wasting a needless word or breath in argument, Alexander began
noiselessly twisting her way towards the brow of the precipice.
Jerry's heart was pounding with terror lest she be discovered--and to
divert from her an attention that might prove fatal, he recklessly rose
and leaped across a spot of moonlight, making a fleeting target, which
brought from two separate sources responses of riflery.

The man knew now that whoever his assailants might be they were out in
force and in earnest.  Cautiously he worked his way along the shadows,
his luck still holding until finally he had reached his point of
vantage within a few yards of the open gate that led to the elevator
itself.  To gain that haven he must dash for it across a band of
unmasked moonlight.  Once inside, he had only to wait for the relief of
reinforcements.

To the right and left of him, and from several spots at once, O'Keefe
heard stirrings in the thicket.  There must be a sizable pack out on
the hunt and he surmised that they were making those unnecessary noises
with the purpose of drawing his fire and bringing him into revealment
by the spurt of his pistol.

The door of the elevator itself stood partly in the moonlight.  Jerry
O'Keefe could see the dull glitter that he knew to be the key--and
could even make out--or so he thought--that the door stood an inch or
two ajar.

Of that he was not quite certain--and it was a vitally important point.

If the lock was not caught, he might get in before he could be killed.
If he had to fumble with a key, his end was certain.

Jerry drew himself together and made the dive.  Four rifles spoke in
unison and four bullets imbedded themselves in the heavy timbers of the
great building as he hurled himself against the door, and felt it give
laxly under his weight.

He had not fired a shot and between himself and his enemies stood the
staunchness of walls against which their rifle bullets would pelt as
harmlessly as hailstones.  Except for his anxiety about Alexander he
might have lighted his pipe and waited with a contented spirit.

Indeed, a slow smile did shape itself on his face, but a startled
thought wiped it away as swiftly and completely as a wet sponge
obliterates writing on a slate.  That thought left his expression as
black as a slate too.

Jerry drew his pistol, and for a moment it was in his mind to open the
door and go out again.

When he had sent the girl away for reinforcements it had not occurred
to him that this ambuscade might be intended to include her as well as
himself.  He had thought that, once apart from him, unless mistaken for
him in the dark, she could walk safely.  Indeed he had been at a total
loss to explain, in any way, the motive of the attack.

Now it had flashed upon him that it was somehow an outgrowth of the old
robbery attempt--and if that were true as high a price lay on the
girl's head as upon his own.  She was out there alone and in all
likelihood unarmed.

Jerry O'Keefe broke into a cold sweat of panic--and he sat with his
ears strained for a pistol shot--a shout--any indication that might
call him across the moonlight zone beyond the door to her defense.

But the stillness of the midsummer night had settled again, except for
the voices of the whippoorwill and the katydid.

By this time, he tried to reassure himself, Alexander had made her way
down into the gorge and was beyond the touch of danger.

But that was not true.  The girl had need to move with such silence as
should break no twig and rustle no shrub.  She must twist along a
course that avoided the patches of moonlight, weaving her slow way in
and out.  Deliberation now was hard, but it would mean greater and more
effective haste later on.  She had even paused, crouching, with inheld
breath, at a spot from which she could watch the door of the elevator,
until Jerry had made his dash.  With a heart swollen and strained by
dread almost to bursting, she had seen him shoot across the exposed
area and burst through the door--and she had heard the fusilade that
resented his escape.

Or was it escape?  He had plunged through the dark opening much as a
falling man might go.  But now safe, wounded or dead, he was inside and
they could not reach him, so it behooved her to use wary care to the
end that she might bring him help.

But as Alexander came to the two large boulders between which she meant
to start down into the gorge she was arrested by a flicker of light
there.  The rock shielded from view the man who seemed to be kindling a
pine torch, but the flare had warned her in time to make her crouch low
and consider her course.  That path which she had chosen was cut off.

Poor Jak, fahr wohl! A better man möcht 'I better have saved .*
(Geht ab.)

(Ed * You can here ducer half bald rhymes gone, the prince of the
unworthy, and disfigure the whole scene.)

Eilfte Scene. (Falstaff is back, and amüsirt himself with frosty word
games on the wariness he had to be Todt represent. he worried as
last, Percy would also like to wake up and giebt him deßwegen another
blow by the following scene is concerned.)

Twelfth Scene. (Prince Henry, and John of Lancaster occur.) Prince Henry.
Come, brother John; thou hast the first time you want splendidly
kept.

Lancaster.

Softly, whom have we here? Did you say I do not, this guy Dike sey Todt?
Prinz Heinrich. That I am that, I saw him without Athem on the
ground unicellular.

Bist du Bey life, or do we see your ghost? Speech, our ears have the
certificate to confirm our eyes when we should believe them, you're not
what you seem. Falstaff. No, it's certainly, I'm not duplicated, but
if I'm not Hans Falstaff, so I want to give an Seyn HansDampf. Here
ligt Percy, if your father an honor for me to anthun wants, so he's
like, where not, so he can be the next Percy himself killed. I hope
either to count or duke, that I can assure you. Prinz Heinrich. How? I
ordered the Percy, and I saw thee Todt unicellular. Falstaff. Thats
you?

Lord, Lord! How the world the lie is revealed, I versichre you, I was
without Athem on the ground, and he also, but we beyde hours at the
same time again, and fought a long hour, after Gloke of Schrewsbury;
if I believe it will well, if not, so like that, it should reward
the bravery to take on sin, I will put my life on it Sezen that I
gave him the wound in the leg had Dike: If the man is still alive,
and it läugnen wanted, I wanted him by my sword Stük feed.

Lancaster. This is the strangest story that I've ever heard.

Prinz Heinrich. This is the strangest fellow, brother John - Come on
you, take your luggage on the hübsch Rüken, and if a lie what you
good thun kan, so I want them to like you, with the cheapest
Ausdrüken übergülden, which I find kan. - (You can hear the blow
Rükzug.)

The field is on us! Come, brother, we want the middle of the battlefield,
and see which of our friends still live, and which have fallen. (They
go from.) Falstaff. I also want Dreiner behind. But I will see how
they will reward me. The sky wage 'is the one who rewarded me!

Alexander rushed for the brow of the cliff, and this time she was not
obstructed.  The relaxed vigilance of a job well done had stolen upon
the watchers.

The journey down the precipice was one that had its difficulties, and
Alexander's brain was reeling with a score of terrors--yet somehow she
reached the tracks.

O'Keefe would not be in the wheat bin itself, she reflected.  It would
be dark in there too--until the light became a glare of death.  Unless
he chanced to hear, through other and fiercer sounds the soft flow of
the myriad kernels, he would have no means of knowing that one
desperate way was being opened to him.  Even then his single hope would
lie in quickness of perception and a sureness of judgment that acted
flawlessly and smoothly under a supreme strain.

If he did see that the wheat was running out and did not wait for it
all to spill itself, he would be sucked into its tide only to emerge
dead.  For it flowed slowly, pressing in every direction, and it would
inevitably strangle the breath out of his lungs.

Even if he were judging all these odds with a meticulous nicety,
Alexander questioned herself breathlessly, would there be time to wait
for the full store to flow through that narrow channel?  It was a race
between a slow tide which could not be hurried and another which rushed
on with the devouring fury of mania.

The girl threw herself down beside an empty freight car and dug her
cold finger nails into her hot temples.  She could hear the steady
stream of wheat flowing into the bin there, and the deadly slowness of
its progress through the hopper was driving her mad.  The elevator she
could not see, but by lifting her head, she could see out all too
clearly the crimson sky overhead.


CHAPTER XIX

When the first acrid warning of scorched timbers came to his nostrils,
Jerry O'Keefe had recognized the desperation of his plight and he laid
out his simple plans in accordance.  He meant to stay where he was till
the last endurable moment, hoping against hope for the coming of the
rescuers.  When it was no longer possible to remain, he would go out of
the door and sell his life at a price--but he knew he would have to
sell it, and perhaps cheaply, for they would do their killing from
cover.

He struck a match for a survey of the place where he must make his last
stand and his eye fell on the coil of rope.  Then, for the first time,
he remembered its use, and vainly wished that the chute could be opened
from within.  By the light of other matches, he looked over into the
great bin and what he saw astonished him.  There was a moving suction
at the center of the pile--a slow motion and declivity--though this
afternoon the stuff had been heaped into a well-rounded mound.  Further
scrutiny verified the amazing results of his first impression.  The
hopper was open!

Jerry O'Keefe smiled grimly.  His enemies had an ironic sense of humor,
he thought.  They meant to give him a choice of deaths, death at the
door by flame and lead or death in the sluice by suffocation.  Then an
incredulous exclamation burst from his lips.  Was there not a wild and
wholly improbable chance that this opening of an avenue might be
Alexander's work?  It seemed unlikely, almost inconceivable, but in
resourcefulness and adroitness of thought nothing was quite
inconceivable of Alexander.

She knew of the rope and its former use--and that meant that the
flowing tide would not have to spell death for him if he waited long
enough and acted wisely enough.  Presumably these enemies were not
neighbors, for if they had been they would not be burning their own
grain.  If that were granted it might follow that they would not know
of the rope.

Jerry breathed deeply, and a desperate smile came for an instant to his
tight lips.

He was watching the unhurried flow of out-running wheat and gauging, as
was the girl below, the racing progress of the flames.  Would there be
time?  The door was cut off now by sheets of fire and he had no longer
any alternative.  If the hot enemy reached him before the wheat was
out, he must die by it or end matters with his own pistol.

He uncoiled the rope and threw its loose end into the bin, watching
with a fascinated gaze the fashion in which it was dragged inward and
downward.

In the increasing heat of the inferno he had thrown off his coat, and
now his shirt went too.  The sweat poured out of his naked chest and
shoulders.

From rafters below him shot wicked tongues of widening flame--  His
breath was labored and his life seemed to wither.  Fernando on the
same trip to Naples in 1506, led a lombarda two blowguns and two
pasavolantes. That in the armed ships by the same time going to
Italy and Barbary, but not certainly ascertained when more iban, four
each in Lombard. appears from these data that the caravels from Palos
undertake their journey, the artillery was not in the large vessel,
and a document confirming the Catholic Monarchs, in the year 1505,
sending 10 Lombard hand, both large and eight small for the ratchet
of Iñigo de Artieta, general of the Navy Biscay it was Columbus at
Cadiz to undertake the discovery, if necessary protected.

The two large stone _tiraban each seventy libras_ the others as
_ribadoquines_. In instructions that were given to D. Johan Manuel to
charter two boots ratchet 2,000 each, indicated that all rode _cient
Lombard calibres_, six of them 25 to 30 pounds, _tirando doors
levadizas_ [18].

Conforms to some extent with this data that offered a view of the
relationships held Saona by Louis XII of France to our D. Fernando year
1507. A historian of the first [19] reported that Admiral Philippe de
Ravestain wore a ratchet on the occasion named _The Charente_, the
best floating in the sea carrying 1,200 men of war and sailors
assembled 200 pieces of artillery, _de which 14 were ruedas_ and
threw stones.

[Note 18: Arantegui, work cit., t. II, pp. 316.] [Note 19: D'Anton,
_Histoire Louis XII_.]
"Things looked mighty unsartain--fer a spell."

And the girl answered in a silvery voice that held the thrill of
invincible courage.  "Nothin' hain't never goin' ter be unsartain fer
us from now on.  Hit teks fire, I reckon, ter weld iron--but----"

The enfeebled man tried to raise himself on his elbow, but she gently
pressed him back.

"Does ye mean hit, Alexander?" he whispered tensely.  "Hit hain't jest
because I've been hurted a leetle--an' ye're compassionate fer me?"

"Jerry," she said and her voice became all at once softly tremulous,
"jest es soon as ye're able I wants ye ter tek me in yore arms--an' I
don't never want ye ter let me go ergin!"

"I'll git thet strong right soon," he declared with a fervor that
brought the strength back to his voice--and the sparkle back into his
blood-shot eyes.


Jack Halloway came into his rooms one day in early September and ran
through some mail that lay piled on his table.  He was not in a happy
humor.  The business here had dragged out to the annoying length of six
weeks and his mind was busy with anxiety centering on the hills.  
[Footnote 37: Marmont Many claims are obviously exaggerated and
often completely untrue, as we shall see further on. His _ "Memoires"
_ by him are in fact as an apology for his life has been written. A
strict ruling on this apology Marmont is the following: "Si l'on
voulait étudier sa vie en adoptant ce qu'il dit sur lui-même dans
les neuf volumes laisse à la postérité comme justification de sa
conduite, on courrait grand risque d ' continuellement être à côte
de vérité.

"(Universal biography Michaud, tome 27, p. 18) At least what is
happening in the Bocca concerns, largely agrees with this verdict.

To be regretted is that the Europe of these events a long time just been
informed by Marmont.]
"You will wonder how I knew where to
send this letter, but you see I did know.

"Jerry and I were married a week ago and all the neighbors came to our
infare to wish us well.  I saw to it that every man there took off his
hat.  I am sending you the tag that was on your coat pocket the day I
mended it.  It wasn't heedful for you to leave it there, and that's how
I knew where you were apt to be now--instead of Virginia."

The man paused again and his great hand shook with disappointment and
chagrin.  Finally he turned the sheet and read the conclusion.

"Seeing that tag gave me warning just in time the night you bragged
that you could make me come into your arms.  Next time, Jack, I counsel
you to be honest with the girls you make love to.  They like it.  Come
and see us when you get back to the mountains.  Alexander McGivins.
P.S.  What I have done, forcing me to my preservation, examination and
I am patiently my fate as it is not in my power hour, evade him.

King Henry. Führet Worcester and Vernon to death, the other accomplice,
we have time.
.