Kelly Library Of St. Gregory's University; Thanks To Alev Akman.


THE PASSING OF THE FRONTIER, A CHRONICLE OF THE OLD WEST

BY EMERSON HOUGH

New Haven: Yale University Press
Toronto: Glasgow, Brook & Co.
London: Humphrey Milford
Oxford University Press
1918

CONTENTS


I. THE FRONTIER IN HISTORY
II. THE RANGE
III. THE CATTLE TRAILS
IV. THE COWBOY
V. THE MINES
VI. PATHWAYS OF THE WEST
VII. THE INDIAN WARS
VIII. THE CATTLE KINGS
IX. THE HOMESTEADER
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


THE PASSING OF THE FRONTIER

Chapter I. The Frontier In History

The frontier! There is no word in the English language more
stirring, more intimate, or more beloved. It has in it all the
elan of the old French phrase, En avant! It carries all of the
old Saxon command, Forward!! It means all that America ever
meant. It means the old hope of a real personal liberty, and yet
a real human advance in character and achievement. To a genuine
American it is the dearest word in all the world.

What is, or was, the frontier? Where was it? Under what stars did
it lie? Because, as the vague Iliads of ancient heroes or the
nebulous records of the savage gentlemen of the Middle Ages make
small specific impingement on our consciousness today, so also
even now begin the tales of our own old frontier to assume a
haziness, an unreality, which makes them seem less history than
folklore. Now the truth is that the American frontier of history
has many a local habitation and many a name. And this is why it
lies somewhat indefinite under the blue haze of the years, all
the more alluring for its lack of definition, like some old
mountain range, the softer and more beautiful for its own
shadows.

The fascination of the frontier is and has ever been an undying
thing. Adventure is the meat of the strong men who have built the
world for those more timid. Adventure and the frontier are one
and inseparable. They suggest strength, courage,
hardihood--qualities beloved in men since the world
began--qualities which are the very soul of the United States,
itself an experiment, an adventure, a risk accepted. Take away
all our history of political regimes, the story of the rise and
fall of this or that partisan aggregation in our government; take
away our somewhat inglorious military past; but leave us forever
the tradition of the American frontier! There lies our comfort
and our pride. There we never have failed. There, indeed, we
always realized our ambitions. There, indeed, we were efficient,
before that hateful phrase was known. There we were a melting-pot
for character, before we came to know that odious appellation
which classifies us as the melting-pot of the nations.

The frontier was the place and the time of the strong man, of the
self-sufficient but restless individual. It was the home of the
rebel, the protestant, the unreconciled, the intolerant, the
ardent--and the resolute. It was not the conservative and tender
man who made our history; it was the man sometimes illiterate,
oftentimes uncultured, the man of coarse garb and rude weapons.
But the frontiersmen were the true dreamers of the nation. They
really were the possessors of a national vision. Not statesmen
but riflemen and riders made America. The noblest conclusions of
American history still rest upon premises which they laid.

But, in its broadest significance, the frontier knows no country.
It lies also in other lands and in other times than our own. When
and what was the Great Frontier? We need go back only to the time
of Drake and the sea-dogs, the Elizabethan Age, when all North
America was a frontier, almost wholly unknown, compellingly
alluring to all bold men. That was the day of new stirrings in
the human heart. Some strange impulse seemed to act upon the soul
of the braver and bolder Europeans; and they moved westward, nor
could have helped that had they tried. They lived largely and
blithely, and died handsomely, those old Elizabethan adventurers,
and they lie today in thousands of unrecorded graves upon two
continents, each having found out that any place is good enough
for a man to die upon, provided that he be a man.

The American frontier was Elizabethan in its quality--childlike,
simple, and savage. It has not entirely passed; for both
Elizabethan folk and Elizabethan customs are yet to be found in
the United States. While the half-savage civilization of the
farther West was roaring on its way across the continent--while
the day of the keelboatman and the plainsman, of the
Indian-fighter and the miner, even the day of the cowboy, was
dawning and setting--there still was a frontier left far behind
in the East, near the top of the mountain range which made the
first great barrier across our pathway to the West. That
frontier, the frontier of Boone and Kenton, of Robertson and
Sevier, still exists and may be seen in the Cumberland--the only
remaining part of America which is all American. There we may
find trace of the Elizabethan Age--idioms lost from English
literature and American speech long ago. There we may see the
American home life as it went on more than a hundred years ago.
We may see hanging on the wall the long muzzle-loading rifle of
an earlier day. We may see the spinning-wheel and the loom. The
women still make in part the clothing for their families, and the
men still make their own household furniture, their own farming
implements, their own boots.

This overhanging frontier of America is a true survival of the
days of Drake as well as of the days of Boone. The people are at
once godly and savage. They breed freely; they love their homes;
they are ever ready for adventure; they are frugal, abstemious,
but violent and strong. They carry on still the half-religious
blood feuds of the old Scotch Highlands or the North of Ireland,
whence they came. They reverence good women. They care little for
material accumulations. They believe in personal ease and
personal independence. With them life goes on not in the slow
monotony of reiterated performance, but in ragged profile, with
large exertions followed by large repose. Now that has been the
fashion of the frontier in every age and every land of all the
world. And so, by studying these people, we may even yet arrive
at a just and comprehensive notion of what we might call the
"feel" of the old frontier.

There exists, too, yet another Saxon frontier in a far-off
portion of the world. In that strange country, Australia,
tremendous unknown regions still remain, and the wild pastoral
life of such regions bids fair to exist yet for many years. A
cattle king of Queensland held at one time sixty thousand square
miles of land. It is said that the average size of pastoral
holdings in the northern territory of Australia is two hundred
and seventy-five thousand acres. Does this not recall the old
times of free range in the American West?

This strange antipodal civilization also retains a curious flavor
of Elizabethan ideas. It does not plan for inordinate fortunes,
the continual amassing of money, but it does deliberately plan
for the use by the individual of his individual life. Australian
business hours are shorter than American. Routine is less
general. The individual takes upon himself a smaller load of
effort. He is restive under monotony. He sets aside a great part
of his life for sport. He lives in a large and young day of the
world. Here we may see a remote picture of our own American
West--better, as it seems to me, than that reflected in the rapid
and wholly commercialized development of Western Canada, which is
not flavored by any age but this.

But much of the frontier of Australia is occupied by men of means
who had behind them government aid and a semi-paternal
encouragement in their adventures. The same is true in part of
the government-fostered settlement of Western Canada. It was not
so with the American West. Here was not the place of the rich man
but of the poor man, and he had no one to aid him or encourage
him. Perhaps no man ever understood the American West who did not
himself go there and make his living in that country, as did the
men who found it and held it first. Each life on our old frontier
was a personal adventure. The individual had no government behind
him and he lacked even the protection of any law.

Our frontier crawled west from the first seaport settlements,
afoot, on horseback, in barges, or with slow wagon-trains. It
crawled across the Alleghanies, down the great river valleys and
up them yet again; and at last, in days of new transportation, it
leaped across divides, from one river valley to another. Its
history, at first so halting, came to be very swift--so swift
that it worked great elisions in its own story.

In our own day, however, the Old West generally means the old cow
country of the West--the high plains and the lower foothills
running from the Rio Grande to the northern boundary. The still
more ancient cattle-range of the lower Pacific Slope will never
come into acceptance as the Old West. Always, when we use these
words, we think of buffalo plains and of Indians, and of their
passing before the footmen and riders who carried the phantom
flag of Drake and the Virgin Queen from the Appalachians to the
Rockies--before the men who eventually made good that glorious
and vaunting vision of the Virginia cavaliers, whose party turned
back from the Rockfish Gap after laying claim in the name of King
George on all the country lying west of them, as far as the South
Sea!

The American cow country may with very good logic arrogate to
itself the title of the real and typical frontier of all the
world. We call the spirit of the frontier Elizabethan, and so it
was; but even as the Elizabethan Age was marked by its contact
with the Spanish civilization in Europe, on the high seas, and in
both the Americas, so the last frontier of the American West also
was affected, and largely, deeply, by Spanish influence and
Spanish customs. The very phraseology of range work bears proof
of this. Scores of Spanish words are written indelibly in the
language of the Plains. The frontier of the cow-range never was
Saxon alone.

It is a curious fact also, seldom if ever noted, that this Old
West of the Plains was very largely Southern and not Northern on
its Saxon side. No States so much as Kentucky and Tennessee and,
later, Missouri--daughters of Old Virginia in her
glory--contributed to the forces of the frontiersmen. Texas,
farther to the south, put her stamp indelibly upon the entire
cattle industry of the West. Visionary, impractical, restless,
adventurous, these later Elizabethan heroes--bowing to no yoke,
insisting on their own rights and scorning often the laws of
others, yet careful to retain the best and most advantageous
customs of any conquered country--naturally came from those
nearest Elizabethan countries which lay abandoned behind them.

If the atmosphere of the Elizabethan Age still may be found in
the forgotten Cumberlands, let us lay claim to kinship with
yonder roystering heroes of a gallant day; for this was ever the
atmosphere of our own frontier. To feel again the following
breezes of the Golden Hind, or see again, floating high in the
cloudless skies, the sails of the Great Armada, was the privilege
of Americans for a double decade within the memory of men yet
living, in that country, so unfailingly beloved, which we call
the Old West of America.


Chapter II. The Range

When, in 1803, those two immortal youths, Meriwether Lewis and
William Clark, were about to go forth on their great journey
across the continent, they were admonished by Thomas Jefferson
that they would in all likelihood encounter in their travels,
living and stalking about, the mammoth or the mastodon, whose
bones had been found in the great salt-licks of Kentucky. We
smile now at such a supposition; yet it was not unreasonable
then. No man knew that tremendous country that lay beyond the
mouth of the Missouri.

The explorers crossed one portion of a vast land which was like
to nothing they had ever seen--the region later to become the
great cattle-range of America. It reached, although they could
know nothing of that, from the Spanish possessions on the south
across a thousand miles of short grass lands to the present
Canadian boundary line which certain obdurate American souls
still say ought to have been at 54 degrees 40 minutes, and not
where it is! From the Rio Grande to "Fifty-four forty," indeed,
would have made nice measurements for the Saxon cattle-range.

Little, however, was the value of this land understood by the
explorers; and, for more than half a century afterwards, it
commonly was supposed to be useless for the occupation of white
men and suitable only as a hunting-ground for savage tribes. Most
of us can remember the school maps of our own youth, showing a
vast region marked, vaguely, "The Great American Desert," which
was considered hopeless for any human industry, but much of which
has since proved as rich as any land anywhere on the globe.

Perhaps it was the treeless nature of the vast Plains which
carried the first idea of their infertility. When the first
settlers of Illinois and Indiana came up from south of the Ohio
River they had their choice of timber and prairie lands. Thinking
the prairies worthless--since land which could not raise a tree
certainly could not raise crops--these first occupants of the
Middle West spent a generation or more, axe in hand, along the
heavily timbered river-bottoms. The prairies were long in
settling. No one then could have predicted that farm lands in
that region would be worth three hundred dollars an acre or
better, and that these prairies of the Mississippi Valley would,
in a few generations, be studded with great towns and would form
a part of the granary of the world.

But, if our early explorers, passing beyond the valley of the
Missouri, found valueless the region of the Plains and the
foothills, not so the wild creatures or the savage men who had
lived there longer than science records. The buffalo then ranged
from the Rio Grande to the Athabaska, from the Missouri to the
Rockies, and beyond. No one seems to have concluded in those days
that there was after all slight difference between the buffalo
and the domestic ox. The native cattle, however, in untold
thousands and millions, had even then proved beyond peradventure
the sustaining and strengthening nature of the grasses of the
Plains.

Now, each creature, even of human species, must adjust itself to
its environment. Having done so, commonly it is disposed to love
that environment. The Eskimo and the Zulu each thinks that he has
the best land in the world: So with the American Indian, who,
supported by the vast herds of buffalo, ranged all over that
tremendous country which was later to be given over to the white
man with his domestic cattle. No freer life ever was lived by any
savages than by the Horse Indians of the Plains in the buffalo
days; and never has the world known a physically higher type of
savage.

On the buffalo-range--that is to say, on the cattle-range which
was to be--Lewis and Clark met several bands of the Sioux--the
Mandans and the Assiniboines, the Blackfeet, the Shoshones.
Farther south were the Pawnees, the Kaws, the Otoes, the Osages,
most of whom depended in part upon the buffalo for their living,
though the Otoes, the Pawnees, the Mandans, and certain others
now and then raised a little corn or a few squashes to help out
their bill of fare. Still farther south dwelt the Kiowas, the
Comanches, and others. The Arapahoes, the Cheyennes, the Crows,
and the Utes, all hunters, were soon to come into the ken of the
white man. Of such of these tribes as they met, the youthful
captains made accounting, gravely and with extraordinary
accuracy, but without discovering in this region much future for
Americans. They were explorers and not industrial investigators.

It was nearly half a century after the journey of Lewis and Clark
that the Forty-Niners were crossing the Plains, whither,
meanwhile, the Mormons had trekked in search of a country where
they might live as they liked. Still the wealth of the Plains
remained untouched. California was in the eyes of the world. The
great cow-range was overleaped. But, in the early fifties, when
the placer fields of California began to be less numerous and
less rich, the half-savage population of the mines roared on
northward, even across our northern line. Soon it was to roll
back. Next it worked east and southeast and northeast over the
great dry plains of Washington and Oregon, so that, as readily
may be seen, the cow-range proper was not settled as most of the
West was, by a directly westbound thrust of an eastern
population; but, on the contrary, it was approached from several
different angles--from the north, from the east, from the west
and northwest, and finally from the south.

The early, turbulent population of miners and adventurers was
crude, lawless, and aggressive. It cared nothing whatever for the
Indian tribes. War, instant and merciless, where it meant murder
for the most part, was set on foot as soon as white touched red
in that far western region.

All these new white men who had crowded into the unknown country
of the Plains, the Rockies, the Sierras, and the Cascades, had to
be fed. They could not employ and remain content with the means
by which the red man there had always fed himself. Hence a new
industry sprang up in the United States, which of itself made
certain history in that land. The business of freighting supplies
to the West, whether by bull-train or by pack-train, was an
industry sui generic, very highly specialized, and pursued by men
of great business ability as well as by men of great hardihood
and daring.

Each of these freight trains which went West carried hanging on
its flank more and more of the white men. As the trains returned,
more and more was learned in the States of the new country which
lay between the Missouri and the Rockies, which ran no man knew
how far north, and no man could guess how far south. Now appears
in history Fort Benton, on the Missouri, the great northern
supply post--just as at an earlier date there had appeared Fort
Hall, one of the old fur-trading posts beyond the Rockies, Bent's
Fort on the Arkansas, and many other outposts of the new Saxon
civilization in the West.

Later came the pony express and the stage coach which made
history and romance for a generation. Feverishly, boisterously, a
strong, rugged, womanless population crowded westward and formed
the wavering, now advancing, now receding line of the great
frontier of American story.

But for long there was no sign of permanent settlement on the
Plains, and no one thought of this region as the frontier. The
men there who were prospecting and exploiting were classified as
no more than adventurers. No one seems to have taken a lesson
from the Indian and the buffalo. The reports of Fremont long
since had called attention to the nourishing quality of those
grasses of the high country, but the day of the cowboy had not
yet dawned. There is a somewhat feeble story which runs to the
effect that in 1866 one of the great wagon-trains, caught by the
early snows of winter, was obliged to abandon its oxen on the
range. It was supposed that, of course, the oxen must perish
during the winter. But next spring the owners were surprised to
find that the oxen, so far from perishing, had flourished very
much--indeed, were fat and in good condition. So runs the story
which is often repeated. It may be true, but to accredit to this
incident the beginnings of the cattle industry in the Indian
country would surely be going too far. The truth is that the cow
industry was not a Saxon discovery. It was a Latin enterprise,
flourishing in Mexico long before the first of these miners and
adventurers came on the range.

Something was known of the Spanish lands to the south through the
explorations of Pike, but more through the commerce of the
prairies--the old wagon trade from the Missouri River to the
Spanish cities of Sante Fe and Chihuahua. Now the cow business,
south of the Rio Grande, was already well differentiated and
developed at the time the first adventurers from the United
States went into Texas and began to crowd their Latin neighbors
for more room. There it was that our Saxon frontiersmen first
discovered the cattle industry. But these southern and northern
riflemen--ruthless and savage, yet strangely
statesmanlike--though they might betimes drive away the owners of
the herds, troubled little about the herds themselves. There was
a certain fascination to these rude strangers in the slow and
easeful civilization of Old Spain which they encountered in the
land below them. Little by little, and then largely and yet more
largely, the warriors of San Jacinto reached out and began to
claim lands for themselves--leagues and uncounted leagues of
land, which had, however, no market value. Well within the memory
of the present generation large tracts of good land were bought
in Texas for six cents an acre; some was bought for half that
price in a time not much earlier. Today much of that land is
producing wealth; but land then was worthless--and so were cows.

This civilization of the Southwest, of the new Republic of Texas,
may be regarded as the first enduring American result of contact
with the Spanish industry. The men who won Texas came mostly from
Kentucky and Tennessee or southern Ohio, and the first colonizer
of Texas was a Virginian, Stephen Fuller Austin. They came along
the old Natchez Trace from Nashville to the Mississippi
River--that highway which has so much history of its own. Down
this old winding trail into the greatest valley of all the world,
and beyond that valley out into the Spanish country, moved
steadily the adventurers whose fathers had but recently crossed
the Appalachians. One of the strongest thrusts of the American
civilization thus entered the cattle-range at its lower end,
between the Rio Grande and the Red River.

In all the several activities, mining, freighting, scouting,
soldiering, riding pony express, or even sheer adventuring for
what might come, there was ever a trading back and forth between
home-staying men and adventuring men. Thus there was an
interchange of knowledge and of customs between East and West,
between our old country and our new. There was an interchange,
too, at the south, where our Saxon civilization came in touch
with that of Mexico.

We have now to note some fundamental facts and principles of the
cattle industry which our American cattlemen took over ready-made
from the hands of Mexico.

The Mexicans in Texas had an abundance of small, hardy horses of
African and Spanish breed, which Spain had brought into the New
World--the same horses that the Moors had brought into Spain--a
breed naturally hardy and able to subsist upon dry food. Without
such horses there could have been no cattle industry. These
horses, running wild in herds, had crossed to the upper Plains.
La Verendrye, and later Lewis and Clark, had found the Indians
using horses in the north. The Indians, as we have seen, had
learned to manage the horse. Formerly they had used dogs to drag
the travois, but now they used the "elk-dog," as they first
called the horse.

In the original cow country, that is, in Mexico and Texas,
countless herds of cattle were held in a loose sort of ownership
over wide and unknown plains. Like all wild animals in that warm
country, they bred in extraordinary numbers. The southern range,
indeed, has always been called the breeding range. The cattle had
little value. He who wanted beef killed beef. He who wanted
leather killed cattle for their hides. But beyond these scant and
infrequent uses cattle had no definite value.

The Mexican, however, knew how to handle cows. He could ride a
horse, and he could rope cattle and brand them. Most of the
cattle of a wide range would go to certain water-holes more or
less regularly, where they might be roughly collected or
estimated. This coming of the cattle to the watering-places made
it unnecessary for owners of cattle to acquire ranch land. It was
enough to secure the water-front where the cows must go to drink.
That gave the owner all the title he needed. His right to the
increase he could prove by another phenomenon of nature, just as
inevitable and invariable as that of thirst. The maternal
instinct of a cow and the dependence of the calf upon its mother
gave the old rancher of immemorial times sufficient proof of
ownership in the increase of his herd. The calf would run with
its own mother and with no other cow through its first season. So
that if an old Mexican ranchero saw a certain number of cows at
his watering-places, and with them calves, he knew that all
before him were his property--or, at least, he claimed them as
such and used them.

Still, this was loose-footed property. It might stray away after
all, or it might be driven away. Hence, in some forgotten time,
our shrewd Spaniard invented a system of proof of ownership which
has always lain at the very bottom of the organized cow industry;
he invented the method of branding. This meant his sign, his
name, his trade-mark, his proof of ownership. The animal could
not shake it off. It would not burn off in the sun or wash off in
the rain. It went with the animal and could not be eradicated
from the animal's hide. Wherever the bearer was seen, the brand
upon its hide provided certain identification of the owner.

Now, all these basic ideas of the cow industry were old on the
lower range in Texas when our white men first drifted thither.
The cattle industry, although in its infancy, and although
supposed to have no great future, was developed long before Texas
became a republic. It never, indeed, changed very much from that
time until the end of its own career.

One great principle was accepted religiously even in those early
and crude days. A man's cow was HIS cow. A man's brand was HIS
brand. There must be no interference with his ownership. Hence
certain other phases of the industry followed inevitably. These
cattle, these calves, each branded by the iron of the owner, in
spite of all precautions, began to mingle as settlers became more
numerous; hence came the idea of the round-up. The country was
warm and lazy. If a hundred or a thousand cows were not
collected, very well. If a calf were separated from its mother,
very well. The old ranchers never quarreled among themselves.
They never would have made in the South anything like a cattle
association; it was left for the Yankees to do that at a time
when cows had come to have far greater values. There were few
arguments in the first rodeos of the lower range. One rancher
would vie with his neighbor in generosity in the matter of
unbranded calves. Haggling would have been held contemptible. On
the lower range in the old times no one cared much about a cow.
Why should one do so? There was no market for cows--no one who
wished to buy them. If one tendered a Mexican cinquo pesos for a
yearling or a two-year-old, the owner might perhaps offer the
animal as a gift, or he might smile and say "Con mucho gusto" as
he was handed a few pieces of silver. There were plenty of cows
everywhere in the world!

Let us, therefore, give the old Spaniard full credit alike in
picturesque romance and in the organized industry of the cow. The
westbound thrust which came upon the upper part of the range in
the days of more shrewd and exacting business methods was simply
the best-known and most published phase of frontier life in the
cow country; hence we have usually accepted it as typical. It
would not be accurate to say that the cattle industry was
basically much influenced or governed by northern or eastern men.
In practically all of its great phenomena the frontier of the old
cow-range was southern by birth and growth.

There lay, then, so long unused, that vast and splendid land so
soon to write romantic history of its own, so soon to come into
the admiration or the wonder of a great portion of the earth--a
land of fascinating interest to the youth of every country, and a
region whose story holds a charm for young and old alike even
today. It was a region royal in its dimensions. Far on the west
it was hedged by the gray-sided and white-topped mountains, the
Rockies. Where the buffalo once lived, the cattle were to live,
high up in the foothills of this great mountain range which ran
from the Rio Grande to Canada. On the east, where lay the
Prairies rather than the Plains, it was a country waving with
high native grasses, with many brilliant flowers hiding among
them, the sweet-William, the wild rose, and often great masses of
the yellow sunflower.

>From the Rio Grande to the Athabaska, for the greater part, the
frontier sky was blue and cloudless during most of the year. The
rainfall was not great. The atmosphere was dry. It was a cheerful
country, one of optimism and not of gloom. In the extreme south,
along the Rio Grande, the climate was moister, warmer, more
enervating; but on the high steppes of the middle range in
Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, western Nebraska, there lay the
finest out-of-doors country, man's country the finest of the
earth.

But for the time, busy with more accustomed things, mining and
freighting and fighting and hunting and trading and trapping, we
Americans who had arrived upon the range cared little for cows.
The upper thrust of the great herds from the south into the north
had not begun. It was after the Civil War that the first great
drives of cattle from the south toward the north began, and after
men had learned in the State of Texas that cattle moved from the
Rio Grande to the upper portions of the State and fed on the
mesquite grass would attain greater stature than in the hot coast
country. Then swiftly, somewhat luridly, there leaped into our
comprehension and our interest that strange country long loosely
held under our flag, the region of the Plains, the region which
we now call the Old West.

In great bands, in long lines, slowly, towheaded, sore-footed,
the vast gatherings of the prolific lower range moved north, each
cow with its title indelibly marked upon its hide. These cattle
were now going to take the place of those on which the Indians
had depended for their living these many years. A new day in
American history had dawned.


Chapter III. The Cattle Trails

The customary method of studying history by means of a series of
events and dates is not the method which we have chosen to
employ in this study of the Old West. Speaking generally, our
minds are unable to assimilate a condensed mass of events and
dates; and that is precisely what would be required of us if we
should attempt here to follow the ways of conventional history.
Dates are at best no more than milestones on the pathway of time;
and in the present instance it is not the milestones but the road
itself with which we are concerned. Where does the road begin?
Why comes it hither? Whither does it lead? These are the real
questions.

Under all the exuberance of the life of the range there lay a
steady business of tremendous size and enormous values. The
"uproarious iniquity" of the West, its picturesqueness, its
vividness--these were but froth on the stream. The stream itself
was a steady and somber flood. Beyond this picturesqueness of
environment very few have cared to go, and therefore sometimes
have had little realization of the vastness of the cowboy's
kingdom, the "magnitude of the interests in his care, or the
fortitude, resolution, and instant readiness essential to his
daily life." The American cowboy is the most modern
representative of a human industry that is second to very few in
antiquity.

Julius Caesar struck the note of real history: Quorum pars magna
fui--"Of which I was a great part." If we are to seek the actual
truth, we ought most to value contemporary records,
representations made by men who were themselves a part of the
scenes which they describe. In that way we shall arrive not
merely upon lurid events, not alone upon the stereotyped
characters of the "Wild West," but upon causes which are much
more interesting and immensely more valuable than any merely
titillating stories from the weirdly illustrated Apocrypha of the
West. We must go below such things if we would gain a just and
lasting estimate of the times. We ought to look on the old range
neither as a playground of idle men nor as a scene of hysterical
and contorted human activities. We ought to look upon it from the
point of view of its uses to mankind. The explorers found it a
wilderness, the home of the red man and the buffalo. What were
the underlying causes of its settlement and development?

There is in history no agency so wondrous in events, no working
instrumentality so great as transportation. The great seeking of
all human life is to find its level. Perhaps the first men
traveled by hollowed logs down stream. Then possibly the idea of
a sail was conceived. Early in the story of the United States men
made commercial journeys from the head of the Ohio to the mouth
of the Mississippi by flatboats, and came back by keelboats. The
pole, the cordelle, the paddle, and the sail, in turn helped them
to navigate the great streams which led out into the West. And
presently there was to come that tremendous upheaval wrought by
the advent of the iron trails which, scorning alike waterways and
mountain ranges, flung themselves almost directly westward across
the continent.

The iron trails, crossing the northern range soon after the Civil
War, brought a market to the cattle country. Inevitably the men
of the lower range would seek to reach the railroads with what
they had to sell--their greatest natural product, cattle on the
hoof. This was the primary cause of the great northbound drives
already mentioned, the greatest pastoral phenomena in the story
of the world.

The southern herds at that time had no market at their doors.
They had to go to the market, and they had to go on foot. That
meant that they must be driven northward by cattle handlers who
had passed their days in the wild life of the lower range. These
cowmen of course took their character and their customs northward
with them, and so they were discovered by those enthusiastic
observers, newly arrived by rail, whom the cowmen were wont to
call "pilgrims."

Now the trail of the great cattle drives--the Long Trail-was a
thing of tremendous importance of itself and it is still full of
interest. As it may not easily be possible for the author to
better a description of it that was written some twenty years
ago, that description is here again set down.*

* "The Story of the Cowboy," by E. Hough. Appleton. 1897.
Reprinted by permission.


The braiding of a hundred minor pathways, the Long Trail lay like
a vast rope connecting the cattle country of the South with that
of the North. Lying loose or coiling, it ran for more than two
thousand miles along the eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains,
sometimes close in at their feet, again hundreds of miles away
across the hard tablelands or the well-flowered prairies. It
traversed in a fair line the vast land of Texas, curled over the
Indian Nations, over Kansas, Colorado, Nebraska, Wyoming, and
Montana, and bent in wide overlapping circles as far west as Utah
and Nevada; as far east as Missouri, Iowa, even Illinois; and as
far north as the British possessions. Even today you may trace
plainly its former course, from its faint beginnings in the lazy
land of Mexico, the Ararat of the cattle-range. It is distinct
across Texas, and multifold still in the Indian lands. Its many
intermingling paths still scar the iron surface of the Neutral
Strip, and the plows have not buried all the old furrows in the
plains of Kansas. Parts of the path still remain visible in the
mountain lands of the far North. You may see the ribbons banding
the hillsides today along the valley of the Stillwater, and along
the Yellowstone and toward the source of the Missouri. The hoof
marks are beyond the Musselshell, over the Bad Lands and the
coulees and the flat prairies; and far up into the land of the
long cold you may see, even today if you like, the shadow of that
unparalleled pathway, the Long Trail of the cattle-range. History
has no other like it.

The Long Trail was surveyed and constructed in a century and a
day. Over the Red River of the South, a stream even today perhaps
known but vaguely in the minds of many inhabitants of the
country, there appeared, almost without warning, vast processions
of strange horned kine--processions of enormous wealth, owned by
kings who paid no tribute, and guarded by men who never knew a
master. Whither these were bound, what had conjured them forth,
whence they came, were questions in the minds of the majority of
the population of the North and East to whom the phenomenon
appeared as the product of a day. The answer to these questions
lay deep in the laws of civilization, and extended far back into
that civilization's history. The Long Trail was finished in a
day. It was begun more than a century before that day, and came
forward along the very appointed ways of time.... Thus, far
down in the vague Southwest, at some distant time, in some
distant portion of old, mysterious Mexico, there fell into line
the hoof prints which made the first faint beginnings of the Long
Trail, merely the path of a half nomadic movement along the line
of the least resistance.

The Long Trail began to deepen and extend. It received then, as
it did later, a baptism of human blood such as no other pathway
of the continent has known. The nomadic and the warlike days
passed, and there ensued a more quiet and pastoral time. It was
the beginning of a feudalism of the range, a barony rude enough,
but a glorious one, albeit it began, like all feudalism, in
large-handed theft and generous murdering. The flocks of these
strong men, carelessly interlapping, increased and multiplied
amazingly. They were hardly looked upon as wealth. The people
could not eat a tithe of the beef; they could not use a hundredth
of the leather. Over hundreds and hundreds of miles of ownerless
grass lands, by the rapid waters of the mountains, by the slow
streams of the plains or the long and dark lagoons of the low
coast country the herds of tens grew into droves of hundreds and
thousands and hundreds of thousands. This was really the dawning
of the American cattle industry.

Chips and flakes of the great Southwestern herd began to be seen
in the Northern States. As early as 1857 Texas cattle were driven
to Illinois. In 1861 Louisiana was, without success, tried as an
outlet. In those hours sacred to the relaxation of undress and the
back hair, in the upper penetralia of the household, where two
or three or six are gathered together on and about the cushioned
frame intended for repose, do they converse, or indulge in
that sort of chat from which not one idea is carried away? No one
reports, fortunately, and we do not know. But do all the women
like this method of spending hour after hour, day after
day-indeed, a lifetime? Is it invigorating, even restful? Think
of the talk this past summer, the rivers and oceans of it,
on piazzas and galleries in the warm evenings or the fresher
mornings, in private houses, on hotel verandas, in the shade of
thousands of cottages by the sea and in the hills! As you recall
it, what was it all about? Was the mind in a vapid condition
after an evening of it?

And there is so much to read, and so much to think about, and the
world is so interesting, if you do think about it, and nearly
every person has some peculiarity of mind that would be worth
study if you could only get at it! It is really, we repeat,
such an interesting world, and most people get so little out of
it. Now there is the conversation of hens, when the hens are
busy and not self-conscious; there is something fascinating
about it, because the imagination may invest it with a recondite
and spicy meaning; but the common talk of people! We infer
sometimes that the hens are not saying anything, because they do
not read, and consequently their minds are empty. And perhaps
we are right.

As to conversation, there is no use in sending the bucket into the
well when the well is dry--it only makes a rattling of windlass
and chain. We do not wish to be understood to be an enemy of
the light traffic of human speech. Deliver us from the didactic
and the everlastingly improving style of thing! Conversation, in
order to be good, and intellectually inspiring, and spiritually
restful, need not always be serious.

It must be alert and intelligent, and mean more by its suggestions
and allusions than is said. There is the light touch-and-go
play about topics more or less profound that is as agreeable as
heat-lightning in a sultry evening. Why may not a person express
the whims and vagaries of a lambent mind (if he can get a
lambent mind) without being hauled up short for it, and plunged
into a heated dispute?
In the freedom of real conversation the mind throws out half-thoughts,
paradoxes, for which a man is not to be held strictly responsible
to the very roots of his being, and which need to be caught up
and played with in the same tentative spirit. The dispute
and the hot argument are usually the bane of conversation and the
death of originality. We like to express a notion, a fancy,
without being called upon to defend it, then and there, in all
its possible consequences, as if it were to be an article in a
creed or a plank in a platform. Must we be always either vapid or
serious?

We have been obliged to take notice of the extraordinary tendency
of American women to cultivation, to the improvement of the mind,
by means of reading, clubs, and other intellectual exercises, and
to acknowledge that they are leaving the men behind; that is,
the men not in the so-called professions. Is this intellectualization
beginning to show in the conversation of women when they are
together, say in the hours of relaxation in the penetralia
spoken of, or in general society? Is there less talk about the
fashion of dress, and the dearness or cheapness of materials, and
about servants, and the ways of the inchoate citizen called the
baby, and the infinitely little details of the private life of
other people? Is it true that if a group of men are talking,
say about politics, or robust business, or literature, and they
are joined by women (whose company is always welcome), the
conversation is pretty sure to take a lower mental plane, to become
more personal, more frivolous, accommodating itself to quite a
different range?

Do the well-read, thoughtful women, however beautiful and brilliant
and capable of the gayest persiflage, prefer to talk with men, to
listen to the conversation of men, rather than to converse with
or listen to their own sex? If this is true, why is it? Women,
as a rule, in "society" at any rate, have more leisure than
men.

In the facilities and felicities of speech they commonly excel
men, and usually they have more of that vivacious dramatic power
which is called "setting out a thing to the life." With all these
advantages, and all the world open to them in newspapers and in
books, they ought to be the leaders and stimulators of the
best conversation.
With them it should never drop down to the too-common flatness and
banality. Women have made this world one of the most beautiful
places of residence to be conceived. They might make it one of
the most interesting.

THE TALL GIRL

It is the fashion for girls to be tall. This is much more than
saying that tall girls are the fashion. It means not only that
the tall girl has come in, but that girls are tall, and are becoming
tall, because it is the fashion, and because there is a demand
for that sort of girl. There is no hint of stoutness, indeed the
willowy pattern is preferred, but neither is leanness suggested;
the women of the period have got hold of the poet's idea,
"tall and most divinely fair," and are living up to it.
Perhaps this change in fashion is more noticeable in England and
on the Continent than in America, but that may be because there is
less room for change in America, our girls being always of an
aspiring turn.

Very marked the phenomenon is in England; on the street, at any
concert or reception, the number of tall girls is so large
as to occasion remark, especially among the young girls just
coming into the conspicuousness of womanhood. The tendency of the
new generation is towards unusual height and gracious slimness.
The situation would be embarrassing to thousands of men who have
been too busy to think about growing upward, were it not for
the fact that the tall girl, who must be looked up to, is almost
invariably benignant, and bears her height with a sweet timidity
that disarms fear.

Besides, the tall girl has now come on in such force that confidence
is infused into the growing army, and there is a sense of
support in this survival of the tallest that is very encouraging
to the young.

Many theories have been put forward to account for this phenomenon.

It is known that delicate plants in dark places struggle up towards
the light in a frail slenderness, and it is said that in England,
which seems to have increasing cloudiness, and in the capital
more and more months of deeper darkness and blackness, it is
natural that the British girl should grow towards the light.
But this is a fanciful view of the case, for it cannot be
proved that English men have proportionally increased their
stature. The English man has always seemed big to the Continental
peoples, partly because objects generally take on gigantic
dimensions when seen through a fog. Another theory, which has much
more to commend it, is that the increased height of women is due
to the aesthetic movement, which has now spent its force, but has
left certain results, especially in the change of the taste in
colors.

The woman of the aesthetic artist was nearly always tall, usually
willowy, not to say undulating and serpentine. These forms of
feminine loveliness and commanding height have been for many years
before the eyes of the women of England in paintings and drawings,
and it is unavoidable that this pattern should not have its
effect upon the new and plastic generation.
Never has there been another generation so open to new ideas;
and if the ideal of womanhood held up was that of length and
gracious slenderness, it would be very odd if women should not
aspire to it. We know very well the influence that the heroines
of the novelists have had from time to time upon the women of a
given period. The heroine of Scott was, no doubt, once common
in society--the delicate creature who promptly fainted on the
reminiscence of the scent of a rose, but could stand any amount
of dragging by the hair through underground passages, and midnight
rides on lonely moors behind mailed and black-mantled knights,
and a run or two of hair-removing typhoid fever, and come out
at the end of the story as fresh as a daisy. She could not
be found now, so changed are the requirements of fiction.

We may assume, too, that the full-blown aesthetic girl of that
recent period--the girl all soul and faded harmonies--would be
hard to find, but the fascination of the height and slenderness
of that girl remains something more than a tradition, and is,
no doubt, to some extent copied by the maiden just coming into
her kingdom.

Those who would belittle this matter may say that the appearance
of which we speak is due largely to the fashion of dress--the
long unbroken lines which add to the height and encourage the
appearance of slenderness. But this argument gives away the case.
Why do women wear the present fascinating gowns, in which the
lithe figure is suggested in all its womanly dignity? In order
that they may appear to be tall. That is to say, because it
is the fashion to be tall; women born in the mode are tall,
and those caught in a hereditary shortness endeavor to conform
to the stature of the come and coming woman.

There is another theory, that must be put forward with some
hesitation, for the so-called emancipation of woman is a delicate
subject to deal with, for while all the sex doubtless feel the
impulse of the new time, there are still many who indignantly
reject the implication in the struggle for the rights of women.
To say, therefore, that women are becoming tall as a part of their
outfit for taking the place of men in this world would be to many
an affront, so that this theory can only be suggested.

Yet probably physiology would bear us out in saying that the truly
emancipated woman, taking at last the place in affairs which men
have flown in the face of Providence by denying her, would
be likely to expand physically as well as mentally, and that as
she is beginning to look down upon man intellectually,
she is likely to have a corresponding physical standard.

Seriously, however, none of these theories are altogether
satisfactory, and we are inclined to seek, as is best in all
cases, the simplest explanation. Women are tall and becoming
tall simply because it is the fashion, and that statement never
needs nor is capable of any explanation. Awhile ago it was the
fashion to be petite and arch; it is now the fashion to be tall
and gracious, and nothing more can be said about it.

Of course the reader, who is usually inclined to find the
facetious side of any grave topic, has already thought of the
application of the self-denying hymn, that man wants but little
here below, and wants that little long; but this may be only a
passing sigh of the period. We are far from expressing any
preference for tall women over short women.
There are creative moods of the fancy when each seems the better.
We can only chronicle, but never create.

THE DEADLY DIARY
Many people regard the keeping of a diary as a meritorious
occupation.
The young are urged to take up this cross; it is supposed to
benefit girls especially. Whether women should do it is to some
minds not an open question, although there is on record the case
of the Frenchman who tried to shoot himself when he heard
that his wife was keeping a diary. This intention of suicide
may have arisen from the fear that his wife was keeping a record
of his own peccadilloes rather than of her own thoughts and
emotions. Or it may have been from the fear that she was putting
down those little conjugal remarks which the husband always
dislikes to have thrown up to him, and which a woman can usually
quote accurately, it may be for years, it may be forever, without
the help of a diary.

So we can appreciate without approving the terror of the Frenchman
at living on and on in the same house with a growing diary. For
it is not simply that this little book of judgment is there in
black and white, but that the maker of it is increasing her power
of minute observation and analytic expression. In discussing
the question whether a woman should keep a diary it is understood
that it is not a mere memorandum of events and engagements, such
as both men and women of business and affairs necessarily
keep, but the daily record which sets down feelings,
emotions, and impressions, and criticises people and records
opinions.

But this is a question that applies to men as well as to
women.

It has been assumed that the diary serves two good purposes:
it is a disciplinary exercise for the keeper of it, and perhaps
a moral guide; and it has great historical value.
As to the first, it may be helpful to order, method, discipline,
and it may be an indulgence of spleen, whims, and unwholesome
criticism and conceit. The habit of saying right out what
you think of everybody is not a good one, and the record of
such opinions and impressions, while it is not so mischievous
to the public as talking may be, is harmful to the recorder.
And when we come to the historical value of the diary, we confess
to a growing suspicion of it. It is such a deadly weapon when
it comes to light after the passage of years.

It has an authority which the spoken words of its keeper never
had. It is 'ex parte', and it cannot be cross-examined. The
supposition is that being contemporaneous with the events
spoken of, it must be true, and that it is an honest record.
Now, as a matter of fact, we doubt if people are any more
honest as to themselves or others in a diary than out of it; and
rumors, reported facts, and impressions set down daily in the heat
and haste of the prejudicial hour are about as likely to be
wrong as right.
Two diaries of the same events rarely agree. And in turning
over an old diary we never know what to allow for the personal
equation. The diary is greatly relied on by the writers of
history, but it is doubtful if there is any such liar in the
world, even when the keeper of it is honest. It is certain to be
partisan, and more liable to be misinformed than a newspaper,
which exercises some care in view of immediate publicity. The
writer happens to know of two diaries which record, on the
testimony of eye-witnesses, the circumstances of the last hours
of Garfield, and they differ utterly in essential particulars.
One of these may turn up fifty years from now, and be accepted as
true. An infinite amount of gossip goes into diaries about men
and women that would not stand the test of a moment's contemporary
publication. But by-and-by it may all be used to smirch or
brighten unjustly some one's character. Suppose a man in the Army
of the Potomac had recorded daily all his opinions of men
and events. Reading it over now, with more light and a juster
knowledge of character and of measures, is it not probable that
he would find it a tissue of misconceptions? Few things are
actually what they seem today; they are colored both by misapprehensions
and by moods. If a man writes a letter or makes report of an
occurrence for immediate publication, subject to universal
criticism, there is some restraint on him.

In his private letter, or diary especially, he is apt to set down
what comes into his head at the moment, often without much
effort at verification.

We have been led to this disquisition into the fundamental nature
of this private record by the question put to us, whether it is a
good plan for a woman to keep a diary. Speaking generally,
the diary has become a sort of fetich, the authority of which ought
to be overthrown.

It is fearful to think how our characters are probably being lied
away by innumerable pen scratches in secret repositories, which
may some day come to light as unimpeachable witnesses. The
reader knows that he is not the sort of man which the diarist
jotted him down to be in a single interview. The diary may be
a good thing for self-education, if the keeper could insure its
destruction. The mental habit of diarizing may have some
value, even when it sets undue importance upon trifles. We
confess that, never having seen a woman's private diary (except
those that have been published), we do not share the popular
impression as to their tenuity implied in the question put
to us. Taking it for granted that they are full of noble thoughts
and beautiful imaginings, we doubt whether the time spent on
them could not be better employed in acquiring knowledge or taking
exercise. For the diary forgotten and left to the next generation
may be as dangerous as dynamite.

THE WHISTLING GIRL
The wisdom of our ancestors packed away in proverbial sayings
may always be a little suspected. We have a vague respect for
a popular proverb, as embodying folk-experience, and expressing
not the wit of one, but the common thought of a race. We
accept the saying unquestioning, as a sort of inspiration out of
the air, true because nobody has challenged it for ages, and probably
for the same reason that we try to see the new moon over our left
shoulder.

Very likely the musty saying was the product of the average ignorance
of an unenlightened time, and ought not to have the respect of
a scientific and traveled people. In fact it will be found
that a large proportion of the proverbial sayings which we glibly
use are fallacies based on a very limited experience of the
world, and probably were set afloat by the idiocy or
prejudice of one person. To examine one of them is enough for our
present purpose.

"Whistling girls and crowing hens Always come to some bad ends."

It would be interesting to know the origin of this proverb, because
it is still much relied on as evincing a deep knowledge of human
nature, and as an argument against change, that is to say, in this
case, against progress.

It would seem to have been made by a man, conservative, perhaps
malevolent, who had no appreciation of a hen, and a conservatively
poor opinion of woman. His idea was to keep woman in her place--a
good idea when not carried too far--but he did not know what her
place is, and he wanted to put a sort of restraint upon her
emancipation by coupling her with an emancipated hen. He therefore
launched this shaft of ridicule, and got it to pass as an arrow of
wisdom shot out of a popular experience in remote ages.
In the first place, it is not true, and probably never was true
even when hens were at their lowest.This "beef cut" was
held apart and driven on ahead from place to place as the
round-up progressed. It was then driven in by easy stages to the
shipping point on the railroad, whence the long trainloads of
cattle went to the great markets.

In the heyday of the cowboy it was natural that his chief
amusements should be those of the outdoor air and those more or
less in line with his employment. He was accustomed to the sight
of big game, and so had the edge of his appetite for its pursuit
worn off. Yet he was a hunter, just as every Western man was a
hunter in the times of the Western game. His weapons were the
rifle, revolver, and rope; the latter two were always with him.
With the rope at times he captured the coyote, and under special
conditions he has taken deer and even antelope in this way,
though this was of course most unusual and only possible under
chance conditions of ground and cover. Elk have been roped by
cowboys many times, and it is known that even the mountain sheep
has been so taken, almost incredible as that may seem. The young
buffalo were easy prey for the cowboy and these he often roped
and made captive. In fact the beginnings of all the herds of
buffalo now in captivity in this country were the calves roped
and secured by cowboys; and these few scattered individuals of a
grand race of animals remain as melancholy reminders alike of a
national shiftlessness and an individual skill and daring.

The grizzly was at times seen by the cowboys on the range, and if
it chanced that several cowboys were together it was not unusual
to give him chase. They did not always rope him, for it was
rarely that the nature of the country made this possible.
Sometimes they roped him and wished they could let him go, for a
grizzly bear is uncommonly active and straightforward in his
habits at close quarters. The extreme difficulty of such a
combat, however, gave it its chief fascination for the cowboy. Of
course, no one horse could hold the bear after it was roped, but,
as one after another came up, the bear was caught by neck and
foot and body, until at last he was tangled and tripped and
hauled
about till he was helpless, strangled, and nearly dead. It is
said that cowboys have so brought into camp a grizzly bear,
forcing him to half walk and half slide at the end of the ropes.
No feat better than this could show the courage of the plainsman
and of the horse which he so perfectly controlled.

Of such wild and dangerous exploits were the cowboy's amusements
on the range. It may be imagined what were his amusements when he
visited the "settlements." The cow-punchers, reared in the free
life of the open air, under circumstances of the utmost freedom
of individual action, perhaps came off the drive or round-up
after weeks or months of unusual restraint or hardship, and felt
that the time had arrived for them to "celebrate." Merely great
rude children, as wild and untamed and untaught as the herds they
led, they regarded their first look at the "settlements" of the
railroads as a glimpse of a wider world. They pursued to the
uttermost such avenues of new experience as lay before them,
almost without exception avenues of vice. It is strange that the
records of those days should be chosen by the public to be held
as the measure of the American cowboy. Those days were brief, and
they are long since gone. The American cowboy atoned for them by
a quarter of a century of faithful labor.

The amusements of the cowboy were like the features of his daily
surroundings and occupation--they were intense, large, Homeric.
Yet, judged at his work, no higher type of employee ever existed,
nor one more dependable. He was the soul of honor in all the ways
of his calling. The very blue of the sky, bending evenly over all
men alike, seemed to symbolize his instinct for justice.
Faithfulness and manliness were his chief traits; his
standard--to be a "square man."

Not all the open range will ever be farmed, but very much that
was long thought to be irreclaimable has gone under irrigation or
is being more or less successfully "dryfarmed." The man who
brought water upon the arid lands of the West changed the entire
complexion of a vast country and with it the industries of that
country. Acres redeemed from the desert and added to the realm of
the American farmer were taken from the realm of the American
cowboy.

The West has changed. The curtain has dropped between us and its
wild and stirring scenes. The old days are gone. The house dog
sits on the hill where yesterday the coyote sang. There are
fenced fields and in them stand sleek round beasts, deep in crops
such as their ancestors never saw. In a little town nearby is the
hurry and bustle of modern life. This town is far out upon what
was called the frontier, long after the frontier has really gone.
Guarding its ghost here stood a little army post, once one of the
pillars, now one of the monuments of the West.

Out from the tiny settlement in the dusk of evening, always
facing toward where the sun is sinking, might be seen riding, not
so long ago, a figure we should know. He would thread the little
lane among the fences, following the guidance of hands other than
his own, a thing he would once have scorned to do. He would ride
as lightly and as easily as ever, sitting erect and jaunty in the
saddle, his reins held high and loose in the hand whose fingers
turn up gracefully, his whole body free yet firm in the saddle
with the seat of the perfect horseman. At the boom of the cannon,
when the flag dropped fluttering down to sleep, he would rise in
his stirrups and wave his hat to the flag. Then, toward the edge,
out into the evening, he would ride on. The dust of his riding
would mingle with the dusk of night. We could not see which was
the one or the other. We could only hear the hoofbeats passing,
boldly and steadily still, but growing fainter, fainter, and more
faint.*

* For permission to use in this chapter material from the
author's "The Story of the Cowboy," acknowledgment is made to D.
Appleton & Co.


Chapter V. The Mines

If the influence of the cattle industry was paramount in the
development of the frontier region found by the first railways,
it should not be concluded that this upthrust of the southern
cattle constituted the only contribution to the West of that day.
There were indeed earlier influences, the chief of which was the
advent of the wild population of the placer mines. It is false as
to the hen. A crowing hen was always an object of
interest and distinction; she was pointed out to visitors; the
owner was proud of her accomplishment, he was naturally likely to
preserve her life, and especially if she could lay.

A hen that can lay and crow is a 'rara avis'. And it
should be parenthetically said here that the hen who can crow
and cannot lay is not a good example for woman. The crowing
hen was of more value than the silent hen, provided she crowed
with discretion; and she was likely to be a favorite, and not
at all to come to some bad end. Except, indeed, where the
proverb tended to work its own fulfillment. And this is the
regrettable side of most proverbs of an ill-nature, that they do
help to work the evil they predict.

Some foolish boy, who had heard this proverb, and was sent out
to the hen-coop in the evening to slay for the Thanksgiving feast,
thought he was a justifiable little providence in wringing the neck
of the crowing hen, because it was proper (according to the saying)
that she should come to some bad end.

And as years went on, and that kind of boy increased and got to
be a man, it became a fixed idea to kill the amusing, interesting,
spirited, emancipated hen, and naturally the barn-yard became
tamer and tamer, the production of crowing hens was discouraged
(the wise old hens laid no eggs with a crow in them, according to
the well-known principle of heredity), and the man who had in
his youth exterminated the hen of progress actually went about
quoting that false couplet as an argument against the higher
education of woman.

As a matter of fact, also, the couplet is not true about woman;
whether it ought to be true is an ethical question that will
not be considered here. The whistling girl does not commonly
come to a bad end. Quite as often as any other girl she learns
to whistle a cradle song, low and sweet and charming, to the young
voter in the cradle.

She is a girl of spirit, of independence of character, of
dash and flavor; and as to lips, why, you must have some sort
of presentable lips to whistle; thin ones will not. The whistling
girl does not come to a bad end at all (if marriage is still
considered a good occupation), except a cloud may be thrown upon
her exuberant young life by this rascally proverb. Even if she
walks the lonely road of life, she has this advantage, that
she can whistle to keep her courage up.

But in a larger sense, one that this practical age can understand,
it is not true that the whistling girl comes to a bad end.
Whistling pays. It has brought her money; it has blown her name
about the listening world. Scarcely has a non-whistling woman
been more famous. She has set aside the adage. She has done
so much towards the emancipation of her sex from the prejudice
created by an ill-natured proverb which never had root in fact.

But has the whistling woman come to stay? Is it well for woman
to whistle? Are the majority of women likely to be whistlers?
Here the indomitable packer from the West, conquering unheard-of
difficulties, brought in whiskey, women, pianos, food, mining
tools. Naturally all these commanded fabulous prices. The price
for each and all lay underfoot. Man, grown superman, could
overleap time itself by a stroke of the pick! What wonder
delirium reigned!

These events became known in the Mississippi Valley and farther
eastward. And now there came hurrying out from the older regions
many more hundreds and thousands eager to reach a land not so far
as California, but reputed to be quite as rich. It was then, as
the bull-trains came in from the East, from the head of
navigation on the Missouri River, that the western outfitting
points of Walla Walla and Lewiston lost their importance.

Southward of the Idaho camps the same sort of story was repeating
itself. Nevada had drawn to herself a portion of the wild men of
the stampedes. Carson for its day (1859-60) was a capital not
unlike the others. Some of its men had come down from the upper
fields, some had arrived from the East over the old Santa Fe
Trail, and yet others had drifted in from California.

All the camps were very much alike. A straggling row of log
cabins or huts of motley construction; a few stores so-called,
sometimes of logs, or, if a saw-mill was at hand, of rude sawn
boards; a number of saloons, each of which customarily also
supported a dance-hall; a series of cabins or huts where dwelt
individual men, each doing his own cooking and washing; and
outside these huts the uptorn earth--such were the camps which
dotted the trails of the stampedes across inhospitable deserts
and mountain ranges. Church and school were unknown. Law there
was none, for of organized society there was none. The women who
lived there were unworthy of the name of woman. The men strode
about in the loose dress of the camp, sometimes without
waistcoat, sometimes coatless, shod with heavy boots, always
armed.

If we look for causes contributory to the history of the
mining-camp, we shall find one which ordinarily is
overlooked--the invention of Colt's revolving pistol. At the time
of the Civil War, though this weapon was not old, yet it had
attained very general use throughout the frontier. That was
before the day of modern ammunition. The six-shooter of the
placer days was of the old cap-and-ball type, heavy,
long-barreled, and usually wooden-handled. It was the general
ownership of these deadly weapons which caused so much bloodshed
in the camps. The revolver in the hands of a tyro is not
especially serviceable, but it attained great deadliness in the
hands of an expert user. Such a man, naturally of quick nerve
reflexes, skillful and accurate in the use of the weapon through
long practice, became a dangerous, and for a time an
unconquerable, antagonist.

It is a curious fact that the great Montana fields were doubly
discovered, in part by men coming east from California, and in
part by men passing west in search of new gold-fields. The first
discovery of gold in Montana was made on Gold Creek by a
half-breed trapper named Francois, better known as Be-net-see.
This was in 1852, but the news seems to have lain dormant for a
time--naturally enough, for there was small ingress or egress for
that wild and unknown country. In 1857, however, a party of
miners who had wandered down the Big Hole River on their way back
east from California decided to look into the Gold Creek
discovery, of which they had heard. This party was led by James
and Granville Stuart, and among others in the party were Jake
Meeks, Robert Hereford, Robert Dempsey, John W. Powell, John M.
Jacobs, Thomas Adams, and some others. These men did some work on
Gold Creek in 1858, but seem not to have struck it very rich, and
to have withdrawn to Fort Bridger in Utah until the autumn of
1860. Then a prospector by the name of Tom Golddigger turned up
at Bridger with additional stories of creeks to the north, so
that there was a gradual straggling back toward Gold Creek and
other gulches. This prospector had been all over the Alder Gulch,
which was ere long to prove fabulously rich.

It was not, however, until 1863 that the Montana camps sprang
into fame. It was not Gold Creek or Alder Gulch, but Florence and
other Idaho camps, that, in the summer and autumn of 1862,
brought into the mountains no less than five parties of
gold-seekers, who remained in Montana because they could not
penetrate the mountain barrier which lay between them and the
Salmon River camps in Idaho.

The first of these parties arrived at Gold Creek by wagon-train
from Fort Benton and the second hailed from Salt Lake. An
election was held for the purpose of forming a sort of community
organization, the first election ever known in Montana. The men
from the East had brought with them some idea of law and
organization. There were now in the Montana fields many good men
such as the Stuart Brothers, Samuel T. Hauser, Walter Dance, and
others later well known in the State. These men were prominent in
the organization of the first miners' court, which had occasion
to try--and promptly to hang--Stillman and Jernigan, two ruffians
who had been in from the Salmon River mines only about four days
when they thus met retribution for their early crimes. An
associate of theirs, Arnett, had been killed while resisting
arrest. The reputation of Florence for lawlessness and bloodshed
was well known; and, as the outrages of the well-organized band
of desperadoes operating in Idaho might be expected to begin at
any time in Montana, a certain uneasiness existed among the
newcomers from the States.

Two more parties, likewise bound for Idaho and likewise baffled
by the Salmon River range, arrived at the Montana camps in the
same summer. Both these were from the Pike's Peak country in
Colorado. And in the autumn came a fifth--this one under military
protection, Captain James L. Fisk commanding, and having in the
party a number of settlers bound for Oregon as well as miners for
Idaho. This expedition arrived in the Prickly Pear Valley in
Montana on September 21, 1862, having left St. Paul on the 16th
of June, traveling by steamboat and wagon-train. While Captain
Fisk and his expedition pushed on to Walla Walla, nearly half of
the immigrants stayed to try their luck at placer-mining. But the
yield was not great and the distant Salmon River mines, their
original destination, still awaited them. Winter was approaching.
It was now too late in the season to reach the Salmon River
mines, five hundred miles across the mountains, and it was four
hundred miles to Salt Lake, the nearest supply post; therefore,
most of the men joined this little army of prospectors in
Montana. Some of them drifted to the Grasshopper diggings, soon
to be known under the name of Bannack--one of the wildest
mining-camps of its day.

These different origins of the population of the first Montana
camps are interesting because of the fact that they indicate a
difference in the two currents of population which now met here
in the new placer fields. In general the wildest and most
desperate of the old-time adventurers, those coming from the
West, had located in the Idaho camps, and might be expected in
Montana at any time. In contrast to these, the men lately out
from the States were of a different type, many of them sober,
most of them law-abiding, men who had come out to better their
fortunes and not merely to drop into the wild and licentious life
of a placercamp. Law and order always did prevail eventually in
any mining community. In the case of Montana, law and order
arrived almost synchronously with lawlessness and desperadoism.

Law and order had not long to wait before the arrival of the
notorious Henry Plummer and his band from Florence. Plummer was
already known as a bad man, but was not yet recognized as the
leader of that secret association of robbers and murderers which
had terrorized the Idaho camps. He celebrated his arrival in
Bannack by killing a man named Cleveland. He was acquitted in the
miners' court that tried him, on the usual plea of self-defense.
He was a man of considerable personal address.

The same tribunal soon assembled once more to try three other
murderers, Moore, Reeves, and Mitchell, with the agreement that
the men should have a jury and should be provided with counsel.
They were all practically freed; and after that the roughs grew
bolder than ever. The Plummer band swore to kill every man who
had served in that court, whether as juryman or officer. So well
did they make good their threat that out of the twenty-seven men
thus engaged all but seven were either killed or driven out of
the country, nine being murdered outright. The man who had acted
as sheriff of this miners' court, Hank Crawford, was unceasingly
hounded by Plummer, who sought time and again to fix a quarrel on
him. Plummer was the best shot in the mountains at that time, and
he thought it would be easy for him to kill his man and enter the
usual plea of self-defense. By good fortune, however, Crawford
caught Plummer off his guard and fired upon him with a rifle,
breaking his right arm. Plummer's friends called in Dr. Glick,
the best physician in Bannack, to treat the wounded man, warning
him that if he told anything about the visit he would be shot
down. Glick held his peace, and later was obliged to attend many
of the wounded outlaws, who were always engaged in affairs with
firearms.

Of all these wild affrays, of the savage life which they denoted,
and of the stern ways in which retribution overtook the
desperadoes of the mines, there is no better historian than
Nathaniel P. Langford, a prominent citizen of the West, who
accompanied the overland expedition of 1862 and took part in the
earliest life of Montana. His work, "Vigilante Days and Ways," is
an invaluable contemporary record.

It is mentally difficult for us now fully to restore these
scenes, although the events occurred no earlier than the Civil
War. "Life in Bannack at this time," says Langford, "was perfect
isolation from the rest of the world. Napoleon was not more of an
exile on St. Helena than a newly arrived immigrant from the
States in this region of lakes and mountains. All the great
battles of the season of 1862--Antietam, Fredericksburg, Second
Bull Run--all the exciting debates of Congress, and the more
exciting combats at sea, first became known to us on the arrival
of newspapers and letters in the spring of 1863.

The Territory of Idaho, which included Montana and nearly all
Wyoming, was organized March 3, 1863. Previous to that time
western Montana and Idaho formed a part of Washington Territory,
of which Olympia was the capital, and Montana, east of the
mountains, belonged to the Territory of Dakota, of which the
capital was Yankton, on the Missouri. Langford makes clear the
political uncertainties of the time, the difficulty of enforcing
the laws, and narrates the circumstances which led to the
erection in 1864 of the new Territory of Montana, comprising the
limits of the present State.*

* The Acts of Congress organizing Territories and admitting
States are milestones in the occupation of this last West. On the
eve of the Civil War, Kansas was admitted into the Union; during
the war, the Territories of Colorado, Nevada, Dakota, Arizona,
Idaho, and Montana were organized, and Nevada was admitted as a
State. Immediately after the war, Nebraska was admitted and
Wyoming was organized as a Territory. In the Centennial Year
(1876) Colorado became a State. In 1889 and 1890 North and South
Dakota, Montana, Washington, Idaho, and Wyoming were admitted as
States. In the latter year Oklahoma was carved out of the Indian
Territory. Utah with its Mormon population was kept waiting at
the doors of the Union until 1896. Oklahoma became a State in
1907; Arizona and New Mexico were admitted in 1912.


In Montana as elsewhere in these days of great sectional
bitterness, there was much political strife; and this no doubt
accounts for an astonishing political event that now took place.
Henry Plummer, the most active outlaw of his day, was elected
sheriff and entrusted with the enforcement of the laws! He made
indeed a great show of enforcing the laws. He married, settled
down, and for a time was thought by some of the ill-advised to
have reformed his ways, although in truth he could not have
reformed.

By June, 1863, the extraordinarily rich strike in Alder Gulch had
been made. The news of this spread like wildfire to Bannack and
to the Salmon River mines in Idaho as well, and the result was
one of the fiercest of all the stampedes, and the rise, almost
overnight, of Virginia City. Meanwhile some Indian fighting had
taken place and in a pitched battle on the Bear River General
Connor had beaten decisively the Bannack Indians, who for years
had preyed on the emigrant trains. This made travel on the
mountain trails safer than it had been; and the rich Last Chance
Gulch on which the city of Helena now stands attracted a
tremendous population almost at once. The historian above cited
lived there. Let him tell of the life.

"One long stream of active life filled the little creek on its
auriferous course from Bald Mountain, through a canyon of wild
and picturesque character, until it emerged into the large and
fertile valley of the Pas-sam-a-ri...the mountain stream
called by Lewis and Clark in their journal "Philanthropy River."
Lateral streams of great beauty pour down the sides of the
mountain chain bounding the valley.... Gold placers were
found upon these streams and occupied soon after the settlement
at Virginia City was commenced.... This human hive, numbering
at least ten thousand people, was the product of ninety days.
Into it were crowded all the elements of a rough and active
civilization. Thousands of cabins and tents and brush wakiups...
were seen on every hand. Every foot of the gulch...was
undergoing displacement, and it was already disfigured by huge
heaps of gravel which had been passed through the sluices and
rifled of their glittering contents.... Gold was abundant,
and every possible device was employed by the gamblers, the
traders, the vile men and women that had come in with the miners
into the locality, to obtain it. Nearly every third cabin was a
saloon where vile whiskey was peddled out for fifty cents a
drink in gold dust. Many of these places were filled with
gambling tables and gamblers.... Hurdy-gurdy dance-houses
were numerous.... Not a day or night passed which did not
yield its full fruition of vice, quarrels, wounds, or murders.
The crack of the revolver was often heard above the merry notes
of the violin. Street fights were frequent, and as no one knew
when or where they would occur, every one was on his guard
against a random shot.

"Sunday was always a gala day.... The stores were all open....
Thousands of people crowded the thoroughfares ready to rush
in the direction of any promised excitement. Horse-racing was
among the most favored amusements. Prize rings were formed, and
brawny men engaged in fisticuffs until their sight was lost and
their bodies pommelled to a jelly, while hundreds of onlookers
cheered the victor.... Pistols flashed, bowie knives
flourished, and braggart oaths filled the air, as often as men's
passions triumphed over their reason. This was indeed the reign
of unbridled license, and men who at first regarded it with
disgust and terror, by constant exposure soon learned to become a
part of it and forget that they had ever been aught else. All
classes of society were represented at this general exhibition.
Judges, lawyers, doctors, even clergymen, could not claim
exemption. Culture and religion afforded feeble protection, where
allurement and indulgence ruled the hour."

Imagine, therefore, a fabulously rich mountain valley twelve
miles in extent, occupied by more than ten thousand men and
producing more than ten millions of dollars before the close of
the first year! It is a stupendous demand on any imagination. How
might all this gold be sent out in safe-keeping? We are told that
the only stage route extended from Virginia City no farther than
Bannack. Between Virginia City and Salt Lake City there was an
absolute wilderness, wholly unsettled, four hundred and
seventy-five miles in width. "There was no post office in the
Territory. Letters were brought from Salt Lake first at a cost of
two dollars and a half each, and later in the season at one
dollar each. All money at infinite risk was sent to the nearest
express office at Salt Lake City by private hands."

Practically every man in the new gold-fields was aware of the
existence of a secret band of well-organized ruffians and
robbers. The general feeling was one of extreme uneasiness. There
were plenty of men who had taken out of the ground considerable
quantities of gold, and who would have been glad to get back to
the East with their little fortunes, but they dared not start.
Time after time the express coach, the solitary rider, the
unguarded wagon-train, were held up and robbed, usually with the
concomitant of murder. When the miners did start out from one
camp to another they took all manner of precautions to conceal
their gold dust. We are told that on one occasion one party bored
a hole in the end of the wagon tongue with an auger and filled it
full of gold dust, thus escaping observation! The robbers learned
to know the express agents, and always had advice of every large
shipment of gold. It was almost useless to undertake to conceal
anything from them; and resistance was met with death. Such a
reign of terror, such an organized system of highway robbery,
such a light valuing of human life, has been seldom found in any
other time or place.

There were, as we have seen, good men in these camps--although
the best of them probably let down the standards of living
somewhat after their arrival there; but the trouble was that the
good men did not know one another, had no organization, and
scarcely dared at first to attempt one. On the other hand, the
robbers' organization was complete and kept its secrets as the
grave; indeed, many and many a lonesome grave held secrets none
ever was to know. How many men went out from Eastern States and
disappeared, their fate always to remain a mystery, is a part of
the untold story of the mining frontier.

There are known to have been a hundred and two men killed by
Plummer and his gang; how many were murdered without their fate
ever being discovered can not be told. Plummer was the leader of
the band, but, arch-hypocrite that he was, he managed to keep his
own connection with it a secret. His position as sheriff gave him
many advantages. He posed as being a silver-mine expert, among
other things, and often would be called out to "expert" some new
mine. That usually meant that he left town in order to commit
some desperate robbery. The boldest outrages always required
Plummer as the leader. Sometimes he would go away on the pretense
of following some fugitive from justice. His horse, the fleetest
in the country, often was found, laboring and sweating, at the
rear of his house. That meant that Plummer had been away on some
secret errand of his own. He was suspected many times, but
nothing could be fastened upon him; or there lacked sufficient
boldness and sufficient organization on the part of the
law-and-order men to undertake his punishment.

We are not concerned with repeating thrilling tales, bloody
almost beyond belief, and indicative of an incomprehensible
depravity in human nature, so much as we are with the causes and
effects of this wild civilization which raged here quite alone in
the midst of one of the wildest of the western mountain regions.
It will best serve our purpose to retain in mind the twofold
character of this population, and to remember that the frontier
caught to itself not only ruffians and desperadoes, men undaunted
by any risk, but also men possessed of a yet steadier personal
courage and hardihood. There were men rough, coarse, brutal,
murderous; but against them were other men self-reliant, stern,
just, and resolved upon fair play.

That was indeed the touchstone of the entire civilization which
followed upon the heels of these scenes of violence. It was fair
play which really animated the great Montana Vigilante movement
and which eventually cleaned up the merciless gang of Henry
Plummer and his associates. The centers of civilization were far
removed. The courts were powerless. In some cases even the
machinery of the law was in the hands of these ruffians. But so
violent were their deeds, so brutal, so murderous, so unfair,
that slowly the indignation of the good men arose to the
white-hot point of open resentment and of swift retribution. What
the good men of the frontier loved most of all was justice. They
now enforced justice in the only way left open to them. They did
this as California earlier had done; and they did it so well that
there was small need to repeat the lesson.

The actual extermination of the Henry Plummer band occurred
rather promptly when the Vigilantes once got under way. One of
the band by the name of Red Yager, in company with yet another by
the name of Brown, had been concerned in the murder of Lloyd
Magruder, a merchant of the Territory. The capture of these two
followed closely upon the hanging of George Ives, also accused of
more than one murder. Ives was an example of the degrading
influence of the mines. He was a decent young man until he left
his home in Wisconsin. He was in California from 1857 to 1858.
When he appeared in Idaho he seemed to have thrown off all
restraint and to have become a common rowdy and desperado. It is
said of him that "few men of his age ever had been guilty of so
many fiendish crimes."

Yager and Brown, knowing the fate which Ives had met, gave up
hope when they fell into the hands of the newly organized
Vigilantes. Brown was hanged; so was Yager; but Yager, before his
death, made a full confession which put the Vigilantes in
possession of information they had never yet been able to
secure.*

* Langford gives these names disclosed by Yager as follows:
"Henry Plummer was chief of the band; Bill Bunton, stool pigeon
and second in command; George Brown, secretary; Sam Bunton,
roadster; Cyrus Skinner, fence, spy, and roadster; George Shears,
horse thief and roadster; Frank Parish, horse thief and roadster;
Hayes Lyons, telegraph man and roadster; Bill Hunter, telegraph
man and roadster; Ned Ray, council-room keeper at Bannack City;
George Ives, Stephen Marshland, Dutch John (Wagner), Alex Carter,
Whiskey Bill (Graves), Johnny Cooper, Buck Stinson, Mexican
Franks Bob Zachary, Boone Helm, Clubfoot George (Lane), Billy
Terwiliger, Gad Moore were roadsters." Practically all these were
executed by the Vigilantes, with many others, and eventually the
band of outlaws was entirely broken up.


Much has been written and much romanced about the conduct of
these desperadoes when they met their fate. Some of them were
brave and some proved cowards at the last. For a time, Plummer
begged abjectly, his eyes streaming with tears. Suddenly he was
smitten with remorse as the whole picture of his past life
appeared before him. He promised everything, begged everything,
if only life might be spared him--asked his captors to cut off
his ears, to cut out his tongue, then strip him naked and banish
him. At the very last, however, he seems to have become composed.
Stinson and Ray went to their fate alternately swearing and
whining. Some of the ruffians faced death boldly. More than one
himself jumped from the ladder or kicked from under him the box
which was the only foothold between him and eternity. Boone Helm
was as hardened as any of them. This man was a cannibal and
murderer. He seems to have had no better nature whatever. His
last words as he sprang off were "Hurrah for Jeff Davis! Let her
rip!" Another man remarked calmly that he cared no more for
hanging than for drinking a glass of water. But each after his
own fashion met the end foreordained for him by his own lack of
compassion; and of compassion he received none at the hands of
the men who had resolved that the law should be established and
should remain forever.

There was an instant improvement in the social life of Virginia
City, Bannack, and the adjoining camps as soon as it was
understood that the Vigilantes were afoot. Langford, who
undoubtedly knew intimately of the activities of this
organization, makes no apology for the acts of the Vigilantes,
although they did not have back of them the color of the actual
law. He says:

"The retribution dispensed to these daring freebooters in no
respect exceeded the demands of absolute justice.... There
was no other remedy. Practically the citizens had no law, but if
law had existed it could not have afforded adequate redress. This
was proven by the feeling of security consequent upon the
destruction of the band. When the robbers were dead the people
felt safe, not for themselves alone but for their pursuits and
their property. They could travel without fear. They had
reasonable assurance of safety in the transmission of money to
the States and in the arrival of property over the unguarded
route from Salt Lake. The crack of pistols had ceased, and they
could walk the streets without constant exposure to danger. There
was an omnipresent spirit of protection, akin to that omnipresent
spirit of law which pervaded older and more civilized
communities....Young men who had learned to believe that the
roughs were destined to rule and who, under the influence of that
faith, were fast drifting into crime shrunk appalled before the
thorough work of the Vigilantes. Fear, more potent than
conscience, forced even the worst of men to observe the
requirements of society, and a feeling of comparative security
among all classes was the result."

Naturally it was not the case that all the bad men were thus
exterminated. From time to time there appeared vividly in the
midst of these surroundings additional figures of solitary
desperadoes, each to have his list of victims, and each himself
to fall before the weapons of his enemies or to meet the justice
of the law or the sterner meed of the Vigilantes. It would not be
wholly pleasant to read even the names of a long list of these;
perhaps it will be sufficient to select one, the notorious Joseph
Slade, one of the "picturesque" characters of whom a great deal
of inaccurate and puerile history has been written. The truth
about Slade is that he was a good man at first, faithful in the
discharge of his duties as an agent of the stage company. Needing
at times to use violence lawfully, he then began to use it
unlawfully. He drank and soon went from bad to worse. At length
his outrages became so numerous that the men of the community
took him out and hanged him. His fate taught many others the risk
of going too far in defiance of law and decency.

What has been true regarding the camps of Florence, Bannack, and
Virginia City, had been true in part in earlier camps and was to
be repeated perhaps a trifle less vividly in other camps yet to
come. The Black Hills gold rush, for instance, which came after
the railroad but before the Indians were entirely cleared away,
made a certain wild history of its own. We had our Deadwood stage
line then, and our Deadwood City with all its wild life of
drinking, gambling, and shooting--the place where more than one
notorious bad man lost his life, and some capable officers of the
peace shared their fate. To describe in detail the life of this
stampede and the wild scenes ensuing upon it is perhaps not
needful here. The main thing is that the great quartz lodes of
the Black Hills support in the end a steady, thrifty, and
law-abiding population.

All over that West, once so unspeakably wild and reckless, there
now rise great cities where recently were scattered only
mining-camps scarce fit to be called units of any social compact.
It was but yesterday that these men fought and drank and dug
their own graves in their own sluices. At the city of Helena, on
the site of Last Chance Gulch, one recalls that not so long ago
citizens could show with a certain contemporary pride the old
dead tree once known as "Hangman's Tree." It marked a spot which
might be called a focus of the old frontier. Around it, and in
the country immediately adjoining, was fought out the great
battle whose issue could not be doubted--that between the new and
the old days; between law and order and individual lawlessness;
between the school and the saloon; between the home and the
dance-hall; between society united and resolved and the
individual reverted to worse than savagery.


Chapter VI. The Pathways Of The West

Since we have declared ourselves to be less interested in bald
chronology than in the naturally connected causes of events which
make chronology worth while, we may now, perhaps, double back
upon the path of chronology, and take up the great early highways
of the West--what we might call the points of attack against the
frontier.

The story of the Santa Fe Trail, now passing into oblivion, once
was on the tongue of every man. This old highroad in its heyday
presented the most romantic and appealing features of the earlier
frontier life. The Santa Fe Trail was the great path of commerce
between our frontier and the Spanish towns trading through Santa
Fe. This commerce began in 1822, when about threescore men
shipped certain goods across the lower Plains by pack-animals. By
1826 it was employing a hundred men and was using wagons and
mules. In 1830, when oxen first were used on the trail, the trade
amounted to $120,000 annually; and by 1843, when the Spanish
ports were closed, it had reached the value of $450,000,
involving the use of 230 wagons and 350 men. It was this great
wagon trail which first brought us into touch with the Spanish
civilization of the Southwest. Its commercial totals do not bulk
large today, but the old trail itself was a thing titanic in its
historic value.

This was the day not of water but of land transport; yet the
wheeled vehicles which passed out into the West as common
carriers of civilization clung to the river valleys--natural
highways and natural resting places of homebuilding man. This has
been the story of the advance of civilization from the first
movements of the world's peoples. The valleys are the cleats of
civilization's golden sluices.

There lay the great valley of the Arkansas, offering food and
water, an easy grade and a direct course reaching out into the
West, even to the edge of the lands of Spain; and here stood
wheeled vehicles able to traverse it and to carry drygoods and
hardware, and especially domestic cotton fabrics, which formed
the great staple of a "Santa Fe assortment." The people of the
Middle West were now, in short, able to feed and clothe
themselves and to offer a little of their surplus merchandise to
some one else in sale. They had begun to export! Out yonder, in a
strange and unknown land, lay one of the original markets of
America!

On the heels of Lewis and Clark, who had just explored the
Missouri River route to the Northwest, Captain Zebulon Pike of
the Army, long before the first wheeled traffic started West, had
employed this valley of the Arkansas in his search for the
southwestern delimitations of the United States. Pike thought he
had found the head of the Red River when after a toilsome and
dangerous march he reached the headwaters of the Rio Grande. But
it was not our river. It belonged to Spain, as he learned to his
sorrow, when he marched all the way to Chihuahua in old Mexico
and lay there during certain weary months.

It was Pike's story of the far Southwest that first started the
idea of the commerce of the Santa Fe Trail. In that day geography
was a human thing, a thing of vital importance to all men. Men
did not read the stock markets; they read stories of adventure,
tales of men returned from lands out yonder in the West.
Heretofore the swarthy Mexicans, folk of the dry plains and hills
around the head of the Rio Grande and the Red, had carried their
cotton goods and many other small and needful things all the way
from Vera Cruz on the seacoast, over trails that were long,
tedious, uncertain, and expensive. A far shorter and more natural
trade route went west along the Arkansas, which would bring the
American goods to the doors of the Spanish settlements. After
Pike and one or two others had returned with reports of the
country, the possibilities of this trade were clear to any one
with the merchant's imagination.

There is rivalry for the title of "Father of the Santa Fe Trail."
As early as 1812, when the United States was at war with England,
a party of men on horseback trading into the West, commonly
called the McKnight, Baird, and Chambers party, made their way
west to Santa Fe. There, however, they met with disaster. All
their goods were confiscated and they themselves lay in Mexican
jails for nine years. Eventually the returning survivors of this
party told their stories, and those stories, far from chilling,
only inflamed the ardor of other adventurous traders. In 1821
more than one American trader reached Santa Fe; and, now that the
Spanish yoke had been thrown off by the Mexicans, the goods,
instead of being confiscated, were purchased eagerly.

It is to be remembered, of course, that trading of this sort to
Mexico was not altogether a new thing. Sutlers of the old fur
traders and trappers already had found the way to New Spain from
the valley of the Platte, south along the eastern edge of the
Rockies, through Wyoming and Colorado. By some such route as that
at least one trader, a French creole, agent of the firm of Bryant
& Morrison at Kaskaskia, had penetrated to the Spanish lands as
early as 1804, while Lewis and Clark were still absent in the
upper wilderness. Each year the great mountain rendezvous of the
trappers--now at Bent's Fort on the Arkansas, now at Horse Creek
in Wyoming, now on Green River in Utah, or even farther beyond
the mountains--demanded supplies of food and traps and ammunition
to enable the hunters to continue their work for another year.
Perhaps many of the pack-trains which regularly supplied this
shifting mountain market already had traded in the Spanish
country.

It is not necessary to go into further details regarding this
primitive commerce of the prairies. It yielded a certain profit;
it shaped the character of the men who carried it on. But what is
yet more important, it greatly influenced the country which lay
back of the border on the Missouri River. It called yet more men
from the eastern settlements to those portions which lay upon the
edge of the Great Plains. There crowded yet more thickly, up to
the line between the certain and the uncertain, the restless
westbound population of all the country.

If on the south the valley of the Arkansas led outward to New
Spain, yet other pathways made out from the Mississippi River
into the unknown lands. The Missouri was the first and last of
our great natural frontier roads. Its lower course swept along
the eastern edge of the Plains, far to the south, down to the
very doors of the most adventurous settlements in the Mississippi
Valley. Those who dared its stained and turbulent current had to
push up, onward, northward, past the mouth of the Platte, far to
the north across degrees of latitude, steadily forward through a
vast virgin land. Then the river bent boldly and strongly off to
the west, across another empire. Its great falls indicated that
it headed high; beyond the great falls its steady sweep westward
and at last southward, led into yet other kingdoms.

When we travel by horse or by modern motor car in that now
accessible region and look about us, we should not fail to
reflect on the long trail of the upbound boats which Manuel Lisa
and other traders sent out almost immediately upon the return of
the Lewis and Clark expedition. We should see them struggling up
against that tremendous current before steam was known, driven by
their lust for new lands. We may then understand fully what we
have read of the enterprises of the old American Fur Company, and
bring to mind the forgotten names of Campbell and Sublette, of
General Ashley and of Wyeth--names to be followed by others
really of less importance, as those of Bonneville and Fremont.
That there could be farms, that there ever might be homes, in
this strange wild country, was, to these early adventurers,
unthinkable.

Then we should picture the millions of buffalo which once covered
these plains and think of the waste and folly of their
slaughtering. We should see the long streams of the Mackinaw
boats swimming down the Missouri, bound for St. Louis, laden with
bales of buffalo and beaver peltry, every pound of which would be
worth ten dollars at the capital of the fur trade; and we should
restore to our minds the old pictures of savage tribesmen, decked
in fur-trimmed war-shirts and plumed bonnets, armed with lance
and sinewed bow and bull-neck shield, not forgetting whence they
got their horses and how they got their food.

The great early mid-continental highway, known as the Oregon
Trail or the Overland Trail, was by way of the Missouri up the
Platte Valley, thence across the mountains. We know more of this
route because it was not discontinued, but came steadily more and
more into use, for one reason after another. The fur traders used
it, the Forty-Niners used it, the cattlemen used it in part, the
railroads used it; and, lastly, the settlers and farmers used it
most of all.

In physical features the Platte River route was similar to that
of the Arkansas Valley. Each at its eastern extremity, for a few
days' travel, passed over the rolling grass-covered and
flower-besprinkled prairies ere it broke into the high and dry
lands of the Plains, with their green or grey or brown covering
of practically flowerless short grasses. But between the two
trails of the Arkansas and the Platte there existed certain wide
differences. At the middle of the nineteenth century the two
trails were quite distinct in personnel, if that word may be
used. The Santa Fe Trail showed Spanish influences; that of the
Platte Valley remained far more nearly American.

Thus far the frontier had always been altering the man who came
to it; and, indirectly, always altering those who dwelt back of
the frontier, nearer to the Appalachians or the Atlantic. A new
people now was in process of formation--a people born of a new
environment. America and the American were conceiving. There was
soon to be born, soon swiftly to grow, a new and lasting type of
man. Man changes an environment only by bringing into it new or
better transportation. Environment changes man. Here in the
midcontinent, at the mid-century, the frontier and the ways of
the frontier were writing their imprint on the human product of
our land.

The first great caravans of the Platte Valley, when the
wagon-trains went out hundreds strong, were not the same as the
scattering cavalcade of the fur hunters, not the same as the
ox-trains and mule-trains of the Santa Fe traffic. The men who
wore deepest the wheel marks of the Oregon Trail were neither
trading nor trapping men, but homebuilding men--the first real
emigrants to go West with the intent of making homes beyond the
Rockies.

The Oregon Trail had been laid out by the explorers of the fur
trade. Zealous missionaries had made their way over the trail in
the thirties. The Argonauts of '49 passed over it and left it
only after crossing the Rockies. But, before gold in California
was dreamed of, there had come back to the States reports of
lands rich in resources other than gold, lying in the far
Northwest, beyond the great mountain ranges and, before the
Forty-Niners were heard of, farmers, homebuilders, emigrants, men
with their families, men with their household goods, were
steadily passing out for the far-off and unknown country of
Oregon.

The Oregon Trail was the pathway for Fremont in 1842, perhaps the
most overvalued explorer of all the West; albeit this comment may
to some seem harsh. Kit Carson and Bill Williams led Fremont
across the Rockies almost by the hand. Carson and Williams
themselves had been taken across by the Indian tribes. But
Fremont could write; and the story which he set down of his first
expedition inflamed the zeal of all. Men began to head out for
that far-away country beyond the Rockies. Not a few scattered
bands, but very many, passed up the valley of the Platte. There
began a tremendous trek of thousands of men who wanted homes
somewhere out beyond the frontier. And that was more than ten
years before the Civil War. The cow trade was not dreamed of; the
coming cow country was overleaped and ignored.

Our national horizon extended immeasurably along that dusty way.
and jaded horses and almost lifeless men rushed forward, buoyed
up with the prospect of having a brush with the rascals who had
given us so much trouble.

We had gone about a mile and a half, when, at a turn in the road,
an old woman rushed out from a log cabin, and, in a loud and
commanding voice, exclaimed,--
'Halt, artillery, or I'll shoot every one of you!'
Not obeying the order, she fired three shots at us, none of which
took effect. At the same time three men rushed from the back of
the house toward the rebel camp at the foot of the hill, shouting
at the top of their voices to give warning of our approach.

A squad of our fellows took after them, and soon overtook them in
a corn-field, when they denied coming from the house, and said
they were out planting corn! A likely story, as it was hardly
daylight, and the rain was falling in torrents. However, during
the forenoon they took _oath_, and were set free!

Past the log house we went at 'double-quick,' and in less time
than it takes to tell it, the artillery took position in a small
piece of wood on the summit of a hill overlooking the town. At
once the order was given, 'Action front!'

and the first the rebels knew of our approach was the rattling
of canister among their tents. Out they swarmed, like bees from a
molested hive. This way and that the chivalry flew, and yet
scarcely knew which way to run. 'Bould sojer boys,' with
nothing but their underclothes on, mounted their nags bareback,
and fled 'over the hills and far away' towards Beverley, firing
as they ran a few random shots. Before the infantry reached
the town most of them had made good their escape, leaving behind,
however, nearly all their baggage, a large number of horses,
wagons, tents, and about eight hundred stand of arms, together
with a nicely-cooked breakfast, which they had no idea they were
preparing for 'Lincoln's hirelings.'
We took about fifty prisoners, among them the man who wounded
Col. (now General) Kelley. They were retained until the next
day, when the oath was administered, and they were let loose
to rejoin their companions in arms. About four weeks after this,
we had the pleasure of retaking, several of these fellows; some
of them, in fact, were taken three or four times, each time taking
the oath, and being set at liberty, and each time, true to their
nature--and Jeff Davis--immediately taking up arms again against
the government.

Phillippi, from any of the neighboring hills, or rather mountains,
presents a rather picturesque appearance. It was, previous to
the war, a place of about one thousand inhabitants. It boasts
a good court-house, a bank, and two hotels, and was by far the
most civilized-looking town we had then seen in Virginia. But,
alas! what a change had come over its once happy populace. When
we entered it, not a dozen inhabitants were left. We were
told that Phillippi was the head-quarters of rebellion in
Western Virginia. Here was published the Barbour County _Jeffersonian_,
a rabid secession newspaper, now no more, for the press was
demolished, and the types thrown into a well. The editor
had joined the rebel army a few days before our arrival, and
was among the loudest denunciators of our government. He boasted
he would shed the last drop of his blood (he was very careful as
to shedding the first) before he would retreat one inch before the
_Abolitionists_. We afterwards learned from some of his men
that he was among the first to mount his horse and run to the
mountains; the last that was seen of him he was going at lightning
speed toward Richmond, and in all probability _il court encore_,--he
is running yet.

We had taken possession of the town and most of the enemy's baggage
and equipments; still our commanding officer was not satisfied,
neither were the men. We had intended to completely surround the
enemy and to cut off every possible chance of his retreat. The
attack was to have been made at five o'clock, A.M.; but
one column, that which marched from Grafton, was about twenty
minutes too late, and when at last it did make its appearance, it
entered town by the wrong road, having been misled by the
guide. The consequence was, the enemy retreated on the Beverley
road, where they met with little or no resistance. Our men
were too much fatigued to follow the fast-fleeing traitors, and
most of them made good their escape.

After the excitement of the attack, the men dropped down
wherever they stood, in the streets, in the fields, or in the
woods, and slept soundly until noon, the rain continuing to fall
in torrents. But what was that to men worn out with marching?
I never slept better than when lying in a newly-plowed corn-field,
with the mud over my ankles, the rain pelting me in the face, and
not a blanket to cover me.

_Bang! bang! bang!

_ and up I jumped from my bed of mud, thinking the fight had
again commenced. Somewhat bewildered, I rubbed the 'sacred soil'
from my eyes and looked about me. It was noon; the rain
had ceased, and from the constant sound of musketry, I supposed
a battle was then raging. But instead of fighting the 'secesh,'
I soon found the Indiana boys were making havoc among the
fowls of the chivalry. They fired too much at random to suit my
taste, and I made tracks for a safer abode. Beating a hasty
retreat to the hill where my company was stationed, I found a
large crowd gathered around some of the captured wagons, overhauling
the plunder. And what a mixed-up mess! Old guns, sabres,
bowie-knives, pistols made in Richmond in 1808, old uniforms
that looked like the property of some strolling actor, and
love-letters which the bold chivalry had received from fair damsels,
who all expressed the desire that, their 'lovyers' would bring home,
Old Abe's scalp.

These letters afforded great amusement to our boys, though it was
hard to read many of them, and were they put into print, Artemus
Ward would have to look to his 'lorrels.'
Bang! bang! bang! they kept on shooting till dark. It is useless
to say we had chickens for supper that night; and I would not
be surprised if the chicken crop of Phillippi and vicinity
should be rather small for a few years to come.

Wild rumors were running through the camp all day that the
'secesh' had been reinforced, were ten thousand strong, and, with
forty pieces of cannon, would attack us that night.

Some said they were commanded by Gov. Wise, the lunatic, others
by Beauregard, and some positively asserted that Jeff Davis led
the rebel forces himself. At all events, it was pretty well
settled that we were to be attacked forthwith. Our men slept
on their arms, but not a secesh appeared.

I, as usual, was on guard that night, and, feeling that a great
responsibility rested on my shoulders, was 'doubly armed.'

A well-known professor, a member
of the same company as myself, was on the first relief; I was on
the second.

I went on duty at ten o'clock, P.M., and the professor kindly
loaned me his revolver, and, in addition, soon returned with
an extra musket, a secession sabre, and one of the captured pistols.
Thus loaded down with swords, pistols, and muskets, and guarding
a six-pounder, I felt _tolerably_ safe. After walking up and
down my beat a few times, I found the two muskets began to
feel rather heavy, and the two sabres to be rather uncomfortable
dangling about my legs; and thinking that two revolvers and a
_secesh_ pistol would be all that I could use to advantage, I
divested myself of the extra equipments, and passed the residue of
my 'two-hours' watch' in committing to memory 'my last dying words,'
for use in case the secesh put an end to my existence.

Our colonel's name was Barnett; the countersign for the night was
Buena Vista. About eleven o'clock I observed a man coming towards
me. 'Halt!' I exclaimed; 'who goes there?'
'A _friendt_,' was the reply.

'Advance, friend, and give the countersign.'
The man walked towards me, and whispered in my ear 'Barnett's
Sister!' at the same time attempting to pass. Placing my bayonet
close against his breast, I ordered him to 'halt!' and called
for the corporal of the guard.

The Dutchman--for such he was--begged and plead, but it was of
no use; I told him he was trying to 'run the guard,' and he
must go to the guard-house.

'Barnett's Sister! Barnett's Sister! Barnett's Sister!' shouted
the Dutchman. 'I know nothing about Barnett's Sister,'
said I; 'stop your noise, or you will rouse the camp.'
Just then, the officer of the guard came round.

I stated the case to him, and the man was taken to the guard-house.
The next morning he was released, and on inquiry at head-quarters
it was found that he had the password, but had confounded 'Buena
Vista' with 'Barnett's Sister.' We all enjoyed a good laugh over
it, and ever after 'Barnett's Sister' was the password for all who
attempted to 'run the guard.'

We lay at Phillippi nearly six weeks. Every day or two an alarm
would occur, the long roll would beat, and the men would form in
line of battle. It is needless to say the alarms were all
false. There are always hundreds of rumors in every camp, and
ours was not an exception.
But after the first week we paid little attention to the many
wild reports which were in circulation. Although Gov. Wise had
said he would take dinner in Phillippi or in ---- on the fourth
of July; notwithstanding Gov.

Letcher had issued a proclamation warning us to leave the State
in twenty-four hours or he would hang every one of us; although
a proclamation dated Staunton, Va., June 7th, 1861, stated to the
people of Western Virginia that their little band of _volunture
(?)_ had been forced from Phillippi by the ruthless Northern foe,
led on by traitors and tories, and that Jeff Davis and John
Letcher had sent to their aid a force of cavalry, artillery
and rifles; and although the proclamation wound up by saying
To-morrow an ARMY will follow!

we felt tolerably safe at Phillippi. We had determined, if the
aforesaid army did appear, it should have a warm reception.

Every day or two scouting parties went out and captured a few
stray 'Bush-Whackers,' to whom the oath was administered, and
they were released. Days and weeks passed, but the army of
Davis, Beauregard, and Co., failed to appear.

They had, however, congregated and entrenched themselves at
Laurel Hill, about thirteen miles east of Phillippi.

We were reinforced from time to time, until our force numbered
some forty-five hundred men, when Gen.

McClellan determined to rout the enemy from Laurel Hill and Rich
Mountain. How well he succeeded, history will tell.

On the night of the 6th of July, we left Phillippi for Laurel Hill,
starting at midnight.

The road was
rather rough, but much better than we expected to find it.

When we were within about five miles of the enemy's camps; we
passed a toll-gate, where an old woman came to the door to
'collect toll.' Some of our boys stopped at the house to get a
drink of water, and asked the old lady how far it was to camp,--meaning
the rebel camp. 'About four miles,' she said, 'but you can't get
in without a pass.'

The artillery was just then passing her door; the boys pointed to
that, and told her 'they thought they had a pass that would
take them in.'
'Oh!' she exclaimed, as the thought struck her that we were Federals,
'you won't find it as easy work as you did at Phillippi; they're
going to fight this time.'
On our return home this same woman was at the door, but she didn't
demand _toll_ this time. 'Well, old lady,' said one of our
fellows, 'what do you think _now_ about the fighting qualities
of your men?'
'They who fight and run away, Will live to fight another day,'
she exclaimed, and, slamming the door, vanished from sight, I
trust forever.

At daylight we drove in the rebel pickets at Laurel Hill. We
were within a mile and a half of their main camp, and halted there
to await orders from Gen.

McClellan, before beginning the attack. He was advancing on the
enemy at Rich Mountain and Beverley.

We threw a few shells into the rebel camp, producing great
consternation among their men and horses. For four days we kept
up skirmishing, but on the fifth day it rained, and little was
done. All were anxious to commence the attack, but, as we had
heard nothing from Gen. McClellan, all had to 'wait for orders.'
That night the enemy, hearing of the Federal victory at Rich
Mountain, and the occupation of Beverley by McClellan, and
evidently thinking himself in a 'bad fix,' retreated from Laurel
Hill toward St. George. In the morning our forces took possession
of his camp and fortifications, and part of our column pursued
the flying forces, overtaking them at Cornick's Ford, where a sharp
engagement ensued, which resulted in a total rout of the rebels,
and the death of Gen.

Garnett. Only a portion of his army escaped over the mountains to
Eastern Virginia.

So hasty was the retreat from Laurel Hill, that the enemy left
behind all the sick and wounded, telling them the Union troops
would kill them as soon as they took possession of their camp. A
large number of tents, a quantity of flour, and a few muskets,
fell into our hands. The fortifications at Laurel Hill were
strong, and evidently planned and constructed by men who
understood their business.

Among the numerous letters which we found in the rebel camp, was
one written to one of the Richmond papers, during the _siege_
of Laurel Hill. In that part of the letter which was intended
for publication, the writer said:--
'The Yankees have at last arrived, about ten thousand strong. For
the past two days we have had some sharp skirmishing, during which
time we have killed one hundred of the Hessians. We have, as yet,
lost but one man.'

In a _private note_ to the editor, the writer adds:--
'I guess the Yankees have got us this time. There is a regiment
here who call themselves the Indiana Ninth, but they lie,--they
are regulars.
They have got good rifles, and they take good aim. If
it wasn't for this, we would attack them.'
This little item shows how the masses of the Southern people are
deceived. Through the medium of the press they are made to believe
they are gaining great victories, and repulsing the
'abolitionists' at every step, killing hundreds of our men, and
losing none of their own. Our total loss at Laurel Hill was six men.

The rebel loss, as near as could be ascertained, was forty. The
rebel leaders know they are playing a game for life or death,
and so long as they can keep in power by deceiving the people,
just so long will this rebellion continue. Could the _truth_ be
forced upon the people of the South, the rebellion would go
down as quickly as it rose.

Many laughable incidents occurred while we were skirmishing with
the enemy at Laurel Hill.

We received a newspaper containing the message of President
Lincoln. One of the Indiana boys, thinking it might do the
secesh good to hear a few loyal sentiments, mounted a stump, paper
in hand, and exclaimed, 'I say, secesh, don't you want to hear
old Abe's message?' He then commenced reading, but had
proceeded only a short way, before 'ping, ping' came the rifle
balls around the stump; down jumped Indiana, convinced that reading
even a President's message amidst a shower of bullets isn't so
agreeable, after all.

We staid at Laurel Hill about two weeks. The enemy had been
completely routed from that part of Virginia, and our term of
enlistment having expired, our thoughts began to turn homeward.
That ninety days' soldiering was the longest three months we ever
experienced. It seemed an age since we had tasted a good meal,
and all were anxious to once more cross the Ohio, and see a
civilized country. The long looked-for order came at last, ''Bout
face!' and we were on our homeward march. A more jovial, ragged,
dirty, and hungry set of men, were never mustered out of service.

We reached Camp Chase at Columbus, Ohio, about the last
of July, and as each man delivered up his knapsack and etceteras,
he felt as if a 'great weight' had been taken from his shoulders.
We were once more free men; no one could order us about,
tell us where we should or where we should not go. There was
no more touching of hats to upstart lieutenants and half-witted
captains or colonels. We could go where we liked, and do
as we pleased, and not be reported, or sent to the guard-house.

If my memory serves me aright, we _did_ do pretty much as we
pleased; in other words, for two days, 'we made Rome howl!'
What we saw of Western Virginia and its inhabitants left
anything but a favorable impression on our minds. The country is
wild and romantic, but good for little or nothing for
farming purposes. The houses are mostly built of logs,
being little more than mere huts, and around each of these
'mansions' may be seen at least a dozen young 'tow-heads,' who
are brought up in ignorance and filth. The inhabitants are
lazy and ignorant, raising hardly enough to keep starvation from
their doors.

School houses are almost unknown; we did not see one in the
whole course of our march; the consequence is, not more than one
in ten of the population can read or write. And the few who 'can
just make out to spell' are worse off than their more ignorant
brethren.

'A little learning is a dangerous thing.'
And these people know just enough to make them _dangerous_.

They have read in some of their county newspapers that
Vice-President Hamlin is a negro, and that Lincoln is waging
this war for the purpose of liberating the slaves and killing their
masters.

This they believe, and any amount of reasoning cannot convince
them to the contrary. It seems to be enough for them to know
that they are _Virginians_; upon this, and this alone, they live
and have their being.

They are by far the most wretched and degraded people in America,--I
had almost said in the world. The women, if possible, are
worse than the men; they go dressed in a loose, uncouth manner,
barefooted and bareheaded; their principal occupation is chewing
tobacco and plundering Union troops by getting ten prices for their
eggs, butter, and corn bread.

And these are the people our children--and their fathers before
them--have been taught to regard as the true _chivalry_ of
America!

The people of the United States are beginning to see that
Virginia and her sons have been greatly over-estimated. That
Virginia has produced true and great men, no one will deny.

There are a few such still within her borders; but, taking her
as a whole, the picture I have drawn is a true one.

By my soldiering experience I learned some things which it would
have been impossible to learn had I never 'gone for a soger.'

First, I ascertained--shall I say from my _personal_ experience?--that
a man dressed in soldier-clothes can stand twice as much bad liquor
as one clothed in the garb of a citizen. Secondly, that to be a
good soldier a man should be able to go at least forty-eight
hours without eating, drinking, or sleeping, and then endure
guard-duty all night in a drenching rain, without grumbling or
fault-finding.

Thirdly, I _think_ I have discovered that the martial road to
glory '_is a hard road to travel_.'

* * * * *
A CABINET SESSION.

_The President: Secretaries Seward, Chase, Bates, Smith, Blair
and Welles. Enter Mr. Stanton._
_Mr.

Lincoln._ Gentlemen, I officially present Mr. Stanton!

[_Mr.

Stanton, bowing with graceful dignity, seats himself at the
table._]
_Mr.

Seward (breaking the momentary pause in his jocular way)._ Remember,
Mr. Secretary of War, you are now in the old chair of Floyd and
Davis: and sit thee down as if on nettles.

_Mr. Chase._ Aye; but out of the 'nettle danger' pluck thou 'the
flower safety.'
_Mr.

Stanton (with emphasis)._ Believe me, I appreciate not so much
the honor as the responsibilities of my new position. I claim a
good omen, for, as I turned just now towards the gate, a little
boy, seated upon one of the granite blocks for the new building
hereabout, trolled out as my salutation the lines of the national
air,--
'Then conquer we must, for our cause it is just, And this be our
motto, In God is our trust.'

_Mr. Welles._ Amen!

_Mr.

Bates._ I suppose you passed not a few interesting hours in this
room at the twilight of Mr. Buchanan's day, whilst holding _my_
portfolio?
_Mr. Stanton._ Too momentous to be called by _me_ interesting.
Posterity, reading, will say _that_. And those twilight hours, as
you felicitously term them, were followed by anxious vigils. But
these belong to confidences.
_Mr. Lincoln (abruptly and familiarly)._ Talking of confidences,
what do you think of the news about Zollicoffer?
_Mr. Stanton._ It appears reliable, and is a most providential
success.
Eastern Tennessee was tending to the position which Lucknow sustained
towards the Indian rebellion. It is now relieved, and a fortnight
or so will bring intelligence that the whole of it has practically
joined forces to Western Virginia. I regard it as of the highest
importance to prove, by industrious acts, that we recognize and
reward the sufferings of these American Albigenses in their Cumberland
fastnesses. How grandly would swell the old Miltonian hymn, properly
paraphrased, when a brigade of the loyal Tennessians may sing

'Avenge, Columbia, thy slaughtered hosts, whose bones Lie scattered
on the Western mountains cold,' 
and so forth!
_Mr. Lincoln._ Now, you are stepping into Seward's province. _He_
is the poet of my cabinet!
_Mr. Seward._ Granted for the argument: but there is more truth
than poetry in what our new brother has just said.Happily there has been no parallel to the
misadventures of this ill-fated caravan. It is difficult
--without reading these, bald and awful details-- to realize the
vast difference between that day and this. Today we may by the
gentle stages of a pleasant railway journey arrive at Donner
Lake. Little trace remains, nor does any kindly soul wish for
more definite traces, of those awful scenes. Only a cross here
and there with a legend, faint and becoming fainter every year,
may be seen, marking the more prominent spots of the historic
starving camp.

Up on the high mountain side, for the most part hid in the
forest, lie the snowsheds and tunnels of the railway, now
encountering its stiffest climb up the steep slopes to the summit
of the Sierras. The author visited this spot of melancholy
history in company with the vice-president of the great railway
line which here swings up so steadily and easily over the
Sierras. Bit by bit we checked out as best we might the fateful
spots mentioned in the story of the Donner Party. A splendid
motor highway runs by the lakeside now. While we halted our own
car there, a motor car drove up from the westward--following that
practical automobile highway which now exists from the plains of
California across the Sierras and east over precisely that trail
where once the weary feet of the oxen dragged the wagons of the
early emigrants. It was a small car of no expensive type. It was
loaded down with camping equipment until the wheels scarcely
could be seen. It carried five human occupants--an Iowa farmer
and his family. They had been out to California for a season.
Casually they had left Los Angeles, had traveled north up the
valleys of California, east across the summit of the Sierras, and
were here now bound for Iowa over the old emigrant trail!

We hailed this new traveler on the old trail. I do not know
whether or not he had any idea of the early days of that great
highway; I suspect that he could tell only of its present
motoring possibilities. But his wheels were passing over the
marks left more than half a century ago by the cracked felloes of
the emigrant wagons going west in search of homes. If we seek
history, let us ponder that chance pause of the eastbound
family, traveling by motor for pleasure, here by the side of the
graves of the travelers of another day, itself so briefly gone.
What an epoch was spanned in the passing of that frontier!


Chapter VII. The Indian Wars

It might well be urged against the method employed in these pages
that, although we undertook to speak of the last American
frontier, all that we really thus far have done has been to
describe a series of frontiers from the Missouri westward. In
part this is true. But it was precisely in this large, loose, and
irregular fashion that we actually arrived at our last frontier.
Certainly our westbound civilization never advanced by any steady
or regular process. It would be a singularly illuminating
map--and one which I wish we might show--which would depict in
different colors the great occupied areas of the West, with the
earliest dates of their final and permanent occupation. Such a
map as this would show us that the last frontier of America was
overleaped and left behind not once but a score of times.

The land between the Missouri and the Rockies, along the Great
Plains and the high foothills, was crossed over and forgotten by
the men who were forging on into farther countries in search of
lands where fortune was swift and easy. California, Oregon, all
the early farming and timbering lands of the distant Northwest--
these lay far beyond the Plains; and as we have noted, they were
sought for, even before gold was dreamed of upon the Pacific
Slope.

So here, somewhere between the Missouri and the Rockies, lay our
last frontier, wavering, receding, advancing, gaining and losing,
changing a little more every decade--and at last so rapidly
changed as to be outworn and abolished in one swift decade all
its own.

This unsettled land so long held in small repute by the early
Americans, was, as we have pointed out, the buffalo range and the
country of the Horse Indians--the Plains tribes who lived upon
the buffalo. For a long time it was this Indian population which
held back the white settlements of Kansas, Nebraska, the Dakotas,
Montana, Wyoming, Colorado. But as men began to work farther and
farther westward in search of homes in Oregon, or in quest of
gold in California or Idaho or Montana, the Indian question came
to be a serious one.

To the Army, soon after the Civil War, fell the task of
exterminating, or at least evicting, the savage tribes over all
this unvalued and unknown Middle West. This was a process not
altogether simple. For a considerable time the Indians themselves
were able to offer very effective resistance to the enterprise.
They were accustomed to living upon that country, and did not
need to bring in their own supplies; hence the Army fought them
at a certain disadvantage. In sooth, the Army had to learn to
become half Indian before it could fight the Indians on anything
like even terms. We seem not so much to have coveted the lands
in the first Indian-fighting days; we fought rather for the
trails than for the soil. The Indians themselves had lived there
all their lives, had conquered their environment, and were happy
in it. They made a bitter fight; nor are they to be blamed for
doing so.

The greatest of our Indian wars have taken place since our own
Civil War; and perhaps the most notable of all the battles are
those which were fought on the old cow range--in the land of our
last frontier. We do not lack abundant records of this time of
our history. Soon after the Civil War the railroads began edging
out into the plains. They brought, besides many new settlers, an
abundance of chroniclers and historians and writers of hectic
fiction or supposed fact. A multitude of books came out at this
time of our history, most of which were accepted as truth. That
was the time when we set up as Wild West heroes rough skinclad
hunters and so-called scouts, each of whom was allowed to tell
his own story and to have it accepted at par. As a matter of
fact, at about the time the Army had succeeded in subduing the
last of the Indian tribes on the buffalo-range, the most of our
Wild West history, at least so far as concerned the boldest
adventure, was a thing of the past. It was easy to write of a
past which every one now was too new, too ignorant, or too busy
critically to remember.

Even as early as 1866, Colonel Marcy, an experienced army officer
and Indian-fighter, took the attitude of writing about a
vanishing phase of American life. In his Army "Life on the
Border," he says:

"I have been persuaded by many friends that the contents of the
book which is herewith presented to the public are not without
value as records of a fast-vanishing age, and as truthful
sketches of men of various races whose memory will shortly depend
only on romance, unless some one who knew them shall undertake to
leave outlines of their peculiar characteristics.... I am
persuaded that excuse may be found in the simple fact that all
these peoples of my description--men, conditions of life, races
of
aboriginal inhabitants and adventurous hunters and pioneers--are
passing away. A few years more and the prairie will be
transformed into farms. The mountain ravines will be the abodes
of busy manufacturers, and the gigantic power of American
civilization will have taken possession of the land from the
great river of the West to the very shores of the Pacific....
The world is fast filling up. I trust I am not in error when I
venture to place some value, however small, on everything which
goes to form the truthful history of a condition of men incident
to the advances of civilization over the continent--a condition
which forms peculiar types of character, breeds remarkable
developments of human nature--a condition also which can hardly
again exist on this or any other continent, and which has,
therefore, a special value in the sum of human history."

Such words as the foregoing bespeak a large and dignified point
of view. No one who follows Marcy's pages can close them with
anything but respect and admiration. It is in books such as this,
then, that we may find something about the last stages of the
clearing of the frontier.

Even in Marcy's times the question of our Government's Indian
policy was a mooted one. He himself as an Army officer looked at
the matter philosophically, but his estimate of conditions was
exact. Long ago as he wrote, his conclusions were such as might
have been given forty years later.

"The limits of their accustomed range are rapidly contracting,
and their means of subsistence undergoing a corresponding
diminution. The white man is advancing with rapid strides upon
all sides of them, and they are forced to give way to his
encroachments. The time is not far distant when the buffalo will
become extinct, and they will then be compelled to adopt some
other mode of life than the chase for a subsistence.... No
man will quietly submit to starvation when food is within his
reach, and if he cannot obtain it honestly he will steal it or
take it by force. If, therefore, we do not induce them to engage
in agricultural avocations we shall in a few years have before us
the alternative of exterminating them or fighting them
perpetually. That they are destined ultimately to extinction does
not in my mind admit of a doubt. For the reasons above mentioned
it may at first be necessary for our government to assert its
authority over them by a prompt and vigorous exercise of the
military arm.... The tendency of the policy I have indicated
will be to assemble these people in communities where they will
be more readily controlled; and I predict from it the most
gratifying results." Another well-informed army officer, Colonel
Richard Dodge, himself a hunter, a trailer, and a rider able to
compete with the savages in their own fields, penetrated to the
heart of the Indian problem when he wrote:

"The conception of Indian character is almost impossible to a man
who has passed the greater portion of his life surrounded by the
influences of a cultivated, refined, and moral society....
The truth is simply too shocking, and the revolted mind takes
refuge in disbelief as the less painful horn of the dilemma. As a
first step toward an understanding of his character we must get
at his standpoint of morality. As a child he is not brought
up....From the dawn of intelligence his own will is his law.
There is no right and no wrong to him.... No dread of
punishment restrains him from any act that boyish fun or fury may
prompt. No lessons inculcating the beauty and sure reward of
goodness or the hideousness and certain punishment of vice are
ever wasted on him. The men by whom he is surrounded, and to whom
he looks as models for his future life, are great and renowned
just in proportion to their ferocity, to the scalps they have
taken, or the thefts they have committed. His earliest boyish
memory is probably a dance of rejoicing over the scalps of
strangers, all of whom he is taught to regard as enemies. The
lessons of his mother awaken only a desire to take his place as
soon as possible in fight and foray. The instruction of his
father is only such as is calculated to fit him best to act a
prominent part in the chase, in theft, and in murder....
Virtue, morality, generosity, honor, are words not only
absolutely without significance to him, but are not accurately
translatable, into any Indian language on the Plains."

These are sterner, less kindly, less philosophic words than
Marcy's, but they keenly outline the duty of the Army on the
frontier. We made treaties with the Indians and broke them. In
turn men such as these ignorant savages might well be expected to
break their treaties also; and they did. Unhappily our Indian
policy at that time was one of mingled ferocity and wheedling.
The Indians did not understand us any more than we did them. When
we withdrew some of the old frontier posts from the old
hunting-range, the action was construed by the tribesmen as an
admission that we feared them, and they acted upon that idea. In
one point of view they had right with them, for now we were
moving out into the last of the great buffalo country. Their war
was one of desperation, whereas ours was one of conquest, no
better and no worse than all the wars of conquest by which the
strong have taken the possessions of the weak.

Our Army at the close of the Civil War and at the beginning of
the wars with the Plains tribes was in better condition than it
has ever been since that day. It was made up of the soundest and
best-seasoned soldiers that ever fought under our flag; and at
that time it represented a greater proportion of our fighting
strength than it ever has before or since. In 1860 the Regular
Army, not counting the volunteer forces, was 16,000. In 1870 it
was 37,000--one soldier to each one thousand of our population.

Against this force, pioneers of the vaster advancing army of
peaceful settlers now surging West, there was arrayed practically
all the population of fighting tribes such as the Sioux, the two
bands of the Cheyennes, the Piegans, the Assiniboines, the
Arapahoes, the Kiowas, the Comanches, and the Apaches. These were
the leaders of many other tribes in savage campaigns which set
the land aflame from the Rio Grande to our northern line. The
Sioux and Cheyennes were more especially the leaders, and they
always did what they could to enlist the aid of the less warlike
tribes such as the Crows, the Snakes, the Bannacks, the
Utes--indeed all of the savage or semi-civilized tribes which had
hung on the flanks of the traffic of the westbound trail.

The Sioux, then at the height of their power, were distinguished
by many warlike qualities. They fought hard and were quick to
seize upon any signs of weakness in their enemies. When we, in
the course of our Civil War, had withdrawn some of the upper
posts, the Sioux edged in at once and pressed back the whites
quite to the eastern confines of the Plains. When we were locked
in the death grip of internecine war in 1862, they rose in one
savage wave of rebellion of their own and massacred with the most
horrible ferocity not less than six hundred and forty-four whites
in Minnesota and South Dakota. When General Sibley went out among
them on his later punitive campaign he had his hands full for
many a long and weary day.

Events following the close of the Civil War did not mend matters
in the Indian situation. The railroads had large land grants
given to them along their lines, and they began to offer these
lands for sale to settlers. Soldier scrip entitling the holder to
locate on public lands now began to float about. Some of the
engineers, even some of the laborers, upon the railroads, seeing
how really feasible was the settlement of these Plains, began to
edge out and to set up their homes, usually not far from the
railway lines. All this increase in the numbers of the white
population not only infuriated the Indians the more, but gave
them the better chance to inflict damage upon our people. Our
Army therefore became very little more than a vast body of
police, and it was always afoot with the purpose of punishing
these offending tribesmen, who knew nothing of the higher laws of
war and who committed atrocities that have never been equalled in
history; unless it be by one of the belligerents of the Great War
in Europe, with whom we are at this writing engaged--once more in
the interest of a sane and human civilization. The last great
struggle for the occupation of the frontier was on. It involved
the ownership of the last of our open lands; and hence may be
called the war of our last frontier.

The settler who pushed West continued to be the man who shared
his time between his rifle and his plough. The numerous buffalo
were butchered with an endless avidity by the men who now
appeared upon the range. As the great herds regularly migrated
southward with each winter's snows, they were met by the settlers
along the lower railway lines and in a brutal commerce were
killed in thousands and in millions. The Indians saw this sudden
and appalling shrinkage of their means of livelihood. It meant
death to them. To their minds, especially when they thought we
feared them, there was but one answer to all this--the whites
must all be killed.

Red Cloud, Crazy Horse, Roman Nose, American Horse, Black
Kettle--these were names of great Indian generals who proved
their ability to fight. At times they brought into the open
country, which as yet remained unoccupied by the great pastoral
movement from the south, as many as five thousand mounted
warriors in one body, and they were well armed and well supplied
with ammunition. Those were the days when the Indian agents were
carrying on their lists twice as many Indians as actually
existed--and receiving twice as many supplies as really were
issued to the tribes. The curse of politics was ours even at that
time, and it cost us then, as now, unestimated millions of our
nation's dearest treasures. As to the reservations which the
Indians were urged to occupy, they left them when they Iced. In
the end, when they were beaten, all they were asked to do was to
return to these reservations and be fed.

There were fought in the West from 1869 to 1875 more than two
hundred pitched actions between the Army and the Indians. In most
cases the white men were heavily outnumbered. The account which
the Army gave of itself on scores of unremembered minor
fields--which meant life or death to all engaged--would make one
of the best pages of our history, could it be written today. The
enlisted men of the frontier Army were riding and shooting men,
able to live as the Indians did and able to beat them at their
own game. They were led by Army officers whose type has never
been improved upon in any later stage of our Army itself, or of
any army in the world.

There are certain great battles which may at least receive
notice, although it would be impossible to mention more than a
few of the encounters of the great Indian wars on the
buffalo-range at about the time of the buffalo's disappearance.
The Fetterman Massacre in 1866, near Fort Phil Kearney, a post
located at the edge of the Big Horn Mountains, was a blow which
the Army never has forgotten. "In a place of fifty feet square
lay the bodies of Colonel Fetterman, Captain Brown, and
sixty-five enlisted men. Each man was stripped naked and hacked
and scalped, the skulls beaten in with war clubs and the bodies
gashed with knives almost beyond recognition, with other ghastly
mutilations that the civilized pen hesitates to record."

This tragedy brought the Indian problem before the country as
never before. The hand of the Western rancher and trader was
implacably against the tribesmen of the plains; the city-dweller
of the East, with hazy notions of the Indian character, was
disposed to urge lenient methods upon those responsible for
governmental policy. While the Sioux and Cheyenne wars dragged
on, Congress created, by act of July 20, 1867, a peace commission
of four civilians and three army officers to deal with the
hostile tribes. For more than a year, with scant sympathy from
the military members, this commission endeavored to remove the
causes of friction by amicable conference with the Indian chiefs.
The attitude of the Army is reflected in a letter of General
Sherman to his brother. "We have now selected and provided
reservations for all, off the great roads. All who cling to their
old hunting-grounds are hostile and will remain so till killed
off. We will have a sort of predatory war for years--every now
and then be shocked by the indiscriminate murder of travelers and
settlers, but the country is so large, and the advantage of the
Indians so great, that we cannot make a single war and end it.
From the nature of things we must take chances and clean out
Indians as we encounter them."

Segregation of the Indian tribes upon reservations seemed to the
commission the only solution of the vexing problem. Various
treaties were made and others were projected looking toward the
removal of the tribesmen from the highways of continental travel.
The result was misgiving and increased unrest among the Indians.

In midsummer of 1868 forays occurred at many points along the
border of the Indian Territory. General Sheridan, who now
commanded the Department of the Missouri, believed that a general
war was imminent. He determined to teach the southern tribesmen a
lesson they would not forget. In the dead of winter our troops
marched against the Cheyennes, then in their encampments below
the Kansas line. The Indians did not believe that white men could
march in weather forty below zero, during which they themselves
sat in their tepees around their fires; but our cavalrymen did
march in such weather, and under conditions such as our cavalry
perhaps could not endure today. Among these troops was the
Seventh Cavalry, Custer's Regiment, formed after the Civil War,
and it was led by Lieutenant-Colonel George A. Custer himself,
that gallant officer whose name was to go into further and more
melancholy history of the Plains.

Custer marched until he got in touch with the trails of the
Cheyennes, whom he knew to belong to Black Kettle's band. He did
not at the time know that below them, in the same valley of the
Washita, were also the winter encampments of the Kiowas, the
Comanches, the Arapahoes, and even a few Apaches. He attacked at
dawn of a bleak winter morning, November 27, 1868, after taking
the precaution of surrounding the camp, and killed Black Kettle,
and another chief, Little Rock, and over a hundred of their
warriors. Many women and children also were killed in this
attack. The result was one which sank deep into the Indian mind.
The only recollection he had of his father was that of seeing his
right ear cut off, his head gashed and his back lacerated, as a
result of the cruel punishment inflicted upon him because he had
dared to beat the overseer of the plantation for brutally assaulting
the slave's wife. Because of becoming morose, disobedient and
intractable thereafter, Henson's father was sold to a planter in
Alabama and his relatives never heard of him again.

His mother was then brought back to the estate of her owner, a
Doctor McPherson, who was much kinder to his slaves. Dr. McPherson
gave the youth his own name, Josiah, and the family name Henson
after Dr. McPherson's uncle, who served in the Revolutionary
War. Josiah showed signs of mental and religious development under
the pious care of his Christian mother and for that reason became
his master's favorite.

Upon the death of Doctor McPherson, however, it became necessary
to sell the estate and slaves to divide his property among his
heirs. The Henson family was then scattered throughout the country
and worst of all Josiah was separated from his mother, notwithstanding
his mother's earnest entreaty that her new master, Isaac Riley,
should also purchase her baby.

Instead of listening to the appeal of this afflicted woman clinging
to his hands, he disengaged himself from her with violent blows.
She was then taken to Riley's farm in Montgomery County. Josiah
was purchased by a man named Robb, a tavern keeper living near
Montgomery Court-House. Both masters were unusually cruel,
in keeping with the tyrannical methods employed by planters of
that time.

Because of ill health resulting from the lack of proper care,
Josiah became very sickly. He was then providentially restored
to his mother, having been offered to her owner by Robb for
a small sum, for the reason that it was thought that he would
die.

His third master was "vulgar in his habits, unprincipled and
cruel in his general deportment and especially addicted to the
vice of licentiousness."[2] On his plantation Henson served
as water-boy, butler and finally as a field hand, experiencing
the usual hardship of the slave. He ate twice a day of cornmeal
and salt herring, with a little buttermilk and a few
vegetables occasionally. His dress was first a single garment,
something like a long shirt reaching to the ankles, later a pair
of trousers and a shirt with the addition of a woolen hat once in
two or three years and a round jacket or overcoat in the winter time.

He slept with ten or a dozen persons in a log hut of a single
small room, with no other floor than the trodden earth, and
without beds or furniture. In spite of this, however, Henson
grew to be a robust lad, who at the age of fifteen could do a
man's work.
Having too more mental capacity than most slaves, he was regarded
as a smart fellow. Hearing remarks like this about himself,
Henson became filled with ambition and pride, and aspired to
a position of influence among his fellows.

At times Henson would toil and induce his fellow slaves to work
much harder and longer than required to obtain from their master a
kind word or act, but these efforts usually produced no more from
their owner than a cold calculation of the value of Josiah to him.

When, however, the white overseer of this plantation was discharged
for stealing from his employer, Josiah had shown himself so capable
that he was made manager of the plantation. In this position his
honest management of the estate made him indispensable to his
master also as a salesman of produce in the markets of Georgetown
and Washington. He had during these years come under the influence
of an anti-slavery white man of Georgetown and had become a devout
Christian with considerable influence as a preacher among the
slaves.

On the second day of the fighting Forsyth had got out
messengers at extreme risk, and at length the party was rescued
by a detachment of the Tenth Cavalry. The Indians later said that
they had in all over six hundred warriors in this fight. Their
losses, though variously estimated, were undoubtedly heavy.

It was encounters such as this which gradually were teaching the
Indians that they could not beat the white men, so that after a
time they began to yield to the inevitable.

What is known as the Baker Massacre was the turning-point in the
half-century of warfare with the Blackfeet, the savage tribe
which had preyed upon the men of the fur trade in a
long-continued series of robberies and murders. On January 22,
1870, Major E. M. Baker, led by half-breeds who knew the country,
surprised the Piegans in their winter camp on the Marias River,
just below the border. He, like Custer, attacked at dawn, opening
the encounter with a general fire into the tepees. He killed a
hundred and seventy-three of the Piegans, including very many
women and children, as was unhappily the case so often in these
surprise attacks. It was deplorable warfare. But it ended the
resistance of the savage Blackfeet. They have been disposed for
peace from that day to this.

The terrible revenge which the Sioux and Cheyennes took in the
battle which annihilated Custer and his men on the Little Big
Horn in the summer of 1876; the Homeric running fight made by
Chief Joseph of the Nez Perces--a flight which baffled our best
generals and their men for a hundred and ten days over more than
fourteen hundred miles of wilderness--these are events so well
known that it seems needless to do more than to refer to them.
The Nez Perces in turn went down forever when Joseph came out and
surrendered, saying, "From where the sun now stands I fight
against the white man no more forever." His surrender to fate did
not lack its dignity. Indeed, a mournful interest attached to the
inevitable destiny of all these savage leaders, who, no doubt,
according to their standards, were doing what men should do and
all that men could do.

The main difficulty in administering full punishment to such
bands was that after a defeat they scattered, so that they could
not be overtaken in any detailed fashion. After the Custer fight
many of the tribe went north of the Canadian line and remained
there for some time. The writer himself has seen along the
Qu'Appelle River in Saskatchewan some of the wheels taken out of
the watches of Custer's men. The savages broke them up and used
the wheels for jewelry. They even offered the Canadians for trade
boots, hats, and clothing taken from the bodies of Custer's men.

The Modoc war against the warriors of Captain Jack in 1873 was
waged in the lava beds of Oregon, and it had the distinction of
being one of the first Indian wars to be well reported in the
newspapers. We heard a great deal of the long and trying
campaigns waged by the Army in revenge for the murder of General
Canby in his council tent. We got small glory out of that war,
perhaps, but at last we hanged the ringleader of the murderers;
and the extreme Northwest remained free from that time on.

Far in the dry Southwest, where home-building man did not as yet
essay a general occupation of the soil, the blood-thirsty Apache
long waged a warfare which tried the mettle of our Army as
perhaps no other tribes ever have done. The Spaniards had fought
these Apaches for nearly three hundred years, and had not beaten
them. Older he gets, the younger he seems. His work to-day should
make the eight-hours' man blush. At bay in Downing Street
since twelve o'clock with two hostile deputations. Came from
Ulster and the City, resolved to beard Home-Rule Lion in his
den.
Alone he met them; one down, the other come on; no interval of rest;
picked men from Ulster, Selected Captains from the City,
surged around table at which he sat. Hardly left him time to
reply. Having politely conducted Ulster to door, enter the City
Fathers, fresh and eager for fray. Told him over again in varied
phrase how he was bringing country to verge of ruin; listened
with perfect courtesy, as if they'd been discussing someone
else--say, his next-door neighbour, SQUIRE of MALWOOD and Junior
Lord of Downing Street. Up again when last in list of City
speakers had concluded. Almost persuaded JOHN LUBBOCK to be a
Home-Ruler; then down to House, dealing with mass of correspondence
littering his table in room behind SPEAKER'S chair; alert on sound
of division-bell; comes in to move Closure; remembers
that in long list of speeches never made this particular one
before; looks up PALGRAVE'S _Handbook_; cons his lesson and
declaims brief formula in deep rich voice that lends touch of
eloquence to its unadorned, remorseless demand. All this, too,
following on a day like yesterday, when two other deputations
stormed Downing Street; drew from him weighty reply; followed,
after hasty dinner, by a speech in the House on the eternal Irish
question, which GRANDOLPH rightly termed, "entrancing."
"A Grand Old Man, indeed!" said PRINCE ARTHUR, talking over these
things to-night, when he should have been listening to TOMMY
BOWLES, who having at the morning sitting had his speech on Vote
on Account closured, delivered another at evening sitting on the
question of the Depreciation of Silver as it affects domestic
architecture in China and Peru.

_Business done._--Vote on Account through Committee.

_Thursday._--CAINE going about House this afternoon, his slim
figure bulging out at the pockets in mysterious fashion,
"Brought your supper with you?" I asked, lightly touching one
of the excrescences that felt like an imperial pint of ginger-beer
(WHITE 1880). "You seem bursting with broiled bones. All no use.
No more all-night sittings _this_ side of Easter."
[Illustration: Portrait of a Member of Parliament examining
the Signatures to a Petition against the Local-Veto Bill, to see
if they are genuine or not.

(_Vide_ Report of the Proceedings in the Commons, March 28,
which suggests that they are obtained in Public Houses.)]

"No, my boy, you're wrong," said CAINE.

"Fact is, I'm going off to the country, and these protuberances
you observe about my person are phonograms. All labelled, you
see," he said, taking out cylinders from several pockets. "Here
are a few remarks on Registration; that's my Local-Veto Speech;
and here is an entirely new view of the Home-Rule question.

If you like to come over to my house at Clapham--close by, you
know, busses every ten minutes--you shall have a night's
thorough enjoyment. Leave you in the room by yourself with the
phonograph. Pop in one of these cylinders; set the phonograph
whizzing; and you'll hear me on Local Veto. Take out cylinder,
put in another, and you'll know more about Home Rule in
five minutes than you ever dreamt.
Can only let you have them for to-night. To-morrow they go down
to Yorkshire, and thro' Easter Recess I shall be delivering, at
various places, six speeches every night, I myself comfortably
making holiday in Wales." "Thank you," I said; "but, if you'll
excuse me, I think I'll go home and go to bed." In truth, a
little depressed. Here's a nice prospect for the holidays!
Bad enough to have Members working off at public meetings
speeches that had been closured in Commons. But if every man is,
during the recess, to multiply himself by phonography, the last
state of this country will be worse than the first.
_Business done._--Adjourned for Easter Holidays.Our great timber
kings, our great cattle kings, made their fortunes out of their
open contempt for the homestead law, which was designed to give
all the people an even chance for a home and a farm. It made, and
lost, America.

Swiftly enough, here and there along all the great waterways of
the northern range, ranchers and their men filed claims on the
water fronts. The dry land thus lay tributary to them. For the
most part the open lands were held practically under squatter
right; the first cowman in any valley usually had his rights
respected, at least for a time. These were the days of the open
range. Fences had not come, nor had farms been staked out.

From the South now appeared that tremendous and elemental
force--most revolutionary of all the great changes we have noted
in the swiftly changing West--the bringing in of thousands of
horned kine along the northbound trails. The trails were hurrying
from the Rio Grande to the upper plains of Texas and northward,
along the north and south line of the Frontier--that land which
now we have been seeking less to define and to mark precisely
than fundamentally to understand.

The Indian wars had much to do with the cow trade. The Indians
were crowded upon the reservations, and they had to be fed, and
fed on beef. Corrupt Indian agents made fortunes, and the Beef
Ring at Washington, one of the most despicable lobbies which ever
fattened there, now wrote its brief and unworthy history. In a
strange way corrupt politics and corrupt business affected the
phases of the cattle industry as they had affected our relations
with the Indians. More than once a herd of some thousand beeves
driven up from Texas on contract, and arriving late in autumn,
was not accepted on its arrival at the army post--some pet of
Washington perhaps had his own herd to sell! All that could be
done then would be to seek out a "holding range." In this way,
more and more, the capacity of the northern Plains to nourish and
improve cattle became established.

Naturally, the price of cows began to rise; and naturally, also,
the demand for open range steadily increased. There now began the
whole complex story of leased lands and fenced lands. The
frontier still was offering opportunity for the bold man to reap
where he had not sown. Lands leased to the Indians of the
civilized tribes began to cut large figure in the cow trade--as
well as some figure in politics--until at length the thorny
situation was handled by a firm hand at Washington. The methods
of the East were swiftly overrunning those of the West. Politics
and graft and pull, things hitherto unknown, soon wrote their
hurrying story also over all this newly won region from which the
rifle-smoke had scarcely yet cleared away.

But every herd which passed north for delivery of one sort or the
other advanced the education of the cowman, whether of the
northern or the southern ranges. Some of the southern men began
to start feeding ranges in the North, retaining their breeding
ranges in the South. The demand of the great upper range for
cattle seemed for the time insatiable.

To the vision of the railroad builders a tremendous potential
freightage now appeared. The railroad builders began to calculate
that one day they would parallel the northbound cow trail with
iron trails of their own and compete with nature for the carrying
of this beef. The whole swift story of all that development,
while the westbound rails were crossing and crisscrossing the
newly won frontier, scarce lasted twenty years. Presently we
began to hear in the East of the Chisholm Trail and of the
Western Trail which lay beyond it, and of many smaller and
intermingling branches. We heard of Ogallalla, in Nebraska, the
"Gomorrah of the Range," the first great upper marketplace for
distribution of cattle to the swiftly forming northern ranches.
The names of new rivers came upon our maps; and beyond the first
railroads we began to hear of the Yellowstone, the Powder, the
Musselshell, the Tongue, the Big Horn, the Little Missouri.

The wild life, bold and carefree, coming up from the South now in
a mighty surging wave, spread all over that new West which
offered to the people of older lands a strange and fascinating
interest. Every one on the range had money; every one was
independent. Once more it seemed that man had been able to
overleap the confining limitations of his life, and to attain
independence, self-indulgence, ease and liberty. A chorus of
Homeric, riotous mirth, as of a land in laughter, rose up all
over the great range. After all, it seemed that we had a new
world left, a land not yet used. We still were young! The cry
arose that there was land enough for all out West. And at first
the trains of white-topped wagons rivaled the crowded coaches
westbound on the rails.

In consequence there came an entire readjustment of values. This
country, but yesterday barren and worthless, now was covered with
gold, deeper than the gold of California or any of the old
placers. New securities and new values appeared. Banks did not
care much for the land as security--it was practically worthless
without the cattle--but they would lend money on cattle at rates
which did not then seem usurious. A new system of finance came
into use. Side by side with the expansion of credits went the
expansion of the cattle business. Literally in hundreds of
thousands the cows came north from the exhaustless ranges of the
lower country.

It was a wild, strange day. But withal it was the kindliest and
most generous time, alike the most contented and the boldest
time, in all the history of our frontiers. There never was a
better life than that of the cowman who had a good range on the
Plains and cattle enough to stock his range. There never will be
found a better man's country in all the world than that which ran
from the Missouri up to the low foothills of the Rockies.

The lower cities took their tribute of the northbound cattle for
quite a time. Wichita, Coffeyville, and other towns of lower
Kansas in turn made bids for prominence as cattle marts. Agents
of the Chicago stockyards would come down along the trails into
the Indian Nations to meet the northbound herds and to try to
divert them to this or that market as a shipping-point. The
Kiowas and Comanches, not yet wholly confined to their
reservations, sometimes took tribute, whether in theft or in open
extortion, of the herds laboring upward through the long slow
season. Trail-cutters and herd-combers, licensed or unlicensed
hangers-on to the northbound throngs of cattle, appeared along
the lower trails--with some reason, occasionally; for in a great
northbound herd there might be many cows included under brands
other than those of the road brands registered for the drovers of
that particular herd. Cattle thieving became an industry of
certain value, rivaling in some localities the operations of the
bandits of the placer camps. There was great wealth suddenly to
be seen. The weak and the lawless, as well as the strong and the
unscrupulous, set out to reap after their own fashion where they
had not sown. If a grave here or there appeared along the trail
or at the edge of the straggling town, it mattered little. If the
gamblers and the desperadoes of the cow towns such as Newton,
Ellsworth, Abilene, Dodge, furnished a man for breakfast day
after day, it mattered little, for plenty of men, remained, as
good or better. The life was large and careless, and bloodshed
was but an incident.

During the early and unregulated days of the cattle industry, the
frontier insisted on its own creed, its own standards. But all
the time, coming out from the East, were scores and hundreds of
men of exacter notions of trade and business. The enormous waste
of the cattle range could not long endure. The toll taken by the
thievery of the men who came to be called range-rustlers made an
element of loss which could not long be sustained by thinking
men. As the Vigilantes regulated things in the mining camps, so
now in slightly different fashion the new property owners on the
upper range established their own ideas, their own sense of
proportion as to law and order. The cattle associations, the
banding together of many owners of vast herds, for mutual
protection and mutual gain were a natural and logical
development. Outside of these there was for a time a highly
efficient corps of cattle-range Vigilantes, who shot and hanged
some scores of rustlers.

It was a frenzied life while it lasted--this lurid outburst, the
last flare of the frontier. Such towns as Dodge and Ogallalla
offered extraordinary phenomena of unrestraint. The tract on which
Lancaster, in Worcester county (Mass.) was settled, was 'between'
the branches of the river, and so it was called '_Nashaway_'
or '_Nashawake_' (_nashaué-ohke_); and this name was afterwards
transferred from the territory to the river itself. There was
another _Nashaway_ in Connecticut, between Quinnebaug and Five-Mile
Rivers in Windham county, and here, too, the mutilated name
of the _nashaue-ohke_ was transferred, as _Ashawog_ or _Assawog_,
to the Five-Mile River.
The men of Dodge knew that another day had dawned. But this
was after the homesteaders had arrived and put up their wire
fences, cutting off from the town the holding grounds of the
northbound herds.

This innovation of barb-wire fences in the seventies had caused a
tremendous alteration of conditions over all the country. It had
enabled men to fence in their own water-fronts, their own
homesteads. Casually, and at first without any objection filed by
any one, they had included in their fences many hundreds of
thousands of acres of range land to which they had no title
whatever. These men--like the large-handed cow barons of the
Indian Nations, who had things much as they willed in a little
unnoted realm all their own--had money and political influence.
And there seemed still range enough for all. If a man wished to
throw a drift fence here or there, what mattered it?

Up to this time not much attention had been paid to the Little
Fellow, the man of small capital who registered a brand of his
own, and who with a Maverick* here and there and the natural
increase, and perhaps a trifle of unnatural increase here and
there--had proved able to accumulate with more or less rapidity a
herd of his own. Now the cattle associations passed rules that no
foreman should be allowed to have or register a brand of his own.
Not that any foreman could be suspected--not at all!--but the
foreman who insisted on his old right to own a running iron and a
registered brand was politely asked to find his employment
somewhere else.

 * In the early days a rancher by the name of Maverick, a Texas
man, had made himself rich simply by riding out on the open range
and branding loose and unmarked occupants of the free lands.
Hence the term "Maverick" was applied to any unbranded animal
running loose on the range. No one cared to interfere with these
early activities in collecting unclaimed cattle. Many a
foundation for a great fortune was laid in precisely that way. It
was not until the more canny days in the North that Mavericks
were regarded with jealous eyes.


The large-handed and once generous methods of the old range now
began to narrow themselves. Even if the Little Fellow were able
to throw a fence around his own land, very often he did not have
land enough to support his herd with profit. A certain antipathy
now began to arise between the great cattle owners and the small
ones, especially on the upper range, where some rather bitter
wars were fought--the cow kings accusing their smaller rivals of
rustling cows; the small man accusing the larger operators of
having for years done the same thing, and of having grown rich at
it.

The cattle associations, thrifty and shifty, sending their brand
inspectors as far east as the stockyards of Kansas City and
Chicago, naturally had the whip hand of the smaller men. They
employed detectives who regularly combed out the country in
search of men who had loose ideas of mine and thine. All the time
the cow game was becoming stricter and harder. Easterners brought
on the East's idea of property, of low interest, sure returns,
and good security. In short, there was set on once more--as there
had been in every great movement across the entire West-- the old
contest between property rights and human independence in
action. It was now once more the Frontier against the States, and
the States were foredoomed to win.

The barb-wire fence, which was at first used extensively by the
great operators, came at last to be the greatest friend of the
Little Fellow on the range. _Mataban_.' The small lake from
which it flows is the 'end of portage' between the waters
of Lake Michigan and those of Lake Superior.

7. CHABENUK, 'a bound mark'; literally, 'that which separates
or divides.' A hill in Griswold, Conn., which was anciently one
of the Muhhekan east bound-marks, was called _Chabinu[n]k_,
'Atchaubennuck,' and 'Chabunnuck.' The village of praying Indians
in Dudley (now Webster?) Mass., was named _Chabanakongkomuk_
(Eliot, 1668,) or _-ongkomum_, and the Great Pond still
retains, it is said, the name of Chaubenagungamaug
(_chabenukong-amaug_?), "the boundary fishing-place." This pond
was a bound mark between the Nipmucks and the Muhhekans, and was
resorted to by Indians of both nations.

* * * * *

III. Participials and verbals employed as place-names may
generally, as was before remarked, be referred to one or the
other of the two preceding classes. The distinction between noun
and verb is less clearly marked in Indian grammar than in English.
The name _Mushauwomuk_ (corrupted to _Shawmut_) may be regarded
as a participle from the verb _mushau[oo]m_ (Narr. _mishoonhom_)
'he goes by boat,'--or as a noun, meaning 'a ferry,'--or as a name
of the first class, compounded of the adjectival _mush[oo]-n_, 'boat
or canoe,' and _wom[oo]-uk_, habitual or customary _going_, i.e.,
'where there is going-by-boat.'

The analysis of names of this class is not easy. In most cases,
its results must be regarded as merely provisional. Without some
clue supplied by history or tradition and without accurate
knowledge of the locality to which the name belongs, or _is
supposed_ to belong, one can never be certain of having found the
right key to the synthesis, however well it may seem to fit the
lock. Experience Mayhew writing from Chilmark on Martha's
Vineyard, in 1722, gives the Indian name of the place where he
was living as _Nimpanickhickanuh_.

If he had not added the information that the name "signifies in
English, _The place of thunder clefts_," and that it was so called
"because there was once a tree there split in pieces by the thunder,"
it is not likely that any one in this generation would have discovered
its precise meaning,--though it might have been conjectured that
_neimpau_, or _nimbau_, 'thunder,' made a part of it.

_Quilútámende_ was (Heckewelder tells us[78]) the Delaware name of
a place on the Susquehanna, in Pennsylvania, where, as the Indians
say, "in their wars with the Five Nations, they fell by surprise
upon their enemies.

The word or name of this place is therefore, _Where we came unawares
upon them_, &c."

Without the tradition, the meaning of the name would not have
been guessed,--or, if guessed, would not have been confidently
accepted.

For three decades we had been receiving a strong and
valuable immigration from the north of Europe. It was in great
part this continuous immigration which occupied the farming lands
of upper Iowa, Minnesota, and the Dakotas. Thus the population of
the Northwest became largely foreign. Each German or Scandinavian
who found himself prospering in this rich new country was himself
an immigration agency. He sent back word to his friends and
relatives in the Old World and these came to swell the steadily
thickening population of the New.

We have seen that the enterprising cattlemen had not been slow to
reach out for such resources as they might. Perhaps at one time
between 1885 and 1890 there were over ten million acres of land
illegally fenced in on the upper range by large cattle companies.
This had been done without any color of law whatever; a man
simply threw out his fences as far as he liked, and took in range
enough to pasture all the cattle that he owned. His only pretext
was "I saw it first." For the Nester who wanted a way through
these fences out into the open public lands, he cherished a
bitter resentment. And yet the Nester must in time win through,
must eventually find the little piece of land which he was
seeking.

The government at Washington was finally obliged to take action.
In the summer of 1885, acting under authorization of Congress,
President Cleveland ordered the removal of all illegal enclosures
and forbade any person or association to prevent the peaceful
occupation of the public land by homesteaders. The President had
already cancelled the leases by which a great cattle company had
occupied grazing lands in the Indian Territory. Yet, with
even-handed justice he kept the land boomers also out of these
coveted lands, until the Dawes Act of 1887 allotted the tribal
lands to the Indians in severalty and threw open the remainder to
the impatient homeseekers. Waiting thousands were ready at the
Kansas line, eager for the starting gun which was to let loose a
mad stampede of crazed human beings.

It always was contended by the cowman that these settlers coming
in on the semi-arid range could not make a living there, that all
they could do was legally to starve to death some good woman.
True, many of them could not last out in the bitter combined
fight with nature and the grasping conditions of commerce and
transportation of that time. The western Canadian farmer of today
is a cherished, almost a petted being. But no one ever showed any
mercy to the American farmer who moved out West.

As always has been the case, a certain number of wagons might be
seen passing back East, as well as the somewhat larger number
steadily moving westward. There were lean years and dry years,
hot years, yellow years here and there upon the range. The phrase
written on one disheartened farmer's wagon top, "Going back to my
wife's folks," became historic.

The railways were finding profit in carrying human beings out to
the cow-range just as once they had in transporting cattle.
Indeed, it did not take the wiser railroad men long to see that
they could afford to set down a farmer, at almost no cost for
transportation, in any part of the new West. He would after that
be dependent upon the railroad in every way. The railroads
deliberately devised the great land boom of 1886, which was more
especially virulent in the State of Kansas. Many of the roads
had lands of their own for sale, but what they wanted most was
the traffic of the settlers. They knew the profit to be derived
from the industry of a dense population raising products which
must be shipped, and requiring imports which also must be
shipped. One railroad even offered choice breeding-stock free on
request. The same road, and others also, preached steadily the
doctrine of diversified farming. In short, the railroads, in
their own interests, did all they could to make prosperous the
farms or ranches of the West. The place taketh his name of that
fountaine, which signifieth _quick spring_, or _quickning spring_.
Probatum."
_Ashimuit_ or _Shumuit_, an Indian village near the line between
Sandwich and Falmouth, Mass.

,--_Shaume_, a neck and river in Sandwich (the _Chawum_ of Capt.
John Smith?),--_Shimmoah_, an Indian village on Nantucket,--may
all have derived their names from springs resorted to by the
natives, as was suggested by the Rev. Samuel Deane in a paper in
_Mass. Hist. Collections_, 2d Series, vol. x. pp. 173, 174.

6. MATTAPPAN, a participle of _mattappu_ (Chip. _namátabi_), 'he
sits down,' denotes a 'sitting-down place,' or, as generally
employed in local names, _the end of a portage_ between two
rivers or from one arm of the sea to another,--where the canoe
was launched again and its bearers re-embarked. Râle translates
the Abnaki equivalent, _mata[n]be_, by 'il va au bord de l'eau,--a
la grève pour s'embarquer,' and _meta[n]béniganik_, by 'au bout de
delà du portage.'

_Mattapan-ock_, afterwards shortened to _Mattapan_, that part of
Dorchester Neck (South Boston) where "the west country people
were set down" in 1630,[77] may have been so called because
it was the end of a carrying place from South Bay to Dorchester
Bay, across the narrowest part of the peninsula, or--as seems
highly probable--because it was the temporary 'sitting-down
place' of the new comers. Elsewhere, we find the name evidently
associated with _portage_.
[Footnote 77: Blake's Annals of Dorchester, p. 9; Winthrop's Journal,
vol. i. p. 28.]None the less the Little Fellow kept on going out into the West.
We did not change our land laws for his sake, and for a time he
needed no sympathy. The homestead law in combination with the
preemption act and the tree claim act would enable a family to
get hold of a very sizable tract of land. The foundations of many
comfortable fortunes were laid in precisely this way by thrifty
men who were willing to work and willing to wait.

It was not until 1917 that the old homestead law limiting the
settler to a hundred and sixty acres of land was modified for the
benefit of the stock-raiser. The stockraising homestead law, as
it is called, permits a man to make entry for not more than six
hundred and forty acres of unappropriated land which shall have
been designated by the Secretary of the Interior as "stockraising
land." Cultivation of the land is not required, but the holder is
required to make "permanent improvements" to the value of a
dollar and twenty-five cents an acre, and at least one-half of
these improvements must be made within three years after the date
of entry. In the old times the question of proof in "proving up"
was very leniently considered. A man would stroll down to the
land office and swear solemnly that he had lived the legal length
of time on his homestead, whereas perhaps he had never seen it or
had no more than ridden across it. Today matters perhaps will be
administered somewhat more strictly; for of all those millions of
acres of open land once in the West there is almost none left
worth the holding for farm purposes.

Such dishonest practices were, however, indignantly denied by
those who fostered the irrigation and dryfarming booms which made
the last phase of exploitation of the old range. A vast amount of
disaster was worked by the failure of number less irrigation
companies, each of them offering lands to the settlers through
the medium of most alluring advertising. In almost every case the
engineers underestimated the cost of getting water on the land.
Very often the amount of water available was not sufficient to
irrigate the land which had been sold to settlers. In countless
cases the district irrigation bonds-which were offered broadcast
by Eastern banks to their small investors--were hardly worth the
paper on which they were written. One after another these wildcat
irrigation schemes, purporting to assure sudden wealth in apples,
pears, celery, garden truck, cherries, small fruits, alfalfa,
pecans, eucalyptus or catalpa trees-anything you liked--went to
the wall. Sometimes whole communities became straitened by the
collapse of these overblown enterprises. The recovery was slow,
though usually the result of that recovery was a far healthier
and more stable condition of society.

This whole question of irrigation and dry farming, this or that
phase of the last scrambling, feverish settling on the last
lands, was sorely wasteful of human enterprise and human
happiness. It was much like the spawning rush of the salmon from
the sea. Many perish. A few survive. Certainly there never was
more cruel injustice done than that to the sober-minded Eastern
farmers, some of them young men in search of cheaper homes, who
sold out all they had in the East and went out to the dry country
to farm under the ditch, or to take up that still more hazardous
occupation--successful sometimes, though always hard and always
risky--dry farming on the benches which cannot be reached with
irrigating waters.

Strangely changed was all the face of the cattle range by these
successive and startling innovations. The smoke of many little
homes rose now, scattered over all that tremendous country from
the Rockies to the edge of the short grass country, from Texas to
the Canadian line. The figure at table answering to Speaker's
call, the "FIRST LORD of the TREASURY" is the same, though different.
Marvellously little different, considering all that has passed
since '86, and remembering the weight of added years when they
come on top of fourscore. Scantier the hair, paler the face and
more furrowed; but the form still erect, the eye flashing,
the right hand beating vigorously, as of yore, on the long-suffering
box; the voice even better than it was for a certain period
towards close of 1880 Parliament; the mental vision as clear; the
fancy as luxuriant; the logic as irresistible; the musical swing
of the stately sentences as harmonious.

For two hours and a quarter, unfaltering, unfailing, Mr. G. held
the unrivalled audience entranced, and sat down amid a
storm of cheering, looking almost as fresh as the posy in his
button-hole.

_Business done._--Mr. G. introduces Home-Rule Bill.

_Tuesday._--COLONEL SAUNDERSON going about to-day just as if
nothing had happened yesterday. _But something did._ Little
misunderstanding arose in connection with appropriation of a
Seat. The Colonel, of course, in the row at the door of the
House, between eleven and noon. Two hundred Members waiting to
get in as soon as doors opened. "Nothing like it seen in civilised
world since the rush for Oklahoma," says Lord PLAYFAIR, who has
been in the United States. "Then, you remember, the
intending settlers, gathering from all parts, bivouacked on line
marked by military, and on appointed day, at fixed hour, at sound
of gun, made the dash into the Promised Land. Lack some of those
particulars here. But the passion just the same; equally reckless;
every man first, and the Sergeant-at-Arms take the hindmost."
PLAYFAIR himself came down two hours later, intending to
take his seat in Peers' Gallery, but, finding another mob at
entrance, almost as turbulent, concluded he would not add to the
tumult by wrestling with anybody for a place in the front rank.

So, meeting a Bishop, who had come down with similar intent and
abandoned endeavour from analogous reason, they went for
a walk in the Park.

SAUNDERSON not a man of that kind. Thoroughly enjoyed himself
for exciting three-quarters of hour. Was in first flight of
heated and dishevelled senators who crossed the Bar when door
flung open, and elderly Messenger was simultaneously flattened
at back of it. SAUNDERSON dropped on to first convenient seat;
folded his arms; beginning to view the scene when, like the
person in the pastoral poem, "he heard a voice which said,"--"You're
sitting on my hat!"
"Well," replied Colonel, genially recognising Irish Member of same
Province, but another faith, "now you mention it, I thought I did
hear something crunch."The old Wyoming deadline of the cowmen
against intruding bands of Green River sheep made a considerable
amount of history which was never recorded.

The sheepmen at length began to succeed in their plans.
Themselves not paying many taxes, not supporting the civilization
of the country, not building the schools or roads or bridges,
they none the less claimed the earth and the fullness thereof.

After the establishment of the great forest reserves, the
sheepmen coveted the range thus included. It has been the
governmental policy to sell range privileges in the forest
reserves for sheep, on a per capita basis. Like privileges have
been extended to cattlemen in certain of the reserves. Always the
contact and the contest between the two industries of sheep and
cows have remained. Of course the issue even in this ancient
contest is foregone--as the cowman has had to raise his cows
under fence, so ultimately must the sheepman also buy his range
in fee and raise his product under fence.

The wandering bands of sheep belong nowhere. They ruin a country.
It is a pathetic spectacle to see parts of the Old West in which
sheep steadily have been ranged. They utterly destroy all the
game; they even drive the fish out of the streams and cut the
grasses and weeds down to the surface of the earth. The denuded
soil crumbles under their countless hoofs, becomes dust, and
blows away. They leave a waste, a desert, an abomination.

There were yet other phases of change which followed hard upon
the heels of our soldiers after they had completed their task of
subjugating the tribes of the buffalo Indians. After the
homesteads had been proved up in some of the Northwestern States,
such as Montana and the Dakotas, large bodies of land were
acquired by certain capitalistic farmers. All this new land had
been proved to be exceedingly prolific of wheat, the great
new-land crop. The farmers of the Northwest had not yet learned
that no country long can thrive which depends upon a single crop.
But the once familiar figures of the bonanza farms of the
Northwest--the pictures of their long lines of reapers or
selfbinders, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty machines, one after
the other, advancing through the golden grain--the pictures of
their innumerable stacks of wheat--the figures of the vast
mileage of their fencing--the yet more stupendous figures of the
outlay required to operate these farms, and the splendid totals
of the receipts from such operations--these at one time were
familiar and proudly presented features of boom advertising in
the upper portions of our black land belt, which day just at the
eastern edge of the old Plains.

There was to be repeated in this country something of the history
of California. In the great valleys, such as the San Joaquin, the
first interests were pastoral, and the cowmen found a vast realm
which seemed to be theirs forever. There came to them, however,
the bonanza wheat farmers, who flourished there about 1875 and
through the next decade. Their highly specialized industry
boasted that it could bake a loaf of bread out of a wheat field
between the hours of sunrise and sunset. The outlay in stock and
machinery on some of these bonanza ranches ran into enormous
figures. But here, as in all new wheat countries, the productive
power of the soil soon began to decrease. Little by little the
number of bushels per acre lessened, until the bonanza farmer
found himself with not half the product to sell which he had
owned the first few years of his operations. In one California
town at one time a bonanza farmer came in and covered three city
blocks with farm machinery which he had turned over to the bank
owning the mortgages on his lands and plant. He turned in also
all his mules and horses, and retired worse than broke from an
industry in which he had once made his hundreds of thousands.
Something of this same story was to follow in the Dakotas.
Presently we heard no more of the bonanza wheat farms; and a
little later they were not. The one-crop country is never one of
sound investing values; and a land boom is something of which to
beware--always and always to beware.

The prairie had passed; the range had passed; the illegal fences
had passed; and presently the cattle themselves were to
pass--that is to say, the great herds. As recently as five years
ago (1912) it was my fortune to be in the town of Belle Fourche,
near the Black Hills--a region long accustomed to vivid history,
whether of Indians, mines, or cows--at the time when the last of
the great herds of the old industry thereabouts were breaking up;
and to see, coming down to the cattle chutes to be shipped to the
Eastern stockyards, the last hundreds of the last great Belle
Fourche herd, which was once numbered in thousands. They came
down out of the blue-edged horizon, threading their way from
upper benches down across the dusty valley. The dust of their
travel rose as it had twenty years earlier on the same old trail.
But these were not the same cattle. There was not a longhorn
among them; there has not been a longhorn on the range for many
years. They were sleek, fat, well-fed animals, heavy and stocky,
even of type, all either whitefaces or shorthorns. With them were
some old-time cowmen, men grown gray in range work. Alongside the
herds, after the ancient fashion of trailing cattle, rode cowboys
who handled their charges with the same old skill. But even the
cowboys had changed. These were without exception men from the
East who had learned their trade here in the West. Here indeed
was one of the last acts of the great drama of the Plains. To
many an observer there it was a tragic thing. I saw many a cowman
there the gravity on whose face had nothing to do with commercial
loss. It was the Old West he mourned. I mourned with him.
Naturally the growth of the great stockyards of the Middle West
had an effect upon all the cattle-producing country of the West,
whether those cattle were bred in large or in small numbers. The
dealers of the stockyards, let us say, gradually evolved a
perfect understanding among themselves as to what cattle prices
ought to be at the Eastern end of the rails. They have always
pleaded poverty and explained the extremely small margin of
profit under which they have operated. Of course, the repeated
turn-over in their business has been an enormous thing; and their
industry, since the invention of refrigerator cars and the
shipment of dressed beef in tins, has been one which has extended
to all the corners of the world. The great packers would rather
talk of "by-products" than of these things. Always they have been
poor, so very poor!

For a time the railroads east of the stockyard cities of Kansas
City and Chicago divided up pro rata the dressed beef traffic.
Investigation after investigation has been made of the methods of
the stockyard firms, but thus far the law has not laid its hands
successfully upon them. Naturally of late years the extremely
high price of beef has made greater profit to the cattle raiser;
but that man, receiving eight or ten cents a pound on the hoof,
is not getting rich so fast as did his predecessor, who got half
of it, because he is now obliged to feed hay and to enclose his
range. Williams translated 'bream.' And _boonamoo_,--the _ponamo_
of Charlevoix (i. 127), who confounded it with some 'species of
dog-fish (chien de mer),'--is the _ap[oo]na[n]-mes[oo]_ of Rasles
and _papônaumsu_, 'winter fish,' of Roger Williams, 'which some
call frost-fish,'--_Morrhua pruinosa_.

The frequent occurrence of this termination in Micmac, Etchemin and
Abnaki local names gives probability to the conjecture, that it
came to be regarded as a general name for the region which these
tribes inhabited,--'L'arcadia,' 'l'Accadie,' and 'la Cadie,'
of early geographers and voyagers. Dr. Kohl has not found
this name on any earlier map than that published by Girolamo
Ruscelli in 1561.[58] That it is of Indian origin there is
hardly room for doubt, and of two or three possible derivations,
that from the terminal _-kâdi_, _-kodiah_, or _-ka[n]tti_, is on
the whole preferable.

But this termination, in the sense of 'place of abundance' or
in that of 'ground, land, or place,' cannot be used _separately_,
as an independent word, in any one of the languages which
have been mentioned; and it is singular that, in two or
three instances, only this termination should have been preserved
after the first and more important component of the name was
lost.

[Footnote 58: See Coll. Me. Hist. Society, 2d Ser., vol. i.
p. 234.]
There are two Abnaki words which are not unlike
_-ka[n]tti_ in sound, one or both of which may perhaps be found
in some local names: (1) _ka[oo]di_, 'where he sleeps,'
a _lodging place_ of men or animals; and (2) _ak[oo]daï[oo]i_,
in composition or as a prefix, _ak[oo]dé_, 'against the current,'
up-stream; as in _ned-ak[oo]té'hémen_, 'I go up stream,' and
_[oo]derak[oo]da[n]na[n]_, 'the fish go up stream.'

Some such synthesis may have given names to fishing-places on tidal
rivers, and I am more inclined to regard the name of 'Tracadie'
or 'Tracody' as a corruption of _[oo]derak[oo]da[n]_, than to
derive it (with Professor Dawson[59] and the Rev. Mr. Rand)
from "_Tulluk-kaddy_; probably, place of residence; dwelling
place,"--or rather (for the termination requires this), where
residences or dwellings are _plenty_,--where there is _abundance_
of dwelling place.
The story of these land rushes was much the same there as it had
been with us. Not all succeeded. The climatic conditions were far
more severe than any which we had endured, and if the soil for a
time in some regions seemed better than some of our poorest, at
least there waited for the one-crop man the same future which had
been discovered for similar methods within our own confines. But
the great Canadian land booms, carefully fostered and well
developed, offered a curious illustration of the tremendous
pressure of all the populations of the world for land and yet
more land.

In the year 1911 the writer saw, all through the Peace River
Valley and even in the neighborhood of the Little Slave Lake, the
advance-guard of wheat farmers crowding out even beyond the
Canadian frontier in the covetous search for yet more cheap land.
In 1912 I talked with a school teacher, who herself had homestead
land in the Judith Basin of Montana--once sacred to cows--and who
was calmly discussing the advisability of going up into the Peace
River country to take up yet more homestead land under the
regulations of the Dominion Government! In the year 1913 I saw an
active business done in town lots at Fort McMurray, five hundred
miles north of the last railroad of Alberta, on the ancient
Athabasca waterway of the fur trade!

Who shall state the limit of all this expansion? The farmer has
ever found more and more land on which he could make a living; he
is always taking land which his predecessor has scornfully
refused. If presently there shall come the news that the land
boomer has reached the mouth of the Mackenzie River--as long ago
he reached certain portions of the Yukon and Tanana country--if
it shall be said that men are now selling town lots under the
Midnight Sun--what then? We are building a government railroad of
our own almost within shadow of Mount McKinley in Alaska. There
are steamboats on all these great sub-Arctic rivers. Perhaps,
some day, a power boat may take us easily where I have stood,
somewhat wearied, at that spot on the Little Bell tributary of
the Porcupine, where a slab on a post said, "Portage Road to Ft.
McPherson"--a "road" which is not even a trail, but which crosses
the most northerly of all the passes of the Rockies, within a
hundred miles of the Arctic Ocean.

Land, land, more land! It is the cry of the ages, more imperative
and clamorous now than ever in the history of the world and only
arrested for the time by the cataclysm of the Great War. The
earth is well-nigh occupied now. Australia, New Zealand, Canada,
even Africa, are colonization grounds. What will be the story of
the world at the end of the Great War none may predict. For the
time there will be more land left in Europe; but, unbelievably
soon, the Great War will have been forgotten; and then the march
of the people will be resumed toward such frontiers of the world
as yet may remain. Land, land, more land!

Always in America we have occupied the land as fast as it was
feasible to do so. We have survived incredible hardships on the
mining frontier, have lived through desperate social conditions
in the cow country, have fought many of our bravest battles in
the Indian country. Always it has been the frontier which has
allured many of our boldest souls. And always, just back of the
frontier, advancing, receding, crossing it this way and that,
succeeding and failing, hoping and despairing--but steadily
advancing in the net result--has come that portion of the
population which builds homes and lives in them, and which is not
content with a blanket for a bed and the sky for a roof above.

We had a frontier once. It was our most priceless possession. It
has not been possible to eliminate from the blood of the American
West, diluted though it has been by far less worthy strains, all
the iron of the old home-bred frontiersmen. The frontier has been
a lasting and ineradicable influence for the good of the United
States. It was there we showed our fighting edge, our
unconquerable resolution, our undying faith. There, for a time at
least, we were Americans.

We had our frontier. We shall do ill indeed if we forget and
abandon its strong lessons, its great hopes, its splendid human
dreams.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

ANDY ADAMS, "The Log of a Cowboy," 1903. "The Outlet," 1905.
_Madamiscomtis_ or _Mattammiscontis_, the name of a tributary
of the Penobscot and of a town in Lincoln county, Me., was
translated by Mr.
Greenleaf, in 1823, "Young Alewive stream;" but it appears to
represent _met-a[n]ms[oo]ak-ka[n]tti_, 'a place where there _has
been_ (but is not now) plenty of alewives,' or to which they no
longer resort.

Compare Râle's _met-a[n]m[oo]ak_, "les poissons ont faites leurs
oeufs; ils s'en sont allés; il n'y en a plus."

_Cobbosseecontee_ river, in the south part of Kennebec county, is
named from a place near "the mouth of the stream, where it adjoineth
itself to Kennebec river,"[52] and 'where there was plenty of
sturgeons,'--_kabassak-ka[n]tti_.

[Footnote 52: Depositions in Coll. Me. Histor.

Society, iv. 113.]

FRANCIS PARKMAN, "The Oregon Trail," 1901, with preface by the
author to the edition of 18991. This is a reprint of the edition
published in 1857 under the title "Prairie and Rocky Mountain
Life," or "The California and Oregon Trail," and has always been
held as a classic in the literature of the West. It holds a
certain amount of information regarding life on the Plains at the
middle of the last century. The original title is more accurate
than the more usual one "The Oregon Trail," as the book itself is
in no sense an exclusive study of that historic highway.

COLONEL R. B. MARCY, U. S. A., "Thirty Years of Army Life on the
Border," 1866. An admirable and very informing book done by an
Army officer who was also a sportsman and a close observer of the
conditions of the life about him. One of the standard books for
any library of early Western literature.

EMERSON HOUGH, "The Story of the Outlaw," 1907. A study of the
Western desperado, with historical narratives of famous outlaws,
stories of noted border movements, Vigilante activities, and
armed conflicts on the border.

NATHANIEL PITT LANGFORD, "Vigilante Days and Ways," 1893. A
storehouse of information done in graphic anecdotal fashion of
the scenes in the early mining camps of Idaho and Montana.
Valuable as the work of a contemporary writer who took part in
the scenes he describes.

JOHN C. VAN TRAMP, "Prairie and Rocky Mountain Adventures or Life
in the West," 1870. A study of the States and territorial regions
of our Western empire, embracing history, statistics, and
geography, with descriptions of the chief cities of the West. In
large part a compilation of earlier Western literature.

SAMUEL BOWLES, "Our New West," 1869. Records of travel between
the Mississippi River and the Pacific Ocean, with details
regarding scenery, agriculture, mines, business, social life,
etc., including a full description of the Pacific States and
studies of the "Mormons, Indians, and Chinese" at that time.

HIRAM MARTIN CHITTENDEN, "The American Fur Trade of the Far
West," 1902. The work of a distinguished Army officer. Done with
the exact care of an Army engineer. An extraordinary collection
of facts and a general view of the picturesque early industry of
the fur trade, which did so much toward developing the American
West. See also his "History of Steamboat Navigation on the
Missouri River" (1903).

A. J. SOWELL, "Early Settlers and Indian Fighters of Southwest
Texas," 1900. A local book, but done with contemporary accuracy
by a man who also studied the Texas Rangers and who was familiar
with some of the earlier frontier characters of the Southwest.

--_Morgan's League of the Iroquois_.]]
_Saganaum_, _Sagana_, now _Saginaw_[68] Bay, on Lake Huron, received
its name from the mouth of the river which flows through
it to the lake.

[Footnote 68: _Saguinam_, Charlevoix, i. 501; iii. 279.]

The _Mississagas_ were people of the _missi-sauk_, _missi-sague_,
or (with locative) _missi-sak-ing_,[69] that is 'great outlet.'
In the last half of the seventeenth century they were seated on
the banks of a river which is described as flowing into Lake
Huron some twenty or thirty leagues south of the Sault Ste.

Marie (the same river probably that is now known as the Mississauga,
emptying into Manitou Bay,) and nearly opposite the Straits of
Mississauga on the South side of the Bay, between Manitoulin and
Cockburn Islands.P. DUNN, "Massacres of the
Mountains, A History of the Indian Wars of the Far West," 1886.

L. E. TEXTOR, "Official Relations between the United States and
the Sioux Indians," 1896.

G. W. MANYPENNY, "Our Indian Wards," 1880.

There is an extensive bibliography appended to Frederic L.
Paxson's "The Last American Frontier" (1910), the first book to
bring together the many aspects of the Far West.