Produced by Greg Weeks, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


THE REVOLT ON VENUS

THE TOM CORBETT
SPACE CADET STORIES

By Carey Rockwell

STAND BY FOR MARS!
DANGER IN DEEP SPACE
ON THE TRAIL OF THE SPACE PIRATES
THE SPACE PIONEERS
THE REVOLT ON VENUS

[Illustration: Frontispiece]

A TOM CORBETT Space Cadet Adventure

THE REVOLT ON VENUS

By CAREY ROCKWELL

WILLY LEY _Technical Adviser_

GROSSET & DUNLAP _Publishers_ New York


COPYRIGHT, 1954, BY
ROCKHILL RADIO


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
ILLUSTRATIONS BY LOUIS GLANZMAN

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    |                      Transcriber's Note                      |
    |                                                              |
    |   The DP team has failed to uncover any evidence that the    |
    |             copyright on this work was renewed.              |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+


ILLUSTRATIONS


_Frontispiece_

"She tried to get farther into the cave"                 54

They were completely surrounded by the jungle            57

Astro kept his blaster aimed at the monsters            107

His eyes probed the jungle for further movement         115

"Mr. Sinclair!" cried Tom, suddenly relieved            161

The Solar Guard troops landed on the rim of the canyon  189

Sinclair wasn't able to get clear in time               210


THE REVOLT ON VENUS


CHAPTER 1


"Emergency air lock open!"

The tall, broad-shouldered officer, wearing the magnificent
black-and-gold uniform of the Solar Guard, spoke into a small microphone
and waited for an acknowledgment. It came almost immediately.

"Cadet Corbett ready for testing," a voice crackled thinly over the
loud-speaker.

"Very well. Proceed."

Seated in front of the scanner screen on the control deck of the rocket
cruiser _Polaris_, Captain Steve Strong replaced the microphone in its
slot and watched a bulky figure in a space suit step out of the air lock
and drift away from the side of the ship. Behind him, five boys, all
dressed in the vivid blue uniforms of the Space Cadet Corps, strained
forward to watch the lone figure adjust the nozzles of the jet unit on
the back of his space suit.

"Come on, Tom!" said the biggest of the five boys, his voice a low,
powerful rumble as he rooted for his unit mate.

"If Tom makes this one," crowed the cadet next to him, a slender boy
with a thick shock of close-cropped blond hair, "the _Polaris_ unit is
home free!"

"This is the last test, Manning," replied one of the remaining three
cadets, the insigne of the _Arcturus_ unit on the sleeve of his uniform.
"_If_ Corbett makes this one, you fellows deserve to win."

Aboard the rocket cruiser _Polaris_, blasting through the black void of
space two hundred miles above Earth, six Space Cadets and a Solar Guard
officer were conducting the final test for unit honors for the term. All
other Academy units had been eliminated in open competition. Now, the
results of the individual space orientation test would decide whether
the three cadets of the _Arcturus_ unit or the three cadets of the
_Polaris_ unit would win final top unit honors.

Roger Manning and Astro kept their eyes glued to the telescanner screen,
watching their unit mate, Tom Corbett, drift slowly through space toward
his starting position. The young cadet's task was basically simple; with
his space helmet blacked out so that he could not see in any direction,
he was to make his way back to the ship from a point a mile away, guided
only by the audio orders from the examining officer aboard the ship. His
score was measured by the time elapsed, and the amount of corrections
and orders given by the examining officer. It was an exercise designed
to test a cadet's steadiness under emergency conditions of space.

The three members of the _Arcturus_ unit had completed their runs and
had returned to the ship in excellent time. Roger and Astro had also
taken their tests and now it depended on Tom. If he could return to the
_Polaris_ in less than ten minutes, with no more than three corrections,
the _Polaris_ unit would be victorious.

Seated directly in front of the scanner, Captain Steve Strong, the
examining officer, watched the space-suited figure dwindle to a mere
speck on the screen. As the regular skipper of the _Polaris_ crew, he
could not help secretly rooting for Tom, but he was determined to be
fair, even to the extent of declaring the _Arcturus_ unit the winner,
should the decision be very close. He leaned forward to adjust the focus
on the scanner, bringing the drifting figure into a close-up view, and
then lifted the microphone to his lips.

"Stand by, Corbett!" he called. "You're getting close to range."

"Very well, sir," replied Tom. "Standing by."

Behind Strong, Roger and Astro looked at each other and turned back to
the screen. As one, they crossed the fingers of both hands.

"Ready, Corbett!" called Strong. "You'll be clocked from the second
you're on range. One hundred feet--seventy-five--fifty--twenty-five
--ten--_time_!"

As the signal echoed in his blacked-out space helmet, Tom jerked his
body around in a sudden violent move, and grasping the valve of the jet
unit on his back, he opened it halfway. He waited, holding his breath,
expecting to hear Captain Strong correct his course. He counted to ten
slowly, and when no correction came over the headphones, he opened the
valve wide and blindly shot through space.

Aboard the Polaris, Astro and Roger shouted with joy and Strong could
not repress a grin. The tiny figure on the scanner was hurtling straight
for the side of the _Polaris_!

As the image grew larger and larger, anxious eyes swiveled back and
forth from the scanner screen to the steady sweeping hand of the
chronometer. Roger bit his lip nervously, and Astro's hands trembled.

When Tom reached a point five hundred feet away from the ship, Strong
flipped open the audio circuit and issued his first order.

"Range five hundred feet," he called. "Cut jets!"

"You're already here, spaceboy!" yelled Roger into the mike, leaning
over Strong's shoulder. The captain silenced him with a glare. No one
could speak to the examinee but the testing officer.

Tom closed the valve of his jet unit and blindly jerked himself around
again to drift feet first toward the ship. Strong watched this approach
closely, silently admiring the effortless way the cadet handled himself
in weightless space. When Tom was fifty feet away from the ship, and
still traveling quite fast, Strong gave the second order to break his
speed. Tom opened the valve again and felt the tug of the jets braking
his acceleration. He drifted slower and slower, and realizing that he
was close to the hull of the ship, he stretched his legs, striving to
make contact. Seconds later he felt a heavy thump at the soles of his
feet, and within the ship there was the muffled clank of metal boot
weights hitting the metal skin of the hull.

"_Time!_" roared Strong and glanced at the astral chronometer over his
head. The boys crowded around as the Solar Guard captain quickly
computed Tom's score. "Nine minutes, fifty-one seconds, and two
corrections," he announced, unable to keep the pride out of his voice.

"We win! We win!" roared Roger. "Term honors go to the _Polaris_!"

Roger turned around and began pounding Astro on the chest, and the giant
Venusian picked him up and waltzed him around the deck. The three
members of the _Arcturus_ unit waited until the first flush of victory
died away and then crowded around the two boys to congratulate them.

"Don't forget the cadet who did it," commented Strong dryly, and the
five cadets rushed below to the jet-boat deck to wait for Tom.

When Tom emerged from the air lock a few moments later, Roger and Astro
swarmed all over him, and another wild dance began. Finally, shaking
free of his well-meaning but violent unit mates, he grinned and gasped,
"Well, from that reception, I guess I did it."

"Spaceboy"--Roger smiled--"you made the _Arcturus_ unit look like three
old men in a washtub counting toes!"

"Congratulations, Corbett," said Tony Richards of the _Arcturus_ crew,
offering his hand. "That was really fast maneuvering out there."

"Thanks, Tony." Tom grinned, running his hand through his brown curly
hair. "But I have to admit I was a little scared. Wow! What a creepy
feeling to know you're out in space alone and not able to see anything."

Their excitement was interrupted by Strong's voice over the ship's
intercom. "Stand by, all stations!"

"Here we go!" shouted Roger. "Back to the Academy--and leave!"

"_Yeeeeooooow!_" Astro's bull-like roar echoed through the ship as the
cadets hurried to their flight stations.

As command cadet of the _Polaris_, Tom climbed up to the control deck,
and strapping himself into the command pilot's seat, prepared to get
under way. Astro, the power-deck cadet who could "take apart a rocket
engine and put it back together again with his thumbs," thundered below
to the atomic rockets he loved more than anything else in the universe.
Roger Manning, the third member of the famed _Polaris_ unit, raced up
the narrow ladder leading to the radar bridge to take command of
astrogation and communications.

While Captain Strong and the members of the _Arcturus_ unit strapped
themselves into acceleration cushions, Tom conducted a routine check of
the many gauges on the great control panel before him. Satisfied, he
flipped open the intercom and called, "All stations, check in!"

"Radar deck, aye!" drawled Roger's lazy voice.

"Power deck, aye!" rumbled Astro.

"Energize the cooling pumps!" ordered Tom.

"Cooling pumps, aye!"

The whine of the mighty pumps was suddenly heard, moaning eerily
throughout the ship.

"Feed reactant!"

The sharp hiss of fuel being forced into the rocket engines rose above
the whine of the pumps, and the ship trembled.

"Stand by to blast," called Tom. "Standard space speed!"

Instantly the _Polaris_ shot toward Earth in a long, curving arc.
Moments later, when the huge round ball of the mother planet loomed
large on the scanner screen, Roger's voice reported over the intercom,
"Academy spaceport control gives us approach orbit 074 for touchdown on
Ramp Twelve, Tom."

"074 Ramp Twelve," repeated Tom. "Got it!"

"Twelve!" roared Astro suddenly over the intercom. "Couldn't you make it
closer to the Academy than that, Manning? We'll have to walk two miles
to the nearest slidewalk!"

"Too bad, Astro," retorted Roger, "but I guess if I had to carry around
as much useless muscle and bone as you do, I'd complain too!"

"I'm just not as lucky as you, Manning," snapped Astro quickly. "I don't
have all that space gas to float me around."

"Knock it off, fellows," interjected Tom firmly. "We're going into our
approach."

Lying on his acceleration cushion, Strong looked over at Tony Richards
of the _Arcturus_ unit and winked. Richards winked and smiled back.
"They never stop, do they, sir?"

"When they do," replied Strong, "I'll send all three of them to sick bay
for examination."

"Two hundred thousand feet to Earth's surface," called Tom. "Stand by
for landing operations."

As Tom adjusted the many controls on the complicated operations panel of
the ship, Roger and Astro followed his orders quickly and exactly. "Cut
main drive rockets and give me one-half thrust on forward braking
rockets!" ordered Tom, his eyes glued to the altimeter.

The _Polaris_ shuddered under the sudden reverse in power, then began an
upward curve, nose pointing back toward space. Tom barked another
command. "Braking rockets full! Stand by main drive rockets!"

The sleek ship began to settle tailfirst toward its destination--Space
Academy, U.S.A.

In the heart of a great expanse of cleared land in the western part of
the North American continent, the cluster of buildings that marked Space
Academy gleamed brightly in the noon sun. Towering over the green grassy
quadrangle of the Academy was the magnificent Tower of Galileo, built of
pure Titan crystal which gleamed like a gigantic diamond. With smaller
buildings, including the study halls, the nucleonics laboratory, the
cadet dormitories, mess halls, recreation halls, all connected by
rolling slidewalks--and to the north, the vast area of the spaceport
with its blast-pitted ramps--the Academy was the goal of every boy in
the year A.D. 2353, the age of the conquest of space.

Founded over a hundred years before, Space Academy trained the youth of
the Solar Alliance for service in the Solar Guard, the powerful force
created to protect the liberties of the planets. But from the beginning,
Academy standards were so high, requirements so strict, that not many
made it. Of the one thousand boys enrolled every year, it was expected
that only twenty-one of them would become officers, and of this group,
only seven would be command pilots. The great Solar Guard fleet that
patrolled the space lanes across the millions of miles between the
satellites and planets possessed the finest, yet most complicated,
equipment in the Alliance. To be an officer in the fleet required a
combination of skills and technical knowledge so demanding that eighty
per cent of the Solar Guard officers retired at the age of forty.

High over the spaceport, the three cadets of the _Polaris_ unit, happy
over the prospect of a full month of freedom, concentrated on the task
of landing the great ship on the Academy spaceport. Watching the
teleceiver screen that gave him a view of the spaceport astern of the
ship, Tom called into the intercom, "One thousand feet to touchdown. Cut
braking rockets. Main drive full!"

The thunderous blast of the rockets was his answer, building up into
roaring violence. Shuddering, the great cruiser eased to the ground foot
by foot, perfectly balanced on the fiery exhaust from her main tubes.

Seconds later the giant shock absorbers crunched on the ramp and Tom
closed the master switch cutting all power. He glanced at the astral
chronometer over his head and then turned to speak into the audio log
recorder. "Rocket cruiser _Polaris_ completed space flight one-seven-six
at 1301."

Captain Strong stepped up to Tom and clapped him on the shoulder.
"Secure the _Polaris_, Tom, and tell Astro to get the reactant pile from
the firing chamber ready for dumping when the hot-soup wagon gets here."
The Solar Guard officer referred to the lead-lined jet sled that removed
the reactant piles from all ships that were to be laid up for longer
than three days. "And you'd better get over to your dorm right away,"
Strong continued. "You have to get ready for parade and full Corps
dismissal."

Tom grinned. "Yes, sir!"

"We're blasting off, sir," said Tony Richards, stepping forward with his
unit mates. "Congratulations again, Corbett. I still can't figure out
how you did it so quickly!"

"Thanks, Tony," replied Tom graciously. "It was luck and the pressure of
good competition."

Richards shook hands and then turned to Strong. "Do I have your
permission to leave the ship, sir?" he asked.

"Permission granted," replied Strong. "And have a good leave."

"Thank you, sir."

The three _Arcturus_ cadets saluted and left the ship. A moment later
Roger and Astro joined Strong and Tom on the control deck.

"Well," said Strong, "what nonsense have you three planned for your
leave? Try and see Liddy Tamal. I hear she's making a new stereo about
the Solar Guard. You might be hired as technical assistants." He smiled.
The famous actress was a favorite of the cadets. Strong waited. "Well,
is it a secret?"

"It was your idea, Astro," said Roger. "Go ahead."

"Yeah," said Tom. "You got us into this."

"Well, sir," mumbled Astro, turning red with embarrassment, "we're going
to Venus."

"What's so unusual about going to Venus?" asked Strong.

"We're going hunting," replied Astro.

"Hunting?"

"Yes, sir," gulped the big Venusian. "For tyrannosaurus."

Strong's jaw dropped and he sat down suddenly on the nearest
acceleration cushion. "I expected something a little strange from you
three whiz kids." He laughed. "It would be impossible for you to go home
and relax for a month. But this blasts me! Hunting for a tyrannosaurus!
What are you going to do with it after you catch it?" He paused and then
added, "If you do."

"Eat it," said Astro simply. "Tyrannosaurus steak is delicious!"

Strong doubled with laughter at the seriousness of Astro's expression.
The giant Venusian continued doggedly, "And besides, there's a bounty on
them. A thousand credits for every tyranno head brought in. They're
dangerous and destroy a lot of crops."

Strong straightened up. "All right, all right! Go ahead! Have yourselves
a good time, but don't take any unnecessary chances. I like my cadets to
have all the arms and legs and heads they're supposed to have." He
paused and glanced at his watch. "You'd better get hopping. Astro, did
you get the pile ready for the soup wagon?"

"Yes, sir!"

"Very well, Tom, secure the ship." He came to attention. "Unit,
_stand--to_!"

The three cadets stiffened and saluted sharply.

"Unit dismissed!"

Captain Strong turned and left the ship.

Hurriedly, Tom, Roger, and Astro checked the great spaceship and fifteen
minutes later were racing out of the main air lock. Hitching a ride on a
jet sled to the nearest slidewalk, they were soon being whisked along
toward their quarters. Already, cadet units were standing around in
fresh blues waiting for the call for final dress parade.

At exactly fifteen hundred, the entire Cadet Corps stepped off with
electronic precision for the final drill of the term. By threes, each
unit marching together, with the _Polaris_ unit walking behind the
standard bearers as honor unit, they passed the reviewing stand. Senior
officers of the Solar Guard, delegates from the Solar Alliance, and
staff officers of the Academy accepted their salute. Commander Walters
stood stiffly in front of the stand, his heart filled with pride as he
recognized the honor unit. He had almost washed out the _Polaris_ unit
in the beginning of their Academy training.

Major Lou Connel, Senior Line Officer of the Solar Guard, stepped
forward when the cadets came to a stop and presented Tom, Roger, and
Astro with the emblem of their achievement, a small gold pin in the
shape of a rocket ship. He, too, had had his difficulties with the
_Polaris_ unit, and while he had never been heard to compliment anyone
on anything, expecting nothing but the best all the time, he
nevertheless congratulated them heartily as he gave them their hard-won
trophy.

After several other awards had been presented, Commander Walters
addressed the Cadet Corps, concluding with "... each of you has had a
tough year. But when you come back in four weeks, you'll think this past
term has been a picnic. And remember, wherever you go, whatever you do,
you're Space Cadets! Act like one! But above all, have a good time!
Spaceman's luck!"

A cadet stepped forward quickly, turned to face the line of cadets, and
held up his hands. He brought them down quickly and words of the Academy
song thundered from a thousand voices.

    "_From the rocket fields of the Academy
    To the far-flung stars of outer space,
    We're Space Cadets training to be
    Ready for dangers we may face.

    Up in the sky, rocketing past,
    Higher than high, faster than fast,
    Out into space, into the sun,
    Look at her go when we give her the gun.

    We are Space Cadets, and we are proud to say
    Our fight for right will never cease.
    Like a cosmic ray, we light the way
    To interplanet peace!_"

"_Dis_-missed!" roared Walters. Immediately the precise lines of cadets
turned into a howling mob of eager boys, everyone seemingly running in a
different direction.

"Come on," said Roger. "I've got everything set! Let's get to the
station ahead of the mob."

"But what about our gear?" said Tom. "We've got to get back to the
dorm."

"I had it sent down to the station last night. I got the monorail
tickets to Atom City last week, and reserved seats on the _Venus Lark_
two weeks ago! Come on!"

"Only Roger could handle it so sweetly," sighed Astro. "You know,
hotshot, sometimes I think you're useful!"

The three cadets turned and raced across the quadrangle for the nearest
slidewalk that would take them to the Academy monorail station and the
beginning of their adventure in the jungles of Venus.

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 2


"The situation may be serious and it may not, but I don't want to take
any chances."

Commander Walters sat in his office, high up in the Tower of Galileo,
with department heads from the Academy and Solar Guard. Behind him, an
entire wall made of clear crystal offered a breath-taking view of the
Academy grounds. Before him, their faces showing their concern over a
report Walters had just read, Captain Strong, Major Connel, Dr. Joan
Dale, and Professor Sykes waited for the commanding officer of the
Academy to continue.

"As you know," said Walters, "the resolution passed by the Council in
establishing the Solar Guard specifically states that it shall be the
duty of the Solar Guard to investigate and secure evidence for the Solar
Alliance Council of any acts by any person, or group of persons,
suspected of overt action against the Solar Constitution or the
Universal Bill of Rights. Now, based on the report I've just read to
you, I would like an opinion from each of you."

"For what purpose, Commander?" asked Joan Dale, the young and pretty
astrophysicist.

"To decide whether it would be advisable to have a full and open
investigation of this information from the Solar Guard attaché on
Venus."

"Why waste time talking?" snapped Professor Sykes, the chief of the
nucleonics laboratory. "Let's investigate. That report sounds serious."

Major Connel leveled a beady eye on the little gray-haired man.

"Professor Sykes, an investigation is serious. When it is based on a
report like this one, it is doubly serious, and needs straight and
careful thinking. We don't want to hurt innocent people."

Sykes shifted around in his chair and glared at the burly Solar Guard
officer. "Don't try to tell me anything about straight thinking, Connel.
I know more about the Solar Constitution and the rights of our citizens
than you'll know in ten thousand light years!"

"Yeah?" roared Connel. "And with all your brains you'd probably find out
these people are nothing more than a harmless bunch of colonists out on
a picnic!"

The professor shot out of his chair and waved an angry finger under
Connel's nose. "And that would be a lot more than I'm finding out right
now with that contraption of yours!" he shouted.

Connel's face turned red. "So that's how you feel about my invention!"
he snapped.

"Yes, that's the way I feel about your invention!" replied Sykes hotly.
"I know three cadets that could build that gadget in half the time it's
taken you just to figure out the theory!"

Commander Walters, Captain Strong, and Joan Dale were fighting to keep
from laughing at the hot exchange between the two veteran spacemen.

"They sound like the _Polaris_ unit," Joan whispered to Strong.

Walters stood up. "Gentlemen! Please! We're here to discuss a report on
the activities of a secret organization on Venus. I will have to ask you
to keep to the subject at hand. Dr. Dale, do you have any comments on
the report?" He turned to the young physicist who was choking off a
laugh.

"Well, Commander," she began, still smiling, "the report is rather
sketchy. I would like to see more information before any real decision
is made."

Walters turned to Strong. "Steve?"

"I think Joan has the right idea, sir," he replied. "While the report
indicates that a group of people on Venus are meeting regularly and
secretly, and wearing some silly uniform, I think we need more
information before ordering a full-scale investigation."

"He's right, Commander," Connel broke in. "You just can't walk into an
outfit and demand a look at their records, books, and membership index,
unless you're pretty sure you'll find something."

"Send a man from here," Strong suggested. "If you use anyone out of the
Venus office, he might be recognized."

"Good idea," commented Sykes.

Joan nodded. "Sounds reasonable."

"How do you feel about it, Connel?" asked Walters.

Connel, still furious over Sykes's comment on his spectrum recorder,
shot an angry glance at the professor. "I think it's fine," he said
bluntly. "Who're you going to send?"

Walters paused before answering. He glanced at Strong and then back at
Connel. "What about yourself?"

"Me?"

"Why not?" continued Walters. "You know as much about Venus as anyone,
and you have a lot of friends there you can trust. Nose around a while,
see what you can learn, unofficially."

"But what about my work on the spectrum recorder?" asked Connel.

"That!" snorted Sykes derisively. "Huh, that can be completed any time
you want to listen to some plain facts about--"

"I'll never listen to anything you have to say, you dried-up old neutron
chaser!" blasted Connel.

"Of course not," cackled Sykes. "And it's the same bullheaded
stubbornness that'll keep you from finishing that recorder."

"I'm sorry, gentlemen," said Walters firmly. "I cannot allow personal
discussions to interfere with the problem at hand. How about it, Connel?
Will you go to Venus?"

Lou Connel was the oldest line officer in the Solar Guard, having
recommended the slightly younger Walters for the post of commandant of
Space Academy and the Solar Guard so that he himself could escape a desk
job and continue blasting through space where he had devoted his entire
life. While Walters had the authority to order him to accept the
assignment, Connel knew that if he begged off because of his work on the
recorder, Walters would understand and offer the assignment to Strong.
He paused and then growled, "When do I blast off?"

Walters smiled and answered, "As soon as we contact Venus headquarters
and tell them to expect you."

"Wouldn't it be better to let me go without any fanfare?" mused the
burly spaceman. "I could just take a ship and act as though I'm on some
kind of special detail. As a matter of fact, Higgleston at the Venusport
lab has some information I could use."

"Anything Higgleston could tell you," interjected Sykes, "I can tell
you! You're just too stubborn to listen to me."

Connel opened his mouth to blast the professor in return, but he caught
a sharp look from Walters and he clamped his lips together tightly.

"I guess that's it, then," said Walters. "Anyone have any other ideas?"
He glanced around the room. "Joan? Steve?"

Dr. Dale and Captain Strong shook their heads silently. Strong was
disappointed that he had not been given the assignment on Venus. Four
weeks at the deserted Academy would seem like living in a graveyard.
Walters sensed his feelings, and smiling, he said, "You've been going
like a hot rocket this past year, Steve. I have a specific assignment
for you."

"Yes, sir!" Strong looked up eagerly.

"I want you to go to the Sweet Water Lakes around New Chicago--"

"Yes, sir?"

"--go to my cabin--"

"Sir?"

"--_and go fishing_!"

Strong grinned. "Thanks, skipper," he said quietly. "I guess I could use
a little relaxation. I was almost tempted to join Corbett, Manning, and
Astro. They're going hunting in the jungle belt of Venus for a
tyrannosaurus!"

"Blast my jets!" roared Connel. "Those boys haven't killed themselves in
line of duty, so they go out and tangle with the biggest and most
dangerous monster in the entire solar system!"

"Well," said Joan with a smile, "I'll put my money on Astro against a
tyranno any time, pound for pound!"

"Hear, hear!" chimed in Sykes, and forgetting his argument with Connel,
he turned to the spaceman. "Say, Lou," he said, "when you get to Venus
tell Higgy I said to show you that magnetic ionoscope he's rigging up.
It might give you some ideas."

"Thanks," replied Connel, also forgetting the hot exchange of a few
minutes before. He stood up. "I'll take the _Polaris_, Commander. She's
the fastest ship available with automatic controls for a solo hop."

"She's been stripped of her reactant pile, Major," said Strong. "It'll
take a good eighteen hours to soup her up again."

"I'll take care of it," said Connel. "Are there any specific orders,
Commander?"

"Use your own judgment, Lou," said Walters. "You know what we want and
how far to go to get it. If you learn anything, we'll start a full-scale
investigation. If not, we'll forget the whole matter and no one will get
hurt."

"And the Solar Guard won't get a reputation of being nosy," added
Strong.

Connel nodded. "I'll take care of it." He shook hands all around, coming
to Sykes last. "Sorry I lost my temper, Professor," he said gruffly.

"Forget it, Major." Sykes smiled. He really admired the gruff spaceman.

The thick-set senior officer came to smart attention, saluted crisply,
turned, and left the office. For the time being, the mysterious trouble
on Venus was his responsibility.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Atom City express leaving on Track Four!"

A metallic voice boomed over the station loud-speaker, as last-minute
passengers boarded the long line of gleaming white monorail cars,
hanging from a single overhead steel rail. In the open doorway of one
of the end cars, a conductor lifted his arm, then paused and waited
patiently as three Space Cadets raced down the stairs and along the
platform in a headlong dash for the train. They piled inside, almost one
on top of the other.

"Thanks for waiting, sir," gasped Tom Corbett.

"Not at all, Cadet," said the conductor. "I couldn't let you waste your
leave waiting for another train."

The elderly man flipped a switch in the narrow vestibule and the door
closed with a soft hiss of air. He inserted a light key into a near-by
socket and twisted it gently, completing a circuit that flashed the "go"
light in the engineer's cab. Almost immediately, the monorail train
eased forward, suspended on the overhead rail. By the time the last
building of Space Academy flashed past, the train was rolling along at
full speed on its dash across the plains to Atom City.

The ride to the great metropolis of the North American continent was
filled with excitement and anticipation for the three members of the
_Polaris_ crew. The cars were crowded with cadets on leave, and while
there was a lot of joking and horseplay, the few civilian passengers
were impressed with the gentlemanly bearing of the young spacemen. Tom
and Roger finally settled down to read the latest magazines supplied by
the monorail company. But Astro headed for the dining car where he
attracted a great deal of attention by his order of a dozen eggs,
followed by two orders of waffles and a full quart of milk. Finally,
when the dining-car steward called a halt, because it was closing time,
Astro made his way back to Tom and Roger with a plastic bag of French
fried potatoes, and the three boys sat, munching them happily. The
countryside flashed by in a blur of summer color as the train roared on
at a speed of two hundred miles an hour.

A few hours and four bags of potatoes later, Astro yawned and stretched
his enormous arms, nearly poking Roger in the eye.

"Hey, ya big ape!" growled Roger. "Watch the eye!"

"You'd never miss it, Manning," said Astro. "Just use your radar."

"Never mind, I like this eye just the way it is."

"We're almost there," called Tom. He pointed out the crystal window and
they could see the high peaks of the Rocky Mountain range looming ahead.
"We cut through the new tunnel in those mountains and we'll be in Atom
City in ten minutes!"

There was a bustle of activity around them as other cadets roused
themselves and collected their gear. Once again conversation became
animated and excited as the train neared its destination. Flashing into
the tunnel, the line of cars began to slow down, rocking gently.

"We'd better go right out to the spaceport," said Tom, pulling his gear
out of the recessed rack under his seat. "Our ship blasts off for Venus
in less than a half-hour."

"Boy, it'll be a pleasure to ride a spaceship without having to
astrogate," said Roger. "I'll just sit back and take it easy. Hope there
are some good-looking space dolls aboard."

Tom turned to Astro. "You know, Astro," he said seriously, "it's a good
thing we're along to take care of this Romeo. If he were alone, he'd
wind up in another kind of hunt."

"I'd like to see how Manning's tactics work on a female dasypus
novemcinctur maximus," said Astro with a sly grin.

"A female what?" yelled Roger.

"A giant armadillo, Roger," Tom explained, laughing. "Very big and very
mean when they don't like you. Don't forget, everything on Venus grows
big because of the lighter gravity."

"Yeah," drawled Roger, looking at Astro. "Big and dumb!"

"What was that again?" bellowed the giant Venusian, reaching for the
flip cadet. The next moment, Roger was struggling futilely, feet kicking
wildly as Astro held him at arm's length six inches off the floor. The
cadets in the car roared with laughter.

"Atom City!" a voice over the intercar communicator boomed and the boys
looked out the window to see the towering buildings of Atom City slowly
slide by. The train had scarcely reached a full stop when the three
cadets piled out of the door, raced up the slidestairs, and jumped into
a jet cab. Fifteen minutes later they marched up to one of the many
ticket counters of the Atom City Interplanetary Spaceport.

"Reservations for Cadets Corbett, Manning, and Astro on the _Venus
Lark_, please," announced Tom.

The girl behind the counter ran her finger down a passenger manifest,
nodded, and then suddenly frowned. She turned back to Tom and said, "I'm
sorry, Cadet, but your reservations have been pre-empted by a priority
listing."

"Priority!" roared Roger. "But I made those reservations two weeks ago.
If there was a change, why didn't you tell us before?"

"I'm sorry, sir," said the girl patiently, "but according to the
manifest, the priority call just came in a few hours ago. Someone
contacted Space Academy, but you had already left."

"Well, is there another ship for Venusport today?"

"Yes," she replied and picked up another manifest. Glancing at it
quickly, she shook her head. "There are no open reservations," she said.
"I'm afraid the next flight for Venusport with open reservations isn't
for four days."

"Blast my jets!" growled Roger disgustedly. "Four days!" He sat down on
his gear and scowled. Astro leaned against the desk and stared gloomily
at the floor. At that moment a young man with a thin face and a strained
intense look pushed Tom to one side with a curt "Excuse me!" and stepped
up to the desk.

"You're holding three reservations on the _Venus Lark_," he spoke
quickly. "Priority number four-seven-six, S.D."

Tom, Roger, and Astro looked at him closely. They saw him nervously pay
for his tickets and then walk away quickly without another look at the
ticket girl.

"Were those our seats, miss?" asked Tom. The girl nodded.

The three cadets stared after the young man who had bumped them off
their ship.

"The symbol S.D. on the priority stands for Solar Delegate," said Roger.
"Maybe he's a messenger."

The young man was joined by two other men also dressed in Venusian
clothing, and after a few words, they all turned and stepped onto the
slidewalk rolling out to the giant passenger ship preparing to blast
off.

"This is the most rocket-blasting bit of luck in the universe!" growled
Roger. "Four days!"

"Cheer up, Roger," said Tom. "We can spend the four days in Atom City.
Maybe Liddy Tamal is here. We can follow Captain Strong's suggestion."

"Even she doesn't make four days delay sound exciting," interrupted
Roger. "Come on. We might as well go back to town or we won't even get a
room."

He picked up his gear and walked back to the jet cab-stand. Astro and
Tom followed the blond-haired cadet glumly.

The stand was empty, but a jet cab was just pulling up to the platform
with a passenger. As the boys walked over to wait at the door, it opened
and a familiar figure in a black-and-gold uniform stepped out.

"Captain Strong!"

[Illustration]

"Corbett!" exclaimed Strong. "What are you doing here? I thought you
were aboard the _Venus Lark_."

"We were bumped out of our reservation by an S.D. priority," said Astro.

"And we can't get out of here for another four days," added Roger
glumly.

Strong sympathized. "That's rough, Astro." He looked at the three dour
faces and then said, "Would you consider getting a free ride to Venus?"

The three cadets looked up hopefully.

"Major Connel's taking the _Polaris_ to Venus to complete some work with
Professor Higgleston in the Venus lab," explained Strong. "If you can
get back to the Academy before he blasts off, he might give you a ride."

"No, thanks!" said Roger. "I'd rather sit here."

"Wait a minute, Roger," said Tom. "We're on leave, remember? And it's
only a short hop to Venus."

"Yeah, hotshot," added Astro. "We'll get to Venus faster than the _Venus
Lark_, and save money besides."

"O.K.," said Roger. "I guess I can take him for a little while."

Strong suppressed a smile. Roger's reluctance to go with Connel was well
founded. Any cadet within hailing distance of the hard-bitten spaceman
was likely to wind up with a bookful of demerits.

"Are you on an assignment, sir?" asked Tom.

"Vacation," said Strong. "Four weeks of fishing at Commander Walters'
cabin at Sweet Water Lakes."

"If you pass through New Chicago," said Tom, "you would be welcome to
stop in at my house. Mom and Dad would be mighty happy to meet you. And
I think Billy, my kid brother, would flip a rocket."

"Thank you, Tom. I might do that if I have time." He looked at his
watch. "You three had better hurry. I'd advise taking a jetcopter back
to the Academy. You might not make it if you wait for a monorail."

"We'll do that, sir," said Tom.

The three boys threw their gear into the waiting cab and piled in.
Strong watched them roar away, frowning in thought. An S.D. priority,
the highest priority in space, was used only by special couriers on
important missions for one of the delegates. He shrugged it off.
"Getting to be as suspicious as an old space hen," he said to himself.
"Fishing is what I need. A good fight with a trout instead of a space
conspiracy!"


CHAPTER 3


"Blast off--minus--five--four--three--two--one--_zero_!"

As the main drive rockets blasted into life, Tom fell back in his seat
before the control panel of the _Polaris_ and felt the growing thrust as
the giant ship lifted off the ground, accelerating rapidly. He kept his
eyes on the teleceiver screen and saw Space Academy fall away behind
them. On the power deck Astro lay strapped in his acceleration cushion,
his outstretched hand on the emergency booster rocket switch should the
main rockets fail before the ship could reach the free fall of space. On
the radar bridge Roger watched the far-flung stars become brighter as
the rocket ship hurtled through the dulling layers of the atmosphere.

As soon as the ship reached weightless space, Tom flipped on the gravity
generators and put the _Polaris_ on her course to Venus. Almost
immediately the intercom began to blast.

"Now hear this!" Major Connel's voice roared. "Corbett, Manning, and
Astro! I don't want any of your space-blasted nonsense on this trip! Get
this ship to Venusport in the shortest possible time without burning out
the pump bearings. And, Manning--!"

"Yes, sir," replied the blond-haired cadet.

"If I so much as hear one wisecrack between you and that overgrown
rocket jockey, Astro, I'll log both of you twenty-five demerits!"

"I understand, sir," acknowledged Roger lazily. "I rather appreciate
your relieving me of the necessity of speaking to that space ape!"

Listening to their voices on the control deck, Tom grinned and waited
expectantly. He wasn't disappointed.

"Ape!" came a bull-like roar from the power deck. "Why, you skinny
moth-eaten piece of space junk--"

"Cadet Astro!"

"Yes, sir?" Astro was suddenly meek.

"If you say one more word, I'll bury you in demerits!"

"But, sir--"

"No _buts_!" roared Connel. "And you, Manning--!"

"Yes, sir?" chimed in Roger innocently.

"Keep your mouth shut!"

"Very well, sir," said Roger.

"Corbett?"

"Yes, sir?"

"I'm putting you in charge of monitoring the intercom. If those two
space idiots start jabbering again, call me. That's an order! I'll be in
my quarters working." Connel switched off abruptly.

"You hear that, fellows?" said Tom. "Knock it off."

"O.K., Tom," replied Roger, "just keep him out of my sight."

"That goes for me, too," added Astro. "Ape! Just wait till I--"

"Astro!" Tom interrupted sharply.

"O.K., O.K.," groaned the big cadet.

Glancing over the panel once more and satisfying himself that the ship
was functioning smoothly, Tom sighed and settled back in his seat,
enjoying the temporary peace and solitude. It had been a tough year,
filled with intensive study in the quest for an officer's commission in
the Solar Guard. Space Academy was the finest school in the world, but
it was also the toughest. The young cadet shook his head, remembering a
six-weeks' grind he, Roger, and Astro had gone through on a nuclear
project. Knowing how to operate an atomic rocket motor was one thing,
but understanding what went on inside the reactant pile was something
else entirely. Never had the three cadets worked harder, or more closely
together. But Astro's thorough, practical knowledge of basic nucleonics,
combined with Roger's native wizardry at higher mathematics, and his own
understanding of the theory, had enabled them to pull through with a
grade of seventy-two, the highest average ever made by a cadet unit not
specializing in physics.

As the ship rocketed smoothly through the airless void of space toward
the misty planet of Venus, Tom made another quick but thorough check of
the panel, and then returned to his reflections on the past term. It had
been particularly difficult since they had missed many valuable hours of
classroom work and study because of their adventure on the new colony of
Roald (as described in _The Space Pioneers_), but they had come through
somehow. He shook his head wondering how they had made it. Forty-two
units had washed out during the term. Instead of getting easier, the
courses of study were getting more difficult all the time, and in his
speech on the parade grounds, Commander Walters had promised--

"Emergency!"

Roger's voice over the intercom brought Tom out of his reverie sharply.

"All hands," continued the cadet on the radar bridge hurriedly, "secure
your stations and get to the jet-boat deck on the double! Emergency!"

As the sharp clang of the emergency alarm rang out, Tom did not stop to
question Roger's sudden order. Neutralizing all controls, he leaped for
the hatch leading below. Taking the ladder four steps at a time, Tom saw
Major Connel tear out of his quarters. The elder spaceman dived for the
ladder himself, not stopping to ask questions. He was automatic in his
reliance on the judgment of others. The few seconds spent in talk could
mean the difference between life and death in space where you seldom got
a second chance.

Tom and Connel arrived on the jet-boat deck to find Astro already
preparing the small space craft for launching. As they struggled into
space suits, Roger appeared. In answer to their questioning looks, he
explained laconically, "Unidentifiable object attached to ship on fin
parallel to steering vanes. Thought we'd better go outside first and
examine later."

Connel nodded his mute agreement, and thirty seconds later the tiny jet
boat was blasting out of the escape lock into space.

Circling around the ship to the stern, the jet boat, under Major
Connel's sure touch, stopped fifty feet from the still glowing, exhaust
tubes. He and the three cadets stared out at a small metallic boxlike
object attached to the underside of the stabilizer fin.

"What do you suppose it is?" asked Astro.

"I don't know," replied Roger, "but it sure doesn't belong there. That's
why I rang the emergency on you."

"You were absolutely right, Manning," asserted Connel. "If it's
harmless, we can always get back aboard and nothing's been lost except a
little time." He rose from the pilot's seat and stepped toward the
hatch. "Come with me, Corbett. We'll have a look. And bring the
radiation counter along."

"Aye, aye, sir!"

Tom reached into a near-by locker, and pulling out a small, rectangular
box with a round hornlike grid in its face, plunged out of the hatch
with Major Connel and blasted across the fifty-foot gap to the
stabilizer fin of the _Polaris_.

Connel gestured toward the object on the fin. "See if she's hot,
Corbett."

The young cadet pressed a small button on the counter and turned the
horn toward the mysterious box. Immediately the needle on the dial above
the horn jumped from white to pink and finally red, quivering against
the stop pin.

"Hot!" exclaimed Tom. "She almost kicked the pin off!"

"Get off the ship!" roared Connel. "It's a fission bomb with a time
fuse!"

Tom dove at the box and tried to pull it off the stabilizer, but Major
Connel grabbed him by the arm and wrenched him out into space.

"You space-blasted idiot!" Connel growled. "That thing's liable to go
off any second! Get away from here!"

With a mighty shove, the spaceman sent Tom flying out toward the jet
boat and then jumped to safety himself. Within seconds he and the young
cadet were aboard the jet boat again and, not stopping to answer Astro's
or Roger's questions, he jammed his foot down hard on the acceleration
lever, sending the tiny ship blasting away from the _Polaris_.

Not until they were two miles away from the stricken rocket ship did
Connel bring the craft to a stop. He turned and gazed helplessly at the
gleaming hull of the _Polaris_.

"So they know," he said bitterly. "They're trying to stop me from even
reaching Venus."

The three cadets looked at each other and then at the burly spaceman,
bewilderment in their eyes.

"What's this all about, sir?" Roger finally asked.

"I'm not at liberty to tell you, Manning," replied Connel. "Though I
want to thank you for your quick thinking. How did you happen to
discover the bomb?"

"I was sighting on Regulus for a position check and Regulus was dead
astern, so when I swung the periscope scanner around, I spotted that
thing stuck to the fin. I didn't bother to think about it, I just
yelled."

[Illustration]

"Glad you did," nodded Connel and turned to stare at the _Polaris_
again. "Now I'm afraid we'll just have to wait until that bomb goes
off."

"Isn't there anything we can do?" asked Tom.

"Not a blasted thing," replied Connel grimly. "Thank the universe we
shut off all power. If that baby had blown while the reactant was
feeding into the firing chambers, we'd have wound up a big splash of
nothing."

"This way," commented Astro sourly, "it'll just blast a hole in the side
of the ship."

"We might be able to repair that," said Tom hopefully.

"There she goes!" shouted Roger.

[Illustration]

Staring out the windshield, they saw a sudden blinding flash of light
appear over the stern section of the _Polaris_, a white-hot blaze of
incandescence that made them flinch and crouch back.

"By the craters of Luna!" exclaimed Connel.

Before their eyes they saw the stabilizer fin melt and curl under the
intense heat of the bomb. There was no sound or shock wave in the vacuum
of space, but they all shuddered as though an overwhelming force had
swept over them. Within seconds the flash was gone and the _Polaris_ was
drifting in the cold blackness of space! The only outward damage visible
was the twisted stabilizer, but the boys realized that she must be a
shambles within.

"I guess we'll have to wait a while before we go back aboard. There
might be radioactivity around the hull," Roger remarked.

"I don't think so," said Tom. "The _Polaris_ was still coasting when we
left her. We cut out the drive rockets, but we didn't brake her. She's
probably drifted away from the radioactivity already."

"Corbett's right," said Connel. "A hot cloud would be a hundred miles
away by now." He pressed down on the acceleration lever and the jet boat
eased toward the ship. Edging cautiously toward the stern of the
spaceship, they saw the blasted section of the fin already cooling in
the intense cold of outer space.

"Think I'd better call a Solar Guard patrol ship, sir?" asked Roger.

"Let's wait until we check the damage, Manning," replied Connel.

"Yeah," chimed in Astro grimly, "if I can help it, I'm going to bring
the _Polaris_ in." He paused and then added, "If I have to carry her on
my back."

As soon as a quick check with the radiation counter showed them that the
hull was free of radioactivity, Major Connel and the three cadets
re-entered the ship.

While the lack of atmosphere outside had dissipated the full force of
the blast, the effect on the inside of the ship, where Earth's air
pressure was maintained, was devastating. Whole banks of delicate
machinery were torn from the walls and scattered over the decks. The
precision instruments of the inner hull showed no signs of leakage, and
the oxygen-circulating machinery could still function on an auxiliary
power hookup.

Completing the quick survey of the ship, Major Connel realized that they
would never be able to continue their flight to Venus and instructed
Roger to contact the nearest Solar Guard patrol ship to pick them up.

"The _Polaris_ will have to be left in space," continued Connel, "and a
maintenance crew will be sent out to see if she can be repaired. If they
decide it isn't worth the labor, they'll junk her here in space."

The faces of the three cadets fell.

"But there's no real damage on her power deck, sir," said Astro. "And
the hull is in good shape, except for the stabilizer fin and some of the
stern plates. Why, sometimes a green Earthworm unit will crack a fin on
their first touchdown."

"And the radar deck can be patched up easy, sir," spoke up Roger. "With
some new tubes and a few rolls of wire I could have her back in shape in
no time."

"That goes for the control deck, too!" said Tom doggedly. Then, after a
quick glance at his unit mates, he faced Connel squarely. "I think it
goes without saying, sir, that we'd appreciate it very much if you could
recommend that she be restored instead of junked."

Connel allowed himself a smile in the face of such obvious love for the
ship. "You forget that to repair her out in space, the parts have to be
hauled from Venus. But I'll see what I can do. Meantime, Roger, see if
you can't get that patrol ship to give us a lift to Venusport. Tell the
C.O. I'm aboard and on urgent official business."

"Yes, sir," said Roger.

"And," continued the spaceman, noticing the downcast looks of Tom and
Astro, "it wouldn't hurt if you two started repairing as much as you
can. So when the maintenance crew arrives, they won't find her in such a
mess."

"Yes, sir!" chorused the two cadets happily.

Connel returned to his quarters and sat down heavily in the remains of
his bunk, rubbing his chin thoughtfully. Somehow, word had gotten out
that he was going to check on the secret organization on Venus and
someone had made a bold and desperate attempt to stop him before he
could get started. It infuriated him to think that anyone would
interrupt official business. As far as Connel was concerned, nothing
came before official business. And he was doubly furious at the danger
to the three cadets, who had innocently hitched a ride on what was
almost a death ship. Someone was going to pay, Connel vowed, clenching
his huge fists--and pay dearly.

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 4


"_Yeeooowww!_"

Roaring with jubilation and jumping high in the air at every other step,
Astro raced out of the gigantic maintenance hangar at the Venusport
spaceport and charged at his two unit mates waiting on the concrete
apron.

"Everything's O.K.," he yelled, throwing his arms around them. "The
_Polaris_ is going to be brought in for full repairs! I just saw the
audiograph report from the maintenance chief!"

Tom and Roger broke into loud cheers and pounded each other on the back.

"Great Jupiter," gasped Roger, "I feel as though I've been sitting up
with a sick friend!"

"Your friend's going to make a full recovery," asserted Astro.

"Did you see Major Connel?" asked Tom.

"Yeah," said Astro. "I think he had a lot to do with it. I saw him
talking to the head maintenance officer."

"Well, now that we've sweated the old girl through the crisis," asserted
Roger, "how's about us concentrating on our vacation?"

"Great," agreed Tom. "This is your party, Astro. Lead the way."

The three cadets left the spaceport in a jet cab and rode happily into
the city of Venusport. As they slid along the superhighway toward the
first and largest of the Venusian cities, Astro pointed out the sights.
This old gentleman, who, by the way, was a great friend of the little
folks, is _Mike Marble_. I introduce him to you as an _old_ gentleman.
But, although he was old, when I first saw him, I must not forget
that he was young once--as young as any of my readers--and that he
played his part as a boy, as well as his part as a man.

There are a good many anecdotes afloat about him and his odd way
of doing things, before he grew up to manhood.

My grandfather knew him when he was a lad at school. I believe
he and Mike were nearly of the same age.

That grandfather of mine, now I think of it, was a great
story-teller.
I have sometimes nearly half made up my mind, while casting about me, to
find some new mine of stories for my young readers, that I would
put my thinking cap on, and see if I could not recollect a budget
of my grandfather's stories, large enough to fill a book.

I am not sure but I will do so one of these days; and, if I do, I shall
print the budget, depend upon it.

My grandfather and Mike Marble were as dear to each other as if they had
been brothers.

They lived not far apart, and went to school together. For some of
Mike's crotchets I am indebted to this old friend of his. Others I
picked up, here and there, among old people that knew him, and others
still I got from a personal acquaintance with him in his old age.

You will excuse me, if I call him _Mike_ sometimes.

He was always so called, when he was a boy, I believe. And while
you are excusing me for calling him _Mike_--you see I take you to be
very kind and obliging--you will please excuse me, also, if I
happen to prefix the title of _Uncle_ to that nickname; for he was
known, far and near, as _Uncle Mike_ in his later days.

It is true that _Michael_ was his name correctly and honestly spelled
out. But it is equally true that Michael was a name to which he
seldom had to answer.

At school, and among his playmates, it was always _Mike_. I really
believe, from what I have heard my grandfather say, that not half
the boys and girls in his neighborhood could have been convinced,
by any common arguments, that his name was Michael.

Indeed, I remember having heard that once, when a schoolmate called
the fellow by the long name, just to see how it would seem, he and
the other boy both burst right out into a perfect roar of laughter
over the sound of it.

"For pity's sake," said he, when he got over his laughing fit,
"don't call me by that hard name again, as long as I live;" and,
as he seemed to be quite in earnest, none of the boys ever addressed
him by any other name than _Mike_, after that.

CHAP. III.

LIGHTS AND SHADOWS.

"But who is _Mike Marble_? where does he live? what sort of a man is
he? what kind of oddities has he got?"
My little friend, your questions come out so fast, and there is
such a long string of them, that they make me think of the way a
whole pack of fire crackers go off, when you touch a coal to one
of them, and throw the whole into the street.

I am going to tell you ever so many things about this same Mike Marble.
Before I get through with him, you will get very well acquainted with
him, I think. But Uncle Frank, you know, has got some oddities himself.
When he has got any thing to do, he, too, has his own way of doing
it.

Some people, I suppose, if they were treating you to a few chapters
in the history of this singular man, would weave the threads together
in a different manner from mine.

They would begin, very likely, by telling where the chap was born,
who were his father and mother, how many brothers and sisters he
had, what their names were, whether he had any uncles and aunts,
and if he had, what kind of uncles and aunts they were, and all
that sort of thing.

And they would describe Mike's appearance exactly--tell you whether
he had black eyes or blue, gray eyes or brown, red eyes or green.

But I don't see much use in that.

Indeed, I am not sure but I shall keep you ignorant as to how he
looked, and let you learn what there is worth learning in his character--for
character is the great thing, after all, you know--by the stories I
shall tell of him. I might, it is true, take every branch, and leaf, and
bud, and flower, of his character, and pick it all to pieces, and
show you, in this way, what he was made of.

But you would get tired of all that.

So I'll take another course.

I'll tell you what he said and did--what he said and did at different
times, at different periods in his life, and in different circumstances.
Don't you think this is the best way to make you acquainted with him? I
do; for, if you find out what a person says, and does, and thinks, you
find out what he is.

One or two things, however, I must say about this Mike Marble, by way
of general introduction.

He was born at a very interesting period--about nine years before
the breaking out of the American Revolution.

He was quite an old man before he went to his final rest. Indeed,
it is but a few years since I saw his weather-beaten face, all
lighted up with smiles.

Unlike many other men, when they get to be old, he never made a
practice of carping at every thing he saw about him, because it was
not exactly in the style of 1776.

He believed that there was wisdom among our grandfathers and
grandmothers, but that there is wisdom, also, among their
grand-children.

I have told you that he had some oddities. I have hinted, too, in a sort
of whisper, that I do not consider a man an absolute Pagan, because
he happens to be a little odd. Something more than this I could say of
Uncle Mike, odd as he was; but I guess you will find out what I
think of him, before I get through.

Suffice it to say, that, while I didn't like him _because_ he was
odd, I did like him, _in spite_ of his oddities.

He was a fine old man. As the world goes, he was a most excellent
man.

He had his faults, a plenty of them; though I have sometimes thought
"That e'en his failings lean'd to virtue's side."

Some of them did, I know. He had his faults, nevertheless. I confess
that. He always had them, no doubt.

Faults are common things among mankind and womankind. But, with your
consent, we will trip lightly over all that part of our hero's history
which is shaded with blemishes.

[Illustration]

CHAP.

IV.

CHIPS FROM BIRCH WOODS.

One of the worst things I ever heard of in the history of Mike, according
to the best of my recollection, was the way he served Billy Birch's
dog. You must know something about this Billy Birch. _Burt_ was his
real name.

But it was changed into Birch by his neighbors, for a reason which I will
give you by and bye.

Mr.

       Burt was a pretty good sort of a man, in his own estimation, but
not greatly or generally beloved by his neighbors.

He was a church-going man, and had a knack, somehow or other, of getting
along decently with the forms--the outside garments, so to speak--of
religion. It was really astonishing how glibly he would _talk_ about
religion. But as to the practical part of it, he did not succeed as well.
That was up-hill work for the old man.

He found it exceedingly difficult to keep himself "unspotted from
the world."

Some of his nearest neighbors thought they could count a great many
worldly spots upon him. I don't know how that was, as I never was
acquainted with the man, and ought not to judge him too harshly.
Indeed, Uncle Frank must endeavor to keep in mind, that with what measure
we mete it shall be measured to us again. But from all the shreds and
patches of his history that have come down to the present day, Mr.
Birch does seem to have been a selfish man, and a great deal too fond
of money.

My young friend, it is one of the most difficult things in this world,
to act up to the spirit of the golden rule of our Lord, and do to others
as we would have them do to us, when we are as full as we can hold
of selfishness.

You may lay that thought up in your memory.

Billy Birch found that truth out. What did he care how many newly-planted
hills of corn and rows of peas his hens might scratch up,
provided the corn was not his corn, and the peas were not his peas, and
provided he did not have to suffer for the scratching? Not a mill. He
would sit, smoking his pipe--for he was a great smoker--in the
old, straight-backed oak chair on the stoop, as cool as a cucumber,
while the biggest rooster on his premises, the lord of the whole
barn-yard, was leading a regiment of hens and petty roosters in a
crusade upon Squire Chapman's corn-field across the way; and if the
Squire or one of his boys came over to inform him what havoc the
hens were making, and to ask him what to do with the troublesome
creatures, the old man would perhaps take his pipe out of his mouth,
and, after slowly puffing out a cloud of smoke, would say, "Why,
drive them out, to be sure!"

What did he care, if his old mare--who, by the way, was a very nervous
sort of a mare, and could not stay long in one spot--what did he
care, if the old creature did jump over the six-rail fence around
the good parson's field of clover, and eat what she wanted, and
trample down, in her nervous way of doing things, a good share of
the rest of the clover?

Why, it didn't hurt _him_ any. The old miser! It wasn't _his_ field
of clover that Katy trampled down. And besides, didn't he pay his minister's
tax?

and didn't the minister and his family live in better style than he and
his family could afford to live in?

Katy loved clover. _He_ wasn't to blame for that, and he didn't know
that Katy was to blame.

It was a very natural taste, that of his old mare. And why didn't the
parson, he should like to know, build his fence higher, if he
didn't want his clover eaten up by other people's horses?

What was it to Billy Birch, if his dog did kill a neighbor's sheep, now
and then? What did he care, what should he care? If they were his own
sheep, that would alter the case. But Cæsar never killed his master's
sheep.

Wasn't that kind in Cæsar? And as to this sheep-biting habit of his,
why it is the _nature_ of dogs to kill sheep. Cæsar _must_ kill somebody's
sheep; and if he hadn't picked out a good fat one from this
flock, it would have been somebody else's flock. What is the use in
making such a fuss about a sheep or two?

The loss of one sheep won't break any body. What can't be cured, must
be endured.
People must take care of their sheep, if they don't want them to
be killed.

That is the way this selfish, narrow-minded farmer reasoned and talked.
You can see, plainly enough, that he was not the sort of man to be
very much respected in the neighborhood. He was not respected.

In fact, there was not, in all the parish, a more generally unpopular
man than Billy Birch.

The boys, I have heard, bore him a grudge of long standing.

It related to the huckleberries and hazel nuts in the old
man's birch woods.
There were bushels of huckleberries, and almost as many hazel nuts,
in those woods.

But would you have thought of such a thing? Mr. Birch forbade the boys
picking any of his huckleberries or hazel nuts. Ever so many
huckleberries decayed on the bushes every year, or were left to be
harvested by the birds, because Mr.

Birch's family could not pick them all themselves, and he was so
tight that he would not let any body else pick them.

He was like the dog in the manger, you see.
He could not eat the hay himself, and he would not let any body else eat
it.

But the meanest thing that I ever heard of his doing, was this: In
these same woods--the woods where the huckleberries and hazel nuts
grew--there were great multitudes of birch trees, of different
species and among the rest, some of that species which goes by the
name, among children, of _black birch_.

I need not tell any of my country readers about this kind of birch. They
know it well enough.

They have eaten birch bark, many a time; and, for ought I know, some
of them have felt a tingling sensation in the region of the back
and legs, brought about by the use of birch twigs in the hands of
some schoolmaster.

Well, Moses Ramble was crossing Billy Birch's woods one day in the spring
of the year.

For awhile, he whistled along, as merry-hearted as the blue birds that
had just returned from their southern tour, and who were chirping on the
branches over his head, breaking off, now and then, a few sprigs
of birch, from the trees along his path.

By and bye, he sat down on the fence, to rest himself, still going on with
his whistling, at intervals, when his mouth was not too much
occupied with the birch to interfere with the music.

[Illustration: THE BOY IN THE WOODS.]

While the merry young fellow was sitting here, feeling at peace with
all the world, and not dreaming but all the world was at peace with him,
he heard a slight rustling behind him, and, looking over his shoulder,
whom should he see but Billy Birch himself, leaning against a
chestnut tree, and looking as if he were angry enough to bite in
two a hoe handle.

What on earth the man was doing there, history does not inform us,
though it used to be more than hinted among the younger citizens
in that neighborhood, that he was prowling about in those woods
as a spy on the movements of the boys.

They said he was just the man for such business.

Moses did not like the appearance of the face that was lowering on
him; and, although he was innocent of the slightest intention of
doing any harm on the man's premises, he thought it would be safer
for him to walk off than it would be to stay there.

So he leaped from the fence, and began, leisurely, to walk home.

"Stop, you young heathen!" said Billy Birch.

       The little fellow did stop, and stood as still as the old chestnut
tree, against which the lord of those woods was leaning.

"What are you _munching_ there, sir?"
Moses, having no suspicion at all that he had been doing any harm to the
estate of the old man, replied, frankly and plainly, that he was eating
birch.

"Aha!" said the farmer, "you are, eh?

I'll teach you to eat my birch.
I'll give you as much birch as you will want for a fortnight!"
And he took the twig which Moses was gnawing out of his hands, and whipped
him with it, until he made the poor fellow cry out with pain and
mortification.

"There, you thief!" he said, after flogging him to his heart's content,
"that will teach you to steal my birch, I guess."
From that day the selfish farmer began to be called _Birch_, in that
section of the country; and it was not many months before his name was
almost as effectually changed as if he had applied to the legislature
of the state to have that body change it for him.

CHAP. V.

A PAIR OF THIEVES.

About that dog of Billy Birch. Have I not promised to tell you something
about him, and the accident that happened to him, which accident
Mike Marble might have prevented, if he had made the attempt?

I have a good mind to tell you about these matters, at any rate,
whether I have made such a promise or not.

Mind now, reader, that, in telling this story, I don't mean to have it
understood that I think Mike did right. I'll grant that he did wrong.
But I mention the fact to show what sort of mischief Mike was up to,
and what sort of blemishes those were, which I confess he had in his
character; for, as I think I said before, this trick was about as
bad a thing as I ever heard of his being guilty of.

Cæsar got to be a great hero in the sheep-killing business--a perfect
Nimrod of a dog. It sometimes happens, I fancy, that soldiers who
spend more of their time in war, actually shooting people and
cutting their throats, after a while, get to liking the trade, and
take pleasure in slaughtering human beings, just as a carpenter or
a printer might take pleasure in _his_ trade.

Well, it got to be somewhat so with Cæsar, it would seem; for it often
came to pass that two or three sheep would be killed in one night,
when, of course, a single fat one would supply his appetite bountifully
for several days, at least.

He must have liked the business, or he would have contented himself
with killing only a sufficient number of sheep to keep him in food.

The neighbors who suffered from Cæsar's favorite amusement, complained,
now and then, to his master. But it did no good. "They must keep
their sheep out of the way," the selfish man would say.

"Cæsar is a capital family dog. I don't know what I should do without
him--he is so faithful." That was as much satisfaction as they could ever
get.

Billy Birch would not shut up his dog at night, and as for killing him,
that was out of the question.

He would rather lose his best horse than Cæsar.

True, the neighbors might have sued the owner of the dog, and have got
the value of their lost sheep in that way.

But they were generally peaceable folks, and had a great dread of
going to law, especially with one of their own neighbors. The result
was, that Cæsar's business prospered more and more every day.

It was in the full tide of his success as a sheep-killer, that he
came, one day, into Mr.

Marble's door yard, and took his station near the wood pile. Mike saw
him, and knew well enough what he came for.
His father had just been slaughtering an ox, and some of the dainty
pieces of the animal were lying on the wood pile, the scent of which
had brought Cæsar to the spot. No doubt, having feasted on mutton so
long, he had got a little sick of it, and thought he would make a dinner
on beef. He was a dainty fellow, you perceive.

I don't know what put it into Mike's head to play the trick he did on
Cæsar. But he had no sooner seen him smelling around among the refuse
pieces of the ox's carcass, than he determined to punish him, if possible,
for his notorious crimes.

So, without saying a word to any body, he gathered up all the choice bits
which had tempted the dog to the yard, and placed them within a
few feet of the heels of Mr.
Marble's old chaise horse, who was standing there, hitched to a gate post,
waiting patiently for somebody to come and harness him.

Now this horse, who was called _Old Ironsides_, was as famous for
his kicking habits as Cæsar was for his sheep-killing.

He seemed to take up kicking as a sort of amusement, to while away his
leisure hours.
It was a wonder that Mr.

Marble kept him; for he had kicked the old chaise to pieces several
times; and as to his stable, he made nothing of kicking off all the
boards within reach of his heels, every few nights, just for the
fun of the thing, and to show what mighty deeds he could do with
his heels.

It is no more than an act of simple justice to Old Ironsides, however,
to say, that he was as gentle as a lamb to the children of his
master.

They could do any thing with him.

Often, when he was standing at the door, or in his stable, they
would go close to him, and pat him on his neck, and play with him, as
if he were one of their own number; and the old fellow would take all
their fun good-humoredly. Among all his sins in the kicking line--and he
had a great many, first and last, to answer for--he never kicked
either of the children.

They all loved him, in fact; and many is the dainty morsel he received
from their hands.

Well, to go on with the story of Mike's piece of mischief. The dog, as
he had expected, trotted along after the pieces of meat, and commenced
eating, without any suspicions of harm, right under the _battery_ of
the old horse. There he remained for some moments, as Mike says,
taking as much comfort eating his dinner, as if he were dining on
one of his father's sheep.

[Illustration: OLD IRONSIDES AND THE CHILDREN.]
Old Ironsides took no notice of the dog. Indeed, he rather appeared half
asleep. He often shut his eyes, by the way, as he was standing at a
post, and dosed, and nodded, much after the fashion of some men, when
they set out to listen to a sermon on Sunday. All the time, however,
Mike had a crotchet in his head.

"Halloo, old fellow!" he shouted, "what are you about there?"
In an instant Old Ironsides was wide awake, and, seeing at a glance
what was going on behind, he pricked up his ears, uttered one brief
snort, and away went his heels like lightning.

Poor Cæsar!

When he touched this planet again--for Old Ironsides had sent him
up towards the moon, much farther than I should want to go, in that
style--he was a lost dog.

Old Ironsides, who proved to be as great a hero, in his way, as
Cæsar was, had killed him.

They were surprised to feel a distinct drop in temperature.

"Your cooling unit must be pretty large, Mr. Sinclair," commented Tom,
looking up at the crystal roof where the sun was clearly visible.

Sinclair smiled. "That's special crystal, mined on Titan at a depth of
ten thousand feet. It's tinted, and shuts out the heat and glare of the
sun."

George then left to lay out their gear for their first hunt the next
morning, and Sinclair took them on a tour of the house. They walked
through long corridors looking into all the rooms, eventually winding up
in the kitchen, and the three boys marveled at the simplicity yet
absolute perfection of the place. Every modern convenience was at hand
for the occupant's comfort. When the sun had dropped a little, they all
put on sunglasses with glareproof eye shields and walked around the
plantation. Sinclair showed them his prize-winning stock and the vast
fields of crops. Aside from the main house, there were only four other
buildings in the clearing. They visited the smallest, a cowshed.

"Where do your field hands live, Mr. Sinclair?" asked Tom, as they
walked through the modern, spotless, milking room.

"I don't have any," replied the planter. "Do most of the work with
machinery, and George and the houseboys do what has to be done by hand."

As they left the shed and started back toward the main house they came
abreast of a small wooden structure. Thinking they were headed there,
Roger started to open the door.

"Close that door!" snapped Sinclair. Roger jerked back. Astro and Tom
looked at the planter, startled by the sharpness in his voice.

Sinclair smiled and explained, "We keep some experiments on different
kinds of plants in there at special low temperatures. You might have let
in hot air and ruined something."

"I'm sorry, sir," said Roger. "I didn't know."

"Forget it," replied the planter. "Well, let's get back to the house.
We're having an early dinner. You boys have to get started at four
o'clock in the morning."

"Four o'clock!" exclaimed Roger.

"Why?" asked Tom.

"We have to go deep into the thicket," Astro explained, using the local
term for the jungle, "so that at high noon we can make camp and take a
break. You can't move out there at noon. It gets so hot you'd fall on
your face after fifteen minutes of fighting the creepers."

"Everything stops at noon," added Sinclair. "Even the tyrannosaurus. You
have to do your traveling in the cool of the day, early and late. Six
hours or so will take you far enough away from the plantation to find
tracks, if there are any."

"Tell me, Mr. Sinclair," asked Roger suddenly, "is this the whole
plantation?" He spread his hands in a wide arc, taking in the clearing
to the edge of the jungle.

Sinclair grinned. "Roger, it'd take a man two weeks to go from one
corner of my property to another. This is just where I live. Three years
ago I had five hundred square miles under cultivation."

Back in the house, they found George setting the table on the porch and
his wife busy in the kitchen. Mrs. Hill was a stout woman, with a
pleasant face and a ready smile. With very little ceremony, the cadets,
Sinclair, George, and his wife sat down to eat. The food was simple
fare, but the sure touch of Mrs. Hill's cooking and the free use of
delicate Venusian jungle spices added exotic flavor, new but immensely
satisfying to the three hungry boys, a satisfaction they demonstrated by
cleaning their plates quickly and coming back for second helpings.
Astro, of course, was not happy until he had polished off his fourth
round. Mrs. Hill beamed with pleasure at their unspoken compliment to
her cooking.

After the meal, Mrs. Hill stacked the dishes and put them into a small
carrier concealed in the wall. Pressing a button, near the opening, she
explained, "That dingus takes them to the sink, washes them, dries them,
and puts everything in its right place. That's the kind of modern living
I like!"

As the sun dropped behind the wall of the jungle and the sky darkened,
they all relaxed. Sinclair and George smoked contentedly, Mrs. Hill
brought out some needle point, and the three cadets rested in
comfortable contour chairs. They chatted idly, stopping only to listen
to the wild calls of birds and animals out in the jungle as George, or
Sinclair, identified them all. George told of his experiences on
tyrannosaurus hunts, and Astro described his method of hunting as a boy.

"I was a big kid," he explained. "And since the only way of earning a
living was by working, I found I could combine business with pleasure. I
used to hitch rides over the belt and parachute in to hunt for baby
tyrannos." He grinned and added, "When I think back, I wonder how I ever
stayed in one piece."

"Land sakes!" exclaimed Mrs. Hill. "It's a wonder you weren't eaten
alive! Those tyrannos are horrible things."

"I was almost a meal once," confessed Astro sheepishly, and at the
urging of the others he described the incident that had cured him of
hunting alone in the jungles of Venus with only a low-powered shock
blaster.

"If I didn't get it at the base of the brain where the nerve centers
aren't so well protected with the first shot, I was in trouble," he
said. "I took a lot of chances, but was careful not to tangle with a
mama or papa tyrannosaurus. I'd stalk the young ones. I'd wait for him
to feed and then let him have it. If I was lucky, I'd get him with one
shot, but most of the time I'd just stun him and have to finish him off
with a second blast. Then I'd skin him, take the hams and shoulders, and
get out of there fast before the wild dogs got wind of the blood. I'd
usually hunt pretty close to a settlement where I could get the meat
frozen. After that, I'd just have to call a couple of the big
restaurants in Venusport and get the best price. I used to make as much
as fifty credits on one kill."

"How would you get the meat to Venusport?" asked Roger, who, for all his
braggadocio, was awed by his unit mate's calm bravery and skill as a
hunter.

"The restaurant that bought it would send a jet boat out for it and I'd
ride back with it. After a while the restaurant owners got to know me
and would give me regular orders. I was trying to fill a special order
on that last hunt."

"What happened?" asked Tom, equally impressed with Astro's life as a boy
hunter.

"I had just about finished hunting in a section near a little settlement
on the other side of Venus," began the big cadet, "but I thought there
might be one more five-hundred-pound baby around, so I dropped in."
Astro paused and grinned. "I didn't find a baby, I found his mother! She
must have weighed twenty-five or thirty tons. Biggest tyranno I've ever
seen. She spotted me the same time I saw her and I didn't even stop to
fire. I never could have dented her hide. I started running and she came
after me. I made it to a cave and went as far back inside as I could.
She stuck her head in after me, and by the craters of Luna, she was only
about three feet away, with me backed up against a wall. She tried to
get farther in, opened her mouth, and snapped and roared like twenty
rocket cruisers going off at once."

[Illustration: "_She tried to get farther into the cave._"]

Tom gulped and Roger's eyes widened.

"I figured there was only one thing to do," continued Astro. "Use the
blaster, even though it couldn't do much damage. I let her have one
right in the eye!" Astro shook his head and laughed. "You should have
seen her pull her head out of that cave! I couldn't sleep for months
after that. I used to dream that she was sticking her head in my window,
always getting closer."

"Did the blaster do any damage at all?" asked Sinclair.

"Oh, yes, sir," said Astro. "I was close enough for the heat charge from
the muzzle to get her on the side of the head. Nothing fatal, but she's
probably still out there in the jungle more ugly than ever with half a
face."

The group fell silent, each thinking of how he would have reacted under
similar conditions; each silently thankful that it hadn't happened to
him. Finally Mrs. Hill rose and said good night, and George excused
himself to take a last look at the stock. Remembering their early call
for the next morning, the cadets said good night to Sinclair and retired
to their comfortable rooms. In bed at last, each boy stretched full
length on his bed and in no time was sound asleep.

It was still dark, an hour and a half before the sun would burst over
the top of the jungle, when Sinclair went to the cadets' room to rouse
them. He found them already up and dressed in their jungle garb. Each
boy was wearing skin-tight trousers and jerseys made of double strength
space-suit cloth and colored a dark moldy green. A hunter dressed in
this manner and standing still could not be seen at twenty paces. The
snug fit of the suit was protection against thorns and snags that could
find no hold on the hard, smooth-surfaced material.

After a hearty breakfast the three cadets collected their gear, the
paralo-ray pistols, the shock rifles, and the small shoulder packs of
synthetic food and camping equipment. Each boy also carried a two-foot
jungle knife with a compass inlaid in the handle. A helmet of clear
plastic with a small mesh-covered opening in the face covered each boy's
head. Dressed as they were, they could walk through the worst part of
the jungles and not get so much as a scratch.

"Well," commented Sinclair, looking them over, "I guess you boys have
everything. I'd hate to be the tyranno that crosses your path!"

The boys grinned. "Thanks for everything, sir," said Tom. "You've been a
lot of help."

"Think nothing of it, Tom. Just bring back a pair of tyranno scalps!"

"Where are Mr. and Mrs. Hill?" asked Astro. "We'd like to say good-by to
them."

"They left before you got up," replied Sinclair. "They're taking a few
days off for a visit to Venusport."

The boys pulled on their jungle boots. Knee-length and paper-thin, they
were nonetheless unpenetrable even if the boys should step on one of the
needle-sharp ground thorns.

They waved a last good-by to their host, standing on the steps of the
big house, and moved across the clearing to the edge of the jungle wall.

As the cadets approached the thick tangle of vines, the calls and
rustling noises from the many crawling things hidden in the forbidding
thicket slowly died down. They walked along the edge of the tangle of
jungle creepers until they found an opening and stepped through.

[Illustration: _They were completely surrounded by the jungle_]

After walking only ten feet they were completely surrounded by the
jungle and could not even see the clearing they had just left. It was
dark, the network of vines, the thick tree trunks and rank growing
vegetation shutting out the sun, leaving the interior of the jungle
strangely plunged in gloom. Astro moved ahead, followed by Roger, with
Tom bringing up the rear. They followed the path they had entered, as
far as it went, and then began cutting their way through the underbrush,
stopping only to cut notches in the trees to mark their passage.

Their long-bladed knives slicing through vines and brush easily, Tom,
Roger, and Astro hacked their way deeper and deeper into the mysterious
and suffocating green world.

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 6


"I guess that's the Sharkey place over there," mumbled Major Connel to
himself, banking his jet launch over the green jungles and pointing the
speedy little craft's nose toward the clearing in the distance. The
Solar Guard officer wrenched the scout around violently in his approach.
He was still boiling over the Venusian Delegate's indifference toward
his mission.

The launch skimmed the jungle treetops and glided to a perfect stop near
the largest of a group of farm buildings. Cutting the motors, Connel sat
and waited for someone to appear. He sat there for ten minutes but no
one came out to greet him. Finally he climbed out of the launch and
stood by the hatch, peering intently at the buildings around him, his
eyes squinting against the glare of the fiery sun overhead. The
plantation seemed deserted. Reaching back into the launch and pulling
out a paralo-ray gun, he strapped its reassuring bulk to his side and
stepped toward the building that was obviously the main house. Nothing
else moved in the hot noon sun.

As he strode purposefully toward the house, eyes alert for any sign of
life, he thought for a moment everyone might be taking a midday nap.
Many of the Venusian colonists adapted the age-old custom of the tropics
to escape the intense heat of midday. But he dismissed the thought
immediately, realizing that his approach in the jet would have awakened
the deepest of sleepers.

Entering the house, he stopped in the spacious front hall and called:

"Hello! Anybody home? Halloo!"

The only answer was the echo of his own voice, vibrating through the
large rooms.

"Funny," muttered the spaceman. "Why is this place deserted?"

He walked slowly through the house, opening doors and looking into all
the rooms, searching the whole place thoroughly before returning to the
clearing. Going to the nearest of the outbuildings, he opened one of the
wide doors and stared into the gloomy interior. With his experienced eye
he saw immediately that the building had been used to house a large jet
craft. There was the slightly pungent odor of jet fuel, and on the floor
the tire marks of a dolly used to roll the craft out to the launching
strip. He followed the tracks outside and around to the side of the
building where he saw the dolly. It was empty.

Shaking his head grimly, Connel made a quick tour of the remaining
buildings. They were all deserted but the last one, which seemed to be
built a little more sturdily than the others. Unlike the others, it was
locked. He looked for a window and discovered that the walls were solid.
There were no openings except the locked door. He hesitated in front of
the door, looking down at the ground for a sign of what might have been
stored in the building. The surrounding area revealed no tracks. He
pulled out a thick-bladed pocketknife and stepped to the lock, then
suddenly stopped and grinned.

"Great," he said to himself. "A Solar Guard officer about to break into
private property without a warrant. Fine thing to have known back at the
Academy!"

He turned abruptly and strode back to the scout. Climbing into the
craft, he picked up the audioscriber microphone and recorded a brief
message. Removing the threadlike tape from the machine, he returned to
the house and left it on the spool of the audioscribe-replay machine
near the front door.

A few moments later the eerie silence of the Sharkey plantation was once
again shattered by the hissing roar of jets as the launch took off and
climbed rapidly over the jungle. Air-borne, Connel glanced briefly at a
chart, changed course, and sent the launch hurtling at full speed across
the jungle toward the Sinclair plantation.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How far do you think we've come?" asked Tom sleepily.

Astro yawned and stretched before answering. "I'd say about fifteen
miles, Tom."

"Seems more like a hundred and fifteen," moaned Roger who was sprawled
on the ground. "I ache all over. Start at the top of my head and work
down, and you won't find one square inch that isn't sore."

Tom grinned. He was tired himself, but the three-day march through the
jungle had been three of the most exciting days in his life. Coming from
a large city where he had to travel two hours by monorail to get to open
green country, the curly-haired cadet found this passage through the
wildest jungle in the solar system new and fascinating. He had seen
flowers of every color in the spectrum, some as large as himself; giant
shrubs with leaves so fine that they looked like spider webs; Venusian
teakwood trees fifty to a hundred feet thick at the base with some
twisted into strange spirals as their trunks, shaded by another larger
tree, sought a clear avenue to the sun. There were bushes that grew
thorns three inches long, hard as steel and thin as needles; jungle
creepers, vines two and three feet thick, twisting around tree trunks
and strangling them. He saw animals too, all double the size of anything
on Earth because of the lighter Venusian gravity; insects the size of
rats, rats the size of dogs, and wild dogs the size of ponies. Up in the
trees, small anthropoids, cousins to the monkeys of Earth, scampered
from limb to limb, screaming at the invaders of their jungle home.
Smooth-furred animals that looked like deer, their horns curling
overhead, scampered about the cadets like puppies, nuzzling them,
nipping at their heels playfully, and barking as though in laughter when
Astro roared at them for getting in the way.

But there were dangerous creatures in the jungle too; the beautiful but
deadly poisonous brush snakes that lurked unseen in the varicolored
foliage, striking out at anything that passed; animals resembling
chipmunks with enlarged razor-sharp fangs, whose craving for raw meat
was so great that they would attack an animal ten times its size;
lizards the size of elephants with scales like armor plate that rooted
in swampy ground for their food, but which would attack any intruder,
charging with amazing speed, their three horns poised; and, finally,
there were the monsters of Venus--giant beasts whose weights were
measured in tons, ruled over by the most horrible of them all--the
tyrannosaurus.

Fights to death between the jungle creatures were common sights for the
boys during their march. They saw a weird soundless fight between a
forty-foot snake and a giant vulture with talons nearly two feet across
and a beak resembling a mammoth nutcracker. The vulture won,
methodically cutting the reptile's body into sections, its beak slicing
through the snake as easily as a knife going through butter.

More than once Astro spotted a dangerous creature, and telling Roger and
Tom to stand back, he would level his shock rifle and blast it.

So far they had seen nothing of their prey--the tyrannosaurus. Tracks
around the steaming swamps were as close as they had come. Once, late in
the evening of the second day they caught a fleeting glimpse of a
plant-eating brontosaurus lumbering through the brush.

All three of the boys had found it difficult to sleep in the jungle. The
first two nights they had taken turns at staying on guard and tending
the campfire. Nothing had bothered them, and on the third night out,
they decided the fire would be enough to scare off the jungle animals.
It was risky, but the continual fight through the jungle underbrush had
tired the three boys to the bone and the few hours they stood guard were
sorely missed the next day, so they decided to chance it.

Roger was already asleep. Astro had just finished checking his rifle to
be ready for instant fire, when Tom threw the last log on the campfire
and crawled into his sleeping bag.

"Think it'll be all right, Astro?" asked Tom. "I'm not anxious to wake
up inside one of these critter's stomachs."

"Most of them have never seen fire, Tom," Astro said reassuringly. "It
scares them. Besides, we're getting close to the big stuff now. You
might see a tyranno or a big bronto any time. And if they come along,
you'll hear 'em, believe me. They're about as quiet as a squadron of
cruisers on battle emergency blasting off from the Academy in the middle
of the night!"

"O.K.," replied Tom. "You're the hunter in this crew." Suddenly he
laughed. "You know I really got a bang out of the way Roger jumped back
from that waddling ground bird yesterday."

Astro grinned. "Yeah, the one thing in this place that's as ferocious as
a kitten and he pulls his ray gun like an ancient cowboy!"

A very tired voice spoke up from the other sleeping bag. "Is that so!
Well, when you two brave men came face to face with that baby lizard on
a tree root, you were ready to finish your leave in Atom City!" Roger
unzipped the end of the bag, stuck his blond head out, and gave his unit
mates a sour look. "Sack in, will you? Your rocket wash is keeping me
awake!"

Laughing, Astro and Tom nodded good night to each other and closed their
sleeping bags. The jungle was still, the only movement being the leaping
tongues of flame from the campfire.

An hour later it began to rain, a light drizzle at first that increased
until it reached the steady pounding of a tropical downpour. Tom awoke
first, opening the flap of his sleeping bag only to get his face full of
slimy water that spilled in. Spluttering and coughing he sat up and saw
that the campfire was out and the campsite was already six inches deep
in water.

"Roger, Astro!" he called and slapped the nearest sleeping bag. Astro
opened the flap a little and peered out sleepily. Instantly he rolled
out of the bag and jumped to his feet.

"Wake Roger up!" he snapped. "We've got to get out of here!"

"What's the matter?" Roger mumbled through the bag, not opening it. "Why
the excitement over a little rain?"

"The fire's out, hotshot," said Astro. "It's as dark as the inside of a
cow's number-four belly. We've got to move!"

"Why?" asked Tom, not understanding the big cadet's sudden nervous
excitement. "What's the matter with staying right where we are? Why go
trooping around in the dark?"

"We can't light a fire anywhere," added Roger, finally sticking his head
out of his sleeping bag.

"We've got to get on high ground!" said Astro, hurriedly packing the
camping equipment. "We're in a hollow here. The rain really comes down
on Venus, and in another hour this place will be a pond!"

Sensing the urgency in Astro's voice, Roger began packing up his
equipment and in a few moments the three boys had their gear slung over
their shoulders and were slogging through water already knee-deep.

"I still don't see why we have to go tracking through the jungle in the
middle of the night," grumbled Roger. "We could climb up a tree and wait
out the storm."

"You'd have to wait long after the rain stops," replied Astro. "There is
one thing in this place nothing ever gets enough of, and that's water.
Animals know it and hang around all the water holes. If a small animal
tries to get a drink, he more than likely winds up in something's
stomach. When it rains like this, hollows fill up like the one we just
left, and everything within running, hopping, and crawling distance
heads for it to get a bellyful of water. In another hour our camp will
be like something out of a nightmare, with every animal in the jungle
coming down for a drink and starting to fight one another."

"Then if we stayed there--" Roger stopped.

"We'd be in the middle of it," said Astro grimly. "We wouldn't last two
minutes."

Walking single file, with Astro in the lead, followed by Roger and then
Tom, they stumbled through the pitch-black darkness. Astro refused to
shine a light, for fear of being attacked by a desperate animal, more
eager for water than afraid of the light. They carried their shock
blasters cocked and ready to fire. The rain continued, increasing in
fury until they were enveloped in a nearly solid wall of water. In a
little while the floor of the jungle became one continuous mudhole, with
each step taking them ankle-deep into the sucking mud. Their climb was
uphill, and the water from above increased, washing down around them in
torrents. More than once one of the cadets fell, gasping for breath,
into the dirty water, only to be jerked back to more solid footing by
the other two. Stumbling, their hands groping wildly in the dark, they
pushed forward.

They were reaching higher ground when Astro stopped suddenly.

"Listen!" he whispered hoarsely.

The boys stood still, the rain pounding down on their plastic headgear,
holding rifles ready and straining their ears for some sound other than
the drumming of rain.

"I don't hear anything," said Roger.

"_Shhh!_" hissed Astro.

They waited, and then from a distance they heard the faint crashing of
underbrush. Gradually it became more distinct until there was no
mistaking its source. A large monster was moving through the jungle near
them!

"What is it?" asked Tom, trying to keep his voice calm.

"A big one," said Astro. "A real big one. And I think it's heading this
way!"

"By the craters of Luna!" gasped Roger. "What do we do?"

"We either run, or stay here and try to blast it."

"Whatever you say, Astro," said Roger. "You're the boss."

"Same here," said Tom. "Call it."

Astro did not answer right away. He strained his ears, listening to the
movements of the advancing monster, trying to ascertain the exact
direction the beast was taking. The noise became more violent, the
crashing more sharply defined as small trees were crushed to the ground.

"If only I knew exactly what it is!" said Astro desperately. "If it's a
tyranno, it walks on its hind legs and has its head way up in the trees,
and could pass within ten feet of us and not see us. But if it's a
bronto, it has a long snakelike neck that he pokes all around and he
wouldn't miss us at a hundred feet!"

"Make up your mind quick, big boy," said Roger. "If that thing gets any
closer, I'm opening up with this blaster. He might eat me, but I'll sure
make his teeth rattle first!"

The ground began to shake as the approaching monster came nearer. Astro
remained still, ears straining for some sound to indicate exactly what
was crashing down on them.

Above them, the shrill scream of an anthropoid suddenly pierced the dark
night as its tree home was sent crashing to the ground. There was a
growing roar and the crashing stopped momentarily.

"Let's get out of here," said Astro tensely. "That's a tyranno, but he's
down on all fours now, looking for that monkey! Keep together and make
as little noise as you can. No talking. Keep your blasters and emergency
lights ready. If he discovers us, you shine the light on his face Roger,
and Tom and I will shoot. O.K.?"

Tom and Roger agreed.

"All right," said Astro, "let's go--and spaceman's luck!"


CHAPTER 7


"What can I do for you, Officer?"

Connel heaved his bulk out of the jet launch and looked hard at the man
standing in front of him. "You Rex Sinclair?"

Sinclair nodded. "That's right."

Connel offered his hand. "Major Connel, Solar Guard."

"Glad to meet you," replied the planter, gripping the spaceman's hand.
"Have something to cool you off."

"Thanks," said Connel. "I can use it. Whew! Must be at least one twenty
in the shade."

Sinclair chuckled. "This way, Major."

They didn't say anything more until Connel was resting comfortably in a
deep chair, admiring the crystal roof of Sinclair's house. After a
pleasant exchange about crops and problems of farming on Venus, the
gruff spaceman squared his back and stared straight at his host. "Mr.
James, the Solar Delegate, told me you've resisted pressure to join the
Venusian Nationalists."

Sinclair's expression changed slightly. His eyebrows lifting
quizzically. "Why--yes, that's true."

"I'd like you to tell me what you know about the organization."

"I see," mused Sinclair. "Is that an order?" he added, chuckling.

"That's a request. I'd like to learn as much about the Nationalists as
possible."

"For what purpose?"

Connel paused and then said casually, "A spot check. The Solar Guard
likes to keep its eyes open for trouble."

"Trouble?" exclaimed Sinclair. "You're not serious!"

Connel nodded his head. "It's probably nothing but a club. However, I'd
like to get some facts on it."

"Have you spoken to anyone else?" asked Sinclair.

"I just came from the Sharkey plantation. It's deserted. Not a soul
around. I'll drop back by there before I return to Venusport." Connel
paused and looked squarely at Sinclair. "Well?"

"I don't know much about them, Major," replied the planter. "It always
seemed to me nothing more than a group of planters getting together--"

Connel cut him off. "Possibly, but why didn't you join?"

"Well--"

"Aren't all your friends in it?"

"Yes, but I just don't have time. I have a big place, and there's only
me and my foreman and housekeeper now. All the field hands left some
time ago."

"Where'd they go?"

"Venusport, I guess. Can't get people to farm these days."

"All right, Mr. Sinclair," declared Connel, "let's lay our cards on the
table. I know how you must feel talking about your friends, but this is
really important. Vitally important to every citizen in the Solar
Alliance. Suppose the Nationalists were really a tight organization with
a purpose--a purpose of making Venus independent of the Solar Alliance.
If they succeeded, if Venus did break away, Mercury might follow, then
Mars--the whole system fall apart--break up into independent states. And
when that happens, there's trouble--customs barriers, jealousies,
individual armies and navies, and then, ultimately, a space war. It's
more than just friendship, Sinclair, it's the smallest crack in the
solid front of the Solar Alliance, but it's a crack that _can_ be opened
further if we don't stop it now."

Sinclair was impressed. "Very well, Major, I'll tell you everything I
know about them. And you're right, it is hard to talk about your
friends. I've grown up here in the Venusian jungle. I helped my father
clear this land where the house is built. Most of the men in the
Nationalists are friends of mine, but"--he sighed--"you're right, I
can't allow this to happen to the Solar Alliance."

"Allow what to happen?" asked Connel.

"Just what you said, about Venus becoming an independent state."

"Tell me all you know," said Connel.

"The group began to form about three years ago. Al Sharkey came over
here one night and said a group of the planters were getting together
every so often to exchange information about crops and farming
conditions. I went a few times, we all did, on this part of Venus. At
first it was fun. We even had picnics and barn dances every three or
four weeks. Then one night someone suggested we come dressed in old
costumes--the type worn by our forefathers who founded Venus."

Connel nodded.

"Well, one thing led to another," continued Sinclair. "They started
talking about the great history of our planet, and complaining about
paying taxes to support the Solar Alliance. Instead of opening up new
colonies like the one out on Pluto, we should develop our own planet.
We stopped dancing, the women stopped coming, and then one night we
elected a president. Al Sharkey. The first thing he did was order all
members to attend meetings in the dress of our forefathers. He gave the
organization a name, the Venusian Nationalists. Right after that, I
stopped going. I got tired of listening to speeches about the wonderful
planet we live on, and how terrible it was to be governed by men on
Earth, millions of miles away."

"Didn't they consider that they had equal representation in the Solar
Alliance Chamber?" asked Connel.

"No, Major. There wasn't anything you could say to any of them. If you
tried to reason with them, they called you a--a--" Sinclair stopped and
turned away.

"What did they call you?" demanded Connel, getting madder by the minute.

"Anyone that disagreed with them was called an Earthling."

"And you disagreed?" asked Connel.

"I quit," said Sinclair stoutly. "And right after that, I started losing
livestock. I found them dead in the pens, poisoned. And some of my crops
were burned."

"Did you protest to the Solar Guard?"

"Of course, but there wasn't any proof any one of my neighbors had done
it. They don't bother me any more, but they don't speak to me either.
It's as though I had a horrible disease. There hasn't been a guest in
this house in nearly two years. Three space cadets are the first
visitors here since I quit the organization."

"Space Cadets?" Connel looked at the planter quizzically.

"Yes, nice young chaps. Corbett, Manning, and a big fellow named Astro.
They're out in the jungle now hunting for tyrannosaurus. I met them
through a friend in Venusport and invited them to use my house as a base
of operations. Do you know them?"

Connel nodded. "Very well. Finest cadet unit at the Academy. How long
have they been in the jungle?"

"About four and a half days now."

"Hope they get themselves a tyranno. But at the same time"--Connel
couldn't help chuckling--"if they do, Space Academy will never hear the
end of it!"

Suddenly the hot wilting silence around the house was shattered by a
thunderous roar. Connel jumped up, followed Sinclair to the window, and
stared out over the clearing. They saw what appeared to be a
well-organized squadron of jet boats come in for a landing with near
military precision. The doors opened quickly and men poured out onto the
dusty field. They were dressed alike in coveralls with short
quarter-length space boots and round plastic crash helmets. Each man
carried a paralo-ray gun strapped to his hips. The uniforms were a
brilliant green, with a white band across the chest. The men formed
ranks, waited for a command from a man dressed in darker green, and then
marched up toward the house.

"By the craters of Luna!" roared Connel. "Who are they?"

"The Nationalists!" cried Sinclair. "They threatened to burn down my
house and destroy my farm if I wrote that letter to the delegate.
They've come to carry out their threat!"

Connel pulled the paralo-ray gun from his hip and gripped it firmly. "Do
you want those men in your house?" he asked Sinclair.

"No--no, of course not!"

"Then you have Solar Guard protection."

"How--?" Sinclair asked. "There are no Solar Guardsmen around here!"

"What in blazes do you think I am, man!" roared Connel as he lunged for
the door and stepped out onto the porch. The men were within a hundred
feet of the porch when they saw Connel. The Solar Guard officer spread
his legs and stuck out his jaw, his paralo-ray gun leveled. "The first
one of you tin soldiers that puts a foot on these steps gets frozen
stiffer than a snowball on Pluto! Now stand where you are, state your
business, and then _blast off_!"

"Halt!" The leader of the column of men held up his hand. Connel saw
that the plastic helmets were frosted over, except for a clear band
across the eye level. All of the faces were hidden. The leader stepped
forward, his hand on his paralo-ray gun. "Greetings, Major Connel."

Connel snorted. "If you'd take off that Halloween mask, I might know who
I'm talking to!"

"My name is Hilmarc."

"Hilmarc?"

"Yes. I am the leader of this detachment."

"Leader, huh?" grunted Connel. "Leader of what? A bunch of little tin
soldiers?"

"You shall see, Major." Hilmarc's voice was low and threatening.

"I'm going to count to five," announced Connel grimly, lifting his
paralo-ray gun, "and if you and your playmates aren't back in your
ships, I start blasting."

"That would be unwise," replied Hilmarc. "Your one gun against all of
ours."

Connel grinned. "I know. It's going to be a whale of a fight, isn't it?"
Then, without pause, he shouted, "_One--two--three--four--five!_"

He opened fire, squeezing the trigger rapidly. The first row of
green-clad men were immediately frozen. Dropping to one knee, the
spaceman again opened fire, and men in the second row stiffened as they
tried to return the fire.

"Fire! Cut him down!" roared Hilmarc frantically.

[Illustration]

The men broke ranks and the area in front of Sinclair's house crackled
with paralo-ray gunfire. Darting behind a chair, Connel dropped to the
floor, his gun growing hot under the continuous discharge of paralyzing
energy. In a matter of moments the Solar Guard officer had frozen nearly
half of the attacking troop, their bodies scattered in various
positions. Suddenly his gun spit fire and began to smoke. The energy
charge was exhausted. Connel jumped to his feet and snapped to
attention. He knew from experience that if being hit was inevitable, the
best way to receive the charge was by standing at attention, taking the
strain off the heart. He faced the clearing and a dozen shots of
paralyzing energy hit him simultaneously. He became rigid and the short
furious battle was over.

[Illustration]

One of the green-clad men released Hilmarc from the effects of Connel's
ninth shot and he stepped forward to stare straight into Connel's eyes.
"I know you can hear me, Major. I want to compliment you on your
shooting. But your brave resistance now is as futile as the resistance
of the entire Solar Guard in the near future." Hilmarc smiled
arrogantly and stepped back. "Now, if you'll excuse me, I will attend to
the business I came here for--to take care of a weakling and an
informer!" He turned and shouted to his men. "You have your orders! Get
Sinclair and then burn everything in sight."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Astro, Tom," gasped Roger. "I--I can't go on."

The blond-haired cadet fell headlong to the ground, almost burying
himself in the mud. Tom and Astro turned without a word, and gripping
Roger under each arm, helped him to his feet. Behind them, the thunder
of the stalking tyrannosaurus came closer, and they forced themselves to
greater effort. For two days they had been running before the monster.
It was a wild flight through a wild jungle that offered them little
protection. And while their fears were centered on the brute behind
them, their sleepy, weary eyes sought out other dangers that lay ahead.
More than once they stopped to blast a hungry, frightened beast that
barred their path, leaving it for the tyrannosaurus and giving
themselves a momentary respite in their flight.

Astro led the way, tirelessly slashing at the vines and creepers with
his jungle knife, opening the path for Roger and Tom. The Venusian cadet
was sure that they were near the clearing around the Sinclair
plantation. Since early morning he had seen the trail markers they had
left when they started into the jungle. The cadets knew that if they
didn't reach the clearing soon they would have to stand and fight the
terrible thing that trailed them. During the first wild night, they had
stumbled into a sinkhole, and as Tom wallowed helplessly in the
clinging, suffocating mud, Astro and Roger stood and fought the giant
beast. The shock rifles cracked against the armorlike hide of the
monster, momentarily stunning him, but in the darkness and rain, they
were unable to get a clear head shot. When Tom finally pulled himself
out of the mudhole, they struggled onward through the jungle, with only
one shot left in each blaster.

"How much farther, Astro?" asked Tom, his voice weak with fatigue. "I'm
starting to fold too."

"Not too far now, Tom," the big cadet assured him. "We should be hitting
the clearing soon now." He turned and looked back. "If we could only get
a clear shot at that brute's head!"

"Hang on, Roger," said Tom. "Just a little more now."

Roger didn't answer, merely bobbing his head in acknowledgment.

Behind them, the crashing thunderous steps seemed to be getting closer
and Astro drove himself harder, slashing at the vines and tangled
underbrush, sometimes just bursting through by sheer driving strength.
But the heavy-footed creature still stalked them ponderously.

Suddenly Astro stopped and sniffed the air. "Smoke!" he cried. "We're
almost there!"

Tom and Roger smiled wanly and they pushed on. A moment later the giant
cadet pointed through the underbrush. "There! I see the clearing!
And--by the stars--there's a fire! The house is burning!"

Forgetting the danger behind them, the three boys raced toward the
clearing. Just before they emerged from the jungle, they stopped and
stood openmouthed with astonishment, staring at the scene before them.

"By the craters of Luna!" gasped Astro. "Look!"

The outbuildings of the plantation were burning furiously, sending up
thick columns of smoke. The wind blew the dense fumes toward them and
they began to cough and gag. Through the smoke they saw a strange array
of jet craft in the clearing. Then suddenly their attention was jerked
back to another danger. The tyrannosaurus was nearly upon them.

"Run!" roared Astro. He broke for the clearing, followed by Roger and
Tom. Once in the open, the boys ran several hundred yards to the nearest
jet craft, and safely in the hatch, turned to see the monster come to
the edge of the clearing and stop. They saw the brute clearly for the
first time.

It stood up on its hind legs, standing almost a hundred feet high. It
moved its flat, triangular-shaped head in a slow arc, peering out over
the clearing. The smoke billowed around it. It snorted several times in
fear and anger. Astro looked at it, wide-eyed, and finally spoke in awed
tones. "By the rings of Saturn, it is!"

"Is what?" asked Tom.

"The same tyranno I blasted when I was a kid, the one that trapped me in
the cave!"

"Impossible!" snorted Roger. "How can you tell?"

"There on the head, the scars--and that eye. That's the mark of a
blaster!"

"Well, I'll be a rocket-headed Earthworm!" said Tom.

The smoke thickened at the moment, and when it cleared again, the great
beast was gone. "I guess the smoke chased him away," said Astro.
"Smoke!" He whirled around. With the threat of the tyrannosaurus gone,
they could face the strange happenings around the clearing.

"Come on," said Tom. He started for the burning buildings in back of the
house.

Just at that moment a group of the green-clad men came around the side
of the house. Astro grabbed Tom by the arm and pulled him back.

"What's going on here? All these ships, buildings burning, and those men
dressed in green. What is it?"

The three boys huddled behind the jet and studied the scene.

"I don't get it," said Tom. "Who are those men? They almost look as if
they're soldiers of some kind, but I don't recognize the uniform."

"Maybe it's the fire department," suggested Roger.

"Wait a minute!" roared Tom suddenly. "There on the porch! Major
Connel!"

"Omigosh!" said Astro. "It is, but what's the matter with him? Why is he
standing there like that?"

"He's been paralo-rayed!" exclaimed Roger. "See how still he is!
Whatever these jokers in uniforms are, they're not friendly!" He raised
his shock rifle. "This last shot in my blaster should--"

"Wait a minute, Roger," said Tom, "don't go off half-cocked. We can't do
much with just three shots. We'd better take over one of these ships.
There must be guns aboard."

"Yeah," said Astro. "How about that big one over there?" He pointed to
the largest of the assembled crafts.

"O.K.," said Tom. "Sneak around this side and make a dash for it."

Gripping their rifles, they slipped around the stern of the small ship,
and keeping a wary eye on the milling men around the front of the
building, they dashed toward the bigger ship.

On the porch of the main house, Major Connel, every muscle in his body
paralyzed, saw the three cadets dart across the field and his heart
skipped a beat. Immediately before him, two of the green-clad men were
holding Sinclair while Hilmarc addressed him arrogantly.

"This is just the beginning, Sinclair. Don't try to cross us again.
Neither you nor anyone else can stop us!" He whirled around and faced
Connel. "And as for you and your Solar Guard, Major Connel, you can
tell them--"

Hilmarc's tirade was suddenly interrupted by a shrill whistle and the
glare of a red flare overhead. There was a chorus of shouts as the men
ducked for cover.

A voice, Connel recognized as Tom's, boomed out over the loud-speaker of
the large jet ship near the edge of the clearing. "Now hear this! You
are covered by an atomic mortar. Drop your guns and raise your hands!"

The men stared at the ship, confused, but Hilmarc issued a curt command.
"Return to the ships!"

"But--but he'll blast us," whined one of the men. "He'll kill us all."

"You fool!" roared Hilmarc. "It must be a friend of Connel's or
Sinclair's. He won't dare fire an atomic shell near this house, for fear
of killing his friends! Now get aboard your ships and blast off!"

From their ship, Tom, Roger, and Astro saw the men scatter across the
field, and realizing their bluff had failed, they opened fire with the
paralo-ray guns. But their range was too far. In a few moments the
clearing around the Sinclair home was alive with the coughing roar of
the jets blasting off.

As soon as they were alone, Sinclair snatched up an abandoned ray gun
and released the major from the charge. Connel immediately jumped for
another gun. But then, as the jets started to take off, he saw that it
would be useless to pursue the invaders. Thankful that the cadets had
arrived in time, he trotted across the clearing to meet them as they
climbed wearily from the remaining jet ship.

"By the craters of Luna," he roared good-naturedly, "you three
space-brained idiots had me scared! I thought you would really let go
with that mortar!"

Tom and Roger grinned, relieved to find the spaceman unhurt, while
Astro looked off at the disappearing fleet of ships.

"What's happened, sir?" asked Tom. "What's it all about?"

"Haven't time to explain now," said Connel. "I just want you three to
know you got back here in time to save the rest of this man's property."
He turned toward Sinclair, who was just approaching. "Did you recognize
any of them?" he asked the planter.

Sinclair shook his head. "I thought I did--by their voices, I mean. But
I couldn't see anyone through that frosted headgear they were wearing."

"Well, they left a ship. We'll find out who that belongs to," said
Connel. "All right, Corbett, Manning, Astro. Stand by to blast off!"

"Blast off?" exclaimed Roger. "But we're on leave, sir!"

[Illustration]

"Not any more, you're not!" snapped Connel. "You're recalled as of now!
Get this ship ready to blast off for Venusport in five minutes!"


CHAPTER 8


"Are you sure they went south, Astro?"

Major Connel was examining a map of the Southern Hemisphere of Venus.
The three cadets were grouped around him in the small control room of
the jet ship.

"I think so, sir," replied Astro. "I watched them circle and then climb.
There would be no reason to climb unless they were going over the
mountains."

"What do you think, Tom?" asked Connel.

"I don't know, sir. The map doesn't show anything but jungle for about a
thousand square miles. Unless there's a secret base somewhere between
here and there"--he placed his fingers on the map where the Sharkey and
Sinclair plantations were marked--"I don't see where they could have
gone."

"Well, that must be the answer, then," sighed the gruff spaceman. "Our
alert to the patrol ships in this area narrows it down. Nothing was
spotted in the air. And they couldn't have blasted off into space. All
their ships were low-flying stuff."

Blasting off from the Sinclair plantation immediately, the three cadets
and the major had hoped to find the operations base of the green-clad
invaders, but the ships had disappeared. The ship they had captured
proved to be a freighter with no name and all identifying marks removed.
They had asked the Solar Guard ship registry in Venusport to check on
the vessel's title but so far had received no answer.

Now blasting back to Venusport at full speed, Connel told the boys the
real nature of his mission to Venus. The boys were shocked, unable to
believe that anyone, or any group of persons, would dare to buck the
authority of the Solar Guard. Yet they had seen with their own eyes a
demonstration of the strength of the Nationalists. Roger had sent a
top-secret teleceiver message to Commander Walters at Space Academy,
requesting an immediate conference with Connel, and had received
confirmation within a half-hour.

"I think Captain Strong will be along too," said Roger to Tom after
Connel had retired to a compartment with a recorder to transcribe a
report of the affair at Sinclair's. "The message said we were to prepare
a full report for consideration by Commander Walters, Professor Sykes,
and Captain Strong."

"Boy," said the curly-haired cadet, "this thing is too big for me to
swallow. Imagine a bunch of dopes dressing up in uniforms and burning a
guy's buildings because he wrote a letter to his delegate!"

"I'd hate to be a member of that organization when Commander Walters
gets through with them," said Roger in a slow drawl. "And particularly
the guy that ordered Connel blasted with that ray gun. Ten shots at
once! Wow! That guy must have nerves made of steel!"

Within an hour the jet freighter was circling Venusport and was given
priority clearance for an immediate landing. Immediately upon landing,
the ship swarmed with Solar Guardsmen, grim-faced men assigned to guard
it, while technicians checked the ship for identification. The three
boys were still wearing the jungle garb when they presented themselves
to Major Connel with the request for a little sleep.

"Take an aspirin!" roared Connel. "We've got important work to do!"

"But, sir," said Roger, his eyes half-closed, "we're dead on our feet!
We've been out in the jungle for three days and--"

"Manning," interrupted the spaceman, "everything you saw during that
business back at Sinclair's might be valuable. I'm sorry, but I'll have
to insist that you talk to the Solar Guard security officers first. As
tired as you are, you might forget something after a heavy sleep."

There was little else the boys could do but follow the burly officer out
of the ship to a well-guarded jet cab which took them through the
streets of Venusport to the Solar Guard headquarters.

They rode the elevator to the conference room in silence, each boy
feeling at any moment that he would collapse from exhaustion. In the
long corridor they passed tough-looking enlisted guardsmen who were
heavily armed, and before being allowed into the conference room, they
were scrutinized by a burly officer. Finally inside, they were allowed
to sit down in soft chairs and were given hot cups of tea to drink while
precise, careful interrogators took down the story of their first
meeting with the Venusian Nationalists. They were forced to repeat
details many times, in the hope that something new might be added.
Groggy after nearly two hours of this, the boys felt sure that the time
had come for them to be allowed to get some sleep, but after the last
question from the interrogators, they were ushered into the presence of
Commander Walters, Major Connel, Professor Sykes, Captain Strong, and
several recording secretaries. Before the conference began, Delegate E.
Philips James arrived with his personal secretary. He offered his
excuses for being late and took his place at the long table. Tom shot a
glance at the secretary. The man looked vaguely familiar to him. The
cadet tried to place him, but he was so tired that he could not think.

"Major Connel," began Commander Walters abruptly, "what do you consider
the best possible move for the Solar Guard to make? Under the present
circumstances, do you think we should undertake a full-scale
investigation? We talked to Al Sharkey, and while he admits being head
of an organization known as the Venusian Nationalists, he denies any
knowledge of any attack on Sinclair such as you describe. And he claims
to have been in Venusport when the incident happened."

Connel thought a moment. "I don't know about Sharkey, but I don't think
a public investigation should be made yet. I think it would arouse a lot
of speculation and achieve no results."

"Then you think we should move against them merely on the basis of this
encounter at the Sinclair plantation," asked E. Philips James in his
smoothest manner.

Connel shook his head. "I think our best bet is to locate their base. If
we can nail them with solid evidence, we'll have a good case to present
before the Grand Council of the Solar Alliance."

"I agree with you, Major." James smiled. Behind him, his secretary was
busy transcribing the conversational exchange on his audioscriber.

"What would you require to locate the base?" asked Walters.

"I haven't worked out the details yet," said Connel, "but a small
expedition into the jungle would be better than sending a regiment of
guardsmen, or a fleet of ships."

"Do you have any idea where the base might be?" Sykes suddenly spoke up.
"Most of those men were supposed to be planters who know the jungle
well. Isn't it possible that they might have their base well hidden and
a small party, such as you suggest, could cover too little ground?"

Connel turned to Astro. "Astro, do you know that section of the belt?"

"Yes, sir," replied Astro. "I hunted all over that area when I was a
boy." The big cadet went on to explain how he had become so familiar
with the jungle, and described briefly their experience with the
tyrannosaurus. All of the men at the table were impressed by his
knowledge of jungle lore.

"I gather you plan to take these cadets on your expedition, Major,"
commented James.

"Yes, I do. They work well together and have already been in the
jungle," answered Connel.

"What do you three boys think of the idea?" asked Walters. "I don't have
to remind you that you'll be up against two kinds of danger: the jungle
itself, and the Nationalists."

"We understand, sir," replied Tom, without even waiting for his unit
mates' quick nods.

"There's another factor," Captain Strong broke in. "You'll be giving up
your leave. There won't be any extra time off. Should this mission be
completed before the next term at the Academy begins, fine. But if not,
you'll have to return to work immediately."

"We understand that too, sir," said Tom. "We're willing to do anything
we can. And if I might offer a personal opinion"--he glanced at Astro
and Roger--"I think the _Polaris_ unit appreciates the seriousness of
the situation and we agree with the major. A small party, especially
ours, since we're already established as hunters, would be less suspect
than a larger one."

"I think we all agree that the _Polaris_ unit is qualified for the
mission, Corbett," said Walters, who saw through Tom's eagerness to be
assigned to go with the major.

The meeting broke up soon afterward. Connel remained with Strong and
Walters to work out the details of the mission and to draft a top-secret
report to the Grand Council of the Solar Alliance.

The three weary cadets were quartered in the finest hotel in Venusport
and had just stumbled into bed when the room teleceiver signal buzzed.
Tom shuffled over to the screen near the table where the remains of a
huge supper gave mute evidence of their hunger. Switching on the
machine, he saw Strong's face come into focus.

"I hope you boys aren't too comfortable," announced Strong. "I'm afraid
the sleep you're so hungry for will have to wait. This is an emergency!"

"Oh, no!" groaned Roger. "I can't understand why emergencies come up
every time I try to pound the pillow!"

Astro fell back onto his bed with the look of a martyred saint and
groaned.

"What is it, sir?" asked Tom, who was as tired as the others.
Nonetheless he felt the urgency in Strong's voice.

"You blast off in half an hour," said the Solar Guard captain. "The
_Polaris_ has been refitted and you're to check her over before
returning to Sinclair's. Everything has been prepared for you. Get
dressed and you'll find a jet cab waiting for you in front of the hotel.
I had hoped to see you again before you left, but I've been ordered
back to the Academy with Commander Walters. We've got to report to the
Solar Council, personally."

"O.K., sir," said Tom, then smiled and added, "We're sorry your fishing
was interrupted."

"I wasn't catching anything, anyway." Strong laughed. "I've got to go.
See you back at the Academy. Spaceman's luck!"

"Same to you, sir," replied Tom. The screen blurred and the image faded
as the connection was broken. Tom turned to face his sleepy-eyed unit
mates. "Well, I guess we'd better take another aspirin. It looks like a
hard night!"

Hastily donning fresh jungle gear supplied the night before in
anticipation of the mission, the three cadets trouped wearily out of
their rooms and rode down to the lobby in the vacuum elevator. They
walked across the deserted lobby as though in a trance and outside to
the quiet street. A jet cab stood at the curb, the driver watching them.
He whistled sharply and waved at them. "Hey, cadets! Over here!"

Still in a fog, the three cadets climbed into the back seat, flopping
into the soft cushions with audible groans as the cab shot away from the
hotel and sped into the main highway which led to the spaceport.

The traffic was light and the cab zoomed along at a smooth, fast clip,
lulling the boys into a fitful doze. But they were rudely awakened when
the car spun into a small country lane and the driver slammed on the
brakes. He whirled around and grinned at them over a paralo-ray pistol.
"Sorry, boys, the ride ends here. Now climb out and start stripping."

The three sleepy cadets came alive instantly. Without a word they moved
in three different directions simultaneously. Tom dived for one door,
Astro the other, while Roger flopped to the floor. The driver fired,
missing all of them, and before he could fire again he was jerked out
of his seat and held in a viselike grip by Astro. Tom quickly wrenched
the paralo-ray gun from his hand.

"All right, you little space crawler," growled Astro, "start talking!"

[Illustration]

"Take it easy, Astro," said Tom. "How do you expect him to talk when
you've got him around the Adam's apple!"

"Yeah, you big ape," said Roger in a slow drawl. "Find out what he has
to say before you twist his head off!"

Astro released the man, pushing him against the cab door and pinning him
there.

"Now let's have it," he growled. "What's this all about?"

"I didn't mean any harm," whined the cab driver. "A guy calls me and
says for me to meet three Space Cadets."

"What guy?" snapped Tom.

"A guy I once knew when I was working the fields in the jungle belt. I
worked on a plantation as a digger."

"What's his name?" asked Roger.

"I don't know his name. He's just a guy. He calls me and says it's worth
a hundred credits to pick up three Space Cadets from the hotel and hold
'em for an hour. I figured the best way to hold you would be to make you
take your clothes off."

"What did he look like?" asked Roger.

"A little guy, with a bald head and a limp. That's all I know--honest."

"A limp, eh?" asked Tom. "A little fellow?"

"How little?" asked Astro, getting the drift of Tom's question.

"Real little. About five feet maybe, not much more'n that!"

The three boys looked at each other and nodded.

"The guy we bought our jungle gear from in the pawnshop!" exclaimed
Astro.

"Yeah," said Tom. "It sure sounds like him. But why would he want to
stop us? And more important, who told him that Captain Strong was
sending a cab for us?"

They turned back to the cab driver for further explanation, but the man
was now actually crying with fright.

"We won't get anything more out of this little creep," said Astro.
"Let's just turn him over to the Solar Guard at the spaceport. They'll
know how to handle him."

"Right," Tom agreed. "We've lost enough time as it is."

"No, no--please!" moaned the cabman. "Lemme go! Take the cab. Drive it
to the spaceport and just leave it, but please don't turn me over to
the Solar Guard. If I'm seen with them, I'll be--" Suddenly the man
darted to one side, eluded Astro's lunge, and scampered away. In a
moment he was swallowed up in the darkness.

"Boy," breathed Astro, "he was sure scared of something!"

"Yes," said Tom. "And I'm beginning to get a little scared myself!"

The cadets climbed into the cab and roared off toward the spaceport,
each boy with the feeling that he was sitting on a smoldering volcano
that was suddenly starting to erupt around him.

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 9


"Rocket cruiser _Polaris_ to Solar Guard Venusport! Request emergency
relay circuit to Commander Walters en route Earth!"

On the radar bridge of the _Polaris_, Roger Manning spoke quickly into
the teleceiver microphone. Just a few minutes before the giant spaceship
had blasted off from Venusport, heading for the Sinclair plantation,
Major Connel had ordered Roger to get in touch with Walters to report
the latest security leak. On the control deck the major paced back and
forth restlessly as Tom guided the _Polaris_ on its short flight.

"I'll find the spy in the Solar Guard if I have to tear Venusport apart
piece by piece!" fumed Connel.

"What about that jet freighter we took away from the Nationalists, sir?"
asked Tom. "Did you ever find out where it came from?"

Connel nodded. "It was an old bucket on the Southern Colonial run. She
was reported lost last year. Somehow those jokers got hold of her and
armed her to the teeth."

"You think maybe the crew could have mutinied, sir?"

"It's highly possible, Corbett," answered Connel, and glanced around.
"If they have any other ships of that size, the _Polaris_ will be able
to handle them."

"Yes, sir." Tom smiled. "The repair crew did a good job on her." The
cadet paused. "Do you suppose one of the Nationalists planted that bomb
on her fin?"

"No doubt of it," replied Connel. "And it seems to tie in with a rather
strange thing that happened in the Venusian Delegate's office the day
before it happened."

"What was that, sir?" asked Tom.

"Three priority orders for seats aboard a Venusport--Atom City express
were stolen. Before a check could be made, the ship had made its run and
the people using the priorities were gone. They must have been the ones
that bumped you off your seats."

"How do you think that ties in with the bomb on the _Polaris_, sir?"

"We're trying to figure that out now," said Connel. "If only we knew
what they looked like it would help. The girl at the ticket office
doesn't remember them and neither does the ship's stewardess."

"But we saw them, sir!" exclaimed Tom.

"You what!" roared Connel.

"Yes, sir. We were standing there at the ticket counter when they called
for their tickets."

"Do you think you'd recognize them again?"

"I'll say!" asserted Tom. "And I'm sure Astro and Roger would, too. We
were so mad, we could have blasted them on the spot."

Connel turned to the intercom and shouted, "Manning, haven't you got
that circuit through yet?"

"Working on it, sir." Roger's voice was smooth and unruffled over the
intercom. "I'm in contact with the commander's ship now. They're calling
him to the radar bridge now."

Tom suddenly jumped out of his seat as though stung. "Say! I saw one of
the fellows again too!"

Connel whirled quickly to face the young cadet. "Where?" he demanded.
"Where did you see him?"

"I--I'm trying to remember." Tom began pacing the deck, snapping his
fingers impatiently. "It was sometime during the past few days--I know
it was!"

"In Venusport?" demanded Connel, following Tom around the deck.

"Yes, sir--"

"Before or after your trip into the jungle?"

"Uhh--before, I think," Tom replied hesitantly. "No. No. It was after we
came back."

"Well, out with it, Corbett!" exploded the major. "When? Where? You
didn't do that much visiting! You were too tired to move!"

"That's just it, sir," said Tom, shaking his head. "I was so tired
everything was a blur. Faces are all mixed up. I--I--" The boy stopped
and put his hands to his head as though trying to squeeze the one vital
face out of his hazy memory.

Connel kept after him like a hungry, stalking animal. "Where, Corbett?
When?" he shouted. "You've got to remember. This is important! Think,
blast you!"

"I'm trying, sir," replied the cadet. "But it just won't come to me."

The buzz of the intercom suddenly sounded and Connel reluctantly left
Tom to answer it. Roger's voice crackled over the speaker. "I have
Commander Walters now, sir. Feeding him down to the control-deck
teleceiver."

"Oh, all right," replied Connel and turned to Tom. "Come on, Corbett. I
want you to report to the commander personally."

"Yes, sir," replied Tom, walking slowly to the teleceiver. "I'm sorry I
can't remember where I saw that man."

"Forget it," Connel said gruffly. "It'll come to you again sometime." He
paused and then added as gently as he could, "Sorry I blasted you like
that."

When Commander Walters' face appeared on the teleceiver screen, Connel
reported the incident of the cab driver and the news that Tom, Roger,
and Astro had seen the three men who had taken the priorities on the
_Venus Lark_.

"Just a minute," said Walters. "I'll have a recorder take down the
descriptions."

Connel motioned to Tom, who stepped before the screen. When he saw
Walters nod, he gave a complete description of the three men he had seen
in the Atom City spaceport.

"Let's see, now," said Walters, after Tom had concluded his report. "The
man who asked for the tickets was young, about twenty-two, dressed in
Venusian clothing, dark, six feet tall, weighed about one hundred and
fifty pounds. Right?"

"Yes, sir," replied Tom.

Connel suddenly stepped before the screen to interject, "And Corbett saw
him in Venusport again sometime during the last two days."

"Really? Where?"

Connel glanced at Tom and then replied hurriedly, "Well, he can't be
sure, sir. We rushed him around pretty fast and he saw a lot of people.
But at least we know he's in Venusport somewhere."

"Yes," nodded Walters. "That's something to work on, at least. And you
have nothing more to add to the descriptions of the other two, Corbett?"

"Not anything particular, sir," said Tom. "They were dressed in
Venusian-type clothes also, but we didn't get a close look at them."

"Very well," said Walters. "Proceed with your mission, Major. I'll have
an alert sent out for the cab driver, and I'll have the owner of the
pawnshop picked up. There must be someone on the Solar Delegate's staff
who stole those priorities. We'll start searching there first, and if we
come up with anyone who can't explain his absence from Venusport at the
time the priorities were used, and fits Corbett's description, we'll
contact you. End transmission!"

"End transmission!" repeated Connel. The screen blanked out and Roger's
voice came over the intercom immediately. "We'll be over Sinclair's in
three minutes," he called. "Stand by."

Tom turned to the controls and in exactly two minutes and fifty seconds
the clearing surrounding Sinclair's home and the burned outbuildings
came into view. Working effortlessly, with almost casual teamwork, the
three cadets brought the giant spaceship to rest in the middle of the
clearing. As the power was cut, the cadets saw George and Mrs. Hill
jumping into a jet car and speeding out to greet them.

After Tom introduced Connel to the couple, the major questioned them
closely about their absence during the attack by the shock troops.

"Mr. Sinclair often gives us time off for a trip into Venusport,"
explained Hill. "It gets pretty lonely out here."

"Is Mr. Sinclair in now?" asked Connel.

"No, he isn't," replied the plantation foreman. "He's on his weekly trip
around the outer fields. I don't expect him back for another day or
two."

"For goodness sakes," exclaimed Mrs. Hill, "you can ask your questions
just as easily and a darn sight more comfortably in the house! Come on.
Let's get out of the sun."

The small group climbed into the jet car and roared off across the
clearing toward the house. The lone building left standing by the
Nationalists looked strange amid the charred ruins of the other
buildings. In the house, the three cadets busied themselves with
home-baked apple pie which the housekeeper had brought out, while Connel
was telling George of the attack on the plantation.

[Illustration]

"I've known about them all along, of course," said the foreman. "But I
never paid any attention to them. I just quit, like Mr. Sinclair, when
they started all that tomfoolery about wearing uniforms and stuff."

"Well," said Connel, accepting a wedge of pie at Mrs. Hill's insistence,
"now they've made the wrong move. Burning Sinclair's property and
attacking an officer of the Solar Guard is going too far."

"What are you going to do about it?" asked George.

"I'm not at liberty to say, Mr. Hill," replied Connel. "But I can tell
you this. When any person, or group of persons, tries to dictate to the
Alliance, the Solar Guard steps in and puts a stop to it!"

Suddenly the silence of the jungle clearing was shattered by the roar of
a single jet craft coming in for a landing. Without looking out the
window, George smiled and said, "There's Mr. Sinclair now! I know the
sound of his jets."

The group crowded out onto the front porch while George took the jet car
and drove off to pick up his employer. A few moments later Sinclair was
seated before Connel, wiping his sweating brow and accepting a cool
drink from Mrs. Hill.

"I was on my way to the north boundary when I saw your ship landing,"
explained Sinclair. "At first I thought it might be those devils coming
back, but then I saw the Solar Guard insigne on the ship and figured it
might be you." He looked at Connel closely. "Anything new, Major?"

"Not yet," replied Connel. "But you can rest assured that you won't be
bothered by them again."

Sinclair paused, eying the major speculatively. "You know, as soon as
you left, I went over to talk to Al Sharkey. I was plenty mad and really
blasted him, but he swears that he was in Venusport at the time and
doesn't know a thing about the raid."

Connel nodded. "That's true. We checked on him. But while he might not
have been in on the raid itself, there's nothing that says he didn't
order it done!"

"I doubt it," said Sinclair, with a queer apologetic note in his voice.
"I'm inclined to believe that it was nothing more than a bunch of the
younger, more hotheaded kids in the organization. As a matter of fact,
Sharkey told me he was quitting as president. Seems you fellows in
Venusport scared him plenty. Not only that, but I heard him calling up
the other planters telling them what happened and every one of them is
chipping in to rebuild my plantation."

Connel looked at the planter steely-eyed. "So you think it was done by a
bunch of kids, huh?"

Sinclair nodded. "Wouldn't be surprised if they're not scared too!"

"Well, you are entitled to your opinion, Mr. Sinclair. And if the other
planters are going to rebuild your buildings, that's fine and charitable
of them." Suddenly Connel's voice became harsh. "That does not, however,
erase the fact that a group of uniformed men, armed with paralo-ray guns
and with ships equipped with blasters, attacked you! Atomic blasters,
Mr. Sinclair, are not bought at the local credit exchange. They are made
exclusively for the Solar Guard! That bunch of hotheaded kids, as you
call them, are capable of attacking any community--even ships of the
Solar Guard itself! That is a threat to the peace of the solar system
and must be stopped!"

Sinclair nodded quickly. "Oh, I agree, Major, I agree. I'm just saying
that--"

Connel stopped him. "I understand, Mr. Sinclair. You're a peaceful man
and want to keep your life peaceful. But my job is to ensure that peace.
As long as a group of militant toughs like we had here are on the loose,
you won't have peace. You'll have pieces!"

Tom, Roger, and Astro, sitting quietly and listening, felt like standing
up and cheering as the major finished.

"I know you can't tell me what you're going to do, Major Connel," said
the planter, "but I hope that you'll allow me to help in any way I can."

Connel hesitated before answering. "Thank you, Mr. Sinclair. But I'm not
here officially now." And then he added, "Nor in regard to the
Nationalists."

Sinclair's eyes lit up slightly. "Oh?"

"No. As you know, the cadets had quite a time with a tyrannosaurus. They
wounded it and it might still be dangerous. That is, more dangerous than
normally. I've got orders to track him down and finish him off."

"But I thought you said you were going to put a stop to this business
with the Nationalists," said the planter.

"I said the Solar Guard would, Sinclair."

"Oh, yes," mumbled Sinclair, "the Solar Guard. Of course."

Connel got up abruptly. "I would appreciate it if you would look after
our ship, though," he said. "I don't think we'll be longer than a week.
Shouldn't be hard to track a tyrannosaurus, especially if it's wounded."

"I suppose you have all the equipment you need," said Sinclair.

"Yes, thank you," replied Connel. Then, thanking Mrs. Hill for the
refreshments, the burly spaceman and the three cadets said good-by and
left the house.

An hour later, ready to strike off into the jungle, the Solar Guard
officer took four of the latest model shock rifles out of the arms
locker of the _Polaris_ and gave one to each boy with extra ammunition.
"Never go after a giant with a popgun," he said. "It's a wonder you
didn't kill yourselves with those old blasters you used, let alone kill
a tyranno."

The three cadets examined the rifles closely and with enthusiasm.

"These are the latest Solar Guard issue," said Connel. "When you pull
that trigger, you release a force three times greater than anything put
into a rifle before."

Then, checking the _Polaris_ and cutting all power, Connel removed the
master switch and hid it. "That's so no one will get any bright ideas
while we're gone," he explained as the boys watched curiously.

"You think someone might try to steal her, sir?" asked Tom.

"You never can tell, Corbett," answered Connel noncommittally.

Once again the three boys moved across the clearing toward the jungle
wall. Astro took the lead as before, followed by Roger and Tom, and
Connel brought up the rear. They moved directly to the spot where they
had last seen the tyrannosaurus, found the trampled underbrush and
massive tracks, and moved purposefully into the dank, suffocating green
world.

The trail was plain to see. Where the boys once had to hack their way
through the thick underbrush, the monster had created a path for them.
The three cadets felt better about being back in the jungle with more
reliable equipment and joked about what they would do to the
tyrannosaurus when they saw it again.

"I thought you were supposed to be the home-grown Venusian hick that
could manage in the jungle like that fairy-tale character, Tarzan,"
Roger teased Astro.

"Listen, you sleepwalking space Romeo," growled Astro, "I know more
about this jungle than you could learn in ten years. And I'm not foolish
enough to battle with a tyranno with the odds on his side. I ran for a
good reason!"

"Boy, did you run!" taunted Roger. "You were as fast as the _Polaris_ on
emergency thrust!"

"Knock off that rocket wash!" roared Connel. "The Nationalists might
have security patrols in this area. They could hear you talking and
blast you before you could bat an eyelash! Now keep quiet and stay
alert!"

The three cadets quieted down after that, walking carefully, stepping
around dead brush that might betray their presence. After working their
way along the tyrannosaurus's trail for several hours, Connel called a
halt, and after a quick look at his compass, motioned for them to cut
away from the monster's tracks.

"We'll start working around in a circle," he said. "One day east, one
south, west, and north. Then we'll move in closer to the heart of the
circle, and repeat the same procedure. That should cover a lot of ground
in eight days. If anything's moving around out here, besides what should
be here, we'll find it. From now on, we'll have a scout. Astro, you know
the jungle, you take the point, about five hundred yards ahead. If you
see anything, signs of a patrol or any danger from the jungle, fall back
and report. Don't try to do anything yourself. Four guns in a good
position are better than one popping off by itself."

"Aye, aye, sir," said Astro. With a quick nod to Tom and Roger, he moved
off through the jungle. In ten feet he was invisible. In thirty seconds
his footsteps were lost in the thousands of jungle sounds around them.

"I'll take the lead now," said Connel. "Corbett, you bring up the rear.
All right, move out!"

From above, in the leafy roof covering the jungle; from the side, in the
thick tangle of vines; and from below, in the thorny underbrush, the
eyes of living things, jungle things, followed the movements of the
three spacemen, perhaps wondering if these new beasts were a threat to
their lives.


CHAPTER 10


"Hal-loo-ooo!"

Astro's voice boomed out over the tops of the trees, where the birds
fluttered in sudden fright. It echoed through the darkness around him,
where smaller creatures crawled and slithered into the protection of
their holes. The voice of the big cadet was loud, but it was not loud
enough for his mates to hear.

Astro was lost.

He couldn't understand how it had happened. Over and over during the
past six hours he had retraced his steps mentally, trying to visualize
the trail, trying to locate the telltale marks he had made with his
jungle knife, and so find Major Connel, Tom, and Roger. It was dark now
and the big cadet had to face the dangerous jungle alone. He laughed
ironically. Connel had given him the point because he knew the jungle!
And now he was lost.

Astro was a little frightened too. It was his frank realization of
trouble that made him afraid. He knew what was in the jungle, and though
he had been there alone before, he had never been in it as deeply as
this, nor had he ever been lost in the nightmarish place after sundown.

While he was desperately anxious to find his unit mates, he had not
fired his rifle. The threat of exposing his position to a possible
Nationalist patrol prevented him from signaling with the blaster or even
from building a fire. During the last hours of the day, when the
suspicion that he was lost became a concrete fact, the big cadet had
been reluctant even to yell. Now, with pitch-black night closing around
him, he dared to call, hoping it would be heard and recognized by his
friends, or if not, considered the howl of a jungle beast by an enemy
patrol should one be near.

He stood with his back against the rough bark of a teakwood tree to
protect his rear and to face out toward the pitch-black night. More than
once the big cadet felt the sudden ripple of a crawling thing moving
around him, across his toes or down the tree trunk. There was a sudden
thrashing in the underbrush near by and he brought the shock rifle up
quickly, ears tuned for the growl, or scream, or hiss of an attacking
beast.

The luminous dial of his watch showed it to be three thirty in the
morning, two and a half hours to go before the sun would drive the
fearful darkness away. He had been calling every five minutes. And every
time he shouted, the movements in the darkness around him increased.

"Hal-loo-ooo!"

He waited, turning his head from one side to the other, intent on the
sounds that came from a distance; the answering call of the waddling
ground bird that had confused him at first until he recognized it; the
shrill scream of the tiny swamp hog; the distant chattering of the
monkeylike creatures in the treetops. But there was no sound from a
human throat.

Astro called again and again. The seconds dragged by into minutes, the
minutes into an hour, and then two hours, and finally, as every muscle
in his body ached from standing backed up to the tree all night and
holding his rifle on alert, the gray murky dawn broke over the jungle
and he began to see the green of the jungle around him. When the sun at
last broke over the Venusian horizon, the night's frost on the leaves
and bushes danced and glittered like jewels.

He washed his face in a near-by pool, careful not to drink any of the
water. He opened a can of synthetic food, and after eating his fill,
cleared away the brush down to the naked black soil and banking it high
on all sides he stretched full length on the ground. He dared not sleep.
Hungry animals were moving about freely now. A paralo-ray gun and the
rifle, both cocked and ready to fire, were held in his hands. He relaxed
as completely as he could, idly watching the mother of a brood of the
anthropoids scamper through the branches of the trees overhead, bringing
her squalling young their breakfast. An hour later, refreshed, he
started through the jungle again, eyes open for signs of recent
activity, human activity, for the big cadet wanted to return to his
comrades.

Stopping occasionally to climb a tree, Astro searched the sky above the
treetops for smoke that would mark a campsite. He felt that sure if
there was any, he would find Roger, Tom, and Connel, since a Nationalist
patrol wouldn't advertise its presence in the jungle. But there were no
smoke signs. The top of the jungle stretched green and still as far as
he could see, steaming under the burning rays of the sun.

Astro knew that it would be impossible to spend another night like the
first in the jungle, so after searching through the forest until three
in the afternoon, he stopped, opened another can of synthetic food, and
ate. He was used to being alone now. The first wave of fear had left
him and he was beginning to remember things he knew as a young boy;
jungle signs that warned him of dangers, the quick identification of the
animal cries, and the knowledge of the habits of the jungle creatures.

After eating, he took his jungle knife and hacked at a long, tough vine,
yanking it down from its lofty tangle. He started weaving it into a
tight oblong basket and two hours later, just before the sun dropped
into the jungle for the night, he was finished. He had a seven-foot bag
woven tightly and pulled together with a small opening at one end. Just
before the sky darkened, the big cadet crawled into this makeshift
sleeping bag, pulled the opening closed with a tight draw cord, and in
thirty seconds was asleep. Nothing would be able to bite through the
tough vine matting, and the chances of a larger beast accidentally
stepping on him were small. Nevertheless, Astro had pulled the bag close
to a huge tree and placed it deep between the swollen roots.

He awoke with a start. The ground was shaking violently. He was sweating
profusely and judged that it must be late in the morning with the sun
beating directly on him. Carefully he opened the end of the makeshift
sleeping bag and peered out. He gasped and reached for his shock rifle,
bringing it up into firing position. The sight that confronted him was
at once horrifying and fascinating. A hundred yards away, a giant snake,
easily a hundred feet long and five feet thick, was wrapped around a
raging tyrannosaurus. The monsters were in a fight to death. Astro
shuddered and pulled back into the bag, keeping the blaster aimed at the
two struggling beasts.

[Illustration: _Astro kept his blaster aimed at the monsters_]

The big cadet deduced that the snake must have been surprised in its
feeding by the tyrannosaurus, and was trying to defend itself. There
wasn't a living thing in the jungle that would deliberately attack a
tyrannosaurus. Only man, with his intelligence and deadly weapons,
could win over the brute force and cunning of the jungle giant. And even
that had failed with this monster. Astro quickly saw it was the same
beast that had chased the three cadets out of the jungle!

With three coils wrapped around the tyrannosaurus's body, the snake was
trying to wrap a fourth around its neck and strangle it, but the monster
was too wily. Rearing back, it suddenly fell to the ground, its weight
crushing the three coils around its middle. The snake jerked
spasmodically, stunned, as the tyrannosaurus scrambled up again. The
ground trembled and branches were ripped from near-by trees. All around
the jungle had been leveled. Everything fell before the thrashing
monsters.

Recovering, the snake's head darted in again, trying to circle the
tyrannosaurus's head and complete the last and fatal coil, but the giant
beast lunged, its massive jaws snapping, and the snake drew back.
Suddenly its tail lashed out and circled the left legs of the
tyrannosaurus. Astro could see the beast straining against the sudden
pressure, at the same time alert for the swooping head of the snake. The
pressure on the leg was too great, and the beast fell to the ground,
giving the snake a momentary advantage. Its head darted in again, but
the tyrannosaurus drew its head into its narrow shoulders, then shot out
again as the snake missed. Astro saw the snake quiver and jerk back as
the tyrannosaurus clamped its jaws closed and bit a chunk out of the
green, scaly body.

The snake had enough. It wanted to get away, to slip to the top of the
tallest tree in the forest, out of reach of the tyrannosaurus, and wait
for the wound to heal or for death to come. It unwound in a maddened
convulsive movement and slithered toward the tree where Astro lay. But
the monster was after it, immediately grabbing it by the tail and
jerking it back. The snake was forced to turn and fight back.

Astro knew that if the snake could get away it would head for the
teakwood above his head, the highest tree around, and the tyrannosaurus
would stamp the ground around its base into powder. He had to move!

A hundred feet to the left was a wild thicket of ground thorns, their
needlelike tips bristling. Even the snake would stay away from them. It
was his only chance should the snake get loose from the tyrannosaurus
again. Making up his mind quickly, the cadet opened the end of the
sleeping bag and shoved his weapons out before him. Then hugging the
ground, he dashed across the clearing. This gave the tyrannosaurus its
final advantage. The snake pulled back, momentarily attracted by Astro's
move, and the tyrannosaurus struck, catching the snake just behind the
head in a grip of death.

The thorns ripped at Astro's tight-fitting jungle dress, tearing into
his flesh as he dove into the thicket. But once inside the cadet lay
still, pointing his rifle at the tyrannosaurus who was methodically
finishing off the giant snake. In a few seconds the snake was dead and
the tyrannosaurus began to feast.

Astro stayed in the thicket, watching the monster devour nearly all of
the dead reptile foe and then rise up and move off through the jungle.
Astro knew that in no time the scavengers of the jungle would be
swarming over the remains of the snake. Once again he had to move.

Getting out of the thicket was painful. From every direction the thorns
jabbed at him, and but for the toughness of his jungle suit, Astro would
have been ripped to shreds. After easing his way back into the
clearing, the cadet pulled out the remains of his jungle pack. He then
saw that his suit was torn to ribbons, and the many slashes on his chest
and arms were bleeding profusely. The scent of the blood would attract
the carnivorous creatures, so he stripped off the bloody jungle suit,
dropping it back in the thicket, and hurried away. A short time later he
came to a water hole where he sponged himself off and applied medication
from his emergency kit to the scratches. Finished, he took stock. The
night's sleep had refreshed him, and except for the loss of his
protective clothing, he was in good shape. He shouldered the pack,
strapped the paralo-ray gun to his hips, and gripping the rifle tightly,
he moved off through the jungle once more. He decided to follow the
tyrannosaurus. The beast would leave a path for him, saving him the
effort of hacking his way through the vines and creepers, and should an
enemy patrol be out, it would stay away from the tyrannosaurus. Finally,
he knew Tom, Roger, and Connel would go after the beast if they saw it.

The sun shone down on the half-naked giant moving through the jungle, a
new white-skinned animal who was braver than the rest, a creature who
dared to trail the king of the jungle.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's all my fault!" said Connel disgustedly. "I should have been able
to read his trail signs."

Tom did not answer. He pulled the straps of his jungle pack tighter and
slung it over his shoulder. Roger stood to one side, watching Major
Connel. Both boys sensed what was coming.

"Well, this is the last day we can spend searching for him," said
Connel. "We've already lost two days."

Roger glanced at Tom and said casually, "It wouldn't hurt to keep our
eyes open for signs of him, would it, sir?"

"Now listen, boys," said Connel firmly, "I know how you feel about
Astro. I have to admit I have a liking for the lad myself. But we've
been sent out here to locate the base of operations of the Nationalists.
The best way to do that is to work around the jungle in a given area. We
haven't done that so far. We've put all our time and effort into a
random search for Astro. We can't signal him, build a fire, shoot off a
blaster--or use any of the simple communication devices. We have to work
under cover, for fear of giving away our presence here in the jungle."
He slung his gear over his shoulder and added, "We'll continue our
search for Astro until noon and then we simply will have to abandon it.
And stop worrying about him. He's a big strong lad and he's been in this
jungle alone before. I have every confidence that he can make his way
back to Sinclair's plantation safely."

The Solar Guard officer paused and looked at the two downcast cadets
before him. "None of that sulking business!" he growled. "You're cadets
on an urgent mission. Now move out. I'll take the point first and you
bring up the rear, Corbett." Without another word, the burly spaceman
turned and moved off through the jungle.

Roger hung back to talk to Tom. "What do you think, Tom?"

Tom shook his head before answering. "He's right, Roger. We're on a job.
It's the same here in the jungle as it is in space. We know that
something is liable to happen to any one of us at any time. And the
mission always comes first."

Roger nodded. "Sure, that's the way it is in the book. But this is
real. That big hick might be hurt--or trapped. Maybe he needs our help!"

"I know how you feel, Roger," replied Tom. "I want to take off and hunt
for Astro myself, but Connel needs us. Don't forget that bunch of guys
in uniforms back at Sinclair's. Commander Walters and the others don't
hold conferences like that one back in Venusport for the fun of it. This
is serious."

Roger shrugged and started off after Connel, Tom following slowly
behind. Their march through the jungle was made in silence, each hoping
for a miracle. But as the sun grew higher and the deadline hour of noon
approached, they steeled themselves to the fact that they might never
see the Venusian cadet again. A short time later, when Tom was taking
his turn at cutting the trail through the brush, he broke through into a
clearing. He stopped and called out, "Major! Roger! Quick!"

Connel and the blond-haired cadet rushed forward, stopping beside Tom to
stare in amazement. Before them, a large area of the jungle was pounded
down and lying amidst the tangle of giant creepers and uprooted bushes
was the remains of a giant snake.

"By the rings of Saturn!" gasped Connel, walking forward to inspect the
clearing. Tom and Roger followed, breaking to the side, their rifles at
ready. The two boys had become jungle-wise quickly and knew that death
lurked behind the wall of green surrounding the cleared area.

"It must have been some fight!" Connel pointed to the tracks of the
tyrannosaurus. "The tyranno must have stumbled on the snake while it was
feeding," said Connel. "Otherwise it would have lit out for that tree
over there." He pointed to the giant teakwood that Astro had slept
under. The three spacemen saw the makeshift sleeping bag at the same
time.

"Major! Look!" cried Tom and raced to the base of the tree.

"It's Astro's, all right," said Connel, examining the woven bag. "I
wonder if he was here when those two things were going after each
other."

"Yes, sir," said Roger in a choked whisper, "he was." He pointed to the
ragged remains of Astro's jungle suit dangling on the near-by thornbush.
The blood was stiff on the material.

The three Earthmen stared at the suit, each too horrified to speak.

Connel's face was set in hard lines as he finally found his voice and
growled, "Our search is over. Let's get back to our job."

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 11


It was not until late the same afternoon that Astro, following the trail
of the tyrannosaurus, realized that the giant beast was seriously hurt.
At first the traces of blood on the ground and underbrush were slight,
but gradually the blood spots became more profuse and the trail was
covered with huge blotches of red. The Venusian cadet grew more
cautious. The tyrannosaurus would be ten times as dangerous now. And it
might be close by, lying in the jungle, licking its wounds.

As the sun began to sink in the western Venusian sky, Astro began to
think about the coming night. He would have to hole up. He couldn't
chance stumbling into the beast in the dark. But it would also mean
taking time to make another sleeping bag. Suddenly he saw a movement in
the brush to his left. He dropped to the ground and aimed the shock
rifle in that direction, eyes probing the green tangle for further
movement.

"Make one move and you'll die!" a harsh voice cut through the jungle.
Astro remained still, his eyes darting to left and right, trying to
locate the owner of the voice.

"Throw down your gun and stand up with your hands over your head!" came
another voice, this one immediately behind him.

[Illustration: _His eyes probed the jungle for further movement_]

A patrol! Astro swore at himself for blindly walking into a trap and
dropped his gun. He stood up and raised his hands over his head, turning
slowly.

"Don't turn around! Stand still!"

Astro stopped.

He could hear the rustle of movement in the underbrush behind him and
then someone called, "Circle around to the right. Spread out and see if
there are any others!"

Off to the side, he could hear the crashing of footsteps moving away in
the jungle.

"All right," continued the unknown voice, "drop that paralo-ray pistol
to the ground. But no smart tricks. We can see you and you can't see us,
so take it easy and do as we say."

Astro lowered his hands and unbuckled the gun belt, letting it fall to
the ground. There was a sudden burst of movement behind him and powerful
arms gripped his wrists. Within seconds his hands were tied quickly and
expertly, and he was spun around to face his captors.

There were ten men, all dressed in the same green uniforms and plastic
headgear he had seen at the Sinclair plantation. They stood in a
semicircle around him, their guns leveled at his naked chest. The leader
of the party nudged the nearest man and commented, "Never thought I'd
see any animal like this in the jungle!" The other men laughed
appreciatively.

"Who are you?" the leader demanded. "What are you doing here?"

"My name is Astro," replied the big cadet boldly. "I'm a Space Cadet,
_Polaris_ unit, Space Academy, U.S.A. I'm here in the jungle with the
rest of my unit hunting tyrannosaurus."

"Tyranno, eh?" queried the man. "How long have you been trailing this
one?"

"Just today. I saw him fight a big snake and lost my jungle gear in a
thicket where I was hiding. I was separated from my space buddies two
days ago."

"Say, Helia," suddenly called one of the other men, "he sounds like a
Venusian."

"Is that true?" asked the leader. "Are you from Venus?"

Astro nodded. "Venusport."

"Then why are you in Space Academy?"

"I want to be a spaceman."

"Why didn't you go to school on Venus, instead of Earth. We have good
space schools here."

"I want a commission in the Solar Guard. You can only get that through
the Academy," replied Astro stoutly.

"Solar Guard!" snorted the leader, and then turned to the nearest man,
speaking rapidly in a strange tongue.

For a moment the language confused Astro, then he recognized it as the
ancient Venusian dialect. He understood it and started to answer, but
then, on second thought, he decided not to reveal his knowledge of the
language.

The leader turned back to Astro and asked a question.

Astro shook his head and said, "If you're talking to me, you have to
speak English. I know that's the Venusian dialect you're speaking, but I
never learned it."

The leader's fist shot out and crashed against Astro's jaw. The big
cadet rocked back with the punch and then he lunged forward, straining
against his bonds.

"Why, you--!" he exploded angrily.

"That was for not being a true Venusian!" snapped the leader. "Every son
of Venus should understand his mother tongue!"

Astro bit his lip and fell silent.

The leader turned away, and shouting a command, started off through the
jungle. Astro knew that the patrol had been ordered to move out, but he
stood still, waiting for them to push him. They did. A hard jab in his
naked side with the butt of a gun sent him stumbling forward in the
center of the patrol.

Well, there was one consolation, he thought grimly. At least he wouldn't
have to spend the night out in the jungle alone again!

Astro had expected a long march, but to his surprise, he was pushed
along a well-worn jungle trail for only three hundred yards in from the
tyrannosaurus's track. Finally they stopped before a huge teakwood tree.
The leader pounded his rifle butt on the trunk three times.

Mystified, Astro watched a small section of the trunk open to reveal a
modern vacuum-tube elevator shaft. He was pushed inside with the men of
the patrol and the tree-trunk door was closed. The leader pushed a lever
and the car dropped so suddenly that Astro nearly lost his balance. He
judged that they must have fallen two hundred feet when the car stopped
and another door opened. He was pushed out into a high-vaulted tunnel
with cement walls.

"Hurry up!" snapped the leader.

The big cadet moved along the tunnel, followed by the patrol, turning
from one tunnel into another, all of them slanting downhill. Astro
guessed that he was being taken to some subterranean cave. He asked his
captors where they were taking him.

"Don't talk!" snapped one of the men at his side.

"This jungle will be swarming with Solar Guardsmen once they discover
I'm lost," said Astro. "Who are you and what are you holding me prisoner
for?" The big cadet decided it would be better to feign ignorance of the
existence of the rebel organization.

"Let the Solar Guard come!" snapped the leader. "They'll find something
they never expected."

"But what do you want with _me_?" asked the cadet.

"You'll know soon enough!"

They had been walking for nearly an hour and the tunnels still slanted
downward but more sharply now. Turning into a much larger tunnel than
any of the rest, Astro noticed a huge door on one side. Through its
crystal-covered ports he saw racks of illegal heat blasters and
paralo-ray guns. A man stepped out of the door, and raising his hand in
a form of salute, called out a few words in the Venusian tongue. Astro
recognized it as a greeting, "Long live Venusians!" and suppressed a
smile.

One by one, the men of the patrol handed over their rifles and ray guns,
while the man in the armory checked off their names. Then they all
removed their knee-length jungle boots and traded their plastic helmets
for others of the same design but of a lighter material. Each man turned
his back while switching helmets, obviously to avoid being recognized by
any of the others, since the new helmet was also frosted except for a
slit at eye level. Wearing the lighter headgear and common street shoes,
the men continued their march through the tunnel. They passed into a
still larger tunnel, and for the first time, Astro could see daylight.
As they drew nearer to the mouth of the tunnel, the cadet could see
outside, and the scene before him made him gasp for breath.

A full twenty miles long and fifteen miles wide, a canyon stretched
before him. And it seemed to the big cadet that every square inch of the
canyon floor was occupied by buildings and spaceships. Hundreds of
green-clad men were moving around the ships and buildings.

"By the craters of Luna!" gasped Astro as the patrol paused in the mouth
of the tunnel. "What--what is this?"

"The first city of Venus. True Venus. Built by Venusians with Venusian
materials only!" said the leader proudly. "There's the answer to your
Solar Guard!"

"I don't understand," said Astro. "What are you going to do?"

"You'll see." The man chuckled. "You'll see. Move on!"

As they trooped out of the tunnel and down into the canyon they passed
groups of men working on the many ships. The cadet recognized what they
were doing at once. The unmistakable outlines of gun ports were being
cut into the sides of several bulky space freighters. Elsewhere, the
steady pounding of metal and grinding of machinery told the cadet that
machine shops were going at full blast. He noticed a difference between
the men of the patrol and the workers. Neither spoke to the other. In
fact, Astro saw that it was rarely that a worker even glanced at them as
they passed by.

Up ahead, Astro saw a huge building, wide and sprawling but only a few
stories high. It was nearly dark now and lights began to wink on in the
many windows. He guessed that he was being taken to the building and was
not surprised when the leader pulled him by the arm, guiding him toward
a small side door. There was a curious look about the building and the
cadet couldn't figure out what it was. Glancing quickly at the wall as
he passed through the door, he nearly burst out laughing. The building
was made of wood! He guessed that the rebels were using materials at
hand rather than importing anything from outside planets. And since
Venus was largely a planet of jungles and vegetation, with few large
mineral deposits, wood would be the easiest thing to use.

The inside of the building was handsomely decorated and designed. He saw
walls covered with carvings, depicting old legends about the first
colonists. He shook his head. "Boy," he thought, "they sure go for the
Venusian stuff in a big way!"

"All right!" snapped the leader. "Stop here!"

Astro stood before a huge double door that had been polished to a
brilliant luster. The cadet waited for the leader to enter, but the
Nationalist stood perfectly still, eyes straight ahead. Suddenly the
doors swung open, revealing a huge chamber, at least a hundred and fifty
feet long. At the far end a man dressed in white with a green band
across his chest sat in a beautifully carved chair. Arrayed on either
side of him were fifty or more men dressed in various shades of green.
The man in white lifted his hand and the patrol leader stepped forward,
pushing Astro before him. They walked across the polished floor and
stopped ten feet away from the man in white, the patrol leader bowing
deeply. Astro glanced at the men standing at either side of the man in
white. The bulge of paralo-ray pistols was plainly visible beneath their
flowing robes.

The man in white lifted his hand in the salute Astro had seen before.
Then the patrol leader straightened up and began to speak rapidly in the
Venusian dialect. Translating easily, Astro heard him report his
capture. When he concluded, the man in white looked at Astro closely and
spoke three words. Astro shook his head.

"He does not speak our mother tongue, Lactu," volunteered the patrol
leader.

The man in white nodded. "How is it," he said in English, "that you are
a native-born Venusian and do not speak the language of your planet?"

"I was an orphan. I had very little formal education," said Astro. "And
as long as we're asking questions around here, how about my asking a
few? Who in space are you? What's the idea of holding me a prisoner?"

"One question at a time, please, brother Venusian," said the man in
white. "And when you address me, my name is Lactu."

"Lactu what?" asked Astro belligerently.

"Your own name should tell you that we on Venus only have one name."

"Never mind that rocket wash!" barked Astro. "When do I get out of
here?"

"You will never leave here as you came," said Lactu quietly.

"What does that mean?" demanded the cadet.

"You have discovered the existence of our base. Ordinarily you would
have been burned to a crisp and left in the jungle. Fortunately, you are
a Venusian by birth, and therefore have the right to join our
organization."

"What does that mean?"

"It means," said Lactu, "that you will take an oath to fight until death
if necessary to free the planet Venus and the Venusian citizens from the
slavery of the Solar Alliance and--"

"Awright, buster!" roared Astro. "I've had enough of that rocket wash! I
took an oath of allegiance to the Solar Guard and the Solar Alliance, to
uphold the cause of peace throughout the universe and defend the
liberties of the planets. Your idea is to destroy peace and make slaves
out of the people of Venus--like these dummies you've got here!" Astro
gestured contemptuously at the men standing on both sides of Lactu. "I
don't want any part of you, so start blasting!" continued the big cadet,
his voice booming out in the big room. "But make it good, 'cause I'm
tough!"

There was a murmur among the men and several put their hands on the
butts of their paralo-ray guns. Even the calm expression in Lactu's eyes
changed.

"You are not afraid of us, are you?" he asked in a low, almost surprised
tone of voice.

"You, nor anything that crawls in the jungle like you!" shouted Astro.
"If you're not happy with the way things are run on Venus, why don't
you take your beef to the Solar Alliance?"

"We prefer to do it our way!" snapped one of the men near Lactu. "And as
for you, a few lashes with a Venusian wet whip will teach you to keep a
civil tongue!"

Astro turned around slowly, looking at each of the men individually. "I
promise you," he said slowly, "the first man who lays a whip on me will
die."

"And who, pray, will do the killing?" snorted a short, stout figure in
the darkest of the green uniforms. "You? Hardly!"

"If it isn't me"--Astro turned to face the man--"it will be any one of a
thousand Space Cadets."

"You have a lot of confidence in yourself and your friends," said Lactu.
"Death apparently doesn't frighten you."

"No more than it does any man of honor," said the cadet. "I've faced
death before. As for my friends"--Astro shrugged and grinned--"touch me
and wait for what happens. And by the stars, mister, you can depend on
it happening!"

"Enough of this, Lactu!" said a man near the end of the group. "We have
important business to conduct. Take this foolish boy out and do away
with him!"

Lactu waved his hand gently. "Observe, gentlemen, here is the true
spirit of Venus. This boy is not an Earthman, nor a Martian. He is a
Venusian--a proud Venusian who has drifted with the tides of space and
taken life where he found it. Tell me honestly, gentlemen, what would
you have thought of Astro, a Venusian, if he had acted any differently
than he has? If he had taken an oath he does not believe and groveled at
our feet? No, gentlemen, to kill this proud, freeborn Venusian would be
a crime. Tell me, Astro, do you have any skills?"

"I can handle nuclear materials in any form."

"We are wasting time, Lactu!" exclaimed one of the men suddenly. "Settle
with this upstart later. Now let us take a vote on the issue before us.
The ship is waiting to blast off for Mercury. Do we ask for her
assistance, or not?"

There was a loud murmur among the assembled men, and Lactu held up his
hand. "Very well, we will vote. All in favor of asking the people of
Mercury to join our movement against the Alliance will say aye!"

"Aye," chorused the men.

"Against?"

Lactu looked around, but there was no reply.

Lactu turned back to Astro. "Well, Venusian, this is your last chance to
join forces with us and to fight for your mother planet."

"Go blast your jets!" snapped Astro. Immediately Lactu's eyes became
hard steely points.

"That was your last chance!" he said. "Take him out and kill him!"

The door suddenly burst open and a green-clad trooper raced across the
bare floor, bowing hastily before Lactu. "Forgive this interruption,
Lactu," he said breathlessly. "There are men in the jungle headed for
the canyon rim. Three of them!"

Lactu turned to Astro. "Your friends, no doubt!" He snapped an order.
"Capture them and bring them to me. And as for you, Astro, we are in
need of capable men to build war heads for our space torpedoes. To
ensure the safety of your friends, I would advise your working for us.
If not, your friends will die before another night falls."


CHAPTER 12


"You're right, Tom," said Major Connel. "They must be around here
somewhere. Start looking. If they're not here, it may mean he's still
alive."

It was Tom who had thought of looking for Astro's weapons. Refusing to
believe that his unit mate had been killed, the curly-haired cadet was
examining the torn jungle suit when the idea occurred to him.

Quickly Roger, Connel, and Tom spread out over the trampled area,
searching the underbrush for Astro's paralo-ray pistol or shock rifle.
Connel examined the underbrush and vines closely for scorch marks made
by the blaster. Finding none, he rejoined the boys.

"Well?" he asked.

"Nothing, sir," replied Roger.

"Can't find them, Major," said Tom.

Connel smacked his fists together and spoke excitedly. "I'm sure Astro
wouldn't be caught unawares by a couple of things like a snake or a
tyrannosaurus without putting up a fight. If he was attacked suddenly,
he would have fired at least one shot, and if it went wild, it would
have burned the vines and brush around here. You didn't find his
weapons, and there are no scorched areas. I'll stake my life on it,
Astro's alive!"

Roger's and Tom's faces brightened. They knew Connel had no proof, but
they were willing to believe anything that would keep their hopes for
their giant unit mate alive.

"Now," said Connel, "assuming he is not dead, and that he is somewhere
in the jungle, we have to figure out what he would do."

Roger was thoughtful a moment. "How long would he last without his
jungle suit, sir?"

"What do you mean?" asked Connel.

Tom's eyes lit up. "If he's alive, sir, then he's probably following a
path or trail that would keep him away from heavy underbrush," he said.

Connel thought a moment. "There's only one trail away from here." He
turned and pointed to the trail made by the tyrannosaurus. "That one."

The three spacemen stared at the wide path left by the huge beast.
Connel hesitated. "It's due north," he said finally. "We've come a full
day west and should be making a turn north. We'll follow the
tyrannosaurus's trail for a full day."

Roger and Tom grinned. They knew Connel was making every effort to find
Astro, while still keeping his mission in mind.

The three spacemen moved along the trail quickly, eyes alert for any
sign Astro might have left. Connel saw the great bloodstains left by the
tyrannosaurus and cautioned the two cadets. "This tyranno is wounded
pretty badly. It might be heading back for its lair, but it might not
make it, and stop along the way. Be careful and keep your eyes open for
any sign that he might have--"

Connel was stopped by Tom's sudden cry. "Major! Look!"

Connel turned and stared. A thousand yards ahead of them on the broken
trail they saw the monstrous bulk of a tyrannosaurus emerge from the
gloom.

"By the rings of Saturn," breathed Connel, "that's the one!"

The great beast spotted the three Earthmen at the same instant. It
raised itself on its hind legs, and shaking its massive head in anger,
started to charge down its own trail toward them.

"Disperse!" cried Connel. "Take cover!"

Tom and Roger darted to one side of the trail while Connel dived for the
other. Taking cover behind a tree, the boys turned and pointed their
rifles down the trail. They saw that the tyrannosaurus had already
covered half the distance between them.

"Aim for the legs!" shouted Connel, from his place of concealment.
"Don't try for a head shot! He's moving too fast! Give it to him in the
legs. Try to cut him down!"

Roger and Tom lay flat on the ground and trained their rifles on the
approaching beast.

"I'll take the right leg," said Roger. "You take the left, Tom."

"On target!" replied Tom, squinting through the sight.

"Ready!" Connel's voice roared across the trail.

Only a hundred and fifty feet away the tyrannosaurus, hearing Connel's
voice, suddenly stopped. Its head weaved back and forth as though it
suspected a trap.

"Fire!" roared Connel.

Tom and Roger fired together, but at the same moment the monster lunged
toward Connel's position. Both shots missed, the energy charges merely
scorching its sides.

[Illustration]

The tyrannosaurus roared with anger and turned toward the boys, head
down and the claws of its short forelegs extended.

At that moment Connel opened fire, aiming for the monster's vulnerable
neck. But it was well protected behind its shoulders and the spaceman
only succeeded in drawing the beast's attention back to himself.

At this instant Tom and Roger opened fire again, sending violent shock
charges into the beast's hide. Caught in the withering cross fire, it
turned blindly on the boys and charged at them. The two cadets fired
coolly, rapidly, unable to miss the great bulk. The air became acrid
with the sharp odor of ionized air. Maddened now beyond the limits of
its endurance, hit at least twenty times and wild with pain, the great
king of the Venusian jungle bore down on the two cadets.

[Illustration]

Roger and Tom saw that their fire was not going to stop the
tyrannosaurus's charge. They were pouring a nearly steady stream of fire
into the monster now, while on the other side of the trail Connel was
doing the same, raking the monstrous hulk from the forelegs to the
hindquarters.

The boys jumped back, Tom still facing the beast and firing his rifle
from the waist. But Roger stumbled in the tangle of the underbrush and
fell backward, dropping his rifle. The beast's head swooped low, jaws
open.

Seeing Roger's danger, Tom jumped downward again without hesitation and
fired point-blank at the beast's scaly head, only ten feet away.

The monster roared in sudden agony and pulled back, jerking his head up
against a thick branch of the tree overhead. The limb tore loose under
the impact and fell crashing to the ground on top of Roger.

From behind, Connel stepped closer to the tyrannosaurus and fired from a
twenty-five-foot range. It wavered and stumbled back, obviously mortally
wounded. From both sides Tom and Connel poured their weapons' power into
the giant beast. Blinded, near death, the monster wavered uncertainly.
Bellowing in fear and pain, it turned and lumbered back down the trail.

Connel and Tom watched it until they were certain it could not attack
them without warning again, and then they hurried to Roger. The heavy
tree limb had landed across his back, pinning him to the ground.

"Roger!" yelled Tom. "Roger, are you all right?"

The blond-haired cadet didn't answer. Grabbing a stout branch lying on
the ground near by, Connel and Tom worked it beneath the limb which lay
across Roger's body and pried it up.

"I've got it," said Connel, holding the weight of the limb on his
shoulder. "Pull him out!"

Tom quickly pulled the unconscious cadet clear and laid him on the
ground. Dropping the limb, Connel bent down to examine the boy. He ran
his fingers along Roger's spine, feeling the bones one by one through
the skin-tight jungle suit. Finally he straightened and shook his head.
"I can't tell anything," he said. "We'll have to take him back to
Sinclair's right away." He stood up. "I'll make a stretcher for him.
Meanwhile, you go after that tyranno and finish him off. He's pretty
far gone, but you never can tell."

"Aye, aye, sir," replied Tom. He picked up his rifle and reloaded it,
checking it carefully. He repeated the precaution with Roger's blaster.

"Hurry up," urged Connel, already reaching for a suitable branch. "Time
means everything now."

"Be right back, sir," replied Tom. And as he walked away, he looked back
at the unconscious form of his unit mate. He could not help reflecting
on the bitter fact that already two members of the expedition were in
danger, and they were no closer to their goal of finding the
Nationalists' hidden base.

Moving carefully, one of the two rifles slung over his shoulder, the
other in his hand ready for use, Tom followed the trail of the
tyrannosaurus. Two thousand yards farther along he saw a place where the
monster had fallen and then struggled back to its feet to stagger on.
Rounding a turn in the trail, Tom stopped abruptly. Before him, not a
hundred feet away, the beast lay sprawled on the ground. The area all
around was devoid of any vegetation. It was trampled down to the black
soil. Tom deduced that it was the beast's lair. He pressed forward
cautiously until he was a scant thirty feet away, and crouched between
the roots of a huge tree where he would be protected should the monster
be able to rise and fight again.

Sighting carefully on the base of the monster's neck, he squeezed the
trigger of the shock rifle. A full energy charge hit the tyrannosaurus
in its most vulnerable spot. It jerked under the sudden blast,
involuntarily tried to rise to its feet, and then fell back, the ground
shaking under the impact of its thirty tons. Then, after one convulsive
kick with its hind legs that uprooted a near-by tree, the beast
stiffened and lay still.

Tom waited, watching the beast for signs of life. After five minutes he
stepped forward cautiously, his rifle ready. He circled the
tyrannosaurus slowly. The great bulk towered above him, and the cadet's
eyes widened in amazement at the size of the fallen giant. Stopping at
its head, which was as wide as he was tall, Tom looked at the jaws and
teeth that had torn so many foes into bloody bits, and shook his head.
He had come to the jungle to kill just such a beast. But with Astro
missing and Roger unconscious the thrill of victory was somehow missing.
He turned and headed back down the trail.

Connel had finished the litter by the time Tom returned, and the officer
was leaning over the blond-haired cadet, examining his back again.

"We'd better move out right away, Tom," said Connel. "I still can't tell
what's wrong. It may be serious, and then it may be nothing more than
just shock. But we can't take a chance."

Tom nodded. "Very well, sir." He adjusted his shoulder pack, slung both
rifles over his shoulder, and started to pick up his end of the litter
when suddenly the jungle silence was shattered by a deafening roar.
Connel jumped to his feet!

"Corbett!" he cried. "That's a rocket ship blasting off!"

"It sure sounded like it, sir," replied Tom.

"And I'll stake my life it's not more than a half mile away!"

The two men jumped out into the trail and scanned the sky. The
unmistakable roar of a spaceship echoed through the jungle. The ship was
accelerating, and the reverberations of the rocket exhaust rolled over
the treetops. Suddenly a flash of gleaming metal streaked across the sky
and Connel roared.

"We've found it, Corbett!" He slapped the cadet on the back. "The
Nationalists' base! We've found it!"

Tom nodded, a half-smile on his face. "We sure have, Major." He
hesitated a moment. "You know, sir, if Roger is really badly hurt we
might not make it back to Sinclair's in time, so--" He stopped.

"I know what you're thinking, Tom," said the officer, "and I agree. But
one of us has to go back with the information."

"You go, sir," said Tom. "I'll take Roger and--"

"You can't carry him alone--"

"I can make it somehow," protested Tom.

Connel shook his head. "I'll help you."

"You mean, you're going to allow yourself to be captured too?"
spluttered Tom.

"Not quite." Connel smiled. "But a good intelligence agent gets as much
information as he can. And he gets correct information! I'll help you
get him to the base and you can take him on in for medical attention.
I'll get back to Sinclair's later."

Tom tried to protest, but the burly spaceman had turned away.


CHAPTER 13


"Stand where you are!"

Tom and Major Connel stiffened and looked around, the unconscious form
of Roger stretched between them on the litter. From the jungle around
them, green-clad Nationalists suddenly emerged, brandishing their guns.

Coupon bonds are bonds with interest coupons or certificates attached
to them, and bearing no name, but payable to any person who presents
the coupons at the treasury at certain times.

Registered bonds are bonds bearing the name of the person who receives
them, and payable to that person or any person to whom he may sell
or transfer them.

Fractional certificates are certificates or bonds issued for any
fractional part of one hundred dollars of the public debt.

All other bonds are issued for amounts of one hundred dollars or some
multiple of a hundred.

A bond is redeemed--that is, bought back--when it is received at
the treasury or office of the sinking fund and the amount of it
is paid to the holder.

The bond is then cancelled. To cancel is to deface or destroy so that the
paper or bond cannot be used again.

A security is something given or deposited as a pledge that money
loaned shall be repaid.

Debts may be due to the sinking fund by railroad or other companies in
which the State has an interest, and securities have to be given
that such debts shall be paid.

The literary fund was formed in 1810 from the sale of public lands,
some of which had been possessed by the Church in colonial times.

The fund has since been increased by the sale of lands given to the
State by Congress for public school purposes. and by fines collected
for offences committed against the State, and by donations made by
private individuals.

It is called the literary fund because it is used for purposes of
education.

Register of the Land Office.

Elected.

By the General Assembly for a term of four years from the
first of March next succeeding election.

Salary, $1,800. He is also Superintendent of Public Buildings.

Duties.

Shall issue grants to all purchasers of waste lands; record all grants
and patents, and furnish lists to the clerks of the county and
corporation courts; shall keep the records, documents, and entries
of Northern Neck Lands, and of lands granted, or to be granted, by
the Commonwealth; shall have care of the public buildings and all
other public property at the seat of government not placed in charge
of others; shall have control of Capitol Square; shall try, prove,
and seal weights and measures; shall report semi-annually to the
Auditor of Public Accounts.

The land office is the office in which business connected with the
sale or granting of public lands is conducted.

This business is under the control of an officer called the register
of the land office, and public buildings in the State are under his
care.

He is also superintendent of weights and measures. At his office are
kept weights and measures, provided by the State, to be furnished
to counties and corporations as standards by which the weights and
measures in business use throughout the State are tested.

The State weights and measures are tried by the register once every
ten years, and when proved to be correct are marked with a seal.

In every county there is a sealer of weights and measures, who must
examine, once every three years, the weights and measures in use throughout
the county, to see that they are up to the standard.

A patent is a government paper granting to some person or persons the
sole right to any lands, privileges, or inventions.

The Northern Neck was the name given in colonial times to the peninsula
lying between the Rappahannock and Potomac Rivers.

State Corporation Commission.

Composed of three members appointed by the Governor, subject to confirmation
by the General Assembly, for a term of six years each.

Salary, $4,000 each.

At least one of the Commissioners must have the qualifications prescribed
for judges of the Supreme Court of Appeals.

Duties. Shall issue all charters or amendments thereof for domestic
corporations and licenses to do business in the State to foreign
corporations; arrange for visitation, regulation and control of all
corporations doing business in the State; prescribe the forms of
all reports and collect and preserve such reports.

Shall control all transportation companies; fix the amount of their taxes;
prescribe rates, charges and classifications of traffic and enforce the
same.

Has the powers and authority of a court of record to administer
oaths and compel attendance of witnesses, and all appeals from the
Commission shall be to the Supreme Court of Appeals only.

Shall make annual reports to the governor.

The term corporation or company includes all trusts, associations
and joint stock companies having any powers or privileges not
possessed by individuals or unlimited partnerships.

Charter means the charter of incorporation under which any such corporation
is formed.

A transportation company is any company or person engaged in the
business of a common carrier.

A transmission company includes any company or person owning and
operating a telephone or telegraph line for hire. Public service
corporations include transportation and transmission companies, gas,
electric light, heat and power companies and all persons authorized to
use or occupy any street or public place in a manner not permitted to the
general public.

Bonds are certificates of indebtedness issued by any corporation and
secured by a mortgage or trust deed.

Domestic corporations are such as are chartered under the laws of Virginia.
Foreign corporations are such as are incorporated under the laws of
some other state or country.

The General Assembly may place under the control of the Corporation
Commission divisions or bureaus of insurance, banking, etc.

Every domestic and foreign corporation doing business in the state shall
file in the office of the Corporation Commission an annual report
as prescribed by law setting forth various facts regarding its
business, and organization, the names of its officers, its place
of business and such other information as may be required by law.

A corporation may be established for the transaction of any lawful business
or to promote or conduct any legitimate object or purpose.

Any number of persons not less than three may associate to incorporate a
college, an alumni association, a literary society, a cemetery
company or association, a fraternal benefit association, a fraternal
association, society, order or lodge, a society for the prevention
of cruelty to children or animals, a charitable or benevolent
association, or social, hunting, fishing club, or any society,
organization or association of a similar nature.

A corporation may be limited as to duration to the time stated in its
charter.

But when no time is so limited it shall be perpetual, subject to the power
of repeal reserved to the General Assembly.

A corporation may sue and be sued in any court of law and equity.

With regard to railroads, canals, and all transportation and
transmission companies, the State Corporation Commission has all
the power and authority formerly belonging to the office of railroad
commissioner; examines them as to their condition, the causes of
accidents, etc.; requires changes and improvements; contracts with
them for the conveyance of convicts, lunatics, etc.

Every railroad company in Virginia has a charter from the State, in which
are stated certain conditions on which, in the interests of the
people, they must carry on their business.

It is the duty of the Commission to examine the railroads from time
to time to see that they are operated in such a way that there
shall be no danger to the people who travel upon them.

To contract is to make an arrangement or a bargain for some work to
be done. The Commission makes contracts with the railway companies for
carrying convicts to prison from the place in which they are tried
and convicted, and for carrying lunatics to the asylum or hospital
in which they are to be confined.

With regard to internal improvements in which the State is interested,
the Commission has all the authority formerly exercised by the Board
of Public Works; appoints State directors and State proxies for
works in which the State is interested; keeps a register of all
property belonging to the State; represents the State in relation
to all corporations whether as a stockholder, creditor, mortgagor,
or otherwise.

Internal improvements are public works of various kinds for the
improvement of the State, such as railroads, canals, highways.

Money of the State may be invested in the capital of corporations carrying
on internal improvements, and it is the duty of the Corporation
Commission to watch and protect the interests of the State in such
undertakings.

For this purpose the Commission appoints directors and proxies to act in
such companies. A proxy is a person appointed as a substitute for another.
Proxies are appointed to represent and vote for the State at
meetings of corporations for internal improvements, in which the
State holds stock.

A TOLL is a charge made for passing certain canals, bridges, etc.
The Commission has the power to fix the amount of toll when it is
not specified in the charter of the canal or bridge company.

Superintendent of the Penitentiary.

Appointed.

By the Board of Penitentiary Directors for term of four years. Salary,
$1,600.

Duties. Shall reside at the Penitentiary and be its chief executive
officer; shall have control and custody of the property of the
Penitentiary; shall employ a guard; shall report quarterly to the
Governor, and monthly and annually to the Board of Directors.

The PENITENTIARY is the State prison at Richmond in which persons
convicted in the State courts are imprisoned.

The GUARD is a body of men employed at the prison by the superintendent
to prevent prisoners from escaping and to suppress rebellion by the
prisoners if attempted.

The Board of Directors is the board or body of men who have the
management of the penitentiary.

They are also appointed by the governor.

Superintendent of Public Printing.

Elected.

By the General Assembly for term of four years. Salary, $1,500.

Duties. Must be a practical printer; shall have the supervision and
management of the public printing and binding of the Commonwealth;
shall report annually to the Governor, and biennially to the General
Assembly.

The numerous public departments and offices of the State require to have
a great deal of printing done.

The acts passed by the General Assembly, the reports of public boards
and of public officers, and the proceedings and decisions of some of the
courts have to be printed and bound into books.

       It is the duty of the superintendent of public printing to make
contracts for such work and all other printing and binding required
for State purposes, and to see that it is properly done.

Commissioner of Agriculture and Immigration.

Elected. By the people at the General Election for term of four years.
Salary, $2,000.

Duties. Subject to the Board of Agriculture and Immigration, he shall
be the executive officer of the Department; shall examine and test
fertilizers, collect mining and manufacturing statistics, establish
a museum of agricultural and horticultural products, woods and
minerals of the State; shall investigate matters pertaining to
agriculture, the cultivation of crops, and the prevention of injury
to them; shall distribute seeds; shall disseminate such information
relating to the soil, climate, natural resources, markets, and
industries of the State as may attract capital and induce
immigration.

It is the business of the Board of Agriculture and Immigration to
promote the interests of farming throughout the State and to encourage
the introduction of capital and immigrants into the State.

The COMMISSIONER OF AGRICULTURE is its executive officer.
STATISTICS are statements of facts, usually accompanied by figures,
showing the condition or progress of countries or peoples or
industries.

The MINING AND MANUFACTURING STATISTICS of the State tell how many mines
and manufacturing establishments are open in the State, how much
work they do, how many people they employ, and give other important
information regarding them.

A CABINET OF MINERALS is a collection of specimens of minerals, such as
coal, ores, and metals.

The commissioner of agriculture must keep in his office a collection
or cabinet of samples or specimens of the minerals of Virginia, and
the place where they are kept must be open to the public.

He must also make arrangements for providing from foreign countries
such farm seeds as he may think of value to the people of the
State, and he must DISTRIBUTE them in a careful and judicious manner
among the people.

Commissioners of the Sinking Fund.

Composed of the Treasurer, Auditor of Public Accounts, and the Second
Auditor.

For explanation of the SINKING FUND, etc., see under Treasurer and
Second Auditor, pages 34-36.

Board of State Canvassers.

Composed of the Governor, Secretary of the Commonwealth, Auditor of Public
Accounts, Treasurer, and Attorney-General.

Duties. Shall examine the certified abstracts of votes on file in
the office of the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and make statement
of the whole number of votes given at any General State election
for certain State executive officers and for members of the Senate
and House of Delegates, Representatives in Congress, and electors
of President and Vice-President of the United States, and determine
what persons have been duly elected.

The manner of voting at elections is explained on page 14, and the
duty of the secretary of the commonwealth with regard to election
returns is explained on page 33. The election returns, made up after the
close of the polls on election day, are sent to the office of the
clerk of the county or corporation in which the election is held.

Election returns are the books containing the names of the candidates and
the number of votes given for each. On the second day after the
election the COMMISSIONERS OF ELECTION meet at the clerk's office and
make out ABSTRACTS of the result of the voting and send them to the
secretary of the commonwealth.

An abstract is a paper containing the name of the person or candidate
who has received the highest number of votes, and the number of
votes received.

Abstracts are made out for governor and lieutenant-governor, for
attorney-general, for secretary, for treasurer, for superintendent
of public instruction, for commissioner of agriculture and immigration,
for senators and delegates, for electors for President and
Vice-President, for congressmen, and for county, district, and
corporation officers voted for at the election.

When the abstracts are made out they are certified and signed by the
commissioners and attested by the clerk, who acts as clerk for the
commissioners.

To CERTIFY is to state or declare that anything is true or correct.

The commissioners certify the abstracts that they are correct, and
they sign their names upon them.

They are then CERTIFIED ABSTRACTS, and certified copies of the
abstracts for State officers are sent to the secretary of the
commonwealth.

These abstracts are examined in the office of the secretary of
the commonwealth, by the Board of State Canvassers, who determine
who are elected.

The secretary of the commonwealth after recording the determinations
of the commissioners makes out certificates of election for senators,
delegates, congressmen, and State officers elected, except for the
governor, lieutenant-governor, secretary, treasurer, and attorney-general.

The certified abstracts of votes for these officers are transmitted
to the speaker of the house of delegates by the secretary of the
commonwealth, and the returns are opened and the votes counted and
declared in the presence of the two houses of the general assembly
within one week after the beginning of the session.

State Board of Education.

Superintendent of Public Instruction.

For the State Board of Education and the State Superintendent of
Public Instruction, see under Education, Chapter XI.

QUESTIONS.

1. What is the term of office of the secretary of the commonwealth?

2. What is his salary?

3. Name some of his duties.

4. Define COMMISSIONS.

5.

Define EXECUTIVE ACTS.

6. What are the seals of the commonwealth?

7. What is a certificate of election?

8. What is the term of office of the treasurer?

9. What is his salary?

10. What are his duties?

11. Define WARRANT; BOND.

12. What is the sinking fund?

13. What is the term of office of the auditor of public accounts?

14. What salary does he receive?

15. What are his duties?

16. What is the term of office of the second auditor?

17. What does REGISTERING BONDS mean?

18. What are coupon bonds? Registered bonds?

19. What are fractional certificates?

20.

What does REDEEMING a bond mean?

21. What is the literary fund?

22. What is the term of office of the register of the land office?

23. What other offices does the register of the land office hold?

24. Mention some of the duties of the register of the land office.
25.

What is the business of the land office?

26.

What are the duties of the superintendent of weights and measures?

27.

What is a patent?

28. What are the duties of the superintendent of the penitentiary?

29. What is the penitentiary?

30. What are the duties of the superintendent of public printing?

31.

How is the commissioner of agriculture and immigration chosen and
for how long?

32. What salary does he receive?

33. What is the business of the department of agriculture and
immigration?

34. Define STATISTICS.

35. What do the mining and manufacturing statistics tell?

36. How many members constitute the State Corporation Commission?

37. How are they chosen?

88. What are their qualifications?

39. What are their duties?

40. What are internal improvements?

41. What are State depositaries?

42. What are the duties of State directors and proxies?

43. What are domestic corporations? 44. Define foreign corporations.
45.

Who are the commissioners of the sinking fund?

46. What are the duties of the commissioners of the sinking fund.

47. What officers compose the Board of State Canvassers?

48. What are the duties of the Board of State Canvassers?

V.

JUDICIARY DEPARTMENT.

Supreme Court of Appeals.

Composed of five judges chosen by joint vote of the two houses of
the General Assembly.

Term, twelve years. Salary: President, $4,200; other judges, each $4,000.
The judges shall not hold any other office or public trust; shall
not practice law.

Qualifications of Judges.

Must have held a judicial station in the United States, or have
practiced law for five years.

Sessions.
As you see, we couldn't. We
knew too much."

"Blasted rebels!" muttered Connel. "The Solar Guard will cool them off!"

"I'm afraid it's too late," said Carson. "They're preparing to strike
now. I've been expecting it for some time. They have enough ships and
arms to wipe out the entire Solar Guard garrison here on Venus in one
attack!" He shook his head. "After that, with Solar Guard ships and
complete control of the planet--" He paused and sighed. "It will mean a
long, bloody space war."

Tom and Connel plied the prisoners with questions and soon began to get
a complete picture of the scope of the Nationalist movement.

"Lactu and his commanders should be sent to a prison asteroid for life,"
said Carson, "for what they have done to former Nationalists."

"Hundreds of unsuspecting Venusians have been brought here under the
guise of helping to free Venus. But when they come and recognize what
Lactu really intends to do, they want to quit. But it's too late, and
they're sent to the caves."

Tom looked at the gaunt man fearfully. There was something in his voice
that sent a chill down his spine.

"They are driven like cattle into the canyon walls," continued Carson.
"There they are forced to dig the huge underground vaults for storage
dumps. They are beaten and whipped and starved."

"Why aren't you in the caves then?" asked Connel.

"Some of us were," replied Carson. "But each of us here owns land and it
is necessary to keep us alive to send back directives to our bankers and
foremen to give aid in one form or another to Sharkey and the Division
Chiefs."

"I see," said Connel. "If you were to die, then your property would be
out of their reach."

"Exactly," said Carson.

"Is Sharkey the real leader of the movement?"

"I don't believe so. But then, no one knows. That's the idea of the
frosted helmets. If you don't know who a man is, you can liquidate him
without conscience. He may be your closest friend, but you would never
know it."

"The blasted space crawlers!" growled Connel. "Well, they'll pay!"

"You have a plan?" asked Carson eagerly.

"No," said Connel slowly, "but at least we all have more of a chance
now."

"How?" asked Carson.

"The Solar Guard sent us here to find this base. If we don't return, or
send some sort of message back within a reasonable time, this jungle
will be swarming with guardsmen!"

Carson looked a little disappointed. "We shall see," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were three things on Astro's mind as twilight darkened into night
over the canyon. One, he had to find out why Roger wasn't with Tom and
Connel when they were taken into the building; two, he had to figure out
a way to contact Tom and Connel; and finally, he had to escape himself,
or help Tom and Connel escape.

The big cadet finished the last job in the machine shop. It had taken
very little time, but the big cadet had lingered over it, trying to find
answers to his three problems. Around him, the workers were leaving
their benches and lathes, to be replaced by still others. A twelve-hour
shift was being used by the Nationalists in their frantic preparations
for an attack on the Venusport garrison of the Solar Guard. Astro
finally dropped the last wrench into the tool kit and straightened up.
He stretched leisurely and glanced over at his guard. The man was still
rubbing his stomach where Astro had hit him, and he watched the big
cadet with a murderous gleam in his eye.

"All finished," said Astro. "Where and when do I eat?"

"If I had my way, you wouldn't," sneered the guard.

"Either I knock off and eat," said Astro confidently, "or I call the
foreman and you talk to Lactu."

"Feeling pretty big, aren't you?" growled the guard. "I haven't
forgotten that punch in the stomach."

"Why, I hardly touched you," said Astro in mock surprise.

The guard glared at him, muttered an oath, and turned away. Astro could
see that he was boiling, almost out of his mind with helpless,
frustrated anger, and suddenly the young cadet realized how he would be
able to move about the base freely. Grinning, he walked arrogantly in
front of the guard and out of the shop into the dark Venusian night. It
was very warm and many of the workers had stripped down to their
trousers. He passed the open doorway of a large tool shop and glanced
inside. It was empty. The men had apparently gone to eat. He suddenly
stopped, turned to the guard, and growled, "If you want to settle our
differences now, we can step inside."

The guard hesitated and glared at Astro. "When I settle with you, big
boy, you'll know about it."

"What's the matter with right now?" asked Astro. "Yellow?" He turned and
walked into the tool shop without looking back. The guard rushed after
him. But the big cadet had carefully gauged the distance between them,
and when he heard the rushing steps of the guard immediately behind him,
he suddenly spun around, swinging a roundhouse right, catching the guard
in the pit of the stomach again. The man stopped dead in his tracks. His
eyes bulged and glazed, and he dropped to the floor like a stone. Astro
pulled the man to the corner of the empty shop, removed the plastic
helmet, and then tied and gagged him. He pulled the helmet over his own
head, nearly tearing one ear off, grabbed the gun and stepped back
outside. He stood in front of the door and glanced up and down the area
between the buildings. Fifty feet away a group of men were working over
a tube casing, but they didn't even look up.

[Illustration]

Staying in the shadows, he walked down the lane, moving carefully. The
plastic helmet would keep him from being recognized right away, but to
complete his plan, he needed one of the green uniforms of the guards.

Deciding it would be too risky to walk around the base, he crouched
behind a huge crate of machinery at the head of the lane. Sentries were
constantly patrolling the area and he was certain that one would pass by
soon. He only hoped the man would be big enough. Fifteen minutes later
the cadet heard footsteps in a slow measured tread. He peered around the
edge of the crate and silently breathed a thankful prayer. It was a
green-clad guard, and luckily, almost as big as he was.

Crouching in the shadow of the crate, Astro tensed for the attack. It
had to be quick and it had to be silent. He couldn't club the guard
because of his helmet. He would have to get him around the throat to
choke off any outcry.

The slow steps came nearer and the big cadet raised himself on the balls
of his feet, ready to spring. When the guard's shadow fell across him,
Astro leaped forward like a striking tiger.

The guard didn't have a chance. Astro's arm coiled around his throat and
the cry of alarm that welled up within him died down in a choking gasp.
Within seconds he was unconscious and the big cadet had dragged him
behind the crate. He stripped him of his uniform, bound and gagged him
with his own rags, and crammed him into the crate. Then, protected by
the helmet and green uniform and carrying the blaster, the cadet stepped
out confidently and strode down the lane.

He went directly to the building he had seen Tom and Connel enter, and
walked boldly up to the guard lounging in front of the door.

"You're relieved," said Astro in the Venusian dialect. "They want you up
in the caves." The cadet had no idea where the caves were, but he knew
that they couldn't be near by and it would be some time before an alarm
could be sounded.

"The caves?" asked the guard. "Who said so?"

"The chief. He wants you to identify somebody."

"Me? Identify someone? I don't understand." The guard was puzzled. "What
section of the caves?"

"The new section," said Astro quickly, figuring there must be a new and
an old section because he had heard a guard refer to the old one.

"Up by the jungle tunnels?"

Astro nodded.

"Must be more of those Solar Guardsmen," said the guard, relaxing. "We
have two of them in here, another in the hospital, and one of them
working in the machine shop."

Hospital! Astro gulped. That would be Roger. But he dared not ask too
many questions. "What's going to happen to them?" he asked casually.

"I don't know," said the guard, "but I wish we'd hurry up and attack
Venusport. I'm getting tired of living out here in the jungle."

"Me too," said Astro. "Well, you'd better get going."

The guard nodded and started to walk away. Suddenly Astro stiffened. Two
other guards were rounding the corner of the building. He called to the
departing guard quickly. "Who's on duty with you tonight?"

"Maron and Teril," replied the guard, and then strode off into the
darkness.

"So long," said Astro, turning to face the two men walking toward him.
He would have to get rid of them.

"Hello, Maron, Teril," he called casually. "Everything quiet?"

"Yes," replied the shorter of the two, as they stopped in front of
Astro, "no trouble tonight."

"Well, there's trouble now!" growled Astro. He brought up the blaster
and cocked it. "Make one wrong move, and you're dead little space birds!
Get over there and open that door!"

Stunned, both men turned to the door without a protest and Astro took
their guns. "Open up!" he growled.

The men slid the heavy bar back and pushed the door open.

"Get inside!" ordered Astro. The two men stumbled inside. Astro stepped
to the door. "Tom! Major!"

There was a cry of joy from the blackness within and Astro recognized
Tom.

"Astro!" roared Connel, rushing up. "What in the stars--?"

"Can't talk now," said Astro. "Here. Take these blasters and then tie
these two up. Close the door, but leave it open a crack. We can talk
while I stay outside and keep watch. If there isn't a guard out here, it
might mean trouble."

"Right," said Connel. He took the blasters, tossing one over to Tom.
"Blast it, I never felt anything so good in my life!" He closed the
door, leaving it open an inch.

"Why is Roger in the hospital?" asked Astro quickly.

Connel told him of the fight with the tyrannosaurus and Roger's injury,
ending with their capture by the patrol.

"You know what's going on here, Major?" asked Astro.

"I sure do," said Connel. "And the sooner we blast them, the happier
I'll be."

"One of us will have to escape and get back to the _Polaris_ to contact
Commander Walters," said Astro. "But they've got radar here as good as
ours. That has to be put out of commission or they can blast any
attacking fleet."

"You're right," said Connel grimly, and turned back into the room.
"Tom!" he called.

"Yes, sir," replied Tom, coming up to the door.

"Since Astro and I speak Venusian--" said Connel, and then added when
Tom gasped, "Yes, I speak it fluently, but I kept it a secret. That
means you're the one to go. Astro and I will have more of a chance here.
You escape and return to the _Polaris_. Contact Commander Walters. Tell
him everything that's happened. We'll give you thirty-six hours to make
it. At exactly noon, day after tomorrow, we'll knock out their radar."

"But how, sir?" asked Tom.

"Never mind. We'll figure out something. Just get back to the _Polaris_
and tell the Solar Guard to attack at noon, day after tomorrow. If you
don't and the fleet attacks earlier, or later, they'll be wiped out."

"What about you, sir?" asked Tom.

"If you get back in time, we'll be all right. If not, then this is
good-by. We'll hold out as long as we can, but that can't be forever.
We're fighting smart, determined men, Tom. And it's a fight to the
finish. Now hurry up and get into one of those uniforms."

While Tom turned back inside to put on the uniform, Connel returned to
Astro outside the door. "Think we can do it, Astro?"

"I don't see why not, sir," replied the big cadet.

A moment later Tom returned, dressed in one of the guard's green uniform
and wearing a helmet. Carson was with him, similarly clad. "Astro better
show me the way out of the base," said Tom. "Carson will stand guard
until he gets back."

"Good idea," said Connel. Tom and Carson slipped out the door.

"All set, Astro?" asked Tom.

"Yeah, there's only one thing wrong," replied the big cadet.

"What's the matter?" asked Connel.

"I don't know the way out of the base."

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 15


"I can tell you the way out of the base."

Adjusting the plastic helmet over his head, Carson stepped up close to
Astro and Tom and spoke confidently. "It's very simple."

"Whew!" exclaimed Tom. "I thought we'd have to go fumbling around."

Carson pointed through the darkness. "Follow this lane straight down
until you come to a large repair lock. There's a space freighter on the
maintenance cradle outside. You can't miss it. Turn left and follow a
trail to the base of the canyon wall. There are jungle creepers and
vines growing up the side and you can climb them easily."

Tom nodded and repeated the directions, then turned to Astro. "Maybe
you'd better stay here, Astro. I can make it alone."

"No." Connel spoke sharply from the doorway. "Astro speaks Venusian. If
you're stopped, he can speak for you. You'd give yourself away."

"Very well, sir," said Tom. "I guess that is best. Ready to go, Astro?"

"Ready," replied the big cadet.

"Good-by, Major," said Tom, reaching into the doorway to shake hands
with Connel. "I'll try my best."

"It's a matter of life and death, Tom." Connel's voice was low and
husky. "Not our lives, or the lives of a few people, but the life and
death of the Solar Alliance."

"I understand, sir." Tom turned to Astro and the two cadets marched off
quickly.

They had no difficulty finding the giant ship on the cradles outside the
repair shop and quickly turned toward the base of the cliff. Twenty
minutes later they had left the center of activity and were close to the
canyon wall. They were congratulating themselves on their luck in not
being stopped or questioned when suddenly they saw a guard ahead of them
on sentry duty.

"Ill take care of him," whispered Astro. "You hide here in the shadows,
and when I whistle, you start climbing. Then I'll cover you from there
until you get to the top. Got it?"

"Right!" The two cadets shook hands briefly. Each knew that there was no
need to speak of their feelings. "Take care of Roger," said Tom. "We
don't know how badly he's been injured."

"I'll see to him," said Astro. "Watch me now and wait for my whistle."
He turned away and then paused to call back softly, "Spaceman's luck,
Tom."

"Same to you, Astro," replied Tom, and then crouched tensely in the
shadows.

The big cadet walked casually toward the sentry, who spotted him
immediately and brought his gun up sharply, calling a challenge in the
Venusian tongue.

"A friend," replied Astro in the same dialect.

The sentry lowered the gun slightly. "What are you doing out here?" he
asked suspiciously.

"Just taking a walk," said Astro. "Looking for something."

"What?" asked the sentry.

"Trying to make a connection."

"A connection? What kind of connection?"

"This kind!" said Astro suddenly, chopping the side of his hand down on
the sentry's neck, between the helmet and his uniform collar.

The sentry fell to the ground like a poleaxed steer and lay still. Astro
grinned, then turned and went whistling off into the darkness. Twenty
feet away Tom heard the signal and hurried to the base of the cliff. He
grabbed a thick vine and pulled himself upward, hand over hand. Halfway
up he found a small ledge and stopped to rest. Below him, he could see
Astro hurrying back toward the center of the base. The dim lights and
the distant hum of activity assured him that so far his escape was
unnoticed. He resumed his climb, and fifteen minutes later the
curly-haired cadet stood on the canyon rim. After another short rest he
turned and plunged into the jungle.

Tom knew that as long as he kept the planet of Earth over his right
shoulder, while keeping the distant star of Regulus ahead of him, he was
traveling in the right direction to Sinclair's plantation. He stopped to
check his bearings often, occasionally having to climb a tree to see
over the top of the jungle. He ignored the threat of an attack by a
jungle beast. For some reason it did not present the danger it had when
he had first entered the jungle, seemingly years before. Under pressure,
the cadet had become skilled in jungle lore and moved with amazing
speed. He kept the blaster ready to fire at the slightest movement, but
fortunately during the first night he encountered nothing more dangerous
than a few furry deerlike animals that scampered behind him off the
trail.

Morning broke across the jungle in a sudden burst of sunlight. The air
was clear and surprisingly cool, and Tom felt that he could make the
Sinclair plantation by nightfall if he continued pushing full speed
ahead.

He stopped once for a quick meal of the last of the synthetics that he
had stuffed in his pocket from his shoulder pack, and then continued in
a steady, ground-eating pace through the jungle. Late in the afternoon
he began to recognize signs of recent trail blazing, and once he cut
across the path Astro had made. He wondered if the trail was one Astro
had cut while he was lost, or previously. He finally decided to go ahead
on his own, since he had managed to come this far without the aid of any
guide markers.

As the darkening shadows of night began to spread over the jungle the
young cadet began to worry. He had been allowed thirty-six hours to make
it back to the _Polaris_, communicate with Commander Walters, and tell
him the position of the base, and Tom had to allow time for the Solar
Guard fleet to assemble and blast off, so that it would arrive at the
base at exactly noon on the next day. He had to reach the Sinclair
plantation before nightfall or the fleet would never make it.

Suddenly to his left he heard a noisy crashing of underbrush and the
roar of a large beast. Tom hesitated. He could hide; he could fight; or
he could break to his right and try to escape. The beast growled
menacingly. It had picked up his scent. Tom was sure it was a large
beast on the prowl for food, and he decided that he could not waste time
hiding, or risk being injured in a battle with the jungle prowler. He
quickly broke to his right and raced through the jungle. Behind him, the
beast picked up the chase, the ground trembling with its approach. It
began to gain on him. Tom was suddenly conscious of having lost his
bearings. He might be running away from the clearing!

Still he ran on, legs aching and lungs burning. He charged through the
underbrush that threatened any moment to trip him. When he was almost at
the point of complete exhaustion, and ready to turn and face the beast
behind him, he saw something that renewed his spirit and sent new
strength through his body. Ahead through the vines and creepers, the
slender nose of the _Polaris_ was outlined against the twilight sky.

Disregarding the beast behind him, he plunged through the last few feet
of jungle undergrowth and raced into the clearing around the Sinclair
home. Behind him, the beast suddenly stopped growling, and when Tom
reached the air lock of the _Polaris_, he saw that the beast had turned
back, reluctant to come out of the protection of the jungle.

Tom pulled the air-lock port open and was about to step inside when he
heard a harsh voice coming from the shadow of the port stabilizer.

"Just stop right where you are!"

Tom jerked around. Rex Sinclair stepped out of the shadow, a paralo-ray
gun in his hand.

"Mr. Sinclair!" cried Tom, suddenly relieved. "Boy, am I glad to see
you!" He jumped to the ground. "Don't you recognize me? Cadet Corbett!"

[Illustration: _"Mr. Sinclair!" cried Tom, suddenly relieved_]

"Yes, I recognize you," snarled Sinclair. "Get away from that air lock
or I'll blast you!"

Tom's face expressed the confusion he felt. "But, Mr. Sinclair, you're
making a mistake. I've got to get aboard and warn--" He stopped. "What's
the idea of holding a paralo ray on me?"

"You're not warning anybody!" Sinclair waved the gun menacingly. "Now
get over to the house and walk slowly with your hands in the air or I'll
freeze you solid!"

Stunned by this sudden turn of events, Tom turned away from the air
lock. "So you're one of them, too," said Tom. "No wonder we were caught
in the jungle. You knew we were looking for the base."

"Never mind that," snapped Sinclair. "Get into the house and make it
quick!"

The young cadet walked slowly toward the house. He saw the charred
remains of the burned outbuildings and nodded. "So it was all an act,
eh? You had your buildings burned to throw us off the track. Small price
to pay to remain in the confidence of the Solar Guard."

"Shut up!" growled Sinclair.

"You might be able to shut me up, but it'll take a lot more than a bunch
of rabble rousers to shut up the Solar Guard!"

"We'll see," snapped Sinclair.

They reached the house and Tom climbed the steps slowly, hoping the
planter would come close enough for a sudden attack, but he was too
careful. They moved into the living room and Tom stopped in surprise.
George Hill and his wife were tied hand and foot to two straight-backed
chairs.

Tom gasped. "George! Mrs. Hill!"

George Hill strained against his bonds and mumbled something through the
gag in his mouth, but Tom couldn't understand what he was trying to say.
Mrs. Hill just looked at the planter with wide, frightened eyes. The
cadet whirled around angrily. "Why, you dirty little space rat!"

Sinclair didn't hesitate. He squeezed the trigger of his paralo-ray gun
and Tom stiffened into rigidity.

The planter dropped the ray gun into a chair and leisurely began to tie
the hands and feet of the immobilized cadet.

"Since you can hear me, Corbett," said Sinclair, "and since you are
powerless to do anything about what I'm about to tell you, I'm going to
give you a full explanation. I owe it to you. You've really worked for
it."

Unable to move a muscle, Tom nevertheless could hear the planter
clearly. He mentally chided himself at his stupidity in allowing himself
to be captured so easily.

Sinclair continued, "My original invitation to you and your friends, to
use my home as a base for your hunting operations was sincere. I had no
idea you were in any way connected with the investigation the Solar
Guard was planning to make into the Nationalist movement."

Tom was completely bound now, and the planter stepped back, picked up
the ray gun, and flipping on the neutralizer, released the cadet from
the effects of the ray charge. Tom shuddered involuntarily, his nerves
and muscles quivering as life suddenly flowed into them again. He
twisted at the bonds on his wrists, and to his amazement found them
slightly loose. He was sure he could work his hands free, but decided to
wait for a better opportunity. He glanced at the clock on the wall near
by and saw that it was nine in the evening. Only fifteen hours before
the Solar Guard must attack!

Sinclair sat down casually in a chair and faced the cadet. George and
Mrs. Hill had stopped struggling and were watching their employer.

"Do you know anything about the bomb we found on the _Polaris_ on our
trip to Venus?" asked Tom.

"I planned that little surprise myself, Corbett," said Sinclair.
"Unfortunately our agents on Earth bungled it."

"It seems to me that was pretty stupid. There would have been another
man sent in Major Connel's place, and we were warned that something big
was in the wind."

"Ah, quite so, Corbett," said Sinclair. "But the destruction of the
_Polaris_ would have caused no end of speculation. There would have been
an investigation which would have temporarily removed the spotlight from
the Nationalist movement. That would have given us ample time to
complete our preparations for the attack."

"Then you knew," said Tom bitterly, "when Major Connel, Roger, Astro,
and I left here that we were going to be captured."

"Well, that was one of the details of the final plan. Personally, I
hoped that you and your nosy major would meet a more dramatic and
permanent end in the jungle."

"What are you going to do with us?" asked Tom, glancing at George and
his wife. "And what do Mr. and Mrs. Hill have to do with your scheme?"

"Unfortunately they discovered who I am, and of course had to be taken
care of. As to your eventual disposition, I haven't had time to think
about that."

"Well, you'd better start thinking," said Tom. "And you'd better do a
good job when you attack the Solar Guard. Perhaps you don't know it,
Sinclair, but the whole pattern of the Solar Guard is one of defense. We
do not invite attack, but are prepared for it. And we have the power to
counterattack!"

"When we get through with your Solar Guard, Corbett," sneered Sinclair,
"there won't be anything left but smoldering heaps of junk and the dead
bodies of stupid men!"

The buzz of a teleceiver suddenly sounded in another part of the house
and Sinclair left the room quickly. When he was sure the planter was out
of earshot, Tom turned to George and whispered, "I think I can work my
hands loose. Where can I find a ray gun?" George began to mumble
frantically but Tom couldn't understand him, and the sound of returning
footsteps silenced Hill. The planter strode back into the room,
hurriedly putting on the green uniform of the Nationalists. "I've just
received word of a speed-up in the preparations for our attack," he
said. "Soon, Corbett--soon you will see what will happen to the Solar
Guard!"

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 16


"Bring that dirty little space crawler in here!"

Captain Strong had never seen Commander Walters so angry. The cords
stood out in his neck and his face was red with fury as he paced up and
down the Solar Guard office in Venusport. "A spy," he roared. "A spy
right in the heart of our organization!" He shook his head.

The door opened and two burly Solar Guardsmen entered, saluted, and
turned to flank the doorway, hands on their paralo-ray pistols. The
private secretary of E. Philips James shuffled in slowly, followed by
two more guards. Walters stepped up to the thin, intense young man and
glared at him. "If I had my way, I'd send you out to the deepest part of
space and leave you there!"

The man bit his lip but said nothing.

"Where is your secret base?" demanded Walters.

"I don't know," replied the secretary nervously.

"Who told you to intercept this message from Mercury?" Walters tapped a
paper on his desk. "Who gave you your orders?"

"I receive orders on an audioceiver in my home," answered the man, a
slight quaver in his voice. "I have never seen my superior."

"And you followed the Nationalist movement blindly, doing whatever they
told you, without question, is that it?"

"Yes."

"Yes, _sir_!" roared Walters.

"Yes, sir," corrected the secretary.

"Who told you to forge those orders for priority seats on the _Venus
Lark_?"

"My superior," said the man.

"How did you know Major Connel was coming here to investigate the
Nationalists?"

"I read the decoded message sent to the Solar Delegate, Mr. James."

"Who told you to send men to bomb the _Polaris_?"

"My superior," said the man.

"Your superior--your superior!" Walters' voice was edged with contempt.
"What else has your superior told you to do?"

"A great many things," said the young man simply.

Walters studied the thin face and then turned to Captain Strong.
"There's only one thing to do, Steve. There's no telling how many of
these rats are inside our organization. Relieve every civilian in any
position of trust and put in our own man. I'll make a public teleceiver
broadcast in half an hour. I'm declaring martial law."

"Yes, sir," replied Strong grimly.

"If you hadn't been in the code room when this message from Mercury came
in, we would never have known the Nationalists were trying to get the
Mercurians to join them in their attack on us until it was too late.
It's the only break we've had, so far, learning that the Mercurians are
still decent, loyal Solar citizens. I hate to think of what would have
happened if they hadn't warned us."

"He very nearly got away with it, sir," said Strong. "If I hadn't heard
the signal for a top-secret message come through on the coding machine,
I never would have suspected him. He tried to hide it in his tunic. He
also confessed to trying to kidnap the cadets when he heard me tell them
that a cab would be waiting for them."

"Well, we know now," said Walters. He turned to one of the guardsmen.
"Sergeant, I'm holding you personally responsible for this man."

"Aye, aye, sir," said the guard, stepping toward the secretary, but
Walters stopped him and addressed the man.

"I'll give you one last chance to tell me where your base is and how
many ships you have," he said.

The secretary looked down at his feet and mumbled, "I don't know where
the base is, and I don't know how many ships there are."

"Then what does this list we found in your tunic mean?" snapped Strong.
"These are the names of ships that have been lost in space."

"I don't know. That list was sent to me over the audioceiver by my
superior. I was to relay it to Mercury should they accept our proposal
to join forces against--" He stopped.

"Get him out of my sight!" barked Walters.

The guards closed in around the little man and he slowly shuffled out of
the office.

"I wonder how many more there are like him in our organization, Steve?"
The commander had turned to the window and was staring out blindly.

"I don't know, sir," replied Strong. "But I think we'd better be
prepared for trouble."

"Agreed," said Walters, turning to the Solar Guard captain. "What do you
suggest?"

"Since we don't know how many ships they have, where their base is, or
when they plan to attack, I suggest putting the Venus squadrons in
defense pattern A. Meanwhile, call in three additional squadrons from
Mars, Earth, and Luna. That way, we can at least be assured of an even
fight."

"But we don't know if they'll attack here on Venus. Suppose we weaken
Earth's fleet and they attack there?" Walters paused, looking troubled.
Then he sighed. "I guess you're right. Put the plan into effect
immediately. It's the only thing we can do."

At exactly midnight every teleceiver on Venus was suddenly blacked out
for a moment and then came into focus again to reveal the grim features
of Commander Walters.

In homes, restaurants, theaters, arriving and departing space liners, in
every public and private gathering place, the citizens of Venus heard
the announcement.

"As commander in chief of the Solar Guard, I hereby place the entire
planet of Venus under martial law. All public laws are suspended until
further notice. All public officials are hereby relieved of their
authority. A ten P.M. until six A.M. curfew will go into effect
immediately. Anyone caught on the streets between these hours will be
arrested. An attack is expected on the city of Venusport, as well as
other Venusian cities, momentarily. Follow established routine for such
an occurrence. Obey officers and enlisted men of the Solar Guard who are
here on Venus to protect you and your property. That is all!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In the living room of Sinclair's house Tom waited impatiently for the
sound of Sinclair's yacht taking off before attempting to free himself
from the rope on his wrists. But when a half-hour had passed with no
sound from outside, he decided not to waste any more time.

Relaxing completely, the curly-haired cadet began working his wrists
back and forth in the loop of rope. It was slow, painful work, and in no
time the skin was rubbed raw. George and Mrs. Hill watched him,
wide-eyed. They saw the skin of his wrists gradually turn pink, then
red, as the cadet pulled and pushed at the rope. A half-hour had passed
before he felt the rope slipping down over the widest part of his hand.
Slowly, so as not to lose the precious advantage, he pulled with all his
strength, unmindful of the pain. He heard a sharp gasp from Mrs. Hill
and then felt the rope become damp. His wrists were bleeding. But at the
same time he felt the rope slipping over his hands. He gave a quick tug
and the rope slipped off and dropped to the floor, a bloody tangle. He
spun around and untied the foreman and his wife quickly, removing the
gags from their mouths gently.

"Your wrists!" cried Mrs. Hill.

"Don't worry about them, ma'am," said Tom. He looked at Hill. "How long
have you been tied up?"

"Just about an hour before you came," answered the foreman. "I found
Sinclair in front of a teleceiver in his room. It's in a secret panel
and I didn't know it was there. I waited and heard him talking to
someone in Venusian. But he spotted me and pulled a ray gun."

"Do you know where he's gone?" asked Tom.

"No, but I sure wish I did!" said the burly foreman stoutly. "I have
something to settle with him."

"That'll have to wait until the Solar Guard is finished with him. Come
on!" Tom started toward the door.

"Where are we going?" asked Hill.

"To the _Polaris_! I've got to warn the Solar Guard of their plans.
They're going to attack the Venusport garrison and take over Venus!"

"By the stars!" gasped Mrs. Hill. "Here I've been feeding that man all
these years and didn't know I was contributing to a revolution!"

Tom was out of the door and running toward the _Polaris_ before she had
finished talking. George followed right behind him.

As the cadet raced across the dark clearing one hope filled his
mind--that the _Polaris_ would be in the same condition in which they
had left it.

The port was still open where Sinclair had caught him and he climbed
inside the giant ship quickly. As soon as he entered, he snapped on the
emergency lights and searched the ship carefully. After examining every
compartment, and satisfied that there was no one aboard, he made his way
back to the radar bridge. There, he saw immediately why Sinclair had
felt free to leave the ship. All radar and communications equipment had
been completely smashed.

The young cadet returned to the control deck and called down to George
Hill, waiting in the air lock. "George! Get Mrs. Hill aboard quickly.
We're blasting off!"

"Blasting off?" the foreman called back. "But I thought you were going
to contact Venusport!"

"I can't," replied Tom. "Sinclair has smashed the communications and the
radar. We'll have to take our information to Venusport in person. I only
hope he's left the rockets and atomic motors alone."

"How about using the teleceiver in the house?" asked the foreman,
climbing up to the control deck.

"Can't take a chance," said Tom. "This is top secret. They might have
the teleceiver tapped."

"Do you know how to handle this ship alone?" asked George, glancing
around at the great control board. "I don't know anything about a ship
this size."

"I can handle it," said Tom. "Get Mrs. Hill aboard!"

"Here I am, Tommy," said Mrs. Hill, climbing up into the control deck.
"I have some bandages and salve for your wrists."

"There's no time, Mrs. Hill," said Tom. "We've got to--"

"Nonsense!" she interrupted firmly. "You just give me your hands. It'll
take only a minute!"

Tom reluctantly held out his wrists and Mrs. Hill expertly applied the
salve and bandaged the cadet's raw wrists. Admittedly feeling better,
Tom turned to the master switch and found it missing. For a second panic
seized him, until he remembered that Major Connel had hidden it. He felt
under the pilot's chair and breathed easier, pulling out the vital
instrument.

"Better get into acceleration chairs," said Tom, strapping himself into
his seat. "This might be a rough take-off."

"Watch yourself, Tom," cautioned George. "We aren't afraid for
ourselves, but you've got to get to Venusport!"

"If he's left the power deck alone, everything will be O.K."

The young cadet stretched out a trembling hand and switched on the
automatic firing control. Then, crossing his fingers, he flipped on the
main generator and breathed easier as the steady hum surged through the
ship. He thought briefly of Astro and Roger, wishing his two unit mates
were at their stations, and then switched on the power feed to the
energizing pumps. There was a second's wait as the pressure began to
build, and he watched the indicator over his head on the control panel
carefully. When it had reached the proper level, he switched in the
reactant feed, giving it full D-12 rate. He glanced at the astral
chronometer over his head automatically and noted the time.

"Stand by!" he called. "Blast off minus five--four--three--two--one
--_zero_!"

He threw the master switch and a roaring burst of power poured into
the main tubes. The ship bucked slightly, raised itself from the
ground slowly, and then suddenly shot upward. In less than a minute
the _Polaris_ had cleared atmosphere and Tom turned on the
artificial-gravity generators. He made a quick computation on the
planetary calculator, fired the port steering rockets, and sent the
ship in a long arching course for Venusport. Then, unstrapping himself,
he turned to see how Mr. and Mrs. Hill had taken the blast-off.

The foreman and his wife were shaking their heads, still in acceleration
shock, and Tom helped them out of their cushions.

"Oh, my! Do you boys have to go through this all the time?" Mrs. Hill
asked. "It's a wonder to me how a human body can take it."

"I feel pretty much the same way," muttered George.

"A cup of hot tea will fix you up fine," Tom reassured them, and leaving
the ship on automatic control, he went into the small galley off the
control deck and brewed three cups of tea. In a few moments the elderly
couple felt better, and Tom told them of the Nationalists' base and
Connel's plan to wreck the radar station at noon the next day. Both Mr.
and Mrs. Hill were shocked at the scope of the Nationalists' plan.

"Well, they bit off more than they could chew when they decided to buck
the Solar Guard," asserted Tom. "When Commander Walters gets finished
with them, Sinclair and the rest won't have anything left but memories!"

"Tell me something, Tom," said George, looking at the control panel
thoughtfully. "Have you figured out how you're going to land this ship
alone and with no radar?"

"I'll have to use the seat of my pants." Tom smiled, and turned back to
his seat. George and his wife looked at each other and quickly strapped
themselves into their acceleration cushions.

A few moments later Tom began braking the ship with the nose rockets. It
made a slow-climbing arc over the spaceport and then settled slowly,
tailfirst. The stern teleceiver was out of order, and the young cadet
had to rely entirely on "feel," to get the _Polaris_ in safely. He had
calculated his rate of fall, the gravity of Venus, and the power of the
rockets, and was dropping at a predetermined rate. At the critical point
he increased power on the drive rockets, continuing to fall slowly until
he felt the jarring bump of the directional fins touching the ground.

"Touchdown!" he roared triumphantly.

He closed the master switch and turned to look at the smiling faces of
Mr. and Mrs. Hill.

"That was fine, Tom," said George, "but I don't want to do it again."

"Don't be a scaredy cat, George Hill!" taunted Mrs. Hill. "Tom handles
this ship as if he were born on it."

Tom grinned. "We'd better hurry up. There must be something going on.
There aren't any lights on here at the spaceport and all the
administration buildings are dark."

He hurried to the air lock and swung it open, jumping lightly to the
ground.

"Halt!" growled a rough voice. "Get your hands in the air and stay right
where you are!"

Puzzled, Tom did as he was told, announcing, "I'm Space Cadet Tom
Corbett, _Polaris_ unit. I request immediate transportation to Commander
Walters. I have important information for him."

He was momentarily blinded by the glare of a ring of lights around him,
and when he finally could see, he found himself in the middle of a squad
of Solar Guardsmen in battle dress.

"What's the password?" asked a tough sergeant whose shock rifle was
aimed right at Tom's midsection.

"Juggernaut!" replied Tom quietly.

The word sent the sergeant into a frenzy of action. "Peters, Smith, get
the jet car around here!"

"What's up, Sergeant?" asked Tom. "Why is everything so dark?"

"Martial law!" replied the guardsman. "Curfew from ten until six."

"Whew!" gasped Tom. "It looks as if I just made it!"

As George and Mrs. Hill climbed out of the air lock, a jet car raced up
and skidded to a stop in front of them. A moment later Tom and the
couple, accompanied by two of the guardsmen, were speeding through the
dark and empty streets of Venusport. The car was stopped once at a
mid-town check point, and Tom had to repeat the password. They picked up
another jet car, full of guardsmen as escorts, and with the echo of the
exhausts roaring in the empty avenues, they sped to central Solar Guard
headquarters.

Tom had never seen so many enlisted guardsmen in one spot before except
on a parade ground. And he noted with a tinge of excitement that each
man was in battle dress. Arriving at headquarters, they were whisked to
the top floor of the building and ushered into Commander Walters'
office. The commander smiled broadly as the young cadet stepped to the
front of his desk and saluted smartly.

"Cadet Corbett reporting, sir," he said.

In a moment the office was filled with men; E. Philips James, the Solar
Delegate, Captain Strong, fleet commanders, and officers of the line.

"Make your report, Cadet Corbett," said Walters.

Tom spoke quickly and precisely, giving full details on the location of
the base, the approximate number of fighting ships, the armament of
each, the location of supply dumps, and finally of Major Connel's plan
to sabotage the radar at noon the following day. Then, one by one, each
official asked him questions pertinent to their tasks. Fleet commanders
asked about the ships' speed, size, armor; Strong inquired about the
stores and supporting lines of supply; Walters asked for the names of
all people connected with the movement. All of these questions Tom
answered as well as he could.

"Well, gentlemen," said Walters, "thanks to Corbett and the others on
this mission, we have all the information we need to counter the
Nationalists. I propose to follow Major Connel's plan and attack the
base at noon tomorrow. Squadrons A and B will approach from the south
and east at exactly noon. Squadrons C, D, and E will come in from the
north and west as a second wave at 1202. The rest of the fleet will go
in from above at 1205. Supporting squadrons are now on their way from
Earth and Mars. Blast off at six hundred hours. Spaceman's luck!"

"Good work, Tom," said Strong, when the conference broke up.

"Yes, sir," said Tom. "But I can't help worrying about Roger and Astro
and Major Connel. What's going to happen to them, sir?"

Strong hesitated. "I don't know, Tom. I really don't know."


CHAPTER 17


"What time is it, Astro?"

"Exactly eleven o'clock, sir."

"All set?"

"Yes, sir."

"You know what to do. Move out!"

Astro and Major Connel were crouched behind a pile of fuel drums piled
near the communications and radar building in the heart of the
Nationalists' base. Above them, the gigantic tree used as the radar
tower rose straight into the Venusian morning sky.

After helping Tom to escape, Astro had returned to the prison building
for Connel and was surprised to find the place surrounded by green-clad
Nationalist guards. Rather than attempt to release Connel then, Astro
hid and waited for the time set to wreck the radar communications of the
enemy. During the second day, he had successfully eluded the many
patrols looking for him. Once from a hiding place he overheard one of
the men mention Connel. He took a daring chance and approached the
patrol openly. Speaking the Venusian dialect, he learned that Connel had
escaped. That news sent the cadet on a different game of hide-and-seek
as he prowled around the base searching for the Solar Guard officer. He
had found him hiding near the radar tower, and they spent the night
close to the communications building waiting for the time to strike.

Their plan was simple. Astro would enter the building from the front,
while Connel would enter from the rear. Astro would draw attention to
himself, and while the guards inside the building were busy dealing with
him, Connel would come upon them from behind, knock them out of action,
and then destroy the radar equipment.

The two spacemen gave no thought to their own safety. They were
concerned only with accomplishing their objective. Having no way of
knowing whether Tom had made it back to Venusport or whether their
destruction of the communications center would be of any value, they
nevertheless had to proceed on the assumption that Tom had gotten
through.

Astro crawled behind the drums and stopped twenty feet from the door to
wait for several Nationalist officers to leave. They finally got into a
jet car and roared away. Astro nodded to the major waiting to edge
around to the rear and then headed for the main entrance.

Connel saw Astro making his way to the front door and hurried around to
complete his part of the mission. He waited exactly three minutes,
gripped his shock rifle firmly, and then crossed over to the rear of the
building and stepped inside.

Once inside, the major found it difficult to keep from bursting into
laughter. The large ground-floor room was a frenzy of brawling, yelling,
shouting Nationalist guards trying to capture the giant cadet. Astro was
standing in the middle of the floor, swinging his great hamlike fists
methodically, mowing down the guards like tenpins. Two of them were on
his back, trying to choke him, while others crowded in from all sides.
But they could not bring the cadet down. Astro saw Connel, shook
himself, and stood free.

"Stand back!" roared Connel. "The first one of you green monkeys that
makes a move will have his teeth knocked out! Now line up over there
against the wall--and I mean fast!"

The sudden attack from the rear startled the Nationalist guards, and
they milled around in confusion. There was no confusion, however, when
Connel fired a blast over their heads. Astro grabbed a paralo-ray gun
and opened up on the guards. A second later the squad of Nationalists
were frozen in their tracks.

Once the men were no further danger to them, Connel and Astro locked the
front and rear doors and then raced up the stairs that led to the main
radar and communications rooms on the second floor.

"You start at that end of the hall, I'll start here!" shouted Connel.
"Smash everything you see!"

"Aye, aye, sir." Astro waved his hand and charged down the hall. He
exploded into a room, firing rapidly, and an electronics engineer froze
in a startled pose in front of his worktable. The big cadet gleefully
swung a heavy chair across the table of delicate electronic instruments,
and smashed shelves of vital parts, pausing only long enough to see if
he had left anything unbroken. He rushed out into the hall again. At the
other end he heard Connel in action in another room. Astro grinned. It
sounded as if the major was having a good time. "Well," thought the big
cadet, "I'm not having such a bad time myself!"

The next room he invaded contained the radar-control panel, and the big
cadet howled with glee as he smashed the butt of his paralo-ray gun into
the delicate vacuum tubes, and ripped wires and circuits loose.

Suddenly he stopped, conscious of someone behind him. He spun around,
finger starting to squeeze the trigger of his gun, and then caught
himself just in time. Major Connel was leaning against the doorjamb, a
wide grin on his face.

"How're you doing?" he drawled.

"Not bad," said Astro casually. "Be a lot of work here, fixing these
things, eh?" He grinned.

"What time is it?" asked Connel.

Astro looked at his watch. "Twenty to twelve."

"We'd better clear out of here and head for the jungle."

Astro hesitated. "You know, sir, I've been thinking."

"If you have an idea, spill it," said the major.

"How about releasing the prisoners, taking over a ship, and blasting
off?"

"And have the Solar Guard fleet blast us out of the skies? No, sir! Come
on, we've got to get moving!"

"We could still try to release Carson and the others," said Astro
stoutly.

"We can try all right, but I don't think we'll be very successful."

The two spacemen returned to the first floor of the building and headed
for the rear door without so much as a look at the line of frozen guards
along the wall. Once outside, they skirted the edge of the building,
staying close to the hedge, and then struck out boldly across the canyon
floor toward the prison building. They were surprised to see that their
smashing attack had gone unnoticed, and Connel reasoned that the
constant roar of activity in the canyon had covered the sounds of their
raid.

"We'll have to hurry, sir," said Astro as they turned into the lane
leading to the prison. "Ten minutes to twelve."

"It's no good, Astro," said Connel, suddenly pulling the cadet back and
pointing to the building. "Look at all the guards--at least a dozen of
them."

Astro waited a second before saying grimly, "We could try, sir."

"Don't be a pigheaded idiot!" roared Connel. "Nothing will happen to
those men now, and in five minutes there'll be so much confusion around
here that we'll be able to walk over and open the door without firing a
shot!"

Suddenly there was an explosive roar behind them and they spun around.
On the opposite side of the canyon three rocket ships were hurtling
spaceward.

"They must have spotted our fleet coming in," said Connel, a puzzled
frown on his face.

"But how could they?" asked Astro. "We knocked out their radar!"

Connel slammed his fist into the palm of his hand. "By the stars, Astro,
we forgot about their monitoring spaceship above the tower! When we
knocked out the main station here in the canyon, it took over and warned
the base of the attack!"

From all sides the canyon reverberated with the roaring blasts of the
Nationalist fleet blasting off. Around them, the green-clad rebels were
running to their defense posts. Officers shouted frantic orders and
workers dropped tools to pick up guns. The building that held Carson and
the other planters was suddenly left alone as the guards hurried to
ships and battle stations.

Connel counted the number of ships blasting off and smiled. "They don't
stand a chance! They're sending up only two heavy cruisers, four
destroyers, and about twenty scouts. The Solar Guard fleet will blast
them into space dust."

Astro jumped up and started to run.

"Hey, Astro! Where are you going?" shouted Connel.

"To find Roger!" Astro shouted in reply. "I'll meet you back here!"

"Right!" shouted Connel, settling back into concealment. There was no
need to release the planters in the guardhouse now. Connel was satisfied
that in a few moments the rebellion against the Solar Alliance would be
defeated. He smiled in prospect of seeing a good fight.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Bandit at three o'clock--range twenty miles!" In half of the cases where
the latter would get angry, and storm, and rage, and fret, and foam,
like a hyena, or a Bengal tiger, the other would remain as cool as a
cucumber, or, perhaps, burst out into a hearty laugh.

One day, when several of the schoolboys, including Michael and Jacob,
were playing ball on the fine lawn in front of the school house,
a dispute occurred between the young grumbler and another boy, and
Mike ventured to suggest to Jacob, as kindly as he could, that he
was in the wrong.

"You little meddlesome dunce!"

said Jacob, all in a blaze of anger, "I'll teach you to mind your
own business, and let other people's quarrels alone."

And, suiting his action to his words, he struck Mike in the face
so hard that the blood ran from his nose in a stream.

Well, what do you think Mike did, then? I know what some boys would
have done, if they had been in his place.

They would have struck Jacob, at any cost. That is the way they would
have taken their revenge. That is the way, indeed, that Mike's
school-fellows advised him to take his revenge.

Half a dozen of them, at least, surrounded him, and urged him to flog
Jacob.

"I'd pay him off for it," said one.

"The rascal!" said another.

"I'd make him smart for it."
"And we'll all stand by you," said one, "if you'll flog him."

"Mike wasn't a bit to blame, either," added another. "If I were in his
place, if I wouldn't make Jake see stars, then--"
The remainder of the speech was lost to every body but the speaker,
as all the boys, by this time, were talking at once.

It is a wonder to me that they did not take the matter altogether into
their own hands, and give Jake the flogging which they thought he so
richly deserved; for Michael was a great favorite among them, and they
could not bear to see him abused. But I believe they contented themselves
with letting off ever so many vials of wrath, in the shape of
words; and Jake Grumble, finding how matters stood, walked sulkily
away.

"Now, Mike, what are you going to do?" asked one of the boys.

"Do about what?" asked the injured boy.

"About the bloody nose that Jake gave you," was the reply.

"I'm going to see if I can't stop its bleeding," said Mike.

"No, I don't mean that," said the other. "I mean what are you
going to do to Jake?"

"Oh," said Mike, "I guess I'll pay him off, one of these days."
"And why not now?" the boy asked.

"I've got as much on my hands as I can attend to, just now," said
Mike.

How do you suppose Jake felt, that day, after his cruel treatment
of one of his playmates?

What do you suppose were his feelings, when he found out what all the
boys thought of his conduct; and when he had time to reflect upon
the folly and wickedness of what he had done?
Perhaps you can guess pretty well how he felt.

Possibly you have yourself wronged some one of your playmates, and recollect
how you felt about it, when you had a chance to get away somewhere,
alone, to think over your conduct.

If so, you can give a pretty rational guess as to the kind of
feelings that were at work in Jake's bosom, on his way home from school
that day.

He did not go home in company with the rest of the boys and girls who
went in the same direction. He was in the habit of doing so. But he felt
so much ashamed on account of what he had done, that he could not
bear to see the faces of any of the children.

Instead of taking the public road that led directly to his father's
house, he went through the gate that led into Deacon Stark's pasture,
and followed the cart-path through the woods.

It was a great deal farther that way.

But he went through the woods so as to get clear of his playmates.
One of the deacon's hired men saw the boy, leaning against the
fence, just at the edge of the woods.

Poor fellow! he was crying, as if his heart would break. So the man said.
Jake got the worst of it, in that affair. Don't you think he did?

But I have not got through with the story yet, and I must go on
with it.

[Illustration: A CRYING SPELL.]"By the craters of Luna!" roared the Solar Guard captain. "Attention!
Attention! All ships--all ships!" he called into the fleet intercom.
"This is Strong aboard command ship. Bandit formation closing fast.
Regroup! Take tight defensive pattern!"

As the Solar Guard squadrons deployed to meet this new attack, Tom felt
a chill run down his spine. The mass of ships blasting to meet them
outnumbered them by almost three to one. And there were more ships
blasting off from the secret ramps in the jungle! He had led the Solar
Guard into a trap!

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 18


"Fire at will! Fire at will!"

Aboard the command ship, Captain Strong roared the order to the rest of
the fleet, and the individual ship commanders of the Solar Guard vessels
broke formation and rocketed into the mass of Nationalist ships, firing
salvo after salvo of space torpedoes. But it was a losing battle. Time
and again, Strong and Tom saw Solar Guard ships hemmed in by three and
four Nationalists' vessels, then blasted into oblivion.

Strong had ordered Tom to maneuver the command ship at will, seeking
targets, yet still keeping from being a target, and the young cadet had
guided the powerful ship through a series of maneuvers that had even
surprised the experienced Solar Guard officer.

"Where's the rest of the fleet?" roared Strong. "Why aren't they here
yet?"

"I don't know, sir," replied Tom, "but if they don't show up soon, there
won't be much left to save!"

"Bandits dead ahead," droned the voice from the radar bridge calmly,
"trying to envelop us."

Tom's hand shot out for the intercom to relay orders to the power deck
and glanced quickly at the scanner. He almost cheered. "Steve--I mean,
Captain Strong. The rest of the fleet! It's coming in! Attacking from
top-side!"

"By the craters of Luna, you're right!" yelled the young Solar Guard
captain, as he saw the white blips on the scanner screen. "O.K., it's
time to stop running and fight!"

The Solar Guard reinforcements swooped down on the fighting ships with
dazzling speed, and the sky over the jungle belt of Venus base was so
thick with zooming, firing, maneuvering ships that observers on the
ground couldn't tell one ship from another. For an hour the battle
raged. During the seesawing back and forth it seemed as if all ships
must be blasted into space junk. Finally the superior maneuvering and
over-all spacemanship of the Solar Guard vessels began to count heavily,
and the Nationalist ships began to plunge into the jungle or drift
helplessly out into space. Reforming, the Solar Guard ships encircled
the enemy in a deadly englobement pattern, and wheeling in great
co-ordinated arcs through space, sent combined volleys of torpedoes
crashing into the enemy ships. The space battle was over, a complete
Solar Guard victory.

Strong called to the remaining ships of his fleet, "Take formation K.
Land and attack the enemy base according to prearranged order. The enemy
fleet is destroyed, but we still have a big job to do."

"What happens now, sir?" asked Tom, relaxing for the first time since
the space battle had begun.

"We try to destroy their base and put an end to this rebellion as
quickly as possible," replied Strong coldly.

One by one, the ships of the Solar Guard fleet landed around the rim of
the canyon base. Troop carriers, that had stood off while the space
battle raged, disgorged hundreds of tough Solar Guard Marines, each
carrying shock rifles, paralo-ray pistols, and small narco grenades
that would put an enemy to sleep in five seconds. A half-hour later,
after the last Nationalist ship had been blasted out of the skies, the
rim of the canyon was alive with Solar Guardsmen waiting to go into
action. Many had comrades in the Solar Guard ships lost in the space
fight and they were eager to avenge their friends.

"How many ships did we lose, sir?" asked Tom, after the squadron
commanders had made their reports to Captain Strong.

"Forty," said Strong grimly. "But the entire Nationalist fleet was wiped
out. Thank the universe that their radar was knocked out, or we would
have been completely wiped out."

"Thank Astro and Major Connel for that, sir," said Tom with the first
smile on his face in days. "I knew none of those green jokers could stop
those two!"

"I've got to report to Commander Walters and the Solar Alliance, Tom.
You take a squad of men and move out. Your job is to find Astro, Roger,
and Major Connel."

"Thank you, sir!" said Tom happily.

       *       *       *       *       *

Down in the canyon, Major Connel had waited as long as he dared for
Astro to return with news of Roger. From his position, the tough
spaceman could not tell how the gigantic space battle had ended until he
saw the Solar Guard troop carriers land on the rim of the canyon above.
Satisfied, he decided that it was time to move.

[Illustration: _The Solar Guard troops landed on the rim of the canyon_]

He stood up, careful not to expose himself, since fighting had broken
out among the workers. Every street, shop, and corner would bring
dangers, and having stayed alive this far, Connel wanted to reach the
Solar Guard forces and continue the fight alongside his friends. Astro
was nowhere in sight when the major moved cautiously down a side
alley, and he was beginning to think that Astro had not escaped from the
base with Roger, when he saw the big cadet suddenly appear around a
corner running as hard as he could. A few seconds later three green-clad
Nationalist guards rounded the corner and pounded after him.

Astro saw Connel and ducked behind an overturned jet car, yelling, "I'm
unarmed! Nail them, Major!"

In a flash Connel dropped to the pavement, and firing from a kneeling
position, cut the Nationalists down expertly. When the last of the enemy
was frozen, Connel rushed to Astro's side.

"What about Roger?" he asked.

"I couldn't reach him," replied Astro. "The sick bay's in the main
administration building and that's so well guarded it would take a full
company to break in."

Connel nodded grimly. "Well, the best thing for us to do is get more men
and then tackle it."

"Yes, sir," said Astro. "I think we'd better head for the canyon walls
on the west. The Marines are pouring down that side."

"Let's go," grunted the major, and led the way down the narrow lane. But
when they reached the open area beyond the repair shops they saw that
the Nationalist guards had thrown up barriers in the streets and were
preparing defenses against frontal assault.

"Maybe we'd better stay where we are, sir," the big cadet said, after
scanning the Nationalist defenses. "We'd never be able to get through
now."

"Ummmh," mused Connel. "You're right. Maybe we can be of more use
striking behind the lines."

Astro grinned. "That's just what I was thinking, sir." He pointed to a
near-by barrier set up in the middle of the street. "We could pick off
the men behind that--"

"Look out!" roared Connel. Behind them, five Nationalist guards had
suddenly appeared. But they were more surprised than Astro and Connel,
and the big cadet took advantage of it by charging right into them.

It was a short but vicious fight. There was no time to aim or fire a
paralo-ray gun. It was a matter of bare knuckles and feet and knees and
shoulders. One by one, the green-clad men were laid low, and finally,
Connel, out of breath, turned to grin at Astro.

"Feel better," he gasped, "than I've felt in weeks!"

Astro grinned. One of Connel's front teeth was missing. Astro leaned
against the wall and pointed to the canyon wall where the columns of
Solar Guard Marines were making their way down into the base under heavy
covering fire from above. "Won't be long now!"

"Come on," said Connel. "They'll probably send scouts out ahead of those
columns and we can make contact with them over there." He pointed toward
a high tangle of barbed wire set up in the middle of the near-by street.
Astro nodded, and exchanging his broken ray gun for one belonging to a
fallen Nationalist, raced to the edge of the barrier with the major.
They crouched and waited for the first contact by the Marines.

"They shouldn't be too long now," said Connel.

"No more than a minute, sir," said Astro, pointing to a running figure
darting from one protective position to another.

"You, there!" shouted a familiar voice. "Behind that barrier!"

Astro glanced at Connel. "Major, that sounds like--!"

"Come out with your hands in the air and nothing will happen to you!"
the voice called again.

"By the stars, you're right!" yelled Connel. "It's Corbett!"

Astro jumped up and yelled, "Tom! Tom! You big space-brained jerk! It's
me, Astro!"

Behind the corner of a house, Tom peered cautiously around the edge and
saw the big cadet scramble over the tangle of barbed wire with Connel
right behind him. Tom held up his hand for the squad in back of him to
hold their fire and stepped out to meet his friends. "Major! Astro!"

The three spacemen pounded each other on the back while the patrol of
Marines watched, grinning. "Where's Roger?" asked Tom finally.

Astro quickly told him of the heavily guarded administration building.

"Is he all right?" asked Tom.

"No one knows," replied Connel. "We haven't been able to get any news of
him at all."

"I'm going after him," said Tom, his jaw set. "No telling what they'll
try to do with him when they see their goose is cooked."

"I'll go with you," said Astro.

"No, you stay here with Major Connel," said Tom. "I think it would be
better if just one tried it, with the rest creating a diversion on the
other side."

"Good idea," said Connel. He turned to the rest of the patrol. "Men,
there's an injured Space Cadet in the sick bay of the main building.
He's the third member of the _Polaris_ unit and has contributed as much
to victory in this battle as any of us. We've got to get him out of the
hands of the Nationalists before something happens to him. Are you
willing to try?"

The Marines agreed without hesitation.

"All right," said Connel, "here's what we'll do." Quickly the major
outlined a plan whereby Tom would sneak through the lines of the
Nationalists around the administration building, while the rest of them
created a diversionary move. It was a daring plan that would require
split-second timing. When they were all agreed as to what they would do
and the time of the operation was set, they moved off toward the
administration building. The rebellion was over, defeated. Yet the
Nationalist leaders were still alive. They were desperate men and Roger
was in their hands. His life meant more to Tom Corbett and Astro than
the smashing victory of the Solar Guard, and they were prepared to give
their own lives to save his.

[Illustration]


CHAPTER 19


"Ready?" asked Connel.

"All set, sir," replied Tom.

"Remember, we'll open up in exactly five minutes and we'll continue to
attack for another seven minutes. That's all the time you have to get
inside, find Roger, and get out again."

"I understand, sir," replied Tom.

"Move out," said Connel, "and spaceman's luck!"

With a last quick glance at Astro who gave him a reassuring nod, Tom
dropped to his knees and crawled out from behind their hidden position.
Dropping flat on his stomach, he inched forward toward the
administration building. All around him ray guns and blasters were
firing with regularity as the columns of Marines advanced from all sides
of the canyon toward the center, mopping up everything in front of them.
The roof of the administration building seemed a solid sheet of fire as
the Nationalist leaders fought back desperately.

He reached the side of the building that was windowless, and scrambled
toward the back door without interference. There he saw five green-clad
men, crouched behind sandbags, protecting the rear entrance. Glancing at
his watch he saw the sweeping hand tick off the last few seconds of his
allotted time. At the exact instant it hit the five-minute mark, there
was a sudden burst of activity at the front of the building. Connel and
the Marine patrol had opened fire in a mock attack. The men guarding the
rear left their barricade and raced into the building to meet the new
assault.

Without a second's hesitation, Tom jumped toward the door. He reached
up, found it unlocked, and then with his ray gun ready, kicked the door
open. He rushed in and dived to the floor, ray gun in his hand, ready to
freeze anything or anyone in sight.

The hall was empty. In the front, the firing continued and the halls of
the building echoed loudly with the frantic commands of the defenders.
Gliding along the near wall, Tom moved slowly forward. Before him, a
door was ajar and he eased toward it. On tiptoe the curly-haired cadet
inched around the edge of the door and glanced inside. He saw a
Nationalist guard on his hands and knees loading empty shock rifles. Tom
quickly stepped inside and jammed his gun in the man's back. "Freeze!"
he said between his teeth.

The trooper tensed, then relaxed, and slowly raised his hands.

"Where's the sick bay?" demanded Tom.

"On the second floor, at the end of the hall."

"Is that where you're keeping Cadet Manning?" demanded Tom.

"Yes," replied the man. "He's--"

Tom fired before the trooper could finish. It was rough, but he knew he
had to act swiftly if he was to help Roger. The trooper was frozen in
his kneeling position, and Tom scooped up a loaded shock rifle before
slipping back into the hall. It was still empty. The firing outside
seemed to be increasing.

He located the stairs, and after a quick but careful check, started up,
heart pounding, guns ready. On the second floor he glanced up and down
the hall, and jumped back into the stair well quickly. Firing from an
open window, three troopers were between him and the only door at the
end of the hall. Not sure if Roger was in that room or not, Tom had to
make sure by looking. And the only way he could do that was to eliminate
the men in his way. He dropped to one knee and took careful aim with the
ray pistol. It would be tricky at such long range, but should the
paralo-ray fail, the cadet was prepared to use the shock rifle. He
fired, and for a breathless second waited for the effects of the ray on
the troopers. Then he saw the men go rigid and he smiled. Three hundred
feet with a ray pistol was very fancy shooting!

He raced for the door. As he entered the room, he saw a figure stretched
out on the floor. He stopped still, cold fear clutching at his heart.

"Roger!" he called. The blond-haired cadet didn't move. Tom jumped to
his unit mate's side and dropped to one knee beside him. It was dark in
the room and he couldn't see very well, but there was no need for light
when he felt Roger's pulse.

"Frozen, by the stars!" he exclaimed. He stepped back, flipped the
neutralizer switch on his ray gun, and fired a short burst. Almost
immediately Roger groaned, blinked his eyes, and sat up.

"Roger! Are you all right?" asked Tom.

"Yeah--sure. I'm O.K.," mumbled his unit mate. "Those dirty space rats.
They didn't know what to do with me when the Marines landed, so they
froze me. They were scared to kill me. Afraid of reprisals."

"They sure used their heads that time," said Tom with a grin. "How's
your back?"

"Fine. I just wrenched it a little. It's better now. But never mind me.
What's going on? Where's Astro and Major Connel? And how did you get
here?"

Tom gave him a quick run-down on everything that had happened,
concluding with, "Major Connel and Astro, with a patrol of Solar Guard
Marines, are outside now drawing the Nationalist fire. Time's running
out on us fast. Think you can walk?"

"Spaceboy," replied Roger, "to get out of this place I'd crawl on my
hands and knees!"

"Then come on!" Tom gave the shock rifle to his unit mate and stepped
back into the hall. It was quiet. Tom waved at Roger to follow and
slipped down the hall toward the stairs. Outside, the Marine patrol
continued firing, never letting up for a second. The two boys reached
the stairs and had started down when Tom grabbed Roger by the arm.
"There's someone moving around down there!"

They hugged the wall and held their breath. Tom glanced at his watch.
Only forty-five seconds to go before the Marines would stop firing and
retire. They had to get out of the building!

"We'll have to take a chance, Roger," murmured Tom. "We'll try to rush
them and fight our way out."

"Don't bother!" said a harsh voice behind them. The two cadets spun
around and looked back toward the second floor. Standing at the top of
the stairs, Rex Sinclair scowled down at them, ray guns in each hand,
leveled at the two cadets.

"By the craters of Luna!" cried Roger. "You!"

"That's one of the things I forgot to tell you, Roger," said Tom wryly.
"Sinclair belongs to this outfit too!"

"Belongs!" roared Roger. "Look at that white uniform he's wearing! This
yellow rat is Lactu, the head of the whole Nationalist movement!"

Tom gaped at the white-clad figure at the head of the stairs. "The
leader!" he gasped.

"Quite right, Corbett," replied Sinclair quietly. "And if it hadn't been
for three nosy cadets, I would have been the leader of the whole planet.
But it's finished now. All that is left for me is escape. And you two
are going to help me do just that!"

Roger suddenly dropped to one knee and leveled the blaster. But the
Nationalist leader was too quick. His paralo-ray crackled and Roger was
frozen solid.

"Why, you--!" roared Tom.

"Drop your gun, Corbett," warned Sinclair, "and take that blaster away
from him."

"I'll get you, Sinclair," said Tom through clenched teeth, "and when I
do--"

"Stop the talk and get busy!" snapped Sinclair.

Tom took the blaster out of Roger's paralyzed hands and dropped it on
the floor. Still holding one ray gun on Tom, Sinclair flipped on the
neutralizer of the other gun and released Roger again.

"Now get moving down those stairs!" ordered Sinclair. "One more funny
move out of either of you and I'll do more than just freeze you."

"What are you going to do with us?" asked Roger.

"As I said, you are going to help me escape. This time the Solar Guard
has won. But there are other planets, other people who need strong
leadership and who like to put on uniforms and play soldier. People will
always find reason to rebel against authority, and I will be there to
channel their frustrations into my own plans. Perhaps it will be Mars.
Or Ganymede. Or even Titan. Another name, another plan, and once again
the Solar Guard will have to fight me. Only next time, I assure you, it
is I who will win!"

"There won't be any next time," growled Roger. "You're washed up now.
This base is swarming with Marines. How do you think you're going to get
out of here?"

"You shall see, my friend. You shall see!"

Sinclair motioned them toward a door on the ground floor. "Open it!"
demanded Sinclair. Tom opened it and stepped inside. It was a cleaner's
closet, crammed with old-fashioned mops and pails and dirty rags.
Sinclair pushed Roger inside and was about to follow when several
green-clad guards came running down the hall toward them.

"Lactu! Lactu!" they shouted frantically. "They're pouring into the
base! The Solar Guard--they've got us surrounded!"

"Keep fighting!" snapped Sinclair. "Don't surrender! Inflict as much
damage as possible!"

"Where--where are you going?" asked one of the men, looking at the
closet speculatively.

"Never mind me!" barked Sinclair. "Do as I tell you. Fight back!"

"It looks like we're losing a leader," observed another of the men
slowly. "You wouldn't be running out on us, would you, Lactu?"

Sinclair fired three quick blasts from the ray guns, freezing the men
solid, and then turned back to Tom and Roger. "Stay in that closet and
do as I tell you."

Inside the closet, Sinclair kicked a pail out of the way and barked,
"Remove the loose plank in the floor and drop it on the floor."

Tom felt around until he found the loose board and lifted it up.

"What's down there?" asked Roger.

"You'll see," said Sinclair. "Now step back, both of you!"

Tom and Roger backed up and watched while Sinclair bent over the hole
in the floor. He felt around inside with one hand and appeared to turn
something. Suddenly the wall opposite the two cadets slid back to reveal
a narrow flight of stairs leading down. Sinclair motioned with his gun
again. "Get going, both of you."

Tom stepped forward, followed by Roger, and they started down the
stairs. At the bottom they found themselves in a narrow tunnel about
four hundred feet underground. The floor of the tunnel slanted downward
sharply.

[Illustration]

"At the end of this tunnel," announced Sinclair, "is a clearing and in
that clearing is a spaceship. It is nearly three miles from the canyon.
By the time the Solar Guard learns of my absence, we shall be lost in
space."

"We?" asked Tom. "You're taking us with you?"

"But of course," said Sinclair. "How else would I assure myself that
the Solar Guard will not harm me unless I take two of their most honored
Space Cadets with me?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's been fifteen minutes," announced Connel, "and they haven't come
out yet. There's only one thing to do. Take that building and find out
what's happened."

The major was crouched behind a wrecked jet car, staring at the
administration building.

"I can get that Marine captain over to our left to co-ordinate an attack
with us, sir," suggested Astro.

"It's risky," said Connel. "They still have a lot of men in there. But
if we wait for another column to reach us, it might be too late. All
right, Astro, tell him we're attacking in ten minutes and ask him to
give us all the help he can."

"Yes, sir," replied Astro, and flopped to the ground to worm his way
toward the head of the Marine column on the left.

It took the cadet nearly five minutes to cover the hundred yards between
the two Solar Guard positions. Several times the firing became so heavy
that the cadet was forced to remain still on the ground while rifle and
ray-gun fire crackled over his head. He made it finally, several Marines
coming out to help him over the top of the barrier. Gasping for breath,
the big cadet asked to see the commanding officer.

A grimy, tired-looking officer turned and walked over to the cadet.

"Astro!"

"Captain Strong!"

"Where's Tom and Roger and Major Connel?" demanded Strong.

Astro told the captain of Tom's attempt to save Roger and that nothing
had been heard from him since. "Major Connel wants us to attack
together," Astro continued. "He's jumping off in four minutes!"

"Right!" snapped Strong. He turned to a young Solar Guard officer
waiting respectfully near by. "You take them in, Ferris. Full frontal
attack. Don't use blasters unless you have to. Take as many prisoners as
possible."

"Very well, sir," replied the lieutenant.

"I'll go back to the other position with Cadet Astro. Start your attack
as soon as you see Major Connel and his men go in."

"Got it, sir," said the lieutenant.

Strong and Astro made their way back to Connel's position quickly, and
after a brief but hearty handclasp, the two officers began plotting the
last assault against the Nationalists' stronghold. While other Marine
columns were wiping up small groups of rebels fighting from disabled
spaceships, repair shops, and other buildings, Strong's column had been
driving straight for the heart of the base. The administration building
was the last barrier between them and complete victory over the rebels.

Strong and Connel spoke briefly of Tom and Roger, neither wanting to
voice his inner fears in front of Astro. The Nationalists previously had
shown little regard for human life. Now, with their backs to the wall,
Connel and Strong knew that if Tom and Roger were captured, they might
be used as hostages to ensure safe passage for some of the rebels.

"Let's go," said Connel finally. "Tom and Roger will be expecting us."
He forced himself to grin at Astro, but the giant cadet turned and faced
the building grimly. Connel lifted his hand, took a last look up and
down the line of waiting Marines, then brought his hand down quickly.
"Over the top. Spaceman's luck!" he shouted.

The Marines vaulted over the top of their defense position and charged
madly toward the building, all guns blazing. The Nationalists returned
the fire, and for the first few seconds it seemed that the world had
suddenly gone mad. Strong found himself shouting, running, and firing in
a red haze. Astro was roaring at the top of his lungs, and Connel just
charged ahead blindly. Marines began to drop on all sides, cut down by
the withering fire. Then, when it appeared that they would have to fall
back, the main column, led by the Solar Guard lieutenant, broke through
the last barricade and swarmed into the building.

Five minutes later the battle was over. The last remnants of the
Nationalists had been defeated and the green-clad troopers were herded
into the streets like cattle. Strong and Connel, followed by Astro,
charged through the building like wild bulls searching for Tom and
Roger.

"No sign of them," said Strong finally. "They must have slipped out
somehow."

"No!" roared Connel. "They've been taken out of here as hostages. I'll
bet my life on that. There must be a secret way out of here!"

"Come on," said Strong. "Let's find it." Suddenly he stopped. "Look!
Those three troopers outside that door! They're frozen! Let's have a
look there first!"

They rushed over to the closet where the three Nationalists had been
frozen by Sinclair.

Strong stopped and gasped. "By the craters of Luna, it's Sharkey!"

"Sharkey? Who's that?" asked Astro.

"Supposed to be the leader of the Nationalists," said Connel.

Strong quickly released Sharkey from the paralo-ray effects and the man
shuddered so violently from the reaction that Astro had to grab him to
keep him from falling down.

"Where are Corbett and Manning?" demanded Connel.

"Lactu ... he took them both in there ... through a secret passageway."
Sharkey pointed to the closet with a trembling finger.

Strong jumped for the closet door and jerked it open. He saw the open
wall and the stairs leading down. "Come on! This way!"

Connel ran wildly into the closet, followed by Astro. Suddenly the big
cadet stopped, turned, and fired point-blank at the figurehead of the
Nationalist rebellion. Sharkey once again grew rigid.

The two Solar Guard officers raced down the stairs into the tunnel and
ran headlong through the darkness. Time was precious now. I am sorry you
forgot the bottles of acidulated drops, but you can send them in
the next hamper as soon as you like.

There are only sixty-two days to the holidays--1688 hours including
nights!

Isn't that jolly!

And now, my dear Mother, I want to write most seriously to you upon
a matter of great importance.

You know I have been doing "Music" as an "extra." Well, it does not
agree with me. The fact is, it is an hour every week in my playtime,
when the Doctor says it is good for my health that I should be enjoying
myself. And "Music" is an extra, like "Sausages for breakfast."
And, of course, one has to think of all that.

How hard dear Papa works to get his living; and, of course, I
oughtn't to waste anything, ought I?

Well, I really think I could give up "Music." After all, it's awful
rot, and only fit for a pack of girls! So this is the great favour
I'm going to ask you--and mind you say "Yes." May I give up "Music,"
and take up "Sausages for breakfast" instead?

Always your most loving Son, BOBBY.

* * * * *

IF THE FASHION SPREADS.

SCENE--_Interior of a Fashionable Church. The Incumbent has read the
Banns of Marriage between JOHN PLANTAGENET DE SMITH and MARY
STUART DE BROWN, and asks the usual question._
_Counsel_ (_rising in pew_). I beg to object.

_Incumbent_ (_surprised, but self-possessed_). You will be good enough
to communicate with us in the Vestry, at the end of the service,

_Counsel_. But I prefer to raise my objections at once. I may say,
Reverend Sir, that I am here on behalf of Mr. JOHN PLANTAGENET DE SMITH,
who is my client.

I am instructed by the Messrs. CAPIAS of Bedford Row, and I contend that
since the Members of the London County Council have instructed counsel
to appear on their behalf at meetings in which they themselves act
judicially, the right extends to Places of Public Worship.
_Incumbent_. Perhaps we might hear you later. If you were kind
enough to raise your objections in the Vestry, it would be--
_Counsel_ (_interrupting_).Unfortunately they learned too late and were sent here to
dig underground pits for my spaceships and storage dumps."

The small column of three marched across the floor of the cave toward
another small tunnel on the opposite side. The slaves were absolutely
still, and the guards smiled a greeting at their leader when he passed
them.

Sinclair ignored them all. "Beyond that tunnel," he continued, pointing
to the small opening ahead of them, "there is a spaceship. We will board
that ship and blast off. The three of us. Where we will go, I haven't
decided yet. Perhaps a long trip into deep space until the Solar Guard
has forgotten about you and me and the Nationalists. Then we will
return, as I said before, to Mars, or perhaps Ganymede, and I will start
all over again."

"You're mad!" said Tom through clenched teeth. "Crazy as a space bug!"

"We shall see, Corbett. We shall see!"

Suddenly Roger broke away and raced toward the mass of slaves. He
shouted wildly, "Get the guards! The Nationalists are beaten! The base
in the canyon has been destroyed! Hurry! Rebel!"

The emaciated men milled around the cadet, all asking questions at once.

Sinclair signaled to the guards. "Shoot him down!" Four guards took
careful aim.

"Roger! Look out!" warned Tom.

Roger whirled around in time to see the guards about to fire. He dived
for a mound of dirt and hid behind it. The energy shock waves licked at
the sand where he had stood a second before. Roger got up and ran for
better cover, the guards continuing to fire at him. Then, around the
cadet, the slave workers began to come alive. Some hurled stones at the
guards, others began climbing up the sides to the ledges where the
guards stood. Taking in the situation at a glance, Sinclair shoved the
ray gun in Tom's back and snarled, "Get going!"

The young cadet had no alternative. He turned and marched hurriedly
across the floor toward the small tunnel ahead of him. Several slave
workers tried to attack Sinclair, but in their weakened condition, they
were no match for the alert Nationalist leader who froze them instantly
with his paralo-ray gun.

Roger saw Tom heading for the tunnel and made a sudden dash for
Sinclair. But the rebel leader heard the pounding of footsteps and
turned to fire at Roger as the cadet sailed through the air in a flying
tackle. The jolting ray hit him squarely and he landed on the ground
with a thud a few feet from Sinclair, completely immobilized again.

Tom tried to seize the momentary advantage, but once again Sinclair was
quicker and forced Tom back into the small opening of the tunnel.

Around them, the slave workers were being whipped into a frenzy after
months of stored-up hatred for their guards. Hundreds of them were
climbing up toward the guards' posts, unmindful of the deadly fire
pouring down on them.

"Get in there quick!" demanded Sinclair. He shoved Tom through the small
opening, and after a quick glance over his shoulder at the surging
slaves, followed the cadet.

Sinclair flashed a light ahead of them and Tom saw the reflection of a
bright surface. In the distance he recognized the outlines of a
spaceship.

"Keep moving!" ordered Sinclair. "You're my protection in getting out of
here, and if I have to freeze you and carry you aboard, that's just what
I'll do! Now get moving!"

Tom walked to the air lock of the ship, Sinclair right in back of him.
The rebel leader pressed an outside button in the ship's stabilizer fin
and the port swung open slowly. "Get in!" growled Sinclair.

Tom stepped into the ship and waited. Sinclair climbed in in back of him
and closed the air lock.

"Through that hatch," said Sinclair, motioning toward the iron ladder,
"and keep your hands in the air."

"How do you think you're going to get through the Solar Guard fleet
that's standing off above the canyon?" asked Tom casually. "As soon as
they see this ship blast off, you'll have a hundred atomic war heads
blasting after you!"

"Not as long as I have you!" sneered Sinclair. "You're my protection!"

"You're wrong," said Tom. "They'll open fire, anyway."

"That's the chance I've got to take," said Sinclair. "Now climb up to
the control deck and get on the audioceiver. You're going to tell them
you're aboard!"

--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS., Printed Matter,
Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no case be returned,
not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed Envelope, Cover,
or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exceptionIf, after three warnings, Sinclair didn't brake jets and
bring his ship to a stop, he would be blasted out of space. He had to do
something.

"Where's the communicator?" asked Tom.

"Over by the radar scanner." Sinclair eyed him suspiciously. "Remember,
Corbett, your life depends on this as much as mine. If you don't
convince them you're worth saving by letting me get away, you're a dead
pigeon!"

"You don't have to tell me," said Tom. "I know when I'm licked."

Sinclair took his position in the pilot's chair, facing the control
panel. For a brief moment his back was to Tom as he bent over to turn on
the generators. Tom took a deep breath and lurched across the deck. But
Sinclair turned and saw him coming, and jerked up the ray gun. He wasn't
able to get clear in time. Tom's fingers circled the barrel of the gun
as Sinclair fired. The barrel grew hot as Sinclair fired repeatedly.
Tom's fingers were beginning to blister under the intense heat, but he
held on. With his other hand he reached up for the rebel's throat.
Sinclair grabbed his wrist and, locked together, they rolled around on
the deck.

[Illustration: _Sinclair wasn't able to get clear in time_]

Sinclair continued to fire the ray gun and Tom's fingers were burning
with pain from the heat. Suddenly the cadet let go the gun, spun around,
and jerked Sinclair off balance. He swung his free hand as hard as he
could into the rebel's stomach. Sinclair doubled over and staggered
back, dropping the gun. Tom was on top of him like a shot, pounding
straight, jolting rights and lefts to the man's head and stomach. But
Sinclair was tough. He twisted around, and quick as a cat, jumped to his
feet. Then, stepping in, he rapped a solid right to Tom's jaw. The cadet
reeled back, nearly falling to the deck. Sinclair was in on top of him
in a flash, pounding his head and body with vicious smashing blows.

Tom fell to the floor under the savagery of the rebel leader's attack.
Sinclair lifted his foot to kick the cadet as Tom's fingers tightened
around the barrel of the discarded ray gun. He brought it up sharply
against the planter's shin and he staggered back in pain. Tom took
careful aim. He fired the gun. Nothing happened. The gun was empty.

A supersedeas is a writ, or order, to suspend the powers of an officer,
or to stay--that is, stop--action under another writ.

Quo warranto is a Latin phrase, the English of which is by what
warrant or authority.

       In law it means a writ brought before a court to inquire by what
authority a person or corporation exercises certain powers.

For example, if a person assume the duties or work of a public office,
and it is believed that he has no legal right to the office,
proceedings in quo warranto may be taken against him.

Certiorari is a writ from a superior court in a certain case, ordering
the removal of the case from an inferior court, so that more speedy
justice may be obtained or that errors may be corrected.

Each individual rebel would
be dealt with under special court proceedings to be established by Solar
Alliance decree later.

"There are still some things I don't understand," said Astro. "How did
they know you were going to investigate them in the first place?"

"After our meeting with Commander Walters," said Connel, "we sent a
special coded message to the Solar Alliance Delegate here on Venus. His
secretary intercepted the message, used stolen priorities for himself
and two assistants to get to Earth and back on an express space liner
without being missed."

"The secretary!" shouted Tom. "That's the same fellow I saw in Atom City
when we were bumped out of our seats on the _Venus Lark_!"

Roger looked up at Tom with a scowl. "A fine time to remember!"

Strong grinned. "We discovered him, Tom, when that attempt was made to
kidnap you by the cab driver. We also picked up the owner of the
pawnshop."

"The most amazing thing about this space joker, Sinclair," commented
Connel, "was the way he had everyone fooled. I couldn't figure out how
he was able to get around so quickly until I learned about those
buildings."

"What buildings?" asked Tom, suddenly remembering how the rebel leader
had disappeared so quickly and quietly when he was being held captive
with Mr. and Mrs. Hill in the Sinclair home.

"Every one of the important members of the organization, the Division
Chiefs, they called themselves, had a small shack on his property near
the edge of the jungle. It was nothing more than a covering for a shaft
that led to a tunnel, which, in turn, led to other tunnels under the
jungle and eventually connected with one leading right into the base."

"You mean," said Astro, "they have underground tunnels all through the
jungle?"

"That's right," asserted Connel. "If they had been prepared for our
attack, they could have beaten the pants off us. Not only in space, but
on the ground. They could have run circles around us in those tunnels. I
got suspicious when I found a hut at the Sharkey place with no windows
in it."

"Say, remember the time Sinclair barked at me for going near that shack
on his place when we first arrived?" said Roger.

Connel grinned. "I'll bet you a plugged credit that if you had opened
that door you'd have been frozen stiffer than a snowman on Pluto."

"Well, anyhow," said Tom happily, "we got what we came after."

"What was that?" asked Strong.

"A tyrannosaurus!" replied the curly-haired cadet.

"And that's another thing," said Connel. "That tyrannosaurus we killed
was a pet of the Nationalists. I don't mean a household pet, but it
fitted into their plans nicely. The tyranno's lair was near the top of
that canyon. Any time a stray hunter came along, the tyrannosaurus would
scare him away. So when you three came along and said you were
deliberately hunting for a tyrannosaurus, they got worried."

"Worried?" asked Roger. "Why?"

"They thought you were actually hunting or investigating them, and when
I started nosing around, they were sure. That's why Sinclair ordered his
boys to burn down his plantation--to try to throw us off the track. So
you see," Connel concluded, "your summer leave really started the ball
rolling against them."

"Summer leave!" shouted Roger. "What day is it?"

We do not wish any hole-and-corner agitation.

I am instructed by my client to say, that he courts the fullest
investigation.

Now, the facts are these:--
[_Gives the facts, and ends an eloquent speech with a magnificent
peroration._ 
_Incumbent_.We won't have any time for
fun!"

"Fun!" snorted Connel. "Fun is for little boys. You three space-brained,
rocket-headed idiots are spacemen!"

[Illustration]

    +--------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                                                              |
    |                      Transcriber's Note                      |
    |                                                              |
    | One instance of "nearby" was changed to "near-by" to conform |
    |        with the hyphenation in the rest of the text.         |
    |                                                              |
    |             The following typos were corrected:              |
    |                                                              |
    |                    Get         "Get                          |
    |                    it          It                            |
    |                    get's       gets                          |
    |                    surpressed  suppressed                    |
    |                    order       ordered                       |
    |                                                              |
    +--------------------------------------------------------------+