Produced by Elaine Walker, Greg Weeks, Jason Isbell and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Transcriber's Notes:
Obvious printer errors have been corrected (including switched lines).
Ellipses have been standardised. Otherwise the text is as printed.


_THE
DEFIANT
AGENTS_


_By Andre Norton_

  RIDE PROUD, REBEL!
  STORM OVER WARLOCK
  GALACTIC DERELICT
  THE TIME TRADERS
  STAR BORN
  YANKEE PRIVATEER
  THE STARS ARE OURS!

_Edited by Andre Norton_

  SPACE PIONEERS
  SPACE SERVICE


_THE
DEFIANT
AGENTS_

_BY
ANDRE
NORTON_

[Illustration]

THE WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY

CLEVELAND AND NEW YORK


_Published by_ The World Publishing Company
2231 West 110th Street, Cleveland 2, Ohio

_Published simultaneously in Canada by_
Nelson, Foster & Scott Ltd.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 62-9063


FIRST EDITION

WP262

Copyright © 1962 by Andre Norton
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any form without written permission from the publisher,
except for brief passages included in a review appearing in
a newspaper or magazine. Printed in the United States of America.


_FOR P. SCHUYLER MILLER
who expressed a wish
for some Apache colonists,
and CHARLES F. KELLEY
who has a liking
for "time agent" tales._


_THE DEFIANT AGENTS_


1


No windows broke any of the four plain walls of the office; there was no
focus of outer-world sunlight on the desk there. Yet the five disks set
out on its surface appeared to glow--perhaps the heat of the mischief
they could cause ... had caused ... blazed in them.

But fanciful imaginings did not cushion or veil cold, hard fact. Dr.
Gordon Ashe, one of the four men peering unhappily at the display, shook
his head slightly as if to free his mind of such cobwebs.

His neighbor to the right, Colonel Kelgarries, leaned forward to ask
harshly: "No chance of a mistake?"

"You saw the detector." The thin gray string of a man behind the desk
answered with chill precision. "No, no possible mistake. These five have
definitely been snooped."

"And two choices among them," Ashe murmured. That was the important
point now.

"I thought these were under maximum security," Kelgarries challenged the
gray man.

Florian Waldour's remote expression did not change. "Every possible
precaution was in force. There was a sleeper--a hidden
agent--planted----"

"Who?" Kelgarries demanded.

Ashe glanced around at his three companions--Kelgarries, colonel in
command of one sector of Project Star, Florian Waldour, the security
head on the station, Dr. James Ruthven....

"Camdon!" he said, hardly able to believe this answer to which logic had
led him.

Waldour nodded.

For the first time since he had known and worked with Kelgarries Ashe
saw him display open astonishment.

"Camdon? But he was sent us by--" The colonel's eyes narrowed. "He must
have been sent.... There were too many cross checks to fake that!"

"Oh, he was sent, all right." For the first time there was a note of
emotion in Waldour's voice. "He was a sleeper, a very deep sleeper. They
must have planted him a full twenty-five or thirty years ago. He's been
just what he claimed to be as long as that."

"Well, he certainly was worth their time and trouble, wasn't he?" James
Ruthven's voice was a growling rumble. He sucked in thick lips,
continuing to stare at the disks. "How long ago were these snooped?"

Ashe's thoughts turned swiftly from the enormity of the betrayal to that
important point. The time element--that was the primary concern now that
the damage was done, and they knew it.

"That's one thing we don't know." Waldour's reply came slowly as if he
hated the admission.

"We'll be safer, then, if we presume the very earliest period."
Ruthven's statement was as ruthless in its implications as the shock
they had had when Waldour announced the disaster.

"Eighteen months ago?" Ashe protested.

But Ruthven was nodding. "Camdon was in on this from the very first.
We've had the tapes in and out for study all that time, and the new
detector against snooping was not put in service until two weeks ago.
This case came up on the first checking round, didn't it?" he asked
Waldour.

"First check," the security man agreed. "Camdon left the base six days
ago. But he has been in and out on his liaison duties from the first."

"He had to go through those search points every time," Kelgarries
protested. "Thought nothing could get through those." The colonel
brightened. "Maybe he got his snooper films and then couldn't take them
off base. Have his quarters been turned out?"

Waldour's lips lifted in a grimace of exasperation. "Please, Colonel,"
he said wearily, "this is not a kindergarten exercise. In confirmation
of his success, listen...." He touched a button on his desk and out of
the air came the emotionless chant of a newscaster.

"Fears for the safety of Lassiter Camdon, space expediter for the
Western Conference Space Council, have been confirmed by the discovery
of burned wreckage in the mountains. Mr. Camdon was returning from a
mission to the Star Laboratory when his plane lost contact with Ragnor
Field. Reports of a storm in that vicinity immediately raised concern--"
Waldour snapped off the voice.

"True--or a cover for his escape?" Kelgarries wondered aloud.

"Could be either. They may have deliberately written him off when they
had all they wanted," Waldour acknowledged. "But to get back to our
troubles--Dr. Ruthven is right to assume the worst. I believe we can
only insure the recovery of our project by thinking that these tapes
were snooped anywhere from eighteen months ago to last week. And we must
work accordingly!"

There was silence in the room as they all considered that. Ashe slipped
down in his chair, his thoughts enmeshed in memories. First there had
been Operation Retrograde, when specially trained "time agents" had
shuttled back and forth in history, striving to locate and track down
the mysterious source of alien knowledge which the eastern Communistic
nations had suddenly begun to use.

Ashe himself and a younger partner, Ross Murdock, had been part of the
final action which had solved the mystery, having traced that source of
knowledge not to an earlier and forgotten Terran civilization but to
wrecked spaceships from an eon-old galactic empire--an empire which had
flourished when glacial ice covered most of Europe and northern America
and Terrans were cave-dwelling primitives. Murdock, trapped by the Reds
in one of those wrecked ships, had inadvertently summoned its original
owners, who had descended to trace--through the Russian time
stations--the looters of their wrecks, destroying the whole Red
time-travel system.

But the aliens had not chanced on the parallel western system. And a
year later that had been put into Project Folsom One. Again Ashe,
Murdock, and a newcomer, the Apache Travis Fox, had gone back into time
to the Arizona of the Folsom hunters, discovering what they wanted--two
ships, one wrecked, the other intact. And when the full efforts of the
project had been centered on bringing the intact ship back into the
present, chance had triggered controls set by the dead alien commander.
A party of four, Ashe, Murdock, Fox, and a technician, had then made an
involuntary voyage into space, touching three worlds on which the
galactic civilization of the far past was now marked only by ruins.

Voyage tape fed into the controls of the ship had taken the men, and,
when rewound, had--by a miracle--returned them to Terra with a cargo of
similar tapes found in a building on a world which might have been the
central capital for a government comprised not of countries or of worlds
but of solar systems. Tapes--each one the key to another planet.

And that ancient galactic knowledge was treasure such as the Terrans had
never dreamed of possessing, though there were the attendant fears that
such discoveries could be weapons in enemy hands. There had been an
enforced sharing with other nations of tapes chosen at random at a great
drawing. And each nation secretly remained convinced that, in spite of
the untold riches it might hold as a result of chance, its rivals had
done better. Right at this moment, Ashe did not in the least doubt,
there were agents of his own party intent on accomplishing at the Red
project just what Camdon had done there. However, that did not help in
solving their present dilemma concerning Operation Cochise, one part of
their project, but perhaps the most important now.

Some of the tapes were duds, either too damaged to be useful, or set for
worlds hostile to Terrans lacking the equipment the earlier
star-traveling race had had at its command. Of the five tapes they now
knew had been snooped, three would be useless to the enemy.

But one of the remaining two.... Ashe frowned. One was the goal toward
which they had been working feverishly for a full twelve months. To
plant a colony across the gulf of space--a successful colony--later to
be used as a steppingstone to other worlds....

"So we have to move faster." Ruthven's comment reached Ashe through his
stream of memories.

"I thought you required at least three more months to conclude personnel
training," Waldour observed.

Ruthven lifted a fat hand, running the nail of a broad thumb back and
forth across his lower lip in a habitual gesture Ashe had learned to
mistrust. As the latter stiffened, bracing for a battle of wills, he saw
Kelgarries come alert too. At least the colonel more often than not was
ready to counter Ruthven's demands.

"We test and we test," said the fat man. "Always we test. We move like
turtles when it would be better to race like greyhounds. There is such a
thing as overcaution, as I have said from the first. One would
think"--his accusing glance included Ashe and Kelgarries--"that there
had never been any improvising in this project, that all had always been
done by the book. I say that this is the time we must take the big
gamble, or else we may find we have been outbid for space entirely. Let
those others discover even one alien installation they can master and--"
his thumb shifted from his lip, grinding down on the desk top as if it
were crushing some venturesome but entirely unimportant insect--"and we
are finished before we really begin."

There were a number of men in the project who would agree with that,
Ashe knew. And a greater number in the country and conference at large.
The public was used to reckless gambles which paid off, and there had
been enough of those in the past to give an impressive argument for
that point of view. But Ashe, himself, could not agree to a speed-up. He
had been out among the stars, shaved disaster too closely because the
proper training had not been given.

"I shall report that I advise a take-off within a week," Ruthven was
continuing. "To the council I shall say that--"

"And I do not agree!" Ashe cut in. He glanced at Kelgarries for the
quick backing he expected, but instead there was a lengthening moment of
silence. Then the colonel spread out his hands and said sullenly:

"I don't agree either, but I don't have the final say-so. Ashe, what
would be needed to speed up any take-off?"

It was Ruthven who replied. "We can use the Redax, as I have said from
the start."

Ashe straightened, his mouth tight, his eyes hard and angry.

"And I'll protest that ... to the council! Man, we're dealing with human
beings--selected volunteers, men who trust us--not with laboratory
animals!"

Ruthven's thick lips pouted into what was close to a smile of derision.
"Always the sentimentalists, you experts in the past! Tell me, Dr. Ashe,
were you always so thoughtful of your men when you sent agents back into
time? And certainly a voyage into space is less a risk than time travel.
These volunteers know what they have signed for. They will be ready----"

"Then you propose telling them about the use of Redax--what it does to a
man's mind?" countered Ashe.

"Certainly. They will receive all necessary instructions."

Ashe was not satisfied and he would have spoken again, but Kelgarries
interrupted:

"If it comes to that, none of us here has any right to make final
decisions. Waldour has already sent in his report about the snoop. We'll
have to await orders from the council."

Ruthven levered himself out of his chair, his solid bulk stretching his
uniform coveralls. "That is correct, Colonel. In the meantime I would
suggest we all check to see what can be done to speed up each one's
portion of labor." Without another word, he tramped to the door.

Waldour eyed the other two with mounting impatience. It was plain he had
work to do and wanted them to leave. But Ashe was reluctant. He had a
feeling that matters were slipping out of his control, that he was about
to face a crisis which was somehow worse than just a major security
leak. Was the enemy always on the other side of the world? Or could he
wear the same uniform, even share the same goals?

In the outer corridor he still hesitated, and Kelgarries, a step or so
in advance, looked back over his shoulder impatiently.

"There's no use fighting--our hands are tied." His words were slurred,
almost as if he wanted to disown them.

"Then you'll agree to use the Redax?" For the second time within the
hour Ashe felt as if he had taken a step only to have firm earth turn
into slippery, shifting sand underfoot.

"It isn't a matter of my agreeing. It may be a matter of getting through
or not getting through--now. If they've had eighteen months, or even
twelve...!" The colonel's fingers balled into a fist. "And _they_ won't
be delayed by any humanitarian reasoning----"

"Then you believe Ruthven will win the council's approval?"

"When you are dealing with frightened men, you're talking to ears closed
to anything but what they want to hear. After all, we can't prove that
the Redax will be harmful."

"But we've only used it under rigidly controlled conditions. To speed up
the process would mean a total disregard of those controls. Snapping a
party of men and women back into their racial past and holding them
there for too long a period...." Ashe shook his head.

"You have been in Operation Retrograde from the start, and we've been
remarkably successful----"

"Operating in a different way, educating picked men to return to certain
points in history where their particular temperaments and
characteristics fitted the roles they were selected to play, yes. And
even then we had our percentage of failures. But to try this--returning
people not physically into time, but _mentally and emotionally_ into
prototypes of their ancestors--that's something else again. The Apaches
have volunteered, and they've been passed by the psychologists and the
testers. But they're Americans of today, not tribal nomads of two or
three hundred years ago. If you break down some barriers, you might just
end up breaking them all."

Kelgarries was scowling. "You mean--they might revert utterly, have no
contact with the present at all?"

"That's just what I do mean. Education and training, yes, but full
awakening of racial memories, no. The two branches of conditioning
should go slowly and hand in hand, otherwise--real trouble!"

"Only we no longer have the time to go slow. I'm certain Ruthven will be
able to push this through--with Waldour's report to back him."

"Then we'll have to warn Fox and the rest. They must be given a choice
in the matter."

"Ruthven said that would be done." The colonel did not sound convinced
of that.

Ashe snorted. "If I hear him telling them, I'll believe it!"

"I wonder whether we can...."

Ashe half turned and frowned at the colonel. "What do you mean?"

"You said yourself that we had our failures in time travel. We expected
those, accepted them, even when they hurt. When we asked for volunteers
for this project we had to make them understand that there was a heavy
element of risk involved. Three teams of recruits--the Eskimos from
Point Barren, the Apaches, and the Islanders--all picked because their
people had a high survival rating in the past, to be colonists on widely
different types of planets. Well, the Eskimos and the Islanders aren't
matched to any of the worlds on those snooped tapes, but Topaz is
waiting for the Apaches. And we may have to move them in there in a
hurry. It's a rotten gamble any way you see it!"

"I'll appeal directly to the council."

Kelgarries shrugged. "All right. You have my backing."

"But you believe such an effort hopeless?"

"You know the red-tape merchants. You'll have to move fast if you want
to beat Ruthven. He's probably on a straight line now to Stanton,
Reese, and Margate. This is what he has been waiting for!"

"There are the news syndicates; public opinion would back us----"

"You don't mean that, of course." Kelgarries was suddenly coldly remote.

Ashe flushed under the heavy brown which overlay his regular features.
To threaten a silence break was near blasphemy here. He ran both hands
down the fabric covering his thighs as if to rub away some soil on his
palms.

"No," he replied heavily, his voice dull. "I guess I don't. I'll contact
Hough and hope for the best."

"Meanwhile," Kelgarries spoke briskly, "we'll do what we can to speed up
the program as it now stands. I suggest you take off for New York within
the hour----"

"Me? Why?" Ashe asked with a trace of suspicion.

"Because I can't leave without acting directly against orders, and that
would put us wrong immediately. You see Hough and talk to him
personally--put it to him straight. He'll have to have all the facts if
he's going to counter any move from Stanton before the council. You know
every argument we can use and all the proof on our side, and you're
authority enough to make it count."

"If I can do all that, I will." Ashe was alert and eager. The colonel,
seeing his change of expression, felt easier.

But Kelgarries stood a moment watching Ashe as he hurried down a side
corridor, before he moved on slowly to his own box of office. Once
inside he sat for a long unhappy time staring at the wall and seeing
nothing but the pictures produced by his thoughts. Then he pressed a
button and read off the symbols which flashed on a small visa-screen
set in his desk. Another button pushed, and he picked up a hand mike to
relay an order which might postpone trouble for a while. Ashe was far
too valuable a man to lose, and his emotions could boil him straight
into disaster over this.

"Bidwell--reschedule Team A. They are to go to the Hypno-Lab instead of
the reserve in ten minutes."

Releasing the mike, he again stared at the wall. No one dared interrupt
a hypno-training period, and this one would last three hours. Ashe could
not possibly see the trainees before he left for New York. And that
would remove one temptation from his path--he would not talk at the
wrong time.

Kelgarries' mouth twisted sourly. He had no pride in what he was doing.
And he was perfectly certain that Ruthven would win and that Ashe's
fears of Redax were well founded. It all came back to the old basic
tenet of the service: the end justified the means. They must use every
method and man under their control to make sure that Topaz would remain
a western possession, even though that strange planet now swung far
beyond the sky which covered both the western and eastern alliances on
Terra. Time had run out too fast; they were being forced to play what
cards they held, even though those might be very low ones. Ashe would be
back, but not, Kelgarries hoped, until this had been decided one way or
another. Not until this was finished.

Finished! Kelgarries blinked at the wall. Perhaps _they_ were finished,
too. No one would know until the transport ship landed on that other
world which appeared on the direction tape symbolized by a jewellike
disk of gold-brown which had given it the code name of Topaz.


2


There were an even dozen of the air-borne guardians, each following the
swing of its own orbital path just within the atmospheric envelope of
the planet which glowed as a great bronze-golden gem in the four-world
system of a yellow star. The globes had been launched to form a web of
protection around Topaz six months earlier, and the highest skill had
gone into their production. Just as contact mines sown in a harbor could
close that landfall to ships not knowing the secret channel, so was this
world supposedly closed to any spaceship not equipped with the signal to
ward off the sphere missiles.

That was the theory of the new off-world settlers whose protection they
were to be, already tested as well as possible, but as yet not put to
the ultimate proof. The small bright globes spun undisturbed across a
two-mooned sky at night and made reassuring blips on an installation
screen by day.

Then a thirteenth object winked into being, began the encircling,
closing spiral of descent. A sphere resembling the warden-globes, it was
a hundred times their size, and its orbit was purposefully controlled
by instruments under the eye and hand of a human pilot.

Four men were strapped down on cushioned sling-seats in the control
cabin of the Western Alliance ship, two hanging where their fingers
might reach buttons and levers, the others merely passengers, their own
labor waiting for the time when they would set down on the alien soil of
Topaz. The planet hung there in their visa-screen, richly beautiful in
its amber gold, growing larger, nearer, so that they could pick out
features of seas, continents, mountain ranges, which had been studied on
tape until they were familiar, yet now were strangely unfamiliar too.

One of the warden-globes alerted, oscillated in its set path, whirled
faster as its delicate interior mechanisms responded to the awakening
spark which would send it on its mission of destruction. A relay
clicked, but for the smallest fraction of a millimeter failed to set the
proper course. On the instrument, far below, which checked the globe's
new course the mistake was not noted.

The screen of the ship spiraling toward Topaz registered a path which
would bring it into violent contact with the globe. They were still some
hundreds of miles apart when the alarm rang. The pilot's hand clawed out
at the bank of controls; under the almost intolerable pressure of their
descent, there was so little he could do. His crooked fingers fell back
powerlessly from the buttons and levers; his mouth was a twisted grimace
of bleak acceptance as the beat of the signal increased.

One of the passengers forced his head around on the padded rest, fought
to form words, to speak to his companion. The other was staring ahead at
the screen, his thick lips wide and flat against his teeth in a snarl
of rage.

"They ... are ... here...."

Ruthven paid no attention to the obvious as stated by his fellow
scientist. His fury was a red, pulsing thing inside him, fed by his own
helplessness. To be pinned here so near his goal, fastened up as a
target for an inanimate but cunningly fashioned weapon, ate into him
like a stream of deadly acid. His big gamble would puff out in a blast
of fire to light up Topaz's sky, with nothing left--nothing. On the
armrest of his sling-seat his nails scratched deep.

The four men in the control cabin could only sit and watch, waiting for
the rendezvous which would blot them out. Ruthven's flaming anger was a
futile blaze. His companion in the passenger seat had closed his eyes,
his lips moving soundlessly in an expression of his own scattered
thoughts. The pilot and his assistant divided their attention between
the screen, with its appalling message, and the controls they could not
effectively use, feverishly seeking a way out in these last moments.

Below them in the bowl of the ship were those who would not know the end
consciously--save in one compartment. In a padded cage a prick-eared
head stirred where it rested on forepaws, slitted eyes blinked, aware
not only of familiar surroundings, but also of the tension and fear
generated by human minds and emotions levels above. A pointed nose
raised, and there was a growling deep in a throat covered with thick
buff-gray hair.

The growl aroused another similar captive. Knowing yellow eyes met
yellow eyes. An intelligence, which was certainly not that of the animal
body which contained it, fought down instinct raging to send both those
bodies hurtling at the fastenings of the twin cages. Curiosity and the
ability to adapt had been bred into both from time immemorial. Then
something else had been added to sly and cunning brains. A step up had
been taken--to weld intelligence to cunning, connect thought to
instinct.

More than a generation earlier mankind had chosen barren desert--the
"white sands" of New Mexico--as a testing ground for atomic experiments.
Humankind could be barred, warded out of the radiation limits; the
natural desert dwellers, four-footed and winged, could not be so
controlled.

For thousands of years, since the first southward roving Amerindian
tribes had met with their kind, there had been a hunter of the open
country, a smaller cousin of the wolf, whose natural abilities had made
an undeniable impression on the human mind. He was in countless Indian
legends as the Shaper or the Trickster, sometimes friend, sometimes
enemy. Godling for some tribes, father of all evil for others. In the
wealth of tales the coyote, above all other animals, had a firm place.

Driven by the press of civilization into the badlands and deserts,
fought with poison, gun, and trap, the coyote had survived, adapting to
new ways with all his legendary cunning. Those who had reviled him as
vermin had unwillingly added to the folklore which surrounded him,
telling their own tales of robbed traps, skillful escapes. He continued
to be a trickster, laughing on moonlit nights from the tops of ridges at
those who would hunt him down.

Then, close to the end of the twentieth century, when myths were
scoffed at, the stories of the coyote's slyness began once more on a
fantastic scale. And finally scientists were sufficiently intrigued to
seek out this creature that seemed to display in truth all the abilities
credited to his immortal namesake by pre-Columbian tribes.

What they discovered was indeed shattering to certain closed minds. For
the coyote had not only adapted to the country of the white sands; he
had evolved into something which could not be dismissed as an animal,
clever and cunning, but limited to beast range. Six cubs had been
brought back on the first expedition, coyote in body, their developing
minds different. The grandchildren of those cubs were now in the ship's
cages, their mutated senses alert, ready for the slightest chance of
escape. Sent to Topaz as eyes and ears for less keenly endowed humans,
they were not completely under the domination of man. The range of their
mental powers was still uncomprehended by those who had bred, trained,
and worked with them from the days their eyes had opened and they had
taken their first wobbly steps away from their dams.

The male growled again, his lips wrinkling back in a snarl as the
emanations of fear from the men he could not see reached panic peak. He
still crouched, belly flat, on the protecting pads of his cage; but he
strove now to wriggle closer to the door, just as his mate made the same
effort.

Between the animals and those in the control cabin lay the others--forty
of them. Their bodies were cushioned and protected with every ingenious
device known to those who had placed them there so many weeks earlier.
Their minds were free of the ship, roving into places where men had not
trod before, a territory potentially more dangerous than any solid earth
could ever be.

Operation Retrograde had returned men bodily into the past, sending
agents to hunt mammoths, follow the roads of the Bronze Age traders,
ride with Attila and Genghis Khan, pull bows among the archers of
ancient Egypt. But Redax returned men in mind to the paths of their
ancestors, or this was the theory. And those who slept here and now in
their narrow boxes, lay under its government, while the men who had
arbitrarily set them so could only assume they were actually reliving
the lives of Apache nomads in the wide southwestern wastes of the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.

Above, the pilot's hand pushed out again, fighting the pressure to reach
one particular button. That, too, had been a last-minute addition, an
experiment which had only had partial testing. To use it was the final
move he could make, and he was already half convinced of its
uselessness.

With no faith and only a very wan hope, he sent that round of metal
flush with the board. What followed no one ever lived to explain.

On the planet the installation which tracked the missiles flashed on a
screen bright enough to blind momentarily the duty man on watch, and its
tracker was shaken off course. When it jiggled back into line it was no
longer the efficient eye-in-the-sky it had been, though its tenders were
not to realize that for an important minute or two.

While the ship, now out of control, sped in dizzy whirls toward Topaz,
engines fought blindly to stabilize, to re-establish their functions.
Some succeeded, some wobbled in and out of the danger zone, two failed.
And in the control cabin three dead men spun in prisoning seats.

Dr. James Ruthven, blood bubbling from his lips with every shallow
breath he could draw, fought the stealthy tide of blackness which crept
up his brain, his stubborn will holding to rags of consciousness,
refusing to acknowledge the pain of his fatally injured body.

The orbiting ship was on an erratic path. Slowly the machines were
correcting, relays clicking, striving to bring it to a landing under
auto-pilot. All the ingenuity built into a mechanical brain was now
centered in landing the globe.

It was not a good landing, in fact a very bad one, for the sphere
touched a mountain side, scraped down rocks, shearing away a portion of
its outer bulk. But the mountain barrier was now between it and the base
from which the missiles had been launched, and the crash had not been
recorded on that tracking instrument. So far as the watchers several
hundred miles away knew, the warden in the sky had performed as
promised. Their first line of defense had proven satisfactory, and there
had been no unauthorized landing on Topaz.

In the wreckage of the control cabin Ruthven pawed at the fastenings of
his sling-chair. He no longer tried to suppress the moans every effort
tore out of him. Time held the whip, drove him. He rolled from his seat
to the floor, lay there gasping, as again he fought doggedly to remain
above the waves--those frightening, fast-coming waves of dark faintness.

Somehow he was crawling, crawling along a tilted surface until he gained
the well where the ladder to the lower section hung, now at an acute
angle. It was that angle which helped him to the next level.

He was too dazed to realize the meaning of the crumpled bulkheads. There
was a spur of bare rock under his hands as he edged over and around
twisted metal. The moans were now a gobbling, burbling, almost
continuous cry as he reached his goal--a small cabin still intact.

For long moments of anguish he paused by the chair there, afraid that he
could not make the last effort, raise his almost inert bulk up to the
point where he could reach the Redax release. For a second of unusual
clarity he wondered if there was any reason for this supreme ordeal,
whether any of the sleepers could be aroused. This might now be a ship
of the dead.

His right hand, his arm, and finally his bulk over the seat, he braced
himself and brought his left hand up. He could not use any of the
fingers; it was like lifting numb, heavy weights. But he lurched
forward, swept the unfeeling lump of cold flesh down against the release
in a gesture which he knew must be his final move. And, as he fell back
to the floor, Dr. Ruthven could not be certain whether he had succeeded
or failed. He tried to screw his head around, to focus his eyes upward
at that switch. Was it down or still stubbornly up, locking the sleepers
into confinement? But there was a fog between; he could not see it--or
anything.

The light in the cabin flickered, was gone as another circuit in the
broken ship failed. It was dark, too, in the small cubby below which
housed the two cages. Chance, which had snuffed out nineteen lives in
the space globe, had missed ripping open that cabin on the mountain
side. Five yards down the corridor the outside fabric of the ship was
split wide open, the crisp air native to Topaz entering, sending a
message to two keen noses through the combination of odors now pervading
the wreckage.

And the male coyote went into action. Days ago he had managed to work
loose the lower end of the mesh which fronted his cage, but his mind had
told him that a sortie inside the ship was valueless. The odd rapport
he'd had with the human brains, unknown to them, had operated to keep
him to the old role of cunning deception, which in the past had saved
countless of his species from sudden and violent death. Now with teeth
and paws he went diligently to work, urged on by the whines of his mate,
that tantalizing smell of an outside world tickling their nostrils--a
wild world, lacking the taint of man-places.

He slipped under the loosened mesh and stood up to paw at the front of
the female's cage. One forepaw caught in the latch and pressed it down,
and the weight of the door swung against him. Together they were free
now to reach the corridor and see ahead the subdued light of a strange
moon beckoning them on into the open.

The female, always more cautious than her mate, lingered behind as he
trotted forward, his ears a-prick with curiosity. Their training had
been the same since cubhood--to range and explore, but always in the
company and at the order of man. This was not according to the pattern
she knew, and she was suspicious. But to her sensitive nose the smell of
the ship was an offense, and the puffs of breeze from without enticing.
Her mate had already slipped through the break; now he barked with
excitement and wonder, and she trotted on to join him.

Above, the Redax, which had never been intended to stand rough usage,
proved to be a better survivor of the crash than most of the other
installations. Power purred along a network of lines, activated beams,
turned off and on a series of fixtures in those coffin-beds. For five of
the sleepers--nothing. The cabin which had held them was a flattened
smear against the mountain side. Three more half aroused, choked, fought
for life and breath in a darkness which was a mercifully short
nightmare, and succumbed.

But in the cabin nearest the rent through which the coyotes had escaped,
a young man sat up abruptly, looking into the dark with wide-open,
terror-haunted eyes. He clawed for purchase against the smooth edge of
the box in which he had lain, somehow got to his knees, weaving weakly
back and forth, and half fell, half pushed to the floor where he could
stand only by keeping his hold on the box.

Dazed, sick, weak, he swayed there, aware only of himself and his own
sensations. There were small sounds in the dark, a stilled moan, a
gasping sigh. But that meant nothing. Within him grew a compulsion to be
out of this place, his terror making him lurch forward.

His flailing hand rapped painfully against an upright surface which his
questing fingers identified hazily as an exit. Unconsciously he fumbled
along the surface of the door until it gave under that weak pressure.
Then he was out, his head swimming, drawn by the light behind the wall
rent.

He progressed toward that in a scrambling crawl, making his way over the
splintered skin of the globe. Then he dropped with a jarring thud onto
the mound of earth the ship had pushed before it during its downward
slide. Limply he tumbled on in a small cascade of clods and sand,
hitting against a less movable rock with force enough to roll him over
on his back and stun him again.

The second and smaller moon of Topaz swung brightly through the sky, its
weird green rays making the blood-streaked face of the explorer an alien
mask. It had passed well on to the horizon, and its large yellow
companion had risen when a yapping broke the small sounds of the night.

As the _yipp, yipp, yipp_ arose in a crescendo, the man stirred, putting
one hand to his head. His eyes opened, he looked vaguely about him and
sat up. Behind him was the torn and ripped ship, but he did not look
back at it.

Instead, he got to his feet and staggered out into the direct path of
the moonlight. Inside his brain there was a whirl of thoughts, memories,
emotions. Perhaps Ruthven or one of his assistants could have explained
that chaotic mixture for what it was. But for all practical purposes
Travis Fox--Amerindian Time Agent, member of Team A, Operation
Cochise--was far less of a thinking animal now than the two coyotes
paying their ritual addresses to a moon which was not the one of their
vanished homeland.

Travis wavered on, drawn somehow by that howling. It was familiar, a
thread of something real through all the broken clutter in his head. He
stumbled, fell, crawled up again, but he kept on.

Above, the female coyote lowered her head, drew a test sniff of a new
scent. She recognized that as part of the proper way of life. She yapped
once at her mate, but he was absorbed in his night song, his muzzle
pointed moonward as he voiced a fine wailing.

Travis tripped, pitched forward on his hands and knees, and felt the jar
of such a landing shoot up his stiffened forearms. He tried to get up,
but his body only twisted, so he landed on his back and lay looking up
at the moon.

A strong, familiar odor ... then a shadow looming above him. Hot breath
against his cheek, and the swift sweep of an animal tongue on his face.
He flung up his hand, gripped thick fur, and held on as if he had found
one anchor of sanity in a world gone completely mad.


3


Travis, one knee braced against the red earth, blinked as he parted a
screen of tall rust-brown grass with cautious fingers to look out into a
valley where golden mist clouded most of the landscape. His head ached
with dull persistence, the pain fostered in some way by his own
bewilderment. To study the land ahead was like trying to see through one
picture interposed over another and far different one. He knew what
ought to be there, but what was before him was very dissimilar.

A buff-gray shape flitted through the tall cover grass, and Travis
tensed. _Mba'a_--coyote? Or were these companions of his actually
_ga-n_, spirits who could choose their shape at will and had, oddly,
this time assumed the bodies of man's tricky enemy? Were they
_ndendai_--enemies--or _dalaanbiyat'i_, allies? In this mad world he did
not know.

_Ei'dik'e?_ His mind formed a word he did not speak: Friend?

Yellow eyes met his directly. Dimly he had been aware, ever since
awaking in this strange wilderness with the coming of morning light,
that the four-footed ones trotting with him as he walked aimlessly had
unbeastlike traits. Not only did they face him eye-to-eye, but in some
ways they appeared able to read his thoughts.

He had longed for water to ease the burning in his throat, the
ever-present pain in his head, and the creatures had nudged him in
another direction, bringing him to a pool where he had mouthed liquid
with a strange sweet, but not unpleasant taste.

Now he had given them names, names which had come out of the welter of
dreams which shadowed his stumbling journey across this weird country.

Nalik'ideyu (Maiden-Who-Walks-Ridges) was the female who continued to
shepherd him along, never venturing too far from his side. Naginlta
(He-Who-Scouts-Ahead) was the male who did just that, disappearing at
long intervals and then returning to face the man and his mate as if
conveying some report necessary to their journey.

It was Nalik'ideyu who sought out Travis now, her red tongue lolling
from her mouth as she panted. Not from exertion, he was certain of that.
No, she was excited and eager ... on the hunt! That was it--a hunt!

Travis' own tongue ran across his lips as an impression hit him with
feral force. There was meat--rich, fresh--just ahead. Meat that lived,
waiting to be killed. Inside him his own avid hunger roused, shaking him
farther out of the crusting dream.

His hands went to his waist, but the groping fingers did not find what
vague memory told him should be there--a belt, heavy with knife in
sheath.

He examined his own body with attention to find he was adequately
covered by breeches of a smooth, dull brown material which blended well
with the vegetation about him. He wore a loose shirt, belted in at the
narrow waist by a folded strip of cloth, the ends of which fluttered
free. On his feet were tall moccasins, the leg pieces extending some
distance up his calves, the toes turned up in rounded points.

Some of this he found familiar, but these were fragments of memory;
again his mind fitted one picture above another. One thing he did know
for sure--he had no weapons. And that realization struck home with a
thrust of real and terrible fear which tore away more of the
bewilderment cloaking his mind.

Nalik'ideyu was impatient. Having advanced a step or two, she now looked
back at him over her shoulder, yellow eyes slitted, her demand on him as
instant and real as if she had voiced understandable words. Meat was
waiting, and she was hungry. Also she expected Travis to aid in the
hunt--at once.

Though he could not match her fluid grace in moving through the grass,
Travis followed her, keeping to cover. He shook his head vigorously, in
spite of the stab of pain the motion cost him, and paid more attention
to his surroundings. It was apparent that the earth under him, the grass
around, the valley of the golden haze, were all real, not part of a
dream. Therefore that other countryside which he kept seeing in a
ghostly fashion was a hallucination.

Even the air which he drew into his lungs and expelled again, had a
strange smell, or was it taste? He could not be sure which. He knew that
hypno-training could produce queer side effects, but ... this....

Travis paused, staring unseeingly before him at the grass still waving
from the coyote's passage. Hypno-training! What was that? Now three
pictures fought to focus in his mind: the two landscapes which did not
match and a shadowy third. He shook his head again, his hands to his
temples. This--this only was real: the ground, the grass, the valley,
the hunger in him, the hunt waiting....

He forced himself to concentrate on the immediate present and the
portion of world he could see, feel, scent, which lay here and now about
him.

The grass grew shorter as he proceeded in Nalik'ideyu's wake. But the
haze was not thinning. It seemed to hang in patches, and when he
ventured through the edge of a patch it was like creeping through a fog
of golden, dancing motes with here and there a glittering speck whirling
and darting like a living thing. Masked by the stuff, Travis reached a
line of brush and sniffed.

It was a warm scent, a heavy odor he could not identify and yet one he
associated with a living creature. Flat to earth, he pushed head and
shoulders under the low limbs of the bush to look ahead.

Here was a space where the fog did not hold, a pocket of earth clear
under the morning sun. And grazing there were three animals. Again shock
cleared a portion of Travis' bemused brain.

They were about the size, he thought, of antelopes, and they had a
general resemblance to those beasts in that they had four slender legs,
a rounded body, and a head. But they had alien features, so alien as to
hold him in open-mouthed amazement.

The bodies had bare spots here and there, and patches of creamy--fur? Or
was it hair which hung in strips, as if the creatures had been partially
plucked in a careless fashion? The necks were long and moved about in a
serpentine motion, as though their spines were as limber as reptiles'.
On the end of those long and twisting necks were heads which also
appeared more suitable to another species--broad, rather flat, with a
singular toadlike look--but furnished with horns set halfway down the
nose, horns which began in a single root and then branched into two
sharp points.

They were unearthly! Again Travis blinked, brought his hand up to his
head as he continued to view the browsers. There were three of them: two
larger and with horns, the other a smaller beast with less of the ragged
fur and only the beginning button of a protuberance on the nose; it was
probably a calf.

One of those mental alerts from the coyotes broke his absorption.
Nalik'ideyu was not interested in the odd appearance of the grazing
creatures; she was intent upon their usefulness in another way--as a
full and satisfying meal--and she was again impatient with him for his
dull response.

His examination took a more practical turn. An antelope's defense was
speed, though it could be tricked into hunting range through its
inordinate curiosity. The slender legs of these beasts suggested a like
degree of speed, and Travis had no weapons at all.

Those nose horns had an ugly look; this thing might be a fighter rather
than a runner. But the suggestion which had flashed from coyote to him
had taken root. Travis was hungry, he was a hunter, and here was meat on
the hoof, queer as it looked.

Again he received a message. Naginlta was on the opposite side of the
clearing. If the creatures depended on speed, then Travis believed they
could probably outrun not only him but the coyotes as well--which left
cunning and some sort of plan.

Travis glanced at the cover where he knew Nalik'ideyu crouched and from
which had come that flash of agreement. He shivered. These were truly no
animals, but _ga-n_, _ga-n_ of power! And as _ga-n_ he must treat them,
accede to their will. Spurred by that, the Apache gave only flicks of
attention to the browsers while at the same time he studied the part of
the landscape uncovered by mist.

Without weapons or speed, they must conceive a trap. Again Travis sensed
that agreement which was _ga-n_ magic, and with it the strong impression
urging him to the right. He was making progress with skill he did not
even recognize and which he had never been conscious of learning.

But, as a scientific man, devoted to the search for truth, no matter
where it leads you, you would not want to deceive yourself with
such a comforting assurance if it were founded on false premises. If,
therefore, you really want to know the conditions under which American
opinion of Germany's conduct has been formed, I will endeavour to
describe them with the same calmness and careful attention to
accuracy which I earnestly endeavour to observe in my scientific
investigations.

In discussing this vitally important matter, I will first endeavour to
picture the American opinion of Germany and the Germans before the war,
since this was the background upon which later opinions were formed.

I will then explain the sources of information which were open to Americans
after the war began; and will next describe how this information
produced an American opinion unfavourable to Germany, as observed
by one who has read widely and watched the trend of his country's
thought with keen interest.

If this analysis is successful in convincing you that American opinion
does not rest on English lies, is not the result of a venal press
controlled by British gold, but has a far more substantial foundation,
then my letter will not have been written in vain. If you are not
convinced, but prefer to retain the comforting belief that if
America only knew the truth it would applaud Germany's actions, then I
shall, at least, have the satisfaction of knowing that I earnestly
endeavoured, in good faith, to return the courtesy which you showed
me when you wrote so fully, by telling you with equal fulness the truth
as I see it.

I.

First, then, let me picture the background of public opinion toward
Germany and the Germans as I saw it before the war began.

Inasmuch as one's vision may be affected favourably or unfavourably by his
personal experiences, it is only fair that I state briefly my own
experiences with people of German birth or parentage.

One of my earliest recollections is of a German maid in our household
who taught me to make my wants known in the German language, and also
taught me to love her as I did members of my own family.

In college, one of my two favourite professors and one of my college
chums were of German parentage. Both these men are still valued
friends, and both believe in the righteousness of Germany's cause. I have
spent parts of three summers in Germany, and have many German friends,
both in America and in Europe.
The two Europeans in my special field of science for whom I have
the greatest personal affection are German professors in Berlin and
Leipzig respectively.

I have more personal friends in the German army than in the Allied
armies. My sister is married to a professor of German descent and German
sympathies. Surely, therefore, if personal relationships prejudice me
at all, they should prejudice me in favour of Germans and things
German.

In my opinion, the American estimate of Germany and her citizens
prior to the war was, in general, most favourable. Certainly America
looked with admiration upon the remarkable advance achieved by Germany
in the short space of forty years.

To your universities we have always acknowledged a great debt. We have
profited much by your advances in economic lines and admired the
combination of scientific research and business which made your
countrymen efficient in many lines.

The large number of your people who have emigrated to America have,
in the main, made good citizens, and we have welcomed them as among the
best of the foreigners who flock to our shores. German music and German
musicians find nowhere a more cordial welcome than here where admiration
for their achievements is unstinted.

Nor have we forgotten the heroic services of the many Germans who laid
down their lives in defence of our flag, that the Union might live. The
Germans' love of honour and family has touched the American heart in
a tender spot, and many of my acquaintances admit that with no other
foreigners do they establish such intimate and affectionate relations
as with their German friends.

This admiration and friendship has not blinded us to certain defects in
the German character, any more than has your friendship for Americans
closed your eyes to our defects.

The bad manners of Germans are proverbial, not only among Americans,
but all over the world; so much so that certain German writers, admitting
that Germans as a nation are ill-mannered, have sought to find in this
fact an explanation for the world-wide antagonism toward Germany's
policy in the war. I do not believe, however, that, so far as
American sentiment is concerned, there is any considerable element
of truth in this explanation.

It is true that we do not like the lack of respect accorded to women by
the average German; that the position of woman in Germany seems to us
anomalous in a nation claiming a superior type of civilisation; that
the bumptious attitude of the German "intellectual" amuses or disgusts
us; and that the insolence of your young officers who elbow us off the
sidewalks in your cities makes us long to meet those individuals
again outside the boundaries of Germany, where no military Government,
jealous of their "honour," could protect them from the thrashing
they deserve.

It is also true that, at international congresses, excursions and banquets,
attended by both men and women representatives of all nations, the
Germans have gained an unenviable reputation for bad manners because
they have pushed themselves into the best places, crowded into the
trains ahead of the women, and generally ignored the courtesies due
to ladies and gentlemen associated with them.

But, in spite of our full recognition of this undesirable national trait,
I doubt whether any great number of Americans have permitted a dislike
of German manners to affect their opinion as to German morals in
the conduct of war, though some do hold that lack of good manners
is a characteristic mark of inferior civilisation.

On the whole, we have been inclined to be tolerant of German rudeness,
regarding it as in part due to the rapid material development of
a young nation, and possibly as, in part, the result of over-aggressiveness
fostered by a military training.

It is only fair to say, also, that our admiration of Germany's achievements
in art, literature, and science never led us so far as to accept
the claim of superiority in these lines advanced by many Germans
on behalf of their country.

The insistence with which this claim has been reiterated and proclaimed
abroad by Germans, often with more of patriotism than of good taste, may
have led a part of the public to believe it.

But the more intelligent and thoughtful portion of the people, accustomed
to analyse such claims by careful comparison with the products of
non-Teutonic civilisation, has been unable to find any adequate basis
for the assumed superiority. Indeed, while intelligent and fair-minded
Americans are not slow to recognise Germany's great contributions to the
world's art, literature, and science, they believe that, with the
possible exception of music, greater contributions have been made
in these lines by France, England, and other nations.

In the realm of invention, we fully appreciate the skill and resourcefulness
manifested by the German people in adapting new discoveries to their
own needs; but we cannot deny the fact that most of the discoveries which
have played so vital a part in the development of modern civilisation
have been made, not in Germany, but in other countries.

In regard to municipal government and various forms of social legislation,
we have long recognised the high position held by your nation. But
in the more vital matter of the relation of the individual to the
supreme governing power, we have always held, and still believe,
that Germany is sadly reactionary.

For half a century your professors, in the employ of an educational system
controlled by a bureaucratic Government, have taught what we condemn
as a false philosophy of government.

Your histories, your books on philosophy, your whole literature, glorify
the _State_; and you have accepted the dangerous doctrine that the
individual exists to serve the State, forgetting that the State
is not the mystical, divine thing you picture it, but a government
carried on by human beings like yourselves, most of them reasonably
upright, but some incompetent and others deliberately bad, just
like any other human government.

We believe that the only excuse for the existence of the State is to
serve the individual, to create conditions which will insure the greatest
liberty and highest possible development to the individual citizen.
It has never seemed to us creditable to the German intellect that
it could be satisfied with a theory of government outgrown by most
other civilised nations.

That you should confuse efficiency with freedom has always seemed to us a
tragic mistake, and never so tragic as now, when a small coterie
of human beings, subject to the same mistakes and sins as other
human beings, can hurl you into a terrible war before you know what
has happened, clap on a rigid censorship to keep out any news they
do not want you to learn, then publish a white book which pretends
to explain the causes of the war, but omits documents of the most
vital importance, thereby causing the people of a confiding nation
to drench the earth with their life-blood in the fond illusion that
the war was forced upon them, and that they are fighting for a noble
cause.

Most pitiful is the sad comment of an intelligent German woman in a
letter recently received in this country: "We, of course, only see
such things as the Government thinks best.

We were told that this war was purely a defensive one, forced upon us. I
begin to believe this may not be true, but hope for a favourable ending."

Certainly in what you wrote to me you were thoroughly sincere and honest;
yet your letter was full of untrue statements because you were
dependent for your information upon a Government-controlled press
which has misled you for military and political reasons.

How can a nation know the truth, think clearly, and act righteously when
a few men, called the "State," can commit you to the most serious
enterprise in your history without your previous knowledge or consent,
and can then keep you in ignorance of vitally important documents and
activities in order to insure your full support of their perilous
undertaking?

Such is the thought which has always led America to denounce as false the
old theory of "divine right of kings," long imposed upon the German
people in the more subtle and, therefore, more dangerous form of
"the divine right of the State." Our conviction that such a government
as yours is reactionary and incompatible with true liberty, and
that it stunts and warps the intellects of its citizens, has been amply
confirmed by extended observation in your country, and more
particularly by the unanswerable fact that millions of your best
blood, including distinguished men of intelligence and wealth, have
forsaken Germany to seek true liberty of intellect and action in
America, renouncing allegiance to the Fatherland to become citizens
here.

Some of them still love the scenes of their childhood, but few
of them would be willing to return to a life under such a Government
as Germany possesses.

To summarise what I said above: Americans, prior to the war, admired
the remarkable advances made by Germany in recent years in economic
and commercial lines; held in high regard your universities and
many of your university professors; loved your music, and felt most
cordial toward the millions of Germans who came to live among us
and share the benefits of our free institutions.

The prevalence of bad manners among Germans we regretted, but made
allowance for this defect; and we did not fail to recognise that some
Germans are fine gentlemen of the most perfect culture, while most of
them have traits of character which we admired.

We recognised the immense value of Germany's contributions to art,
literature, and science, but did not consider Germany's contributions
in these lines as equal to those of other nations. We never have regarded
German culture as superior, but rather as inferior, to that of
certain other countries; and the Germans' loud claims to superiority
have seemed to us egotistical and the result of a weak point in the
German character.

For your form of government and the philosophy of history taught
by your university professors we could never have much admiration
or respect.

Both seemed to us unworthy of an intelligent, civilised people, and sure
to lead to disaster. Your military preparations, evident to every
observant visitor, have long caused us to distrust your Government and
to consider your country a menace to the world's peace.
In a word, we admired and loved your people, although we considered them
neither perfect nor even superior to other people; but we disapproved
and distrusted your reactionary military Government.

II.

Such was our attitude when the war burst upon the world. Since that time
what opportunities have the American people had to form an intelligent
opinion as to who was wrong and who was right? What sources of information
have been open to us, what means of getting at the facts?
Have we been drowned in English lies, as several of your professors
have written me is the case?

Have we relied on one corrupt party newspaper, as you intimate is
our habit?

Have we been dependent on a press bought up with English gold, as is
continually asserted by the German press?

In the first place, we have relied in part upon our previous knowledge of
the German Government and the German people. The hundreds of Americans
who have studied in your universities, the thousands who have visited
your country, and the millions who have come into close contact with
Germans in this country, all have a pretty good idea of the German
type of mind, German standards of national morality, German virtues
and defects.

Americans have, of course, used this information in reaching a
conclusion as to the truth or falsehood of charges against Germany.

I talked with some of our American professors just as they landed on the
pier in New York fresh from a summer in Germany which was cut short
by the outbreak of the war. They came direct from your country and were
as fully informed of the German points of view right up to the
declaration of war as were any of your citizens.

Many Americans who have spent months and even years on German soil,
and who know the country and the people intimately, have made us
well acquainted with German standards and German methods of
thinking.

It is true that since the war began much of our news has come through
cables controlled by the Allies; but Americans have too much common
sense to accept such reports as final. News from biassed sources
is always accepted with reservation, and not fully believed unless
confirmed from independent sources.

Furthermore, Americans have never lacked for first-hand information from
Germany.

Direct wireless reports from your country to several stations in America
have given us a valuable check on cable reports. German papers come
to us regularly, and are continually and extensively quoted. Germany
has sent special agents to this country to represent her side of
every issue.

The speeches and writings of these agents have been published repeatedly
and at length in almost every paper in our country from the Atlantic
to the Pacific.

American correspondents in Germany and in the war-zone have told as much
as your censors would permit concerning what they saw of Germany and
Germany's army. Many Americans have returned from Germany during the
war, and have published their experiences and impressions. Some of them
have seen your army at work, suffered from its inhumanity, and
been subjected to outrages and indignities by the civil officials
of your Government.

Others were dined and honoured as notable guests and given unusual
opportunities for seeing as much as your officials wanted them to see.
Both have offered valuable first-hand testimony as to the behaviour
of the German nation at war. Your university professors and other
prominent citizens of your country have written us circular and
private letters without number, presenting Germany's arguments in
every conceivable form.

Your Ambassador and other officials of your Government have been
most active in keeping first-hand information before the American
public.

Thousands of your reservists, unable to cross the sea in safety, remain
in this country to talk and write in behalf of their Fatherland.

In addition to all this, Germany's cause has been most vigorously
championed by many Germans and German-Americans long resident in
America.

Münsterberg and others have published numerous articles and books in
Germany's favour. Every possible plea to justify Germany's position has
been enthusiastically spread abroad by the German-American press,
and with that love of "fair play" which is a widely-recognised
characteristic of Americans, even those papers which believe Germany
responsible for the war and its worst horrors, have printed volumes
of material from pro-German authors in order that the whole truth might
be known by a full and free discussion of both sides of every
question. I have read many pro-German articles in the _New York
Times_, the _New York Sun_, the _Outlook_, and other papers and magazines
opposed to German policy--articles by Münsterberg, Kuno Franke,
Von Bernstorff, Dernburg, and other staunch defenders of Germany.

The columns of our papers are freely open to every authoritative champion
of the German cause, no matter what the editorial policy of the papers
may be. Never was fuller and freer opportunity for defence accorded to
anyone than has been given to the friends of Germany to present in print
to the American public every possible justification for Germany's
acts. Only the grossest ignorance of the actual facts could ever lead
anyone to make the charge in good faith that the truth about Germany
has been concealed from Americans. Your letter did not contain a single
statement or argument that has not been printed over and over again in
papers from one end of America to the other by various defenders
of the German cause.

Germany's official documents issued in defence of her position at the
beginning of the war, her charges of atrocities against her enemies and
her supposed proofs of the falsity of atrocity charges against the
Germans, have all been published fully and widely, although you seem not
to be aware of this fact.

"I say that alone among us you have crossed the stars before, therefore
new things are not so hard to understand. And we need a scout. Also the
coyotes run in your footsteps, and you do not fear them."

It made good sense. Let him scout ahead of the party, taking the coyotes
with him. Stay away from the camp for a while and speak small--until the
people on Buck's stairway were more closely united.

"I go in the morning," Travis agreed. He could slip away tonight, but
just now he could not force himself away from the fire, from the
companionship.

"You might take Tsoay with you," Buck continued.

Travis waited for him to enlarge on that suggestion. Tsoay was one of
the youngest of their group, Buck's own cross-cousin and near-brother.

"It is well," Buck explained, "that we learn this land, and it has
always been our custom that the younger walk in the footprints of the
older. Also, not only should trails be learned, but also men."

Travis caught the thought behind that. Perhaps by taking the younger men
as scouts, one after another, he could build up among them a following
of sorts. Among the Apaches, leadership was wholly a matter of
personality. Until the reservation days, chieftains had gained their
position by force of character alone, though they might come
successively from one family clan over several generations.

He did not want the chieftainship here. No, but neither did he want
growing whispers working about him to cut him off from his people. To
every Apache severance from the clan was a little death. He must have
those who would back him if Deklay, or those who thought like Deklay,
turned grumbling into open hostility.

"Tsoay is one quick to learn," Travis agreed. "We go at dawn--"

"Along the mountain range?" Buck inquired.

"If we seek a protected place for the rancheria, yes. The mountains have
always provided good strongholds for the People."

"And you think there is need for a fort?"

Travis shrugged. "I have been one day's journey out into this world. I
saw nothing but animals. But that is no promise that elsewhere there are
no enemies. The planet was on the tapes we brought back from that other
world, and so it was known to the others who once rode between star and
star as we rode between ranch and town. If they had this world set on a
journey tape, it was for a reason; that reason may still be in force."

"Yet it was long ago that these star people rode so...." Buck mused.
"Would the reason last so long?"

Travis remembered two other worlds, one of weird desert inhabited by
beast things--or had they once been human, human to the point of
possessing intelligence?--that had come out of sand burrows at night to
attack a spaceship. And the second world where the ruins of a giant city
had stood choked with jungle vegetation, where he had made a blowgun
from tubes of rustless metal as a weapon gift for small winged men--but
were they men? Both had been remnants of that ancient galactic empire.

"Some things could so remain," he answered soberly. "If we find them, we
must be careful. But first a good site for the rancheria."

"There is no return to home for us," Buck stated flatly.

"Why do you say that? There could be a rescue ship later--"

The other raised his eyes again to Travis. "When you slept under the
Redax how did you ride?"

"As a warrior--raiding ... living...."

"And I--I was one with _go'ndi_," Buck returned simply.

"But--"

"But the white man has assured us that such power--the power of a
chief--does not exist? Yes, the Pinda-lick-o-yi has told us so many
things. He is busy, busy with his tools, his machines, always busy. And
those who think in another fashion cannot be measured by his rules, so
they are foolish dreamers. Not all white men think so. There was Dr.
Ashe--he was beginning to understand a little.

"Perhaps I, too, am standing still, halfway up the stairway of the past.
But of this I am very sure: For us, there will be no return to our own
place. And the time will come when something new shall grow from the
seed of the past. Also it is necessary that you be one of the tenders of
that growth. So I urge you, take Tsoay, and the next time, Lupe. For the
young who may be swayed this way and that by words--as the wind shakes a
small tree--must be given firm roots."

In Travis education warred with instinct, just as the picture Redax had
planted in his mind had warred with his awaking to this alien landscape.
Yet now he believed he must be guided by what he felt. And he knew that
no man of his race would claim _go'ndi_, the power of spirit known only
to a great chief, unless he had actually felt it swell within him. It
might have been fostered by hallucination in the past, but the aura of
it carried into the here and now. And Travis had no doubts that Buck
believed implicitly in what he said, and that belief carried credulity
to others.

"This is wisdom, _Nantan_--"

Buck shook his head. "I am no _nantan_, no chief. But of some things I
am sure. You also be sure of what lies within you, younger brother!"

On the third day, ranging eastward along the base of the mountain range,
Travis found what he believed would be an acceptable camp site. There
was a canyon with a good spring of water cut round by well-marked game
trails. A series of ledges brought him up to a small plateau where scrub
wood could be used to build the wickiups. Water and food lay within
reach, and the ledge approach was easy to defend. Even Deklay and his
fellow malcontents were forced to concede the value of the site.

His duty to the clan accomplished, Travis returned to his own concern,
one which had haunted him for days. Topaz had been taped by men of the
vanished star empire. Therefore, the planet was important, but why? As
yet he had found no indication that anything above the intelligence
level of the split horns was native to this world. But he was gnawed by
the certainty that there _was_ something here, waiting.... And the
desire to learn what it was became an ever-burning ache.

Perhaps he was what Deklay had accused him of being, one who had come to
follow the road of the Pinda-lick-o-yi too closely. For Travis was
content to scout with only the coyotes for company, and he did not find
the loneliness of the unknown planet as intimidating as most of the
others.

He was checking his small trail pack on the fourth day after they had
settled on the plateau when Buck and Jil-Lee hunkered down beside him.

"You go to hunt--?" Buck broke the silence first.

"Not for meat."

"What do you fear? That _ndendai_--enemy people--have marked this as
their land?" Jil-Lee questioned.

"That may be true, but now I hunt for what this world was at one time,
the reason why the ancient star men marked it as their own."

"And this knowledge may be of value to us?" Jil-Lee asked slowly. "Will
it bring food to our mouths, shelter for our bodies--mean life for us?"

"All that is possible. It is the unknowing which is bad."

"True. Unknowing is always bad," Buck agreed. "But the bow which is
fitted to one hand and strength of arm, may not be suited to another.
Remember that, younger brother. Also, do you go alone?"

"With Naginlta and Nalik'ideyu I am not alone."

"Take Tsoay with you also. The four-footed ones are indeed _ga-n_ for
the service of those they like, but it is not good that man walks alone
from his kind."

There it was again, the feeling of clan solidarity which Travis did not
always share. On the other hand, Tsoay would not be a hindrance. On
other scouts the boy had proved to have a keen eye for the country and a
liking for experimentation which was not a universal attribute even
among those of his own age.

"I would go to find a path through the mountains; it may be a long
trail," Travis half protested.

"You believe what you seek may lie to the north?"

Travis shrugged. "I do not know. How can I? But it will be another way
of seeking."

"Tsoay shall go. He keeps silent before older warriors as is proper for
the untried, but his thoughts fly free as do yours," Buck replied. "It
is in him also, this need to see new places."

"There is this," Jil-Lee got to his feet, "--do not go so far, brother,
that you may not easily find a way to return. This is a wide land, and
within it we are but a handful of men alone----"

"That, too, I know." Travis thought he could read more than one kind of
warning in Jil-Lee's words.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were the second day away from the plateau camp, and climbing, when
they chanced upon the pass Travis had hoped might exist. Before them lay
an abrupt descent to what appeared to be open plains country cloaked in
a dusky amber Travis now knew was the thick grass found in the southern
valleys. Tsoay pointed with his chin.

"Wide land--good for horses, cattle, ranches...."

But all those lay far beyond the black space surrounding them. Travis
wondered if there was any native animal which could serve man in place
of the horse.

"Do we go down?" Tsoay asked.

From this point Travis could sight no break far out on the amber plain,
no sign of any building or any disturbance of its smooth emptiness. Yet
it drew him. "We go," he decided.

Close as it had looked from the pass, the plain was yet a day and a
night, spent in careful watching by turns, ahead of them. It was
midmorning of the second day that they left the foothill breaks, and the
grass of the open country was waist high about them. Travis could see it
rippling where the coyotes threaded ahead. Then he was conscious of a
persistent buzzing, a noise which irritated faintly until he was
compelled to trace it to its source.

The grass had been trampled flat for an irregular patch, with a trail
of broken stalks out of the heart of the plain. At one side was a
buzzing, seething mass of glitter-winged insects which Travis already
knew as carrion eaters. They arose reluctantly from their feast as he
approached.

He drew a short breath which was close to a grunt of astounded
recognition. What lay there was so impossible that he could not believe
the evidence of his eyes. Tsoay gave a sharp exclamation, went down on
one knee for a closer examination, then looked at Travis over his
shoulder, his eyes wide, more than a trace of excitement in his voice.

"Horse dung--and fresh!"


5


"There was one horse, unshod but ridden. It came here from the plains
and it had been ridden hard, going lame. There was a rest here, maybe
shortly after dawn." Travis sorted out what they had learned by a
careful examination of the ground.

Nalik'ideyu and Naginlta, Tsoay, watched and listened as if the coyotes
as well as the boy could understand every word.

"There is that also--" Tsoay indicated the one trace left by the unknown
rider, an impression blurred as if some attempt had been made to conceal
it.

"Small and light, the rider is both. Also in fear, I think--"

"We follow?" Tsoay asked.

"We follow," Travis assented. He looked to the coyotes, and as he had
learned to do, thought out his message. This trail was the one to be
followed. When the rider was sighted they were to report back if the
Apaches had not yet caught up.

There was no visible agreement; the coyotes simply vanished through the
wall of grass.

"Then there are others here," Tsoay said as he and Travis began their
return to the foothills. "Perhaps there was a second ship--"

"That horse," Travis said, shaking his head. "There was no provision in
the project for the shipping of horses."

"Perhaps they have always been here."

"Not so. To each world its own species of beasts. But we shall know the
truth when we look upon that horse--and its rider."

It was warmer this side of the mountains, and the heat of the plains
beat at them. Travis thought that the horse might well be seeking water
if allowed his head. Where did he come from? And why had his rider gone
in haste and fear?

This was rough, broken country and the tired, limping horse seemed to
have picked the easiest way through it, without any hindrance from the
man with him. Travis spotted a soft patch of ground with a deep-set
impression. This time there had been no attempt at erasure; the boot
track was plain. The rider had dismounted and was leading the horse--yet
he was moving swiftly.

They followed the tracks around the bend of a shallow cut and found
Nalik'ideyu waiting for them. Between her forefeet was a bundle still
covered with smears of soft earth, and behind her were drag marks from a
hole under the overhang of a bush. The coyote had plainly just
disinterred her find. Travis squatted down to examine it, using his eyes
before his hands.

It was a bag made of hide, probably the hide of one of the split horns
by its color and the scraps of long hair which had been left in a
simple decorative fringe along the bottom. The sides had been laced
together neatly by someone used to working in leather, the closing flap
lashed down tightly with braided thong loops.

As the Apache leaned closer to it he could smell a mixture of odors--the
hide itself, horse, wood smoke, and other scents--strange to him. He
undid the fastenings and pulled out the contents.

There was a shirt, with long full sleeves, of a gray wool undyed from
the sheep. Then a very bulky short jacket which, after fingering it
doubtfully, Travis decided was made of felt. It was elaborately
decorated with highly colorful embroidery, and there was no mistaking
the design--a heavy antlered Terran deer in mortal combat with what
might be a puma. It was bordered with a geometric pattern of beautiful,
oddly familiar work. Travis smoothed it flat over his knee and tried to
remember where he had seen its like before ... a book! An illustration
in a book! But which book, when? Not recently, and it was not a pattern
known to his own people.

Twisted into the interior of the jacket was a silklike scarf, clear,
light blue--the blue of Terra's cloudless skies on certain days, so
different from the yellow shield now hanging above them. A small case of
leather, with silhouetted designs cut from hide and affixed to it,
designs as intricate and complex as the embroidery on the jacket--art of
a high standard. In the case a knife and spoon, the bowl and blade of
dull metal, the handles of horn carved with horse heads, the tiny
wide-open eyes set with glittering stones.

Personal possessions dear to the owner, so that when they must be
abandoned for flight they were hidden with some hope of recovery. Travis
slowly repacked them, trying to fold the garments into their original
creases. He was still puzzled by those designs.

"Who?" Tsoay touched the edge of the jacket with one finger, his
admiration for it plain to read.

"I don't know. But it is of our own world."

"That is a deer, though the horns are wrong," Tsoay agreed. "And the
puma is very well done. The one who made this knows animals well."

Travis pushed the jacket back into the bag and laced it shut. But he did
not return it to the hiding place. Instead, he made it a part of his own
pack. If they did not succeed in running down the fugitive, he wanted an
opportunity for closer study, a chance to remember just where he had
seen that picture before.

The narrow valley where they had discovered the bag sloped upward, and
there were signs that their quarry found the ground harder to cover. The
second discard lay in open sight--again a leather bag which Nalik'ideyu
sniffed and then began to lick eagerly, thrusting her nose into its
flaccid interior.

Travis picked it up, finding it damp to the touch. It had an odd smell,
like that of sour milk. He ran a finger around inside, brought it out
wet; yet this was neither water bag nor canteen. And he was completely
mystified when he turned it inside out, for though the inner surface was
wet, the bag was empty. He offered it to the coyote, and she took it
promptly.

Holding it firmly to the earth with her forepaws, she licked the
surface, though Travis could see no deposit which might attract her. It
was clear that the bag had once held some sort of food.

"Here they rested," Tsoay said. "Not too far ahead now--"

But now they were in the kind of country where a man could hide in order
to check on his back trail. Travis studied the terrain and then made his
own plans. They would leave the plainly marked trace of the fugitive,
strike out upslope to the east and try to parallel the other's route. In
that maze of rock outcrops and wood copses there was tricky going.

Nalik'ideyu gave a last lick to the bag as Travis signaled her. She
regarded him, then turned her head to survey the country before them. At
last she trotted on, her buff coat melting into the vegetation. With
Naginlta she would scout the quarry and keep watch, leaving the men to
take the longer way around.

Travis pulled off his shirt, folding it into a packet and tucking it
beneath the folds of his sash-belt, just as his ancestors had always
done before a fight. Then he cached his pack and Tsoay's. As they began
the stiff climb they carried only their bows, the quivers slung on their
shoulders, and the long-bladed knives. But they flitted like shadows
and, like the coyotes, their red-brown bodies became indistinguishable
against the bronze of the land.

They should be, Travis judged, not more than an hour away from sundown.
And they had to locate the stranger before the dark closed in. His
respect for their quarry had grown. The unknown might have been driven
by fear, but he held to a good pace and headed intelligently for just
the kind of country which would serve him best. If Travis could only
remember where he had seen the like of that embroidery! It had a
meaning which might be important now....

Tsoay slipped behind a wind-gnarled tree and disappeared. Travis stooped
under a line of bush limbs. Both were working their way south, using the
peak ahead as an agreed landmark, pausing at intervals to examine the
landscape for any hint of a man and horse.

Travis squirmed snake fashion into an opening between two rock pillars
and lay there, the westering sun hot on his bare shoulders and back, his
chin propped on his forearm. In the band holding back his hair he had
inserted some concealing tufts of wiry mountain grass, the ends of which
drooped over his rugged features.

Only seconds earlier he had caught that fragmentary warning from one of
the coyotes. What they sought was very close, it was right down there.
Both animals were in ambush, awaiting orders. And what they found was
familiar, another confirmation that the fugitive was Terran, not native
to Topaz.

With searching eyes, Travis examined the site indicated by the coyotes.
His respect for the stranger was raised another notch. In time either he
or Tsoay might have sighted that hideaway without the aid of the animal
scouts; on the other hand, they might have failed. For the fugitive had
truly gone to earth, using some pocket or crevice in the mountain wall.

There was no sign of the horse, but a branch here and there had been
pulled out of place, the scars of their removal readable when one knew
where to look. Odd, Travis began to puzzle over what he saw. It was
almost as if whatever pursuit the stranger feared would come not at
ground level but from above; the precautions the stranger had taken were
to veil his retreat to the reaches of the mountain side.

Had he expected any trailer to make a flanking move from up that slope
where the Apaches now lay? Travis' teeth nipped the weathered skin of
his forearm. Could it be that at some time during the day's journeying
the fugitive had doubled back, having seen his trackers? But there had
been no traces of any such scouting, and the coyotes would surely have
warned them. Human eyes and ears could be tricked, but Travis trusted
the senses of Naginlta and Nalik'ideyu far above his own.

No, he did not believe that the rider expected the Apaches. But the man
did expect someone or something which would come upon him from the
heights. The heights.... Travis rolled his head slightly to look at the
upper reaches of the hills about him--with suspicion.

In their own journey across the mountains and through the pass they had
found nothing threatening. Dangerous animals might roam there. There had
been some paw marks, one such trail the coyotes had warned against. But
the type of precautions the stranger had taken were against intelligent,
thinking beings, not against animals more likely to track by scent than
by sight.

And if the stranger expected an attack from above, then Travis and Tsoay
must be alert. Travis analyzed each feature of the hillside, setting in
his mind a picture of every inch of ground they must cross. Just as he
had wanted daylight as an ally before, so now was he willing to wait for
the shadows of twilight.

He closed his eyes in a final check, able to recall the details of the
hiding place, knowing that he could reach it when the conditions
favored, without mistake. Then he edged back from his vantage point, and
raising his fingers to his lips, made a small angry chittering, three
times repeated. One of the species inhabiting these heights, as they had
noted earlier, was a creature about as big as the palm of a man's hand,
resembling nothing so much as a round ball of ruffled feathers, though
its covering might actually have been a silky, fluffy fur. Its short
legs could cover ground at an amazing speed, and it had the bold
impudence of a creature with few natural enemies. This was its usual
cry.

Tsoay's hand waved Travis on to where the younger man had taken position
behind the bleached trunk of a fallen tree.

"He hides," Tsoay whispered.

"Against trouble from above." Travis added his own observation.

"But not us, I think."

So Tsoay had come to that conclusion too? Travis tried to gauge the
nearness of twilight. There was a period after the passing of Topaz' sun
when the dusky light played odd tricks with shadows. That would be the
first time for their move. He said as much, and Tsoay nodded eagerly.
They sat with their backs to a boulder, the tree trunk serving as a
screen, and chewed methodically on ration tablets. There was energy and
sustenance in the tasteless squares which would support men, even though
their stomachs continued to demand the satisfaction of fresh meat.

Taking turns, they dozed a little. But the last banners of Topaz' sun
were still in the sky when Travis judged the shadows cover enough. He
had no way of knowing how the stranger was armed. Though he used a horse
for transportation, he might well carry a rifle and the most modern
Terran sidearms.

The Apaches' bows were little use for infighting, but they had their
knives. However, Travis wanted to take the fugitive unharmed if he
could. There was information he must have. So he did not even draw his
knife as he started downhill.

When he reached a pool of violet dusk at the bottom of the small ravine
Naginlta's eyes regarded him knowingly. Travis signaled with his hand
and thought out what would be the coyotes' part in this surprise attack.
The prick-eared silhouette vanished. Uphill the chitter of a fluff-fur
sounded twice--Tsoay was in position.

A howl ... wailing ... sobbing ... was heard, one of the keening songs
of the _mba'a_. Travis darted forward. He heard the nicker of a
frightened horse, a clicking which could have marked the pawing of hoof
on gravel, saw the brush hiding the stranger's hole tremble, a portion
of it fall away.

Travis sped on, his moccasins making no sound on the ground. One of the
coyotes gave tongue for the second time, the eerie wailing rising to a
yapping which echoed from the rocks about them. Travis poised for a
dive.

Another section of those artfully heaped branches had given way and a
horse reared, its upflung head plainly marked against the sky. A blurred
figure weaved back and forth before it, trying to control the mount. The
stranger had his hands full, certainly no weapon drawn--this was it!

Travis leaped. His hands found their mark, the shoulders of the
stranger. There was a shrill cry from the other as he tried to turn in
the Apache's hold, to face his attacker. But Travis bore them both on,
rolling almost under the feet of the horse, sliding downhill, the
unknown's writhing body pinned down by the Apache's weight and his
clasp, tight as an iron grip, about the other's chest and upper arms.

He felt his opponent go limp, but was suspicious enough not to release
that hold, for the heavy breathing of the stranger was not that of an
unconscious man. They lay so, the unknown still tight in Travis' hold
but no longer fighting. The Apache could hear Tsoay soothing the horse
with the purring words of a practiced horseman.

Still the stranger did not resume the struggle. They could not lie in
this position all night, Travis thought with a wry twist of amusement.
He shifted his hold, and got the lightning-quick response he had
expected. But it was not quite quick enough, for Travis had the other's
hands behind his back, cupping slender, almost delicate wrists together.

"Throw me a cord!" he called to Tsoay.

The younger man ran up with an extra bow cord, and in a moment they had
bonds on the struggling captive. Travis rolled their catch over,
reaching down for a fistful of hair to pull the head into a patch of
clearer light.

In his grasp that hair came loose, a braid unwinding. He grunted as he
looked down into the stranger's face. Dust marks were streaked now with
tear runnels, but the gray eyes which turned fiercely on him said that
their owner cried more in rage than fear.

His captive might be wearing long trousers tucked into curved, toed
boots, and a loose overblouse, but she was certainly not only a woman,
but a very young and attractive one. Also, at the present moment, an
exceedingly angry one. And behind that anger was fear, the fear of one
fighting hopelessly against insurmountable odds. But as she eyed Travis
now her expression changed.

He felt she had expected another captor altogether and was astounded at
the sight of him. Her tongue touched her lips, moistening them, and now
the fear in her was another kind--the wary fear of one facing a totally
new and perhaps dangerous thing.

"Who are you?" Travis spoke in English, for he had no doubts that she
was Terran.

Now she sucked in her breath with a gasp of pure astonishment.

"Who are _you_?" she parroted his question in a marked accent. English
was not her native tongue, he was sure.

Travis reached out, and again his hands closed on her shoulders. She
started to twist and then realized he was merely pulling her up to a
sitting position. Some of the fear had left her eyes, an intent interest
taking its place.

"You are not Sons of the Blue Wolf," she stated in her heavily accented
speech.

Travis smiled. "I am the Fox, not the Wolf," he returned. "And the
Coyote is my brother." He snapped his fingers at the shadows, and the
two animals came noiselessly into sight. Her gaze widened even more at
Naginlta and Nalik'ideyu, and she deduced the bond which must exist
between her captor and the beasts.

"This woman is also of our world." Tsoay spoke in Apache, looking over
their prisoner with frank interest. "Only she is not of the People."

Sons of the Blue Wolf? Travis thought again of the embroidery designs on
the jacket. Who had called themselves by that picturesque
title--where--and when in time?

"What do you fear, Daughter of the Blue Wolf?" he asked.

And with that question he seemed to touch some button activating terror.
She flung back her head so that she could see the darkening sky.

"The flyer!" Her voice was muted as if more than a whisper would carry
to the stars just coming into brilliance above them. "They will come ...
tracking. I did not reach the inner mountains in time."

There was a despairing note in that which cut through to Travis, who
found that he, too, was searching the sky, not knowing what he looked
for or what kind of menace it promised, only that it was real danger.


6


"The night comes," Tsoay spoke slowly in English. "Do these you fear
hunt in the dark?"

She shook her head to free her forehead from a coil of braid, pulled
loose in her struggle with Travis.

"They do not need eyes or such noses as those four-footed hunters of
yours. They have a machine to track--"

"Then what purpose is this brush pile of yours?" Travis raised his chin
at the disturbed hiding place.

"They do not constantly use the machine, and one can hope. But at night
they can ride on its beam. We are not far enough into the hills to lose
them. Bahatur went lame, and so I was slowed...."

"And what lies in these mountains that those you fear dare not invade
them?" Travis continued.

"I do not know, save if one can climb far enough inside, one is safe
from pursuit."

"I ask it again: Who are you?" The Apache leaned forward, his face in
the fast-fading light now only inches away from hers. She did not shrink
from his close scrutiny but met him eye to eye. This was a woman of
proud independence, truly a chief's daughter, Travis decided.

"I am of the People of the Blue Wolf. We were brought across the star
lanes to make this world safe for ... for ... the...." She hesitated,
and now there was a shade of puzzlement on her face. "There is a
reason--a dream. No, there is the dream and there is reality. I am
Kaydessa of the Golden Horde, but sometimes I remember other
things--like this speech of strange words I am mouthing now----"

"The Golden Horde!" Travis knew now. The embroidery, Sons of the Blue
Wolf, all fitted into a special pattern. But what a pattern! Scythian
art, the ornament that the warriors of Genghis Khan bore so proudly.
Tatars, Mongols--the barbarians who had swept from the fastness of the
steppes to change the course of history, not only in Asia but across the
plains of middle Europe. The men of the Emperor Khans who had ridden
behind the yak-tailed standards of Genghis Khan, Kublai Khan,
Tamerlane--!

"The Golden Horde," Travis repeated once again. "That lies far back in
the history of another world, Wolf Daughter."

She stared at him, a queer, lost expression on her dust-grimed face.

"I know." Her voice was so muted he could hardly distinguish the words.
"My people live in two times, and many do not realize that."

Tsoay had crouched down beside them to listen. Now he put out his hand,
touching Travis' shoulder.

"Redax?"

"Or its like." For Travis was sure of one point. Two great armies whose
Ideal Bursts into the earnest Real.

Ideals twain, on battle height Flaming into radiant light!

One, is Freedom over all; One, is Slavery's tyrant thrall:

These are written on the plain 'Mid the Battle's fiery rain.

These the Powers that must contend To the dark and bitter end.

Look upon the Nation's dead!
Lo, the blood of martyrs shed!

Dying that our Country may Know her Resurrection day!

What shall be the Traitor's gain?
Endless scorn, undying pain.

Ever o'er the giant wrong Sings the Right her triumph song.

Yes, as sure as God doth reign Right the mastery shall obtain!

Over all these beauteous lands These two Brothers clasp their hands.

These two Brothers now at strife Make one heart, one soul, one
life!

This at last will be their song:
'One forever, free, and strong.'
Northmen, ye have not in hate Closed the heart's fraternal gate!

Ye have not for greed, nor gold, Forged the slave-chains manifold!

But in patience ye have wrought Out your Godlike, freeborn thought!

Ye have toiled that man might be Clothed with truth and liberty.

God hath answered from the skies; Bids you for His own arise!

Now the work is at your door:

Help His meek and suffering poor!

There are hearts uncomforted, Weeping o'er the battle-dead.

There are wounded brave ones here:
Bring your hearts of kindness near!

Freedmen shiver at your gate-- Let them not forgotten wait!

Bind the wounded heart that bleeds; Mould your _speeches_ into _deeds!_

This is what all true hearts say:

'Glorious is our work to-day!'

LITERARY NOTICES.

DREAMTHORP; A Book of Essays written in the Country. By ALEXANDER
SMITH, Author of 'A Life Drama,' 'City Poems,' etc. Boston: J.E. Tilton
& Company. For sale by Walter Low, 823 Broadway. New York.

We have been very unexpectedly charmed with this volume. Inverted and
fantastical as he may be in his poems, Mr. Smith's essays are fresh,
natural, racy, and genial. They are models in their way, and we wish our
contributors would study them as such. Each essay is
complete in itself; every sentence full of interest; there is no straining
for effect, no writing to astonish a _blasé_ audience, no show of
unwonted erudition; but the light of a poet's soul, the sunshine
of a calm and loving heart, are streaming and brooding over all
these gentle pages.

Knowledge is indeed within them, but it has ripened into wisdom; culture
has matured into wine with the summer in its glow--yet, notwithstanding
its many excellences, the book is so quiet, true, and natural, we
know not what favor it may find among us. We were pleased to see
that in 'A Shelf in My Book-case' our own Hawthorne had a conspicuous
place. 'Twice-Told Tales' is an especial favorite with Mr. Smith,
as it indeed is with most imaginative people.

His analysis of Hawthorne is very fine, and it is like meeting with an
old friend in a foreign land to come across the name so dear to
ourselves in these pages from across the sea.

Equally pleasant to us is the Chapter on Vagabonds.

'A fellow feeling makes us wondrous kind,' and, confessing ourselves
to be one of this genus, we dwell with delight on our author's
genial description of their naive pleasures and innocent eccentricities.

Mr.

Smith says: 'The true vagabond is to be met with among actors,
poets, painters.

These may grow in any way their nature dictates. They are not required
to conform to any traditional pattern. A little more
air and light should be let in upon life.

I should think the world had stood long enough under the drill of
Adjutant Fashion.

It is hard work; the posture is wearisome, and Fashion is an awful
martinet and has a quick eye, and comes down mercilessly on the unfortunate
wight who cannot square his toes to the approved pattern, or who
appears upon parade with a darn in his coat or with a shoulder belt
insufficiently pipe-clayed.

It is killing work.
Suppose we try 'standing at ease' for a little?'

SCENES AND THOUGHTS IN EUROPE. By GEORGE H. CALVERT, Author of 'The
Gentleman.' Boston: Little, Brown & Company. A new edition of a work first
published in 1846.

Mr. Calvert is a writer of considerable vigor, but we think these 'Scenes
and Thoughts' seriously injured by the hatred of Catholicity which breathes
everywhere through them. We miss in them the large, liberal, and loving
spirit which characterized 'The Gentleman.' Charity is the soul of
wisdom, and we can never rightly appreciate that which we hate. Mr.
Calvert totally ignores all the good and humanizing effects of the
Catholic Church, and sees only the faults and follies of those who
minister at her altars.

Not the least cheering example of the progress we are daily making, is
the improvement in this respect in our late books of travels.

We have ceased to denounce in learning to describe aright, and feel
the pulsations of a kindred heart, though it beat under the scarlet
robe of the cardinal, the dalmatic of the priest, or the coarse
serge of the friar.

'My son, give me thy heart,' says our God. If we can deem from a life
of self-abnegation a man has so done, we have ceased inquiring into
the dogmas of his creed. It is the heart and not the intellect which
is required, 'Little children, love one another,' is the true law of
life, progress, and human happiness.

SOUNDINGS FROM THE ATLANTIC, by OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.

Boston:

Ticknor & Fields. For sale by D. Appleton & Co., New York.

As the title indicates, the essays contained in this volume are already
known to the readers of _The Atlantic_.

Wherever Dr. Holmes sounds, he is sure to light upon pearls and golden
sands, and scatter them about with a profusion so reckless that we feel
convinced the supply is not to be exhausted. Scientist and poet,
analyst and creator, full of keen satire, genial humor, and tender
pathos, who may compete with him in varied gifts, or rival the
charm of intellectual grace which he breathes at will into all he
writes?

The contents of this volume are: 'Bread and the Newspaper,' 'My
Hunt After the Captain,' 'The Stereoscope and the Stereograph,'
'Sun Painting and Sun Sculpture,' 'Doings of the Sunbeam,' 'The
Human Wheel, its Spokes and Felloes,' 'A Visit to the Autocrat's
Landlady,' 'A Visit to the Asylum for Aged and Decayed Punsters,'
'The Great Instrument,' 'The Inevitable Trial.'

HINTS FOR THE NURSERY; or, The Young Mother's Guide.

By Mrs. C. A. HOPKINSON. Boston: Little, Brown & Company, 1863. For sale
by Blakeman & Mason.

A valuable and instructive little book, eminently calculated to spare the
rising generation many a pang in body and mind, and the youthful mother
many a heartache.

LIFE AND LETTERS OF JOHN WINTHROP, Governor of the Massachusetts Bay
Company, at their Emigration to New England, 1630. By ROBERT C. WINTHROP.
Boston: Ticknor & Fields. For sale by D. Appleton & Co., New York.

This work is dedicated to the Massachusetts Historical Society, who have
honored the author with their presidency for eight years past. It is
rather an autobiography than a biography, and an autobiography of the
most trustworthy kind, 'written accidentally and unconsciously, as it
were, in familiar letters or private journals, or upon the records of
official service.' Such a Life is the volume before us. The most skilful
use has been made of his material by our author.

John Winthrop the elder, through contemporaneous records, in the familiar
language of private correspondence and diary, tells us the story of a
considerable part of his career in his own words, Cotton Mather says of
him: ...

'This third Adam Winthrop was the father of that renowned John Winthrop,
who was the father of New England, and the founder of a colony, which,
upon many accounts, like him that founded it, may challenge the
first place among the English glories of America.'

The volume also offers us in great detail a picture not only of the
outward life, but of the inmost thoughts, motives, and principles
of the American Puritans.

Valuable to the antiquarian, it will also interest, in its naive
pictures of home life, the general reader.

The brave and brilliant Theodore Winthrop, who gave up his young
life to his country in the battle of Big Bethel, has rendered this
name dear to all loyal Americans.

ROUND THE BLOCK. An American Novel. With Illustrations.
New York: D. Appleton & Co., 443 and 445 Broadway.

A Novel of American life, incident, and character. The style is easy,
the tale interesting, the moral healthful. There is considerable humor
in the delineation of character. The people drawn are such as we have
all known, sketched without exaggeration, and actuated by constantly
occurring motives. The book is anonymous, but we believe the author
will yet be known to fame, Tiffles and Patching are true to life,
and the exhibition of the 'Pannyrarmer' worthy of Dickens.

THE LIFE OF JESUS. By ERNEST RENAN, Membre de l'Institut. Translated
from the original French by Charles Edwin Wilbour, translator of
'Les Misérables.'

New York: Carlton, publisher, 413 Broadway.

A book which has attained a sudden and wide circulation, if not a
lasting popularity, in France.

We look upon it as a _romance_ based upon the Sacred History of the Gospels.
It is artistically constructed, and written with considerable genius.
'It is dramatic, beginning with a pastoral and ending with the
direst of human tragedies.'

M. Renan we suppose to be a Pantheist.

He says: 'As to myself, I think that there is not in the universe
an intelligence superior to that of man.'

This view of course leads him to discard supernaturalism, and write
of Christ as simply man.

He believes as suits his system, and refuses testimony--without
condescending to tell us why it is not equally as valid as that received.
He says: 'The highest consciousness of God that ever existed in the
bosom of humanity, was that of Jesus.' He is the 'universal ideal'--and
yet we think he strives to make of this 'universal ideal' an
impostor!

Christ tells us of various facts with regard to himself: of his divine
Sonhood and mission--if these things are not true, then was he
either weakly self-deceived or a wilful deceiver. He sets up a claim
to the working of miracles, and assumes the part of the Messiah of the
prophets. This want of truth M. Renan smooths over by saying: 'Sincerity
with oneself had not much meaning with Orientals; they are little
habituated to the delicate distinctions of the critical spirit!'

The resurrection of Lazarus, as he represents it, was a pious fraud managed
by the apostles, agreed to by the Master, 'because he knew not how to
conquer the greediness of the crowd and of his own disciples for
the marvellous.' Does not the mere fact of such an acquiescence argue
the impostor? Christ seeks death to deliver himself from his fearful
embarrassments! Did he really rise from the dead? M.

Renan tells us, with a sickly sentimentalism worthy of Michelet: 'The
powerful imagination of Mary of Magdala played in that affair a capital
part. Divine power of love! Sacred moments, when the passion of a
visionary gives to the world a resuscitated God.' If this be indeed the
Life of Jesus, well may we exclaim with the apostle: 'If in this life
only we have hope in Christ, we are, of all men, the most miserable.'

And is this all that the most advanced naturalism can do? All that human
genius and erudition can offer us? All that artistic grace
and tenderness can win for us? Clouds and darkness rise before us as
we read, the mother of our Lord loses her sanctity, Jesus becomes
an impostor, the apostles deceivers, human testimony is forever
dishonored.

A pall shrouds the infinite blue of the sky, and our beloved dead
seem festering in eternal corruption!

We must confess we prefer the bold and defiant scepticism of Voltaire, to
the Judas kiss of M. Renan.

EDITOR'S TABLE.

ART ITEMS.

Among our exchanges is a little periodical entitled '_The New Path_,
published by the Society for the Advancement of Truth in Art.'

The members of this Society are otherwise known as 'Pre-Raphaelites,'
in other words, as seekers of the Ancient Path, trodden before
certain mannerisms had corrupted the minds of many painters and
most technical connoisseurs.

Their aims and principles are, so far as they go, pure and lofty.

Truth in Art is a noble thing. But can these gentlemen find none outside
of their own society?

The face of nature is very dear to us, and during long years have we
closely observed its forms, its changing hues and expressions. We do like
when we look at a picture to know whether the trees be oaks, elms,
or pines; whether the rocks be granitic, volcanic, or stratified;
whether the foliage be of spring, midsummer, or autumn; even whether
the foreground herbage be of grasses or broad-leaved weeds; but is
there no danger that minutiæ may absorb too much attention, that
the larger parts may be lost in the lesser, that while each weed
tells its own story, the distant mountains, the atmosphere, the
whole picture, in short, may fail to tell us theirs in any interesting
or even intelligible manner?

In excess of surface details, may we not lose body, roundness; and, in
matching exact color rather than the effect of color through the tremulous
ether, may not the subtle mysteries of distance, of actually diffused and
all-suffusing light, escape the painter? It is possible to possess the
body and fail to grasp the life. Give us not blotchy nondescripts for
natural objects, fling to the winds all narrow, school-made,
conventional ideas, but, in giving us the real, give us the ideal
also; otherwise we freeze, missing the spirit which should warm and
shine through the letter.

We fear lest in his zeal for truth, many a Pre-Raphaelite may be led
to overlook beauty. To a finite mind the two words are by no means
synonymous. There can be no _real_ beauty without truth, but many truths
are not beautiful, and beauty, no less than truth, is an important
ingredient in that complex resultant, Art.

We quote from one of the articles of organization of the above-named
Society: 'The right course for young artists is faithful and loving
representations of Nature, selecting nothing and rejecting nothing,
seeking only to express the greatest possible amount of fact.'

Now we all know that the best way to stultify the mind and conception
of a youthful student, in any branch of art, is to keep before him
commonplace models.

Indeed, what student gifted with genius, or even with any high degree
of talent, will not (if unrestrained) himself select as studies, not
any mere chronicle of desired facts, but the most significant forms
(suited to his proficiency) in which he can find those facts
embodied?

The article quoted must be based upon the belief that there are no
commonplace, ugly objects in nature. If we sit down and reason over, or
use our microscopes upon any work of the Almighty, we can find wisdom
and beauty therein, but that does not alter the fact that beauty and
significance are distributed in degrees of more and less. 'Art is long
and time is fleeting,' and the genuine artist has no hours to waste
over the less significant and characteristic. Besides, each student
deserving the name, has his own individuality, and will naturally
select, and the more lovingly paint, objects in accordance with
his especial bent of mind.

Not that we would have him become one-sided, and neglect the study of
matters that might some day be useful; but in this, as in all things else,
he must temper feeling with judgment, and make the mechanical
execution the simple, faithful handmaiden to truly imaginative
conception.

In the moral world we may cheerfully accept physical deformity for the
sake of some elevated principle therewith developed; but in the
realm of art, man's only sphere of creation, we want the best the
artist can give us, the greatest truth with the highest beauty.

We are not willing to take the truth without the beauty.

If we are to be told that sunlight tipping the edges of trees produces
certain effects upon those edges and the shadowed foliage behind, let
the fact be worthily represented, and not so prosily set forth that the
picture shall be to us simply a matter of curiosity.

That those trees did actually stand and grow thus, is small comfort,
for the artist might surely have found other and more interesting
forms telling the same tale. If light falling through loose foliage does
indeed make upon the garments of a lad lying beneath spots at a little
distance wonderfully like mildew, then rather let the boy sit for
us under a tree of denser foliage, where a pathetic subject will
not risk an unintentionally comic treatment.

If a stone-breaker's face corrupts in purple spots at a certain
period after death, we would prefer him painted before corruption,
and consequently hideousness, had begun.

If women will wear gowns ugly in color and form, and will sit or stand in
graceless positions, we can readily avoid such subjects, and bestow our
careful finish upon more worthy models.

Let us not be misunderstood; we well know that the humorous, the grotesque,
the sublime may use ugliness to serve their own legitimate purposes,
but then that ugliness must be humorous, grotesque, or sublime, and
not flat, prosy, or revolting.

A blemish is by no means necessarily an ugliness. A leaf nibbled by
insects and consequently discolored, a lad with ragged jacket and soiled
trowsers, a peasant girl with bent hat and tattered gown, are often
more picturesque objects than the perfect leaf or the well-attired
child.

Speaking of a certain artist, _The New Path_ says: 'He follows nature
as long as she is graceful and does not offend his eye, but once let
her make what strikes him as a discord, and which is a discord, of course,
for she, the great poet, makes no music without discords--and,
straightway, Mr. ---- takes out the offending note, smooths it down,
and thinks he has bettered nature's work.'

Now, in music there are no _discords_; so soon as a discord
is admitted, the sounds cease to be music;--there are _dissonances_,
peculiar and unusual combinations of air vibrations, but these are
never long dwelt on, and must always be resolved into the full and
satisfactory harmony, of which the beauty is enhanced by the momentary
lapse into strangeness.

Dissonance is never the prevailing idea, and above all, never the final,
closing one; it must always bear a certain relation to the key in
which it is used, and the musical composition must be ended
by the fullest and most satisfactory chord, or suggestion of a chord,
found in that key.

The majority of the Pre-Raphaelite school are willing to admit that
'there is but one Turner, and Ruskin is his prophet.'

Let us then hear _one_ of the views which the eloquent oracle has
advanced in connection with this subject.

After advising the non-imaginative painter to remain in the region of
the purely topographical or historical landscape, he continues;
'But, beyond this, let him note that though historical topography
forbids _alteration_ (did Turner heed this precept?)

, it neither forbids sentiment nor choice. So far from doing this, the
proper choice of subject is an absolute duty to the topographical
painter: he should first take care that it is a subject intensely
pleasing to himself, else he will never paint it well; and then
also, that it shall be one in some sort pleasurable to the general
public, else it is not worth painting at all; and lastly, take care
that it be instructive, as well as pleasurable to the public, else
it is not worth painting with care.

I should particularly insist at present on this careful choice of subject,
because the Pre-Raphaelites, taken as a body, have been culpably
negligent in this respect, not in humble honor of Nature, but in
morbid indulgence of their own impressions. They happen to find their
fancies caught by a bit of an oak hedge, or the weeds at the sides
of a duck pond, because, perhaps, they remind them of a stanza of
Tennyson; and forthwith they sit down to sacrifice the most consummate
skill, two or three months of the best summer time available for
outdoor work (equivalent to some seventieth or sixtieth of all their
lives), and nearly all their credit with the public, to this duck-pond
delineation.

Now it is indeed quite right that they should see much to be loved
in the hedge, nor less in the ditch; but it is utterly and inexcusably
wrong that they should neglect the nobler scenery, which is full
of majestic interest, or enchanted by historical association; so
that, as things go at present, we have all the commonalty, that may
be seen whenever we choose, painted properly; but all of lovely and
wonderful, which we cannot see but at rare intervals, painted vilely:
the castles of the Rhine and Rhone made vignettes of for the annuals;
and the nettles and mushrooms, which were prepared by nature eminently
for nettle porridge and fish sauce, immortalized by art as reverently
as if we were Egyptians, and they deities.'

Want of space forbids further extracts, but we recommend the entire
chapter: Of Turnerian Topography, Modern Painters, vol. iv., to the
perusal of our readers.

We are glad to see the national mind beginning to effervesce on art
subjects. The most opposite views, the new and the old, the conventional
and the truly imaginative, the severely real and the more latitudinarian,
the earnest and the flippant, the pedantic and the broad, far
reaching--will continue to clash for a season, while a school of
American Landscape is, we think, destined to rise steadily through
the chaotic elements, and to reach a height of excellence to which
the conscientious efforts of all advocates of the highest Truth in
Art will have greatly contributed.

We are indebted to Mr. Cropsey for a pleasant opportunity to visit his
studio (No. 625 Broadway), and see such pictures and sketches as he now
has by him, the results of a long residence abroad and of his summer
work among the hills of Sussex, N. J. A view of Korfe Castle, Dorsetshire,
England, is a highly-finished and evidently accurate representation
of that interesting spot.

"Daughter of the Wolf," he spoke slowly. "Remember!" Travis made that an
order, an emphatic appeal to the mind under the influence of the caller.

She frowned, the struggle she was making naked on her face. Then she
answered:

"You--Fox--"

Travis grunted with relief, his alarm subsiding. Then she _could_
remember.

"Yes," he responded eagerly.

But she was gazing about, her puzzlement growing. "Where is this--?"

"We are higher in the mountains."

Now fear was pushing out bewilderment. "How did I come here?"

"I brought you." Swiftly he outlined what had happened at their night
camp.

The hand which had been at her head was now pressed tight across her
lips as if she were biting furiously into its flesh to still some panic
of her own, and her gray eyes were round and haunted.

"You are free now," Travis said.

Kaydessa nodded, and then dropped her hand to speak. "You brought me
away from the hunters. You did not have to obey them?"

"I heard nothing."

"You do not hear--you feel!" She shuddered. "Please." She clawed at the
stone beside her, pulling up to her feet. "Let us go--let us go quickly!
They will try again--move farther in--"

"Listen," Travis had to be sure of one thing--"have they any way of
knowing that they had you under control and that you have again
escaped?"

Kaydessa shook her head, some of the panic again shadowing her eyes.

"Then we'll just go on--" his chin lifted to the wastelands before
them--"try to keep out of their reach."

And away from the pass to the south, he told himself silently. He dared
not lead the enemy to that secret, so he must travel west or hole up
somewhere in this unknown wilderness until they could be sure Kaydessa
was no longer susceptible to that call, or that they were safely beyond
its beamed radius. There was the chance of contacting her outlaw kin,
just as there was the chance of stumbling into a pack of the ape-things.
Before dark they must discover a protected camp site.

They needed water, food. He had a bare half dozen ration tablets. But
the coyotes could locate water.

"Come!" Travis beckoned to Kaydessa, motioning her to climb ahead of him
so that he could watch for any indication of her succumbing once again
to the influence of the enemy. But his burdened early morning flight had
told on Travis more than he thought, and he discovered he could not spur
himself on to a pace better than a walk. Now and again one of the
coyotes, usually Nalik'ideyu, would come into view, express impatience
in both stance and mental signal, and then be gone again. The Apache was
increasingly aware that the animals were disturbed, yet to his tentative
gropings at contact they did not reply. Since they gave no warning of
hostile animal or man, he could only be on constant guard, watching the
countryside about him.

They had been following a ledge for several minutes before Travis was
aware of some strange features of that path. Perhaps he had actually
noted them with a trained eye before his archaeological studies of the
recent past gave him a reason for the faint marks. This crack in the
mountain's skin might have begun as a natural fault, but afterward it
had been worked with tools, smoothed, widened to serve the purpose of
some form of intelligence!

Travis caught at Kaydessa's shoulder to slow her pace. He could not have
told why he did not want to speak aloud here, but he felt the need for
silence. She glanced around, perplexed, more so when he went down on his
knees and ran his fingers along one of those ancient tool marks. He was
certain it was very old. Inside of him anticipation bubbled. A road made
with such labor could only lead to something of importance. He was going
to make the discovery, the dream which had first drawn him into these
mountains.

"What is it?" Kaydessa knelt beside him, frowning at the ledge.

"This was cut by someone, a long time ago," Travis half whispered and
then wondered why. There was no reason to believe the road makers could
hear him when perhaps a thousand years or more lay between the chipping
of that stone and this day.

The Tatar girl looked over her shoulder. Perhaps she too was troubled by
the sense that here time was subtly telescoped, that past and present
might be meeting. Or was that feeling with them both because of their
enforced conditioning?

"Who?" Now her voice sank in turn.

"Listen--" he regarded her intently--"did your people or the Reds ever
find any traces of the old civilization here--ruins?"

"No." She leaned forward, tracing with her own finger the same
almost-obliterated marks which had intrigued Travis. "But I think they
have looked. Before they discovered that we could be free, they sent out
parties--to hunt, they said--but afterward they always asked many
questions about the country. Only they never asked about ruins. Is that
what they wished us to find? But why? Of what value are old stones piled
on one another?"

"In themselves, little, save for the knowledge they may give us of the
people who piled them. But for what the stones might contain--much
value!"

"And how do you know what they might contain, Fox?"

"Because I have seen such treasure houses of the star men," he returned
absently. To him the marks on the ledge were a pledge of greater
discoveries to come. He must find where that carefully constructed road
ran--to what it led. "Let us see where this will take us."

But first he gave the chittering signal in four sharp bursts. And the
tawny-gray bodies came out of the tangled brush, bounding up to the
ledge. Together the coyotes faced him, their attention all for his
halting communication.

Ruins might lie ahead; he hoped that they did. But on another planet
such ruins had twice proved to be deadly traps, and only good fortune
had prevented their closing on Terran explorers. If the ape-things or
any other dangerous form of life had taken up residence before them, he
wanted good warning.

Together the coyotes turned and loped along the now level way of the
ledge, disappearing around a curve fitted to the mountain side while
Travis and Kaydessa followed.

They heard it before they saw its source--a waterfall. Probably not a
large one, but high. Rounding the curve, they came into a fine mist of
spray where sunlight made rainbows of color across a filmy veil of
water.

For a long moment they stood entranced. Kaydessa then gave a little cry,
held out her hands to the purling mist and brought them to her lips
again to suck the gathered moisture.

Water slicked the surface of the ledge, and Travis pushed her back
against the wall of the cliff. As far as he could discern, their road
continued behind the out-flung curtain of water, and footing on the wet
stone was treacherous. With their backs to the solid security of the
wall, facing outward into the solid drape of water, they edged behind it
and came out into rainbowed sunlight again.

Here either provident nature or ancient art had hollowed a pocket in the
stone which was filled with water. They drank. Then Travis filled his
canteen while Kaydessa washed her face, holding the cold freshness of
the moisture to her cheeks with both palms.

She spoke, but he could not hear her through the roar. She leaned closer
and raised her voice to a half shout:

"This is a place of spirits! Do you not also feel their power, Fox?"

Perhaps for a space out of time he did feel something. This was a
watering place, perhaps a never-ceasing watering place--and to his
desert-born-and-bred race all water was a spirit gift never to be taken
for granted. The rainbow--the Spirit People's sacred sign--old beliefs
stirred in Travis, moving him. "I feel," he said, nodding in emphasis to
his agreement.

They followed the ledge road to a section where a landslide of an
earlier season had choked it. Travis worked a careful way across the
debris, Kaydessa obeying his guidance in turn. Then they were on a
sloping downward way which led to a staircase--the treads weather-worn
and crumbling, the angle so steep Travis wondered if it had ever been
intended for beings with a physique approximating the Terrans'.

They came to a cleft where an arch of stone was chiseled out as a
roofing. Travis thought he could make out a trace of carving on the
capstone, so worn by years and weather that it was now only a faint
shadow of design.

The cleft was a door into another valley. Here, too, golden mist swirled
in tendrils to disguise and cloak what stood there. Travis had found his
ruins. Only the structures were intact, not breached by time.

Mist flowed in lapping tongues back and forth, confusing outlines, now
shuttering, now baring oval windows which were spaced in diamonds of
four on round tower surfaces. There were no visible cracks, no cloaking
of climbing vegetation, nothing to suggest age and long roots in the
valley. Nor did the architecture he could view match any he had seen on
those other worlds.

Travis strode away from the cleft doorway. Under his moccasins was a
block pavement, yellow and green stone set in a simple pattern of
checks. This, too, was level, unchipped and undisturbed, save for a
drift or two of soil driven in by the wind. And nowhere could he see any
vegetation.

The towers were of the same green stone as half the pavement blocks, a
glassy green which made him think of jade--if jade could be mined in
such quantities as these five-story towers demanded.

Nalik'ideyu padded to him, and he could hear the faint click of her
claws on the pavement. There was a deep silence in this place, as if the
air itself swallowed and digested all sound. The wind which had been
with them all the day of their journeying was left beyond the cleft.

Yet there was life here. The coyote told him that in her own way. She
had not made up her mind concerning that life--wariness and curiosity
warred in her now as her pointed muzzle lifted toward the windows
overhead.

The windows were all well above ground level, but there was no opening
in the first stories as far as Travis could see. He debated moving into
the range of those windows to investigate the far side of the towers for
doorways. The mist and the message from Nalik'ideyu nourished his
suspicions. Out in the open he would be too good a target for whatever
or whoever might be standing within the deep-welled frames.

The silence was shattered by a boom. Travis jumped, slewed half around,
knife in hand.

Boom-boom ... a second heavy beat-beat ... then a clangor with a
swelling echo.

Kaydessa flung back her head and called, her voice rising up as if
tunneled by the valley walls. She then whistled as she had done when
they fronted the ape-thing and ran on to catch at Travis' sleeve, her
face eager.

"My people! Come--it is my people!"

She tugged him on before breaking into a run, weaving fearlessly around
the base of one of the towers. Travis ran after her, afraid he might
lose her in the mist.

Three towers, another stretch of open pavement, and then the mist lifted
to show them a second carved doorway not two hundred yards ahead. The
boom-boom seemed to pull Kaydessa, and Travis could do nothing but trail
her, the coyotes now trotting beside him.


8


They burst through a last wide band of mist into a wilderness of tall
grass and shrubs. Travis heard the coyotes give tongue, but it was too
late. Out of nowhere whirled a leather loop, settling about his chest,
snapping his arms tight to his body, taking him off his feet with a jerk
to be dragged helplessly along the ground behind a galloping horse.

A tawny fury sprang in the air to snap at the horse's head. Travis
kicked fruitlessly, trying to regain his feet as the horse reared, and
fought against the control of his shouting rider. All through the melee
the Apache heard Kaydessa shrilly screaming words he did not understand.

Travis was on his knees, coughing in the dust, exerting the muscles in
his chest and shoulders to loosen the lariat. On either side of him the
coyotes wove a snarling pattern of defiance, dashing back and forth to
present no target for the enemy, yet keeping the excited horses so
stirred up that their riders could use neither ropes nor blades.

Then Kaydessa ran between two of the ringing horses to Travis and jerked
at the loop about him. The tough, braided leather eased its hold, and he
was able to gasp in full lungfuls of air. She was still shouting, but
the tone had changed from one of recognition to a definite scolding.

Travis won to his feet just as the rider who had lassoed him finally got
his horse under rein and dismounted. Holding the rope, the man walked
hand over hand toward them, as Travis back on the Arizona range would
have approached a nervous, unschooled pony.

The Mongol was an inch or so shorter than the Apache, and his face was
young, though he had a drooping mustache bracketing his mouth with
slender spear points of black hair. His breeches were tucked into high
red boots, and he wore a loose felt jacket patterned with the same
elaborate embroidery Travis had seen on Kaydessa's. On his head was a
hat with a wide fur border--in spite of the heat--and that too bore
touches of scarlet and gold design.

Still holding his lariat, the Mongol reached Kaydessa and stood for a
moment, eying her up and down before he asked a question. She gave an
impatient twitch to the rope. The coyotes snarled, but the Apache
thought the animals no longer considered the danger immediate.

"This is my brother Hulagur." Kaydessa made the introduction over her
shoulder. "He does not have your speech."

Hulagur not only did not understand, he was also impatient. He jerked at
the rope with such sudden force that Travis was almost thrown. Then
Kaydessa dragged as fiercely on the lariat in the other direction and
burst into a soaring harangue which drew the rest of the men closer.

Travis flexed his upper arms, and the slack gained by Kaydessa's action
made the lariat give again. He studied the Tatar outlaws. There were
five of them beside Hulagur, lean men, hard-faced, narrow-eyed, the
ragged clothing of three pieced out with scraps of hide. Besides the
swords with the curved blades, they were armed with bows, two to each
man, one long, one shorter. One of the riders carried a lance, long
tassels of woolly hair streaming from below its head. Travis saw in them
a formidable array of barbaric fighting men, but he thought that man for
man the Apaches could not only take on the Mongols with confidence, but
might well defeat them.

The Apache had never been a hot-headed, ride-for-glory fighter like the
Cheyenne, the Sioux, and the Comanche of the open plains. He estimated
the odds against him, used ambush, trick, and every feature of the
countryside as weapon and defense. Fifteen Apache fighting men under
Chief Geronimo had kept five thousand American and Mexican troops in the
field for a year and had come off victorious for the moment.

Travis knew the tales of Genghis Khan and his formidable generals who
swept over Asia into Europe, unbeaten and seemingly undefeatable. But
they had been a wild wave, fed by a reservoir of manpower from the
steppes of their homeland, utilizing driven walls of captives to protect
their own men in city assaults and attacks. He doubted if even that
endless sea of men could have won the Arizona desert defended by Apaches
under Cochise, Victorio, or Magnus Colorado. The white man had done
it--by superior arms and attrition; but bow against bow, knife against
sword, craft and cunning against craft and cunning--he did not think
so....

Hulagur dropped the end of the lariat, and Kaydessa swung around,
loosening the loop so that the rope fell to Travis' feet. The Apache
stepped free of it, turned and passed between two of the horsemen to
gather up the bow he had dropped. The coyotes had gone with him and when
he turned again to face the company of Tatars, both animals crowded past
him to the entrance of the valley, plainly urging him to retire there.

The horsemen had faced about also, and the warrior with the lance
balanced the shaft of the weapon in his hand as if considering the
possibility of trying to spear Travis. But just then Kaydessa came up,
towing Hulagur by a firm hold on his sash-belt.

"I have told this one," she reported to Travis, "how it is between us
and that you also are enemy to those who hunt us. It is well that you
sit together beside a fire and talk of these things."

Again that boom-boom broke her speech, coming from farther out in the
open land.

"You will do this?" She made of it a half question, half statement.

Travis glanced about him. He could dodge back into the misty valley of
the towers before the Tatars could ride him down. However, if he could
patch up some kind of truce between his people and the outlaws, the
Apaches would have only the Reds from the settlement to watch. Too many
times in Terran past had war on two fronts been disastrous.

"I come--carrying this--and not pulled by your ropes." He held up his
bow in an exaggerated gesture so that Hulagur could understand.

Coiling the lariat, the Mongol looked from the Apache bow to Travis.
Slowly, and with obvious reluctance, he nodded agreement.

At Hulagur's call the lancer rode up to the waiting Apache, stretched
out a booted foot in the heavy stirrup, and held down a hand to bring
Travis up behind him riding double. Kaydessa mounted in the same fashion
behind her brother.

Travis looked at the coyotes. Together the animals stood in the door to
the tower valley, and neither made any move to follow as the horses
trotted off. He beckoned with his hand and called to them.

Heads up, they continued to watch him go in company with the Mongols.
Then without any reply to his coaxing, they melted back into the mists.
For a moment Travis was tempted to slide down and run the risk of taking
a lance point between the shoulders as he followed Naginlta and
Nalik'ideyu into retreat. He was startled, jarred by the new awareness
of how much he had come to depend on the animals. Ordinarily, Travis Fox
was not one to be governed by the wishes of a _mba'a_, intelligent and
un-animallike as it might be. This was an affair of men, and coyotes had
no part in it!

Half an hour later Travis sat in the outlaw camp. There were fifteen
Mongols in sight, a half dozen women and two children adding to the
count. On a hillock near their yurts, the round brush-and-hide
shelters--not too different from the wickiups of Travis' own people--was
a crude drum, a hide stretched taut over a hollowed section of log. And
next to that stood a man wearing a tall pointed cap, a red robe, and a
girdle from which swung a fringe of small bones, tiny animal skulls, and
polished bits of stone and carved wood.

It was this man's efforts which sent the boom-boom sounding at intervals
over the landscape. Was this a signal--part of a ritual? Travis was not
certain, though he guessed that the drummer was either medicine man or
shaman, and so of some power in this company. Such men were credited
with the ability to prophesy and also endowed with mediumship between
man and spirit in the old days of the great Hordes.

The Apache evaluated the rest of the company. As was true of his own
party, these men were much the same age--young and vigorous. And it was
also apparent that Hulagur held a position of some importance among
them--if he were not their chief.

After a last resounding roll on the drum, the shaman thrust the sticks
into his girdle and came down to the fire at the center of the camp. He
was taller than his fellows, pole thin under his robes, his face narrow,
clean-shaven, with brows arched by nature to give him an unchanging
expression of scepticism. He strode along, his tinkling collection of
charms providing him with a not unmusical accompaniment, and came to
stand directly before Travis, eying him carefully.

Travis copied his silence in what was close to a duel of wills. There
was that in the shaman's narrowed green eyes which suggested that if
Hulagur did in fact lead these fighting men, he had an advisor of
determination and intelligence behind him.

"This is Menlik." Kaydessa did not push past the men to the fireside,
but her voice carried.

Hulagur growled at his sister, but his admonition made no impression on
her, and she replied in as hot a tone. The shaman's hand went up,
silencing both of them.

"You are--who?" Like Kaydessa, Menlik spoke a heavily accented English.

"I am Travis Fox, of the Apaches."

"The Apaches," the shaman repeated. "You are of the West, the American
West, then."

"You know much, man of spirit talk."

"One remembers. At times one remembers," Menlik answered almost
absently. "How does an Apache find his way across the stars?"

"The same way Menlik and his people did," Travis returned. "You were
sent to settle this planet, and so were we."

"There are many more of you?" countered Menlik swiftly.

"Are there not many of the Horde? Would one man, or three, or four, be
sent to hold a world?" Travis fenced. "You hold the north, we the south
of this land."

"But _they_ are not governed by a machine!" Kaydessa cut in. "They are
free!"

Menlik frowned at the girl. "Woman, this is a matter for warriors. Keep
your tongue silent between your jaws!"

She stamped one foot, standing with her fists on her hips.

"I am a Daughter of the Blue Wolf. And we are all warriors--men and
women alike--so shall we be as long as the Horde is not free to ride
where we wish! These men have won their freedom; it is well that we
learn how."

Menlik's expression did not change, but his lids drooped over his eyes
as a murmur of what might be agreement came from the group. More than
one of them must have understood enough English to translate for the
others. Travis wondered about that. Had these men and women who had
outwardly reverted to the life of their nomad ancestors once been well
educated in the modern sense, educated enough to learn the basic
language of the nation their rulers had set up as their principal enemy?

"So you ride the land south of the mountains?" the shaman continued.

"That is true."

"Then why did you come hither?"

Travis shrugged. "Why does anyone ride or travel into new lands? There
is a desire to see what may lie beyond----"

"Or to scout before the march of warriors!" Menlik snapped. "There is no
peace between your rulers and mine. Do you ride now to take the herds
and pastures of the Horde--or to try to do so?"

Travis turned his head deliberately from side to side, allowing them all
to witness his slow and openly contemptuous appraisal of their camp.

"_This_ is your Horde, Shaman? Fifteen warriors? Much has changed since
the days of Temujin, has it not?"

"What do you know of Temujin--you, who are a man of no ancestors, out of
the West?"

"What do I know of Temujin? That he was a leader of warriors and became
Genghis Khan, the great lord of the East. But the Apaches had their
warlords also, rider of barren lands. And I am of those who raided over
two nations when Victorio and Cochise scattered their enemies as a man
scatters a handful of dust in the wind."

"You talk bold, Apache...." There was a hint of threat in that.

"I speak as any warrior, Shaman. Or are you so used to talking with
spirits instead of men that you do not realize that?"

He might have been alienating the shaman by such a sharp reply, but
Travis thought he judged the temper of these people. To face them boldly
was the only way to impress them. They would not treat with an inferior,
and he was already at a disadvantage coming on foot, without any backing
in force, into a territory held by horsemen who were suspicious and
jealous of their recently acquired freedom. His only chance was to
establish himself as an equal and then try to convince them that Apache
and Tatar-Mongol had a common cause against the Reds who controlled the
settlement on the northern plains.

Menlik's right hand went to his sash-girdle and plucked out a carved
stick which he waved between them, muttering phrases Travis could not
understand. Had the shaman retreated so far along the road to his past
that he now believed in his own supernatural powers? Or was this to
impress his watching followers?

"You call upon your spirits for aid, Menlik? But the Apache has the
companionship of the _ga-n_. Ask of Kaydessa: Who hunts with the Fox in
the wilds?" Travis' sharp challenge stopped that wand in mid-air.
Menlik's head swung to the girl.

"He hunts with wolves who think like men." She supplied the information
the shaman would not openly ask for. "I have seen them act as his
scouts. This is no spirit thing, but real and of this world!"

"Any man may train a dog to his bidding!" Menlik spat.

"Does a dog obey orders which are not said aloud? These brown wolves
come and sit before him, look into his eyes. And then he knows what lies
within their heads, and they know what he would have them do. This is
not the way of a master of hounds with his pack!"

Again the murmur ran about the camp as one or two translated. Menlik
frowned. Then he rammed his sorcerer's wand back into his sash.

"If you are a man of power--such powers," he said slowly, "then you may
walk alone where those who talk with spirits go--into the mountains." He
then spoke over his shoulder in his native tongue, and one of the women
reached behind her into a hut, brought out a skin bag and a horn cup.
Kaydessa took the cup from her and held it while the other woman poured
a white liquid from the bag to fill it.

Kaydessa passed the cup to Menlik. He pivoted with it in his hand,
dribbling expertly over its brim a few drops at each point of the
compass, chanting as he moved. Then he sucked in a mouthful of the
contents before presenting the vessel to Travis.

The Apache smelled the same sour scent that had clung to the emptied bag
in the foothills. And another part of memory supplied him with the
nature of the drink. This was kumiss, a fermented mare's milk which was
the wine and water of the steppes.

He forced himself to swallow a draft, though it was alien to his taste,
and passed the cup back to Menlik. The shaman emptied the horn and,
with that, set aside ceremony. With an upraised hand he beckoned Travis
to the fire again, indicating a pot set on the coals.

"Rest ... eat!" he bade abruptly.

Night was gathering in. Travis tried to calculate how far Tsoay must
have backtracked to the rancheria. He thought that he could have already
made the pass and be within a day and a half from the Apache camp if he
pushed on, as he would. As to where the coyotes were, Travis had no
idea. But it was plain that he himself must remain in this encampment
for the night or risk rousing the Mongols' suspicion once more.

He ate of the stew, spearing chunks out of the pot with the point of his
knife. And it was not until he sat back, his hunger appeased, that the
shaman dropped down beside him.

"The Khatun Kaydessa says that when she was slave to the caller, you did
not feel its chains," he began.

"Those who rule you are not my overlords. The bonds they set upon your
minds do not touch me." Travis hoped that that was the truth and his
escape that morning had not been just a fluke.

"This could be, for you and I are not of one blood," Menlik agreed.
"Tell me--how did you escape your bonds?"

"The machine which held us so was broken," Travis replied with a portion
of the truth, and Menlik sucked in his breath.

"The machines, always the machines!" he cried hoarsely. "A thing which
can sit in a man's head and make him do what it will against his will;
it is demon sent! There are other machines to be broken, Apache."

"Words will not break them," Travis pointed out.

"Only a fool rides to his death without hope of striking a single blow
before he chokes on the blood in his throat," Menlik retorted. "We
cannot use bow or tulwar against weapons which flame and kill quicker
than any storm lightning! And always the mind machines can make a man
drop his knife and stand helplessly waiting for the slave collar to be
set on his neck!"

Travis asked a question of his own. "I know that they can bring a caller
part way into this mountain, for this very day I saw its effect upon the
maiden. But there are many places in the hills well set for ambushes,
and those unaffected by the machine could be waiting there. Would there
be many machines so that they could send out again and again?"

Menlik's bony hand played with his wand. Then a slow smile curved his
lips into the guise of a hunting cat's noiseless snarl.

"There is meat in that pot, Apache, rich meat, good for the filling of a
lean belly! So men whose minds the machine could not trouble--such men
to be waiting in ambush for the taking of the men who use such a
machine--yes. But here would have to be bait, very good bait for such a
trap, Lord of Wiles. Never do those others come far into the mountains.
Their flyer does not lift well here, and they do not trust traveling on
horseback. They were greatly angered to come so far in to reach
Kaydessa, though they could not have been too close, or you would not
have escaped at all. Yes, strong bait."

"Such bait as perhaps the knowledge that there were strangers across the
mountains?"

Menlik turned his wand about in his hands. He was no longer smiling, and
his glance at Travis was sharp and swift.

"Do you sit as Khan in your tribe, Lord?"

"I sit as one they will listen to." Travis hoped that was so. Whether
Buck and the moderates would hold clan leadership upon his return was a
fact he could not count upon as certain.

"This is a thing which we must hold council over," Menlik continued.
"But it is an idea of power. Yes, one to think about, Lord. And I shall
think...."

He got up and moved away. Travis blinked at the fire. He was very tired,
and he disliked sleeping in this camp. But he must not go without the
rest his body needed to supply him with a clear head in the morning. And
not showing uneasiness might be one way of winning Menlik's confidence.


9


Travis settled his back against the spire of rock and raised his right
hand into the path of the sun, cradling in his palm a disk of glistening
metal. Flash ... flash ... he made the signal pattern just as his
ancestors a hundred years earlier and far across space had used trade
mirrors to relay war alerts among the Chiricahua and White Mountain
ranges. If Tsoay had returned safely, and if Buck had kept the agreed
lookout on that peak a mile or so ahead, then the clan would know that
he was coming and with what escort.

He waited now, rubbing the small metal mirror absently on the loose
sleeve of his shirt, waiting for a reply. Mirrors were best, not smoke
fires which would broadcast too far the presence of men in the hills.
Tsoay must have returned....

"What is it that you do?"

Menlik, his shaman's robe pulled up so that his breeches and boots were
dark against the golden rock, climbed up beside the Apache. Menlik,
Hulagur, and Kaydessa were riding with Travis, offering him one of
their small ponies to hurry the trip. He was still regarded warily by
the Tatars, but he did not blame them for their cautious attitude.

"Ah--" A flicker of light from the point ahead. One ... two ... three
flashes, a pause, then two more together. He had been read. Buck had
dispatched scouts to meet them, and knowing his people's skill at the
business, Travis was certain the Tatars would never suspect their
flanking unless the Apaches purposefully revealed themselves. Also the
Tatars were not to go to the rancheria, but would be met at a mid-point
by a delegation of Apaches. This was no time for the Tatars to learn
just how few the clan numbered.

Menlik watched Travis flash an acknowledgment to the sentry ahead. "In
this way you speak to your men?"

"This way I speak."

"A thing good and to be remembered. We have the drum, but that is for
the ears of all with hearing. This is for the eyes only of those on
watch for it. Yes, a good thing. And your people--they will meet with
us?"

"They wait ahead," Travis confirmed.

It was close to midday and the heat, gathered in the rocky ways, was
like a heaviness in the air itself. The Tatars had shucked their heavy
jackets and rolled the fur brims of their hats far up their heads away
from their sweat-beaded faces. And at every halt they passed from hand
to hand the skin bag of kumiss.

Now even the ponies shuffled on with drooping heads, picking a way in a
cut which deepened into a canyon. Travis kept a watch for the scouts.
And not for the first time he thought of the disappearance of the
coyotes. Somehow, back in the Tatar camp, he had counted confidently on
the animals' rejoining him once he had started his return over the
mountains.

But he had seen nothing of either beast, nor had he felt that
unexplainable mental contact with them which had been present since his
first awakening on Topaz. Why they had left him so unceremoniously after
defending him from the Mongol attack, and why they were keeping
themselves aloof now, he did not know. But he was conscious of a thread
of alarm for their continued absence, and he hoped he would find they
had gone back to the rancheria.

The ponies thudded dispiritedly along a sandy wash which bottomed the
canyon. Here the heat became a leaden weight and the men were panting
like four-footed beasts running before hunters. Finally Travis sighted
what he had been seeking, a flicker of movement on the wall well above.
He flung up his hand, pulling his mount to a stand. Apaches stood in
full view, bows ready, arrows on cords. But they made no sound.

Kaydessa cried out, booted her mount to draw equal with Travis.

"A trap!" Her face, flushed with heat, was also stark with anger.

Travis smiled slowly. "Is there a rope about you, Wolf Daughter?" he
inquired softly. "Are you now dragged across this sand?"

Her mouth opened and then closed again. The quirt she had half raised to
slash at him, flopped across her pony's neck.

The Apache glanced back at the two men. Hulagur's hand was on his sword
hilt, his eyes darting from one of those silent watchers to the next.
But the utter hopelessness of the Tatar position was too plain. Only
Menlik made no move toward any weapon, even his spirit wand. Instead, he
sat quietly in the saddle, displaying no emotion toward the Apaches save
his usual self-confident detachment.

"We go on." Travis pointed ahead.

Just as suddenly as they had appeared from the heart of the golden
cliffs, so did the scouts vanish. Most of them were already on their way
to the point Buck had selected for the meeting place. There had been
only six men up there, but the Tatars had no way of knowing just how
large a portion of the whole clan that number was.

Travis' pony lifted his head, nickered, and achieved a stumbling trot.
Somewhere ahead was water, one of those oases of growth and life which
pocked the whole mountain range--to the preservation of all animals and
all men.

Menlik and Hulagur pushed on until their mounts were hard on the heels
of the two ridden by the girl and Travis. Travis wondered if they still
waited for some arrow to strike home, though he saw that both men rode
with outward disregard for the patrolling scouts.

A grass-leaf bush beckoned them on and again the ponies quickened pace,
coming out into a tributary canyon which housed a small pool and a good
stand of grass and brush. To one side of the water Buck stood, his arms
folded across his chest, armed only with his belt knife. Grouped behind
him were Deklay, Tsoay, Nolan, Manulito--Travis tabulated hurriedly.
Manulito and Deklay were to be classed together--or had been when he was
last in the rancheria. On Buck's stairway from the past, both had
halted more than halfway down. Nolan was a quiet man who seldom spoke,
and whose opinion Travis could not foretell. Tsoay would back Buck.

Probably such a divided party was the best Travis could have hoped to
gather. A delegation composed entirely of those who were ready to leave
the past of the Redax--a collection of Bucks and Jil-Lees--was outside
the bounds of possibility. But Travis was none too happy to have Deklay
in on this.

Travis dismounted, letting the pony push forward by himself to dip nose
into the pool.

"This is," Travis pointed politely with his chin--"Menlik, one who talks
with spirits.... Hulagur, who is son to a chief ... and Kaydessa, who is
daughter to a chief. They are of the horse people of the north." He made
the introduction carefully in English.

Then he turned to the Tatars. "Buck, Deklay, Nolan, Manulito, Tsoay," he
named them all, "these stand to listen, and to speak for the Apaches."

But sometime later when the two parties sat facing each other, he
wondered whether a common decision could come from the clansmen on his
side of that irregular circle. Deklay's expression was closed; he had
even edged a short way back, as if he had no desire to approach the
strangers. And Travis read into every line of Deklay's body his distrust
and antagonism.

He himself began to speak, retelling his adventures since they had
followed Kaydessa's trail, sketching in the situation at the
Tatar-Mongol settlement as he had learned it from her and from Menlik.
He was careful to speak in English so that the Tatars could hear all he
was reporting to his own kind. And the Apaches listened blank-faced,
though Tsoay must already have reported much of this. When Travis was
done it was Deklay who asked a question:

"What have we to do with these people?"

"There is this--" Travis chose his words carefully, thinking of what
might move a warrior still conditioned to riding with the raiders of a
hundred years earlier, "the Pinda-lick-o-yi (whom we call 'Reds,') are
never willing to live side by side with any who are not of their mind.
And they have weapons such as make our bow cords bits of rotten string,
our knives slivers of rust. They do not kill; they enslave. And when
they discover that we live, then they will come against us--"

Deklay's lips moved in a wolf grin. "This is a large land, and we know
how to use it. The Pinda-lick-o-yi will not find us--"

"With their eyes maybe not," Travis replied. "With their machines--that
is another matter."

"Machines!" Deklay spat. "Always these machines.... Is that all you can
talk about? It would seem that you are bewitched by these machines,
which we have not seen--none of us!"

"It was a machine which brought you here," Buck observed. "Go you back
and look upon the spaceship and remember, Deklay. The knowledge of the
Pinda-lick-o-yi is greater than ours when it deals with metal and wire
and things which can be made with both. Machines brought us along the
road of the stars, and there is no tracker in the clan who could hope to
do the same. But now I have this to ask: Does our brother have a plan?"

"Those who are Reds," Travis answered slowly, "they do not number many.
But more may later come from our own world. Have you heard of such
arriving?" he asked Menlik.

"Not so, but we are not told much. We live apart and no one of us goes
to the ship unless he is summoned. For they have weapons to guard them,
or long since they would have been dead. It is not proper for a man to
eat from the pot, ride in the wind, sleep easy under the same sky with
him who has slain his brother."

"They have then killed among your people?"

"They have killed," Menlik returned briefly.

Kaydessa stirred and muttered a word or two to her brother. Hulagur's
head came up, and he exploded into violent speech.

"What does he say?" Deklay demanded.

The girl replied: "He speaks of our father who aided in the escape of
three and so afterward was slain by the leader as a lesson to us--since
he was our 'white beard,' the Khan."

"We have taken the oath in blood--under the Wolf Head Standard--that
they will also die," Menlik added. "But first we must shake them out of
their ship-shell."

"That is the problem," Travis elaborated for the benefit of his
clansmen. "We must get these Reds away from their protected camp--out
into the open. When they now go they are covered by this 'caller' which
keeps the Tatars under their control, but it has no effect on us."

"So, again I say: What is all this to us?" Deklay got to his feet. "This
machine does not hunt us, and we can make our camps in this land where
no Pinda-lick-o-yi can find them----"

"We are not _dobe-gusndhe-he_--invulnerable. Nor do we know the full
range of machines they can use. It does no one well to say
'_doxa-da_'--this is not so--when he does not know all that lies in an
enemy's wickiup."

To Travis' relief he saw agreement mirrored on Buck's face, Tsoay's,
Nolan's. From the beginning he had had little hope of swaying Deklay; he
could only trust that the verdict of the majority would be the accepted
one. It went back to the old, old Apache institution of prestige. A
_nantan_-chief had the _go'ndi_, the high power, as a gift from birth.
Common men could possess horse power or cattle power; they might have
the gift of acquiring wealth so they could make generous gifts--be
_ikadntl'izi_, the wealthy ones who spoke for their family groups within
the loose network of the tribe. But there was no hereditary
chieftainship or even an undivided rule within a rancheria. The
_nagunlka-dnat'an_, or war chief, often led only on the warpath and had
no voice in clan matters save those dealing with a raid.

And to have a split now would fatally weaken their small clan. Deklay
and those of a like mind might elect to withdraw and not one of the rest
could deny him that right.

"We shall think on this," Buck said. "Here is food, water, pasturage for
horses, a camp for our visitors. They will wait here." He looked at
Travis. "You will wait with them, Fox, since you know their ways."

Travis' immediate reaction was objection, but then he realized Buck's
wisdom. To offer the proposition of alliance to the Apaches needed an
impartial spokesman. And if he himself did it, Deklay might
automatically oppose the idea. Let Buck talk and it would be a statement
of fact.

"It is well," Travis agreed.

Buck looked about, as if judging time from the lie of sun and shadow on
the ground. "We shall return in the morning when the shadow lies here."
With the toe of his high moccasin he made an impression in the soft
earth. Then, without any formal farewell, he strode off, the others fast
on his heels.

"He is your chief, that one?" Kaydessa asked, pointing after Buck.

"He is one having a large voice in council," Travis replied. He set
about building up the cooking fire, bringing out the body of a
split-horn calf which had been left them. Menlik sat on his heels by the
pool, dipping up drinking water with his hand. Now he squinted his eyes
against the probe of the sun.

"It will require much talking to win over the short one," he observed.
"That one does not like us or your plan. Just as there will be those
among the Horde who will not like it either." He flipped water drops
from his fingers. "But this I do know, man who calls himself Fox, if we
do not make a common cause, then we have no hope of going against the
Reds. It will be for them as a man crushing fleas." He brought his hand
down on his knee in emphatic slaps. "So ... and so ... and so!"

"This do I think also," Travis admitted.

"So let us both hope that all men will be as wise as we," Menlik said,
smiling. "And since we can take a hand in that decision, this remains a
time for rest."

The shaman might be content to sleep the afternoon away, but after he
had eaten, Hulagur wandered up and down the valley, making a lengthy
business of rubbing down their horses with twists of last season's
grass. Now and then he paused beside Kaydessa and spoke, his uneasiness
plain to Travis although he could not understand the words.

Travis had settled down in the shade, half dozing, yet alert to every
movement of the three Tatars. He tried not to think of what might be
happening in the rancheria by switching his mind to that misty valley of
the towers. Did any of those three alien structures contain such a grab
bag of the past as he, Ashe, and Murdock had found on that other world
where the winged people had gathered together for them the artifacts of
an older civilization? At that time he had created for their hosts a new
weapon of defense, turning metal tubes into blow-guns. It had been
there, too, where he had chanced upon the library of tapes, one of which
had eventually landed Travis and his people here on Topaz.

Even if he did find racks of such tapes in one of those towers, there
would be no way of using them--with the ship wrecked on the mountain
side. Only--Travis' fingers itched where they lay quiet on his
knees--there might be other things waiting. If he were only free to
explore!

He reached out to touch Menlik's shoulder. The shaman half turned,
opening his eyes with the languid effort of a sleepy cat. But the spark
of intelligence awoke in them quickly.

"What is it?"

For a moment Travis hesitated, already regretting his impulse. He did
not know how much Menlik remembered of the present. Remember of the
present--one part of the Apache's mind was wryly amused at that snarled
estimate of their situation. Men who had been dropped into their racial
and ancestral pasts until the present time was less real than the
dreams conditioning them had a difficult job evaluating any situation.
But since Menlik had clung to his knowledge of English, he must be less
far down that stairway.

"When we met you, Kaydessa and I, it was outside that valley." Travis
was still of two minds about this questioning, but the Tatar camp had
been close to the towers and there was a good chance the Mongols had
explored them. "And inside were buildings ... very old...."

Menlik was fully alert now. He took his wand, played with it as he
spoke:

"That is, or was, a place of much power, Fox. Oh, I know that you
question my kinship with the spirits and the powers they give. But one
learns not to dispute what one feels here--and here--" His long,
somewhat grimy fingers went to his forehead and then to the bare brown
chest where his shirt fell open. "I have walked the stone path in that
valley, and there have been the whispers--"

"Whispers?"

Menlik twirled the wand. "Whispers which are too low for many ears to
distinguish. You can hear them as one hears the buzzing of an insect,
but never the words--no, never the words! But that is a place of great
power!"

"A place to explore!"

But Menlik watched only his wand. "That I wonder, Fox, truly do I
wonder. This is not our world. And here there may be that which does not
welcome us."

Tricks-in-trade of a shaman? Or was it true recognition of something
beyond human description? Travis could not be sure, but he knew that he
must return to the valley and see for himself.

"Listen," Menlik said, leaning closer, "I have heard your tale, that
you were on that first ship, the one which brought you unwilling along
the old star paths. Have you ever seen such a thing as this?"

He smoothed a space of soft earth and with the narrow tip of his wand
began to draw. Whatever role Menlik had played in the present before he
had been reconditioned into a shaman of the Horde, he had had the
ability of an artist, for with a minimum of lines he created a figure in
that sketch.

It was a man or at least a figure with general human outlines. But the
round, slightly oversized skull was bare, the clothing skintight to
reveal unnaturally thin limbs. There were large eyes, small nose and
mouth, rather crowded into the lower third of the head, giving an
impression of an over-expanded brain case above. And it was familiar.

Not the flying men of the other world, certainly not the nocturnal
ape-things. Yet for all its alien quality Travis was sure he had seen
its like before. He closed his eyes and tried to visualize it apart from
lines in the soil.

Such a head, white, almost like the bone of a skull laid bare, such a
head lying face down on a bone-thin arm clad in a blue-purple skintight
sleeve. Where had he seen it?

The Apache gave a sharp exclamation as he remembered fully. The derelict
spaceship as he had first found it--the dead alien officer had still
been seated at its controls! The alien who had set the tape which took
them out into that forgotten empire--he was the subject of Menlik's
drawing!

"Where? When did you see such a one?" The Apache bent down over the
Tatar.

Menlik looked troubled. "He came into my mind when I walked the valley.
I thought I could almost see such a face in one of the tower windows,
but of that I am not sure. Who is it?"

"Someone from the old days--those who once ruled the stars," Travis
answered. But were they still here then, the remnant of a civilization
which had flourished ten thousand years ago? Were the Baldies, who
centuries ago had hunted down so ruthlessly the Russians who had dared
to loot their wrecked ships, still on Topaz?

He remembered the story of Ross Murdock's escape from those aliens in
the far past of Europe, and he shivered. Murdock was tough, steel tough,
yet his own description of that epic chase and the final meeting had
carried with it his terror. What could a handful of primitively armed
and almost primitively minded Terrans do now if they had to dispute
Topaz with the Baldies?


10


"Beyond this--" Menlik worked his way to the very lip of a drop, raising
a finger cautiously--"beyond this we do not go."

"But you say that the camp of your people lies well out in the plains--"
Jil-Lee was up on one knee, using the field glasses they had brought
from the stores of the wrecked ship. He passed them along to Travis.
There was nothing to be sighted but the rippling amber waves of the tall
grasses, save for an occasional break of a copse of trees near the
foothills.

They had reached this point in the early morning, threading through the
pass, making their way across the section known to the outlaws. As the
door closed, his daughter sighed again. For a while she appeared to be
absorbed in thought.

Recovering, she directed the nurse to proceed with the book she had in
reading.

We dare not inquire what was passing in her mind during those few
moments of reflection. Perhaps, through that strange discrimination
which is sometimes permitted to those appointed to die, she had a
partial insight into her father's real nature.

I trust not. I hope she was spared that trial. It is an awful thing for a
child to awaken to a sense of a parent's unworthiness!

CHAPTER IV.

The two brothers had met--had met more congenially than they ever met
before. This was all Hiram's doings. He seemed like a new creature
in his bearing toward Doctor Frank, who could not (indeed he had
no wish to do so) resist the influence of his cordial treatment.

After dinner, they sat together in the library.

They chatted of the old, old times when Frank was in college, and
Hiram, a little bit of a fellow, was his pet and plaything during
the vacations.

'We have done something, Frank, to keep up the Meeker name in New York,'
said the millionnaire, when that topic was exhausted.

'You are at the top of the profession, and I--I have accomplished a good
deal.'

Hiram spoke in such a genial, mellow tone, that Frank was touched.

'Yes,' he replied; '_you_ have at least achieved wonders. Do you
remember what mother used always to prophesy about you?

It is fulfilled tenfold.'
'Poor mother!'

sighed Hiram.

'Ah, yes! she was carried off very unexpectedly.

What a vigorous constitution she had, to all appearance!'
'Do you know, Frank, they tell me I may look for a similar visitation
at her age?'
'You? nonsense! Who has been filling your ears with such stuff?'
'Stuff or not, so I am advised seriously. What think you of it?'
Thus appealed to, Doctor Frank regarded his brother more critically.

'That is right,' said Hiram.

'Now that you are here, give me an examination.'
Doctor Frank thereupon asked several pertinent questions, to which
satisfactory replies were made. He sounded Hiram's chest: it was
responsive as a drum. Then he proceeded to manipulate him in a more
professional way. He put his ear close down, and held it for a minute,
to get the pulsation of the heart. This he repeated two or three
times.

Hiram's face grew anxious.

'You find something wrong,' he said.

His brother made no reply, except to ask more questions.

At last he exclaimed, 'You are all right, Hiram--all right. There _is_
a little irregularity about the action of the heart: it is not chronic,
but connected with the digestive organs.

You are in as good health as a man could ask to be. Only, don't use
your brain quite so much; it interferes with your digestion, and
that in you affects the action of the heart.

It is not worth mentioning, I assure you' (Hiram was looking alarmed);
'but, since you can just as well as not, I say, take more exercise,
and give your brain a holiday now and then.'

'Thank you--thank you! So you don't think there is anything in the idea
that I shall be--be--struck with paralysis--at about the same age
that mother was?'

'Pure nonsense, Hiram--utter nonsense!' exclaimed Doctor Frank, cheerfully.
[He knew how foolish it is to alarm one.] 'Still, exercise, exercise.
That we ought all to do.'
The next day, Hiram commenced his morning rides; one hour before
breakfast regularly.

He had fought the battle of life, and had won. Now he was called on to
go into another contest. He set to work at this with his customary
assiduity.

No one who saw the millionnaire on his horse, trotting sharply over
the road very early in the morning, understood really what was going
on.

One day, however, Dr. Ephraim Peters caught sight of him, spurring
on under full headway, as if everything depended on the work he had in
hand.

'Do you know who that is, and what he is about?'

asked the young doctor of his companion.

'No.'
'It is Hiram Meeker, _fighting Death_'

CHAPTER V.

As the gay season progressed, the love affair between Signor
Filippo Barbone and the daughter of the millionnaire was not
permitted to languish.

The Signor was not in society.

Much as she might desire to do so, Belle dared not venture on the
hazardous experiment of introducing into her own aristocratic circle
one who had so lately figured as a second-rate opera singer.

He would have been recognized at once, and the whole town agitated by
the scandal.

Belle knew this very well.

Yet, strange to say, it did not in the least weaken her infatuation for
this coarse fellow. On the contrary, I think it stimulated it.

Self-willed and imperious, she tolerated with extreme impatience any
restraint whatever. In this instance, it was the more tantalizing and
exciting, because she felt that the world would be in opposition
to her; while her lover adroitly added fuel to the flame, by
protesting that he would no longer consent to be so unjust, so
selfish, so criminal, as to attempt to absorb her attention, or
even intrude on her notice.

True, he should himself fade away and perish (he looked very much like
it); what of that? What were misery and death to him, compared with
her ease and peace of mind?

Thereupon he would disappear for two or three days, during which time Belle
would work herself into a fever of excitement. And when he did return,
unable, as he would say, to keep his oath to himself never to see her
again, she would receive him with such emotion and such passionate
demonstrations of delight, that the wily knave was satisfied he
had completed his conquest.

Things were at just this pass, when Hiram received an anonymous letter,
warning him in vague terms of what was going on, but mentioning no
names.

Hiram was thunderstruck. On reflection, he was convinced that it was the
work of some envious person, who had got up the note to cause him or
his daughter annoyance; or else that it was a miserable joke, perpetrated
by some foolish fellow. So entirely was he assured that one or the
other hypothesis was correct, that he dismissed the matter from
his mind.

He carried the note home, however, and handed it to Belle in a playful
manner, while he bestowed his customary caress, and received a kiss
in return.

'Young lady, what do you think of that?' he asked.

It was fortunate--or rather most unfortunate--that Hiram did not entertain
the slightest suspicion of his daughter: else he would have been
led to scrutinize her countenance as he made the remark.

Like most persons who are accustomed to decide for themselves, he never
questioned the correctness of his judgment after it was once formed.

Belle, for an instant, felt the floor sinking away under her feet!

It was only for an instant.

With the readiness for which the sex are so remarkable, she at once gave
way to a most violent exhibition of temper.

She walked up and down the room, apparently in a transport of rage; she
tore the note into a hundred pieces, and _threw them into the grate_.

What was to be done? What would her father do to punish the miscreant who
had dared take such a liberty with her name? Boldly she stepped before
him, and asked the question.

During these exhibitions, Hiram stood smiling all the while.

Belle was very handsome, and never, as he thought, so brilliant as at
that moment, giving vent to her woman's passion.

It was really so.

Her form, her face, her eyes worked so harmoniously in the scene she
had got up to cover what was below the surface, that she did
present, to any one whose senses were arbiters, a most beautiful
display.

'You are laughing at me, papa--I see very plainly you are laughing at
me! I will not endure it! I--'
'Belle,' interrupted her father, 'you little goose, what do you
think I care for the scribbling of any fool that chooses to disgrace
himself?

What should you, my daughter, care? To be sure, I can understand why
you may suddenly give way to your feelings; but there is reason
in all things.

Don't you think the miserable fellow who penned that scrawl (by-the-way,
you have very foolishly destroyed it, provided you did wish to trace it
out)--I say, don't you think the fellow who perpetrated the
ridiculous joke would be pleased enough to see how you take it?'

He took his daughter by the arm--a very beautiful arm--and gave her a
little shake--a playful, pleasant shake. Looking her in the face, he said:
'Answer me, Belle--am I not right? Have you not sense enough to see
that I am right?'
'Oh, I suppose so, papa. You are always right. That is, I never can
answer your arguments; but--'
'That will do, Belle. Run off to your room, and come down quite yourself
for dinner.'
Belle gave her father an arch smile, to show how obedient she was, and
bounded away.

Hiram watched his daughter with delight as she ran up the staircase, and
his heart exulted in the possession of a child so charming and
attractive.

THE ANDES.

The Andes, like a vast wall, extend along the western coast of South
America. Woods cluster, like billows of foliage, around the feet
of the mountains.

A vast network of intersecting streams is woven by the gigantic warp
and woof of these mountains. Many brooks, stealing along, scarcely
heard, over the table-lands, and many fierce torrents, dashing
wildly through rocky crevices, fill the great streams that roll,
some into the Caribbean Sea, some into the near Pacific; while one,
the mighty Amazon, stretches across the continent for more than
three thousand miles, and swells the Atlantic with the torrents of
the Andes.

The keel of a vessel entering the Amazon from the Atlantic, may cut
through waters that once fell as flakes of snow on the most western
ridges of the Andes, and glistened with the last rays of the sun
as he sank in the Pacific.

A spell of fascination hangs about the Amazon. Its wonders, known and
unknown, have a marvellous attraction; and the perils encountered
in its exploration give a throb of interest to its very name.

How terrible were the sufferings of Gonzalo Pizarro and his companions,
who set forth in youth and vigor to explore the valley of the Amazon!
How worn and haggard the survivors returned to Quito, leaving some of
the daring cavaliers of Spain to bleach in death on the wild plain,
or to moulder in the lonely glen!

No river has sadder chronicles of suffering and danger than the Amazon.
Still, the exploration, so hazardous, yet of such vast value, will
go on.

Many a hero in the great war with nature will follow the track of Herndon,
the noble man as well as the brave explorer, who escaped the perils
of the great river, only to sink, with his manly heart, into the
great deep.

In science as in war, ranks after ranks may fall; but the living
press on to fill the vacant places. The squadrons are ever full
and eager for service. To search new lands through and through, or to
drag old cities from the graves of centuries, men will advance as
heroically as an army moves to the capture of Chapultepec. Not a flower
can breathe forth its fragrance, though in marshes full of venomous
serpents and of as deadly malaria, but science will count its leaves,
and copy with unerring pencil the softest tints that stain them with
varied bloom and beauty.
Science will detect every kind of rock in the structure of the most
defiant crag.

Not a bird can chant or build its nest in the most leafy shade, but science
will find the nest, describe every change of color on the feathers of
the little singer, and set to music every tone that gushes from its tiny
throat.

Not a gem can repose safe from seizure, in the rocks, in the sand, or in
the torrent. Not a star can twinkle in the abyss of night, but science
will tell its rate of light, and describe its silent and mysterious
orbit.

Torrid heat, the earthquake, the tornado, the pestilence, mountains of
ice, craters of flame--science will dare them all, to know one more law
of nature. God speed the daring of science, if only her votaries
will not place the law in the place of Him who made both it and the works
which it was commissioned to guide.

Science, when she has found the highest and the most comprehensive
law of nature, has not touched Deity itself; she has but touched
the hem of the garment of the Great Lawgiver.

One veteran of science, Alexander von Humboldt, has yielded to the
great law of humanity, as inexorable as any that he found in nature.

His researches in South America, though mainly confined to the valley
of the Oronoco, were most thorough, and his array of facts and
observations are of inestimable value.

Yet, Humboldt searched into nature with the coldness of the anatomist,
content with examining its material structure, rather than with the
zeal of one who seeks images of Divine power impressed alike on
solid rocks and gliding streams.

Science, however rigid, would not have restrained the ardor of homage to
the Author of creative energy and grandeur, bursting forth
irrepressibly in scenes where angels would have adored the Great
First Cause, and where man can do no less.

Humboldt's fame as an observer is founded on a rock which no mortal power
can shake. He lacked the reverential insight into the higher and deeper
powers of nature, but, so far as his mental eyes saw, he described
surely and vividly the manifestations of those powers.

He was an observer of wonderful skill in the outer courts of nature,
though he seemed either not to seek or to be bewildered in seeking
her interior shrine.

He exemplified rather the talent than the genius of discovery, the
patient sagacity which accumulates materials, rather than the fervid
enthusiasm which traces the stream of nature's action to its spring,
the great Creative Will. Yet, the very title of Humboldt's great work,
the concentrated fruit of a life of toil, 'Cosmos,' meaning beauty and
order, and, then, the visible world, as illustrating both, seems to
show a gleam of feeling above the spirit of material research. His warmest
admirer could have respecting him no worthier hope than that he, who
has left the scene of earthly beauty which he so long and diligently
studied, may have had the joy to discern, in the sphere of celestial
order, the Cosmos of the skies, higher and deeper truths than
external nature can teach.

An American artist, Church, has portrayed with great force and beauty
some portions of the inspiring scenery of the Andes. Church's
pictures are avowedly compositions, and not transcripts of actual
views; yet, they are not more remarkable for ideal beauty than for
truthfulness to nature. Although no real scenes among the Andes
correspond to his painting, yet the glorious characteristics of the
Andes are seen in every line, in every color, in all the strange
lights and shadows of his paintings.

Imagination, which sees at once the powers and proportions of things, is,
when joined to a feeling heart, the surest guide to him who would
describe natural truth, whether of the souls of men or of material
forms.

The realists of art may not be so well satisfied with a composition, as
with the delineation, line by line, and point by point, of a scene in
nature; yet the more comprehensive critic will own that universality
will gain by the composition far more than local identity can lose. By
his imaginative skill, Church has portrayed in two or three pictures those
characteristics of scenery which, to be faithfully delineated in
copies from actual views, would require a hundred paintings.

This is alike his best defence and his highest praise.

In recalling my own observations among these noble mountains, and in
striving to express them in language, I feel how much higher is
the vantage ground of the painter.

One may examine for hours the canvas, until every scene is fixed on the
memory as on the canvas itself. Yet I will endeavor to give a general
view of the scenery of the stupendous Andes--stupendous truly, yet
among those mountains are scenes of such quiet beauty as to touch
the heart as tenderly as softest music.

Scarcely a hundred miles from the Pacific Ocean arise some of the highest
peaks of the Andes, yet the way upward is much longer. From the coast,
or from the decks of ships sailing by it, may be seen, in clear
weather, some of the peaks of the mountains.

On the shores, hazes and mists often temper the tropical sun and
obscure distant objects; but, at early morning and evening, sometimes
the great snowy dome of Chimborazo may be seen afar, towering in
majesty above the tropical verdure between its base and the ocean.

It looks as if invading the heavens with its colossal form; and at
such times it wears a vesture of glory.

A few years ago, in New England, of a clear night in the depth of winter,
an aurora of the north reddened the whole sky; and the earth
beneath, covered with snow, was as red as the sky above. Imagine such
an aurora to fall upon the snowy summit of a mountain four miles high,
and you may conceive how attractive is the flush of beauty upon
the brow of Chimborazo at sunrise and at sunset.

Turn from the broad Pacific, as its long waves glance in the sun; and,
as the morning tide washes up the tropical rivers, go with it along
one of them, a part of the way, perhaps, in a sailing vessel or
a steamer, but the rest in a light canoe.

Tropical shrubbery and forests line the banks of the stream. New forms
and modes of life impress the traveller from the temperate zone.
The scenery of the tropics, so long the wonder of the imagination,
now expands in wild luxuriance before the sight.

When you have gone as far as you can along the winding river,
waiting, perhaps, for hours, here and there upon the bank, in some
rude cabin, or under the shade of some broad fragrant tree, for the
returning tide from the ocean to bear you swiftly on; disembark
upon a strange soil, and prepare to pursue your journey by mules
or horses.

You reach the forests, and pierce their dark recesses by narrow paths,
mere winding threads of road. Great clouds of foliage press around you,
and, at the slightest breeze, thrill with that murmur of myriads of trees,
which is so full of mystery and awe; for there, the very forests,
unbroken and unbounded, seem audibly to breathe together with
mystical accord, and to blend low quivering tones with the grand
chorus which swells daily upward from vales and mountains, seas and
shores.

Interspersed with the thick foliage, on every hand are blossoms and
fruits of every tropical kind. Pale, white bridal blossoms clothe the
orange tree, or golden fruit hangs among its clusters of glossy
leaves.

The starry rind and pale-green crown of the pineapple tempt you to enjoy
the luscious fruit. High in air the cocoanut tree lifts its palmy
diadem.

The long broad leaves of the plantain protect its branches of green or
yellow fruit, and throw a grateful shade upon the way, open here and
there.
Not at the Red, who had
released his hold of the rock, preferring to totter instead of lose
control of the chest plate--but into the air straight before the nose of
the mount.

The pony neighed wildly, tried to turn, and its shoulder caught the
free, groping hand of the Red and spun the man around and back, so that
he flung up both hands in an effort to ward himself off the rocks. Then
the pony stampeded down the break, its companions catching the same
fever, trailing in a mad dash which kept the Red hard against the
boulders.

He continued to stand there until the horses, save for the wounded one
still kicking fruitlessly, were gone. Travis felt a sense of reprieve.
They might not be able to get at the Red, but he was hurt and afoot, two
strikes which might yet reduce him to a condition the Apaches could
handle.

Apparently the other was also aware of that, for now he pushed out from
the rocks and stumbled along after the ponies. But he went only a step
or two. Then, settling back once more against a convenient boulder, he
began to work at the plate on his chest.

Nolan appeared noiselessly beside Travis. "What does he do?" His lips
were very close to the younger man's ear, his voice hardly more than a
breath.

Travis shook his head slightly. The Red's actions were a complete
mystery. Unless, now disabled and afoot, he was trying to summon aid.
Though there was no landing place for a helicopter here.

Now was the time to try and reach Lupe. Travis had seen a slight
movement in the fallen Apache's hand, the first indication that the
enemy's shot had not been as fatal as it had looked. He touched Nolan's
arm, pointed to Lupe; and then, discarding his bow and quiver beside the
war leader, he stripped for action. There was cover down to the wounded
Apache which would aid him. He must pass one of the Tatars on the way,
but none of the tribesmen had shown any signs of life since they had
fallen from their saddles at the first attack.

With infinite care, Travis lowered himself into a narrow passage, took a
lizard's way between brush and boulder, pausing only when he reached the
Tatar for a quick check on the potential enemy.

The lean brown face was half turned, one cheek in the sand, but the
slack mouth, the closed eyes were those, Travis believed, of a dead man.
By some action of his diabolic machine the Red must have snuffed out his
four captives--perhaps in the belief that they were part of the Apache
attack.

Travis reached the rock where Lupe lay. He knew that Nolan was watching
the Red and would give him warning if he suddenly showed an interest in
anything but his machine. The Apache reached out, his hands closing on
Lupe's ankles. Beneath his touch, flesh and muscle tensed. Lupe's eyes
were open, focused now on Travis. There was a bleeding furrow above his
right ear. The Red had tried a difficult head shot, failing in his aim
by a mere fraction of an inch.

Lupe made a swift move for which Travis was ready. His grip on the
other's body helped to tumble them both around a rock which lay between
them and the Red. There was the crack of another shot and dust spurted
from the side of the boulder. But they lay together, safe for the
present, as Travis was sure the enemy would not risk an open attack on
their small fortress.

With Travis' aid Lupe struggled back up to the site where Nolan waited.
Jil-Lee was there to make competent examination of the boy's wound.

"Creased," he reported. "A sore head, but no great damage. Perhaps a
scar later, warrior!" He gave Lupe an encouraging thump on the shoulder,
before plastering an aid pack over the cut.

"Now we go!" Nolan spoke with emphatic decision.

"He saw enough of us to know we are not Tatars."

Nolan's eyes were cold, his mouth grim as he faced Travis.

"And how can we fight him--?"

"There is a wall--a wall you cannot see--about him," Lupe broke in.
"When I would strike at him, I could not!"

"A man with invisible protection and a gun," Jil-Lee took up the
argument. "How would you deal with him, younger brother?"

"I don't know," Travis admitted. Yet he also believed that if they
withdrew, left the Red here to be found by his own people, the enemy
would immediately begin an investigation of the southern country.
Perhaps, pushed by their need for learning more about the Apaches, they
would bring the helicopter in over the mountains. The answer to all
Apache dangers, for now, lay in the immediate future of this one man.

"He is hurt, he cannot go far on foot. And even if he calls the 'copter,
there is no landing place. He will have to move elsewhere to be picked
up." Travis thought aloud, citing the thin handful of points in their
favor.

Tsoay nodded toward the rim of the ravine. "Rocks up there and rocks can
roll. Start an earthslide...."

Something within Travis balked at that. From the first he had been
willing enough to slug it out with the Red, weapon to weapon, man to
man. Also, he had wanted to take a captive, not stand over a body. But
to use the nature of the country against the enemy, that was the oldest
Apache trick of all and one they would have to be forced to employ.

Nolan had already nodded in assent, and Tsoay and Jil-Lee started off.
Even if the Red did possess a protective wall device, could it operate
in full against a landslide? They all doubted that.

The Apaches reached the cliff rim without exposing themselves to the
enemy's fire. The Red still sat there calmly, his back against the rock,
his hands busy with his equipment as if he had all the time in the
world.

Then suddenly came a scream from more than one throat.

"_Dar-u-gar_!" The ancient war cry of the Mongol Hordes.

Then over the lip of the other slope rose a wave of men--their curved
swords out, a glazed set to their eyes--heading for the Amerindians with
utter disregard for any personal safety. Menlik in the lead, his
shaman's robe flapping wide below his belt like the wings of some
oversized predatory bird. Hulagur ... Jagatai ... men from the outlaws'
camp. And they were not striving to destroy their disabled overlord in
the vale below, but to wipe out the Apaches!

Only the fact that the Apaches were already sheltered behind the rocks
they were laboring to dislodge gave them a precious few moments of
grace. There was no time to use their bows. They could only use knives
to meet the swords of the Tatars, knives and the fact that they could
fight with unclouded minds.

"He has them under control!" Travis pawed at Jil-Lee's shoulder. "Get
him--they'll stop!"

He did not wait to see if the other Apache understood. Instead, he threw
the full force of his own body against the rock they had made the center
stone of their slide. It gave, rolled, carrying with it and before it
the rest of the piled rubble. Travis stumbled, fell flat, and then a
body thudded down upon him, and he was fighting for his life to keep a
blade from his throat. Around him were the shouts and cries of embroiled
warriors; then all was silenced by a roar from below.

Glazed eyes in a face only a foot from his own, the twisted, panting
mouth sending gusts of breath into his nostrils. Suddenly there was
reason back in those eyes, a bewilderment, which became fear ...
panic.... The Tatar's body twisted in Travis' hold, striving now not to
attack, but to win free. As the Apache loosened his grip the other
jerked away, so that for a moment or two they lay gasping, side by side.

Men sat up to look at men. There was a spreading stain down Jil-Lee's
side and one of the Tatars sprawled near him, both his hands on his
chest, coughing violently.

Menlik clawed at the trunk of a wind-twisted mountain tree, pulled
himself to his feet, and stood swaying as might a man long ill and
recovering from severe exertion.

Insensibly both sides drew apart, leaving a space between Tatar and
Apache. The faces of the Amerindians were grim, those of the Mongols
bewildered and then harsh as they eyed their late opponents with dawning
reason. What had begun in compulsion for the Tatars might well flare now
into rational combat--and from that to a campaign of extermination.

Travis was on his feet. He looked over the lip of the drop. The Red was
still in his place down there, a pile of rubble about him. His
protection must have failed, for his head was back at an unnatural angle
and the dent in his helmet could be easily seen.

"That one is dead--or helpless!" Travis cried out. "Do you still wish to
fight for him, Shaman?"

Menlik came away from the tree and walked to the edge of the drop. The
others, too, were moving forward. After the shaman looked down he
stooped, picked up a small stone, and flung it at the motionless Red.
There was a crack of sound. They all saw the tiny spurt of flame, a curl
of smoke from the plate on the Red's chest. Not only the man, but his
control was finished now.

A wolfish growl and two of the Tatars swung over, started down to the
Red. Menlik shouted and they slackened pace.

"We want that," he cried in English. "Perhaps so we can learn--"

"The learning is yours," Jil-Lee replied. "Just as this land is yours,
Shaman. But I warn you, from this day do not ride south!"

Menlik turned, the charms on his belt clicking. "So that is the way it
is to be, Apache?"

"That is the way it shall be, Tatar! We do not ride to war with allies
who may turn their knives against our backs because they are slaves to a
machine the enemy controls."

The Tatar's long, slender-fingered hands opened and closed. "You are a
wise man, Apache, but sometimes more than wisdom alone is needed----"

"We are wise men, Shaman, let it rest there," Jil-Lee replied somberly.

Already the Apaches were on their way, putting two cliff ridges behind
them before they halted to examine and cover their wounds.

"We go." Nolan's chin lifted, indicating the southern route. "Here we
do not come again; there is too much witchcraft in this place."

Travis stirred, saw that Jil-Lee was frowning at him.

"Go--?" he repeated.

"Yes, younger brother? You would continue to run with these who are
governed by a machine?"

"No. Only, eyes are needed on this side of the mountains."

"Why?" This time Jil-Lee was plainly on the side of the conservatives.
"We have now seen this machine at work. It is fortunate that the Red is
dead. He will carry no tales of us back to his people as you feared.
Thus, if we remain south from now on, we are safe. And this fight
between Tatar and Red is none of ours. What do you seek here?"

"I must go again to the place of the towers," Travis answered with the
truth. But his friends were facing him with heavy disapproval--now a
full row of Deklays.

"Did you not tell us that you felt this strange thing during the night
we waited about the camp? What if you become one with these Tatars and
are also controlled by the machine? Then you, too, can be made into a
weapon against us--your clansmen!" Jil-Lee was almost openly hostile.

Sense was on his side. But in Travis was this other desire of which he
was becoming more conscious by the minute. There was a reason for those
towers, perhaps a reason important enough for him to discover and run
the risk of angering his own people.

"There may be this--" Nolan's voice was remote and cold, "you may
already be a piece of this thing, bound to the machines. If so, we do
not want you among us."

There it was--an open hostility with more power behind it than Deklay's
motiveless disapproval had carried. Travis was troubled. The family, the
clan--they were important. If he took the wrong step now and was
outlawed from that tight fortress, then as an Apache he would indeed be
a lost man. In the past of his people there had been renegades from the
tribe--men such as the infamous Apache Kid who had killed and killed
again, not only white men but his own people. Wolf men living wolves'
lives in the hills. Travis was threatened with that. Yet--up the ladder
of civilization, down the ladder--why did this feverish curiosity ride
him so cruelly now?

"Listen," Jil-Lee, his side padded with bandages, stepped closer--"and
tell me, younger brother, what is it that you seek in these towers?"

"On another world there were secrets of the old ones to be found in such
ancient buildings. Here that might also be true."

"And among the secrets of those old ones," Nolan's voice was still
harsh--"were those which brought us to this world, is that not so?"

"Did any man drive you, Nolan, or you, Tsoay, or you, Jil-Lee, or any of
us, to promise to go beyond the stars? You were told what might be done,
and you were eager to try it. You were all volunteers!"

"Save for this voyage when we were told nothing," Jil-Lee answered,
cutting straight to the heart of the matter. "Yet, Nolan, I do not
believe that it is for more voyage tapes that our younger brother now
searches, nor would those do us any good--as our ship will not rise
again from here. What is it that you do seek?"

"Knowledge--weapons, maybe. Can we stand against these machines of the
Reds? Yet many of the devices they now use are taken from the star ships
they have looted through time. To every weapon there is a defense."

Nolan blinked and for the first time a hint of interest touched the mask
of his face. "To the bow, the rifle," he said softly, "to the rifle, the
machine gun, to the cannon, the big bomb. The defense can be far worse
than the first weapon. So you think that in these towers there may be
things which shall be to the Reds' machines as the bomb is to the cannon
of the Horse Soldiers?"

Travis had an inspiration. "Did not our people lay aside the bow for the
rifle when we went up against the Bluecoats?"

"We do not so go up against these Reds!" protested Lupe.

"Not now. But what if they come across the mountains, perhaps driving
the Tatars before them to do their fighting--?"

"And you believe that if you find weapons in these towers, you will know
how to use them?" Jil-Lee asked. "What will give you that knowledge,
younger brother?"

"I do not claim such knowledge," Travis countered. "But this much I do
have: Once I studied to be an archaeologist and I have seen other
storehouses of these star people. Who else among us can say as much as
that?"

"That is the truth," Jil-Lee acknowledged. "Also there is good sense in
this seeking out of the tower things. Let the Reds find such first--if
they exist at all--and then we may truly be caught in a box canyon with
only death at our heels."

"And you would go to these towers now?" Nolan demanded.

"I can cut across country and then rejoin you on the other side of the
pass!" The feeling of urgency which had been mounting in Travis was now
so demanding that he wanted to race ahead through the wilderness. He was
surprised when Jil-Lee put out his palm up as if to warn the younger
man.

"Take care, younger brother! This is not a lucky business. And remember,
if one goes too far down a wrong trail, there is sometimes no
returning--"

"We shall wait on the other side of the pass for one day," Nolan added.
"Then--" he shrugged--"where you go will be your own affair."

Travis did not understand that promise of trouble. He was already two
steps down his chosen path.


12


Travis had taken a direct cross route through the heights, but not
swiftly enough to reach his objective before nightfall. And he had no
wish to enter the tower valley by moonlight. In him two emotions now
warred. There was the urge to invade the towers, to discover their
secret, and flaring higher and higher the beginnings of a new fear. Was
he now a battlefield for the superstitions of his race reborn by the
Redax and his modern education in the Pinda-lick-o-yi world--half Apache
brave of the past, half modern archaeologist with a thirst for
knowledge? Or was the fear rooted more deeply and for another reason?

Travis crouched in a hollow, trying to understand what he felt. Why was
it suddenly so overwhelmingly important for him to investigate the
towers? If he only had the coyotes with him.... Why and where had they
gone?

He was alive to every noise out of the night, every scent the wind
carried to him. The night had its own life, just as the daylight hours
held theirs. Only a few of those sounds could he identify, even less did
he see. There was one wide-winged, huge flying thing which passed
across the green-gold plate of the nearer moon. It was so large that for
an instant Travis believed the helicopter had come. Then the wings
flapped, breaking the glide, and the creature merged in the shadows of
the night--a hunter large enough to be a serious threat, and one he had
never seen before.

Relying on his own small defense, the strewing of brittle sticks along
the only approach to the hollow, Travis dozed at intervals, his head
down on his forearm across his bent knees. But the cold cramped him and
he was glad to see the graying sky of pre-dawn. He swallowed two ration
tablets and a couple of mouthfuls of water from his canteen and started
on.

By sunup he had reached the ledge of the waterfall, and he hurried along
the ancient road at a pace which increased to a run the closer he drew
to the valley. Deliberately he slowed, his native caution now in
control, so that he was walking as he passed through the gateway into
the swirling mists which alternately exposed and veiled the towers.

There was no change in the scene from the time he had come there with
Kaydessa. But now, rising from a comfortable sprawl on the
yellow-and-green pavement, was a welcoming committee--Nalik'ideyu and
Naginlta showing no more excitement at his coming than if they had
parted only moments before.

Travis went down on one knee, holding out his hand to the female, who
had always been the more friendly. She advanced a step or two, touched a
cold nose to his knuckles, and whined.

"Why?" He voiced that one word, but behind it was a long list of
questions. Why had they left him? Why were they here where there was no
hunting? Why did they meet him now as if they had calmly expected his
return?

Travis glanced from the animals to the towers, those windows set in
diamond pattern. And again he was visited by the impression that he was
under observation. With the mist floating across those openings, it
would be easy for a lurker to watch him unseen.

He walked slowly on into the valley, his moccasins making no sound on
the pavement, but he could hear the faint click of the coyotes' claws as
they paced beside him, on each hand. The sun did not penetrate here,
making merely a gilt fog of the mist. As he approached within touching
distance of the first tower, it seemed to Travis that the mist was
curling about him; he could no longer see the archway through which he
had entered the valley.

"Naye'nezyani--Slayer of Monsters--give strength to the bow arm, to the
knife wrist!" Out of what long-buried memory did that ancient plea come?
Travis was hardly aware of the sense of the words until he spoke them
aloud. "You who wait--_shi inday to-dah ishan_--an Apache is not food
for you! I am Fox of the Itcatcudnde'yu--the Eagle People; and beside me
walk _ga'ns_ of power...."

Travis blinked and shook his head as one waking. Why had he spoken so,
using words and phrases which were not part of any modern speech?

He moved on, around the base of the first tower, to find no door, no
break in its surface below the second-story windows--to the next
structure and the next, until he had encircled all three. If he were to
enter any, he must find a way of reaching the lowest windows.

On he went to the other opening of the valley, the one which gave upon
the territory of the Tatar camp. But he did not sight any of the Mongols
as he hacked down a sapling, trimmed, and smoothed it into a
blunt-pointed lance. His sash-belt, torn into even strips and knotted
together, gave him a rope which he judged would be barely long enough
for his purpose.

Then Travis made a chancy cast for the lower window of the nearest
tower. On the second try the lance slipped in, and he gave a quick jerk,
jamming the lance as a bar across the opening. It was a frail ladder but
the best he could improvise. He climbed until the sill of the window was
within reach and he could pull himself up and over.

The sill was a wide one, at least a twenty-four-inch span between the
inner and outer surface of the tower. Travis sat there for a minute,
reluctant to enter. Near the end of his dangling scarf-rope the two
coyotes lay on the pavement, their heads up, their tongues lolling from
their mouths, their expressions ones of detached interest.

Perhaps it was the width of the outer wall that subdued the amount of
light in the room. The chamber was circular, and directly opposite him
was a second window, the lowest of the matching diamond pattern. He took
the four-foot drop from the sill to the floor but lingered in the light
as he surveyed every inch of the room. There were no furnishings at all,
but in the very center sank a well of darkness. A smooth pillar, glowing
faintly, rose from its core. Travis' adjusting eyes noted how the light
came in small ripples--green and purple, over a foundation shade of dark
blue.

The pillar seemed rooted below and it extended up through a similar
opening in the ceiling, providing the only possible exit up or down,
save for climbing from window to window outside. Travis moved slowly to
the well. Underfoot was a smooth surface overlaid with a velvet carpet
of dust which arose in languid puffs as he walked. Here and there he
sighted prints in the dust, strange triangular wedges which he thought
might possibly have been made by the claws of birds. But there were no
other footprints. This tower had been undisturbed for a long, long time.

He came to the well and looked down. There was dark there, dark in which
the pulsations of light from the pillar shown the stronger. But that
glow did not extend beyond the edge of the well through which the thick
rod threaded. Even by close examination he could detect no break in the
smooth surface of the pillar, nothing remotely resembling hand- or
footholds. If it did serve the purpose of a staircase, there were no
treads.

At last Travis put out his hand to touch the surface of the pillar. And
then he jerked back--to no effect. There was no breaking contact between
his fingers and an unknown material which had the sleekness of polished
metal but--and the thought made him slightly queasy--the warmth and very
slight give of flesh!

He summoned all his strength to pull free and could not. Not only did
that hold grip him, but his other hand and arm were being drawn to join
the first! Inside Travis primitive fears awoke full force, and he threw
back his head, voicing a cry of panic as wild as that of a hunting
beast.

An instant later, his left palm was as tight a prisoner as his right.
And with both hands so held, his whole body was suddenly snapped
forward, off the safe foundation of the floor, tight to the pillar.

In this position he was sucked down into the well. And while unable to
free himself from the pillar, he did slip along its length easily
enough. Travis shut his eyes in an involuntary protest against this
weird form of capture, and a shiver ran through his body as he continued
to descend.

After the first shock had subsided the Apache realized that he was not
truly falling at all. Had the pillar been horizontal instead of
vertical, he would have gauged its speed that of a walk. He passed
through two more room enclosures; he must already be below the level of
the valley floor outside. And he was still a prisoner of the pillar, now
in total darkness.

His feet came down against a level surface, and he guessed he must have
reached the end. Again he pulled back, arching his shoulders in a final
desperate attempt at escape, and stumbled away as he was released.

He came up sideways against a wall and stood there panting. The light,
which might have come from the pillar but which seemed more a part of
the very air, was bright enough to reveal that he was in a corridor
running into greater dark both right and left.

Travis took two strides back to the pillar, fitted his palms once again
to its surface, with no result. This time his flesh did not adhere and
there was no possible way for him to climb that slick pole. He could
only hope that at some point the corridor would give him access to the
surface. But which way to go--?

At last he chose the right-hand path and started along it, pausing every
few steps to listen. But there was no sound except the soft pad of his
own feet. The air was fresh enough, and he thought he could detect a
faint current coming toward him from some point ahead--perhaps an exit.

Instead, he came into a room and a small gasp of astonishment was wrung
out of him. The walls were blank, covered with the same ripples of
blue-purple-green light which colored the pillar. Just before him was a
table and behind it a bench, both carved from the native yellow-red
mountain rock. And there was no exit except the doorway in which he now
stood.

Travis walked to the bench. Immovable, it was placed so that whoever sat
there must face the opposite wall of the chamber with the table before
him. And on the table was an object Travis recognized immediately from
his voyage in the alien star ship, one of the reader-viewers through
which the involuntary explorers had learned what little they knew of the
older galactic civilization.

A reader--and beside it a box of tapes. Travis touched the edge of that
box gingerly, half expecting it to crumble into nothingness. This was a
place long deserted. Stone table, bench, the towers could survive
through centuries of abandonment, but these other objects....

The substance of the reader was firm under the film of dust; there was
less dust here than had been in the upper tower chamber. Hardly knowing
why, Travis threw one leg over the bench and sat down behind the table,
the reader before him, the box of tapes just beyond his hand.

He surveyed the walls and then looked away hurriedly. The rippling
colors caught at his eyes. He had a feeling that if he watched that ebb
and flow too long, he would be captured in some subtle web of
enchantment just as the Reds' machine had caught and held the Tatars. He
turned his attention to the reader. It was, he believed, much like the
one they had used on the ship.

This room, table, bench, had all been designed with a set purpose. And
that purpose--Travis' fingers rested on the box of tapes he could not
yet bring himself to open--that purpose was to use the reader, he would
swear to that. Tapes so left must have had a great importance for those
who left them. It was as if the whole valley was a trap to channel a
stranger into this underground chamber.

Travis snapped open the box, fed the first disk into the reader, and
applied his eyes to the vision tube at its apex.

The rippling walls looked just the same when he looked up once more, but
the cramp in his muscles told Travis that time had passed--perhaps hours
instead of minutes--since he had taken out the first disk. He cupped his
hands over his eyes and tried to think clearly. There had been sheets of
meaningless symbol writing, but also there had been many clear,
three-dimensional pictures, accompanied by a singsong commentary in an
alien tongue, seemingly voiced out of thin air. He had been stuffed with
ragged bits and patches of information, to be connected only by guesses,
and some wild guesses, too. But this much he did know--these towers had
been built by the bald spacemen, and they were highly important to that
vanished stellar civilization. The information in this room, as
disjointed as it had been for him, led to a treasure trove on Topaz
greater than he had dreamed.

Travis swayed on the bench. To know so much and yet so little! If Ashe
were only here, or some other of the project technicians! A treasure
such as Pandora's box had been, peril for one who opened it and did not
understand. The Apache studied the three walls of blue-purple-green in
turn and with new attention. There were ways through those walls; he was
fairly sure he could unlock at least one of them. But not now--certainly
not now!

And there was another thing he knew: The Reds must _not_ find this. Such
a discovery on their part would not only mean the end of his own people
on Topaz, but the end of Terra as well. This could be a new and alien
Black Death spread to destroy whole nations at a time!

If he could--much as his archaeologist's training would argue against
it--he would blot out this whole valley above and below ground. But
while the Reds might possess a means of such destruction, the Apaches
did not. No, he and his people must prevent its discovery by the enemy
by doing what he had seen as necessary from the first--wiping out the
Red leaders! And that must be done before they chanced upon the towers!

Travis arose stiffly. His eyes ached, his head felt stuffed with
pictures, hints, speculations. He wanted to get out, back into the open
air where perhaps the clean winds of the heights would blow some of
this frightening half knowledge from his benumbed mind. He lurched down
the corridor, puzzled now by the problem of getting back to the window
level.

Here, before him, was the pillar. Without hope, but still obeying some
buried instinct, Travis again set his hands to its surface. There was a
tug at his cramped arms; once more his body was sucked to the pillar.
This time he was rising!

He held his breath past the first level and then relaxed. The principle
of this weird form of transportation was entirely beyond his
understanding, but as long as it worked in reverse he didn't care to
find out. He reached the windowed chamber, but the sunlight had left it;
instead, the clean cut of moon sweep lay on the dusty floor. He must
have been hours in that underground place.

Travis pulled away from the embrace of the pillar. The bar of his wooden
lance was still across the window and he ran for it. To catch the
scouting party at the pass he must hurry. The report they would make to
the clan now had to be changed radically in the face of his new
discoveries. The Apaches dared not retreat southward and withdraw from
the fight, leaving the Reds to use what treasure lay here.

As he hit the pavement below he looked about for the coyotes. Then he
tried the mind call. But as mysteriously as they had met him in the
valley, so now were they gone again. And Travis had no time to hunt for
them. With a sigh, he began his race to the pass.

In the old days, Travis remembered, Apache warriors had been able to
cover forty-five or fifty miles a day on foot and over rough territory.
But perhaps his modern breeding had slowed him. He had been so sure he
could catch up before the others were through the pass. But he stood now
in the hollow where they had camped, read the sign of overturned stone
and bent twig left for him, and knew they would reach the rancheria and
report the decision Deklay and the others wanted before he could head
them off.

Travis slogged on. He was so tired now that only the drug from the
sustenance tablets he mouthed at intervals kept him going at a dogged
pace, hardly more than a swift walk. And always his mind was haunted by
fragments of pictures, pictures he had seen in the reader. The big bomb
had been the nightmare of his own world for so long, and what was that
against the forces the bald star rovers had been able to command?

He fell beside a stream and slept. There was sunshine about him as he
arose to stagger on. What day was this? How long had he sat in the tower
chamber? He was not sure of time any more. He only knew that he must
reach the rancheria, tell his story, somehow win over Deklay and the
other reactionaries to prove the necessity for invading the north in
force.

A rocky point which was a familiar landmark came into focus. He padded
on, his chest heaving, his breath whistling through parched, sun-cracked
lips. He did not know that his face was now a mask of driven resolution.

"Hahhhhhh--"

The cry reached his dulled ears. Travis lifted his head, saw the men
before him and tried to think what that show of weapons turned toward
him could mean.

A stone thudded to earth only inches before his feet, to be followed by
another. He wavered to a stop.

"_Ni'ilgac_--!"

Witch? Where was a witch? Travis shook his head. There was no witch.

"_Do ne'ilka da_'!"

The old death threat, but why--for whom?

Another stone, this one hitting him in the ribs with force enough to
send him reeling back and down. He tried to get up again, saw Deklay
grin widely and take aim--and at last Travis realized what was
happening.

Then there was a bursting pain in his head and he was falling--falling
into a well of black, this time with no pillar of blue to guide him.


13


The rasp of something wet and rough, persistent against his cheek;
Travis tried to turn his head to avoid the contact and was answered by a
burst of pain which trailed off into a giddiness, making him fear
another move, no matter how minor. He opened his eyes and saw the
pointed ears, the outline of a coyote head between him and a dull gray
sky, was able to recognize Nalik'ideyu.

A wetness other than that from the coyote's tongue slid down his
forehead now. The dull clouds overhead had released the first heavy rain
Travis had experienced since their landing on Topaz. He shivered as the
chill damp of his clothes made him aware that he must have been lying
out in the full force of the downpour for some time.

It was a struggle to get to his knees, but Nalik'ideyu mouthed a hold on
his shirt, tugging and pulling so that somehow he crept into a hollow
beneath the branches of a tree where the spouting water was lessened to
a few pattering drops.

There the Apache's strength deserted him again and he could only hunch
over, his bent knees against his chest, trying to endure the throbbing
misery in his head, the awful floating sensation which followed any
movement. Fighting against that, he tried to remember just what had
happened.

The meeting with Deklay and at least four or five others ... then the
Apache accusation of witchcraft, a serious thing in the old days. Old
days! To Deklay and his fellows, these _were_ the old days! And the
threat that Deklay or some other had shouted at him--"_Do ne'ilka
da'_"--meant literally: "It won't dawn for you--death!"

Stones, the last thing Travis remembered were the stones. Slowly his
hands went out to explore his body. There was more than one bruised area
on his shoulders and ribs, even on his thighs. He must still have been a
target after he had fallen under the stone which had knocked him
unconscious. Stoned ... outlawed! But why? Surely Deklay's hostility
could not have swept Buck, Jil-Lee, Tsoay, even Nolan, into agreeing to
that? Now he could not think straight.

Travis became aware of warmth, not only of warmth and the soft touch of
a furred body by his side, but a comforting communication of mind, a
feeling he had no words to describe adequately. Nalik'ideyu was sitting
crowded against him, her nose thrust up to rest on his shoulder. She
breathed in soft puffs which stirred the loose locks of his rain-damp
hair. And now he flung one arm about her, a gesture which brought a
whisper of answering whine.

He was past wondering about the actions of the coyotes, only supremely
thankful for Nalik'ideyu's present companionship. And a moment later
when her mate squeezed under the low loop of a branch and joined them
in this natural wickiup, Travis held out his other hand, drew it
lovingly across Naginlta's wet hide.

"Now what?" he asked aloud. Deklay could only have taken such a drastic
action with the majority of the clan solidly behind him. It could well
be that this reactionary was the new chief, this act of Travis'
expulsion merely adding to Deklay's growing prestige.

The shivering which had begun when Travis recovered consciousness, still
shook him at intervals. Back on Terra, like all the others in the team,
he had had every inoculation known to the space physicians, including
several experimental ones. But the cold virus could still practically
immobilize a man, and this was no time to give body room to chills and
fever.

Catching his breath as his movements touched to life the pain in one
bruise after another, Travis peeled off his soaked clothing, rubbed his
body dry with handfuls of last year's leaves culled from the thick
carpet under him, knowing there was nothing he could do until the
whirling in his head disappeared. So he burrowed into the leaves until
only his head was uncovered, and tried to sleep, the coyotes curling up
one on either side of his nest.

He dreamed but later could not remember any incident from those dreams,
save a certain frustration and fear. When he awoke, again to the sound
of steady rain, it was dark. He reached out--both coyotes were gone. His
head was clearer and suddenly he knew what must be done. As soon as his
body was strong enough, he, too, would return to instincts and customs
of the past. This situation was desperate enough for him to challenge
Deklay.

In the dark Travis frowned. He was slightly taller, and three or four
years younger than his enemy. But Deklay had the advantage in a stouter
build and longer reach. However, Travis was sure that in his present
life Deklay had never fought a duel--Apache fashion. And an Apache duel
was not a meeting anyone entered into lightly. Travis had the right to
enter the rancheria and deliver such a challenge. Then Deklay must meet
him or admit himself in the wrong. That part of it was simple.

But in the past such duels had just one end, a fatal one for at least
one of the fighters. If Travis took this trail, he must be prepared to
go the limit. And he didn't want to kill Deklay! There were too few of
them here on Topaz to make any loss less than a real catastrophe. While
he had no liking for Deklay, neither did he nurse any hatred. However,
he must challenge the other or remain a tribal outcast; and Travis had
no right to gamble with time and the future, not after what he had
learned in the tower. It might be his life and skill, or Deklay's,
against the blotting out of them all--and their home world into the
bargain.

First, he must locate the present camp of the clan. If Nolan's arguments
had counted, they would be heading south away from the pass. And to
follow would draw him farther from the tower valley. Travis' battered
face ached as he grinned bitterly. This was another time when a man
could wish he were two people, a scout on sentry duty at the valley, the
fighter heading in the opposite direction to have it out with Deklay.
But since he was merely one man he would have to gamble on time, one of
the trickiest risks of all.

Before dawn Nalik'ideyu returned, carrying with her a bird--or at least
birds must have been somewhere in the creature's ancestry, but the
present representative of its kind had only vestigial remnants of wings,
its trailing feet and legs well developed and far more powerful.

Travis skinned the corpse, automatically putting aside some spine quills
to feather future arrows. Then he ate slivers of dusky meat raw,
throwing the bones to Nalik'ideyu.

Though he was still stiff and sore, Travis was determined to be on his
way. He tried mind contact with the coyote, picturing the Apaches,
notably Deklay, as sharply as he could by mental image. And her assent
was clear in return. She and her mate were willing to lead him to the
tribe. He gave a light sigh of relief.

As he slogged on through the depressing drizzle, the Apache wondered
again why the coyotes had left him before and waited in the tower
valley. What link was there between the animals of Terra and the remains
of the long-ago empire of the stars? For he was certain it was not by
chance that Nalik'ideyu and Naginlta had lingered in that misty place.
He longed to communicate with them directly, to ask questions and be
answered.

Without their aid, Travis would never have been able to track the clan.
The drizzle alternated with slashing bursts of rain, torrential enough
to drive the trackers to the nearest cover. Overhead the sky was either
dull bronze or night black. Even the coyotes paced nose to ground, often
making wide casts for the trail while Travis waited.

The rain lasted for three days and nights, filling watercourses with
rapidly rising streams. Travis could only hope that the others were
having the same difficulty traveling that he was, perhaps the more so
since they were burdened with packs. The fact that they kept on meant
that they were determined to get as far from the northern mountains as
they could.

On the fourth morning the bronze of the clouds slowly thinned into the
usual gold, and the sun struck across hills where mist curled like steam
from a hundred bubbling pots. Travis relaxed in the welcome warmth,
feeling his shirt dry on his shoulders. It was still a waterlogged
terrain ahead which should continue to slow the clan. He had high
expectations of catching up with them soon, and now the worst of his
bruises had faded. His muscles were limber, and he had worked out his
plan as best he could.

Two hours later he sat in ambush, waiting for the scout who was walking
into his hands. Under the direction of the coyotes, Travis had circled
the line of march, come in ahead of the clan. Now he needed an emissary
to state his challenge, and the fact that the scout he was about to jump
was Manulito, one of Deklay's supporters, suited Travis' purpose
perfectly. He gathered his feet under him as the other came opposite,
and sprang.

The rush carried Manulito off his feet and face down on the sod while
Travis made the best of his advantage and pinned the wildly fighting man
under him. Had it been one of the older braves he might not have been so
successful, but Manulito was still a boy by Apache standards.

"Lie still!" Travis ordered. "Listen well--so you can say to Deklay the
words of the Fox!"

The frenzied struggles ceased. Manulito managed to wrench his head to
the left so he could see his captor. Travis loosened his grip, got to
his feet. Manulito sat up, his face darkly sullen, but he did not reach
for his knife.

"You will say this to Deklay: The Fox says he is a man of little sense
and less courage, preferring to throw stones rather than meet knife to
knife as does a warrior. If he thinks as a warrior, let him prove
it--his strength against my strength--after the ways of the People!"

Some of the sullenness left Manulito's expression. He was eager,
excited.

"You would duel with Deklay after the old custom?"

"I would. Say this to Deklay, openly so that all men may hear. Then
Deklay must also give answer openly."

Manulito flushed at that implication concerning his leader's courage,
and Travis knew that he would deliver the challenge openly. To keep his
hold on the clan the latter must accept it, and there would be an
audience of his people to witness the success or defeat of their new
chief and his policies.

As Manulito disappeared Travis summoned the coyotes, putting full effort
into getting across one message. Any tribe led by Deklay would be
hostile to the mutant animals. They must go into hiding, run free in the
wilderness if the gamble failed Travis. Now they withdrew into the
bushes but not out of reach of his mind.

He did not have too long to wait. First came Jil-Lee, Buck, Nolan,
Tsoay, Lupe--those who had been with him on the northern scout. Then the
others, the warriors first, the women making a half circle behind,
leaving a free space in which Deklay walked.

"I am the Fox," Travis stated. "And this one has named me witch and
_natdahe_, outlaw of the mountains. Therefore do I come to name names in
my turn. Hear me, People: This Deklay--he would walk among you as
_'izesnantan_, a great chief--but he does not have the _go'ndi_, the
holy power of a chief. For this Deklay is a fool, with a head filled by
nothing but his own wishes, not caring for his clan brothers. He says he
leads you into safety; I say he leads you into the worst danger any
living man can imagine--even in peyote dreams! He is one twisted in his
thoughts, and he would make you twisted also----"

Buck cut in sharply, hushing the murmur of the massed clan.

"These are bold words, Fox. Will you back them?"

Travis' hands were already peeling off his shirt. "I will back them," he
stated between set teeth. He had known since his awakening after the
stoning that this next move was the only one left for him to make. But
now that the testing of his action came, he could not be certain of the
outcome, of anything save that the final decision of this battle might
affect more than the fate of two men. He stripped, noting that Deklay
was doing the same.

Having stepped into the center of the glade, Nolan was using the point
of his knife to score a deep-ridged circle there. Naked except for his
moccasins, with only his knife in his hand, Travis took the two strides
which put him in the circle facing Deklay. He surveyed his opponent's
finely muscled body, realizing that his earlier estimate of Deklay's
probable advantages were close to the mark. In sheer strength the other
outmatched him. Whether Deklay was skillful with his knife was another
question, one which Travis would soon be able to answer.

They circled, eyes intent upon each move, striving to weigh and measure
each other's strengths and weaknesses. Knife dueling among the
Pinda-lick-o-yi, Travis remembered, had once been an art close to
finished swordplay, with two evenly matched fighters able to engage for
a long time without seriously marking each other. But this was a far
rougher and more deadly game, with none of the niceties of such a
meeting.

He evaded a vicious thrust from Deklay.

"The bull charges," he laughed. "And the Fox snaps!" By some incredible
stroke of good fortune, the point of his weapon actually grazed Deklay's
arm, drawing a thin, red inch-long line across the skin.

"Charge again, bull. Feel once more the Fox's teeth!"

He strove to goad Deklay into a crippling loss of temper, knowing how
the other could explode into violent rage. It was dangerous, that rage,
but it could also make a man blindly careless.

There was an inarticulate sound from Deklay, a dusky swelling in the
man's face. He spat, as might an enraged puma, and rushed at Travis who
did not quite manage to avoid the lunge, falling back with a smarting
slash across the ribs.

"The bull gores!" Deklay bellowed. "Horns toss the Fox!"

He rushed again, elated by the sight of the trickling wound on Travis'
side. But the slighter man slipped away.

Travis knew he must be careful in such evasions. One foot across the
ridged circle and he was finished as much as if Deklay's blade had found
its mark. Travis tried a thrust of his own, and his foot came down hard
on a sharp pebble. Through the sole of his moccasin pain shot upward,
caused him to stumble. Again the scarlet flame of a wound, down his
shoulder and forearm this time.

Well, there was one trick, he knew. Travis tossed the knife into the
air, caught it with his left hand. Deklay was now facing a left-handed
fighter and must adjust to that.

"Paw, bull, rattle your horns!" Travis cried. "The Fox still shows his
teeth!"

Deklay recovered from his instant of surprise. With a cry which was
indeed like the bellow of an old range bull, he rushed into grapple,
sure of his superior strength against a younger and already wounded man.

Travis ducked, one knee thumping the ground. He groped out with his
right hand, caught up a handful of earth, and flung it into the dusky
brown face. Again it seemed that luck was on his side. That handful
could not be as blinding as sand, but some bit of the shower landed in
Deklay's eye.

For a space of seconds Deklay was wide open--open for a blow which would
rip him up the middle, the blow Travis could not and would not deliver.

Instead, he took the offensive recklessly, springing straight for his
opponent. As the earth-grimed fingers of one hand clawed into Deklay's
face, he struck with the other, not with the point of the knife but with
its shaft. But Deklay, already only half conscious from the blow, had
his own chance. He fell to the ground, leaving his knife behind, two
inches of steel between Travis' ribs.

Somehow--he didn't know from where he drew that strength--Travis kept
his feet and took one step and then another, out of the circle until the
comforting brace of a tree trunk was against his bare back. Was he
finished--?

He fought to nurse his rags of consciousness. Had he summoned Buck with
his eyes? Or had the urgency of what he had to say reached somehow from
mind to mind? The other was at his side, but Travis put out a hand to
ward him off.

"Towers--" He struggled to keep his wits through the pain and billowing
weakness beginning to creep through him. "Reds mustn't get to the
towers! Worse than the bomb ... end us all!"

He had a hazy glimpse of Nolan and Jil-Lee closing in about him. The
desire to cough tore at him, but they had to know, to believe....

"Reds get to the towers--everything finished. Not only here ... maybe
back home too...."

Did he read comprehension on Buck's face? Would Nolan and Jil-Lee and
the rest believe him? Travis could not suppress the cough any longer,
and the ripping pain which followed was the worst he had ever
experienced. But still he kept his feet, tried to make them understand.

"Don't let them get to the towers. Find that storehouse!"

Travis stood away from the tree, reached out to Buck his earth and
bloodstained hand. "I swear ... truth ... this must be done!"

He was going down, and he had a queer thought that once he reached the
ground everything would end, not only for him but also for his mission.
Trying to see the faces of the men about him was like attempting to
identify the people in a dream.

"Towers!" He had meant to shout it, but he could not even hear for
himself that last word as he fell.


14


Travis' back was braced against blanketed packs as he steadied a piece
of light-yellow bark against one bent knee scowling at the lines drawn
on it in faint green.

"We are here then ... and the ship there--" His thumb was set on one
point of the crude map, forefinger on the other. Buck nodded.

"That is so. Tsoay, Eskelta, Kawaykle, they watch the trails. There is
the pass, two other ways men can come on foot. But who can watch the
air?"

"The Tatars say the Reds dare not bring the 'copter into the mountains.
After they first landed they lost a flyer in a tricky air-current flow
up there. They have only one left and won't risk it. If only they aren't
reinforced before we can move!" There it was again, that constant
gnawing fear of time, time shortening into a rope to strangle them all.

"You think that the knowledge of our ship will bring them into the
open?"

"That--or information about the towers would be the only things
important enough to pull out their experts. They could send a controlled
Tatar party to explore the ship, sure. But that wouldn't give them the
technical reports they need. No, I think if they knew a wrecked Western
Confederation ship was here, it would bring them--or enough of them to
lessen the odds. We have to catch them in the open. Otherwise, they can
hole up forever in that ship-fort of theirs."

"And just how do we let them know our ship is here? Send out another
scouting party and let them be trailed back?"

"That's our last resource." Travis continued to frown at the map. Yes,
it would be possible to let the Reds sight and trail an Apache party.
But there was none in the clan who were expendable. Surely there was
some other way of laying the trap with the wrecked ship for bait.
Capture one of the Reds, let him escape again, having seen what they
wanted him to see? Again a time-wasting business. And how long would
they have to wait and what risks would they take to pick up a Red
prisoner?

"If the Tatars were dependable...." Buck was thinking aloud.

But that "if" was far too big. They could not trust the Tatars. No
matter how much the Mongols wanted to aid in pulling down the Reds, as
long as they could be controlled by the caller they were useless. Or
were they?

"Thought of something?" Buck must have caught Travis' change of
expression.

"Suppose a Tatar saw our ship and then was picked up by a Red hunting
patrol and they got the information out of him?"

"Do you think any outlaw would volunteer to let himself be picked up
again? And if he did, wouldn't the Reds also be able to learn that he
had been set up for the trap?"

"An escaped prisoner?" Travis suggested.

Now Buck was plainly considering the possibilities of such a scheme. And
Travis' own spirits rose a little. The idea was full of holes, but it
could be worked out. Suppose they capture, say, Menlik, bring him here
as a prisoner, let him think they were about to kill him because of that
attack back in the foothills. Then let him escape, pursue him northward
to a point where he could be driven into the hands of the Reds? Very
chancy, but it just might work. Travis was favoring a gamble now, since
his desperate one with the duel had paid off.

The risk he had accepted then had cost him two deep wounds, one of which
might have been serious if Jil-Lee's project-sponsored medical training
had not been to hand. But it had also made Travis one of the clan again,
with his people willing to listen to his warning concerning the tower
treasury.

"The girl--the Tatar girl!"

At first Travis did not understand Buck's ejaculation.

"We get the girl," the other elaborated, "let her escape, then hunt her
to where they'll pick her up. Might even imprison her in the ship to
begin with."

Kaydessa? Though something within him rebelled at that selection for the
leading role in their drama, Travis could see the advantage of Buck's
choice. Woman-stealing was an ancient pastime among primitive cultures.
The Tatars themselves had found wives that way in the past, just as the
Apache raiders of old had taken captive women into their wickiups. Yes,
for raiders to steal a woman would be a natural act, accepted as such
by the Reds. For the same woman to endeavor to escape and be hunted by
her captors also was reasonable. And for such a woman, cut off from her
outlaw kin, to eventually head back toward the Red settlement as the
only hope of evading her enemies--logical all the way!

"She would have to be well frightened," Travis observed with reluctance.

"That can be done for us--"

Travis glanced at Buck with sharp annoyance. He would not allow certain
games out of their common past to be played with Kaydessa. But Buck had
something very different from old-time brutality in mind.

"Three days ago, while you were still flat on your back, Deklay and I
went back to the ship--"

"Deklay?"

"You beat him openly, so he must restore his honor in his own sight. And
the council has forbidden another duel or challenge," Buck replied.
"Therefore he will continue to push for recognition in another way. And
now that he has heard your story and knows we must face the Reds, not
run from them, he is eager to take the war trail--too eager. So we
returned to the ship to make another search for weapons----"

"There were none there before except those we had...."

"Nor now either. But we discovered something else." Buck paused and
Travis was shaken out of his absorption with the problem at hand by a
note in the other's voice. It was as if Buck had come upon something he
could not summon the right words to describe.

"First," Buck continued, "there was this dead thing there, near where
we found Dr. Ruthven. It was something like a man ... but all silvery
hair----"

"The ape-things! The ape-things from the other worlds! What else did you
see?" Travis had dropped the map. His side gave him a painful twinge as
he caught at Buck's sleeve. The bald space rovers--did they still exist
here somewhere? Had they come to explore the ship built on the pattern
of their own but manned by Terrans?

"Nothing except tracks, a lot of them, in every open cabin and hole. I
think there must have been a sizable pack of the things."

"What killed the dead one?"

Buck wet his lips. "I think--fear...." His voice dropped a little,
almost apologetically, and Travis stared.

"The ship is changed. Inside, there is something wrong. When you walk
the corridors your skin crawls, you think there is something behind you.
You hear things, see things from the corners of your eyes.... When you
turn, there's nothing, nothing at all! And the higher you climb into the
ship, the worse it is. I tell you, Travis, never have I felt anything
like it before!"

"It was a ship of many dead," Travis reminded him. Had the age-old
Apache fear of the dead been activated by the Redax into an acute
phobia--to strike down such a level-headed man as Buck?

"No, at first that, too, was my thought. Then I discovered that it was
worst not near that chamber where we lay our dead, but higher, in the
Redax cabin. I think perhaps the machine is still running, but running
in a wrong way--so that it does not awaken old memories of our
ancestors now, but brings into being all the fears which have ever
haunted us through the dark of the ages. I tell you, Travis, when I came
out of that place Deklay was leading me by the hand as if I were a
child. And he was shivering as a man who will never be warm again. There
is an evil there beyond our understanding. I think that this Tatar girl,
were she only to stay there a very short time, would be well
frightened--so frightened that any trained scientist examining her later
would know there was a mystery to be explored."

"The ape-things--could they have tried to run the Redax?" Travis
wondered. To associate machines with the creatures was outwardly pure
folly. But they had been discovered on two of the planets of the old
civilization, and Ashe had thought that they might represent the
degenerate remnants of a once intelligent species.

"That is possible. If so, they raised a storm which drove them out and
killed one of them. The ship is a haunted place now."

"But for us to use the girl...." Travis had seen the logic in Buck's
first suggestion, but now he differed. If the atmosphere of the ship was
as terrifying as Buck said, to imprison Kaydessa there, even
temporarily, was still wrong.

"She need not remain long. Suppose we should do this: We shall enter
with her and then allow the disturbance we would feel to overcome us. We
could run, leave her alone. When she left the ship, we could then take
up the chase, shepherding her back to the country she knows. Within the
ship we would be with her and could see she did not remain too long."

Travis could see a good prospect in that plan. There was one thing he
would insist on--if Kaydessa was to be in that ship, he himself would be
one of the "captors." He said as much, and Buck accepted his
determination as final.

They dispatched a scouting party to infiltrate the territory to the
north, to watch and wait their chance of capture. Travis strove to
regain his feet, to be ready to move when the moment came.

Five days later he was able to reach the ridge beyond which lay the
wrecked ship. With him were Jil-Lee, Lupe, and Manulito. They satisfied
themselves that the globe had had no visitors since Buck and Deklay;
there was no sign that the ape-things had returned.

"From here," Travis said, "the ship doesn't look too bad, almost as if
it might be able to take off again."

"It might lift," Jil-Lee gestured to the mountaintop behind the curve of
the globe--"about that far. The tubes on this side are intact."

"What would happen were the Reds to get inside and try to fly again?"
Manulito wondered aloud.

Travis was struck by a sudden idea, one perhaps just as wild as the
other inspirations he had had since landing on Topaz, but one to be
studied and explored--not dismissed without consideration. Suppose
enough power remained to lift the ship partially and then blow it up?
With the Red technicians on board at the time.... But he was no
engineer, he had no idea whether any part of the globe might or might
not work again.

"They are not fools; a close look would tell them it is a wreck,"
Jil-Lee countered.

Travis walked on. Not too far ahead a yellow-brown shape moved out of
the brush, stood stiff-legged in his path, facing the ship and growling
in a harsh rumble of sound. Whatever moved or operated in that wreck was
picked up by the acute sense of the coyote, even at this distance.

"On!" Travis edged around the snarling animal. With one halting step and
then another, it followed him. There was a sharp warning yelp from the
brush, and a second coyote head appeared. Naginlta followed Travis, but
Nalik'ideyu refused to approach the grounded globe.

Travis surveyed the ship closely, trying to remember the layout of its
interior. To turn the whole sphere into a trap--was it possible? How had
Ashe said the Redax worked? Something about high-frequency waves
stimulating certain brain and nerve centers.

What if one were shielded from those rays? That tear in the side--he
himself must have climbed through that the night they crashed. And the
break was not too far from the space lock. Near the lock was a storage
compartment. And if it had not been jammed, or its contents crushed,
they might have something. He beckoned to Jil-Lee.

"Give me a hand--up there."

"Why?"

"I want to see if the space suits are intact."

Jil-Lee regarded Travis with open bewilderment, but Manulito pushed
forward. "We do not need those suits to walk here, Travis. This air we
can breathe--"

"Not for the air, and not in the open." Travis advanced at a deliberate
pace. "Those suits may be insulated in more ways than one----"

"Against a mixed-up Redax broadcast, you mean!" Jil-Lee exclaimed.
"Yes, but you stay here, younger brother. This is a risky climb, and you
are not yet strong."

Travis was forced to accede to that, waiting as Manulito and Lupe
climbed up to the tear and entered. The white clouds would roll
up, looking like huge snow balls, encircled with living fires. The earth
and hills and trees were covered with snow, and the lightnings
seemed to be playing "King, King Canico" along its crusted surface.

If it thundered at all, it seemed to be between a groaning and a rumbling
sound. The trees and hills seemed white with livid fire. I can remember
that storm now as the grandest picture that has ever made any
impression on my memory.

As soon as it quit lightning, the most blinding snow storm fell that I
ever saw. It fell so thick and fast that I got hot.

I felt like pulling off my coat. I was freezing. The winds sounded like
sweet music.

I felt grand, glorious, peculiar; beautiful things began to play
and dance around my head, and I supposed I must have dropped to
sleep or something, when I felt Schwartz grab me, and give me a
shake, and at the same time raised his gun and fired, and yelled
out at the top of his voice, "Here is your mule."

The next instant a volley of minnie balls was scattering the snow all
around us. I tried to walk, but my pants and boots were stiff and
frozen, and the blood had ceased to circulate in my lower limbs.

But Schwartz kept on firing, and at every fire he would yell out, "Yer is
yer mool!" Pfifer could not speak English, and I reckon he said "Here
is your mule" in Dutch.

About the same time we were hailed from three Confederate officers, at
full gallop right toward us, not to shoot. And as they galloped up to us
and thundered right across the bridge, we discovered it was Stonewall
Jackson and two of his staff.

At the same time the Yankee cavalry charged us, and we, too, ran back
across the bridge.

STANDING PICKET ON THE POTOMAC
Leaving Winchester, we continued up the valley.

The night before the attack on Bath or Berkly Springs, there fell the
largest snow I ever saw.

Stonewall Jackson had seventeen thousand soldiers at his command.

The Yankees were fortified at Bath.

An attack was ordered, our regiment marched upon top of a mountain
overlooking the movements of both armies in the valley below. About 4
o'clock one grand charge and rush was made, and the Yankees were
routed and skedaddled.

By some circumstance or other, Lieutenant J.

Lee Bullock came in command of the First Tennessee Regiment. But
Lee was not a graduate of West Point, you see.

The Federals had left some spiked batteries on the hill side, as we were
informed by an old citizen, and Lee, anxious to capture a battery, gave
the new and peculiar command of, "Soldiers, you are ordered to go
forward and capture a battery; just piroute up that hill; piroute,
march.

Forward, men; piroute carefully." The boys "pirouted" as best they could.
It may have been a new command, and not laid down in Hardee's or
Scott's tactics; but Lee was speaking plain English, and we understood
his meaning perfectly, and even at this late day I have no doubt that
every soldier who heard the command thought it a legal and technical
term used by military graduates to go forward and capture a
battery.

At this place (Bath), a beautiful young lady ran across the street.

I have seen many beautiful and pretty women in my life, but she was the
prettiest one I ever saw. Were you to ask any member of the First Tennessee
Regiment who was the prettiest woman he ever saw, he would
unhesitatingly answer that he saw her at Berkly Springs during the
war, and he would continue the tale, and tell you of Lee Bullock's
piroute and Stonewall Jackson's charge.

We rushed down to the big spring bursting out of the mountain side, and
it was hot enough to cook an egg.

Never did I see soldiers more surprised. The water was so hot we
could not drink it.

The snow covered the ground and was still falling.

That night I stood picket on the Potomac with a detail of the Third
Arkansas Regiment. I remember how sorry I felt for the poor fellows,
because they had enlisted for the war, and we for only twelve months.That would be, according to their way of
thinking, an eternal threat."

Jil-Lee nodded. "That is true. This is a complicated plan, yes, and one
in which many things may go wrong. But it is also one which covers all
the loopholes we know of."

With Lupe's aid Manulito crawled out of the suit. As he leaned it
carefully against a supporting rock he said:

"I have been thinking of this treasure house in the towers. Suppose we
could find new weapons there...."

Travis hesitated. He still shrank from the thought of opening the secret
places behind those glowing walls, to loose a new peril.

"If we took weapons from there and lost the fight...." He advanced his
first objection and was glad to see the expression of comprehension on
Jil-Lee's face.

"It would be putting the weapons straight into Red hands," the other
agreed.

"We may have to chance it before we're through," Manulito warned.
"Suppose we do get some of their technicians into this trap. That isn't
going to open up their main defense for us. We may need a bigger
nutcracker than we've ever seen."

With a return of that queasy feeling he had known in the tower, Travis
knew Manulito was speaking sense. They might have to open Pandora's box
before the end of this campaign.


15


They camped another two days near the wrecked ship while Manulito
prowled the haunted corridors and cabins in his space suit, planning his
booby trap. At night he drew diagrams on pieces of bark and discussed
the possibility of this or that device, sometimes lapsing into
technicalities his companions could not follow. But Travis was well
satisfied that Manulito knew what he was doing.

On the morning of the third day Nolan slipped into their midst. He was
dust-grimed, his face gaunt, the signs of hard travel plain to read.
Travis handed him the nearest canteen, and they watched him drink
sparingly in small sips before he spoke.

"They come ... with the girl--"

"You had trouble?" asked Jil-Lee.

"The Tatars had moved their camp, which was only wise, since the Reds
must have had a line on the other one. And they are now farther to the
west. But--" he wiped his lips with the back of his hand--"also we saw
your towers, Fox. And that is a place of power!"

"No sign that the Reds are prowling there?"

Nolan shook his head. "To my mind the mists there conceal the towers
from aerial view. Only one coming on foot could tell them from the
natural crags of the hills."

Travis relaxed. Time still granted them a margin of grace. He glanced up
to see Nolan smiling faintly.

"This maiden, she is a kin to the puma of the mountains," he announced.
"She has marked Tsoay with her claws until he looks like the ear-clipped
yearling fresh from the branding chute----"

"She is not hurt?" Travis demanded.

This time Nolan chuckled openly. "Hurt? No, we had much to do to keep
her from hurting us, younger brother. That one is truly as she claims, a
daughter of wolves. And she is also keen-witted, marking a return trail
all the way, though she does not know that is as we wish. Did we not
pick the easiest way back for just that reason? Yes, she plans to
escape."

Travis stood up. "Let us finish this quickly!" His voice came out on a
rough note. This plan had never had his full approval. Now he found it
less and less easy to think about taking Kaydessa into the ship,
allowing the emotional torment lurking there to work upon her. Yet he
knew that the girl would not be hurt, and he had made sure he would be
beside her within the globe, sharing with her the horror of the unseen.

A rattling of gravel down the narrow valley opening gave warning to
those by the campfire. Manulito had already stowed the space suit in
hiding. To Kaydessa they must have seemed reverted entirely to savagery.

Tsoay came first, an angry raking of four parallel scratches down his
left cheek. And behind him Buck and Eskelta shoved the prisoner, urging
her on with a show of roughness which did not descend to actual
brutality. Her long braids had shaken loose, and a sleeve was torn,
leaving one slender arm bare. But none of the fighting spirit had left
her.

They thrust her out into the circle of waiting men and she planted her
feet firmly apart, glaring at them all indiscriminately until she
sighted Travis. Then her anger became hotter and more deadly.

"Pig! Rooter in the dirt! Diseased camel--" she shouted at him in
English and then reverted to her own tongue, her voice riding up and
down the scale. Her hands were tied behind her back, but there were no
bonds on her tongue.

"This is one who can speak thunders, and shoot lightnings from her
mouth," Buck commented in Apache. "Put her well away from the wood, lest
she set it aflame."

Tsoay held his hands over his ears. "She can deafen a man when she
cannot set her mark on him otherwise. Let us speedily get rid of her."

Yet for all their jeering comments, their eyes held respect. Often in
the past a defiant captive who stood up boldly to his captors had
received more consideration than usual from Apache warriors; courage was
a quality they prized. A Pinda-lick-o-yi such as Tom Jeffords, who rode
into Cochise's camp and sat in the midst of his sworn enemies for a
parley, won the friendship of the very chief he had been fighting.
'You are the owner of the block of 'model houses,' as they are called?'

Hiram nodded.

'A patient of mine, a laboring man, is one of your tenants. He broke
his leg a few months ago, falling from a scaffolding. He has had hard
work to live since. Thursday his wife was taken ill.

Yesterday was rent day--he pays monthly in advance. He could not get
the money, and your agent refuses to give him any grace. Now what I want
to say is, the poor woman can't be moved without danger to her
life.'

'Well?'
'Well,' echoed the other, 'I want to get an order from you to let her
remain.'
'See the agent.'
'I have seen him; and, what is more, although I am poor enough
myself--for I am just starting, you see, in New York--I offered to
pawn my watch and pay the rent myself, but the man would not take
it.'

'No?'
'No, he would not. He said they had gone over the time, and he did
not want tenants who depended on charity to pay rent; besides he said he
was afraid the woman was going to die, and he did not want a death
in the building--it would give it a bad name.'

The young man paused, with the air of one who had made a successful
argument, and was waiting for an auspicious result.

The only notice Hiram took of him was to say, in a decided tone, as he
resumed his calculations, 'I can't interfere.'
'CAN'T interfere!' said the other, with naive astonishment.
'Why, what do you mean?

It will kill the woman, I tell you! You _must_ interfere.'
'Young man, you forget yourself. I repeat, go to the agent. I shall not
interfere.'
'Well, well,' said the young physician, rising, 'I have heard of
hard hearts and cruel men who grind the faces of the poor, but you are
the first I have seen. I don't envy you, though. I would not stand
in your shoes for a good deal.'

While Dr. Ephraim Peters was delivering himself of the above, Hiram
had struck a small bell which stood before him, and a young man entered
in response to the summons just as the doctor concluded.

'Holmes, send for a policeman.'
'Yes, sir.' And Holmes withdrew to execute the commission.

'Do you mean that for me?' exclaimed the young doctor, choking with
passion, while the gray eyes flashed dangerously.

Hiram made no reply, but occupied himself intently with the figures
before him.

'I say,' said the other, in a louder tone, 'do you mean that for me? I
suppose you do, and I have half a mind that the errand shall not
be for nothing.

Yes, I have _more_ than half a mind to break every bone in your worthless
body!'
He looked at that moment, with his clenched hand, erect figure, and
energetic presence, quite capable of carrying out the threat.

Still, Hiram paid not the slightest attention to this demonstration,
but worked at his figures, more abstracted than ever. He knew it was
merely a matter of time; the policeman would arrive in two or three
minutes, and, as he hoped, would catch the doctor in the midst of
his violent outburst of passion.

On the other hand, our young hero soon discovered that he was to get no
satisfaction from his antagonist, as he now considered him, by the
course he was pursuing.

He, too, began to count the moments--well aware that he had not much
time to spare.

He determined to change his tactics.

'After all,' he exclaimed, in a deliberate tone, 'I will not give
you the chance for a case of assault and battery.

I think better of the whole matter. Nature is slower, to be sure, but she
will do the work better than I could. Do you know what an advantage
I have over you? I am twenty-five, and you fifty-five. Money cannot buy
back those thirty years.

That's about all I have to say.

'Not quite, either,' he continued, still more deliberately. 'I am a
medical man, accustomed to judge of a person's condition by observation.

Do you want me to tell you what is the matter with you?'

Dr. Ephraim Peters paused, as if for a reply.

A natural instinct, which acts without our volition, took such
sudden possession of Hiram, that he raised his eyes from his papers
and turned them upon the questioner, as if expecting him to
continue.
'I see the subject interests you,' said the doctor. 'Take my advice.
Sit over your papers less, and exercise more--or you will be struck
with paralysis within five years! Good-day.'
He turned and quitted the apartment with a slow and dignified
step.
As he advanced a little way along the street, he encountered Holmes,
still in search of a police officer.
He had been at two or three places where one was always visible;
but, as usual when wanted, none were to be found.
'Holmes,' said the doctor, addressing him as if he had known him
all his life, 'hurry back to your employer; he wants you particularly.'

Holmes sped off at the word, delighted to be relieved in his search;
and Dr.Or at least we can be on
guard there if they return with Kaydessa on that path."

Lupe dropped down lightly from an upper ledge. He was grinning.

"That woman is one who thinks. She runs from the ship first as a rabbit
with a wolf at her heels. Then she begins to think. She climbs--" He
lifted one finger to the slope behind them. "She goes behind a rock to
watch under cover. When Fox comes from the ship with Eskelta, again she
climbs. Buck lets himself be seen, so she moves east, as we wish--"

"And now?" questioned Travis.

"She is keeping to the high ways; almost she thinks like one of the
People on the war trail. Nolan believes she will hole up for the night
somewhere above. He will make sure."

Travis licked his lips. "She has no food or water."

Jil-Lee's lips shaped a smile. "They will see that she comes upon both
as if by chance. We have planned all of this, as you know, younger
brother."

That was true. Travis knew that Kaydessa would be guided without her
knowledge by the "accidental" appearance now and then of some
pursuer--just enough to push her along.

"Then, too, she is now armed," Jil-Lee added.

"How?" demanded Travis.

"Look to your own belt, younger brother. Where is your knife?"

Startled, Travis glanced down. His sheath was empty, and he had not
needed that blade since he had drawn it to cut meat at the morning meal.
Lupe laughed.

"She had steel in her hand when she came out of that ghost ship."

"Took it from me while we struggled!" Travis was openly surprised. He
had considered the frenzy displayed by the Tatar girl as an outburst of
almost mindless terror. Yet Kaydessa had had wit enough to take his
knife! Could this be another case where one race was less affected by a
mind machine than the other? Just as the Apaches had not been governed
by the Red caller, so the Tatars might not be as sensitive to the Redax.

"She is a strong one, that woman--one worth many ponies." Eskelta
reverted to the old measure of a wife's value.

"That is true!" Travis agreed emphatically and then was annoyed at the
broadening of Jil-Lee's smile. Abruptly he changed the subject.

"Manulito is setting the booby trap in the ship."

"That is well. He and Eskelta will remain here, and you with them."

"Not so! We must go to the towers----" Travis protested.

"I thought," Jil-Lee cut in, "that you believed the weapons of the old
ones too dangerous for us to use."

"Maybe they will be forced into our hands. But we must be sure the
towers are not entered by the Reds on their way here."

"That is reasonable. But for you, younger brother, no trailing today,
perhaps not tomorrow. If that wound opens again, you might have much bad
trouble."

Travis was forced to accept that, in spite of his worry and impatience.
And the next day when he did move on he had only the report that
Kaydessa had sheltered beside a pool for the night and was doggedly
moving back across the mountains.

Three days later Travis, Jil-Lee, and Buck came into the tower valley.
Kaydessa was in the northern foothills, twice turned back from the west
and the freedom of the outlaws by the Apache scouts. And only half an
hour before, Tsoay had reported by mirror what should have been welcome
news: the Red helicopter was cruising as it had on the day they watched
the hunters enter the uplands. There was an excellent chance of the
fugitive's being sighted and picked up soon.

Tsoay had also spotted a party of three Tatars watching the helicopter.
But after one wide sweep of the flyer they had taken to their ponies and
ridden away at the fastest pace their mounts could manage in this rough
territory.

On a stretch of smooth earth Buck scratched a trail, and they studied
it. The Reds would have to follow this route to seek the wrecked ship--a
route covered by Apache sentinels. And following the chain of
communication the result of the trap would be reported to the party at
the towers.

The waiting was the most difficult; too many imponderables did not allow
for unemotional thinking. Travis was down to the last shred of patience
when word came on the second morning at the hidden valley that Kaydessa
had been picked up by a Red patrol--drawn out to meet them by the
caller.

"Now--the tower weapons!" Buck answered the report with an imperative
order to Travis. And the other knew he could no longer postpone the
inevitable. And only by action could he blot out the haunting mental
picture of Kaydessa once more drawn into the bondage she so hated.

Flanked by Jil-Lee and Buck, he climbed back through the tower window
and faced the glowing pillar.

He crossed the room, put out both hands to the sleek pole, uncertain if
the weird transport would work again. He heard the sharp gasp from the
others as his body was sucked against the pillar and carried downward
through the well. Buck followed him, and Jil-Lee came last. Then Travis
led the way along the underground corridor to the room with the table
and the reader.

He sat down on the bench, fumbled with the pile of tape disks, knowing
that the other two were watching him with almost hostile intentness. He
snapped a disk into the reader, hoping he could correctly interpret the
directions it gave.

He looked up at the wall before him. Three ... four steps, the correct
move--and then an unlocking....

"You know?" Buck demanded.

"I can guess----"

"Well?" Jil-Lee moved to the table. "What do we do?"

"This--" Travis came from behind the table, walked to the wall. He put
out both hands, flattened his palms against the green-blue-purple
surface and slid them slowly along. Under his touch, the material of the
wall was cool and hard, unlike the live feel the pillar had. Cool
until--

One palm, held at arm's length had found the right spot. He slid the
other hand along in the opposite direction until his arms were level
with his shoulders. His fingers were able now to press on those points
of warmth. Travis tensed and pushed hard with all ten fingers.


16


At first, as one second and then two passed and there was no response to
the pressure, Travis thought he had mistaken the reading of the tape.
Then, directly before his eyes, a dark line cut vertically down the
wall. He applied more pressure until his fingers were half numb with
effort. The line widened slowly. Finally he faced a slit some eight feet
in height, a little more than two in width, and there the opening
remained.

Light beyond, a cold, gray gleam--like that of a cloudy winter day on
Terra--and with it the chill of air out of some arctic wasteland.
Favoring his still bandaged side, Travis scraped through the door ahead
of the others, and came into the place of gray cold.

"Wauggh!" Travis heard that exclamation from Jil-Lee, could have echoed
it himself except that he was too astounded by what he had seen to say
anything at all.

The light came from a grid of bars set far above their heads into the
native rock which roofed this storehouse, for storehouse it was. There
were orderly lines of boxes, some large enough to contain a tank, others
no bigger than a man's fist. Symbols in the same blue-green-purple
lights of the outer wall shone from their sides.

"What--?" Buck began one question and then changed it to another: "Where
do we begin to look?"

"Toward the far end." Travis started down the center aisle between rows
of the massed spoils of another time and world--or worlds. The same tape
which had given him the clue to the unlocking of the door, emphasized
the importance of something stored at the far end, an object or objects
which must be used first. He had wondered about that tape. A sensation
of urgency, almost of despair, had come through the gabble of alien
words, the quick sequence of diagrams and pictures. The message might
have been taped under a threat of some great peril.

There was no dust on the rows of boxes or on the floor underfoot. A
current of cold, fresh air blew at intervals down the length of the huge
chamber. They could not see the next aisle across the barriers of stored
goods, but the only noise was a whisper and the faint sounds of their
own feet. They came out into an open space backed by the wall, and
Travis saw what had been so important.

"No!" His protest was involuntary, but his denial loud enough to echo.

Six--six of them--tall, narrow cases set upright against the wall; and
from their depths, five pairs of dark eyes staring back at him in cold
measurement. These were the men of the ships--the men Menlik had dreamed
of--their bald white heads, their thin bodies with the skintight
covering of the familiar blue-green-purple. Five of them were here,
alive--watching ... waiting....

Five men--and six boxes. That small fact broke the spell in which those
eyes held Travis. He looked again at the sixth box to his right.
Expecting to meet another pair of eyes this time, he was disconcerted to
face only emptiness. Then, as his gaze traveled downward, he saw what
lay on the floor there--a skull, a tangle of bones, tattered material
cobwebbed into dusty rags by time. Whatever had preserved five of the
star men intact, had failed the sixth of their company.

"They are alive!" Jil-Lee whispered.

"I do not think so," Buck answered. Travis took another step, reached
out to touch the transparent front of the nearest coffin case. There was
no change in the eyes of the alien who stood within, no indication that
if the Apaches could see him, he would be able to return their interest.
The five stares which had bemused the visitors at first, did not break
to follow their movements.

But Travis knew! Whether it was some message on the tape which the sight
of the sleepers made clear, or whether some residue of the driving
purpose which had set them there now reached his mind, was immaterial.
He knew the purpose of this room and its contents, why it had been made
and the reason its six guardians had been left as prisoners--and what
they wanted from anyone coming after them.

"They sleep," he said softly.

"Sleep?" Buck caught him up.

"They sleep in something like deep freeze."

"Do you mean they can be brought to life again!" Jil-Lee cried.

"Maybe not now--it must be too long--but they were meant to wait out a
period and be restored."

"How do you know that?" Buck asked.

"I don't know for certain, but I think I understand a little. Something
happened a long time ago. Maybe it was a war, a war between whole star
systems, bigger and worse than anything we can imagine. I think this
planet was an outpost, and when the supply ships didn't come any more,
when they knew they might be cut off for some length of time, they
closed down. Stacked their supplies and machines here and then went to
sleep to wait for their rescuers...."

"For rescuers who never came," Jil-Lee said softly. "And there is a
chance they could be revived even now?"

Travis shivered. "Not one I would want to take."

"No," Buck's tone was somber, "that I agree to, younger brother. These
are not men as we know them, and I do not think they would be good
_dalaanbiyat'i_--allies. They had _go'ndi_ in plenty, these star men,
but it is not the power of the People. No one but a madman or a fool
would try to disturb this sleep of theirs."

"The truth you speak," Jil-Lee agreed. "But where in this," he turned
his shoulder to the sleeping star men and looked back at the filled
chamber--"do we find anything which will serve us here and now?"

Again Travis had only the scrappiest information to draw upon. "Spread
out," he told them. "Look for the marking of a circle surrounding four
dots set in a diamond pattern."

They went, but Travis lingered for a moment to look once more into the
bleak and bitter eyes of the star men. How many planet years ago had
they sealed themselves into those boxes? A thousand, ten thousand? Their
empire was long gone, yet here was an outpost still waiting to be
revived to carry on its mysterious duties. It was as if in Saxon-invaded
Britain long ago a Roman garrison had been frozen to await the return of
the legions. Buck was right; there was no common ground today between
Terran man and these unknowns. They must continue to sleep undisturbed.

Yet when Travis also turned away and went back down the aisle, he was
still aware of a persistent pull on him to return. It was as though
those eyes had set locking cords to will him back to release the
sleepers. He was glad to turn a corner, to know that they could no
longer watch him plunder their treasury.

"Here!" That was Buck's voice, but it echoed so oddly across the big
chamber that Travis had difficulty in deciding what part of the
warehouse it was coming from. And Buck had to call several times before
Travis and Jil-Lee joined him.

There was the circle-dot-diamond symbol shining on the side of a case.
They worked it out of the pile, setting it in the open. Travis knelt to
run his hands along the top. The container was an unknown alloy, tough,
unmarked by the years--perhaps indestructible.

Again his fingers located what his eyes could not detect--the
impressions on the edge, oddly shaped impressions into which his finger
tips did not fit too comfortably. He pressed, bearing down with the full
strength of his arms and shoulders, and then lifted up the lid.

The Apaches looked into a set of compartments, each holding an object
with a barrel, a hand grip, a general resemblance to the sidearms of
their own world and time, but sufficiently different to point up the
essential strangeness. With infinite care Travis worked one out of the
vise-support which held it. The weapon was light in weight, lighter than
any automatic he had ever held. Its barrel was long, a good eighteen
inches--the grip alien in shape so that it didn't fit comfortably into
his hand, the trigger nonexistent, but in its place a button on the
lower part of the barrel which could be covered by an outstretched
finger.

"What does it do?" asked Buck practically.

"I'm not sure. But it is important enough to have a special mention on
the tape." Travis passed the weapon along to Buck and worked another
loose from its holder.

"No way of loading I can see," Buck said, examining the weapon with care
and caution.

"I don't think it fires a solid projectile," Travis replied. "We'll have
to test them outside to find out just what we do have."

The Apaches took only three of the weapons, closing the box before they
left. And as they wriggled back through the crack door, Travis was
visited again by that odd flash of compelling, almost possessive power
he had experienced when they had lain in ambush for the Red hunting
party. He took a step or two forward until he was able to catch the edge
of the reading table and steady himself against it.

"What is the matter?" Both Buck and Jil-Lee were watching him;
apparently neither had felt that sensation. Travis did not reply for a
second. He was free of it now. But he was sure of its source; it had not
been any backlash of the Red caller! It was rooted here--a compulsion
triggered to make the original intentions of the outpost obeyed, a last
drag from the sleepers. This place had been set up with a single
purpose: to protect and preserve the ancient rulers of Topaz. And
perhaps the very presence here of the intruding Terrans had released a
force, started an unseen installation.

Now Travis answered simply: "They want out...."

Jil-Lee glanced back at the slit door, but Buck still watched Travis.

"They call?" he asked.

"In a way," Travis admitted. But the compulsion had already ebbed; he
was free. "It is gone now."

"This is not a good place," Buck observed somberly. "We touch that which
should not be held by men of our earth." He held out the weapon.

"Did not the People take up the rifles of the Pinda-lick-o-yi for their
defense when it was necessary?" Jil-Lee demanded. "We do what we must.
After seeing that," his chin indicated the slit and what lay behind
it--"do you wish the Reds to forage here?"

"Still," Buck's words came slowly, "this is a choice between two evils,
rather than between an evil and a good--"

"Then let us see how powerful this evil is!" Jil-Lee headed for the
corridor leading to the pillar.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late afternoon when they made their way through the swirling
mists of the valley under the archway giving on the former site of the
outlaw Tatar camp. Travis sighted the long barrel of the weapon at a
small bush backed by a boulder, and he pressed the firing button. There
was no way of knowing whether the weapon was loaded except to try it.

The result of his action was quick--quick and terrifying. There was no
sound, no sign of any projectile ... ray-gas ... or whatever might have
issued in answer to his finger movement. But the bush--the bush was no
more!

A black smear made a ragged outline of the extinguished branches and
leaves on the rock which had stood behind. Light streams through the wide,
clear space in a golden tide of splendor.

Again, you are partly surrounded by an amphitheatre of hills, rising in
gradations, and of such impressive magnitude and extent that one
might imagine that here the secret forces of nature are wont to
take bodily shape, to look on the grand tragic storms which their
own fearful agency has raised.

Now, on one side, the mountains subside into soft undulations; on the
other, the ridges are colossal, dark, and broken, and along the
edges of their successive summits is a line of snow, varying with
the line of the cliffs, and glittering like burnished silver in the
sun, above the jagged battlements.

The deep blue sky, the shining snow, the huge, dark, rocky bases, the
different shades of color harmoniously blending, the soft and rugged
shapes contrasting vividly--well may impress the soul with
pleasure-relieving awe, with awe-ennobling pleasure.

Dismount awhile for rest. Enter this rude, thatched house by the wayside,
on a level spot.

Laden mules pass by in crowds, attended by Indian drivers, each of whom
doffs his hat and blesses you--a mere ceremony, it may be, but one in
picturesque keeping with the scenery.

Invigorated by the breeze, the shade, the rest, prepare to go higher,
higher, higher yet. First, pluck some of these roses that grow profusely
around you, that, if you reach the line of snow that never melts,
you may place upon the cold bosom of perpetual winter these blushing
symbols of perpetual spring.

Again, you reach the edge of a cliff, through the deep, narrow valley
between which and the cliff opposite pours a furious torrent, which,
resounding louder and louder as it is approached, now drowns all other
sounds in its despotic roar.

But, fearful as it looks, it must be crossed. Some of these torrents are
spanned by bridges; but most of them are so impetuous, especially in the
rainy season, that bridges even of stone would be undermined, and those
of timber would be swept away like wisps of straw. You must now trust
to the sagacity of your mules or horses. You descend the precipitous
side of the cliff, seeming to yourself as if about to fall headlong
into the torrent; but after a painful and perilous jaunt, you reach
its level.

Its roar now confuses and nearly stuns you. Each side is more or
less precipitous, and you seem at the mercy of the furious tide,
while jutting rocks above seem just ready to be loosened by some
convulsion, and to crush you with their merciless weight: meantime,
your horse stands unmoved by the peril before or above him, apparently
deaf to the noise of the torrent, and quietly surveys the rapids, as if
to select the safest point to cross.
Disturb him not.

He takes his time, and places one foot and then another in the torrent.
As he reaches the main current, he trembles, not with fear, but with
the effort to keep himself from being swept against the rocks.

He may be able to keep his footing and to walk across, though panting
and shaking at every step; or the stream may be so deep that he
is forced to swim.

If so, he bears up _manfully_ (if one may say so) against the rushing
force, and at last scrambles up the least steep peak of the opposite
bank, bearing you more dizzy than he is.

But the bank itself is only the foot of a ridge as precipitous as
that which you descended to reach the stream. Quietly, patiently, surely
the horse ascends. A sudden misstep or unwary slip among the loose
stones of the path would send you far backward into the torrent which
you have just escaped.

This very seldom happens, for the horses and mules have been well trained
for the service. In all the perils, the horse or mule is a safer guide
than you.

Give him a free rein, and he will bear you up the hardest, roughest,
steepest places.

You are now high among the Andes, far above every sign of tropical vegetation;
and, although hourly you are approaching the equatorial line, yet
hourly also it is growing colder. Look up! A snowy peak rises
directly before you, and seems to challenge you with its refulgent,
inaccessible majesty. The sight at first almost appals, but fascinates.

The feeling of fear soon surrenders to absorbing enjoyment of the
sublimity of the scene. The more you look, the more you desire to look.

There stands the mountain, a single glance at which repays all the fatigue
and danger of the road;--there it stands, as high above the Pacific
Ocean as if Vesuvius should be piled upon itself again, and again, and
yet again.
"Naginlta!" he greeted the coyote. Trouble? He could have shouted that
question, but he put a tight rein on his impatience and strove to
communicate in the only method possible.

No, what the coyote had come to report was not trouble but the fact that
the one he had been set to guard was headed back into the mountains,
though others came with her--four others. Nalik'ideyu still watched
their camp. Her mate had come for further orders.

Travis squatted before the animal, cupped the coyote's jowls between his
palms. Naginlta suffered his touch with only a small whine of
uneasiness. With all his power of mental suggestion, Travis strove to
reach the keen brain he knew was served by the yellow eyes looking into
his.

The others with Kaydessa were to be led on, taken to the ship. But
Kaydessa must not suffer harm. When they reached a spot near-by--Travis
thought of a certain rock beyond the pass--then one of the coyotes was
to go ahead to the ship. Let the Apaches there know....

Manulito and Eskelta should also be warned by the sentry along the
peaks, but additional alerting would not go amiss. Those four with
Kaydessa--they must reach the trap!

"What was that?" Buck rolled out of his blanket.

"Naginlta--" The coyote sped back into the dark again. "The Reds have
taken the bait, a party of at least four with Kaydessa are moving into
the foothills, heading south."

But the enemy party was not the only one on the move. In the light of
day a sentry's mirror from a point in the peaks sent another warning
down to their camp.

Out in their mountain meadows the Tatar outlaws were on horseback,
moving toward the entrance of the tower valley. Buck knelt by the
blanket covering the alien weapons.

"Now what?"

"We'll have to stop them," Travis replied, but he had no idea of just
how they would halt those determined Mongol horsemen.


17


There were ten of them riding on small, wiry steppe ponies--men and
women both, and well armed. Travis recalled it was the custom of the
Horde that the women fought as warriors when necessary. Menlik--there
was no mistaking the flapping robe of their leader. And they were
singing! The rider behind the shaman thumped with violent energy a drum
fastened beside his saddle horn, its heavy boom, boom the same call the
Apache had heard before. The Mongols were working themselves into the
mood for some desperate effort, Travis deduced. And if they were too
deeply under the Red spell, there would be no arguing with them. He
could wait no longer.

The Apache swung down from a ledge near the valley gate, moved into the
open and stood waiting, the alien weapon resting across his forearm. If
necessary, he intended to give a demonstration with it for an object
lesson.

"_Dar-u-gar_!" The war cry which had once awakened fear across a quarter
of Terra. Thin here, and from only a few throats, but just as menacing.

Two of the horsemen aimed lances, preparing to ride him down. Travis
sighted a tree midway between them and pressed the firing button. This
time there was a flash, a flicker of light, to mark the disappearance of
a living thing.

One of the lancers' ponies reared, squealed in fear. The other kept on
his course.

"Menlik!" Travis shouted. "Hold up your man! I do not want to kill!"

The shaman called out, but the lancer was already level with the
vanished tree, his head half turned on his shoulders to witness the
blackened earth where it had stood. Then he dropped his lance, sawed on
the reins. A rifle bullet might not have halted his charge, unless it
killed or wounded, but what he had just seen was a thing beyond his
understanding.

The tribesmen sat their horses, facing Travis, watching him with the
feral eyes of the wolves they claimed as forefathers, wolves that
possessed the cunning of the wild, cunning enough not to rush breakneck
into unknown danger.

Travis walked forward. "Menlik, I would talk--"

There was an outburst from the horsemen, protests from Hulagur and one
or two of the others. But the shaman urged his mount into a walking pace
toward the Apache until they stood only a few feet from each other--the
warrior of the steppes and the Horde facing the warrior of the desert
and the People.

"You have taken a woman from our yurts," Menlik said, but his eyes were
more on the alien gun than on the man who held it. "Brave are you to
come again into our land. He who sets foot in the stirrup must mount
into the saddle; he who draws blade free of the scabbard must be
prepared to use it."

"The Horde is not here--I see only a handful of people," Travis replied.
"Does Menlik propose to go up against the Apaches so? Yet there are
those who are his greater enemies."

"A stealer of women is not such a one as needs a regiment under a
general to face him."

Suddenly Travis was impatient of the ceremonious talking; there was so
little time.

"Listen, and listen well, Shaman!" He spoke curtly now. "I have not your
woman. She is already crossing the mountains southward," he pointed with
his chin--"leading the Reds into a trap."

Would Menlik believe him? There was no need, Travis decided, to tell him
now that Kaydessa's part in this affair was involuntary.

"And you?" The shaman asked the question the Apache had hoped to hear.

"_We_," Travis emphasized that, "march now against those hiding behind
in their ship out there." He indicated the northern plains.

Menlik raised his head, surveying the land about them with disbelieving,
contemptuous appraisal.

"You are chief then of an army, an army equipped with magic to overcome
machines?"

"One needs no army when he carries this." For the second time Travis
displayed the power of the weapon he carried, this time cutting into
shifting rubble an outcrop of cliff wall. Menlik's expression did not
change, though his eyes narrowed.

The shaman signaled his small company, and they dismounted. Travis was
heartened by this sign that Menlik was willing to talk. The Apache made
a similar gesture, and Jil-Lee and Buck, their own weapons well in
sight, came out to back him. Travis knew that the Tatar had no way of
knowing that the three were alone; he well might have believed an unseen
troop of Apaches were near-by and so armed.

"You would talk--then talk!" Menlik ordered.

This time Travis outlined events with an absence of word embroidery.
"Kaydessa leads the Reds into a trap we have set beyond the peaks--four
of them ride with her. How many now remain in the ship near the
settlement?"

"There are at least two in the flyer, perhaps eight more in the ship.
But there is no getting at them in there."

"No?" Travis laughed softly, shifted the weapon on his arm. "Do you not
think that this will crack the shell of that nut so that we can get at
the meat?"

Menlik's eyes flickered to the left, to the tree which was no longer a
tree but a thin deposit of ash on seared ground.

"They can control us with the caller as they did before. If we go up
against them, then we are once more gathered into their net--before we
reach their ship."

"That is true for you of the Horde; it does not affect the People,"
Travis returned. "And suppose we burn out their machines? Then will you
not be free?"

"To burn up a tree? Lightning from the skies can do that."

"Can lightning," Buck asked softly, "also make rock as sand of the
river?"

Menlik's eyes turned to the second example of the alien weapon's power.

"Give us proof that this will act against their machines!"

"What proof, Shaman?" asked Jil-Lee. "Shall we burn down a mountain that
you may believe? This is now a matter of time."

Travis had a sudden inspiration. "You say that the 'copter is out.
Suppose we use that as a target?"

"That--that can sweep the flyer from the sky?" Menlik's disbelief was
open.

Travis wondered if he had gone too far. But they needed to rid
themselves of that spying flyer before they dared to move out into the
plain. And to use the destruction of the helicopter as an example, would
be the best proof he could give of the invincibility of the new Apache
arms.

"Under the right conditions," he replied stoutly, "yes."

"And those conditions?" Menlik demanded.

"That it must be brought within range. Say, below the level of a
neighboring peak where a man may lie in wait to fire."

Silent Apaches faced silent Mongols, and Travis had a chance to taste
what might be defeat. But the helicopter must be taken before they
advanced toward the ship and the settlement.

"And, maker of traps, how do you intend to bait this one?" Menlik's
question was an open challenge.

"You know these Reds better than we," Travis counterattacked. "How would
you bait it, Son of the Blue Wolf?"

"You say Kaydessa is leading the Reds south; we have but your word for
that," Menlik replied. "Though how it would profit you to lie on such a
matter--" He shrugged. "If you do speak the truth, then the 'copter will
circle about the foothills where they entered."

"And what would bring the pilot nosing farther in?" the Apache asked.

Menlik shrugged again. "Any manner of things. The Reds have never
ventured too far south; they are suspicious of the heights--with good
cause." His fingers, near the hilt of his tulwar, twitched. "Anything
which might suggest that their party is in difficulty would bring them
in for a closer look--"

"Say a fire, with much smoke?" Jil-Lee suggested.

Menlik spoke over his shoulder to his own party. There was a babble of
answer, two or three of the men raising their voices above those of
their companions.

"If set in the right direction, yes," the shaman conceded. "When do you
plan to move, Apaches?"

"At once!"

But they did not have wings, and the cross-country march they had to
make was a rough journey on foot. Travis' "at once" stretched into night
hours filled with scrambling over rocks, and an early morning of
preparations, with always the threat that the helicopter might not
return to fly its circling mission over the scene of operations. All
they had was Menlik's assurance that while any party of the Red
overlords was away from their well-defended base, the flyer did just
that.

"Might be relaying messages on from a walkie-talkie or something like
that," Buck commented.

"They should reach our ship in two days ... three at the most ... if
they are pushing," Travis said thoughtfully. "It would be a help--if
that flyer is a link in any com unit--to destroy it before its crew
picks up and relays any report of what happens back there."

Jil-Lee grunted. He was surveying the heights above the pocket in which
Menlik and two of the Mongols were piling brush. "There ... there ...
and there...." The Apache's chin made three juts. "If the pilot swoops
for a quick look, our cross fire will take out his blades."

They held a last conference with Menlik and then climbed to the perches
Jil-Lee had selected. Sentries on lookout reported by mirror flash that
Tsoay, Deklay, Lupe, and Nolan were now on the move to join the other
three Apaches. If and when Manulito's trap closed its jaws on the Reds
at the western ship, the news would pass and the Apaches would move out
to storm the enemy fort on the prairie. And should they blast any caller
the helicopter might carry, Menlik and his riders would accompany them.

There it was, just as Menlik had foretold: The wasp from the open
country was flying into the hills. Menlik, on his knees, struck flint to
steel, sparking the fire they hoped would draw the pilot to a closer
investigation.

The brush caught, and smoke, thick and white, came first in separate
puffs and then gathered into a murky pillar to form a signal no one
could overlook. In Travis' hands the grip of the gun was slippery. He
rested the end of the barrel on the rock, curbing his rising tension as
best he could.

To escape any caller on the flyer, the Tatars had remained in the valley
below the Apaches' lookout. And as the helicopter circled in, Travis
sighted two men in its cockpit, one wearing a helmet identical to the
one they had seen on the Red hunter days ago. The Reds' long undisputed
sway over the Mongol forces would make them overconfident. Travis
thought that even if they sighted one of the waiting Apaches, they would
not take warning until too late.

Menlik's bush fire was performing well and the flyer was heading
straight for it. The machine buzzed the smoke once, too high for the
Apaches to trust raying its blades. Then the pilot came back in a lower
sweep which carried him only yards above the smoldering brush, on a
level with the snipers.

Travis pressed the button on the barrel, his target the fast-whirling
blades. Momentum carried the helicopter on, but at least one of the
marksmen, if not all three, had scored. The machine plowed through the
smoke to crack up beyond.

Was their caller working, bringing in the Mongols to aid the Reds
trapped in the wreck?

Travis watched Menlik make his way toward the machine, reach the cracked
cover of the cockpit. But in the shaman's hand was a bare blade on which
the sun glinted. The Mongol wrenched open the sprung door, thrust inward
with the tulwar, and the howl of triumph he voiced was as worldless and
wild as a wolf's.

More Mongols flooding down ... Hulagur ... a woman ... centering on the
helicopter. This time a spear plunged into the interior of the broken
flyer. Before nightfall I took in every object and commenced my weary
vigils.

I had to stand all night. I could hear the rumblings of the Federal
artillery and wagons, and hear the low shuffling sound made by troops
on the march. The snow came pelting down as large as goose eggs. About
midnight the snow ceased to fall, and became quiet. Now and then the
snow would fall off the bushes and make a terrible noise.

While I was peering through the darkness, my eyes suddenly fell upon the
outlines of a man.

The more I looked the more I was convinced that it was a Yankee picket. I
could see his hat and coat--yes, see his gun. I was sure that it was
a Yankee picket.

What was I to do? The relief was several hundred yards in the rear. The
more I looked the more sure I was.
At last a cold sweat broke out all over my body.

Turkey bumps rose.
I summoned all the nerves and bravery that I could command, and said:
"Halt! who goes there?"

There being no response, I became resolute.
I did not wish to fire and arouse the camp, but I marched right up to it
and stuck my bayonet through and through it. It was a stump. I tell
the above, because it illustrates a part of many a private's recollections
of the war; in fact, a part of the hardships and suffering that
they go through.

One secret of Stonewall Jackson's success was that he was such a strict
disciplinarian. He did his duty himself and was ever at his post, and
he expected and demanded of everybody to do the same thing.

He would have a man shot at the drop of a hat, and drop it himself. The
first army order that was ever read to us after being attached to
his corps, was the shooting to death by musketry of two men who had
stopped on the battlefield to carry off a wounded comrade. It was read
to us in line of battle at Winchester.

SCHWARTZ AND PFIFER"We do not skulk any longer like rats or city men in dark holes," he
told them. "This time we ride, and we shall take an accounting from
those out there--a fine accounting!"

"They still have other controllers," Travis pointed out.

"And you have that which is an answer to all their machines," blazed
Menlik in return.

"They will send against us your own people if they can," Buck warned.

Menlik pulled at his upper lip. "That is also truth. But now they have
no eyes in the sky, and with so many of their men away, they will not
patrol too far from camp. I tell you, _andas_, with these weapons of
yours a man could rule a world!"

Travis looked at him bleakly. "Which is why they are taboo!"

"Taboo?" Menlik repeated. "In what manner are these forbidden? Do you
not carry them openly, use them as you wish? Are they not weapons of
your own people?"

Travis shook his head. "These are the weapons of dead men--if we can
name them men at all. These we took from a tomb of the star race who
held Topaz when our world was only a hunting ground of wild men wearing
the skins of beasts and slaying mammoths with stone spears. They are
from a tomb and are cursed, a curse we took upon ourselves with their
use."

There was a strange light deep in the shaman's eyes. Travis did not know
who or what Menlik had been before the Red conditioner had returned him
to the role of Horde shaman. He might have been a technician or
scientist--and deep within him some remnants of that training could now
be dismissing everything Travis said as fantastic superstition.

Yet in another way the Apache spoke the exact truth. There was a curse
on these weapons, on every bit of knowledge gathered in that warehouse
of the towers. As Menlik had already noted, that curse was power, the
power to control Topaz, and then perhaps to reach back across the stars
to Terra.

When the shaman spoke again his words were a half whisper. "It will take
a powerful curse to keep these out of the hands of men."

"With the Reds gone or powerless," Buck asked, "what need will anyone
have for them?"

"And if another ship comes from the skies--to begin all over again?"

"To that we shall have an answer, also, if and when we must find it,"
Travis replied. That could well be true ... other weapons in the
warehouse powerful enough to pluck a spaceship out of the sky, but they
did not have to worry about that now.

"Arms from a tomb. Yes, this is truly dead men's magic. I shall say so
to my people. When do we move out?"

"When we know whether or not the trap to the south is sprung," Buck
answered.

The report came an hour after sunrise the next morning when Tsoay,
Nolan, and Deklay padded into camp. The war chief made a slight gesture
with one hand.

"It is done?" Travis wanted confirmation in words.

"It is done. The Pinda-lick-o-yi entered the ship eagerly. Then they
blew it and themselves up. Manulito did his work well."

"And Kaydessa?"

"The woman is safe. When the Reds saw the ship, they left their machine
outside to hold her captive. That mechanical caller was easily
destroyed. She is now free and with the _mba'a_ she comes across the
mountains, Manulito and Eskelta with her also. Now--" he looked from his
own people to the Mongols, "why are you here with these?"

"We wait, but the waiting is over," Jil-Lee said. "Now we go north!"


18


They lay along the rim of a vast basin, a scooping out of earth so wide
they could not sight its other side. The bed of an ancient lake, Travis
speculated, or perhaps even the arm of a long-dried sea. But now the
hollow was filled with rolling waves of golden grass, tossing heavy
heads under the flowing touch of a breeze with the exception of a space
about a mile ahead where round domes--black, gray, brown--broke the
yellow in an irregular oval around the globular silver bead of a spacer:
a larger ship than that which had brought the Apaches, but of the same
shape.

"The horse herd ... to the west." Nolan evaluated the scene with the
eyes of an experienced raider. "Tsoay, Deklay, you take the horses!"

They nodded, and began the long crawl which would take them two miles or
more from the party to stampede the horses.

To the Mongols in those domelike yurts horses were wealth, life itself.
They would come running to investigate any disturbance among the grazing
ponies, thus clearing the path to the ship and the Reds there. Travis,
Jil-Lee, and Buck, armed with the star guns, would spearhead that
attack--cutting into the substance of the ship itself until it was a
sieve through which they could shake out the enemy. The well was
then tubed, and a hand pump inserted, when it was found to yield at
the rate of ten or fifteen barrels per day.
Speculation soon began to run wild, and the fortunate owner of this
well, among other propositions, received an offer of fifty thousand
dollars for his well.

To all these tempting offers he persistently returned the same reply--that
he had bored that well for his own use, and that if others wished
a well, they could do as he had done.

Oil was generally obtained in the valley around Franklin at the depth of
about three hundred feet from the surface, for pumping wells; in
the valley of Oil Creek the same stratum was reached at about half
that depth.

In all these wells, whether successful as oil wells or not, a strong
body of salt water was obtained, that added greatly to the facility of
separating the oil by its increased gravity. Hitherto the business had
been pursued with advantage and profit to those who were engaged. The
demand was steady and prices remunerative, and visions of untold
wealth were looming up before the minds of thousands.

Prospecting was extending far and near. Every stream and ravine that
deflected toward the Alleghany or Oil Creek was leased, and in very
many unpropitious localities operations were commenced.

But a change now took place in the development of oil proceedings
that wrought ruin in the hopes of many an ardent operator.

In the Oil Creek region, some of the smaller wells having been exhausted,
resort was had to deeper boring.
And the Mongol guard, who had been sitting cross-legged, the
reins of his mount dangling close to his hand, got to his feet.

"Ahhhuuuuu!" The ancient Apache war cry that had sounded across deserts,
canyons, and southwestern Terran plains to ice the blood, ripped just as
freezingly through the honey-hued air of Topaz.

The horses wheeled, racing upslope away from the settlement. A figure
broke from the grass, flapped his arms at one of the mounts, grabbed at
flying mane, and pulled himself up on the bare back. Only a master
horseman would have done that, but the whooping rider now drove the herd
on, assisted by the snapping and snarling coyotes.

"Deklay--" Jil-Lee identified the reckless rider, "that was one of his
rodeo tricks."

Among the yurts it was as if someone had ripped up a rotten log to
reveal an ants' nest and sent the alarmed insects into a frenzy. Men
boiled out of the domes, the majority of them running for the horse
pasture. One or two were mounted on ponies that must have been staked
out in the settlement. The main war party of Apaches skimmed silently
through the grass on their way to the ship.

The three who were armed with the alien weapons had already tested their
range by experimentation back in the hills, but the fear of exhausting
whatever powered those barrels had curtailed their target practice. Now
they snaked to the edge of the bare ground between them and the ladder
hatch of the spacer. To cross that open space was to provide targets for
lances and arrows--or the superior armament of the Reds.

"A chance we can hit from here." Buck laid his weapon across his bent
knee, steadied the long barrel of the burner, and pressed the firing
button.

The closed hatch of the ship shimmered, dissolved into a black hole.
Behind Travis someone let out the yammer of a war whoop.

"Fire--cut the walls to pieces!"

Travis did not need that order from Jil-Lee. He was already beaming
unseen destruction at the best target he could ask for--the side of the
sphere. If the globe was armed, there was no weapon which could be
depressed far enough to reach the marksmen at ground level.

Holes appeared, irregular gaps and tears in the fabric of the ship. The
Apaches were turning the side of the globe into lacework. How far those
rays penetrated into the interior they could not guess.

Occasionally in passing through the shale, small fissures in the rock are
passed through, with circumstances indicating the presence of a
stratum or vein of water, as at such times the sand accumulated
in boring all disappears, leaving the bits clean and bright.

At other times small veins or cavities of petroleum are pierced, the product
of which rises to the surface of the well, and indicates its
presence by appearing in the sand pump.

In the earlier stages of the business this 'show of oil,' as it
was termed, was considered most favorable to ultimate success; but
latterly it is not regarded as essential, as many first-class wells
have been discovered without the intermediate show; and on the other
hand, there has been many a brilliant show that has resulted in
failure and disappointment.

The presence of surface oil is not always a sure criterion in deciding
upon a location for a well.

Oftentimes very fine wells are opened in localities where no oil
has been found on the surface, and no appearance of oil having been
obtained at any previous time in the neighborhood.

Perhaps the most unsuccessful operations in the whole Oil Creek valley
have been in the midst of the ancient pits that have already been alluded
to.

Wells have been bored in the bottom of these pits without the least
success. At a point near the bank of the Alleghany, some two miles above
Franklin, there was a well-known oil spring some forty years ago. It
supplied the family that lived near it as well as the surrounding
neighborhood with petroleum for medical and other domestic purposes
to the extent of their wants.

For many years the supply has entirely failed. During a recent excavation,
at the precise spot where it was known formerly to exist, for the purpose
of laying the abutment of a bridge, no trace of oil was found--not even
a discoloration of the earth.

Of course the boring of wells has become quite an institution in the
oil region, and is carried on with great system. After selecting
a site, the first thing in order is the erection of a derrick. This is
a frame in the form of a truncated pyramid, about ten feet square
at the bottom, and five at the top, having one of its four posts
pierced with rounds to answer the purpose of a ladder, by means of
which the workmen can ascend and descend.

This derrick is from twenty to thirty feet in height, and has at
its summit a pulley, by means of which the boring implements are drawn
from the well. A pit is then sunk through the earth within the derrick,
about six feet square, until the work is interrupted by water.
The remaining distance to the rock is reached by driving strong cast-iron
pipe by means of a battering ram.

This pipe has a caliber of about five inches, with walls of one inch in
thickness.
Travis sped on. He passed another door and then backtracked hurriedly as
he realized it had given on to an engine room. With the gun he blasted
two long lines cutting the fittings into ragged lumps. Abruptly the
lights went out; the burr of the alarms was silenced. Part of the ship,
if not all, was dead. And now it might come to hunter and hunted in the
dark. But that was an advantage as far as the Apaches were concerned.

Back in the corridor again, Travis crept through a curiously lifeless
atmosphere. The shouting was stilled as if the sudden failure of the
machines had stunned the Reds.

A tiny sound--perhaps the scrape of a boot on a ladder. Travis edged
back into a compartment. A flash of light momentarily lighted the
corridor; the approaching figure was using a torch. Travis drew his
knife with one hand, reversed it so he could use the heavy hilt as a
silencer. The other was hurrying now, on his way to investigate the
burned-out engine cabin. Travis could hear the rasp of his fast
breathing. Now!

The Apache had put down the gun, his left arm closed about a shoulder,
and the Red gasped as Travis struck with the knife hilt. Not clean--he
had to hit a second time before the struggles of the man were over.
Then, using his hands for eyes, he stripped the limp body on the floor
of automatic and torch.

With the Red's weapon in the front of his sash, the burner in one hand
and the torch in the other, Travis prowled on. There was a good chance
that those above might believe him to be their comrade returning. He
found the ladder leading to the next level, began to climb, pausing now
and then to listen.

Shock preceded sound. Under him the ladder swayed and the globe itself
rocked a little. A blast of some kind must have been set off at or under
the level of the ground. The bunker Buck had mentioned?

Travis clung to the ladder, waited for the vibrations to subside. There
was a shouting above, a questioning.... Hurriedly he ascended to the
next level, scrambled out and away from the ladder just in time to avoid
the light from another torch flashed down the well. Again that call of
inquiry, then a shot--the boom of the explosion loud in the confined
space.

To climb into the face of that light with a waiting marksman above was
sheer folly. Could there be another way up? Travis retreated down one of
the corridors raying out from the ladder well. A quick inspection of the
cabins along that route told him he had reached a section of living
quarters. The pattern was familiar; the control cabin would be on the
next level.

Suddenly the Apache remembered something: On each level there should be
an emergency opening giving access to the insulation space between the
inner and outer skins of the ship through which repairs could be made.
If he could find that and climb up to the next level....

The light shining down the well remained steady, and there was the
echoing crack of another shot. But Travis was far enough away from the
ladder now to dare use his own torch, seeking the door he needed on the
wall surface. With a leap of heart he sighted the outline--his luck was
in! The Russian and western ships were alike.

Once the panel was open he flashed his torch up, finding the climbing
rungs and, above, the shadow outline of the next level opening. Securing
the alien gun in his sash beside the automatic and holding the torch in
his mouth, Travis climbed, not daring to think of the deep drop below.
Four ... five ... ten rungs, and he could reach the other door.

His fingers slid over it, searching for the release catch. But there was
no answering give. Balling his fist, he struck down at an awkward angle
and almost lost his balance as the panel fell away beneath his blow. The
door swung and he pulled through.

Darkness! Travis snapped on the torch for an instant, saw about him the
relays of a com system, and gave it a full spraying as he pivoted,
destroying the eyes and ears of the ship--unless the burnout he had
effected below had already done that. A flash of automatic fire from his
left, a searing burn along his arm an inch or so below the shoulder--

Travis' action was purely reflex. He swung the burner around, even as
his mind gave a frantic No! To defend himself with automatic, knife,
arrow--yes; but not this way. He huddled against the wall.

An instant earlier there had been a man there, a living, breathing
man--one of his own species, if not of his own beliefs. Then because his
own muscles had unconsciously obeyed warrior training, there was this.
So easy--to deal death without really meaning to. The weapon in his
hands was truly the devil gift they were right to fear. Such weapons
were not to be put into the hands of men--any men--no matter how well
intentioned.

Travis gulped in great mouthfuls of air. He wanted to throw the burner
away, hurl it from him. But the task he could rightfully use it for was
not yet done.

Somehow he reeled on into the control cabin to render the ship truly a
dead thing and free himself of the heavy burden of guilt and terror
between his hands. That weight could be laid aside; memory could not.
And no one of his kind must ever have to carry such memories again.

       *       *       *       *       *

The booming of the drums was like a pulse quickening the blood to a
rhythm which bit at the brain, made a man's eyes shine, his muscles
tense as if he held an arrow to bow cord or arched his fingers about a
knife hilt. A fire blazed high and in its light men leaped and whirled
in a mad dance with tulwar blades catching and reflecting the red gleam
of flames. Mad, wild, the Mongols were drunk with victory and freedom.
Beyond them, the silver globe of the ship showed the black holes of its
death, which was also the death of the past--for all of them.

"What now?" Menlik, the dangling of amulets and charms tinkling as he
moved, came up to Travis. There was none of the wild fervor in the
shaman's face; instead, it was as if he had taken several strides out of
the life of the Horde, was emerging into another person, and the
question he asked was one they all shared.

Travis felt drained, flattened. They had achieved their purpose. The
handful of Red overlords were dead, their machines burned out. There
were no controls here any more; men were free in mind and body. What
were they to do with that freedom?

"First," the Apache spoke his own thoughts--"we must return these."

The three alien weapons were lashed into a square of Mongol fabric,
hidden from sight, although they could not be so easily shut out of
mind. Only a few of the others, Apache or Mongol, had seen them; and
they must be returned before their power was generally known.

"I wonder if in days to come," Buck mused, "they will not say that we
pulled lightning out of the sky, as did the Thunder Slayer, to aid us.
But this is right. We must return them and make that valley and what it
holds taboo."

"And what if another ship comes--one of _yours_?" Menlik asked shrewdly.

Travis stared beyond the Tatar shaman to the men about the fire. His
nightmare dragged into the open.... What if a ship did come in, one with
Ashe, Murdock, men he knew and liked, friends on board? What then of his
guardianship of the towers and their knowledge? Could he be as sure of
what to do then? He rubbed his hand across his forehead and said slowly:

"We shall take steps when--or if--that happens--"

But could they, would they? He began to hope fiercely that it would not
happen, at least in his lifetime, and then felt the cold bleakness of
the exile they must will themselves into.

"Whether we like it or not," (was he talking to the others or trying to
argue down his own rebellion?) When we had crossed the bridge and taken
our station for the night, I saw another snow storm was coming. The
zig-zag lightnings began to flare and flash, and sheet after sheet
of wild flames seemed to burst right over our heads and were hissing
around us.

The very elements seemed to be one aurora borealis with continued
lightning. Streak after streak of lightning seemed to be piercing each
the other, the one from the north and the other from the south.

This is a large
land and neither of our groups numbers many. Shall we split apart
fatally from this day when there is room for all? If these ancient
things are evil, then let us both guard them with a common taboo."

He was right, of course. And they would have to face the truth squarely.
To both Apache and Mongol any off-world ship, no matter from which side,
would be a menace. Here was where they would remain and set roots. The
sooner they began thinking of themselves as people with a common bond,
the better it would be. And Menlik's suggestion provided a tie.

"You speak well," Buck was saying. "This shall be a thing we share. We
are three who know. Do you be three also, but choose well, Menlik!"

"Be assured that I will!" the Tatar returned. "We start a new life here;
there is no going back. But as I have said: The land is wide. We have no
quarrel with one another, and perhaps our two peoples shall become one;
after all, we do not differ too greatly...." He smiled and gestured to
the fire and the dancers.

Among the Mongols another man had gone into action, his head thrown back
as he leaped and twirled, voicing a deep war cry. Travis recognized
Deklay. Apache, Mongol--both raiders, horsemen, hunters, fighters when
the need arose. The drawing-in draft illustrated in Fig. 6 is a slight
variation of the regular point draw; it consists, as will be seen, of a
draw from back to front, and also a full one from front to back,
there by causing a _double point_.

But there would be the bond of the guardianship,
the determination that what slept in the towers would not be roused--in
their lifetime or many lifetimes!

Travis smiled a bit crookedly. A new religion of sorts, a priesthood
with sacred and forbidden knowledge ... in time a whole new life and
civilization stemming from this night. New Street Square, in the
Parish of St. Bride, in the City Of London; and published by GEORGE
BELL, Of No. 186.

Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid."Shall we go?"

To get the weapons back--that was of first importance. Maybe then he
could sleep soundly, to dream of riding across the Arizona range at dawn
under a blue sky with a wind in his face, a wind carrying the scent of
piñon pine and sage, a wind which would never caress or hearten him
again, a wind his sons and sons' sons would never know. To dream
troubled dreams, and hope in time those dreams would fade and thin--that
a new world would blanket out the old. Better so, Travis told himself
with defiance and determination--better so!