And without waiting for an answer, she turned affectedly away, and took
a place at the tea-table where room had been made for her by two young
men. Reaching out a white hand, she chose a cake, and began to nibble it
slowly, her elbows resting on the table, the ruffles of white lace
falling back from her bare and rounded arms. Her look meanwhile, half
absent, half audacious, seemed to wander round the persons near, as
though she saw them, without taking any real account of them.

"What have you been doing, Alicia, all this time?" said Marsham, as he
handed her a cup of tea.

"Dressing."

An incredulous shout from the table.

"Since lunch!"

Miss Drake nodded. Lady Lucy put in an explanatory remark about a
"dressmaker from town," but was not heard. The table was engaged in
watching the new-comer.

"May we congratulate you on the result?" said Mr. Ferrier, putting up
his eye-glass.

"If you like," said Miss Drake, indifferently, still gently munching at
her cake. Then suddenly she smiled--a glittering infectious smile, to
which unconsciously all the faces near her responded. "I have been
reading the book you lent me!" she said, addressing Mr. Ferrier.

"Well?"

"I'm too stupid--I can't understand it."

Mr. Ferrier laughed.

"I'm afraid that excuse won't do, Miss Alicia. You must find another."

She was silent a moment, finished her cake, then took some grapes, and
began to play with them in the same conscious provocative way--till at
last she turned upon her immediate neighbor, a young barrister with a
broad boyish face.

"Well, I wonder whether _you'd_ mind?"

"Mind what?"

"If your father had done something shocking--forged--or murdered--or
done something of that kind--supposing, of course, he were dead."

"Do you mean--if I suddenly found out?"

She nodded assent.

"Well!" he reflected; "it would be disagreeable!"

"Yes--but would it make you give up all the things you
like?--golfing--and cards--and parties--and the girl you were engaged
to--and take to slumming, and that kind of thing?"

The slight inflection of the last words drew smiles. Mr. Ferrier held
up a finger.

"Miss Alicia, I shall lend you no more books."

"Why? Because I can't appreciate them?"

Mr. Ferrier laughed.

"I maintain that book is a book to melt the heart of a stone."

"Well, I tried to cry," said the girl, putting another grape into her
mouth, and quietly nodding at her interlocutor--"I did--honor bright.
But--really--what does it matter what your father did?"

"My _dear!_" said Lady Lucy, softly. Her singularly white and finely
wrinkled face, framed in a delicate capote of old lace, looked coldly at
the speaker.

"By-the-way," said Mr. Ferrier, "does not the question rather concern
you in this neighborhood? I hear young Brenner has just come to live at
West Hill. I don't now what sort of a youth he is, but if he's a decent
fellow, I don't imagine anybody will boycott him on account of his
father's misdoings."

He referred to one of the worst financial scandals of the preceding
generation. Lady Lucy made no answer, but any one closely observing her
might have noticed a sudden and sharp stiffening of the lips, which was
in truth her reply.

"Oh, you can always ask a man like that to garden-parties!" said a
shrill, distant voice. The group round the table turned. The remark was
made by old Lady Niton, who sat enthroned in an arm-chair near the fire,
sometimes knitting, and sometimes observing her neighbors with a
malicious eye.

"Anything's good enough, isn't it, for garden-parties?" said Mrs.
Fotheringham, with a little sneer.

Lady Niton's face kindled. "Let us be Radicals, my dear," she said,
briskly, "but not hypocrites. Garden-parties are invaluable--for people
you can't ask into the house. By-the-way, wasn't it you, Oliver, who
scolded me last night, because I said somebody wasn't 'in Society'?"

"You said it of a particular hero of mine," laughed Marsham. "I
naturally pitied Society."

"What is Society? Where is it?" said Sir James Chide, contemptuously. "I
suppose Lady Palmerston knew."

The famous lawyer sat a little apart from the rest. Diana, who had only
caught his name, and knew nothing else of him, looked with sudden
interest at the man's great brow and haughty look. Lady Niton shook her
head emphatically.

"We know quite as well as she did. Society is just as strong and just as
exclusive as it ever was. But it is clever enough now to hide the fact
from outsiders."

"I am afraid we must agree that standards have been much relaxed," said
Lady Lucy.

"Not at all--not at all!" cried Lady Niton. "There were black sheep
then; and there are black sheep now."

Lady Lucy held her own.

"I am sure that people take less care in their invitations," she said,
with soft obstinacy. "I have often heard my mother speak of society in
her young days,--how the dear Queen's example purified it--and how much
less people bowed down to money then than now."

"Ah, that was before the Americans and the Jews," said Sir James Chide.

"People forget their responsibility," said Lady Lucy, turning to Diana,
and speaking so as not to be heard by the whole table. "In old days it
was birth; but now--now when we are all democratic--it should be
_character_.--Don't you agree with me?"

"Other people's character?" asked Diana.

"Oh, we mustn't be unkind, of course. But when a thing is notorious.
Take this young Brenner. His father's frauds ruined hundreds of poor
people. How can I receive him here, as if nothing had happened? It ought
not to be forgotten. He himself ought to _wish_ to live quietly!"

Diana gave a hesitating assent, adding: "But I'm sorry for Mr. Brenner!"

Mr. Ferrier, as she spoke, leaned slightly across the tea-table as
though to listen to what she said. Lady Lucy moved away, and Mr.
Ferrier, after spending a moment of quiet scrutiny on the young mistress
of Beechcote, came to sit beside her.

Mrs. Fotheringham threw herself back in her chair with a little yawn.
"Mamma is more difficult than the Almighty!" she said, in a loud aside
to Sir James Chide. "One sin--or even somebody else's sin--and you are
done for."

Sir James, who was a Catholic, and scrupulous in speech, pursed his lips
slightly, drummed on the table with his fingers, and finally rose
without reply, and betook himself to the _Times_. Miss Drake meanwhile
had been carried off to play billiards at the farther end of the hall by
the young men of the party. It might have been noticed that, before she
went, she had spent a few minutes of close though masked observation of
her cousin Oliver's new friend. Also, that she tried to carry Oliver
Marsham with her, but unsuccessfully. He had returned to Diana's
neighborhood, and stood leaning over a chair beside her, listening to
her conversation with Mr. Ferrier.

His sister, Mrs. Fotheringham, was not content to listen. Diana's
impressions of the country-side, which presently caught her ear,
evidently roused her pugnacity. She threw herself on all the girl's
rose-colored appreciations with a scorn hardly disguised. All the
"locals," according to her, were stupid or snobbish--bores, in fact, of
the first water. And to Diana's discomfort and amazement, Oliver Marsham
joined in. He showed himself possessed of a sharper and more caustic
tongue than Diana had yet suspected. His sister's sallies only amused
him, and sometimes he improved on them, with epithets or comments,
shrewder than hers indeed, but quite as biting.

"His neighbors and constituents!" thought Diana, in a young
astonishment. "The people who send him to Parliament!"

Mr. Ferrier seemed to become aware of her surprise and disapproval, for
he once or twice threw in a satirical word or two, at the expense, not
of the criticised, but of the critics. The well-known Leader of the
Opposition was a stout man of middle height, with a round head and face,
at first sight wholly undistinguished, an ample figure, and smooth,
straight hair. But there was so much honesty and acuteness in the eyes,
so much humor in the mouth, and so much kindness in the general aspect,
that Diana felt herself at once attracted; and when the master of the
house was summoned by his head gamekeeper to give directions for the
shooting-party of the following day, and Mrs. Fotheringham had gone off
to attend what seemed to be a vast correspondence, the politician and
the young girl fell into a conversation which soon became agreeable and
even absorbing to both. Mrs. Colwood, sitting on the other side of the
hall, timidly discussing fancy work with the Miss Varleys, Lady Lucy's
young nieces, saw that Diana was making a conquest; and it seemed to
her, moreover, that Mr. Ferrier's scrutiny of his companion was somewhat
more attentive and more close than was quite explained by the mere
casual encounter of a man of middle-age with a young and charming girl.
Was he--like herself--aware that matters of moment might be here at
their beginning?

Meanwhile, if Mr. Ferrier was making discoveries, so was Diana. A man,
it appeared, could be not only one of the busiest and most powerful
politicians in England, but also a philosopher, and a reader, one whose
secret tastes were as unworldly and romantic as her own. Books, music,
art--he could handle these subjects no less skilfully than others
political or personal. And, throughout, his deference to a young and
pretty woman was never at fault. Diana was encouraged to talk, and then,
without a word of flattery, given to understand that her talk pleased.
Under this stimulus, her soft dark beauty was soon glowing at its best;
innocence, intelligence, and youth, spread as it were their tendrils
to the sun.

Meanwhile, Sir James Chide, a few yards off, was apparently absorbed
partly in the _Times_, partly in the endeavor to make Lady Lucy's fox
terrier go through its tricks.

Once Mr. Ferrier drew Diana's attention to her neighbor.

"You know him?"

"I never saw him before."

"You know who he is?"

"Ought I?--I am so sorry!"

"He is perhaps the greatest criminal advocate we have. And a very
distinguished politician too.--Whenever our party comes in, he will be
in the Cabinet.--You must make him talk this evening."

"I?" said Diana, laughing and blushing.

"You can!" smiled Mr. Ferrier. "Witness how you have been making me
chatter! But I think I read you right? You do not mind if one
chatters?--if one gives you information?"

"Mind!--How could I be anything but grateful? It puzzles me so--this--"
she hesitated.

"This English life?--especially the political life? Well!--let me be
your guide. I have been in it for a long while."

Diana thanked him, and rose.

"You want your room?" he asked her, kindly.--"Mrs. Fotheringham, I
think, is in the drawing-room. Let me take you to her. But, first, look
at two or three of these pictures as you go."

"These--pictures?" faltered Diana, looking round her, her tone changing.

"Oh, not those horrible frescos! Those were perpetrated by Marsham's
father. They represent, as you see, the different processes of the Iron
Trade. Old Henry Marsham liked them, because, as he said, they explained
him, and the house. Oliver would like to whitewash them--but for filial
piety. People might suppose him ashamed of his origin. No, no!--I mean
those two or three old pictures at the end of the room. Come and look at
them--they are on our way."

He led her to inspect them. They proved to be two Gainsboroughs and a
Raeburn, representing ancestors on Lady Lucy's side. Mr. Ferrier's talk
of them showed his intimate knowledge both of Varleys and Marshams, the
knowledge rather of a kinsman than a friend. Diana perceived, indeed,
how great must be the affection, the intimacy, between him and them.

Meanwhile, as the man of fifty and the slender girl in black passed
before him, on their way to examine the pictures, Sir James Chide,
casually looking up, was apparently struck by some rapid and powerful
impression. It arrested the hand playing with the dog; it held and
transformed the whole man. His eyes, open as though in astonishment or
pain, followed every movement of Diana, scrutinized every look and
gesture. His face had flushed slightly--his lips were parted. He had the
aspect of one trying eagerly, passionately, to follow up some clew that
would not unwind itself; and every now and then he bent
forward--listening--trying to catch her voice.

Presently the inspection was over. Diana turned and beckoned to Mrs.
Colwood. The two ladies went toward the drawing-room, Mr. Ferrier
showing the way.

When he returned to the hall, Sir James Chide, its sole occupant, was
walking up and down.

"Who was that young lady?" said Sir James, turning abruptly.

"Isn't she charming? Her name is Mallory--and she has just settled at
Beechcote, near here. That small fair lady was her companion. Oliver
tells me she is an orphan--well off--with no kith or kin. She has just
come to England, it seems, for the first time. Her father brought her up
abroad away from everybody. She will have a success! But of all the
little Jingoes!"

Mr. Ferrier's face expressed an amused recollection of some of Diana's
speeches.

"Mallory?" said Sir James, under his breath--"_Mallory?_" He walked to
the window, and stood looking out, his hands in his pockets.

Mr. Ferrier went up-stairs to write letters. In a few minutes the man at
the window came slowly back toward the fire, staring at the ground.

"The look in the eyes!" he said to himself--"the mouth!--the voice!"

He stood by the vast and pompous fireplace--hanging over the blaze--the
prey of some profound agitation, some flooding onset of memory. Servants
passed and repassed through the hall; sounds loud and merry came from
the drawing-room. Sir James neither saw nor heard.


CHAPTER III


Alicia Drake--a vision of pale pink--had just appeared in the long
gallery at Tallyn, on her way to dinner. Her dress, her jewels, and all
her minor appointments were of that quality and perfection to which only
much thought and plentiful money can attain. She had not, in fact, been
romancing in that account of her afternoon which has been already
quoted. Dress was her weapon and her stock in trade; it was, she said,
necessary to her "career." And on this plea she steadily exacted in its
support a proportion of the family income which left but small pickings
for the schooling of her younger brothers and the allowances of her two
younger sisters. But so great were the indulgence and the pride of her
parents--small Devonshire land-owners living on an impoverished
estate--that Alicia's demands were conceded without a murmur. They
themselves were insignificant folk, who had, in their own opinion,
failed in life; and most of their children seemed to them to possess the
same ineffective qualities--or the same absence of qualities--as
themselves. But Alicia represented their one chance of something
brilliant and interesting, something to lift them above their neighbors
and break up the monotony of their later lives. Their devotion was a
strange mixture of love and selfishness; at any rate, Alicia could
always feel, and did always feel, that she was playing her family's game
as well as her own.

Her own game, of course, came first. She was not a beauty, in the sense
in which Diana Mallory was a beauty; and of that fact she had been
perfectly aware after her first apparently careless glance at the
new-comer of the afternoon. But she had points that never failed to
attract notice: a free and rather insolent carriage, audaciously
beautiful eyes, a general roundness and softness, and a
grace--unfailing, deliberate, and provocative, even in actions, morally,
the most graceless--that would have alone secured her the "career" on
which she was bent.

Of her mental qualities, one of the most profitable was a very shrewd
power of observation. As she swept slowly along the corridor, which
overlooked the hall at Tallyn, none of the details of the house were
lost upon her. Tallyn was vast, ugly--above all, rich. Henry Marsham,
the deceased husband of Lady Lucy and father of Oliver and Mrs.
Fotheringham, had made an enormous fortune in the Iron Trade of the
north, retiring at sixty that he might enjoy some of those pleasures of
life for which business had left him too little time. One of these
pleasures was building. Henry Marsham had spent ten years in building
Tallyn, and at the end of that time, feeling it impossible to live in
the huge incoherent place he had created, he hired a small villa at Nice
and went to die there in privacy and peace. Nevertheless, his will laid
strict injunctions upon his widow to inhabit and keep up Tallyn;
injunctions backed by considerable sanctions of a financial kind. His
will, indeed, had been altogether a document of some eccentricity;
though as eight years had now elapsed since his death, the knowledge of
its provisions possessed by outsiders had had time to grow vague. Still,
there were strong general impressions abroad, and as Alicia Drake
surveyed the house which the old man had built to be the incubus of his
descendants, some of them teased her mind. It was said, for instance,
that Oliver Marsham and his sister only possessed pittances of about a
thousand a year apiece, while Tallyn, together with the vast bulk of
Henry Marsham's fortune, had been willed to Lady Lucy, and lay,
moreover, at her absolute disposal. Was this so, or no? Miss Drake's
curiosity, for some time past, would have been glad to be informed.

Meanwhile, here was the house--about which there was no mystery--least
of all, as to its cost. Interminable broad corridors, carpeted with ugly
Brussels and suggesting a railway hotel, branched out before Miss
Drake's eyes in various directions; upon them opened not bedrooms but
"suites," as Mr. Marsham père had loved to call them, of which the
number was legion, while the bachelors' wing alone would have lodged a
regiment. Every bedroom was like every other, except for such variations
as Tottenham Court Road, rioting at will, could suggest. Copies in
marble or bronze of well-known statues ranged along the corridors--a
forlorn troupe of nude and shivering divinities. The immense hall below,
with its violent frescos and its brand-new Turkey carpets, was panelled
in oak, from which some device of stain or varnish had managed to
abstract every particle of charm. A whole oak wood, indeed, had been
lavished on the swathing and sheathing of the house, With the only
result that the spectator beheld it steeped in a repellent yellow-brown
from top to toe, against which no ornament, no piece of china, no
picture, even did they possess some individual beauty, could possibly
make it prevail.

And the drawing-room! As Alicia Drake advanced alone into its empty and
blazing magnificence she could only laugh in its face--so eager and
restless was the effort which it made, and so hopeless the defeat.
Enormous mirrors, spread on white and gold walls; large copies from
Italian pictures, collected by Henry Marsham in Rome; more facile
statues holding innumerable lights; great pieces of modern china painted
with realistic roses and poppies; crimson carpets, gilt furniture, and
flaring cabinets--Miss Drake frowned as she looked at it. "What _could_
be done with it?" she said to herself, walking slowly up and down, and
glancing from side to side--"What _could_ be done with it?"

A rustle in the hall announced another guest. Mrs. Fotheringham entered.
Marsham's sister dressed with severity; and as she approached her cousin
she put up her eye-glass for what was evidently a hostile inspection of
the dazzling effect presented by the young lady. But Alicia was not
afraid of Mrs. Fotheringham.

"How early we are!" she said, still quietly looking at the reflection of
herself in the mirror over the mantel-piece and warming a slender foot
at the fire. "Haven't some more people arrived, Cousin Isabel? I thought
I heard a carriage while I was dressing."

"Yes; Miss Vincent and three men came by the late train."

"All Labor members?" asked Alicia, with a laugh.

Mrs. Fotheringham explained, with some tartness, that only one of the
three was a Labor member--Mr. Barton. Of the other two, one was Edgar
Frobisher, the other Mr. McEwart, a Liberal M.P., who had just won a
hotly contested bye-election. At the name of Edgar Frobisher, Miss
Drake's countenance showed some animation. She inquired if he had been
doing anything madder than usual. Mrs. Fotheringham replied, without
enthusiasm, that she knew nothing about his recent doings--nor about Mr.
McEwart, who was said, however, to be of the right stuff. Mr. Barton, on
the other hand, "is a _great_ friend of mine--and a most remarkable man.
Oliver has been very lucky to get him."

Alicia inquired whether he was likely to appear in dress clothes.

"Certainly not. He never does anything out of keeping with his
class--and he knows that we lay no stress on that kind of thing." This,
with another glance at the elegant Paris frock which adorned the person
of Alicia--a frock, in Mrs. Fotheringham's opinion, far too expensive
for the girl's circumstances. Alicia received the glance without
flinching. It was one of her good points that she was never meek with
the people who disliked her. She merely threw out another inquiry as to
"Miss Vincent."

"One of mamma's acquaintances. She was a private secretary to some one
mamma knows, and she is going to do some work for Oliver when the
session begins.

"Didn't Oliver tell me she is a Socialist?"

Mrs. Fotheringham believed it might be said.

"How Miss Mallory will enjoy herself!" said Alicia, with a little laugh.

"Have you been talking to Oliver about her?" Mrs. Fotheringham stared
rather hard at her cousin.

"Of course. Oliver likes her."

"Oliver likes a good many people."

"Oh no, Cousin Isabel! Oliver likes very few people--very, very few,"
said Miss Drake, decidedly, looking down into the fire.

"I don't know why you give Oliver such an unamiable character! In my
opinion, he is often not so much on his guard as I should like to
see him."

"Oh, well, we can't all be as critical as you, dear Cousin Isabel! But,
anyway, Oliver admires Miss Mallory extremely. We can all see that."

The girl turned a steady face on her companion. Mrs. Fotheringham was
conscious of a certain secret admiration. But her own point of view had
nothing to do with Miss Drake's.

"It amuses him to talk to her," she said, sharply; "I am sure I hope it
won't come to anything more. It would be very unsuitable."

"Why? Politics? Oh! that doesn't matter a bit."

"I beg your pardon. Oliver is becoming an important man, and it will
never do for him to hamper himself with a wife who cannot sympathize
with any of his enthusiasms and ideals."

Miss Drake shrugged her shoulders.

"He would convert her--and he likes triumphing. Oh! Cousin Isabel!--look
at that lamp!"

An oil lamp in an inner drawing-room, placed to illuminate an easel
portrait of Lady Lucy, was smoking atrociously. The two ladies' flew
toward it, and were soon lost to sight and hearing amid a labyrinth of
furniture and palms.

The place they left vacant was almost immediately filled by Oliver
Marsham himself, who came in studying a pencilled paper, containing the
names of the guests. He and his mother had not found the dinner very
easy to arrange. Upon his heels followed Mr. Ferrier, who hurried to the
fire, rubbing his hands and complaining of the cold.

"I never felt this house cold before. Has anything happened to your
_calorifère_? These rooms are too big! By-the-way, Oliver"--Mr. Ferrier
turned his back to the blaze, and looked round him--"when are you going
to reform this one?"

Oliver surveyed it.

"Of course I should like nothing better than to make a bonfire of it
all! But mother--"

"Of course--of course! Ah, well, perhaps when you marry, my dear boy!
Another reason for making haste!"

The older man turned a laughing eye on his companion. Marsham merely
smiled, a little vaguely, without reply. Ferrier observed him, then
began abstractedly to study the carpet. After a moment he looked up--

"I like your little friend, Oliver--I like her particularly!"

"Miss Mallory? Yes, I saw you had been making acquaintance. Well?"

His voice affected a light indifference, but hardly succeeded.

"A very attractive personality!--fresh and womanly--no nonsense--heart
enough for a dozen. But all the same the intellect is hungry, and wants
feeding. No one will ever succeed with her, Oliver, who forgets she has
a brain. Ah! here she is!"

For the door had been thrown open, and Diana entered, followed by Mrs.
Colwood. She came in slowly, her brow slightly knit, and her black eyes
touched with the intent seeking look which was natural to them. Her
dress of the freshest simplest white fell about her in plain folds. It
made the same young impression as the childish curls on the brow and
temples, and both men watched her with delight, Marsham went to
meet her.

"Will you sit on my left? I must take in Lady Niton."

Diana smiled and nodded.

"And who is to be my fate?"

"Mr. Edgar Frobisher. You will quarrel with him--and like him!"

"One of the 'Socialists'?"

"Ah--you must find out!"

He threw her a laughing backward glance as he went off to give
directions to some of his other guests. The room filled up. Diana was
aware of a tall young man, fair-haired, and evidently Scotch, whom she
had not seen before, and then of a girl, whose appearance and dress
riveted her attention. She was thin and small--handsome, but for a
certain strained emaciated air, a lack of complexion and of bloom. But
her blue eyes, black-lashed and black-browed, were superb; they made
indeed the note, the distinction of the whole figure. The thick hair,
cut short in the neck, was brushed back and held by a blue ribbon, the
only trace of ornament in a singular costume, which consisted of a very
simple morning dress, of some woollen material, nearly black, garnished
at the throat and wrists by some plain white frills. The dress hung
loosely on the girl's starved frame, the hands were long and thin, the
face sallow. Yet such was the force of the eyes, the energy of the
strong chin and mouth, the flashing freedom of her smile, as she stood
talking to Lady Lucy, that all the ugly plainness of the dress seemed to
Diana, as she watched her, merely to increase her strange effectiveness,
to mark her out the more favorably from the glittering room, from Lady
Lucy's satin and diamonds, or the shimmering elegance of Alicia Drake.

As she bowed to Mr. Frobisher, and took his arm amid the pairs moving
toward the dining-room, Diana asked him eagerly who the lady in the dark
dress might be.

"Oh! a great friend of mine," he said, pleasantly. "Isn't she splendid?
Did you notice her evening dress?"

"Is it an evening dress?"

"It's _her_ evening dress. She possesses two costumes--both made of the
same stuff, only the morning one has a straight collar, and the evening
one has frills."

"She doesn't think it right to dress like other people?"

"Well--she has very little money, and what she has she can't afford to
spend on dress. No--I suppose she doesn't think it right."

By this time they were settled at table, and Diana, convinced that she
had found one of the two Socialists promised her, looked round for the
other. Ah! there he was, beside Mrs. Fotheringham--who was talking to
him with an eagerness rarely vouchsafed to her acquaintances. A
powerful, short-necked man, in the black Sunday coat of the workman,
with sandy hair, blunt features, and a furrowed brow--he had none of the
magnetism, the strange refinement of the lady in the frills. Diana drew
a long breath.

"How odd it all is!" she said, as though to herself.

Her companion looked at her with amusement.

"What is odd? The combination of this house--with Barton--and Miss
Vincent?"

"Why do they consent to come here?" she asked, wondering. "I suppose
they despise the rich."

"Not at all! The poor things--the rich--can't help themselves--just yet.
_We_ come here--because we mean to use the rich."

"You!--you too?"

"A Fabian--" he said, smiling. "Which means that I am not in such a
hurry as Barton."

"To ruin your country? You would only murder her by degrees?"--flashed
Diana.

"Ah!--you throw down the glove?--so soon? Shall we postpone it for a
course or two? I am no use till I have fed."

Diana laughed. They fell into a gossip about their neighbors. The plain
young man, with a shock of fair hair, a merry eye, a short chin, and the
spirits of a school-boy, sitting on Lady Niton's left, was, it seemed,
the particular pet and protégé of that masterful old lady. Diana
remembered to have seen him at tea-time in Miss Drake's train. Lady
Niton, she was told, disliked her own sons, but was never tired of
befriending two or three young men who took her fancy. Bobbie Forbes was
a constant frequenter of her house on Campden Hill. "But he is no toady.
He tells her a number of plain truths--and amuses her guests. In return
she provides him with what she calls 'the best society'--and pushes his
interests in season and out of season. He is in the Foreign Office, and
she is at present manoeuvring to get him attached to the Special Mission
which is going out to Constantinople."

Diana glanced across the table, and in doing so met the eyes of Mr.
Bobbie Forbes, which laughed into hers--involuntarily--as much as to
say--"You see my plight?--ridiculous, isn't it?"

For Lady Niton was keeping a greedy conversational hold on both Marsham
and the young man, pouncing to right or left, as either showed a
disposition to escape from it--so that Forbes was violently withheld
from Alicia Drake, his rightful lady, and Marsham could engage in no
consecutive conversation with Diana.

"No escape for you!" smiled Mr. Frobisher, presently, observing the
position. "Lady Niton always devastates a dinner-party."

Diana protested that she was quite content. Might she assume, after the
fourth course, that his hunger was at least scotched and conversation
thrown open?

"I am fortified--thank you. Shall we go back to where we left off? You
had just accused me of ruining the country?"

"By easy stages," said Diana. "Wasn't that where we had come to? But
first--tell me, because it's all so puzzling!--do you and Mr.
Marsham agree?"

"A good deal. But he thinks _he_ can use _us_--which is his mistake."

"And Mr. Ferrier?"

Mr. Frobisher shook his head good-humoredly.

"No, no!--Ferrier is a Whig--the Whig of to-day, _bien entendu_, who is
a very different person from the Whig of yesterday--still, a Whig, an
individualist, a moderate man. He leads the Liberal party--and it is
changing all the time under his hand into something he dreads and
detests. The party can't do without him now--but--"

He paused, smiling.

"It will shed him some day?"

"It must!"

"And where will Mr. Marsham be then?"

"On the winning side--I think."

The tone was innocent and careless; but the words offended her.

She drew herself up a little.

"He would never betray his friends!"

"Certainly not," said Mr. Frobisher, hastily; "I didn't mean that. But
Marsham has a mind more open, more elastic, more modern than
Ferrier--great man as he is."

Diana was silent. She seemed still to hear some of the phrases and
inflections of Mr. Ferrier's talk of the afternoon. Mr. Frobisher's
prophecy wounded some new-born sympathy in her. She turned the
conversation.

With Oliver Marsham she talked when she could, as Lady Niton allowed
her. She succeeded, at least, in learning something more of her
right-hand neighbor and of Miss Vincent. Mr. Frobisher, it appeared, was
a Fellow of Magdalen, and was at present lodging in Limehouse, near the
docks, studying poverty and Trade-unionism, and living upon a pound a
week. As for Miss Vincent, in her capacity of secretary to a well-known
Radical member of Parliament, she had been employed, for his benefit, in
gathering information first-hand, very often in the same fields where
Mr. Frobisher was at work. This brought them often together--and they
were the best of comrades, and allies.

Diana's eyes betrayed her curiosity; she seemed to be asking for clews
in a strange world. Marsham apparently felt that nothing could be more
agreeable than to guide her. He began to describe for her the life of
such a woman of the people as Marion Vincent. An orphan at fourteen,
earning her own living from the first; self-dependent, self-protected;
the friend, on perfectly equal terms, of a group of able men, interested
in the same social ideals as herself; living alone, in contempt of all
ordinary conventions, now in Kensington or Belgravia, and now in a back
street of Stepney, or Poplar, and equally at home and her own mistress
in both; exacting from a rich employer the full market value of the
services she rendered him, and refusing to accept the smallest gift or
favor beyond; a convinced Socialist and champion of the poor, who had
within the past twelve months, to Marsham's knowledge, refused an offer
of marriage from a man of large income, passionately devoted to her,
whom she liked--mainly, it was believed, because his wealth was based on
sweated labor: such was the character sketched by Marsham for his
neighbor in the intermittent conversation, which was all that Lady Niton
allowed him.

Diana listened silently, but inwardly her mind was full of critical
reactions. Was this what Mr. Marsham most admired, his ideal of what a
woman should be? Was he exalting, exaggerating it a little, by way of
antithesis to those old-fashioned surroundings, that unreal atmosphere,
as he would call it, in which, for instance, he had found her--Diana--at
Rapallo--under her father's influence and bringing up? The notion
spurred her pride as well as her loyalty to her father. She began to
hold herself rather stiffly, to throw in a critical remark or two, to be
a little flippant even, at Miss Vincent's expense. Homage so warm laid
at the feet of one ideal was--she felt it--a disparagement of others;
she stood for those others; and presently Marsham began to realize a
hurtling of shafts in the air, an incipient battle between them.

He accepted it with delight. Still the same poetical, combative,
impulsive creature, with the deep soft voice! She pleased his senses;
she stirred his mind; and he would have thrown himself into one of the
old Rapallo arguments with her then and there but for the gad-fly at
his elbow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Immediately after dinner Lady Niton possessed herself of Diana. "Come
here, please, Miss Mallory! I wish to make your acquaintance," Thus
commanded, the laughing but rebellious Diana allowed herself to be led
to a corner of the over-illuminated drawing-room.

"Well!"--said Lady Niton, observing her--"so you have come to settle in
these parts?"

Diana assented.

"What made you choose Brookshire?" The question was enforced by a pair
of needle-sharp eyes. "There isn't a person worth talking to within a
radius of twenty miles."

Diana declined to agree with her; whereupon Lady Niton impatiently
exclaimed: "Tut--tut! One might as well milk he-goats as talk to the
people here. Nothing to be got out of any of them. Do you like
conversation?"

"Immensely!"

"Hum!--But mind you don't talk too much. Oliver talks a great deal more
than is good for him. So you met Oliver in Italy? What do you think
of him?"

Diana, keeping a grip on laughter, said something civil.

"Oh, Oliver's clever enough--and _ambitious!_" Lady Niton threw up her
hands. "But I'll tell you what stands in his way. He says too sharp
things of people. Do you notice that?"

"He is very critical," said Diana, evasively.

"Oh, Lord, much worse than that!" said Lady Niton, coolly. "He makes
himself very unpopular. You should tell him so."

"That would be hardly my place." said Diana, flushing a little.

Lady Niton stared at her a moment rather hard--then said: "But he's
honey and balm itself compared to Isabel! The Marshams are old friends
of mine, but I don't pretend to like Isabel Fotheringham at all. She
calls herself a Radical, and there's no one insists more upon their
birth and their advantages than she. Don't let her bully you--come to me
if she does--I'll protect you."

Diana said vaguely that Mrs. Fotheringham had been very kind.

"You haven't had time to find out," said Lady Niton, grimly. She leaned
back fanning herself, her queer white face and small black eyes alive
with malice. "Did you ever see such a crew as we were at dinner? I
reminded Oliver of the rhyme--'The animals went in two by two.'--It's
always the way here. There's no _society_ in this house, because you
can't take anything or any one for granted. One must always begin from
the beginning. What can I have in common with that man Barton? The last
time I talked to him, he thought Lord Grey--the Reform Bill Lord
Grey--was a Tory--and had never heard of Louis Philippe. He knows
nothing that _we_ know--and what do I care about his Socialist
stuff?--Well, now--Alicia"--her tone changed--"do you admire Alicia?"

Diana, in discomfort, glanced through the archway, leading to the inner
drawing-room, which framed the sparkling figure of Miss Drake--and
murmured a complimentary remark.

"No!"--said Lady Niton, with emphasis; "no--she's not handsome--though
she makes people believe she is. You'll see--in five years. Of course
the stupid men admire her, and she plays her cards very cleverly;
but--my dear!"--suddenly the formidable old woman bent forward, and
tapped Diana's arm with her fan--"let me give you a word of advice.
Don't be too innocent here--or too amiable. Don't give yourself
away--especially to Alicia!"

Diana had the disagreeable feeling of being looked through and through,
physically and mentally; though at the same time she was only very
vaguely conscious as to what there might be either for Lady Niton or
Miss Drake to see.

"Thank you very much," she said, trying to laugh it off. "It is very
kind of you to warn me--but really I don't think you need." She looked
round her waveringly.

"May I introduce you to my friend? Mrs. Colwood--Lady Niton." For her
glance of appeal had brought Mrs. Colwood to her aid, and between them
they coped with this _enfant terrible_ among dowagers till the
gentlemen came in.

"Here is Sir James Childe," said Lady Niton, rising. "He wants to talk
to you, and he don't like me. So I'll go."

Sir James, not without a sly smile, discharged arrow-like at the
retreating enemy, took the seat she had vacated.

"This is your first visit to Tallyn, Miss Mallory?"

The voice speaking was the _voix d'or_ familiar to Englishmen in many a
famous case, capable of any note, any inflection, to which sarcasm or
wrath, shrewdness or pathos, might desire to tune it. In this case it
was gentleness itself; and so was the countenance he turned upon Diana.
Yet it was a countenance built rather for the sterner than the milder
uses of life. A natural majesty expressed itself in the domed forehead,
and in the fine head, lightly touched with gray; the eyes too were gray,
the lips prominent and sensitive, the face long, and, in line, finely
regular. A face of feeling and of power; the face of a Celt, disciplined
by the stress and conflict of a non-Celtic world. Diana's young
sympathies sprang to meet it, and they were soon in easy conversation.

Sir James questioned her kindly, but discreetly. This was really her
first visit to Brookshire?

"To England!" said Diana; and then, on a little wooing, came out the
girl's first impressions, natural, enthusiastic, gay. Sir James
listened, with eyes half-closed, following every movement of her lips,
every gesture of head and hand.

"Your parents took you abroad quite as a child?"

"I went with my father. My mother died when I was quite small."

Sir James did not speak for a moment. At last he said:

"But before you went abroad, you lived in London?"

"Yes--in Kensington Square."

Sir James made a sudden movement which displaced a book on a little
table beside him. He stooped to pick it up.

"And your father was tired of England?"

Diana hesitated--

"I--I think he had gone through great trouble. He never got over mamma's
death."

"Oh yes, I see," said Sir James, gently. Then, in another tone:

"So you settled on that beautiful coast? I wonder if that was the winter
I first saw Italy?"

He named the year.

"Yes--that was the year," said Diana. "Had you never seen Italy before
that?" She looked at him in a little surprise.

"Do I seem to you so old?" said Sir James, smiling. "I had been a very
busy man, Miss Mallory, and my holidays had been generally spent in
Ireland. But that year"--he paused a moment--"that year I had been ill,
and the doctors sent me abroad--in October," he added, slowly and
precisely. "I went first to Paris, and I was at Genoa in November."

"We must have been there--just about then! Mamma died in October. And I
remember the winter was just beginning at Genoa--it was very cold--and I
got bronchitis--I was only a little thing."

"And Oliver tells me you found a home at Portofino?"

Diana replied. He kept her talking; yet her impression was that he did
not listen very much to what she said. At the same time she felt herself
_studied_, in a way which made her self-conscious, which perhaps she
might have resented in any man less polished and less courteous.

"Pardon me--" he said, abruptly, at a pause in the conversation. "Your
name interests me particularly. It is Welsh, is it not? I knew two or
three persons of that name; and they were Welsh."

Diana's look changed a little.

"Yes, it is Welsh," she said, in a hesitating, reserved voice; and then
looked round her as though in search of a change of topic.

Sir James bent forward.

"May I come and see you some day at Beechcote?"

Diana flushed with surprise and pleasure.

"Oh! I should be so honored!"

"The honor would be mine," he said, with pleasant deference. "Now I
think I see that Marsham is wroth with me for monopolizing you
like this."

He rose and walked away, just as Marsham brought up Mr. Barton to
introduce him to Diana.

Sir James wandered on into a small drawing-room at the end of the long
suite of rooms; in its seclusion he turned back to look at the group he
had left behind. His face, always delicately pale, had grown strained
and white.

"Is it _possible_"--he said to himself--"that she knows nothing?--that
that man was able to keep it all from her?"

He walked up and down a little by himself--pondering--the prey of the
same emotion as had seized him in the afternoon; till at last his ear
was caught by some hubbub, some agitation in the big drawing-room,
especially by the sound of the girlish voice he had just been listening
to, only speaking this time in quite another key. He returned to see
what was the matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

He found Miss Mallory the centre of a circle of spectators and
listeners, engaged apparently in a three-cornered and very hot
discussion with Mr. Barton, the Socialist member, and Oliver Marsham.
Diana had entirely forgotten herself, her shyness, the strange house,
and all her alarms. If Lady Niton took nothing for granted at Tallyn,
that was not, it seemed, the case with John Barton. He, on the contrary,
took it for granted that everybody there was at least a good Radical,
and as stoutly opposed as himself to the "wild-cat" and "Jingo" policy
of the Government on the Indian frontier, where one of our perennial
little wars was then proceeding. News had arrived that afternoon of an
indecisive engagement, in which the lives of three English officers and
some fifty men of a Sikh regiment had been lost. Mr. Barton, in taking
up the evening paper, lying beside Diana, which contained the news, had
made very much the remark foretold by Captain Roughsedge in the
afternoon. It was, he thought, a pity the repulse had not been more
decisive--so as to show all the world into what a hornet's nest the
Government was going--"and a hornet's nest which will cost us half a
million to take before we've done."

Diana's cheeks flamed. Did Mr. Barton mean to regret that no more
English lives had been lost?

Mr. Barton was of opinion that if the defeat had been a bit worse,
bloodshed might have been saved in the end. A Jingo Viceroy and a Jingo
press could only be stopped by disaster--

On the contrary, said Diana, we could not afford to be stopped by
disaster. Disaster must be retrieved.

Mr. Barton asked her--why? Were we never to admit that we were in the
wrong?

The Viceroy and his advisers, she declared, were not likely to be wrong.
And prestige had to be maintained.

At the word "prestige" the rugged face of the Labor member grew
contemptuous and a little angry. He dealt with it as he was accustomed
to deal with it in Socialist meetings or in Parliament. His touch in
doing so was neither light nor conciliatory; the young lady, he thought,
required plain speaking.

But so far from intimidating the young lady, he found in the course of a
few more thrusts and parries that he had roused a by no means despicable
antagonist. Diana was a mere mouth-piece; but she was the mouth-piece of
eye-witnesses; whereas Barton was the mouth-piece of his daily newspaper
and a handful of partisan books written to please the political section
to which he belonged.

He began to stumble and to make mistakes--gross elementary mistakes in
geography and fact--and there-with to lose his temper. Diana was upon
him in a moment--very cool and graceful--controlling herself well; and
it is probable that she would have won the day triumphantly but for the
sudden intervention of her host.

Oliver Marsham had been watching her with mingled amusement and
admiration. The slender figure held defiantly erect, the hands
close-locked on the knee, the curly head with the air of a Niké--he
could almost _see_ the palm branch in the hand, the white dress and the
silky hair, blown back by the blasts of victory!--appealed to a
rhetorical element in his nature always closely combined both with his
feelings and his ambitions. Headlong energy and partisanship--he was
enchanted to find how beautiful they could be, and he threw himself into
the discussion simply--at first--that he might prolong an emotion, might
keep the red burning on her lip and cheek. That blundering fellow Barton
should not have it all to himself!

But he was no sooner well in it than he too began to flounder. He rode
off upon an inaccurate telegram in a morning paper; Diana fell upon it
at once, tripped it up, exposed it, drove it from the field, while Mr.
Ferrier approved her from the background with a smiling eye and a
quietly applauding hand. Then Marsham quoted a speech in the
Indian Council.

Diana dismissed it with contempt, as the shaft of a _frondeur_
discredited by both parties. He fell back on Blue Books, and other
ponderosities--Barton by this time silent, or playing a clumsy chorus.
But if Diana was not acquainted with these things in the ore, so to
speak, she was more than a little acquainted with the missiles that
could be forged from them. That very afternoon Hugh Roughsedge had
pointed her to some of the best. She took them up--a little wildly
now--for her coolness was departing--and for a time Marsham could hardly
keep his footing.

A good many listeners were by now gathered round the disputants. Lady
Niton, wielding some noisy knitting needles by the fireside, was
enjoying the fray all the more that it seemed to be telling against
Oliver. Mrs. Fotheringham, on the other hand, who came up occasionally
to the circle, listened and went away again, was clearly seething with
suppressed wrath, and had to be restrained once or twice by her brother
from interfering, in a tone which would at once have put an end to a
duel he himself only wished to prolong.

Mr. Ferrier perceived her annoyance, and smiled over it. In spite of his
long friendship with the family, Isabel Fotheringham was no favorite
with the great man. She had long seemed to him a type--a strange and
modern type--of the feminine fanatic who allows political difference to
interfere not only with private friendship but with the nearest and most
sacred ties; and his philosopher's soul revolted. Let a woman talk
politics, if she must, like this eager idealist girl--not with the venom
and gall of the half-educated politician. "As if we hadn't enough of
that already!"

Other spectators paid more frivolous visits to the scene. Bobbie Forbes
and Alicia Drake, attracted by the sounds of war, looked in from the
next room. Forbes listened a moment, shrugged his shoulders, made a
whistling mouth, and then walked off to a glass bookcase--the one sign
of civilization in the vast room--where he was soon absorbed in early
editions of English poets, Lady Lucy's inheritance from a literary
father. Alicia moved about, a little restless and scornful, now
listening unwillingly, and now attempting diversions. But in these she
found no one to second her, not even the two pink-and-white nieces of
Lady Lucy, who did not understand a word of what was going on, but were
none the less gazing open-mouthed at Diana.

Marion Vincent meanwhile had drawn nearer to Diana. Her strong
significant face wore a quiet smile; there was a friendly, even an
admiring penetration in the look with which she watched the young
prophetess of Empire and of War. As for Lady Lucy, she was silent, and
rather grave. In her secret mind she thought that young girls should not
be vehement or presumptuous. It was a misfortune that this pretty
creature had not been more reasonably brought up; a mother's hand had
been wanting. While not only Mr. Ferrier and Mrs. Colwood, sitting side
by side in the background, but everybody else present, in some measure
or degree, was aware of some play of feeling in the scene, beyond and
behind the obvious, some hidden forces, or rather, perhaps, some
emerging relation, which gave it significance and thrill. The duel was a
duel of brains--unequal at that; what made it fascinating was the
universal or typical element in the clash of the two personalities--the
man using his whole strength, more and more tyrannously, more and more
stubbornly--the girl resisting, flashing, appealing, fighting for dear
life, now gaining, now retreating--and finally overborne.

For Marsham's staying powers, naturally, were the greater. He summoned
finally all his nerve and all his knowledge. The air of the
carpet-knight with which he had opened battle disappeared; he fought
seriously and for victory. And suddenly Diana laughed--a little
hysterically--and gave in. He had carried her into regions of history
and politics where she could not follow. She dropped her head in her
hands a moment--then fell back in her chair--silenced--her beautiful
passionate eyes fixed on Marsham, as his were on her.

"Brava! Brava!" cried Mr. Ferrier, clapping his hands. The room joined
in laughter and applause.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later the ladies streamed out into the hall on their way
to bed. Marsham came to light a candle for Diana.

"Do you forgive me?" he said, as he gave it to her.

The tone was gay and apologetic.

She laughed unsteadily, without reply.

"When will you take your revenge?"

She shook her head, touched his hand for "good-night," and went
up-stairs.

As Diana reached her room she drew Mrs. Colwood in with her--but not, it
seemed, for purposes of conversation. She stood absently by the fire
taking off her bracelets and necklace. Mrs. Colwood made a few remarks
about the evening and the guests, with little response, and presently
wondered why she was detained. At last Diana put up her hands, and
smoothed back the hair from her temples with a long sigh. Then she laid
a sudden grasp upon Mrs. Colwood, and looked earnestly and imploringly
into her face.

"Will you--please--call me Diana? And--and--will you kiss me?"

She humbly stooped her head. Mrs. Colwood, much touched, threw her arms
around her, and kissed her heartily. Then a few warm words fell from
her--as to the scene of the evening. Diana withdrew herself at once,
shivering a little.

"Oh, I want papa!" she said--"I want him so much!"

And she hid her eyes against the mantel-piece.

Mrs. Colwood soothed her affectionately, perhaps expecting some outburst
of confidence, which, however, did not come. Diana said a quiet
"good-night," and they parted.

But it was long before Mrs. Colwood could sleep. Was the emotion she had
just witnessed--flinging itself geyserlike into sight, only to sink back
as swiftly out of ken--was it an effect of the past or an omen of the
future? The longing expressed in the girl's heart and voice, after the
brave show she had made--had it overpowered her just because she felt
herself alone, without natural protectors, on the brink of her
woman's destiny?


CHAPTER IV


The next day, when Diana looked out from her window, she saw a large and
dreary park wrapped in scudding rain which promised evil things for the
shooting-party of the day. Mr. Marsham senior had apparently laid out
his park and grounds on the same principles as those on which he had
built his house. Everything was large and expensive. The woods and
plantations were kept to a nicety; not a twig was out of place. Enormous
cost had been incurred in the planting of rare evergreens; full-grown
trees had been transplanted wholesale from a distance, and still wore in
many cases a sickly and invalided air; and elaborate contrasts in dark
and light foliage had been arranged by the landscape-gardener employed.
Dark plantations had a light border--light plantations a dark one. A
lake or large pond, with concrete banks and two artificial islands, held
the centre of the park, and on the monotonous stretches of immaculate
grass there were deer to be seen wherever anybody could reasonably
expect them.

Diana surveyed it all with a lively dislike. She pitied Lady Lucy and
Mr. Marsham because they must live in such a place. Especially, surely,
must it be hampering and disconcerting to a man, preaching the
democratic gospel, and looking forward to the democratic millennium, to
be burdened with a house and estate which could offer so few excuses for
the wealth of which they made an arrogant and uninviting display.
Immense possessions and lavish expenditure may be, as we all know, so
softened by antiquity, or so masked by taste, as not to jar with ideals
the most different or remote. But here "proputty! proputty!" was the cry
of every ugly wood and tasteless shrubbery, whereas the prospective
owner of them, according to his public utterances and career, was
magnificently careless of property--was, in fact, in the eyes of the
lovers of property, its enemy. The house again spoke loudly and
aggressively of money; yet it was the home of a champion of the poor.

Well--a man cannot help it, if his father has suffered from stupidity
and bad taste; and encumbrances of this kind are more easily created
than got rid of. No doubt Oliver Marsham's democratic opinions had been
partly bred in him by opposition and recoil. Diana seemed to get a good
deal of rather comforting light on the problem by looking at it from
this point of view.

Indeed, she thought over it persistently while she dressed. From the
normal seven-hours' sleep of youth she had awakened with braced nerves.
To remember her duel of the night before was no longer to thrill with an
excitement inexplicable even to herself, and strangely mingled with a
sense of loneliness or foreboding. Under the morning light she looked at
things more sanely. Her natural vanity, which was the reflection of her
wish to please, told her that she had not done badly. She felt a
childish pleasure in the memory of Mr. Barton's discomfiture; and as to
Mr. Marsham, it was she, and not her beliefs, not the great Imperial
"cause" which had been beaten. How could she expect to hold her own with
the professional politician when it came really to business? In her
heart of hearts she knew that she would have despised Oliver Marsham if
he had not been able to best her in argument. "If it had been papa," she
thought, proudly, "that would have been another story!"

Nevertheless, as she sat meekly under the hands of her maid, smiles
"went out and in," as she remembered the points where she had pressed
him hard, had almost overcome him. An inclination to measure herself
with him again danced within her. Will against will, mind against
mind--her temperament, in its morning rally, delighted in the thought.
And all the time there hovered before her the living man, with his
agreeable, energetic, challenging presence. How much better she had
liked him, even in his victory of the evening, than in the carping
sarcastic mood of the afternoon!

In spite of gayety and expectation, however, she felt her courage fail
her a little as she left her room and ventured out into the big populous
house. Her solitary bringing-up had made her liable to fits of shyness
amid her general expansiveness, and it was a relief to meet no
one--least of all, Alicia Drake--on her way down-stairs. Mrs. Colwood,
indeed, was waiting for her at the end of the passage, and Diana held
her hand a little as they descended.

A male voice was speaking in the hall--Mr. Marsham giving the last
directions for the day to the head keeper. The voice was sharp and
peremptory--too peremptory, one might have thought, for democracy
addressing a brother. But the keeper, a gray-haired, weather-beaten man
of fifty, bowed himself out respectfully, and Marsham turned to greet
Diana. Mrs. Colwood saw the kindling of his eyes as they fell on the
girl's morning freshness. No sharpness in the voice now!--he was all
eagerness to escort and serve his guests.

He led them to the breakfast-room, which seemed to be in an uproar,
caused apparently by Bobbie Forbes and Lady Niton, who were talking at
each other across the table.

"What is the matter?" asked Diana, as she slipped into a place to which
Sir James Chide smilingly invited her--between himself and Mr. Bobbie.

Sir James, making a pretence of shutting his ears against the din,
replied that he believed Mr. Forbes was protesting against the tyranny
of Lady Niton in obliging him to go to church.

"She never enters a place of worship herself, but she insists that her
young men friends shall go.--Mr. Bobbie is putting his foot down!"

"Miss Mallory, let me get you some fish," said Forbes, turning to her
with a flushed and determined countenance. "I have now vindicated the
rights of man, and am ready to attend--if you will allow me--to the
wants of woman. Fish?--or bacon?"

Diana made her choice, and the young man supplied her; then bristling
with victory, and surrounded by samples of whatever food the
breakfast-table afforded, he sat down to his own meal. "No!" he said,
with energy, addressing Diana. "One must really draw the line. The last
Sunday Lady Niton took me to church, the service lasted an hour and
three-quarters. I am a High Churchman--I vow I am--an out-and-outer. I
go in for snippets--and shortening things. The man here is a dreadful
old Erastian--piles on everything you can pile on--so I just felt it
necessary to give Lady Niton notice. To-morrow I have work for the
department--_at home!_ Take my advice, Miss Mallory--don't go."

"I'm not staying over Sunday," smiled Diana.

The young man expressed his regret. "I say," he said, with a quick look
round, "you didn't think I was rude last night, did you?"

"Rude? When?"

"In not listening. I can't listen when people talk politics. I want to
drown myself. Now, if it was poetry--or something reasonable. You know
the only things worth looking at--in this beastly house"--he lowered his
voice--"are the books in that glass bookcase. It was Lady Lucy's
father--old Lord Merston--collected them. Lady Lucy never looks at them.
Marsham does, I suppose--sometimes. Do you know Marsham well?"

"I made acquaintance with him and Lady Lucy on the Riviera."

Mr. Bobbie observed her with a shrewd eye. In spite of his inattention
of the night before, the interest of Miss Mallory's appearance upon the
scene at Tallyn had not been lost upon him, any more than upon other
people. The rumor had preceded her arrival that Marsham had been very
much "smitten" with her amid the pine woods of Portofino. Marsham's
taste was good--emphatically good. At the same time it was clear that
the lady was no mere facile and commonplace girl. It was Forbes's
opinion, based on the scene of the previous evening, that there might be
a good deal of wooing to be done.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There are so many things I wanted to show you--and to talk about!" said
Oliver Marsham, confidentially, to Diana, in the hall after
breakfast--"but this horrid shoot will take up all the day! If the
weather is not too bad, I think some of the ladies meant to join us at
luncheon. Will you venture?"

His tone was earnest; his eyes indorsed it. Diana hoped it might be
possible to come. Marsham lingered beside her to the last minute; but
presently final orders had to be given to keepers, and country neighbors
began to arrive.

"They do the thing here on an enormous scale," said Bobbie Forbes,
lounging and smoking beside Diana; "it's almost the biggest shoot in the
county. Amusing, isn't it?--in this Radical house. Do you see that
man McEwart?"

Diana turned her attention upon the young member of Parliament who had
arrived the night before--plain, sandy-haired, with a long flat-backed
head, and a gentlemanly manner.

"I suspect a good deal's going on here behind the scenes," said Bobbie,
dropping his voice. "That man Barton may be a fool to talk, but he's a
great power in the House with the other Labor men. And McEwart has been
hand and glove with Marsham all this Session. They're trying to force
Ferrier's hand. Some Bill the Labor men want--and Ferrier won't hear of.
A good many people say we shall see Marsham at the head of a Fourth
Party of his own very soon, _Se soumettre, ou se démettre!_--well, it
may come to that--for old Ferrier. But I'll back him to fight his
way through."

"How can Mr. Marsham oppose him?" asked Diana, in wonder, and some
indignation with her companion. "He is the Leader of the party, and
besides--they are such friends!"

Forbes looked rather amused at her womanish view of things. "Friends? I
should rather think so!"

By this time he and Diana were strolling up and down the winter garden
opening out of the hall, which was now full of a merry crowd waiting
for the departure of the shooters. Suddenly Forbes paused.

"Do you see that?"

Diana's eyes followed his till they perceived Lady Lucy sitting a little
way off under a camellia-tree covered with red blossom. Her lap was
heaped with the letters of the morning. Mr. Ferrier, with a cigarette in
his mouth, stood beside her, reading the sheets of a letter which she
handed to him as she herself finished them. Every now and then she spoke
to him, and he replied. In the little scene, between the slender
white-haired woman and the middle-aged man, there was something so
intimate, so conjugal even, that Diana involuntarily turned away as
though to watch it were an impertinence.

"Rather touching, isn't it?" said the youth, smiling benevolently. "Of
course you know--there's a romance, or rather _was_--long ago. My mother
knew all about it. Since old Marsham's death, Lady Lucy's never done a
thing without Ferrier to advise her. Why she hasn't married him, that's
the puzzle.--But she's a curious woman, is Lady Lucy. Looks so soft,
but--" He pursed up his lips with an important air.

"Anyhow, she depends a lot on Ferrier. He's constantly here whenever he
can be spared from London and Parliament. He got Oliver into
Parliament--his first seat I mean--for Manchester. The Ferriers are very
big people up there, and old Ferrier's recommendation of him just put
him in straight--no trouble about it! Oh! and before that when he was at
Eton--and Oxford too--Ferrier looked after him like a father.--Used to
have him up for exeats--and talk to the Head--and keep his mother
straight--like an old brick. Ferrier's a splendid chap!"

Diana warmly agreed.

"Perhaps you know," pursued the chatterbox, "that this place is all
hers--Lady Lucy's. She can leave it and her money exactly as she
pleases. It is to be hoped she won't leave much of it to Mrs.
Fotheringham. _Isn't_ that a woman! Ah! you don't know her yet.
Hullo!--there's Marsham after me."

For Marsham was beckoning from the hall. They returned hurriedly.

"Who made Oliver that waistcoat?" said Lady Niton, putting on her
spectacles.

"I did," said Alicia Drake, as she came up, with her arm round the
younger of Lady Niton's nieces. "Isn't it becoming?"

"Hum!" said Lady Niton, in a gruff tone, "young ladies can always find
new ways of wasting their time."

Marsham approached Diana.

"We're just off," he said, smiling. "The clouds are lifting. You'll
come?"

"What, to lunch?" said Lady Niton, just behind. "Of course they will.
What else is there for the women to do? Congratulate you on your
waistcoat, Oliver."

"Isn't it superb?" he said, drawing himself up with mock majesty, so as
to show it off. "I am Alicia's debtor for life."

Yet a careful ear might have detected something a little hollow in the
tone.

Lady Niton looked at him, and then at Miss Drake, evidently restraining
her sharp tongue for once, though with difficulty. Marsham lingered a
moment making some last arrangements for the day with his sister. Diana
noticed that he towered over the men among whom he stood; and she felt
herself suddenly delighting in his height, in his voice which was
remarkably refined and agreeable, in his whole capable and masterful
presence. Bobbie Forbes standing beside him was dwarfed to
insignificance, and he seemed to be conscious of it, for he rose on his
toes a little, involuntarily copying Marsham's attitude, and looking
up at him.

As the shooters departed, Forbes bringing up the rear, Lady Niton laid
her wrinkled hand on his arm.

"Never mind, Bobbie, never mind!"--she smiled at him confidentially. "We
can't all be six foot."

Bobbie stared at her--first fiercely--then exploded with laughter, shook
off her hand and departed.

Lady Niton, evidently much pleased with herself, came back to the window
where most of the other ladies stood watching the shooters with their
line of beaters crossing the lawn toward the park beyond. "Ah!" she
said, "I thought Alicia would see the last of them!"

For Miss Drake, in defiance of wind and spitting rain, was walking over
the lawn the centre of a large group, with Marsham beside her. Her white
serge dress and the blue shawl she had thrown over her fair head made a
brilliant spot in the dark wavering line.

"Alicia is very picturesque," said Mrs. Fotheringham, turning away.

"Yes--and last summer Oliver seemed to be well aware of it," said Lady
Niton, in her ear.

"Was he? He has always been very good friends with Alicia."

"He could have done without the waistcoat," said Lady Niton, sharply.

"Aren't you rather unkind? She began it last summer, and finished it
yesterday. Then, of course, she presented it to him. I don't see why
that should expose her to remarks."

"One can't help making remarks about Alicia," said Lady Niton, calmly,
"and she can defend herself so well."

"Poor Alicia!"

"Confess you wouldn't like Oliver to marry her."

"Oliver never had any thought of it."

Lady Niton shook her queer gray head.

"Oliver paid her a good deal of attention last summer. Alicia must
certainly have considered the matter. And she is a young lady not
easily baffled."

"Baffled!" Mrs. Fotheringham laughed. "What can she do?"

"Well, it's true that Oliver seems to have got another idea in his head.
What do you think of that pretty child who came yesterday--the
Mallory girl?"

Mrs. Fotheringham hesitated, then said, coldly:

"I don't like discussing these things. Oliver has plenty of time before
him."

"If he is turning his thoughts in that quarter," persisted Lady Niton,
"I give him my blessing. Well bred, handsome, and well off--what's your
objection?"

Mrs. Fotheringham laughed impatiently. "Really, Lady Niton, I made no
objection."

"You don't like her!"

"I have only known her twenty-four hours. How can I have formed any
opinion about her?"

"No--you don't like her! I suppose you thought she talked stuff last
night?"

"Well, there can be no two opinions about that!" cried Mrs.
Fotheringham. "Her father seems to have filled her head with all sorts
of false Jingo notions, and I must say I wondered Oliver was so patient
with her."

Lady Niton glanced at the thin fanatical face of the speaker.

"Oliver had great difficulty in holding his own. She is no fool, and
you'll find it out, Isabel, if you try to argue her down--"

"I shouldn't dream of arguing with such a child!"

"Well, all I know is Ferrier seemed to admire her performance."

Mrs. Fotheringham paused a moment, then said, with harsh intensity:

"Men have not the same sense of responsibility."

"You mean their brains are befogged by a pretty face?"

"They don't put non-essentials aside, as we do. A girl like that, in
love with what she calls 'glory' and 'prestige,' is a dangerous and
demoralizing influence. That glorification of the Army is at the root of
half our crimes!"

Mrs. Fotheringham's pale skin had flushed till it made one red with her
red hair. Lady Niton looked at her with mingled amusement and
irritation. She wondered why men married such women as Isabel
Fotheringham. Certainly Ned Fotheringham himself--deceased some three
years before this date--had paid heavily for his mistake; especially
through the endless disputes which had arisen between his children and
his second wife--partly on questions of religion, partly on this matter
of the Army. Mrs. Fotheringham was an agnostic; her stepsons, the
children of a devout mother, were churchmen. Influenced, moreover, by a
small coterie, in which, to the dismay of her elderly husband, she had
passed most of her early married years, she detested the Army as a
brutal influence on the national life. Her youngest step-son, however,
had insisted on becoming a soldier. She broke with him, and with his
brothers who supported him. Now a childless widow, without ties and
moderately rich, she was free to devote herself to her ideas. In former
days she would have been a religious bigot of the first water; the
bigotry was still there; only the subjects of it were changed.

Lady Niton delighted in attacking her; yet was not without a certain
respect for her. Old sceptic that she was, ideals of any sort imposed
upon her. How people came by them, she herself could never imagine.

On this particular morning, however, Mrs. Fotheringham did not allow
herself as long a wrangle as usual with her old adversary. She went off,
carrying an armful of letters with large enclosures, and Lady Niton
understood that for the rest of the morning she would be as much
absorbed by her correspondence--mostly on public questions--as the
Leader of the Opposition himself, to whom the library was sacredly
given up.

"When that woman takes a dislike," she thought to herself, "it sticks!
She has taken a dislike to the Mallory girl. Well, if Oliver wants her,
let him fight for her. I hope she won't drop into his mouth! Mallory!
Mallory! I wonder where she comes from, and who her people are."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Diana was sitting among her letters, which mainly concerned
the last details of the Beechcote furnishing. She and Mrs. Colwood were
now "Muriel" and "Diana" to each other, and Mrs. Colwood had been
admitted to a practical share in Diana's small anxieties.

Suddenly Diana, who had just opened a hitherto unread letter, exclaimed:

"Oh, but _how_ delightful!"

Mrs. Colwood looked up; Diana's aspect was one of sparkling pleasure and
surprise.

"One of my Barbadoes' cousins is here--in London--actually in
London--and I knew nothing of her coming. She writes to me.--Of course
she must come to Beechcote--she must come at once!"

She sprang up, and went to a writing-table near, to look for a telegraph
form. She wrote a message with eagerness, despatched it, and then
explained as coherently as her evident emotion and excitement
would allow.

"They are my only relations in the world--that I know of--that papa ever
spoke to me about. Mamma's sister married Mr. Merton. He was a planter
in Barbadoes. He died about three years ago, but his widow and daughters
have lived on there. They were very poor and couldn't afford to come
home. Fanny is the eldest--I think she must be about twenty."

Diana paced up and down, with her hands behind her, wondering when her
telegram would reach her cousin, who was staying at a London
boarding-house, when she might be expected at Beechcote, how long she
could be persuaded to stay--speculations, in fact, innumerable. Her
agitation was pathetic in Mrs. Colwood's eyes. It testified to the
girl's secret sense of forlornness, to her natural hunger for the ties
and relationships other girls possessed in such abundance.

Mrs. Colwood inquired if it was long since she had had news of her
cousins.

"Oh, some years!" said Diana, vaguely. "I remember a letter
coming--before we went to the East--and papa reading it. I know"--she
hesitated--"I know he didn't like Mr. Merton."

She stood still a moment, thinking. The lights and shadows of reviving
memory crossed her face, and presently her thought emerged, with very
little hint to her companion of the course it had been taking out
of sight.

"Papa always thought it a horrid life for them--Aunt Merton and the
girls--especially after they gave up their estate and came to live in
the town. But how could they help it? They must have been very poor.
Fanny"--she took up the letter--"Fanny says she has come home to learn
music and French--that she may earn money by teaching when she goes
back. She doesn't write very well, does she?"

She held out the sheet.

The handwriting, indeed, was remarkably illiterate, and Mrs. Colwood
could only say that probably a girl of Miss Merton's circumstances had
had few advantages.

"But then, you see, we'll _give_ her advantages!" cried Diana, throwing
herself down at Mrs. Colwood's feet, and beginning to plan aloud.--"You
know if she will only stay with us, we can easily have people down from
London for lessons. And she can have the green bedroom--over the
dining-room--can't she?--and the library to practise in. It would be
absurd that she should stay in London, at a horrid boarding-house, when
there's Beechcote, wouldn't it?"

Mrs. Colwood agreed that Beechcote would probably be quite convenient
for Miss Merton's plans. If she felt a little pang at the thought that
her pleasant _tête-à-tête_ with her new charge was to be so soon
interrupted, and for an indefinite period, by a young lady with the
handwriting of a scullery-maid, she kept it entirely hidden.

Diana talked herself into the most rose-colored plans for Fanny Merton's
benefit--so voluminous, indeed, that Mrs. Colwood had to leave her in
the middle of them that she might go up-stairs and mend a rent in her
walking-dress. Diana was left alone in the drawing-room, still smiling
and dreaming. In her impulsive generosity she saw herself as the earthly
providence of her cousin, sharing with a dear kinswoman her own unjustly
plentiful well-being.

Then she took up the letter again. It ran thus:

     "My dear Diana,--You mustn't think it cheeky my calling you
     that, but I am your real cousin, and mother told me to write
     to you. I hope too you won't be ashamed of us though we are
     poor. Everybody knows us in Barbadoes, though of course
     that's not London. I am the eldest of the family, and I got
     very tired of living all in a pie, and so I've come home to
     England to better myself.--A year ago I was engaged to be
     married, but the young man behaved badly. A good riddance,
     all my friends told me--but it wasn't a pleasant experience.
     Anyway now I want to earn some money, and see the world a
     little. I have got rather a good voice, and I am considered
     handsome--at least smart-looking. If you are not too grand to
     invite me to your place, I should like to come and see you,
     but of course you must do as you please. I got your address
     from the bank Uncle Mallory used to send us checks on. I can
     tell you we have missed those checks pretty badly this last
     year. I hope you have now got over your great sorrow.--This
     boarding-house is horribly poky but cheap, which is the great
     thing. I arrived the night before last,

"And I am
    Your affectionate cousin
                     FANNY MERTON."

No, it really was not an attractive letter. On the second reading, Diana
pushed it away from her, rather hastily. Then she reminded herself
again, elaborately, of the Mertons' disadvantages in life, painting them
in imagination as black as possible. And before she had gone far with
this process all doubt and distaste were once more swept away by the
rush of yearning, of an interest she could not subdue, in this being of
her own flesh and blood, the child of her mother's sister. She sat with
flushed cheeks, absorbed in a stream of thoughts and reminiscence.

"You look as though you had had good news," said Sir James Chide, as he
paused beside her on his way through the drawing-room. He was not a
sportsman; nor was Mr. Ferrier.

His eyes rested upon her with such a kind interest, his manner showed so
plainly yet again that he desired to be her friend, that Diana
responded at once.

"I have found a cousin!" she said, gayly, and told the story of her
expected visitor.

Outwardly--perfunctorily--Sir James's aspect while she was speaking
answered to hers. If she was pleased, he was pleased too. He
congratulated her; he entered into her schemes for Miss Merton's
amusement. Really, all the time, the man's aspect was singularly grave,
he listened carefully to every word; he observed the speaker.

"The young lady's mother is your aunt?"

"She was my mother's sister."

"And they have been long in Barbadoes?"

"I think they migrated there just about the same time we went
abroad--after my mother's death."

Sir James said little. He encouraged her to talk on; he listened to the
phrases of memory or expectation which revealed her history--her
solitary bringing-up--her reserved and scholarly father--the singular
closeness, and yet as it seemed strangeness of her relation to him. It
appeared, for instance, that it was only an accident, some years before,
which had revealed to Diana the very existence of these cousins. Her
father had never spoken of them spontaneously.

"I hope she will be everything that is charming and delightful," he said
at last as he rose. "And remember--I am to come and see you!"

He stooped his gray head, and gently touched her hand with an old man's
freedom.

Diana warmly renewed her invitation.

"There is a house near you that I often go to--Sir William Felton's. I
am to be there in a few weeks. Perhaps I shall even be able to make
acquaintance with Miss Fanny!"

He walked away from her.

Diana could not see the instant change of countenance which accompanied
the movement. Urbanity, gentleness, kind indulgence vanished. Sir James
looked anxious and disturbed; and he seemed to be talking to himself.

The rest of the morning passed heavily. Diana wrote some letters, and
devoutly hoped the rain would stop. In the intervals of her
letter-writing, or her study of the clouds, she tried to make friends
with Miss Drake and Mrs. Fotheringham. But neither effort came to good.
Alicia, so expansive, so theatrical, so much the centre of the
situation, when she chose, could be equally prickly, monosyllabic, and
repellent when it suited her to be so. Diana talked timidly of dress, of
London, and the Season. They were the subjects on which it seemed most
natural to approach Miss Drake; Diana's attitude was inquiring and
propitiatory. But Alicia could find none but careless or scanty replies
till Madeleine Varley came up. Then Miss Drake's tongue was loosened. To
her, as to an equal and intimate, she displayed her expert knowledge of
shops and _modistes_, of "people" and their stories. Diana sat snubbed
and silent, a little provincial outsider, for whom "seasons" are not
made. Nor was it any better with Mrs. Fotheringham. At twelve o'clock
that lady brought the London papers into the drawing-room. Further
information had been received from the Afghan frontier. The English loss
in the engagement already reported was greater than had been at first
supposed; and Diana found the name of an officer she had known in India
among the dead. As she pondered the telegram, the tears in her eyes, she
heard Mrs. Fotheringham describe the news as "on the whole very
satisfactory." The nation required the lesson. Whereupon Diana's tongue
was loosed and would not be quieted. She dwelt hotly on the "sniping,"
the treacheries, the midnight murders which had preceded the expedition,
Mrs. Fotheringham listened to her with flashing looks, and suddenly she
broke into a denunciation of war, the military spirit, and the ignorant
and unscrupulous persons at home, especially women, who aid and abet
politicians in violence and iniquity, the passion of which soon struck
Diana dumb. Here was no honorable fight of equal minds. She was being
punished for her advocacy of the night before, by an older woman of
tyrannical temper, toward whom she stood in the relation of guest to
host. It was in vain to look round for defenders. The only man present
was Mr. Barton, who sat listening with ill-concealed smiles to what was
going on, without taking part in it.

Diana extricated herself with as much dignity as she could muster, but
she was too young to take the matter philosophically. She went up-stairs
burning with anger, the tears of hurt feeling in her eyes. It seemed to
her that Mrs. Fotheringham's attack implied a personal dislike; Mr.
Marsham's sister had been glad to "take it out of her." To this young
cherished creature it was almost her first experience of the kind.

On the way up-stairs she paused to look wistfully out of a staircase
window. Still raining--alack! She thought with longing of the open
fields, and the shooters. Was there to be no escape all day from the
ugly oppressive house, and some of its inmates? Half shyly, yet with a
quickening of the heart, she remembered Marsham's farewell to her of
that morning, his look of the night before. Intellectually, she was
comparatively mature; in other respects, as inexperienced and
impressionable as any convent girl.

"I fear luncheon is impossible!" said Lady Lucy's voice.

Diana looked up and saw her descending the stairs.

"Such a pity! Oliver will be so disappointed."

She paused beside her guest--an attractive and distinguished figure. On
her white hair she wore a lace cap which was tied very precisely under
her delicate chin. Her dress, of black satin, was made in a full plain
fashion of her own; she had long since ceased to allow her dressmaker
any voice in it; and her still beautiful hands flashed with diamonds,
not however in any vulgar profusion. Lady Lucy's mother had been of a
Quaker family, and though Quakerism in her had been deeply alloyed with
other metals, the moral and intellectual self-dependence of Quakerism,
its fastidious reserves and discrimination were very strong in her.
Discrimination indeed was the note of her being. For every Christian,
some Christian precepts are obsolete. For Lady Lucy that which
runs--"Judge Not!"--had never been alive.

Her emphatic reference to Marsham had brought the ready color to Diana's
cheeks.

"Yes--there seems no chance!--" she said, shyly, and regretfully, as the
rain beat on the window.

"Oh, dear me, yes!" said a voice behind them. "The glass is going up.
It'll be a fine afternoon--and we'll go and meet them at Holme Copse.
Sha'n't we, Lady Lucy?"

Mr. Ferrier appeared, coming up from the library laden with papers. The
three stood chatting together on the broad gallery which ran round the
hall. The kindness of the two elders was so marked that Diana's spirits
returned; she was not to be quite a pariah it seemed! As she walked away
toward her room, Mr. Ferrier's eyes pursued her--the slim round figure,
the young loveliness of her head and neck.

"Well!--what are you thinking about her?" he said, eagerly, turning to
the mistress of the house.

Lady Lucy smiled.

"I should prefer it if she didn't talk politics," she said, with the
slightest possible stiffness, "But she seems a very charming girl."

"She talks politics, my dear lady, because living alone with her father
and with her books, she has had nothing else to talk about but politics
and books. Would you rather she talked scandal--or Monte Carlo?"

The Quaker in Lady Lucy laughed.

"Of course if she married Oliver, she would subordinate her opinions to
his."

"Would she!" said Mr. Ferrier--"I'm not so sure!"

Lady Lucy replied that if not, it would be calamitous. In which she
spoke sincerely. For although now the ruler, and, if the truth were
known, the somewhat despotic ruler of Tallyn, in her husband's lifetime
she had known very well how to obey.

"I have asked various people about the Mallorys," she resumed. "But
nobody seems to be able to tell me anything."

"I trace her to Sir Thomas of that ilk. Why not? It is a Welsh name!"

"I have no idea who her mother was," said Lady Lucy, musing. "Her father
was very refined--_quite_ a gentleman."

"She bears, I think, very respectable witness to her mother," laughed
Ferrier. "Good stock on both sides; she carries it in her face."

"That's all I ask," said Lady Lucy, quietly.

"But that you _do_ ask!" Her companion looked at her with an eye half
affectionate, half ironic. "Most exclusive of women! I sometimes wish I
might unveil your real opinions to the Radical fellows who come here."

Lady Lucy colored faintly.

"That has nothing to do with politics."

"Hasn't it? I can't imagine anything that has more to do with them."

"I was thinking of character--honorable tradition--not blood."

Ferrier shook his head.

"Won't do. Barton wouldn't pass you--'A man's a man for a' that'--and a
woman too."

"Then I am a Tory!" said Lady Lucy, with a smile that shot pleasantly
through her gray eyes.

"At last you confess it!" cried Ferrier, as he carried off his papers.
But his gayety soon departed. He stood awhile at the window in his room,
looking out upon the sodden park--a rather gray and sombre figure. Over
his ugly impressiveness a veil of weariness had dropped. Politics and
the strife of parties, the devices of enemies and the dissatisfaction of
friends--his soul was tired of them. And the emergence of this possible
love-affair--for the moment, ardent and deep as were the man's
affections and sympathies, toward this Marsham household, it did but
increase his sense of moral fatigue. If the flutter in the blood--and
the long companionship of equal love--if these were the only things of
real value in life--how had _his_ been worth living?


CHAPTER V


The last covert had been shot, and as Marsham and his party, followed by
scattered groups of beaters, turned homeward over the few fields that
separated them from the park, figures appeared coming toward them in the
rosy dusk--Mr. Ferrier and Diana in front, with most of the other guests
of the house in their train. There was a merry fraternization between
the two parties--a characteristic English scene, in a characteristic
setting: the men in their tweed shooting-suits, some with their guns
over their shoulders, for the most part young and tall, clean-limbed and
clear-eyed, the well-to-do Englishman at his most English moment, and
brimming with the joy of life; the girls dressed in the same tweed
stuffs, and with the same skilled and expensive simplicity, but wearing,
some of them, over their cloth caps, bright veils, white or green or
blue, which were tied under their chins, and framed faces aglow with
exercise and health.

Marsham's eyes flew to Diana, who was in black, with a white veil. Some
of the natural curls on her temples, which reminded him of a Vandyck
picture, had been a little blown by the wind across her beautiful brow;
he liked the touch of wildness that they gave; and he was charmed anew
by the contrast between her frank young strength, and the wistful look,
so full of _relation_ to all about it, as though seeking to understand
and be one with it. He perceived too her childish pleasure in each
fresh incident and experience of the English winter, which proved to
her anew that she had come home; and he flattered himself, as he went
straight to her side, that his coming had at least no dimming effect on
the radiance that had been there before.

"I believe you are not pining for the Mediterranean!" he said, laughing,
as they walked on together.

In a smiling silence she drew in a great breath of the frosty air while
her eyes ranged along the chalk down, on the western edge of which they
were walking, and then over the plain at their feet, the smoke wreaths
that hung above the villages, the western sky filled stormily with the
purples and grays and crimsons of the sunset, the woods that climbed the
down, or ran in a dark rampart along its crest.

"No one can ever love it as much as I do!"--she said at last--"because I
have been an exile. That will be my advantage always."

"Your compensation--perhaps."

"Mrs. Colwood puts it that way. Only I don't like having my grievance
taken away."

"Against whom?"

"Ah! not against papa!" she said, hurriedly--"against Fate!"

"If you dislike being deprived of a grievance--so do I. You have
returned me my Rossetti."

She laughed merrily.

"You made sure I should lose or keep it?"

"It is the first book that anybody has returned to me for years. I was
quite resigned."

"To a damaging estimate of my character? Thank you very much!"

"I wonder"--he said, in another tone--"what sort of estimate you have
of _my_ character--false, or true?"

"Well, there have been a great many surprises!" said Diana, raising her
eyebrows.

"In the matter of my character?"

"Not altogether."

"My surroundings? You mean I talked Radicalism--or, as you would call
it, Socialism--to you at Portofino, and here you find me in the
character of a sporting Squire?"

"I hear"--she said, deliberately looking about her--"that this is the
finest shoot in the county."

"It is. There is no denying it. But, in the first place, it's my
mother's shoot, not mine--the estate is hers, not mine--and she wishes
old customs to be kept up. In the next--well, of course, the truth is
that I like it abominably!"

He had thrust his cap into his pocket, and was walking bareheaded. In
the glow of the evening air his strong manhood seemed to gain an added
force and vitality. He moved beside her, magnified and haloed, as it
were, by the dusk and the sunset. Yet his effect upon her was no mere
physical effect of good looks and a fine stature. It was rather the
effect of a personality which strangely fitted with and evoked her
own--of that congruity, indeed, from which all else springs.

She laughed at his confession.

"I hear also that you are the best shot in the neighborhood."

"Who has been talking to you about me?" he asked, with a slight knitting
of the brows.

"Mr. Ferrier--a little."

He gave an impatient sigh, so disproportionate to the tone of their
conversation, that Diana looked at him in sudden surprise.

"Haven't you often wondered how it is that the very people who know you
best know you least?"

The question was impetuously delivered. Diana recalled Mr. Forbes's
remarks as to dissensions behind the scenes. She stepped cautiously.

"I thought Mr. Ferrier knew everything!"

"I wish he knew something about his party--and the House of Commons!"
cried Marsham, as though a passion within leaped to the surface.

The startled eyes beside him beguiled him further.

"I didn't mean to say anything indiscreet--or disloyal," he said, with a
smile, recovering himself. "It is often the greatest men who cling to
the old world--when the new is clamoring. But the new means to be heard
all the same."

Diana's color flashed.

"I would rather be in that old world with Mr. Ferrier than in the new
with Mr. Barton!"

"What is the use of talking of preferences? The world is what it is--and
will be what it will be. Barton is our master--Ferrier's and mine. The
point is to come to terms, and make the best of it."

"No!--the point is--to hold the gate!--and die on the threshold, if need
be."

They had come to a stile. Marsham had crossed it, and Diana mounted. Her
young form showed sharply against the west; he looked into her eyes,
divided between laughter and feeling; she gave him her hand. The man's
pulses leaped anew. He was naturally of a cool and self-possessed
temperament--the life of the brain much stronger in him than the life of
the senses. But at that moment he recognized--as perhaps, for the first
time, the night before--that Nature and youth had him at last in grip.
At the same time the remembrance of a walk over the same ground that he
had taken in the autumn With Alicia Drake flashed, unwelcomed, into his
mind. It stirred a half-uneasy, half-laughing compunction. He could not
flatter himself--yet--that his cousin had forgotten it.

"What gate?--and what threshold?" he asked Diana, as they moved on. "If
you mean the gate of power--it is too late. Democracy is in the
citadel--and has run up its own flag. Or to take another metaphor--the
Whirlwind is in possession--the only question is who shall ride it!"

Diana declared that the Socialists would ride it to the abyss--with
England on the crupper.

"Magnificent!" said Marsham, "but merely rhetorical. Besides--all that
we ask, is that Ferrier should ride it. Let him only try the beast--and
he will find it tame enough."

"And if he won't?--"

"Ah, if he won't--" said Marsham, uncertainly, and paused. In the
growing darkness she could no longer see his face plainly. But presently
he resumed, more earnestly and simply.

"Don't misunderstand me! Ferrier is our chief--my chief, above all--and
one does not even discuss whether one is loyal to him. The party owes
him an enormous debt. As for myself--" He drew a long breath, which was
again a sigh.

Then with a change of manner, and in a lighter tone: "I seem to have
given myself away--to an enemy!"

"Poor enemy!"

[Illustration: "The man's pulses leaped anew".]

He looked at her, half laughing, half anxious.

"Tell me!--last night--you thought me intolerant--overbearing?"

"I disliked being beaten," said Diana, candidly; "especially as it was
only my ignorance that was beaten--not my cause."

"Shall we begin again?"

Through his gayety, however, a male satisfaction in victory pierced very
plainly. Diana winced a little.

"No, no! I must go back to Captain Roughsedge first and get some new
arguments!"

"Roughsedge!" he said, in surprise. "Roughsedge? He never carried an
argument through in his life!"

Diana defended her new friend to ears unsympathetic. Her defence,
indeed, evoked from him a series of the same impatient, sarcastic
remarks on the subject of the neighbors as had scandalized her the day
before. She fired up, and they were soon in the midst of another
battle-royal, partly on the merits of particular persons and partly on a
more general theme--the advantage or disadvantage of an optimist view of
your fellow-creatures.

Marsham was, before long, hard put to it in argument, and very
delicately and discreetly convicted of arrogance or worse. They were
entering the woods of the park when he suddenly stopped and said:

"Do you know that you have had a jolly good revenge--pressed down and
running over?"

Diana smiled, and said nothing. She had delighted in the encounter; so,
in spite of castigation, had he. There surged up in him a happy excited
consciousness of quickened life and hurrying hours. He looked with
distaste at the nearness of the house; and at the group of figures
which had paused in front of them, waiting for them, on the farther edge
of the broad lawn.

"You have convicted me of an odious, exclusive, bullying temper--or you
think you have--and all you will allow _me_ in the way of victory is
that I got the best of it because Captain Roughsedge wasn't there!"

"Not at all. I respect your critical faculty!"

"You wish to hear me gush like Mrs. Minchin. It is simply astounding the
number of people you like!"

Diana's laugh broke into a sigh.

"Perhaps it's like a hungry boy in a goody-shop. He wants to eat them
all."

"Were you so very solitary as a child?" he asked her, gently, in a
changed tone, which was itself an act of homage, almost a caress.

"Yes--I was very solitary," she said, after a pause. "And I am really
gregarious--dreadfully fond of people!--and curious about them. And I
think, oddly enough, papa was too."

A question rose naturally to his lips, but was checked unspoken. He well
remembered Mr. Mallory at Portofino; a pleasant courteous man, evidently
by nature a man of the world, interested in affairs and in literature,
with all the signs on him of the English governing class. It was
certainly curious that he should have spent all those years in exile
with his child, in a remote villa on the Italian coast. Health, Marsham
supposed, or finance--the two chief motives of life. For himself, the
thought of Diana's childhood between the pine woods and the sea gave him
pleasure; it added another to the poetical and romantic ideas which she
suggested. There came back on him the plash of the waves beneath the
Portofino headland, the murmur of the pines, the fragrance of the
underwood. He felt the kindred between all these, and her maidenly
energy, her unspoiled beauty.

"One moment!" he said, as they began to cross the lawn. "Has my sister
attacked you yet?"

The smile with which the words were spoken could be heard though not
seen. Diana laughed, a little awkwardly.

"I am afraid Mrs. Fotheringham thinks me a child of blood and thunder! I
am so sorry!"

"If she presses you too hard, call me in. Isabel and I understand each
other."

Diana murmured something polite.

Mr. Frobisher meanwhile came to meet them with a remark upon the beauty
of the evening, and Alicia Drake followed.

"I expect you found it a horrid long way," she said to Diana. Diana
disclaimed fatigue.

"You came _so_ slowly, we thought you must be tired."

Something in the drawling manner and the slightly insolent expression
made the words sting. Diana hurried on to Marion Vincent's side. That
lady was leaning on a stick, and for the first time Diana saw that she
was slightly lame. She looked up with a pleasant smile and greeting; but
before they could move on across the ample drive, Mr. Frobisher
overtook them.

"Won't you take my arm?" he said, in a low voice.

Miss Vincent slipped her hand inside his arm, and rested on him. He
supported her with what seemed to Diana a tender carefulness, his head
bent to hers, while he talked and she replied.

Diana followed, her girl's heart kindling.

"Surely!--surely!--they are in love?--engaged?"

But no one else appeared to take any notice or made any remark.

Long did the memory of the evening which followed live warm in the heart
of Diana. It was to her an evening of triumph--triumph innocent,
harmless, and complete. Her charm, her personality had by now captured
the whole party, save for an opposition of three--and the three realized
that they had for the moment no chance of influencing the popular voice.
The rugged face of Mr. Barton stiffened as she approached; it seemed to
him that the night before he had been snubbed by a chit, and he was not
the man to forget it easily. Alicia Drake was a little pale and a little
silent during the evening, till, late in its course, she succeeded in
carrying off a group of young men who had come for the shoot and were
staying the night, and in establishing a noisy court among them Mrs.
Fotheringham disapproved, by now, of almost everything that concerned
Miss Mallory: of her taste in music or in books, of the touch of
effusion in her manner, which was of course "affected" or
"aristocratic"; of the enthusiasms she did _not_ possess, no less than
of those She did. On the sacred subject of the suffrage, for instance,
which with Mrs. Fotheringham was a matter for propaganda everywhere and
at all times, Diana was but a cracked cymbal, when struck she gave back
either no sound at all, or a wavering one. Her beautiful eyes were blank
or hostile; she would escape like a fawn from the hunter. As for other
politics, no one but Mrs. Fotheringham dreamed of introducing them. She,
however, would have discovered many ways of dragging them in, and of
setting down Diana; but here her brother was on the watch, and time
after time she found herself checked or warded off.

Diana, indeed, was well defended. The more ill-humored Mrs. Fotheringham
grew, the more Lady Niton enjoyed the evening and her own "Nitonisms."
It was she who after dinner suggested the clearing of the hall and an
impromptu dance--on the ground that "girls must waltz for their living."
And when Diana proved to be one of those in whom dancing is a natural
and shining gift, so that even the gilded youths of the party, who were
perhaps inclined to fight shy of Miss Mallory as "a girl who talked
clever," even they came crowding about her, like flies about a
milk-pail--it was Lady Niton who drew Isabel Fotheringham's attention to
it loudly and repeatedly. It was she also who, at a pause in the dancing
and at a hint from Mrs. Colwood, insisted on making Diana sing, to the
grand piano which had been pushed into a corner of the hall. And when
the singing, helped by the looks and personality of the singer, had
added to the girl's success, Lady Niton sat fanning herself in reflected
triumph, appealing to the spectators on all sides for applause. The
topics that Diana fled from, Lady Niton took up; and when Mrs.
Fotheringham, bewildered by an avalanche of words, would say--"Give me
time, please, Lady Niton--I must think!"--Lady Niton would reply,
coolly--"Not unless you're accustomed to it"; while she finally capped
her misdeeds by insisting that it was no good to say Mr. Barton had a
warm heart if he were without that much more useful possession--a
narrow mind.

Thus buttressed and befriended on almost all sides, Diana drank her cup
of pleasure. Once in an interval between two dances, as she passed on
Oliver Marsham's arm, close to Lady Lucy, that lady put up her frail old
hand, and gently touched Diana's. "Do not overtire yourself, my dear!"
she said, with effusion; and Oliver, looking down, knew very well what
his mother's rare effusion meant, if Diana did not. On several
occasions Mr. Perrier sought her out, with every mark of flattering
attention, while it often seemed to Diana as if the protecting kindness
of Sir James Chide was never far away. In her white _ingenue's_ dress
she was an embodiment of youth, simplicity, and joy, such as perhaps our
grandmothers knew more commonly than we, in our more hurried and complex
day. And at the same time there floated round her something more than
youth--something more thrilling and challenging than mere girlish
delight--an effluence, a passion, a "swell of soul," which made this
dawn of her life more bewitching even for its promise than for its
performance.

For Marsham, too, the hours flew. He was carried away, enchanted; he had
eyes for no one, time for no one but Diana; and before the end of the
evening the gossip among the Tallyn guests ran fast and free. When at
last the dance broke up, many a curious eye watched the parting between
Marsham and Diana; and in their bedroom on the top floor Lady Lucy's two
nieces sat up till the small hours discussing, first, the situation--was
Oliver really caught at last?--and then, Alicia's refusal to discuss it.
She had said bluntly that she was dog-tired--and shut her door
upon them.

       *       *       *       *       *

On a hint from his mother, Marsham went to say good-night to her in her
room. She threw her arms round his neck, whispering: "Dear Oliver!--dear
Oliver!--I just wished you to know--if it is as I think--that you had my
blessing."

He drew back, a little shrinking and reluctant--yet still flushed, as it
were, with the last rays Diana's sun had shed upon him.

"Things mustn't be hurried, mother."

"No--no--they sha'n't. But you know how I have wished to see you
happy--how ambitious I have been for you!"

"Yes, mother, I know. You have been always very good to me." He had
recovered his composure, and stood holding her hand and smiling at her.

"What a charming creature, Oliver! It is a pity, of course, her father
has indoctrinated her with those opinions, but--"

"Opinions!" he said, scornfully--"what do they matter!" But he could not
discuss Diana. His blood was still too hot within him.

"Of course--of course!" said Lady Lucy, soothingly. "She is so
young--she will develop. But what a wife, Oliver, she will make--how she
might help a man on--with her talents and her beauty and her refinement.
She has such dignity, too, for her years."

He made no reply, except to repeat:

"Don't hurry it, mother--don't hurry it."

"No--no"--she said, laughing--"I am not such a fool. There will be many
natural opportunities of meeting."

"There are some difficulties with the Vavasours. They have been
disagreeable about the gardens. Ferrier and I have promised to go over
and advise her."

"Good!" said Lady Lucy, delighted that the Vavasours had been
disagreeable. "Good-night, my son, good-night!"

A minute later Oliver stood meditating in his own room, where he had
just donned his smoking-jacket. By one of the natural ironies of life,
at a moment when he was more in love than he had ever been yet, he was,
nevertheless, thinking eagerly of prospects and of money. Owing to his
peculiar relation to his mother, and his father's estate, marriage would
be to him no mere satisfaction of a personal passion. It would be a
vital incident in a politician's career, to whom larger means and
greater independence were now urgently necessary. To marry with his
mother's full approval would at last bring about that provision for
himself which his father's will had most unjustly postponed. He was
monstrously dependent upon her. It had been one of the chief checks on a
strong and concentrated ambition. But Lady Lucy had long made him
understand that to marry according to her wishes would mean
emancipation: a much larger income in the present, and the final
settlement of her will in his favor. It was amazing how she had taken to
Diana! Diana had only to accept him, and his future was secured.

But though thoughts of this kind passed in tumultuous procession through
the grooves of consciousness, they were soon expelled by others. Marsham
was no mere interested schemer. Diana should help him to his career; but
above all and before all she was the adorable brown-eyed creature, whose
looks had just been shining upon him, whose soft hand had just been
lingering in his! As he stood alone and spellbound in the dark, yielding
himself to the surging waves of feeling which broke over his mind, the
thought, the dream, of holding Diana Mallory in his arms--of her head
against his breast--came upon him with a sudden and stinging delight.

Yet the delight was under control--the control of a keen and practical
intelligence. There rose in him a sharp sense of the unfathomed depths
and possibilities in such a nature as Diana's. Once or twice that
evening, through all her sweet forthcomingness, when he had forced the
note a little, she had looked at him in sudden surprise or shrinking.
No!--nothing premature! It seemed to him, as it had seemed to Bobbie
Forbes, that she could only be won by the slow and gradual conquest of a
rich personality. He set himself to the task.

       *       *       *       *       *

Down-stairs Mr. Ferrier and Sir James Chide were sitting together in a
remote corner of the hall. Mr. Ferrier, in great good-humor with the
state of things, was discussing Oliver's chances, confidentially, with
his old friend. Sir James sat smoking in silence. He listened to
Ferrier's praises of Miss Mallory, to his generous appreciation of
Marsham's future, to his speculations as to what Lady Lucy would do for
her son, upon his marriage, or as to the part which a creature so
brilliant and so winning as Diana might be expected to play in London
and in political life.

Sir James said little or nothing. He knew Lady Lucy well, and had known
her long. Presently he rose abruptly and went up-stairs to bed.

"Ought I to speak?" he asked himself, in an agony of doubt. "Perhaps a
word to Ferrier?--"

No!--impossible!--impossible! Yet, as he mounted the stairs, over the
house which had just seen the triumph of Diana, over that radiant figure
itself, the second sight of the great lawyer perceived the brooding of a
cloud of fate; nor could he do anything to avert or soften its downfall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Diana's golden hour had found an unexpected epilogue. After
her good-night to Marsham she was walking along the gallery corridor
going toward her room, when she perceived Miss Vincent in front of her
moving slowly and, as it seemed, with difficulty. A sudden impulse made
Diana fly after her.

"Do let me help you!" she said, shyly.

Marion Vincent smiled, and put her hand in the girl's arm.

"How do people manage to live at all in these big houses, and with
dinner-parties every night!" she said, laughing. "After a day in the
East End I am never half so tired."

She was indeed so pale that Diana was rather frightened, and remembering
that in the afternoon she had seen Miss Vincent descend from an upper
floor, she offered a rest in her own room, which was close by, before
the evidently lame woman attempted further stairs.

Marion Vincent hesitated a moment, then accepted. Diana hurried up a
chair to the fire, installed her there, and herself sat on the floor
watching her guest with some anxiety.

Yet, as she did so, she felt a certain antagonism. The face, of which
the eyes were now closed, was nobly grave. The expression of its deeply
marked lines appealed to her heart. But why this singularity--this
eccentricity? Miss Vincent wore the same dress of dark woollen stuff,
garnished with white frills, in which she had appeared the night before,
and her morning attire, as Mr. Frobisher had foretold, had consisted of
a precisely similar garment, adorned with a straight collar instead of
frills. Surely a piece of acting!--of unnecessary self-assertion!

Yet all through the day--and the evening--Diana had been conscious of
this woman's presence, in a strange penetrating way, even when they had
had least to do with each other. In the intervals of her own joyous
progress she had been often aware of Miss Vincent sitting apart,
sometimes with Mr. Frobisher, who was reading or talking to her,
sometimes with Lady Lucy, and--during the dance--with John Barton.
Barton might have been the Jeremiah or the Ezekiel of the occasion. He
sat astride upon a chair, in his respectable workman's clothes, his eyes
under their shaggy brows, his weather-beaten features and compressed
lips expressing an ill-concealed contempt for the scene before him. It
was rumored that he had wished to depart before dinner, having concluded
his consultation with Mr. Ferrier, but that Mrs. Fotheringham had
persuaded him to remain for the night. His presence seemed to make
dancing a misdemeanor, and the rich house, with its services and
appurtenances, an organized crime. But if his personality was the
storm-point of the scene, charged with potential lightning, Marion
Vincent's was the still small voice, without threat or bitterness, which
every now and then spoke to a quick imagination like Diana's its message
from a world of poverty and pain. And sometimes Diana had been startled
by the perception that the message seemed to be specially for her. Miss
Vincent's eyes followed her; whenever Diana passed near her, she
smiled--she admired. But always, as it seemed to Diana, with a meaning
behind the smile. Yet what that meaning might be the girl could
not tell.

At last, as she watched her, Marion Vincent looked up.

"Mr. Barton would talk to me just now about the history of his own life.
I suppose it was the dance and the supper excited him. He began to
testify! Sometimes when he does that he is magnificent. He said some
fine things to-night. But I am run down and couldn't stand it."

Diana asked if Mr. Barton had himself gone through a great struggle with
poverty.

"The usual struggle. No more than thousands of others. Only in him it is
vocal--he can reflect upon it.--You had an easy triumph over him last
night," she added, with a smile, turning to her companion.

"Who wouldn't have?" cried Diana. "What outrageous things he said!"

"He doesn't know much about India--or the Colonies. He hasn't travelled;
he reads very little. He showed badly. But on his own subjects he is
good enough. I have known him impress or convert the most unlikely
people--by nothing but a bare sincerity. Just now--while the servants
were handing champagne--he and I were standing a little way off under
the gallery. His eyes are weak, and he can't bear the glare of all these
lights. Suddenly he told me the story of his father's death."

She paused, and drew her hand across her eyes. Diana saw that they were
wet. But although startled, the girl held herself a little aloof and
erect, as though ready at a moment's notice to defend herself against a
softening which might involve a treachery to glorious and sacred things.

"It so chanced"--Miss Vincent resumed--"that it had a bearing on
experiences of my own--just now."

"You are living in the East End?"

"At present. I am trying to find out the causes of a great wave of
poverty and unemployment in a particular district."--She named it.--"It
is hard work--and not particularly good for the nerves."

She smiled, but at the same moment she turned extremely white, and as
she fell back in her chair, Diana saw her clinch her hand as though in
a strong effort for physical self-control.

Diana sprang up.

"Let me get you some water!"

"Don't go. Don't tell anybody. Just open that window." Diana obeyed, and
the northwest wind, sweeping in, seemed to revive her pale companion
almost at once.

"I am very sorry!" said Miss Vincent, after a few minutes, in her
natural voice. "Now I am all right." She drank some water, and
looked up.

"Shall I tell you the story he told me? It is very short, and it might
change your view of him."

"If you feel able--if you are strong enough," said Diana, uncomfortably,
wondering why it should matter to Miss Vincent or anybody else what view
she might happen to take of Mr. Barton.

"He said he remembered his father (who was a house-painter--a very
decent and hard-working man) having been out of work for eight weeks. He
used to go out looking for work every day--and there was the usual
story, of course, of pawning or selling all their possessions--odd
jobs--increasing starvation--and so on. Meanwhile, _his_ only
pleasure--he was ten--was to go with his sister after school to look at
two shops in the East India Dock Road--one a draper's with a 'Christmas
Bazaar'--the other a confectioner's. He declares it made him not more
starved, but less, to look at the goodies and the cakes; they _imagined_
eating them; but they were both too sickly, he thinks, to be really
hungry. As for the bazaar, with its dolls and toys, and its Father
Christmas, and bright lights, they both thought it paradise. They used
to flatten their noses against the glass; sometimes a shopman drove
them away; but they came back and back. At last the iron shutters would
come down--slowly. Then he and his sister would stoop--and stoop--to get
a last look. Presently there would be only a foot of bliss left; then
they both sank down flat on their stomachs on the pavement, and so
stayed--greedily--till all was dark, and paradise had been swallowed up.
Well, one night, the show had been specially gorgeous; they took hands
afterward, and ran home. Their father had just come in. Mr. Barton can
remember his staggering into the room. I'll give it in his words.
'Mother, have you got anything in the house?' 'Nothing, Tom.' And mother
began to cry. 'Not a bit of bread, mother?' 'I gave the last bit to the
children for their teas.' Father said nothing, but he lay down on the
bed. Then he called me. 'Johnnie,' he said, 'I've got work--for next
week--but I sha'n't never go to it--it's too late,' and then he asked me
to hold his hand, and turned his face on the pillow. When my mother came
to look, he was dead. 'Starvation and exhaustion'--the doctor said."

Marion Vincent paused.

"It's just like any other story of the kind--isn't it?" Her smile turned
on Diana. "The charitable societies and missions send them out by scores
in their appeals. But somehow as he told it just now, down-stairs, in
that glaring hall, with the champagne going round--it seemed
intolerable."

"And you mean also"--said Diana, slowly--"that a man with that history
can't know or care very much about the Empire?"

"Our minds are all picture-books," said the woman beside her, in a low,
dreamy voice: "it depends upon what the pictures are. To you the words
'England'--and the 'Empire'--represent one set of pictures--all bright
and magnificent--like the Christmas Bazaar. To John Barton and me"--she
smiled--"they represent another. We too have seen the lights, and the
candles, and the toys; we have admired them, as you have; but we know
the reality is not there. The reality is in the dark streets, where men
tramp, looking for work; it is in the rooms where their wives and
children live stifled and hungry--the rooms where our working folk
die--without having lived."

Her eyes, above her pale cheeks, had opened to their fullest extent--the
eyes of a seer. They held Diana. So did the voice, which was the voice
of one in whom tragic passion and emotion are forever wearing away the
physical frame, as the sea waves break down a crumbling shore.

Suddenly Diana bent over her, and took her hands.

"I wonder why you thought me worth talking to like this?" she said,
impetuously.

"I liked you!" said Marion Vincent, simply. "I liked you as you talked
last night. Only I wanted to add some more pictures to your
picture-book. _Your_ set--the popular one--is called _The Glories of
England_. There is another--I recommend it to you: _The Shames of
England_."

"You think poverty a disgrace?" murmured Diana, held by the glowing
fanatical look of the speaker.

"_Our_ poverty is a disgrace--the life of our poor is a disgrace. What
does the Empire matter--what do Afghan campaigns matter--while London is
rotten? However" (she smiled again, and caressed Diana's hand), "will
you make friends with me?"

"Is it worth while for you?" said Diana, laughing. "I shall always
prefer my picture-book to yours, I am afraid. And--I am not poor--and I
don't give all my money away."

Miss Vincent surveyed her gayly.

"Well, I come here," (she looked significantly round the luxurious
room), "and I am very good friends with the Marshams. Oliver Marsham is
one of the persons from whom I hope most."

"Not in pulling down wealth--and property!" cried Diana.

"Why not? Every revolution has its Philippe Égalité Oh, it will come
slowly--it will come slowly," said the other, quietly. "And of course
there will be tragedy--there always is--in everything. But not, I hope,
for you--never for you!" And once more her hand dropped softly
on Diana's.

"You were happy to-night?--you enjoyed the dance?"

The question, so put, with such a look, from another mouth, would have
been an impertinence. Diana shrank, but could not resent it. Yet,
against her will, she flushed deeply.

"Yes. It was delightful. I did not expect to enjoy it so much, but--"

"But you did! That's well. That's good!"

Marion Vincent rose feebly. And as she stood, leaning on the chair, she
touched the folds of Diana's white dress.

"When shall I see you again?--and that dress?"

"I shall be in London in May," said Diana, eagerly--May I come then? You
must tell me where."

"Ah, you won't come to Bethnal Green in that dress. What a pity!"

Diana helped her to her room, where they shook hands and parted. Then
Diana came back to her own quarters. She had put out the electric light
for Miss Vincent's sake. The room was lit only by the fire. In the
full-length mirror of the toilet-table Diana saw her own white
reflection, and the ivy leaves in her hair. The absence of her mourning
was first a pain; then the joy of the evening surged up again. Oh, was
it wrong, was it wrong to be happy--in this world "where men sit and
hear each other groan"? She clasped her hands to her soft breast, as
though defending the warmth, the hope that were springing there, against
any dark protesting force that might threaten to take them from her.


CHAPTER VI


"Henry," said Mrs. Roughsedge to her husband, "I think it would do you
good to walk to Beechcote."

"No, my dear, no! I have many proofs to get through before dinner. Take
Hugh. Only--"

Dr. Roughsedge, smiling, held up a beckoning finger. His wife
approached.

"Don't let him fall in love with that young woman. It's no good."

"Well, she must marry somebody, Henry."

"Big fishes mate with big fishes--minnows with minnows."

"Don't run down your own son, sir. Who, pray, is too good for him?"

"The world is divided into wise men, fools, and mothers. The characters
of the first two are mingled--disproportionately--in the last," said Dr.
Roughsedge, patiently enduring the kiss his wife inflicted on him.
"Don't kiss me, Patricia--don't tread on my proofs--go away--and tell
Jane not to forget my tea because you have gone out."

Mrs. Roughsedge departed, and the doctor, who was devoted to her, sank
at once into that disorderly welter of proofs and smoke which
represented to him the best of the day. The morning he reserved for hard
work, and during the course of it he smoked but one pipe. A quotation
from Fuller which was often on his lips expressed his point of view:
"Spill not the morning, which is the quintessence of the day, in
recreation. For sleep itself is a recreation. And to open the morning
thereto is to add sauce to sauce."

But in the afternoon he gave himself to all the delightful bye-tasks:
the works of supererogation, the excursions into side paths, the
niggling with proofs, the toying with style, the potterings and
polishings, the ruminations, and rewritings and refinements which make
the joy of the man of letters. For five-and-twenty years he had been a
busy Cambridge coach, tied year in and year out to the same strictness
of hours, the same monotony of subjects, the same patient drumming on
thick heads and dull brains. Now that was all over. A brother had left
him a little money; he had saved the rest. At sixty he had begun to
live. He was editing a series of reprints for the Cambridge University
Press, and what mortal man could want more than a good wife and son, a
cottage to live in, a fair cook, unlimited pipes, no debts, and the best
of English literature to browse in? The rural afternoon, especially,
when he smoked and grubbed and divagated as he pleased, was alone enough
to make the five-and-twenty years of "swink" worth while.

Mrs. Roughsedge stayed to give very particular orders to the
house-parlormaid about the doctor's tea, to open a window in the tiny
drawing-room, and to put up in brown paper a pair of bed-socks
that she had just finished knitting for an old man in one of the
parish-houses. Then she joined her son, who was already waiting for
her--impatiently--in the garden.

Hugh Roughsedge had only just returned from a month's stay in London,
made necessary by those new Army examinations which his soul detested.
By dint of strenuous coaching he had come off moderately victorious, and
had now returned home for a week's extra leave before rejoining his
regiment. One of the first questions on his tongue, as his mother
instantly noticed, had been a question as to Miss Mallory. Was she still
at Beechcote? Had his mother seen anything of her?

Yes, she was still at Beechcote. Mrs. Roughsedge, however, had seen her
but seldom and slightly since her son's departure for London. If she had
made one or two observations from a distance, with respect to the young
lady, she withheld them. And like the discerning mother that she was, at
the very first opportunity she proposed a call at Beechcote.

On their way thither, this February afternoon, they talked in a
desultory way about some new War-Office reforms, which, as usual, the
entire Army believed to be merely intended--wilfully and
deliberately--for its destruction; about a recent gambling scandal in
the regiment, or the peculiarities of Hugh's commanding officer.
Meanwhile he held his peace on the subject of some letters he had
received that morning. There was to be an expedition in Nigeria.
Officers were wanted; and he had volunteered. The result of his
application was not yet known. He had no intention whatever of upsetting
his parents till it was known.

"I wonder how Miss Mallory liked Tallyn," said Mrs. Roughsedge, briskly.

She had already expressed the same wonder once or twice. But as neither
she nor her son had any materials for deciding the point the remark
hardly promoted conversation. She added to it another of more effect.

"The Miss Bertrams have already made up their minds that she is to marry
Oliver Marsham."

"The deuce!" cried the startled Roughsedge. "Beg your pardon, mother,
but how can those old cats possibly know?"

"They can't know," said Mrs. Roughsedge, placidly. "But as soon as you
get a young woman like that into the neighborhood, of course everybody
begins to speculate."

"They mumble any fresh person, like a dog with a bone," said Roughsedge,
indignantly.

They were passing across the broad village street. On either hand were
old timbered cottages, sun-mellowed and rain-beaten; a thatched roof
showing here and there; or a bit of mean new building, breaking the
time-worn line. To their left, keeping watch over the graves which
encircled it, rose the fourteenth-century church; amid the trees around
it rooks were cawing and wheeling; and close beneath it huddled other
cottages, ivy-grown, about the village well. Afternoon school was just
over, and the children were skipping and running about the streets.
Through the cottage doors could be seen occasionally the gleam of a fire
or a white cloth spread for tea. For the womenfolk, at least, tea was
the great meal of the day in Beechcote. So that what with the flickering
of the fires, and the sunset light on the windows, the skipping
children, the dogs, the tea-tables, and the rooks, Beechcote wore a
cheerful and idyllic air. But Mrs. Roughsedge knew too much about these
cottages. In this one to the left a girl had just borne her second
illegitimate child; in that one farther on were two mentally deficient
children, the offspring of feeble-minded parents; in the next, an old
woman, the victim of pernicious anæmia, was moaning her life away; in
the last to the right the mother of five small children had just died in
her sixth confinement. Mrs. Roughsedge gave a long sigh as she looked at
it. The tragedy was but forty-eight hours old; she had sat up with the
mother through her dying hours.

"Oh, my dear!" said Mrs. Roughsedge, suddenly--"here comes the Vicar. Do
you know, it's so unlucky--and so strange!--but he has certainly taken a
dislike to Miss Mallory--I believe it was because he had hoped some
Christian Socialist friends of his would have taken Beechcote, and he
was disappointed to find it let to some one with what he calls 'silly
Tory notions' and no particular ideas about Church matters. Now there's
a regular fuss--something about the Book Club. I don't understand--"

The Vicar advanced toward them. He came along at a great pace, his lean
figure closely sheathed in his long clerical coat, his face a little
frowning and set.

At the sight of Mrs. Roughsedge he drew up, and greeted the mother and
son.

"May I have a few words with you?" he asked Mrs. Roughsedge, as he
turned back with them toward the Beechcote lane. "I don't know whether
you are acquainted, Mrs. Roughsedge, with what has just happened in the
Book Club, to which we both belong?"

The Book Club was a village institution of some antiquity. It embraced
some ten families, who drew up their Mudie lists in common and sent the
books from house to house. The Vicar and Dr. Roughsedge had been till
now mainly responsible for these lists--so far, at least, as "serious
books" were concerned, the ladies being allowed the chief voice in
the novels.

Mrs. Roughsedge, a little fluttered, asked for information.

"Miss Mallory has recommended two books which, in my opinion, should not
be circulated among us," said the Vicar. "I have protested--in vain.
Miss Mallory maintains her recommendation. I propose, therefore, to
withdraw from the Club."

"Are they improper?" cried Mrs. Roughsedge, much distressed. Captain
Roughsedge threw an angry look first at his mother and then at
the Vicar.

"Not in the usual sense," said the Vicar, stiffly--"but highly improper
for the reading of Christian people. One is by a Unitarian, and the
other reproduces some of the worst speculations of an infidel German
theology. I pointed out the nature of the books to Miss Mallory. She
replied that they were both by authors whom her father liked. I
regretted it. Then she fired up, refused to withdraw the names, and
offered to resign. Miss Mallory's subscription to the Club is, however,
much larger than mine. _I_ shall therefore resign--protesting, of
course, against the reason which induces me to take this course."

"What's wrong with the books?" asked Hugh Roughsedge.

The Vicar drew himself up.

"I have given my reasons."

"Why, you see that kind of thing in every newspaper," said Roughsedge,
bluntly.

"All the more reason why I should endeavor to keep my parish free from
it," was the Vicar's resolute reply. "However, there is no more to be
said. I wished Mrs. Roughsedge to understand what had happened--that
is all."

He paused, and offered a limp hand in good-bye.

"Let me speak to Miss Mallory," said Mrs. Roughsedge, soothingly.

The Vicar shook his head.

"She is a young lady of strong will." And with a hasty nod of farewell
to the Captain, whose hostility he divined, he walked away.

"And what about obstinate and pig-headed parsons!" said Roughsedge,
hotly, addressing his remark, however, safely to the Vicar's back, and
to his mother. "Who makes him a judge of what we shall read! I shall
make a point of asking for both the books!"

"Oh, my dear Hugh!" cried his mother, in rather troubled protest. Then
she happily reflected that if he asked for them, he was not in the least
likely to read them. "I hope Miss Mallory is not really an unbeliever."

"Mother! Of course, what that poker in a wide-awake did was to say
something uncivil about her father, and she wasn't going to stand that.
Quite right, too."

"She did come to church on Christmas Day," said Mrs. Roughsedge,
reflecting. "But, then, a great many people do that who don't believe
anything. Anyway, she has always been quite charming to your father and
me. And I think, besides, the Vicar might have been satisfied with your
father's opinion--_he_ made no complaint about the books. Oh, now the
Miss Bertrams are going to stop us! They'll of course know all
about it!"

If Captain Roughsedge growled ugly words into his mustache, his mother
was able to pretend not to hear them, in the gentle excitement of
shaking hands with the Miss Bertrams. These middle-aged ladies, the
daughters of a deceased doctor from the neighboring county town of
Dunscombe, were, if possible, more plainly dressed than usual, and their
manners more forbidding.

"You will have heard of this disagreeable incident which has occurred,"
said Miss Maria to Mrs. Roughsedge, with a pinched mouth. "My sister and
I shall, of course, remove our names from the Club."

"I say--don't your subscribers order the books they like?" asked
Roughsedge, half wroth and half laughing, surveying the lady with his
hand on his side.

"There is a very clear understanding among us," said Miss Maria,
sharply, "as to the character of the books to be ordered. No member of
the Club has yet transgressed it."

"There must be give and take, mustn't there?" said Miss Elizabeth, in a
deprecatory voice. She was the more amiable and the weaker of the two
sisters. "_We_ should _never_ order books that would be offensive to
Miss Mallory."

"But if you haven't read the books?"

"The Vicar's word is quite enough," said Miss Maria, with her most
determined air.

They all moved on together, Captain Roughsedge smoothing or tugging at
his mustache with a restless hand.

But Miss Bertram, presently, dropping a little behind, drew Mrs.
Roughsedge with her.

"There are all sorts of changes at the house," she said, confidentially.
"The laundry maids are allowed to go out every evening, if they
like--and Miss Mallory makes no attempt to influence the servants to
come to church. The Vicar says the seats for the Beechcote servants have
never been so empty."

"Dear, dear!" murmured Mrs. Roughsedge.

"And money is improperly given away. Several people whom the Vicar
thinks most unfit objects of charity have been assisted. And in a
conversation with her last week Miss Mallory expressed herself in a very
sad way about foreign missions. Her father's idea, again, no doubt--but
it is all very distressing. The Vicar doubts"--Miss Maria spoke warily,
bringing her face very close to the gray curls--"whether she has ever
been confirmed."

This final stroke, however, fell flat. Mrs. Roughsedge showed no
emotion. "Most of my aunts," she said, stoutly, "were never confirmed,
and they were good Christians and communicants all their lives."

Miss Maria's expression showed that this reference to a preceding
barbaric age of the Church had no relevance to the existing order
of things.

"Of course," she added, hastily, "I do not wish to make myself
troublesome or conspicuous in any way. I merely mention these things as
explaining why the Vicar felt bound to make a stand. The Church feeling
in this parish has been so strong it would, indeed, be a pity if
anything occurred to weaken it."

Mrs. Roughsedge gave a doubtful assent. As to the Church feeling, she
was not so clear as Miss Bertram. One of her chief friends was a
secularist cobbler who lived under the very shadow of the church. The
Miss Bertrams shuddered at his conversation. Mrs. Roughsedge found him
racy company, and he presented to her aspects of village life and
opinion with which the Miss Bertrams were not at all acquainted.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the mother and son approached the old house in the sunset light, its
aspect of mellow and intimate congruity with the woods and fields about
it had never been more winning. The red, gray, and orange of its old
brickwork played into the brown and purples of its engirdling trees,
into the lilacs and golds and crimsons of the western sky behind it,
into the cool and quiet tones of the meadows from which it rose. A
spirit of beauty had been at work fusing man's perishable and passing
work with Nature's eternal masterpiece; so that the old house had in it
something immortal, and the light which played upon it something gently
personal, relative, and fleeting. Winter was still dominant; a northeast
wind blew. But on the grass under the spreading oaks which sheltered the
eastern front a few snow-drops were out. And Diana was gathering them.

She came toward her visitors with alacrity. "Oh! what a long time since
you have been to see me!"

Mrs. Roughsedge explained that she had been entertaining some relations,
and Hugh had been in London. She hoped that Miss Mallory had enjoyed her
stay at Tallyn. It certainly seemed to both mother and son that the
ingenuous young face colored a little as its owner replied--"Thank
you--it was very amusing"--and then added, with a little
hesitation--"Mr. Marsham has been kindly advising me since, about the
gardens--and the Vavasours. _They_ were to keep up the gardens, you
know--and now they practically leave it to me--which isn't fair."

Mrs. Roughsedge secretly wondered whether this statement was meant to
account for the frequent presence of Oliver Marsham at Beechcote. She
had herself met him in the lane riding away from Beechcote no less than
three times during the past fortnight.

"Please come in to tea!" said Diana; "I am just expecting my
cousin--Miss Merton. Mrs. Colwood and I are so excited!--we have never
had a visitor here before. I came out to try and find some snow-drops
for her room. There is really nothing in the greenhouses--and I can't
make the house look nice."

Certainly as they entered and passed through the panelled hall to the
drawing-room Hugh Roughsedge saw no need for apology. Amid the warm
dimness of the house he was aware of a few starry flowers, a few
gleaming and beautiful stuffs, the white and black of an engraving, or
the blurred golds and reds of an old Italian picture, humble school-work
perhaps, collected at small cost by Diana's father, yet still breathing
the magic of the Enchanted Land. The house was refined, pleading,
eager--like its mistress. It made no display--but it admitted no
vulgarity. "These things are not here for mere decoration's sake," it
seemed to say. "Dear kind hands have touched them; dear silent voices
have spoken of them. Love them a little, you also!--and be at home."

Not that Hugh Roughsedge made any such conscious analysis of his
impressions. Yet the house appealed to him strangely. He thought Miss
Mallory's taste marvellous; and it is one of the superiorities in women
to which men submit most readily.

The drawing-room had especially a festive air. Mrs. Colwood was keeping
tea-cakes hot, and building up a blazing fire with logs of beech-wood.
When she had seated her guests, Diana put the snow-drops she had
gathered into an empty vase, and looked round her happily, as though now
she had put the last touch to all her preparations. She talked readily
of her cousin's coming to Mrs. Roughsedge; and she inquired minutely of
Hugh when the next meet was to be, that she might take her guest to
see it.

"Fanny will be just as new to it all as I!" she said. "That's so nice,
isn't it?" Then she offered Mrs. Roughsedge cake, and looked at her
askance with a hanging head. "Have you heard--about the Vicar?"

Mrs. Roughsedge admitted it.

"I did lose my temper," said Diana, repentantly. "But _really!_--papa
used to tell me it was a sign of weakness to say violent things you
couldn't prove. Wasn't it Lord Shaftesbury that said some book he didn't
like was 'vomited out of the jaws of hell'? Well, the Vicar said things
very like that. He did indeed!"

"Oh no, my dear, no!" cried Mrs. Roughsedge, disturbed by the quotation,
even, of such a remark. Hugh Roughsedge grinned. Diana,
however, insisted.

"Of course, I would have given them up. Only I just happened to say that
papa always read everything he could by those two men--and then"--she
flushed--"Well, I don't exactly remember what Mr. Lavery said. But I
know that when he'd said it I wouldn't have given up either of those
books for the world!"

"I hope, Miss Mallory, you won't think of giving them up," said Hugh,
with vigor. "It will be an excellent thing for Lavery."

Mrs. Roughsedge, as the habitual peacemaker of the village, said hastily
that Dr. Roughsedge should talk to the Vicar. Of course, he must not be
allowed to do anything so foolish as to withdraw from the Club, or the
Miss Bertrams either."

"Oh! my goodness," cried Diana, hiding her face--and then raising it,
crimson. "The Miss Bertrams, too! Why, it's only six weeks since I
first came to this place, and now I'm setting it by the ears!"

Her aspect of mingled mirth and dismay had in it something so childish
and disarming that Mrs. Roughsedge could only wish the Vicar had been
there to see. His heretical parishioner fell into meditation.

"What can I do? If I could only be sure that he would never say things
like that to me again--"

"But he will!" said Captain Roughsedge. "Don't give in, Miss Mallory."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Roughsedge, as the door opened, "shall we ask Mr.
Marsham?"

Diana turned with a startled movement. It was evident that Marsham was
not expected. But Mrs. Roughsedge also inferred from a shrewd
observation of her hostess that he was not unwelcome. He had, in fact,
looked in on his way home from hunting to give a message from his
mother; that, at least, was the pretext. Hugh Roughsedge, reading him
with a hostile eye, said to himself that if it hadn't been Lady Lucy it
would have been something else. As it happened, he was quite as well
aware as his mother that Marsham's visits to Beechcote of late had been
far more frequent than mere neighborliness required.

Marsham was in hunting dress, and made his usual handsome and energetic
impression. Diana treated him with great self-possession, asking after
Mr. Ferrier, who had just returned to Tallyn for the last fortnight
before the opening of Parliament, and betraying to the Roughsedges that
she was already on intimate terms with Lady Lucy, who was lending her
patterns for her embroidery, driving over once or twice a week, and
advising her about various household affairs. Mrs. Roughsedge, who had
been Diana's first protector, saw herself supplanted--not without a
little natural chagrin.

The controversy of the moment was submitted to Marsham, who decided
hotly against the Vicar, and implored Diana to stand firm. But somehow
his intervention only hastened the compunction that had already begun to
work in her. She followed the Roughsedges to the door when
they departed.

"What must I do?" she said, sheepishly, to Mrs. Roughsedge. "Write to
him?"

"The Vicar? Oh, dear Miss Mallory, the doctor will settle it. You
_would_-change the books?"

"Mother!" cried Hugh Roughsedge, indignantly, "we're all bullied--you
know we are--and now you want Miss Mallory bullied too."

"'Who would be free, themselves must strike the blow,'" laughed Marsham,
in the background, as he stood toying with his tea beside Mrs. Colwood.

Diana shook her head.

"I can't be friends with him," she said, naively, "for a long long time.
But I'll rewrite my list. And _must_ I go and call on the Miss Bertrams
to-morrow?"

Her mock and smiling submission, as she stood, slender and lovely, amid
the shadows of the hall, seemed to Hugh Roughsedge, as he looked back
upon her, the prettiest piece of acting. Then she turned, and he knew
that she was going back to Marsham. At the same moment he saw Mrs.
Colwood's little figure disappearing up the main stairway. Frowning and
silent, he followed his mother out of the house.

Diana looked round rather wistfully for Mrs. Colwood as she re-entered
the room; but that lady had many letters to write.

Marsham noticed Mrs. Colwood's retreat with a thrill of pleasure. Yet
even now he had no immediate declaration in his mind. The course that he
had marked out for himself had been exactly followed. There had been no
"hurrying it." Only in these weeks before Parliament, while matters of
great moment to his own political future were going forward, and his
participation in them was not a whit less cool and keen than it had
always been, he had still found abundant time for the wooing of Diana.
He had assumed a kind of guardian's attitude in the matter of her
relations to the Vavasours--who in business affairs had proved both
greedy and muddle-headed; he had flattered her woman's vanity by the
insight he had freely allowed her into the possibilities and the
difficulties of his own Parliamentary position, and of his relations to
Ferrier; and he had kept alive a kind of perpetual interest and flutter
in her mind concerning him, by the challenge he was perpetually offering
to the opinions and ideas in which she had been brought up--while yet
combining it with a respect toward her father's memory, so courteous,
and, in truth, sincere, that she was alternately roused and subdued.

On this February evening, it seemed to his exultant sense, as Diana sat
chatting to him beside the fire, that his power with her had
substantially advanced, that by a hundred subtle signs--quite
involuntary on her part--she let him understand that his personality was
pressing upon hers, penetrating her will, transforming her gay and
fearless composure.

For instance, he had been lending her books representing his own
political and social opinions. To her they were anathema. Her father's
soul in her regarded them as forces of the pit, rising in ugly clamor to
drag down England from her ancient place. But to hate and shudder at
them from afar had been comparatively easy. To battle with them at close
quarters, as presented by this able and courteous antagonist, who passed
so easily and without presumption from the opponent into the teacher,
was a more teasing matter. She had many small successes and
side-victories, but they soon ceased to satisfy her, in presence of the
knowledge and ability of a man who had been ten years in Parliament, and
had made for himself--she began to understand--a considerable position
there. She was hotly loyal to her own faiths; but she was conscious of
what often seemed to her a dangerous and demoralizing interest in his! A
demoralizing pleasure, too, in listening--in sometimes laying aside the
watchful, hostile air, in showing herself sweet, yielding, receptive.

These melting moods, indeed, were rare. But no one watching the two on
this February evening could have failed to see in Diana signs of
happiness, of a joyous and growing dependence, of something that refused
to know itself, that masqueraded now as this feeling, now as that, yet
was all the time stealing upon the sources of life, bewitching blood and
brain. Marsham lamented that in ten days he and his mother must be in
town for the Parliamentary season. Diana clearly endeavored to show
nothing more than a polite regret. But in the half-laughing,
half-forlorn requests she made to him for advice in certain practical
matters which must be decided in his absence she betrayed herself; and
Marsham found it amazingly sweet that she should do so. He said eagerly
that he and Lady Lucy must certainly come down to Tallyn every alternate
Sunday, so that the various small matters he had made Diana intrust to
him--the finding of a new gardener; negotiations with the Vavasours,
connected with the cutting of certain trees--or the repairs of a ruinous
gable of the house--should still be carried forward with all possible
care and speed. Whereupon Diana inquired how such things could possibly
engage the time and thought of a politician in the full stream of
Parliament.

"They will be much more interesting to me," said Marsham, in a low
steady voice, "than anything I shall be doing in Parliament."

Diana rose, in sudden vague terror--as though with the roar in her ears
of rapids ahead--murmured some stammering thanks, walked across the
room, lowered a lamp which was flaming, and recovered all her smiling
self-possession. But she talked no more of her own affairs. She asked
him, instead, for news of Miss Vincent.

Marsham answered, with difficulty. If there had been sudden alarm in
her, there had been a sudden tumult of the blood in him. He had almost
lost his hold upon himself; the great words had been almost spoken.

But when the conversation had been once more guided into normal
channels, he felt that he had escaped a risk. No, no, not yet! One false
step--one check--and he might still find himself groping in the dark.
Better let himself be missed a little!--than move too soon. As to
Roughsedge--he had kept his eyes open. There was nothing there.

So he gave what news of Marion Vincent he had to give. She was still in
Bethnal Green working at her inquiry, often very ill, but quite
indomitable. As soon as Parliament began she had promised to do some
secretarial work for Marsham on two or three mornings a week.

"I saw her last week," said Marsham. "She always asks after you."

"I am so glad! I fell in love with her. Surely"--Diana
hesitated--"surely--some day--she will marry Mr. Frobisher?"

Marsham shook his head.

"I think she feels herself too frail."

Diana remembered that little scene of intimacy--of tenderness--and
Marsham's words stirred about her, as it were, winds of sadness and
renunciation. She shivered under them a little, feeling, almost
guiltily, the glow of her own life, the passion of her own hopes.

Marsham watched her as she sat on the other side of the fire, her
beautiful head a little bent and pensive, the firelight playing on the
oval of her cheek. How glad he was that he had not spoken!--that the
barrier between them still held. A man may find heaven or hell on the
other side of it. But merely to have crossed it makes life the poorer.
One more of the great, the irrevocable moments spent and done--yielded
to devouring time. He hugged the thought that it was still before him.
The very timidity and anxiety he felt were delightful to him; he had
never felt them before. And once more--involuntarily, disagreeably--he
thought of Alicia Drake, and of the passages between them in the
preceding summer.

Alicia was still at Tallyn, and her presence was, in truth, a constant
embarrassment to him. Lady Lucy, on the contrary, had a strong sense of
family duty toward her young cousin, and liked to have her for long
visits at Tallyn or in London. Marsham believed his mother knew nothing
of the old flirtation between them. Alicia, indeed, rarely showed any
special interest in him now. He admitted her general discretion. Yet
occasionally she would put in a claim, a light word, now mocking, now
caressing, which betrayed the old intimacy, and Marsham would wince
under it. It was like a creeping touch in the dark. He had known what it
was to feel both compunction and a kind of fear with regard to Alicia.
But, normally, he told himself that both feelings were ridiculous. He
had done nothing to compromise either himself or her. He had certainly
flirted with Alicia; but he could not honestly feel that the chief part
in the matter had been his.

These thoughts passed in a flash. The clock struck, and regretfully he
got up to take his leave. Diana rose, too, with a kindling face.

"My cousin will be here directly!" she said, joyously.

"Shall I find her installed when I come next time?"

"I mean to keep her as long--as long--as ever I can!"

Marsham held her hand close and warm a moment, felt her look waver a
second beneath his, and then, with a quick and resolute step, he
went his way.

He was just putting on his coat in the outer hall when there was a sound
of approaching wheels. A carriage stopped at the door, to which the
butler hurried. As he opened it Marsham saw in the light of the porch
lamp the face of a girl peering out of the carriage window. It was a
little awkward. His own horse was held by a groom on the other side of
the carriage. There was nothing to do but to wait till the young lady
had passed. He drew to one side.

Miss Merton descended. There was just time for Marsham to notice an
extravagant hat, smothered in ostrich feathers, a large-featured, rather
handsome face, framed in a tangled mass of black hair, a pair of sharp
eyes that seemed to take in hungrily all they saw--the old hall, the
butler, and himself, as he stood in the shadow. He heard the new guest
speak to the butler about her luggage. Then the door of the inner hall
opened, and he caught Diana's hurrying feet, and her cry--

"Fanny!"

He passed the lady and escaped. As he rode away into the darkness of the
lanes he was conscious of an impression which had for the moment checked
the happy flutter of blood and pulse. Was _that_ the long-expected
cousin? Poor Diana! A common-looking, vulgar young woman--with a most
unpleasant voice and accent. An unpleasant manner, too, to the
servants--half arrogant, half familiar. What a hat!--and what a
fringe!--worthy of some young "lidy" in the Old Kent Road! The thought
of Diana sitting at table with such a person on equal terms pricked him
with annoyance; for he had all his mother's fastidiousness, though it
showed itself in different forms. He blamed Mrs. Colwood--Diana ought to
have been more cautiously guided. The thought of all the tender
preparation made for the girl was both amusing and repellent.

Miss Merton, he understood, was Diana's cousin on the mother's side--the
daughter of her mother's sister. A swarm of questions suddenly arose in
his mind--questions not hitherto entertained. Had there been, in fact, a
_mésalliance_--some disagreeable story--which accounted, perhaps, for
the self-banishment of Mr. Mallory?--the seclusion in which Diana had
been brought up? The idea was most unwelcome, but the sight of Fanny
Merton had inevitably provoked it. And it led on to a good many other
ideas and speculations of a mingled sort connected, now with Diana, now
with recollections, pleasant and unpleasant, of the eight or ten years
which had preceded his first sight of her.

For Oliver Marsham was now thirty-six, and he had not reached that age
without at least one serious attempt--quite apart from any passages with
Alicia Drake--to provide himself with a wife. Some two years before this
date he had proposed to a pretty girl of great family and no money, with
whom he supposed himself ardently in love. She, after some hesitation,
had refused him, and Marsham had had some reason to believe that in
spite of his mother's great fortune and his own expectations, his
_provenance_ had not been regarded as sufficiently aristocratic by the
girl's fond parents. Perhaps had he--and not Lady Lucy--been the owner
of Tallyn and its £18,000 a year, things might have been different. As
it was, Marsham had felt the affront, as a strong and self-confident man
was likely to feel it; and it was perhaps in reaction from it that he
had allowed himself those passages with Alicia Drake which had, at
least, soothed his self-love.

In this affair Marsham had acted on one of the convictions with which he
had entered public life--that there is no greater help to a politician
than a distinguished, clever, and, if possible, beautiful wife.
Distinction, Radical though he was, had once seemed to him a matter of
family and "connection." But after the failure of his first attempt,
"family," in the ordinary sense, had ceased to attract him. Personal
breeding, intelligence, and charm--these, after all, are what the
politician who is already provided with money, wants to secure in his
wife; without, of course, any obvious disqualification in the way of
family history. Diana, as he had first met her among the woods at
Portofino, side by side with her dignified and gentlemanly father, had
made upon him precisely that impression of personal distinction of which
he was in search--upon his mother also.

The appearance and the accent, however, of the cousin had struck him
with surprise; nor was it till he was nearing Tallyn that he succeeded
in shaking off the impression. Absurd! Everybody has some relations that
require to be masked--like the stables, or the back door--in a skilful
arrangement of life. Diana, his beautiful, unapproachable Diana, would
soon, no doubt, be relieved of this young lady, with whom she could have
no possible interests in common. And, perhaps, on one of his week-end
visits to Tallyn and Beechcote, he might get a few minutes' conversation
with Mrs. Colwood which would throw some light on the new guest.

       *       *       *       *       *

Diana meanwhile, assisted by Mrs. Colwood, was hovering about her
cousin. She and Miss Merton had kissed each other in the hall, and then
Diana, seized with a sudden shyness, led her guest into the drawing-room
and stood there speechless, a little; holding her by both hands and
gazing at her; mastered by feeling and excitement.

"Well, you _have_ got a queer old place!" said Fanny Merton, withdrawing
herself. She turned and looked about her, at the room, the flowers, the
wide hearth, with its blazing logs, at Mrs. Colwood, and finally
at Diana.

"We are so fond of it already!" said Diana. "Come and get warm." She
settled her guest in a chair by the fire, and took a stool beside her.
"Did you like Devonshire?"

The girl made a little face.

"It was awfully quiet. Oh, my friends, of course, made a lot of fuss
over me--and that kind of thing. But I wouldn't live there, not if
you paid me."

"We're very quiet here," said Diana, timidly. She was examining the face
beside her, with its bright crude color, its bold eyes, and sulky mouth,
slightly underhung.

"Oh, well, you've got some good families about, I guess. I saw one or
two awfully smart carriages waiting at the station."

"There are a good many nice people," murmured Diana. "But there is not
much going on."

"I expect you could invite a good many here if you wanted," said the
girl, once more looking round her. "Whatever made you take this place?"

"I like old things so much," laughed Diana. "Don't you?"

"Well, I don't know. I think there's more style about a new house. You
can have electric light and all that sort of thing."

Diana admitted it, and changed the subject. "Had the journey been cold?"

Freezing, said Miss Merton. But a young man had lent her his fur coat to
put over her knees, which had improved matters. She laughed--rather
consciously.

"He lives near here. I told him I was sure you'd ask him to something,
if he called."

"Who was he?"

With much rattling of the bangles on her wrists, Fanny produced a card
from her hand-bag. Diana looked at it in dismay. It was the card of a
young solicitor whom she had once met at a local tea-party, and decided
to avoid thenceforward.

She said nothing, however, and plunged into inquiries as to her aunt and
cousins.

"Oh! they're all right. Mother's worried out of her life about money;
but, then, we've always been that poor you couldn't skin a cent off us,
so that's nothing new."

Diana murmured sympathy. She knew vaguely that her father had done a
good deal to subsidize these relations. She could only suppose that in
his ignorance he had not done enough.

Meanwhile Fanny Merton had fixed her eyes upon Diana with a curious
hostile look, almost a stare, which had entered them as she spoke of the
family poverty, and persisted as they travelled from Diana's face and
figure to the pretty and spacious room beyond. She examined everything,
in a swift keen scrutiny, and then as the pouncing glance came back to
her cousin, the girl suddenly exclaimed:

"Goodness! but you are like Aunt Sparling!"

Diana flushed crimson. She drew back and said, hurriedly, to Mrs.
Colwood:

"Muriel, would you see if they have taken the luggage up-stairs?"

Mrs. Colwood went at once.

Fanny Merton had herself changed color, and looked a little embarrassed.
She did not repeat her remark, but began to take her furs off, to smooth
her hair deliberately, and settle her bracelets. Diana came nearer to
her as soon as they were alone.

"Do you really think I am like mamma?" she said, tremulously, all her
eyes fixed upon her cousin.

"Well, of course I never saw her!" said Miss Merton, looking down at the
fire. "How could I? But mother has a picture of her, and you're as like
as two peas."

"I never saw any picture of mamma," said Diana; "I don't know at all
what she was like."

"Ah, well--" said Miss Merton, still looking down. Then she stopped, and
said no more. She took out her handkerchief, and began to rub a spot of
mud off her dress. It seemed to Diana that her manner was a little
strange, and rather rude. But she had made up her mind there would be
peculiarities in Fanny, and she did not mean to be repelled by them.

"Shall I take you to your room?" she said. "You must be tired, and we
shall be dining directly."

Miss Merton allowed herself to be led up-stairs, looking curiously round
her at every step.

"I say, you must be well off!" she burst out, as they came to the head
of the stairs, "or you'd never be able to run a place like this!"

"Papa left me all his money," said Diana, coloring again. "I hope he
wouldn't have thought it extravagant."

She passed on in front of her guest, holding a candle. Fanny Merton
followed. At Diana's statement as to her father's money the girl's face
had suddenly resumed its sly hostility. And as Diana walked before her,
Miss Merton again examined the house, the furniture, the pictures; but
this time, and unknown to Diana, with the air of one half jealous and
half contemptuous of all she saw.


Part II

     "_The soberest saints are more stiff-neckèd
     Than the hottest-headed of the wicked._"


CHAPTER VII


"I shall soon be back," said Diana--"very soon. I'll just take this book
to Dr. Roughsedge. You don't mind?"

The question was addressed--in a deprecatory tone--to Mrs. Colwood, who
stood beside her at the Beechcote front door.

Muriel Colwood smiled, and drew the furs closer round the girl's slim
throat.

"I shall mind very much if you don't stay out a full hour and get a good
walk."

Diana ran off, followed by her dog. There was something in the manner
both of the dog and its mistress that seemed to show impetuous
escape--and relief.

"She looks tired out!" said the little companion to herself, as she
turned to enter the hall. "How on earth is she going to get through six
weeks of it?--or six months!"

The house as she walked back through it made upon her the odd impression
of having suddenly lost some of its charm. The peculiar sentiment--as of
a warmly human, yet delicately ordered life, which it had breathed out
so freely only twenty-four hours before, seemed to her quick feeling
to have been somehow obscured or dissipated. All its defects,
old or new--the patches in the panelling, the darkness of the
passages--stood out.

And "all along of Eliza!" All because of Miss Fanny Merton! Mrs. Colwood
recalled the morning--Miss Merton's late arrival at the breakfast-table,
and the discovery from her talk that she was accustomed to breakfast in
bed, waited upon by her younger sisters; her conversation at breakfast,
partly about the prices of clothes and eatables, partly in boasting
reminiscence of her winnings at cards, or in sweepstakes on the "run,"
on board the steamer. Diana had then devoted herself to the display of
the house, and her maid had helped Miss Merton to unpack. The process
had been diversified by raids made by Miss Fanny on Diana's own
wardrobe, which she had inspected from end to end, to an accompaniment
of critical remark. According to her, there was very little that was
really "shick" in it, and Diana should change her dressmaker. The number
of her own dresses was large; and as to their colors and make, Mrs.
Colwood, who had helped to put away some of them, could only suppose
that tropical surroundings made tropical tastes. At the same time the
contrast between Miss Fanny's wardrobe, and what she herself reported,
in every tone of grievance and disgust, of the family poverty, was
surprising, though no doubt a great deal of the finery had been as
cheaply bought as possible.

By luncheon-time Diana had shown some symptoms of fatigue, perhaps--Mrs.
Colwood hoped!--of revolt. She had been already sharply questioned as to
the number of servants she kept and the wages they received, as to the
people in the neighborhood who gave parties, and the ages and incomes of
such young or unmarried men as might be met with at these parties. Miss
Merton had boasted already of two love-affairs--one the unsuccessful
engagement in Barbadoes, the other--"a near thing"--which had enlivened
the voyage to England; and she had extracted a promise from Diana to ask
the young solicitor she had met with in the train--Mr. Fred Birch--to
lunch, without delay. Meanwhile she had not--of her own initiative--said
one word of those educational objects, in pursuit of which she was
supposed to have come to England. Diana had proposed to her the names of
certain teachers both of music and languages--names which she had
obtained with much trouble. Miss Fanny had replied, rather carelessly,
that she would think about it.

It was at this that the eager sweetness of Diana's manner to her cousin
had shown its first cooling. And Mrs. Colwood had curiously observed
that at the first sign of shrinking on her part, Miss Fanny's demeanor
had instantly changed. It had become sugared and flattering to a degree.
Everything in the house was "sweet"; the old silver used at table, with
the Mallory crest, was praised extravagantly; the cooking no less. Yet
still Diana's tired silence had grown; and the watching eyes of this
amazing young woman had been, in Mrs. Colwood's belief, now insolently
and now anxiously, aware of it.

Insolence!--that really, if one came to think of it, had been the note
of Miss Merton's whole behavior from the beginning--an ill-concealed,
hardly restrained insolence, toward the girl, two years older than
herself, who had received her with such tender effusion, and was,
moreover, in a position to help her so materially. What could it--what
did it mean?

Mrs. Colwood stood at the foot of the stairs a moment, lost in a trance
of wonderment. Her heart was really sore for Diana's disappointment, for
the look in her face, as she left the house. How on earth could the
visit be shortened and the young lady removed?

The striking of three o'clock reminded Muriel Colwood that she was to
take the new-comer out for an hour. They had taken coffee in the
morning-room up-stairs, Diana's own sitting-room, where she wrote her
letters and followed out the lines of reading her father had laid down
for her. Mrs. Colwood returned thither; found Miss Merton, as it seemed
to her, in the act of examining the letters in Diana's blotting-book;
and hastily proposed to her to take a turn in the garden.

Fanny Merton hesitated, looked at Mrs. Colwood a moment dubiously, and
finally walked up to her.

"Oh, I don't care about going out, it's so cold and nasty. And, besides,
I--I want to talk to you."

"Miss Mallory thought you might like to see the old gardens," said Mrs.
Colwood. "But if you would rather not venture out, I'm afraid I must go
and write some letters."

"Why, you were writing letters all the morning! My fingers would drop
off if I was to go on at it like that. Do you like being a companion? I
should think it was rather beastly--if you ask me. At home they did talk
about it for me. But I said: 'No, thank you! My own mistress, if
you please!'"

The speaker sat down by the fire, raised her skirt of purple cloth, and
stretched a pair of shapely feet to the warmth. Her look was
good-humored and lazy.

"I am very happy here," said Mrs. Colwood, quietly. "Miss Mallory is so
charming and so kind."

Miss Fanny cleared her throat, poked the fire with the tip of her shoe,
fidgeted with her dress, and finally said--abruptly:

"I say--have all the people about here called?"

The tone was so low and furtive that Mrs. Colwood, who had been putting
away some embroidery silks which had been left on the table by Diana,
turned in some astonishment. She found the girl's eyes fixed upon
her--eager and hungry.

"Miss Mallory has had a great many visitors"--she tried to pitch her
words in the lightest possible tone--"I am afraid it will take her a
long time to return all her calls."

"Well, I'm glad it's all right about that!--anyway. As mamma said, you
never know. People are so queer about these things, aren't they? As if
it was Diana's fault!"

Through all her wrath, Muriel Colwood was conscious of a sudden pang of
alarm--which was, in truth, the reawakening of something already vaguely
felt or surmised. She looked rather sternly at her companion.

"I really don't know what you mean, Miss Merton. And I never discuss
Miss Mallory's affairs. Perhaps you will kindly allow me to go to
my letters."

She was moving away when the girl beside her laughed again--rather
angrily--and Mrs. Colwood paused, touched again by instinctive fear.

"Oh, of course if I'm not to say a word about it--I'm not--that's all!
Well, now, look here--Diana needn't suppose that I've come all this way
just for fun. I had to say that about lessons, and that kind of thing--I
didn't want to set her against me--but I've ... Well!--why should I be
ashamed, I should like to know?"--she broke out, shrilly, sitting erect,
her face flushing deeply, her eyes on fire. "If some one owes you
something--why shouldn't you come and get it? Diana owes my mother
_money!_--a lot of money!--and we can't afford to lose it. Mother's
awfully sweet about Diana--she said, 'Oh no, it's unkind'--but I say
it's unkind to _us_, not to speak, when we all want money so bad--and
there are the boys to bring up--and--"

"Miss Merton--I'm very sorry--but really I cannot let you talk to me of
Miss Mallory's private affairs. It would neither be right--nor
honorable. You must see that. She will be in by tea-time herself.
Please!--"

Muriel's tone was gentle; but her attitude was resolution itself. Fanny
Merton stared at the frail slim creature in her deep widow's black; her
color rose.

"Oh, very well. Do as you like!--I'm agreeable! Only I thought
perhaps--as you and Diana seem to be such tremendous friends--you'd like
to talk it over with me first. I don't know how much Diana knows; and I
thought perhaps you'd give me a hint. Of course, she'll know all there
was in the papers. But my mother claims a deal more than the trust
money--jewels, and that kind of thing. And Uncle Mallory treated us
shamefully about them--_shamefully_! That's why I'm come over. I made
mother let me! Oh, she's so soft, is mother, she'd let anybody off. But
I said, 'Diana's rich, and she _ought_ to make it up to us! If nobody
else'll ask her, I will!'"

The girl had grown pale, but it was a pallor of determination and of
passion. Mrs. Colwood had listened to the torrent of words, held against
her will, first by astonishment, then by something else. If it should be
her duty to listen?--for the sake of this young life, which in these few
weeks had so won upon her heart?

She retraced a few steps.

"Miss Merton, I do not understand what you have been saying. If you have
any claim upon Miss Mallory, you know well that she is the soul of
honor and generosity. Her one desire is to give everybody _more_ than
their due. She is _too_ generous--I often have to protect her. But, as I
have said before, it is not for me to discuss any claim you may have
upon her."

Fanny Merton was silent for a minute--staring at her companion. Then she
said, abruptly:

"Does she ever talk to you about Aunt Sparling?"

"Her mother?"

The girl nodded.

Mrs. Colwood hesitated--then said, unwillingly: "No. She has mentioned
her once or twice. One can see how she missed her as a child--how she
misses her still."

"Well, I don't know what call she has to miss her!" cried Fanny Merton,
in a note of angry scorn. "A precious good thing she died when she
did--for everybody."

Mrs. Colwood felt her hands trembling. In the growing darkness of the
winter afternoon it seemed to her startled imagination as though this
black-eyed black-browed girl, with her scowling passionate face, were
entering into possession of the house and of Diana--an evil and invading
power. She tried to choose her words carefully.

"Miss Mallory has never talked to me of her parents. And, if you will
excuse me, Miss Merton--if there is anything sad--or tragic--in their
history, I would rather hear it from Miss Mallory than from you!"

"Anything sad?--anything _sad_? Well, upon my word!--"

The girl breathed fast. So, involuntarily, did Mrs. Colwood.

"You don't mean to say"--the speaker threw her body forward, and brought
her face close to Mrs. Colwood--"you are not going to tell me that you
don't know about Diana's mother?"

She laid her hand upon Muriel's dress.

"Why should I know? Please, Miss Merton!" and with a resolute movement
Mrs. Colwood tried to withdraw her dress.

"Why, _everybody_ knows!--everybody!--everybody! Ask anybody in the
world about Juliet Sparling--and you'll see. In the saloon, coming over,
I heard people talk about her all one night--they didn't know who _I_
was--and of course I didn't tell. And there was a book in the ship's
library--_Famous Trials_--or some name of that sort--with the whole
thing in it. You don't know--about--Diana's _mother_?"

The fierce, incredulous emphasis on the last word, for a moment,
withered all reply on Mrs. Colwood's lips. She walked to the door
mechanically, to see that it was fast shut. Then she returned. She sat
down beside Diana's guest, and it might have been seen that she had
silenced fear and dismissed hesitation. "After all," she said, with
quiet command, "I think I will ask you, Miss Merton, to explain what
you mean?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The February afternoon darkened round the old house. There was a light
powdering of snow on grass and trees. Yet still there were breathings
and bird-notes in the air, and tones of color in the distance, which
obscurely prophesied the spring. Through the wood behind the house the
snow-drops were rising, in a white invading host, over the ground
covered with the red-brown deposit of innumerable autumns. Above their
glittering white, rose an undergrowth of laurels and box, through which
again shot up the magnificent trunks--gray and smooth and round--of the
great beeches, which held and peopled the country-side, heirs of its
ancestral forest. Any one standing in the wood could see, through the
leafless trees, the dusky blues and rich violets of the encircling
hill--hung there, like the tapestry of some vast hall; or hear from time
to time the loud wings of the wood-pigeons as they clattered through the
topmost boughs.

Diana was still in the village. She had been spending her hour of escape
mostly with the Roughsedges. The old doctor among his books was now
sufficiently at his ease with her to pet her, teach her, and, when
necessary, laugh at her. And Mrs. Roughsedge, however she might feel
herself eclipsed by Lady Lucy, was, in truth, much more fit to minister
to such ruffled feelings as Diana was now conscious of than that
delicate and dignified lady. Diana's disillusion about her cousin was,
so far, no very lofty matter. It hurt; but on her run to the village the
natural common-sense Mrs. Colwood had detected had wrestled stoutly with
her wounded feelings. Better take it with a laugh! To laugh, however,
one must be distracted; and Mrs. Roughsedge, bubbling over with gossip
and good-humor, was distraction personified. Stern Justice, in the
person of Lord M.'s gamekeeper, had that morning brought back Diana's
two dogs in leash, a pair of abject and convicted villains, from the
delirium of a night's hunting. The son of Miss Bertram's coachman had
only just missed an appointment under the District Council by one place
on the list of candidates. A "Red Van" bursting with Socialist
literature had that morning taken up its place on the village green; and
Diana's poor housemaid, in payment for a lifetime's neglect, must now
lose every tooth in her head, according to the verdict of the local
dentist, an excellent young man, in Mrs. Roughsedge's opinion, but
ready to give you almost too much pulling out for your money. On all
these topics she overflowed--with much fun and unfailing good-humor. So
that after half an hour spent with Mrs. Roughsedge and Hugh in the
little drawing-room at the White Cottage, Diana's aspect was very
different from what it had been when she arrived.

Hugh, however, had noticed her pallor and depression. He was obstinately
certain that Oliver Marsham was not the man to make such a girl happy.
Between the rich Radical member and the young officer--poor, slow of
speech and wits, and passionately devoted to the old-fashioned ideals
and traditions in which he had been brought up--there was a natural
antagonism. But Roughsedge's contempt for his brilliant and successful
neighbor--on the ground of selfish ambitions and unpatriotic
trucklings--was, in truth, much more active than anything Marsham had
ever shown--or felt--toward himself. For in the young soldier there
slept potentialities of feeling and of action, of which neither he nor
others were as yet aware.

Nevertheless, he faced the facts. He remembered the look with which
Diana had returned to the Beechcote drawing-room, where Marsham awaited
her, the day before--and told himself not to be a fool.

Meanwhile he had found an opportunity in which to tell her, unheard by
his parents, that he was practically certain of his Nigerian
appointment, and must that night break it to his father and mother. And
Diana had listened like a sister, all sympathy and kind looks, promising
in the young man's ear, as he said good-bye at the garden gate, that she
would come again next day to cheer his mother up.

He stood looking after her as she walked away; his hands in his pockets,
a flush on his handsome face. How her coming had glorified and
transformed the place! No womanish nonsense, too, about this going of
his!--though she knew well that it meant fighting. Only a kindling of
the eyes--a few questions as practical as they were eager--and then that
fluttering of the soft breath which he had noticed as she bent over
his mother.

But she was not for him! Thus it is that women--the noblest and the
dearest--throw themselves away. She, with all the right and proper
feelings of an Englishwoman, to mate with this plausible Radical and
Little Englander! Denis but the Abbey, on quitting that part of it devoted
to education, they proceeded to visit the church, with its various
objects of interest; and as De Chaulieu's thoughts were now forced
into another direction, his cheerfulness began insensibly to return.

Natalie looked so beautiful, too, and the affection betwixt the two young
sisters was so pleasant to behold! And they spent a couple of hours
wandering about with Hortense, who was almost as well informed as
the Suisse, till the brazen doors were open which admitted them to
the royal vault.

Satisfied, at length, with what they had seen, they began to think
of returning to the inn, the more especially as De Chaulieu, who had
not eaten a morsel of food since the previous evening, owned to being
hungry; so they directed their steps to the door, lingering here and there
as they went, to inspect a monument or a painting, when, happening
to turn his head aside to see if his wife, who had stopt to take a last
look at the tomb of King Dagobert, was following, he beheld with horror
the face of Jacques Rollet appearing from behind a column! At the same
instant, his wife joined him, and took his arm, inquiring if he
was not very much delighted with what he had seen.

He attempted to say yes, but the word would not be forced out; and
staggering out of the door, he alleged that a sudden faintness had
overcome him.

They conducted him to the Hôtel, but Natalie now became seriously alarmed;
and well she might.

His complexion looked ghastly, his limbs shook, and his features bore an
expression of indescribable horror and anguish. What could be the
meaning of so extraordinary a change in the gay, witty, prosperous De
Chaulieu, who, till that morning, seemed not to have a care in the world?
For, plead illness as he might, she felt certain, from the expression
of his features, that his sufferings were not of the body but of the
mind; and, unable to imagine any reason for such extraordinary
manifestations, of which she had never before seen a symptom, but a
sudden aversion to herself, and regret for the step he had taken, her
pride took the alarm, and, concealing the distress she really
felt, she began to assume a haughty and reserved manner toward him, which
he naturally interpreted into an evidence of anger and contempt.
The dinner was placed upon the table, but Du Chaulieu's appetite of
which he had lately boasted, was quite gone, nor was his wife better able
to eat.

The young sister alone did justice to the repast; but although the
bridegroom could not eat, he could swallow champagne in such copious
draughts, that ere long the terror and remorse that the apparition
of Jacques Rollet had awakened in his breast were drowned in
intoxication.

Amazed and indignant, poor Natalie sat silently observing this elect
of her heart, till overcome with disappointment and grief, she quitted
the room with her sister, and retired to another apartment, where she
gave free vent to her feelings in tears.

After passing a couple of hours in confidences and lamentations,
they recollected that the hours of liberty granted, as an especial
favor, to Mademoiselle Hortense, had expired; but ashamed to exhibit
her husband in his present condition to the eyes of strangers,
Natalie prepared to re-conduct her to the _Maison Royale_ herself.

Looking into the dining-room as they passed, they saw De Chaulieu lying
on a sofa fast asleep, in which state he continued when his wife
returned.

At length, however, the driver of their carriage begged to know if Monsieur
and Madame were ready to return to Paris, and it became necessary to
arouse him. The transitory effects of the champagne had now sub sided;
but when De Chaulieu recollected what had happened, nothing could exceed
his shame and mortification. So engrossing indeed were these sensations
that they quite overpowered his previous ones, and, in his present
vexation, he, for the moment, forgot his fears.

He knelt at his wife's feet, begged her pardon a thousand times, swore
that he adored her, and declared that the illness and the effect
of the wine had been purely the consequences of fasting and
over-work.

It was not the easiest thing in the world to reassure a woman whose
pride, affection, and taste, had been so severely wounded; but Natalie
tried to believe, or to appear to do so, and a sort of reconciliation
ensued, not quite sincere on the part of the wife, and very humbling
on the part of the husband. Under these circumstances it was impossible
that he should recover his spirits or facility of manner; his gayety
was forced, his tenderness constrained; his heart was heavy within
him; and ever and anon the source whence all this disappointment
and woe had sprung would recur to his perplexed, tortured mind.

Thus mutually pained and distrustful, they returned to Paris, which
they reached about nine o'clock. In spite of her depression, Natalie,
who had not seen her new apartments, felt some curiosity about them,
whilst De Chaulieu anticipated a triumph in exhibiting the elegant
home he had prepared for her.

With some alacrity, therefore, they stepped out of the carriage,
the gates of the Hôtel were thrown open, the concierge rang the
bell which announced to the servants that their master and mistress
had arrived, and whilst these domestics appeared above, holding
lights over the balusters, Natalie, followed by her husband, ascended
the stairs.

But when they reached the landing-place of the first flight, they saw the
figure of a man standing in a corner as if to make way for them; the
flash from above fell upon his face, and again Antoine de Chaulieu
recognized the features of Jacques Rollet!

From the circumstance of his wife's preceding him, the figure was not
observed by De Chaulieu till he was lifting his foot to place it on the
top stair; the sudden shock caused him to miss the step, and, without
uttering a sound, he fell back, and never stopped till he reached
the stories at the bottom.

The screams of Natalie brought the concierge from below and the maids from
above, and an attempt was made to raise the unfortunate man from the
ground; but with cries of anguish he besought them to desist.

"Let me," he said, "die here!

What a fearful vengeance is thine! Oh, Natalie, Natalie!" he exclaimed
to his wife, who was kneeling beside him, "to win fame, and fortune,
and yourself, I committed a dreadful crime!

With lying words I argued away the life of a fellow-creature, whom,
whilst I uttered them, I half believed to be innocent: and now,
when I have attained all I desired, and reached the summit of my
hopes, the Almighty has sent him back upon the earth to blast me with
the sight. Three times this day--three times this day! Again!
again!"

--and as he spoke, his wild and dilated eyes fixed themselves on one
of the individuals that surrounded him.

"He is delirious," said they.

"No," said the stranger! "What he says is true enough,--at least in part;"
and bending over the expiring man, he added, "May Heaven forgive
you, Antoine de Chaulieu!

I was not executed; one who well knew my innocence saved my life.

I may name him, for he is beyond the reach of the law now,--it was
Claperon, the jailer, who loved Claudine, and had himself killed Alphonse
de Bellefonds from jealousy.
An unfortunate wretch had been several years in the jail for a murder
committed during the frenzy of a fit of insanity. Long confinement had
reduced him to idiocy. To save my life Claperon substituted the
senseless being for me, on the scaffold, and he was executed in my
stead. He has quitted the country, and I have been a vagabond on
the face of the earth ever since that time. At length I obtained, through
the assistance of my sister, the situation of concierge in the Hôtel
Marboeuf, in the Rue Grange Batelière. I entered on my new place
yesterday evening, and was desired to awaken the gentleman on the third
floor at seven o'clock.

When I entered the room to do so, you were asleep, but before I had time
to speak you awoke, and I recognized your features in the glass. Knowing
that I could not vindicate my innocence if you chose to seize me, I fled,
and seeing an omnibus starting for St. Denis, I got on it with a
vague idea of getting on to Calais, and crossing the Channel to
England. But having only a franc or two in my pocket, or indeed in the
world, I did not know how to procure the means of going forward; and
whilst I was lounging about the place, forming first one plan and then
another, I saw you in the church, and concluding you wore in pursuit
of me, I thought the best way of eluding your vigilance was to make my
way back to Paris as fast as I could; so I set off instantly, and
walked all the way; but having no money to pay my night's lodging,
I came here to borrow a couple of livres of my sister Claudine, who
lives in the fifth story."

"Thank Heaven!" exclaimed the dying man; "that sin is off my soul!
Natalie, dear wife, farewell! Forgive! forgive all!"
These were the last words he uttered; the priest, who had been summoned
in haste, held up the cross before his failing sight; a few strong
convulsions shook the poor bruised and mangled frame; and then all was
still.

And thus ended the Young Advocate's Wedding Day

.

* * * * *
[FROM DICKENS'S HOUSEHOLD WORDS FOR JUNE 29.]
THE POWER OF MERCY.

Quiet enough, in general, is the quaint old town of Lamborough.
Why all this bustle to-day?

Along the hedge-bound roads which lead to it, carts, chaises, vehicles
of every description are jogging along filled with countrymen; and
here and there the scarlet cloak or straw bonnet of some female
occupying a chair, placed somewhat unsteadily behind them, contrasts
gaily with the dark coats, or gray smock-frocks of the front row;
from every cottage of the suburb, some individuals join the stream,
which rolls on increasing through the streets till it reaches the
castle.

The ancient moat teems with idlers, and the hill opposite, usually the
quiet domain of a score or two of peaceful sheep, partakes of the
surrounding agitation.

The voice of the multitude which surrounds the court-house, sounds like
the murmur of the sea, till suddenly it is raised to a sort of shout.
John West, the terror of the surrounding country, the sheep-stealer
and burglar, had been found guilty.

"What is the sentence?" is asked by a hundred voices.

The answer is "Transportation for Life."

But there was one standing aloof on the hill, whose inquiring eye
wandered over the crowd with indescribable anguish, whose pallid cheek
grew more and more ghastly at every denunciation of the culprit, and
who, when at last the sentence was pronounced, fell insensible upon
the green-sward. It was the burglar's son.

When the boy recovered from his swoon, it was late in the afternoon;
he was alone; the faint tinkling of the sheep-bell had again replaced
the sound of the human chorus of expectation, and dread, and
jesting; all was peaceful, he could not understand why he lay there,
feeling so weak and sick.

He raised himself tremulously and looked around, the turf was cut and
spoilt by the trampling of many feet. All his life of the last few months
floated before his memory, his residence in his father's hovel with
ruffianly comrades, the desperate schemes he heard as he pretended to
sleep on his lowly bed, their expeditions at night, masked and armed,
their hasty returns, the news of his father's capture, his own removal
to the house of some female in the town, the court, the trial, the
condemnation.

The father had been a harsh and brutal parent, but he had not positively
ill-used his boy. Of the Great and Merciful Father of the fatherless
the child knew nothing. He deemed himself alone in the world. Yet
grief was not his pervading feeling, nor the shame, of being known as
the son of a transport. It was revenge which burned within him. He
thought of the crowd which had come to feast upon his father's agony;
he longed to tear them to pieces, and he plucked savagely a handful
of the grass on which he leant. Oh, that he were a man! that he could
punish them all--all,--the spectators first the constables, the
judge, the jury, the witnesses,--one of them especially, a clergyman
named Leyton, who had given his evidence more positively, more
clearly, than all the others.

Oh, that he could do that man some injury,--but for him his father
would not have been identified and convicted.

       Suddenly a thought occurred to him,--his eyes sparkled with fierce
delight.

"I know where he lives," he said to himself; "he has the farm and parsonage
of Millwood. I will go there at once,--it is almost dark already. I will
do as I have heard father say he once did to the Squire. I will
set his barns and his house on fire. Yes, yes, he shall burn for
it,--he shall get no more fathers transported."
To procure a box of matches was an easy task, and that was all the
preparation the boy made.

The autumn was far advanced. A cold wind was beginning to moan amongst the
almost leafless trees, and George West's teeth chattered, and his ill-clad
limbs grew numb as he walked along the fields leading to Millwood.
"Lucky it's a dark night; this fine wind will fan the flame nicely,"
he repeated to himself.

The clock was striking nine, but all was quiet as midnight; not
a soul stirring, not a light in the parsonage windows that he could
see. He dared not open the gate, lest the click of the latch should
betray him, so he softly climbed over; but scarcely had he dropped on
the other side of the wall before the loud barking of a dog startled
him. He cowered down behind the hay-rick, scarcely daring to breathe,
expecting each instant that the dog would spring upon him. It was
some time before the boy dared to stir, and as his courage cooled,
his thirst for revenge somewhat subsided also, till he almost determined
to return to Lamborough; but he was too tired, too cold, too
hungry,--besides, the woman would beat him for staying out so late.

What could he do? where should he go? and as the sense of his lonely
and forlorn position returned, so did also the affectionate remembrance
of his father, his hatred of his accusers, his desire to satisfy his
vengeance; and, once more, courageous through anger, he rose, took the
box from his pocket, and boldly drew one of them across the sand-paper.
It flamed; he stuck it hastily in the stack against which he rested,--it
only flickered a little, and went out.

In great trepidation, young West once more grasped the whole of the
remaining matches in his hand and ignited them, but at the same instant
the dog barked.

He hears the gate open, a step is close to him, the matches are extinguished,
the lad makes a desperate effort to escape,--but a strong hand was
laid on his shoulder, and a deep calm voice inquired, "What can
have urged you to such a crime?"

Then calling loudly, the gentleman, without relinquishing his hold, soon
obtained the help of some farming men, who commenced a search with
their lanterns all about the farm.

Of course they found no accomplices, nothing at all but the handful of
half-consumed matches the lad had dropped, and he all that time
stood trembling, and occasionally struggling, beneath the firm, but
not rough grasp of the master who held him.

At last the men were told to return to the house, and thither, by
a different path, was George led till they entered a small,
poorly-furnished room.

The walls were covered with books, as the bright flame of the fire
revealed to the anxious gaze of the little culprit.

The clergyman lit a lamp, and surveyed his prisoner attentively.

The lad's eyes were fixed on the ground, whilst Mr.

Leyton's wandered from his pale, pinched features to his scanty, ragged
attire, through the tatters of which he could discern the thin
limbs quivering from cold or fear; and when at last impelled by
curiosity at the long silence, George looked up, there was something
so sadly compassionate in the stranger's gentle look, that the boy
could scarcely believe that he was really the man whose evidence
had mainly contributed to transport his father.

At the trial he had been unable to see his face, and nothing so
kind had over gazed upon him.

His proud bad feelings were already melting.

"You look half-starved," said Mr. Leyton, "draw nearer to the fire,
you can sit down on that stool whilst I question you; and mind you
answer me the truth.

I am not a magistrate, but of course can easily hand you over to
justice if you will not allow me to benefit you in my own way."

George still stood twisting his ragged cap in his trembling fingers,
and with so much emotion depicted on his face, that the good clergyman
resumed, in still more soothing accents: "I have no wish to do you
anything but good, my poor boy; look up at me, and see if you cannot
trust me; you need not be thus frightened.

I only desire to hear the tale of misery your appearance indicates, to
relieve it if I can."

Here the young culprit's heart smote him. Was this the man whose house he
had tried to burn? On whom he had wished to bring ruin and perhaps
death?

Was it a snare spread for him to lead to confession?

But when he looked on that grave compassionate countenance, he felt
that it was _not_.

"Come, my lad, tell me all."

George had for years heard little but oaths, and curses, and ribald
jests, or the thief's jargon of his father's associates, and had
been constantly cuffed and punished; but the better part of his
nature was not extinguished; and at those words from the mouth of
his _enemy_, he dropped on his knees, and clasping his hands, tried
to speak: but could only sob.

He had not wept before during that day of anguish; and now his tears
gushed forth so freely, his grief was so passionate as he half
knelt, half rested on the floor, that the good questioner saw that
sorrow must have its course ere calm could be restored.

The young penitent still wept, when a knock was heard at the door, and
a lady entered. It was the clergyman's wife; he kissed her as she
asked how he had succeeded with the wicked man in the jail.

"He told me," replied Mr.

Leyton, "that he had a son whose fate tormented him more than his punishment.
Indeed his mind was so distracted respecting the youth, that he was
scarcely able to understand my exhortations. He entreated me with agonizing
energy to save his son from such a life as he had led, and gave
me the address of a woman in whose house he lodged.

I was, however, unable to find the boy in spite of many earnest
inquiries."

"Did you hear his name?" asked the wife.

"George West," was the reply.

At the mention of his name, the boy ceased to sob. Breathlessly he heard
the account of his father's last request, of the benevolent
clergyman's wish to fulfill it.

He started up, ran toward the door, and endeavored to open it; Mr.

Leyton calmly restrained him. "You must not escape," he said.

"I cannot stop here. I cannot bear to look at you.

Let me go!" The lad said this wildly, and shook himself away.

"Why, I intend you nothing but kindness."

A new flood of tears gushed forth; and George West said between his
sobs,
"Whilst you were searching for me to help me, I was trying to burn
you in your house.

I cannot bear it." He sunk on his knees, and covered his face with both
hands.

There was a long silence, for Mr. and Mrs.

Leyton were as much moved as the boy, who was bowed down with
shame and penitence, to which hitherto he had been a stranger.

At last the clergyman asked, "What could have induced you to commit
such a crime?"
Rising suddenly in the excitement of remorse, gratitude, and many feelings
new to him, he hesitated for a moment, and then told his story;
he related his trials, his sins, his sorrows, his supposed wrongs,
his burning anger at the terrible fate of his only parent, and his
rage at the exultation of the crowd: his desolation on recovering
from his swoon, his thirst for vengeance, the attempt to satisfy it.

He spoke with untaught, child-like simplicity, without attempting to
suppress the emotions which successively overcame him.

When he ceased, the lady hastened to the crouching boy, and soothed
him with gentle words.

The very tones of her voice were new to him.

They pierced his heart more acutely than the fiercest of the upbraidings
and denunciations of his old companions.

       He looked on his merciful benefactors with bewildered tenderness.

He kissed Mrs.
Leyton's hand then gently laid on his shoulder. He gazed about like one
in a dream who dreaded to wake. He became faint and staggered.
He was laid gently on a sofa, and Mr. and Mrs.

Leyton left him.

Food was shortly administered to him, and after a time, when his senses
had become sufficiently collected, Mr.

Leyton returned to the study, and explained holy and
beautiful things, which were new to the neglected boy: of the great yet
loving Father; of Him who loved the poor, forlorn wretch, equally with
the richest, and noblest, and happiest; of the force and efficacy
of the sweet beatitude, "Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall
obtain Mercy."
I heard this story from Mr. Leyton, during a visit to him in May.
George West was then head-plowman to a neighboring farmer, one of the
cleanest, best behaved, and moat respected laborers in the parish.
Meanwhile, as Mrs. Colwood knew, Diana had been engaged in
correspondence with her solicitors, who had been giving her some prudent
and rather stringent advice on the subject of income and expenditure.
This morning, so Mrs. Colwood believed, a letter had arrived.

Presently she stole out of her room to the head of the stairs. There she
remained, pale and irresolute, for a little while, listening to the
sounds in the house. But the striking of the hall clock, the sighing of
a stormy wind round the house, and, occasionally, a sound of talking in
the drawing-room, was all she heard.

       *       *       *       *       *

Diana had been busy in the hanging of some last pictures in the
drawing-room--photographs from Italian pictures and monuments. They had
belonged to her father, and had been the dear companions of her
childhood. Each, as she handled it, breathed its own memory; of the
little villa on the Portofino road, with its green shutters, and rooms
closed against the sun; or of the two short visits to Lucca and Florence
she had made with her father.

Among the photographs was one of the "Annunciation" by Donatello, which
glorifies the southern wall of Santa Croce. Diana had just hung it in a
panelled corner, where its silvery brilliance on dark wood made a point
of pleasure for the eye. She lingered before it, wondering whether it
would please _him_ when he came. Unconsciously her life had slipped into
this habit of referring all its pains and pleasures to the unseen
friend--holding with him that constant dialogue of the heart without
which love neither begins nor grows.

Yet she no longer dreamed of discussing Fanny, and the perplexities
Fanny had let loose on Beechcote, with the living Marsham. Money affairs
must be kept to one's self; and somehow Fanny's visit had become neither
more nor less than a money affair.

That morning Diana had received a letter from old Mr. Riley, the head of
the firm of Riley & Bonner--a letter which was almost a lecture. If the
case were indeed urgent, said Mr. Riley, if the money must be found, she
could, of course, borrow on her securities, and the firm would arrange
it for her. But Mr. Riley, excusing himself as her father's old friend,
wrote with his own hand to beg her to consider the matter further. Her
expenses had lately been many, and some of her property might possibly
decline in value during the next few years. A prudent management of her
affairs was really essential. Could not the money be gradually saved out
of income?

Diana colored uncomfortably as she thought of the letter. What did the
dear old man suppose she wanted the money for? It hurt her pride that
she must appear in this spendthrift light to eyes so honest and
scrupulous.

But what could she do? Fanny poured out ugly reports of her mother's
financial necessities to Muriel Colwood; Mrs. Colwood repeated them to
Diana. And the Mertons were Diana's only kinsfolk. The claim of blood
pressed her hard.

Meanwhile, with a shrinking distaste, she had tried to avoid the
personal discussion of the matter with Fanny. The task of curbing the
girl's impatience, day after day, had fallen to Mrs. Colwood.

Diana was still standing in a reverie before the "Annunciation" when the
drawing-room door opened. As she looked round her, she drew herself
sharply together with the movement of a sudden and instinctive
antipathy.

"That's all right," said Fanny Merton, surveying the room with
satisfaction, and closing the door behind her. "I thought I'd find
you alone."

Diana remained nervously standing before the picture, awaiting her
cousin, her eyes wider than usual, one hand at her throat.

"Look here," said Fanny, approaching her, "I want to talk to you."

Diana braced herself. "All right." She threw a look at the clock. "Just
give me time to get tidy before lunch."

"Oh, there's an hour--time enough!"

Diana drew forward an arm-chair for Fanny, and settled herself into the
corner of a sofa. Her dog jumped up beside her, and laid his nose on
her lap.

Fanny held herself straight. Her color under the powder had heightened a
little. The two girls confronted each other, and, vaguely, perhaps, each
felt the strangeness of the situation. Fanny was twenty, Diana
twenty-three. They were of an age when girls are generally under the
guidance or authority of their elders; comparatively little accustomed,
in the normal family, to discuss affairs or take independent decisions.
Yet here they met, alone and untrammelled; as hostess and guest in the
first place; as kinswomen, yet comparative strangers to each other, and
conscious of a secret dislike, each for the other. On the one side, an
exultant and partly cruel consciousness of power; on the other, feelings
of repugnance and revolt, only held in check by the forces of a tender
and scrupulous nature.

Fanny cleared her throat.

"Well, of course, Mrs. Colwood's told me all you've been saying to her.
And I don't say I'm surprised."

Diana opened her large eyes.

"Surprised at what?"

"Surprised--well!--surprised you didn't see your way all at once, and
that kind of thing. I know I'd want to ask a lot of questions--shouldn't
I, just! Why, that's what I expected. But, you see, my time in England's
getting on. I've nothing to say to my people, and they bother my life
out every mail."

"What did you really come to England for?" said Diana, in a low voice.
Her attitude, curled up among the cushions of the sofa, gave her an
almost childish air. Fanny, on the other hand, resplendent in her
scarlet dress and high coiffure, might have been years older than her
cousin. And any stranger watching the face in which the hardness of an
"old campaigner" already strove with youth, would have thought her, and
not Diana, the mistress of the house.

At Diana's question, Fanny's eyes flickered a moment.

"Oh, well, I had lots of things in my mind. But it was the money that
mattered most."

"I see," murmured Diana.

Fanny fidgeted a little with one of the three bead necklaces which
adorned her. Then she broke out:

"Look here, Diana, you've never been poor in your life, so you don't
know what it's like being awfully hard up. But ever since father died,
mother's had a frightful lot of trouble--all of us to keep, and the
boys' schooling to pay, and next to nothing to do it on. Father left
everything in a dreadful muddle. He never had a bit of sense--"

Diana made a sudden movement. Fanny looked at her astonished, expecting
her to speak. Diana, however, said nothing, and the girl resumed:

"I mean, in business. He'd got everything into a shocking state, and
instead of six hundred a year for us--as we'd always been led on to
expect--well, there wasn't three! Then, you know, Uncle Mallory used to
send us money. Well" (she cleared her throat again and looked away from
Diana), "about a year before he died he and father fell out about
something--so _that_ didn't come in any more. Then we thought perhaps
he'd remember us in his will. And that was another disappointment. So,
you see, really mother didn't know where to turn."

"I suppose papa thought he had done all he could," said Diana, in a
voice which tried to keep quite steady. "He never denied any claim he
felt just. I feel I must say that, because you seem to blame papa. But,
of course, I am very sorry for Aunt Bertha."

At the words "claim" and "just" there was a quick change of expression
in Fanny's eyes. She broke out angrily: "Well, you really don't know
about it, Diana, so it's no good talking. And I'm not going to rake up
old things--"

"But if I don't know," said Diana, interrupting, "hadn't you better tell
me? Why did papa and Uncle Merton disagree? And why did you think papa
ought to have left you money?" She bent forward insistently. There was a
dignity--perhaps also a touch of haughtiness--in her bearing which
exasperated the girl beside her. The haughtiness was that of one who
protects the dead. But Fanny's mind was not one that perceived the
finer shades.

"Well, I'm not going to say!" said Fanny, with vehemence. "But I can
tell you, mother _has_ a claim!--and Uncle Mallory _ought_ to have left
us something!"

The instant the words were out she regretted them. Diana abandoned her
childish attitude. She drew herself together, and sat upright on the
edge of the sofa. The color had come flooding back hotly into her
cheeks, and the slightly frowning look produced by the effort to see the
face before her distinctly gave a peculiar intensity to the eyes.

"Fanny, please!--you must tell me why!"

The tone, resolute, yet appealing, put Fanny in an evident
embarrassment.

"Well, I can't," she said, after a moment--"so it's no good asking me."
Then suddenly, she hesitated--"or--at least--"

"At least what? Please go on."

Fanny wriggled again, then said, with a burst:

"Well, my mother was Aunt Sparling's younger sister--you know
that--don't you?--"

"Of course."

"And our grandfather died a year before Aunt Sparling. She was mother's
trustee. Oh, the money's all right--the trust money, I mean," said the
girl, hastily. "But it was a lot of other things--that mother says
grandpapa always meant to divide between her and Aunt Sparling--and she
never had them--nor a farthing out of them!"

"What other things? I don't understand."

"Jewels!--there!--jewels--and a lot of plate. Mother says she had a
right to half the things that belonged to her mother. Grandpapa always
told her she should have them. And there wasn't a word about them in
the will."

"_I_ haven't any diamonds," said Diana, quietly, "or any jewels at all,
except a string of pearls papa gave me when I was nineteen, and two or
three little things we bought in Florence."

Fanny Merton grew still redder; she stared aggressively at her cousin:

"Well--that was because--Aunt Sparling sold all the things!"

Diana started and recoiled.

"You mean," she said--her breath fluttering--"that--mamma sold things
she had no right to--and never gave Aunt Bertha the money!"

The restrained passion of her look had an odd effect upon her companion.
Fanny first wavered under it, then laughed--a laugh that was partly
perplexity, partly something else, indecipherable.

"Well, as I wasn't born then, I don't know. You needn't be cross with
me, Diana; I didn't mean to say any harm of anybody. But--mother
says"--she laid an obstinate stress on each word--"that she remembers
quite well--grandpapa meant her to have: a diamond necklace; a
_rivière_" (she began to check the items off on her fingers)--"there
were two, and of course Aunt Sparling had the best; two bracelets, one
with turquoises and one with pearls; a diamond brooch; an opal pendant;
a little watch set with diamonds grandma used to wear; and then a lot of
plate! Mother wrote me out a list--I've got it here."

She opened a beaded bag on her wrist, took out half a sheet of paper,
and handed it to Diana.

Diana looked at it in silence. Even her lips were white, and her fingers
shook.

"Did you ever send this to papa?" she asked, after a minute.

Fanny fidgeted again.

"Yes."

"And what did he say? Have you got his letter?"

"No; I haven't got his letter."

"Did he admit that--that mamma had done this?"

Fanny hesitated: but her intelligence, which was of a simple kind, did
not suggest to her an ingenious line of reply.

"Well, I dare say he didn't. But that doesn't make any difference."

"Was that what he and Uncle Merton quarrelled about?"

Fanny hesitated again; then broke out: "Father only did what he
ought--he asked for what was owed mother!"

"And papa wouldn't give it!" cried Diana, in a strange note of scorn;
"papa, who never could rest if he owed a farthing to anybody--who always
overpaid everybody--whom everybody--"

[Illustration: "YOU NEEDN'T BE CROSS WITH ME, DIANA"]

She rose suddenly with a bitten lip. Her eyes blazed--and her cheeks.
She walked to the window and stood looking out, in a whirlwind of
feeling and memory, hiding her face as best she could from the girl
who sat watching her with an expression half sulky, half insolent. Diana
was thinking of moments--recalling forgotten fragments of dialogue--in
the past, which showed her father's opinion of his Barbadoes
brother-in-law: "A grasping, ill-bred fellow"--"neither gratitude, nor
delicacy"--"has been the evil genius of his wife, and will be the ruin
of his children." She did not believe a word of Fanny's story--not a
word of it!

She turned impetuously. Then, as her eyes met Fanny's, a shock ran
through her--the same sudden, inexplicable fear which had seized on Mrs.
Colwood, only more sickening, more paralyzing. And it was a fear which
ran back to and linked itself with the hour of heart-searching in the
wood. What was Fanny thinking of?--what was in her mind--on her lips?
Impulses she could not have defined, terrors to which she could give no
name, crept over Diana's will and disabled it. She trembled from head to
foot--and gave way.

She walked up to her cousin.

"Fanny, is there any letter--anything of grandpapa's--or of my
mother's--that you could show me?"

"No! It was a promise, I tell you--there was no writing. But my mother
could swear to it."

The girl faced her cousin without flinching. Diana sat down again, white
and tremulous, the moment of energy, of resistance, gone. In a wavering
voice she began to explain that she had, in fact, been inquiring into
her affairs, that the money was not actually at her disposal, that to
provide it would require an arrangement with her bankers, and the
depositing of some securities; but that, before long, it should be
available.

Fanny drew a long breath. She had not expected the surrender. Her eyes
sparkled, and she began to stammer thanks.

"Don't!" said Diana, putting out a hand. "If I owe it you--and I take it
on your word--the money shall be paid--that's all. Only--only, I wish
you had not written to me like that; and I ask that--that--you will
never, please, speak to me about it again!"

She had risen, and was standing, very tall and rigid, her hands pressing
against each other.

Fanny's face clouded.

"Very well," she said, as she rose from her seat, "I'm sure I don't want
to talk about it. I didn't like the job a bit--nor did mother. But if
you are poor--and somebody owes you something--you can't help trying to
get it--that's all!"

Diana said nothing. She went to the writing-table and began to arrange
some letters. Fanny looked at her.

"I say, Diana!--perhaps you won't want me to stay here after--You seem
to have taken against me."

Diana turned.

"No," she said, faintly. Then, with a little sob: "I thought of nothing
but your coming."

Fanny flushed.

"Well, of course you've been very kind to me--and all that sort of
thing. I wasn't saying you hadn't been. Except--Well, no, there's one
thing I _do_ think you've been rather nasty about!"

The girl threw back her head defiantly.

Diana's pale face questioned her.

"I was talking to your maid yesterday," said Fanny, slowly, "and she
says you're going to stay at some smart place next week, and you've been
getting a new dress for it. And you've never said a _word_ to me about
it--let alone ask me to go with you!"

Diana looked at her amazed.

"You mean--I'm going to Tallyn!"

"That's it," said Fanny, reproachfully. "And you know I don't get a lot
of fun at home--and I might as well be seeing people--and going about
with you--though I do have to play second fiddle. You're rich, of
course--everybody's nice to you--"

She paused. Diana, struck dumb, could find, for the moment, nothing to
say. The red named in Fanny's cheeks, and she turned away with
a flounce.

"Oh, well, you'd better say it at once--you're ashamed of me! I haven't
had your blessed advantages! Do you think I don't know that!"

In the girl's heightened voice and frowning brow there was a touch of
fury, of goaded pride, that touched Diana with a sudden remorse. She ran
toward her cousin--appealing:

"I'm _very_ sorry, Fanny. I--I don't like to leave you--but they are my
great friends--and Lady Lucy, though she's very kind, is very
old-fashioned. One couldn't take the smallest liberty with her. I don't
think I could ask to take you--when they are quite by themselves--and
the house is only half mounted. But Mrs. Colwood and I had been thinking
of several things that might amuse you--and I shall only be two
nights away."

"I don't want any amusing--thanks!" said Fanny, walking to the door.

She closed it behind her. Diana clasped her hands overhead in a gesture
of amazement.

"To quarrel with me about that--after--the other thing!"

No!--not Tallyn!--not Tallyn!--anywhere, anything, but that!

Was she proud?--snobbish? Her eyes filled with tears, but her will
hardened. What was to be gained? Fanny would not like them, nor
they her.

       *       *       *       *       *

The luncheon-party had been arranged for Mr. Birch, Fanny's train
acquaintance. Diana had asked the Roughsedges, explaining the matter,
with a half-deprecating, half-humorous face, to the comfortable ear of
Mrs. Roughsedge. Explanation was necessary, for this particular young
man was only welcome in those houses of the neighborhood which were not
socially dainty. Mrs. Roughsedge understood at once--laughed
heartily--accepted with equal heartiness--and then, taking Diana's hand,
she said, with a shining of her gray eye:

"My dear, if you want Henry and me to stand on our heads we will attempt
it with pleasure. You are an angel!--and angels are not to be worried by
solicitors."

The first part of which remark referred to a certain morning after
Hugh's announcement of his appointment to the Nigerian expedition, when
Diana had shown the old people a sweet and daughter-like sympathy, which
had entirely won whatever portion of their hearts remained still to
be captured.

Hugh, meanwhile, was not yet gone, though he was within a fortnight of
departure. He was coming to luncheon, with his parents, in order to
support Diana. The family had seen Miss Merton some two or three times,
and were all strongly of opinion that Diana very much wanted supporting.
"Why should one be civil to one's cousin?" Dr. Roughsedge inquired of
his wife. "If they are nice, let them stand on their own merits. If
not, they are disagreeable people who know a deal too much about you.
Miss Diana should have consulted me!"

The Roughsedges arrived early, and found Diana alone in the
drawing-room. Again Captain Roughsedge thought her pale, and was even
sure that she had lost flesh. This time it was hardly possible to put
these symptoms down to Marsham's account. He chafed under the thought
that he should be no longer there in case a league, offensive and
defensive, had in the end to be made with Mrs. Colwood for the handling
of cousins. It was quite clear that Miss Fanny was a vulgar little minx,
and that Beechcote would have no peace till it was rid of her.
Meanwhile, the indefinable change which had come over his mother's face,
during the preceding week, had escaped even the quick eyes of an
affectionate son. Alas! for mothers--when Lalage appears!

Mr. Birch arrived to the minute, and when he was engaged in affable
conversation with Diana, Fanny, last of the party--the door being
ceremoniously thrown open by the butler--entered, with an air. Mr. Birch
sprang effusively to his feet, and there was a noisy greeting between
him and his travelling companion. The young man was slim, and
effeminately good-looking. His frock-coat and gray trousers were new and
immaculate; his small feet were encased in shining patent-leather boots,
and his blue eyes gave the impression of having been carefully matched
with his tie. He was evidently delighted to find himself at Beechcote,
and it might have been divined that there was a spice of malice in his
pleasure. The Vavasours had always snubbed him; Miss Mallory herself had
not been over-polite to him on one or two occasions; but her cousin was
a "stunner," and, secure in Fanny's exuberant favor, he made himself
quite at home. Placed on Diana's left at table, he gave her much voluble
information about her neighbors, mostly ill-natured; he spoke familiarly
of "that clever chap Marsham," as of a politician who owed his election
for the division entirely to the good offices of Mr. Fred Birch's firm,
and described Lady Lucy as "an old dear," though very "frowsty" in her
ideas. He was strongly of opinion that Marsham should find an heiress as
soon as possible, for there was no saying how "long the old lady would
see him out of his money," and everybody knew that at present "she kept
him beastly short." "As for me," the speaker wound up, with an engaging
and pensive _naïveté_, "I've talked to him till I'm tired."

At last he was headed away from Tallyn and its owners, only to fall into
a rapturous debate with Fanny over a racing bet which seemed to have
been offered and taken on the journey which first made them acquainted.
Fanny had lost, but the young man gallantly excused her.

"No--no, couldn't think of it! Not till next time. Then--my word!--I'll
come down upon you--won't I? Teach you to know your way about--eh?"

Loud laughter from Fanny, who professed to know her way about already.
They exchanged "tips"--until at last Mr. Birch, lost in admiration of
his companion, pronounced her a "ripper"--he had never yet met a lady so
well up--"why, you know as much as a man!"

Dr. Roughsedge meanwhile observed the type. The father, an old-fashioned
steady-going solicitor, had sent the son to expensive schools, and
allowed him two years at Oxford, until the College had politely
requested the youth's withdrawal. WILLIAM CAMDEN, CLARENCEUX KING OF
ARMS, from the Picture in the possession of the Earl of Clarendon.

SIR ANTHONY SHIRLEY, AMBASSADOR FROM THE COURT OF PERSIA TO JAMES
I., from the Original Miniature by Peter Oliver.

HENRY CAREY, LORD FALKLAND, LORD DEPUTY OF IRELAND, from the Original
by VANSOMER, formerly in the Strawberry Hill Collection.

SIR ROBERT DUDLEY, SON OF THE EARL OF LEICESTER, from the Original Miniature
by N. HILLIARD, in the possession of Lord De l'Isle and Dudley.

THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM LENTHALL, SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF
COMMONS, from a Miniature by J. COOPER, in the possession of R.S.
Holford, Esq.

MARGARET CAVENDISH, DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, from the Original Picture
in the Collection of F.

Vernon Wentworth, Esq.

SIR THOMAS BROWNE, M.D., of NORWICH, from an Original Picture in the
College of Physicians, London.

SIR CHARLES SCARBOROUGH, M.D., PHYSICIAN TO CHARLES II., JAMES II.,
and WILLIAM III., from the Original Picture in the Barber-Surgeons'
Hall.

FLORA MACDONALD, from the Original by A.

RAMSAY, 1749, in the Picture Gallery, Oxford.

M.M. HOLLOWAY, 25. BEDFORD STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

* * * * *
Originally published at 6l. 6s., now re-issued by WASHBOURNE, New
Bridge Street, in 12 vols. 8vo., at 3l. 3s.

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF VENERABLE BEDE,
Collected and edited by the Rev.

Dr. GILES, comprising the COMMENTARY ON HOLY SCRIPTURE, ECCLESIASTICAL
HISTORY, HOMILIES, TRACTS, LETTERS, POEMS, LIFE, &c.

&c., in Latin and English.--Also,

THE MISCELLANEOUS WORKS AND LIFE OF BEDE,
Published at 3l. 3s., may, for a short period, be had at 1l. 11s. 6d., in
6 vols. 8vo., cloth, lettered Contents.

It is intended to raise the price of these immediately on the
disposal of a moiety of the small Stock now on hand.

"A new edition of Bede's Works is now published by Dr.

Giles, who has made a discovery amongst the MS. treasures which can
scarcely fail of presenting the venerable Anglo-Saxon's Homilies
in a far more trustworthy form than the press has hitherto produced
them."

--_Soames's Edition of Mosheim's Note_, vol. ii. p 142

.
said the doctor, helping himself to another oyster.
"That's why they exist."

"I suppose you're teasing," said Fanny, rather crossly.

"I am quite incapable of it," protested the doctor. "Shall we not all
agree that duchesses exist for the envy and jealousy of mankind?"

"Womankind?" put in Diana. The doctor smiled at her, and finished his
oyster. Brave child! Had that odious young woman been behaving in
character that morning? He would like to have the dealing with her! As
for Diana, her face reminded him of Cowper's rose "just washed by a
shower"--delicately fresh--yet eloquent of some past storm.--Good
Heavens! Where was that fellow Marsham? Philandering with
politics?--when there was this flower for the gathering!

       *       *       *       *       *

Luncheon was half-way through when a rattling sound of horses' hoofs
outside drew the attention of the table.

"Somebody else coming to lunch," said Mr. Birch. "Sorry for 'em, Miss
Mallory. We haven't left 'em much. You've done us so uncommon well."

Diana herself looked in some alarm round the table.

"Plenty, my dear lady, plenty!" said the doctor, on her other hand.
"Cold beef, and bread and cheese--what does any mortal want more? Don't
disturb yourself."

Diana wondered who the visitors might be. The butler entered.

"Sir James Chide, ma'am, and Miss Drake. They have ridden over from
Overton Park, and didn't think it was so far. They told me to say they
didn't wish to disturb you at luncheon, and might they have a cup
of coffee?"

Diana excused herself, and hurried out. Mr. Birch explained at length to
Mrs. Colwood and Fanny that Overton Park belonged to the Judge, Sir
William Felton; that Sir James Chide was often there; and no doubt Miss
Drake had been invited for the ball of the night before; awfully smart
affair!--the coming-out ball of the youngest daughter.

"Who is Miss Drake?" asked Fanny, thinking enviously of the ball, to
which she had not been invited. Mr. Birch turned to her with
confidential jocosity.

"Lady Lucy Marsham's cousin; and it is generally supposed that she might
by now have been something else but for--"

He nodded toward the chair at the head of the table which Diana had left
vacant.

"Whatever do you mean?" said Fanny. The Marshams to her were, so far,
mere shadows. They represented rich people on the horizon whom Diana
selfishly wished to keep to herself.

"I'm telling tales, I declare I am!" said Mr. Birch. "Haven't you seen
Mr. Oliver Marsham yet, Miss Merton?"

"No. I don't know anything about him."

"Ah!" said Mr. Birch, smiling, and peeling an apple with deliberation.

Fanny flushed.

"Is there anything up--between him and Diana?" she said in his ear.

Mr. Birch smiled again.

"I saw old Mr. Vavasour the other day--clients of ours, you understand.
A close-fisted old boy, Miss Merton. They imagined they'd get a good
deal out of your cousin. But not a bit of it. Oliver Marsham does all
her business for her. The Vavasours don't like it, I can tell you."

"I haven't seen either him or Lady Lucy--is that her name?--since I
came."

"Let me see. You came about a fortnight ago--just when Parliament
reassembled. Mr. Marsham is our member. He and Lady Lucy went up to town
the day before Parliament met."

"And what about Miss Drake?"

"Ah!--poor Miss Drake!" Mr. Birch raised a humorous eyebrow. "Those
little things will happen, won't they? It was just at Christmas, I
understand, that your cousin paid her first visit to Tallyn. A man who
was shooting there told me all about it."

"And Miss Drake was there too?"

Mr. Birch nodded.

"And Diana cut her out?" said Fanny, bending toward him eagerly.

Mr. Birch smiled again. Voices were heard in the hall, but before the
new guests entered, the young man put up a finger to his lips:

"Don't you quote me, please, Miss Merton. But, I can tell you, your
cousin's very high up in the running just now. And Oliver Marsham will
have twenty thousand a year some day if he has a penny. Miss Mallory
hasn't told you anything--hasn't she? Ha--ha! Still waters, you
know--still waters!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later Sir James Chide was seated between Diana and Fanny
Merton, Mr. Birch having obligingly vacated his seat and passed to the
other side of the table, where his attempts at conversation were coldly
received by Miss Drake. That young lady dazzled the eyes of Fanny, who
sat opposite to her. The closely fitting habit and black riding-hat gave
to her fine figure and silky wealth of hair the maximum of effect. Fanny
perfectly understood that only money and fashion could attain to Miss
Drake's costly simplicity. She envied her from the bottom of her heart;
she would have given worlds to see the dress in which she had figured at
the ball. Miss Drake, no doubt, went to two or three balls a week, and
could spend anything she liked upon her clothes.

Yet Diana had cut her out--Diana was to carry off the prize! Twenty
thousand a year! Fanny's mind was in a ferment--the mind of a raw and
envious provincial, trained to small ambitions and hungry desires. Half
an hour before, she had been writing a letter home, in a whirl of
delight and self-glorification. The money Diana had promised would set
the whole family on its legs, and Fanny had stipulated that after the
debts were paid she was to have a clear, cool hundred for her own
pocket, and no nonsense about it. It was she who had done it all, and
if it hadn't been for her, they might all have gone to the workhouse.
But now her success was to her as dross. The thought of Diana's future
wealth and glory produced in her a feeling which was an acute physical
distress. So Diana was to be married!--and to the great _parti_ of the
neighborhood! Fanny already saw her in the bridal white, surrounded by
glittering bridesmaids; and a churchful of titled people, bowing before
her as she passed in state, like poppies under a breeze.

And Diana had never said a word to her about it--to her own cousin!
Nasty, close, mean ways! Fanny was not good enough for Tallyn--oh no!
_She_ was asked to Beechcote when there was nothing going on--or next to
nothing--and one might yawn one's self to sleep with dulness from
morning till night. But as soon as she was safely packed off, then there
would be fine times, no doubt; the engagement would be announced; the
presents would begin to come in; the bridesmaids would be chosen. But
she would get nothing out of it--not she; she would not be asked to be
bridesmaid. She was not genteel enough for Diana.

Diana--_Diana_!--the daughter--

Fanny's whole nature gathered itself as though for a spring upon some
prey, at once tempting and exasperating. In one short fortnight the
inbred and fated antagonism between the two natures had developed
itself--on Fanny's side--to the point of hatred. In the depths of her
being she knew that Diana had yearned to love her, and had not been
able. That failure was not her crime, but Diana's.

Fanny looked haughtily round the table. How many of them knew what she
knew? Suddenly a name recurred to her!--the name announced by the butler
and repeated by Mr. Birch. At the moment she had been thinking of other
things; it had roused no sleeping associations. But now the obscure
under-self sent it echoing through the brain. Fanny caught her breath.
The sudden excitement made her head swim.--She turned and looked at the
white-haired elderly man sitting between her and Diana.

Sir James Chide!

Memories of the common gossip in her home, of the talk of the people on
the steamer, of pages in that volume of _Famous Trials_ she had studied
on the voyage with such a close and unsavory curiosity danced through
the girl's consciousness. Well, _he_ knew! No good pretending there. And
he came to see Diana--and still Diana knew nothing! Mrs. Colwood must
simply be telling lies--silly lies! Fanny glanced at her with contempt.

Yet so bewildered was she that when Sir James addressed her, she stared
at him in what seemed a fit of shyness. And when she began to talk it
was at random, for her mind was in a tumult. But Sir James soon divined
her. Vulgarity, conceit, ill-breeding--the great lawyer detected them in
five minutes' conversation. Nor were they unexpected; for he was well
acquainted with Miss Fanny's origins. Yet the perception of them made
the situation still more painfully interesting to him, and no less
mysterious than before. For he saw no substantial change in it; and he
was, in truth, no less perplexed than Fanny. If certain things had
happened in consequence of Miss Merton's advent, neither he nor any
other guest would be sitting at Diana Mallory's table that day; of that
he was morally certain. Therefore, they had not happened.

He returned with a redoubled tenderness of feeling to his conversation
with Diana. He had come to Overton for the Sunday, at great professional
inconvenience, for nothing in the world but that he must pay this visit
to Beechcote; and he had approached the house with dread--dread lest he
should find a face stricken with the truth. That dread was momentarily
lifted, for in those beautiful dark eyes of Diana innocence and
ignorance were still written; but none the less he trembled for her; he
saw her as he had seen her at Tallyn, a creature doomed, and consecrate
to pain. Why, in the name of justice and pity, had her father done this
thing? So it is that a man's love, for lack of a little simple courage
and common-sense, turns to cruelty.

Poor, poor child!--At first sight he, like the Roughsedges, had thought
her pale and depressed. Then he had given his message. "Marsham has
arrived!--turned up at Overton a couple of hours ago--and told us to say
he would follow us here after luncheon. He wired to Lady Felton this
morning to ask if she would take him in for the Sunday. Some big
political meeting he had for to-night is off. Lady Lucy stays in
town--and Tallyn is shut up. But Lady Felton was, of course, delighted
to get him. He arrived about noon. Civility to his hostess kept him to
luncheon--then he pursues us!"

Since then!--no lack of sparkle in the eyes or color in the cheek! Yet
even so, to Sir James's keen sense, there was an increase, a sharpening,
in Diana's personality, of the wistful, appealing note, which had been
always touching, always perceptible, even through the radiant days of
her Tallyn visit.

Ah, well!--like Dr. Roughsedge, only with a far deeper urgency, he, too,
for want of any better plan, invoked the coming lover. In God's name,
let Marsham take the thing into his own hands!--stand on his own
feet!--dissipate a nightmare which ought never to have arisen--and
gather the girl to his heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Fanny's attention--and the surging anger of her thoughts--were
more and more directed upon the girl with the fair hair opposite. A
natural bond of sympathy seemed somehow to have arisen between her and
this Miss Drake--Diana's victim. Alicia Drake, looking up, was
astonished, time after time, to find herself stared at by the
common-looking young woman across the table, who was, she understood,
Miss Mallory's cousin. What dress, and what manners! One did not often
meet that kind of person in society. She wished Oliver joy of his future
relations.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the old panelled drawing-room the coffee was circulating. Sir James
was making friends with Mrs. Colwood, whose gentle looks and widow's
dress appealed to him. Fanny, Miss Drake, and Mr. Birch made a group by
the fireplace; Mr. Birch was posing as an authority on the drama; Fanny,
her dark eyes fixed upon Alicia, was not paying much attention; and
Alicia, with ill-concealed impatience, was yawning behind her glove.
Hugh Roughsedge was examining the Donatello photograph.

"Do you like it?" said Diana, standing beside him. She was conscious of
having rather neglected him at lunch, and there was a dancing something
in her own heart which impelled her to kindness and compunction. Was not
the good, inarticulate youth, too, going out into the wilds, his life
in his hands, in the typical English way? The soft look in her eyes
which expressed this mingled feeling did not mislead the recipient. He
had overheard Sir James Glide's message; he understood her.

Presently, Mrs. Roughsedge, seeing that it was a sunny day and the
garden looked tempting, asked to be allowed to inspect a new greenhouse
that Diana was putting up. The door leading out of the drawing-room to
the moat and the formal garden was thrown open; cloaks and hats were
brought, and the guests streamed out.

"You are not coming?" said Hugh Roughsedge to Diana.

At this question he saw a delicate flush, beyond her control, creep over
her cheek and throat.

"I--I am expecting Mr. Marsham," she said. "Perhaps I ought to stay."

Sir James Chide looked at his watch.

"He should be here any minute. We will overtake you, Captain
Roughsedge."

Hugh went off beside Mrs. Colwood. Well, well, it was all plain enough!
It was only a fortnight since the Marshams had gone up to town for the
Parliamentary season. And here he was, again upon the scene. Impossible,
evidently, to separate them longer. Let them only get engaged, and be
done with it! He stalked on beside Mrs. Colwood, tongue-tied and
miserable.

Meanwhile, Sir James lingered with Diana. "A charming old place!" he
said, looking about him. "But Marsham tells me the Vavasours have
been odious."

"We have got the better of them! Mr. Marsham helped me."

"He has an excellent head, has Oliver. This year he will have special
need of it. It will be a critical time for him."

Diana gave a vague assent. She had, in truth, two recent letters from
Marsham in her pocket at that moment, giving a brilliant and minute
account of the Parliamentary situation. But she hid the fact, warm and
close, like a brooding bird; only drawing on her companion to talk
politics, that she might hear Marsham's name sometimes, and realize the
situation Marsham had described to her, from another point of view.--And
all the time her ear listened for the sound of hoofs, and for the front
door bell.

At last! The peal echoed through the old house. Sir James rose, and,
instinctively, Diana rose too. Was there a smile--humorous and
tender--in the lawyer's blue eyes?

"I'll go and finish my cigarette out-of-doors. Such a tempting
afternoon!"

And out he hurried, before Diana could stop him. She remained standing,
with soft hurrying breath, looking out into the garden. On a lower
terrace she saw Fanny and Alicia Drake walking together, and could not
help a little laugh of amusement that seemed to come out of a heart of
content. Then the door opened, and Marsham was there.


CHAPTER IX


Marsham's first feeling, as he advanced into the room, and, looking
round him, saw that Diana was alone, was one of acute physical pleasure.
The old room with its mingling of color, at once dim and rich; the
sunlit garden through the casement windows; the scent of the logs
burning on the hearth, and of the hyacinths and narcissus with which the
warm air was perfumed; the signs everywhere of a woman's life and charm;
all these first impressions leaped upon him, aiding the remembered spell
which had recalled him--hot-foot and eager--from London, to this place,
on the very first opportunity.

And if her surroundings were poetic, how much more so was the
girl-figure itself!--the slender form, the dark head, and that shrinking
joy which spoke in her gesture, in the movement she made toward him
across the room. She checked it at once, but not before a certain
wildness in it had let loose upon him a rush of delight.

"Sir James explained?" he said, as he took her hand.

"Yes. I had no notion you would be here--this week-end."

"Nor had I--till last night. Then an appointment broken down--and--_me
voici_!"

"You stay over to-morrow?"

"Of course! But it is absurd that the Feltons should be five miles
away!"

She stammered:

"It is a charming ride."

"But too long!--One does not want to lose time."

She was now sitting; and he beside her. Mechanically she had taken up
some embroidery--to shield her eyes. He examined the reds and blues of
the pattern, the white fingers, the bending cheek. Suddenly, like Sir
James Chide or Hugh Roughsedge, he was struck with a sense of change.
The Dian look which matched her name, the proud gayety and frankness of
it, were somehow muffled and softened. And altogether her aspect was a
little frail and weary. The perception brought with it an appeal to the
protective strength of the man. What were her cares? Trifling, womanish
things! He would make her confess them; and then conjure them away!

"You have your cousin with you?"

"Yes."

"She will make you a long visit?"

"Another week or two, I think."

"You are a believer in family traditions?--But of course you are!"

"Why 'of course'?" Her color had sparkled again, but the laugh was not
spontaneous.

"I see that you are in love with even your furthest kinsmen--you must
be--being an Imperialist! Now I am frankly bored by my kinsmen--near
and far."

"All the same--you ask their help!"

"Oh yes, in war; pure self-interest on both sides."

"You have been preaching this in the House of Commons?"

The teasing had answered. No more veiling of the eyes!

"No--I have made no speeches. Next week, in the Vote of Censure debate,
I shall get my chance."

"To talk Little Englandism? Alack!"

The tone was soft--it ended in a sigh.

"Does it really trouble you?"

She was looking down at her work. Her fingers drew the silk out and
in--a little at random. She shook her head slightly, without reply.

"I believe it does," he said, gently, still smiling. "Well, when I make
my speech, I shall remember that."

She looked up suddenly. Their eyes met full. On her just parted lips the
words she had meant to say remained unspoken. Then a murmur of voices
from the garden reached them, as though some one approached.
Marsham rose.

"Shall we go into the garden? I ought to speak to Robins. How is he
getting on?"

Robins was the new head gardener, appointed on Marsham's recommendation.

"Excellently." Diana had also risen. "I will get my hat."

He opened the door for her. Hang those people outside! But for them she
would have been already in his arms.

Left to himself, he walked to and fro, restless and smiling. No more
self-repression--no more politic delay! The great moment of
life--grasped--captured at last! He in his turn understood the
Faust-cry--"Linger awhile!--thou art so fair!" Only let him pierce to
the heart of it--realize it, covetously, to the full! All the ordinary
worldly motives were placated and at rest; due sacrifice had been done
to them; they teased no more. Upgathered and rolled away, like
storm-winds from the sea, they had left a shining and a festal wave for
love to venture on. Let him only yield himself--feel the full swell of
the divine force!

He moved to the window, and looked out.

_Birch_!--What on earth brought that creature to Beechcote. His
astonishment was great, and perhaps in the depths of his mind there
emerged the half-amused perception of a feminine softness and tolerance
which masculine judgment must correct. She did not know how precious she
was; and that it must not be made too easy for the common world to
approach her. All that was picturesque and important, of course, in the
lower classes; labor men, Socialists, and the like. But not vulgar
half-baked fellows, who meant nothing politically, and must yet be
treated like gentlemen. Ah! There were the Roughsedges--the Captain not
gone yet?--Sir James and Mrs. Colwood--nice little creature, that
companion--they would find some use for her in the future. And on the
lower terrace, Alicia Drake, and--that girl? He laughed, amusing himself
with the thought of Alicia's plight. Alicia, the arrogant, the
fastidious! The odd thing was that she seemed to be absorbed in the
conversation that was going on. He saw her pause at the end of the
terrace, look round her, and deliberately lead the way down a long grass
path, away from the rest of the party. Was the cousin good company,
after all?

Diana returned. A broad black hat, and sables which had been her
father's last gift to her, provided the slight change in surroundings
which pleases the eye and sense of a lover. And as a man brought up in
wealth, and himself potentially rich, he found it secretly agreeable
that costly things became her. There should be no lack of them in
the future.

They stepped out upon the terrace. At sight of them the Roughsedges
approached, while Mr. Fred Birch lagged behind to inspect the sundial.
After a few words' conversation, Marsham turned resolutely away.

"Miss Mallory wants to show me a new gardener."

Up comes the gardener with something on a pitchfork. Thought at first it
was a new development of the polyanthus. (We are always growing
strange things. The Member for Sark says, "In Our Garden it is the
unexpected that happens.")

Turned out to be a post-card. Our gardener is very careful to keep up our
new character.

If the missive had been brought to us in the house, of course it would
have been served up on a plate.

In the garden it is appropriately handed about on a pitch-fork.

"My dear TOBY" (this is the post-card), "I'm just going up to Edinburgh;
another Midlothian Campaign; You have been with me every time;
don't desert me now; have something quite new and original to say
on the Irish Question; would like you to hear it.

Perhaps you never heard of Mitchelstown?

Been looking up particulars. Mean to tell the whole story.

Will be nice and fresh; come quite a shock on BALFOUR. Don't fail; Yours
ever, W.E.G."

Didn't fail, and here I am, not in Our Garden, but in Edinburgh. Left the
Member for Sark in charge. A little uneasy; never know from day to day
what his well-meant but ill-directed energy may not achieve.
At least the celery will be safe. One day, after I had worn myself out
with watching gardener dig trench, Sark came along, and in our absence
filled it up. Said it looked untidy to have long hole like that in
respectable garden.

Supposed we had been laying a drain; quite surprised we weren't
pleased, when he gleefully announced he had filled it up.

Just come back from great meeting in Corn Exchange. Difficult to realise
that it's eleven years since Mr. G. here in first campaign.
A great deal happened in meantime, but enthusiasm just the same.

Mr. G. I suppose a trifle older, but ROSEBERY still boyish-looking.

Proceedings opened with procession of Delegates presenting addresses to
Mr. G. Excellently arranged; reflects great credit on PAT CAMPBELL.

(Capital name that for manager of variety _troupe_.) Leading idea
was to present imposing representation of Liberal Scotia doing homage
to its great chief.

"I have only just arrived," he said, rather sharply.
"Please don't wait for me.--Shall we go on?" he said, turning to Diana.

They walked on. As Diana paused at the iron gate which closed the long
walk, she looked round her involuntarily, and saw that Alicia and Fanny
were now standing on the lower terrace, gazing after them. It struck her
as strange and rude, and she felt the slight shock she had felt several
times already, both in her intercourse with Fanny and in her
acquaintance with Miss Drake--as of one unceremoniously jostled
or repulsed.

Marsham meanwhile was full of annoyance. That Alicia should still treat
him in that domestic, possessive way--and in Diana's presence--was
really intolerable. It must be stopped.

He paused on the other side of the gate.

"After all, I am not in a mood to see Robins to-day. Look!--the light is
going. Will you show me the path on to the hill? You spoke to me once
of a path you were fond of."

She tried to laugh.

"You take Robins for granted?"

"I am quite indifferent to his virtues--even his vices! This chance--is
too precious. I have so much to say to you."

She led the way in silence. The hand which held up her dress from the
mire trembled a little unseen. But her sense of the impending crisis had
given her more rather than less dignity. She bore her dark head finely,
with that unconscious long-descended instinct of the woman, waiting
to be sued.

They found a path beyond the garden, winding up through a leafless wood.
Marsham talked of indifferent things, and she answered him with spirit,
feeling it all, so far, a queer piece of acting. Then they emerged on
the side of the hill beside a little basin in the chalk, where a gnarled
thorn or two, an overhanging beech, and a bed of withered heather, made
a kind of intimate, furnished place, which appealed to the passer-by.

"Here is the sunset," said Marsham, looking round him. "Are you afraid
to sit a little?"

He took a light overcoat he had been carrying over his arm and spread it
on the heather. She protested that it was winter, and coats were for
wearing. He took no notice, and she tamely submitted. He placed her
regally, with an old thorn for support and canopy; and then he stood a
moment beside her gazing westward.

They looked over undulations of the chalk, bare stubble fields and
climbing woods, bathed in the pale gold of a February sunset. The light
was pure and wan--the resting earth shone through it gently yet
austerely; only the great woods darkly massed on the horizon gave an
accent of mysterious power to a scene in which Nature otherwise showed
herself the tamed and homely servant of men. Below were the trees of
Beechcote, the gray walls, and the windows touched with a last
festal gleam.

Suddenly Marsham dropped down beside her.

"I see it all with new eyes," he said, passionately. "I have lived in
this country from my childhood; and I never saw it before! Diana!--"

He raised her hand, which only faintly resisted; he looked into her
eyes. She had grown very pale--enchantingly pale. There was in her the
dim sense of a great fulfilment; the fulfilment of Nature's promise to
her; implicit in her woman's lot from the beginning.

"Diana!--" the low voice searched her heart--"You know--what I have come
to say? I meant to have waited a little longer--I was afraid!--but I
couldn't wait--it was beyond my strength. Diana!--come to me,
darling!--be my wife!"

He kissed the hand he held. His eyes beseeched; and into hers, widely
fixed upon him, had sprung tears--the tears of life's supremest joy. Her
lip trembled.

"I'm not worthy!" she said, in a whisper--"I'm not worthy!"

"Foolish Diana!--Darling, foolish Diana!--Give me my answer!"

And now he held both hands, and his confident smile dazzled her.

"I--" Her voice broke. She tried again, still in a whisper. "I will be
everything to you--that a woman can."

At that he put his arm round her, and she let him take that first kiss,
in which she gave him her youth, her life--all that she had and was.
Then she withdrew herself, and he saw her brow contract, and her mouth.

"I know!"--he said, tenderly--"I know! Dear, I think he would have been
glad. He and I made friends from the first."

She plucked at the heather beside her, trying for composure. "He would
have been so glad of a son--so glad--"

And then, by contrast with her own happiness, the piteous memory of her
father overcame her; and she cried a little, hiding her eyes against
Marsham's shoulder.

"There!" she said, at last, withdrawing herself, and brushing the tears
away. "That's all--that's done with--except in one's heart. Did--did
Lady Lucy know?"

She looked at him timidly. Her aspect had never been more lovely. Tears
did not disfigure her, and as compared with his first remembrance of
her, there was now a touching significance, an incomparable softness in
all she said and did, which gave him a bewildering sense of treasures to
come, of joys for the gathering.

Suddenly--involuntarily--there flashed through his mind the recollection
of his first love-passage with Alicia--how she had stung him on, teased,
and excited him. He crushed it at once, angrily.

As to Lady Lucy, he smilingly declared that she had no doubt guessed
something was in the wind.

"I have been 'gey ill to live with' since we got up to town. And when
the stupid meeting I had promised to speak at was put off, my mother
thought I had gone off my head--from my behavior. 'What are you going to
the Feltons' for?--You never care a bit about them.' So at last I
brought her the map and made her look at it--'Felton Park to Brinton, 3
miles--Haylesford, 4 miles--Beechcote, 2 miles and 1/2--Beechcote Manor,
half a mile--total, ten miles.'--'Oliver!'--she got so red!--'you are
going to propose to Miss Mallory!' 'Well, mother!--and what have you got
to say?' So then she smiled--and kissed me--and sent you messages--which
I'll give you when there's time. My mother is a rather formidable
person--no one who knew her would ever dream of taking her consent to
anything for granted; but this time"--his laugh was merry--"I didn't
even think of asking it!"

"I shall love her--dearly," murmured Diana.

"Yes, because you won't be afraid of her. Her standards are hardly made
for this wicked world. But you'll hold her--you'll manage her. If you'd
said 'No' to me, she would have felt cheated of a daughter."

"I'm afraid Mrs. Fotheringham won't like it," said Diana, ruefully,
letting herself be gathered again into his arms.

"My sister? I don't know what to say about Isabel, dearest--unless I
parody an old saying. She and I have never agreed--except in opinion. We
have been on the same side--and in hot opposition--since our childhood.
No--I dare say she will be thorny! Why did you fight me so well,
little rebel?"

He looked down into her dark eyes, revelling in their sweetness, and in
the bliss of her surrendered beauty. If this was not his first proposal,
it was his first true passion--of that he was certain.

She released herself--rosy--and still thinking of Mrs. Fotheringham.
"Oliver!"--she laid her hand shyly on his--"neither she nor you will
want me to stifle what I think--to deny what I do really believe? I dare
say a woman's politics aren't worth much"--she laughed and sighed.

"I say!--don't take that line with Isabel!"

"Well, mine probably aren't worth much--but they are mine--and papa
taught them me--and I can't give them up."

"What'll you do, darling?--canvass against me?" He kissed her hand
again.

"No--but I _can't_ agree with you!"

"Of course you can't. Which of us, _I_ wonder, will shake the other? How
do you know that I'm not in a blue fright for my principles?"

"You'll explain to me?--you'll not despise me?" she said, softly,
bending toward him; "I'll always, always try and understand."

Who could resist an attitude so feminine, yet so loyal, at once so old
and new? Marsham felt himself already attacked by the poison of Toryism,
and Diana, with a happy start, envisaged horizons that her father never
knew, and questions where she had everything to learn.

Hand in hand, trembling still under the thrill of the moment which had
fused their lives, they fell into happy discursive talk: of the Tallyn
visit--of her thoughts and his--of what Lady Lucy and Mr. Ferrier had
said, or would say. In the midst of it the fall of temperature, which
came with the sunset, touched them, and Marsham sprang up with the
peremptoriness of a new relationship, insisting that he must take her
home out of the chilly dusk. As they stood lingering in the hollow,
unwilling to leave the gnarled thorns, the heather-carpet, and the glow
of western light--symbols to them henceforth that they too, in their
turn, amid the endless generations, had drunk the mystic cup, and shared
the sacred feast--Diana perceived some movement far below, on the open
space in front of Beechcote. A little peering through the twilight
showed them two horses with their riders leaving the Beechcote door.

"Oh! your cousin--and Sir James!" cried Diana, in distress, "and I
haven't said good-bye--"

"You will see them soon again. And I shall carry them the news
to-night."

"Will you? Shall I allow it?"

Marsham laughed; he caught her hand again, slipped it possessively
within his left arm, and held it there as they went slowly down the
path. Diana could not think with any zest of Alicia and her reception of
the news. A succession of trifles had shown her quite clearly that
Alicia was not her friend; why, she did not know. She remembered many
small advances on her own part.

But at the mention of Sir James Chide, her face lit up.

"He has been so kind to me!" she said, looking up into Marsham's
face--"so very kind!"

Her eyes showed a touch of passion; the passion that some natures can
throw into gratitude; whether for little or much. Marsham smiled.

"He fell in love with you! Yes--he is a dear old boy. One can well
imagine that he has had a romance!"

"Has he?"

"It is always said that he was in love with a woman whom he defended on
a charge of murder."

Diana exclaimed.

"He had met her when they were both very young, and lost his heart to
her. Then she married and he lost sight of her. He accepted a brief in
this murder case, ten years later, not knowing her identity, and they
met for the first time when he went to see her with her solicitor
in prison."

Diana breathlessly asked for the rest of the story.

"He defended her magnificently. It was a shocking case. The sentence was
commuted, but she died almost immediately. They say Sir James has never
got over it."

Diana pondered; her eyes dim.

"How one would like to do something for him!--to give him pleasure!"

Marsham caressed her hand.

"So you shall, darling. He shall be one of our best friends. But he
mustn't make Ferrier jealous."

Diana smiled happily. She looked forward to all the new ties of kindred
or friendship that Marsham was to bring her--modestly indeed, yet in the
temper of one who feels herself spiritually rich and capable of giving.

"I shall love all your friends," she said, with a bright look. "I'm glad
you have so many!"

"Does that mean that you've felt rather lonely sometimes? Poor darling!"
he said, tenderly, "it must have been solitary often at Portofino."

"Oh no--I had papa." Then her truthfulness overcame her. "I don't mean
to say I didn't often want friends of my own age--girl friends
especially."

"You can't have them now!"--he said, passionately, as they paused at a
wicket-gate, under a yew-tree. "I want you all--all--to myself." And in
the shadow of the yew he put his arms round her again, and their hearts
beat together.

But our nature moves within its own inexorable limits. In Diana,
Marsham's touch, Marsham's embrace awakened that strange mingled
happiness, that happiness reared and based on tragedy, which the pure
and sensitive feel in the crowning moments of life. Love is tortured by
its own intensity; and the thought of death strikes through the
experience which means the life of the race. As her lips felt Marsham's
kiss, she knew, as generations of women have known before her, that life
could give her no more; and she also knew that it was transiency and
parting that made it so intolerably sweet.

"Till death us do part," she said to herself. And in the intensity of
her submission to the common lot she saw down the years the end of what
had now begun--herself lying quiet and blessed, in the last sleep, her
dead hand in Marsham's.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why must we go home?" he said, discontentedly, as he released her. "One
turn more!--up the avenue! There is light enough yet!"

She yielded weakly; pacifying her social conscience by the half-penitent
remark that Mrs. Colwood would have said good-bye to her guests, and
that--she--she supposed they would soon have to know.

"Well, as I want you to marry me in six weeks," said Marsham, joyously,
"I suppose they will."

"Six weeks!" She gasped. "Oh, how unreasonable!"

"Dearest!--A fortnight would do for frocks. And whom have we to consult
but ourselves? I know you have no near relations. As for cousins, it
doesn't take long to write them a few notes, and ask them to
the wedding."

Diana sighed.

"My only cousins are the Mertons. They are all in Barbadoes but Fanny."

Her tone changed a little. In her thoughts, she added, hurriedly: "I
sha'n't have any bridesmaids!"

Marsham, discreetly, made no reply. Personally, he hoped that Miss
Merton's engagements might take her safely back to Barbadoes before the
wedding-day. But if not, he and his would no doubt know how to deal with
her--civilly and firmly--as people must learn to deal with their
distasteful relations.

Meanwhile on Diana's mind there had descended a sudden cloud of thought,
dimming the ecstasy of her joy. The February day was dying in a
yellowish dusk, full of beauty. They were walking along a narrow avenue
of tall limes which skirted the Beechcote lands, and took them past the
house. Above their heads the trees met in a brown-and-purple tracery of
boughs, and on their right, through the branches, they saw a pale full
moon, throning it in a silver sky. The mild air, the movements of the
birds, the scents from the earth and bushes spoke of spring; and
suddenly Diana perceived the gate leading to the wood where that very
morning the subtle message of the changing year had come upon her,
rending and probing. A longing to tell Marsham all her vague troubles
rose in her, held back by a natural shrinking. But the longing
prevailed, quickened by the loyal sense that she must quickly tell him
all she knew about herself and her history, since there was nobody else
to tell him.

"Oliver!"--she began, hurriedly--"I ought to tell you--I don't think you
know. My name wasn't Mallory to begin with--my father took that name."

Marsham gave a little start.

"Dear--how surprising!--and how interesting! Tell me all you can--from
the year One."

He smiled upon her, with a sparkling look that asked for all her
history. But secretly he had been conscious of a shock. Lately he had
made a few inquiries about the Welsh Mallorys. And the answers had been
agreeable; though the old central stock of the name, to which he
presumed Diana belonged, was said to be extinct. No doubt--so he had
reflected--it had come to an end in her father.

"Mallory was the name of my father's mother. He took it for various
reasons--I never quite understood--and I know a good deal of property
came to him. But his original name--my name--was Sparling."

"Sparling!" A pause. "And have you any Sparling relations."

"No. They all died out--I think--but I know so little!--when I was
small. However, I have a box of Sparling papers which I have never
examined. Perhaps--some day--we might look at them together."

Her voice shook a little.

"You have never looked at them?"

"Never."

"But why, dearest?"

"It always seemed to make papa so unhappy--anything to do with his old
name. Oliver!"--she turned upon him suddenly, and for the first time she
clung to him, hiding her face against his shoulder--"Oliver!--I don't
know what made him unhappy--I don't know why he changed his name.
Sometimes I think--there may have been some terrible thing between
him--and my mother."

He put his arm round her, close and tenderly.

"What makes you think that?" Then he whispered to her--"Tell your
lover--your husband--tell him everything."

She shrank in delicious tremor from the great word, and it was a few
moments before she could collect her thoughts. Then she said--still
resting against him in the dark--and in a low rapid voice, as though she
followed the visions of an inner sense:

"She died when I was only four. I just remember--it is almost my first
recollection of anything--seeing her carried up-stairs--" She broke off.
"And oh! it's so strange!--"

"Strange? She was ill?"

"Yes, but--what I seem to remember never explains itself--and I did not
dare to ask papa. She hadn't been with us--for a long time. Papa and I
had been alone. Then one day I saw them carrying her up-stairs--my
father and two nurses--I ran out before my nurse could catch me--and saw
her--she was in her hat and cloak. I didn't know her, and when she
called me, I ran away. Then afterward they took me in to see her in
bed--two or three times--and I remember once"--Diana began to sob
herself--"seeing her cry. She lay sobbing--and my father beside her; he
held her hand--and I saw him hide his eyes upon it. They never noticed
me; I don't know that they saw me. Then they told me she was dead--I saw
her lying on the bed--and my nurse gave me some flowers to put beside
her--some violets. They were the only flowers. I can see her still,
lying there--with her hands closed over them."

She released herself from Marsham, and, with her hand in his, she drew
him slowly along the path, while she went on speaking, with an effort
indeed, yet with a marvellous sense of deliverance--after the silence of
years. She described the entire seclusion of their life at Portofino.

"Papa never spoke to me of mamma, and I never remember a picture of
her. After his death I saw a closed locket on his breast for the first
time. I would not have opened it for the world--I just kissed it--" Her
voice broke again; but after a moment she quietly resumed. "He changed
his name--I think--when I was about nine years old. I remember that
somehow it seemed to give him comfort--he was more cheerful with me
afterward--"

"And you have no idea what led him to go abroad?"

She shook her head. Marsham's changed and rapid tone had betrayed some
agitation in the mind behind; but Diana did not notice it. In her story
she had come to what, in truth, had been the determining and formative
influence on her own life--her father's melancholy, and the mystery in
which it had been enwrapped; and even the perceptions of love were for
the moment blinded as the old tyrannous grief overshadowed her.

"His life"--she said, slowly--"seemed for years--one long struggle to
bear--what was really--unbearable. Then when I was about nineteen there
was a change. He no longer shunned people quite in the same way, and he
took me to Egypt and India. We came across old friends of his whom I, of
course, had never seen before; and I used to wonder at the way in which
they treated him--with a kind of reverence--as though they would not
have touched him roughly for the world. Then directly after we got home
to the Riviera his illness began--"

She dwelt on the long days of dumbness, and her constant sense that he
wished--in vain--to communicate something to her.

"He wanted something--and I could not give it him--could not even tell
what it was. It was misery! One day he managed to write: 'If you are in
trouble, go to Riley & Bonner--ask them.' They were his solicitors, whom
he had depended on from his boyhood. But since his death I have never
wanted anything from them but a little help in business. They have been
very good; but--I could not go and question them. If there was anything
to know--papa had not been able to tell me--I did not want anybody
else--to--"

Her voice dropped. Only half an hour since the flowering of life! What a
change in both! She was pacing along slowly, her head thrown back; the
oval of her face white among her furs, under the ghostly touch of the
moonlight; a suggestion of something austere--finely remote--in her
attitude and movement. His eyes were on the ground, his shoulders bent;
she could not see his face.

"We must try and unravel it--together," he said, at last, with an
effort. "Can you tell me your mother's name?"

"It was an old Staffordshire family. But she and papa met in America,
and they married there. Her father died not long afterward, I think. And
I have never heard of any relations but the one sister, Mrs. Merton. Her
name was Wentworth. Oh!" It was an involuntary cry of physical pain.

"Diana!--Did I hurt your hand? my darling!"

The sudden tightness of his grip had crushed her fingers. She smiled at
him, as he kissed them, in hasty remorse.

"And her Christian name?" he asked, in a low voice.

"Juliet."

There was a pause. They had turned back, and were walking toward the
house. The air had grown much colder; frosty stars were twinkling, and
a chilly wind was blowing light clouds across the moon. The two figures
moved slowly in and out of the bands of light and shadow which crossed
the avenue.

Diana stopped suddenly.

Here, at last, was the opportunity he had sighed for!
So interesting a case, too, furnishing such ample occasion for
passion, pathos, indignation!

And how eminently fortunate that the speech which he set himself with
ardor to prepare, would be delivered in the presence of the father
and brother of his mistress, and perhaps of the lady herself! The
evidence against Jacques, it is true, was altogether presumptive; there
was no proof whatever that he had committed the crime; and for his own
part he stoutly denied it. But Antoine de Chaulieu entertained no
doubt of his guilt, and his speech was certainly well calculated to
carry that conviction into the bosom of others. It was of the highest
importance to his own reputation that he should procure a verdict, and
he confidently assured the afflicted and enraged family of the victim
that their vengeance should be satisfied.
Under these circumstances could anything be more unwelcome than a piece
of intelligence that was privately conveyed to him late on the evening
before the trial was to come on, which tended strongly to exculpate
the prisoner, without indicating any other person as the criminal.

       Here was an opportunity lost.

The first step of the ladder on which he was to rise to fame, fortune,
and a wife, was slipping from under his feet!

Of course, so interesting a trial was anticipated with great eagerness
by the public, and the court was crowded with all the beauty and
fashion of Rouen.

Though Jacques Rollet persisted in asserting his innocence, founding
his defense chiefly on circumstances which were strongly corroborated
by the information that had reached De Chaulieu the preceding
evening,--he was convicted.

       In spite of the very strong doubts he privately entertained respecting
the justice of the verdict, even De Chaulieu himself, in the first
flush of success, amidst a crowd of congratulating friends, and the
approving smiles of his mistress, felt gratified and happy; his
speech had, for the time being, not only convinced others, but
himself; warmed with his own eloquence, he believed what he said.

But when the glow was over, and he found himself alone, he did not
feel so comfortable. A latent doubt of Rollet's guilt now burnt strongly
in his mind, and he felt that the blood of the innocent would be
on his head.

It is true there was yet time to save the life of the prisoner, but
to admit Jacques innocent, was to take the glory out of his own
speech, and turn the sting of his argument against himself.

Besides, if he produced the witness who had secretly given him the
information, he should be self-condemned, for he could not conceal
that he had been aware of the circumstance before the trial.

Matters having gone so far, therefore, it was necessary that Jacques
Rollet should die; so the affair took its course; and early one morning
the guillotine was erected in the court-yard of the jail, three criminals
ascended the scaffold, and three heads fell into the basket, which were
presently afterward, with the trunks that had been attached to
them, buried in a corner of the cemetery.

Antoine de Chaulieu was now fairly started in his career, and his
success was as rapid as the first step toward it had been tardy.

He took a pretty apartment in the Hôtel Marboeuf, Rue Grange-Batelière,
and in a short time was looked upon as one of the most rising
young advocates in Paris. His success in one line brought him
success in another; he was soon a favorite in society, and an object
of interest to speculating mothers; but his affections still
adhered to his old love Natalie de Bellefonds, whose family now
gave their assent to the match--at least, prospectively--a circumstance
which furnished such an additional incentive to his exertions, that
in about two years from the date of his first brilliant speech, he
was in a sufficiently flourishing condition to offer the young lady
a suitable home.

In anticipation of the happy event, he engaged and furnished a suite
of apartments in the Rue du Helder; and as it was necessary that
the bride should come to Paris to provide her trousseau, it was
agreed that the wedding should take place there, instead of at
Bellefonds, as had been first projected; an arrangement the more
desirable, that a press of business rendered Mons. de Chaulieu's
absence from Paris inconvenient.

"You know?" he said, under his breath.

Marsham nodded.

"And you--have known it all along?"

"From the first moment, almost, that I set eyes on that poor child. Does
_she_ know? Have you broken it to her?"

The questions hurried on each other's heels. Marsham shook his head, and
Sir James, turning away, made a sound that was almost a groan.

"You have proposed to her?"

"Yes."

"And she has accepted you?"

"Yes." Marsham walked to the mantel-piece, and hung over the fire.

Sir James watched him for a moment, twisting his mouth. Then he walked
up to his companion and laid a hand on his arm.

"Stick it out, Oliver!" he said, breathing quick. "Stick it out! You'll
have to fight--but she's worth it."

Marsham's hand groped for his. Sir James pressed it, and walked away
again, his eyes on the carpet. When he came back, he said, shortly:

"You know your mother will resist it to the last?"

By this, Marsham had collected his forces, and as he turned to the
lamplight, Sir James saw a countenance that reassured him.

"I have no hope of persuading her. It will have to be faced."

"No, I fear there is no hope. She sees all such things in a false light.
Forgive me--we must both speak plainly. She will shudder at the bare
idea of Juliet Sparling's daughter as your wife; she will think it means
a serious injury to your career--in reality it does nothing of the
sort--and she will regard it as her duty to assert herself."

"You and Ferrier must do all you can for me," said Marsham, slowly.

"We shall do everything we can, but I do not flatter myself it will be
of the smallest use. And supposing we make no impression--what then?"

Marsham paused a moment; then looked up.

"You know the terms of my father's will? I am absolutely dependent on my
mother. The allowance she makes me at present is quite inadequate for a
man in Parliament, and she could stop it to-morrow."

"You might have to give up Parliament?"

"I should very likely have to give up Parliament."

Sir James ruminated, and took up his half-smoked cigar for counsel.

"I can't imagine, Oliver, that your mother would push her opposition to
quite that point. But, in any case, you have forgotten Miss Mallory's
own fortune."

"It has never entered into my thoughts!" cried Marsham, with an emphasis
which Sir James knew to be honest. "But, in any case, I cannot live upon
my wife. If I could not find something to do, I should certainly give up
politics."

His tone had become a little dry and bitter, his aspect gray.

Sir James surveyed him a moment--pondering.

"You will find plenty of ways out, Oliver--plenty! The sympathy of all
the world will be with you. You have won a beautiful and noble creature.
She has been brought up under a more than Greek fate. You will rescue
her from it. You will show her how to face it--and how to conquer it."

A tremor swept across Marsham's handsome mouth. But the perplexity and
depression in the face remained.

Sir James had a slight consciousness of rebuff. But it disappeared in
his own emotion. He resumed:

"She ought to be told the story--perhaps with some omissions--at once.
Her mother"--he spoke with a slow precision, forcing out the words--"was
not a bad woman. If you like, I will break it to Miss Mallory. I am
probably more intimately acquainted with the story than any one else
now living."

Something in the tone, in the solemnity of the blue eyes, in the
carriage of the gray head, touched Marsham to the quick. He laid a hand
on his old friend's shoulder--affectionately--in mute thanks.

"Diana mentioned her father's solicitors--"

"I know"--interrupted Sir James--"Riley & Bonner--excellent
fellows--both of them still living. They probably have all the records.
And I shouldn't wonder if they have a letter--from Sparling. He _must_
have made provision--for the occasion that has now arisen."

"A letter?--for Diana?"

Sir James nodded. "His behavior to her was a piece of moral cowardice, I
suppose. I saw a good deal of him during the trial, of course, though it
is years now since I lost all trace of him. He was a sensitive, shy
fellow, wrapped up in his archæology, and very ignorant of the
world--when it all happened. It tore him up by the roots. His life
withered in a day."

Marsham flushed.

"He had no right to bring her up in this complete ignorance! He could
not have done anything more cruel!--more fatal! No one knows what the
effect may be upon her."

And with a sudden rush of passion through the blood, he seemed to hold
her once more in his arms, he felt the warmth of her cheek on his; all
her fresh and fragrant youth was present to him, the love in her voice,
and in her proud eyes. He turned away, threw himself into a chair, and
buried his face in his hands.

Sir James looked down upon him. Instead of sympathy, there was a
positive lightening in the elder man's face--a gleam of satisfaction.

"Cheer up, old fellow!" he said, in a low voice. "You'll bring her
through. You stand by her, and you'll reap your reward. By Gad, there
are many men who would envy you the chance!"

Marsham made no reply. Was it his silence that evoked in the mind of Sir
James the figure which already held the mind of his companion?--the
figure of Lady Lucy? He paced up and down, with the image before
him--the spare form, resolutely erect, the delicate resolution of the
face, the prim perfection of the dress, judged by the Quakerish standard
of its owner. Lady Lucy almost always wore gloves--white or gray. In Sir
James's mind the remembrance of them took a symbolic importance. What
use in expecting the wearer of them to handle the blood and mire of
Juliet Sparling's story with breadth and pity?

"Look here!" he said, coming to a sudden stop. "Let us decide at once on
what is to be done. You said nothing to Miss Mallory?"

"Nothing. But she is already in some trouble and misgiving about the
past. She is in the mood to inquire; she has been, I think, for some
time. And, naturally, she wishes to hide nothing from me."

"She will write to Riley & Bonner," said Sir James, quietly. "She will
probably write to-night. They may take steps to acquaint her with her
history--or they may not. It depends. Meanwhile, who else is likely to
know anything about the engagement?"

"Diana was to tell Mrs. Colwood--her companion; no one else."

"Nice little woman!--all right there! But"--Sir James gave a slight
start--"what about the cousin?"

"Miss Merton? Oh no! There is clearly no sympathy between her and Diana.
How could there be?"

"Yes--but my dear fellow!--that girl knows--must know--everything there
is to know! And she dislikes Diana; she is jealous of her; that I saw
quite plainly this afternoon. And, moreover, she is probably quite well
informed about you and your intentions. She gossiped half through lunch
with that ill-bred fellow Birch. I heard your name once or twice.
Oh!--and by-the-way!"--Sir James turned sharply on his heel--"what was
she confabulating about with Miss Drake all that time in the garden? Did
they know each other before?"

Marsham replied in the negative. But he, too, was disagreeably arrested
by the recollection of the two girls walking together, and of the
intimacy and animation of their talk. And he could recall what Sir James
had not seen--the strangeness of Alicia's manner, and the peremptoriness
with which she had endeavored to carry him home with her. Had she--after
hearing the story--tried to interrupt or postpone the crucial scene with
Diana? That seemed to him the probable explanation, and the idea roused
in him a hot and impotent anger. What business was it of hers?

"H'm!" said Sir James. "You may be sure that Miss Drake is now in the
secret. She was very discreet on the way home. But she will take sides;
and not, I think, with us. She seems to have a good deal of influence
with your mother."

Marsham reluctantly admitted it.

"My sister, too, will be hostile. Don't let's forget that."

Sir James shrugged his shoulders, with the smile of one who is
determined to keep his spirits up.

"Well, my dear Marsham, you have your battle cut out for you! Don't
delay it. Where is Lady Lucy?"

"In town."

"Can't you devise some excuse that will take you back to her early
to-morrow morning?"

Marsham thought over it. Easy enough, if only the engagement were
announced! But both agreed that silence was imperative. Whatever chance
there might be with Lady Lucy would be entirely destroyed were the
matter made public before her son had consulted her.

"Everybody here is on the tiptoe of expectation," said Sir James. "But
that you know; you must face it somehow. Invent a letter from
Ferrier--some party _contretemps_--anything!--I'll help you through. And
if you see your mother in the morning, I will turn up in the afternoon."

The two men paused. They were standing together--in conference; but each
was conscious of a background of hurrying thoughts that had so far been
hardly expressed at all.

Marsham suddenly broke out:

"Sir James!--I know you thought there were excuses--almost
justification--for what that poor creature did. I was a boy of fifteen
at the time you made your famous speech, and I only know it by report.
You spoke, of course, as an advocate--but I have heard it said--that you
expressed your own personal belief. Wherever the case is discussed,
there are still--as you know--two opinions--one more merciful than the
other. If the line you took was not merely professional; if you
personally believed your own case; can you give me some of the
arguments--you were probably unable to state them all in court--that
convinced you? Let me have something wherewith to meet my mother. She
won't look at this altogether from the worldly point of view. She will
have a standard of her own. Merely to belittle the thing, as long past
and forgotten, won't help me. But if I _could_ awaken her pity!--if you
could give me the wherewithal--"

Sir James turned away. He walked to the window and stood there a minute,
his face invisible. When he returned, his pallor betrayed what his
steady and dignified composure would otherwise have concealed.

"I can tell you what Mrs. Sparling told me--in prison--with the accents
of a dying woman--what I believed then--what I believe now.--Moreover, I
have some comparatively recent confirmation of this belief.--But this is
too public!"--he looked round the library--"we might be disturbed. Come
to my room to-night. I shall go up early, on the plea of letters. I
always carry with me--certain documents. For her child's sake, I will
show them to you."

At the last words the voice of the speaker, rich in every tender and
tragic note, no less than in those of irony or invective, wavered for
the first time. He stooped abruptly, took up the book he had been
reading, and left the room.

Marsham, too, went up-stairs. As he passed along the main corridor to
his room, lost in perplexity and foreboding, he heard the sound of a
woman's dress, and, looking up, saw Alicia Drake coming toward him.

She started at sight of him, and under the bright electric light of the
passage he saw her redden.

"Well, Oliver!--you stayed a good while."

"Not so very long. I have been home nearly an hour. I hope the horses
went well!"

"Excellently. Do you know where Sir James is?"

It seemed to him the question was significantly asked. He gave it a cold
answer.

"Not at this moment. He was in the smoking-room a little while ago."

He passed her abruptly. Alicia Drake pursued her way to the hall. She
was carrying some letters to the post-box near the front door. When she
arrived there she dropped two of them in at once, and held the other a
moment in her hand, looking at it. It was addressed to "Mrs.
Fotheringham, Manningham House, Leeds."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, Diana herself was wrestling with her own fate.

When Marsham rode away from her, and she had watched his tall figure
disappear into the dusk, she turned back toward the house, and saw it
and the world round it with new eyes. The moon shone on the old front,
mellowing it to a brownish ivory; the shadows of the trees lay clear on
the whitened grass; and in the luminous air colors of sunrise and of
moonrise blended, tints of pearl, of gold, and purple. A consecrating
beauty lay on all visible things, and spoke to the girl's tender and
passionate heart. In the shadow of the trees she stood a moment, her
hands clasped on her breast, recalling Marsham's words of love and
comfort, resting on him, reaching out through him to the Power behind
the world, which spoke surely through this loveliness of the night, this
joy in the soul!

And yet, her mood, her outlook--like Marsham's--was no longer what it
had been on the hill-side. No ugly light of revelation had broken upon
her, as upon him. But the conversation in the lime-walk had sobered the
first young exaltation of love; it had somehow divided them from the
happy lovers of every day; it had also divided them--she hardly knew how
or why--from that moment on the hill when Oliver had spoken of immediate
announcement and immediate marriage. Nothing was to be said--except to
Muriel--till Lady Lucy knew. She was glad. It made her bliss, in this
intervening moment, more fully her own. She thought with yearning of
Oliver's interview with his mother. A filial, though a trembling love
sprang up in her. And the sense of having come to shelter and to haven
seemed to give her strength for what she had never yet dared to face.
The past was now to be probed, interrogated. She was firmly resolved to
write to Riley & Bonner, to examine any papers there might be; not
because she was afraid that anything might come between her and Oliver;
rather because now, with his love to support her, she could bear
whatever there might be to bear.

She stepped into the house. Some one was strumming in the
drawing-room--with intervals between the strummings--as though the
player stopped to listen for something or some one. Diana shrank into
herself. She ran up-stairs noiselessly to her sitting-room, and opened
the door as quietly as possible.

"Muriel!"

The voice was almost a whisper. Mrs. Colwood did not hear it. She was
bending over the fire, with her back to the door, and a reading-lamp
beside her. To her amazement, Diana heard a sob, a sound of stifled
grief, which struck a sudden chill through her own excitement. She
paused a moment, and repeated her friend's name. Mrs. Colwood started.
She hastily rose, turning her face from Diana.

"Is that you? I thought you were still out."

Diana crossed the floor, and put her arm round the little gentle woman,
whose breath was still shaken by the quiet sobs she was trying
desperately to repress.

"Muriel, dear!--what is it?"

Mrs. Colwood found her voice, and her composure.

"Nothing! I was foolish--it doesn't matter."

Diana was sure she understood. She was suddenly ashamed to bring her own
happiness into this desolate and widowed presence, and the kisses with
which, mutely, she tried to comfort her friend, were almost a plea to
be forgiven.

But Muriel drew herself away. She looked searchingly, with recovered
self-command, into Diana's face.

"Has Mr. Marsham gone?"

"Yes," said Diana, looking at her.

Then the smile within broke out, flooding eyes and lips. Under the
influence of it, Mrs. Colwood's small tear-stained face passed through a
quick instinctive change. She, too, smiled as though she could not help
it; then she bent forward and kissed Diana.

"Is it all right?"

The peculiar eagerness in the tone struck Diana. She returned the kiss,
a little wistfully.

"Were you so anxious about me? Wasn't it--rather plain?"

Mrs. Colwood laughed.

"Sit down there, and tell me all about it."

She pushed Diana into a chair and sat down at her feet. Diana, with some
difficulty, her hand over her eyes, told all that could be told of a
moment the heart of which no true lover betrays. Muriel Colwood listened
with her face against the girl's dress, sometimes pressing her lips to
the hand beside her.

"Is he going to see Lady Lucy to-morrow?" she asked, when Diana paused.

"Yes. He goes up by the first train."

Both were silent awhile. Diana, in the midst of all the natural flutter
of blood and pulse, was conscious of a strong yearning to tell her
friend more--to say: "And he has brought me comfort and courage--as well
as love! I shall dare now to look into the past--to take up my father's
burden. If it hurts, Oliver will help me."

But she had been brought up in a school of reticence, and her loyalty to
her father and mother sealed her lips. That anxiety, that burden, nobody
must share with her but Oliver--and perhaps his mother; his mother, so
soon to be hers.

Muriel Colwood, watching her face, could hardly restrain herself. But
the moment for which her whole being was waiting in a tension scarcely
to be borne had not yet come. She chastened and rebuked her own dread.

They talked a little of the future. Diana, in a blessed fatigue, threw
herself back in her chair, and chattered softly, listening now and then
for the sounds of the piano in the room below, and evidently relieved
whenever, after a silence, fresh fragments from some comic opera of the
day, much belied in the playing, penetrated to the upper floor.
Meanwhile, neither of them spoke of Fanny Merton. Diana, with a laugh,
repeated Marsham's proposal for a six weeks' engagement. That was
absurd! But, after all, it could not be very long. She hoped Oliver
would be content to keep Beechcote. They could, of course, always spend
a good deal of time with Lady Lucy.

And in mentioning that name she showed not the smallest misgiving, not
a trace of uneasiness, while every time it was uttered it pricked the
shrinking sense of her companion. Mrs. Colwood had not watched and
listened during her Tallyn visit for nothing.

At last a clock struck down-stairs, and a door opened. Diana sprang up.

"Time to dress! And I've left Fanny alone all this while!"

She hurried toward the door; then turned back.

"Please!--I'm not going to tell Fanny just yet. Neither Fanny nor any
one--till Lady Lucy knows. What happened after we went away? Was
Fanny amused?"

"Very much, I should say."

"She made friends with Miss Drake?"

"They were inseparable, till Miss Drake departed."

Diana laughed.

"How odd! That I should never have prophesied. And Mr. Birch? I needn't
have him to lunch again, need I?"

"Miss Merton invited him to tea--on Saturday."

Diana reddened.

"Must I--!" she said, impetuously; then stopped herself, and opened the
door.

Outside, Fanny Merton was just mounting the stairs, a candle in her
hand. She stopped in astonishment at the sight of Diana.

"Diana! where have you been all this time?"

"Only talking to Muriel. We heard you playing; so we thought you weren't
dull," said Diana, rather penitently.

"I was only playing till you came in," was the sharp reply. "When did
Mr. Marsham go?"

Diana by this time was crossing the landing to the door of her room,
with Fanny behind her.

"Oh, quite an hour ago. Hadn't we better dress? Dinner will be ready
directly."

Fanny took no notice. She entered her cousin's room, in Diana's wake.

"Well?" she said, interrogatively. She leaned her back against the
wardrobe, and folded her arms.

Diana turned. She met Fanny's black eyes, sparkling with excitement.

"I'll give you my news at dinner," said Diana, flushing against her
will. "And I want to know how you liked Miss Drake."

Fanny's eyes shot fire.

"That's all very fine! That means, of course, that you're not going to
tell me anything!"

"Fanny!" cried Diana, helplessly. She was held spellbound by the
passion, the menace in the girl's look. But the touch of shrinking in
her attitude roused brutal violence in Fanny.

"Yes, it does!" she said, fiercely. "I understand!--don't I! I am not
good enough for you, and you'll make me feel it. You're going to make a
smart marriage, and you won't care whether you ever set eyes on any of
us again. Oh! I know you've given us money--or you say you will. If I
knew which side my bread was buttered, I suppose I should hold my
tongue.--But when you treat me like the dirt under your feet--when you
tell everything to that woman Mrs. Colwood, who's no relation, and
nothing in the world to you--and leave me kicking my heels all alone,
because I'm not the kind you want, and you wish to goodness I'd never
come--when you show as plain as you can that I'm a common creature--not
fit to pick up your gloves!--I tell you I just won't stand it. No one
would--who knew what I know!"

The last words were flung in Diana's teeth with all the force that
wounded pride and envious wrath could give them. Diana tottered a
little. Her hand clung to the dressing-table behind her.

"What do you know?" she said. "Tell me at once--what you mean."

Fanny contemptuously shook her head. She walked to the door, and before
Diana could stop her, she had rushed across to her own room and locked
herself in.

There she walked up and down panting. She hardly understood her own
rage, and she was quite conscious that, for her own interests, she had
acted during the whole afternoon like a fool. First, stung by the pique
excited in her by the talk of the luncheon-table, she had let herself be
exploited and explored by Alicia Drake. She had not meant to tell her
secret, but somehow she had told it, simply to give herself importance
with this smart lady, and to feel her power over Diana. Then, it was no
sooner told than she was quickly conscious that she had given away an
advantage, which from a tactical point of view she had infinitely better
have kept; and that the command of the situation might have passed from
her to this girl whom Diana had supplanted. Furious with herself, she
had tried to swear Miss Drake to silence, only to be politely but rather
scornfully put aside.

Then the party had broken up. Mr. Birch had been offended by the absence
of the hostess, and had vouchsafed but a careless good-bye to Miss
Merton. The Roughsedges went off without asking her to visit them; and
as for the Captain, he was an odious young man. Since their departure,
Mrs. Colwood had neglected her, and now Diana's secret return, her long
talk with Mrs. Colwood, had filled the girl's cup of bitterness. She had
secured that day a thousand pounds for her family and herself; and at
the end of it, she merely felt that the day had been an abject and
intolerable failure! Did the fact that she so felt it bear strange
witness to the truth that at the bottom of her anger and her cruelty
there was a masked and distorted something which was not wholly
vile--which was, in fact, the nature's tribute to something nobler than
itself? That Diana shivered at and repulsed her was the hot-iron that
burned and seared. And that she richly deserved it--and knew it--made
its smart not a whit the less.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fanny did not appear at dinner. Mrs. Colwood and Diana dined
alone--Diana very white and silent. After dinner, Diana began slowly to
climb the shallow old staircase. Mrs. Colwood followed her.

"Where are you going?" she said, trying to hold her back.

Diana looked at her. In the girl's eyes there was a sudden and tragic
indignation.

"Do you all know?" she said, under her breath--"all--all of you?" And
again she began to mount, with a resolute step.

Mrs. Colwood dared not follow her any farther. Diana went quickly up and
along the gallery; she knocked at Fanny's door. After a moment Mrs.
Colwood heard it opened, and a parley of voices--Fanny's short and
sullen, Diana's very low. Then the door closed, and Mrs. Colwood knew
that the cousins were together.

How the next twenty minutes passed, Mrs. Colwood could never remember.
At the end of them she heard steps slowly coming down the stairs, and a
cry--her own name--not in Diana's voice. She ran out into the hall.

At the top of the stairs, stood Fanny Merton, not daring to move
farther. Her eyes were starting out of her head, her face flushed and
distorted.

"You go to her!" She stooped, panting, over the balusters, addressing
Mrs. Colwood. "She won't let me touch her."

Diana descended, groping. At the foot of the stairs she caught at Mrs.
Colwood's hand, went swaying across the hall and into the drawing-room.
There she closed the door, and looked into Mrs. Colwood's eyes. Muriel
saw a face in which bloom and first youth were forever dead, though in
its delicate features horror was still beautiful. She threw her arms
round the girl, weeping. But Diana put her aside. She walked to a chair,
and sat down. "My mother--" she said, looking up.

Her voice dropped. She moistened her dry lips, and began once more: "My
mother--"

But the brain could maintain its flickering strength no longer. There
was a low cry of "Oliver!" that stabbed the heart; then, suddenly, her
limbs were loosened, and she sank back, unconscious, out of her friend's
grasp and ken.


CHAPTER XI


"Her ladyship will be here directly, sir." Lady Lucy's immaculate butler
opened the door of her drawing-room in Eaton Square, ushered in Sir
James Chide, noiselessly crossed the room to see to the fire, and then
as noiselessly withdrew.

"Impossible that any one should be as respectable as that man looks!"
thought Sir James, impatiently. He walked forward to the fire, warmed
hands and feet chilled by a nipping east wind, and then, with his back
to the warmth, he examined the room.

It was very characteristic of its mistress. At Tallyn Henry Marsham had
worked his will; here, in this house taken since his death, it was the
will and taste of his widow which had prevailed. A gray paper with a
small gold sprig upon it, sofas and chairs not too luxurious, a Brussels
carpet, dark and unobtrusive, and chintz curtains; on the walls,
drawings by David Cox, Copley Fielding, and De Wint; a few books with
Mudie labels; costly photographs of friends and relations, especially of
the relations' babies; on one table, and under a glass case, a model in
pith of Lincoln Cathedral, made by Lady Lucy's uncle, who had been a
Canon of Lincoln; on another, a set of fine carved chessmen; such was
the furniture of the room. It expressed--and with emphasis--the tastes
and likings of that section of English society in which, firmly based as
it is upon an ample supply of all material goods, a seemly and
intelligent interest in things ideal and spiritual is also to be found.
Everything in the room was in its place, and had been in its place for
years. Sir James got no help from the contemplation of it.

The door opened, and Lady Lucy came quietly in. Sir James looked at her
sharply as they shook hands. She had more color than usual; but the
result was to make the face look older, and certain lines in it
disagreeably prominent. Very likely she had been crying. He hoped
she had.

"Oliver told you to expect me?"

She assented. Then, still standing, she looked at him steadily.

"This is a very terrible affair, Sir James."

"Yes. It must have been a great shock to you."

"Oh! that does not matter," she said, impatiently. "I must not think of
myself. I must think of Oliver. Will you sit down?"

She motioned him, in her stately way, to a seat. He realized, as he
faced her, that he beheld her in a new aspect. She was no longer the
gracious and smiling hostess, as her familiar friends knew her, both at
Tallyn and in London. Her manner threw a sudden light on certain
features in her history: Marsham's continued dependence on his mother
and inadequate allowance, the autocratic ability shown in the management
of the Tallyn household and estates, management in which Marsham was
allowed practically no share at all, and other traits and facts long
known to him. The gentle, scrupulous, composed woman of every day had
vanished in something far more vigorously drawn; he felt himself
confronted by a personality as strong as, and probably more stubborn
than his own.

Lady Lucy seated herself. She quietly arranged the folds of her black
satin dress; she drew forward a stool, and rested her feet upon it. Sir
James watched her, uncertain how to begin. But she saved him
the decision.

"I have had a painful interview with my son" she said, quietly. "It
could not be otherwise, and I can only hope that in a little while he
will do me justice. Oliver will join us presently. And now--first, Sir
James, let me ask you--you really believe that Miss Mallory has been
till now in ignorance of her mother's history?"

Sir James started.

"Good Heavens, Lady Lucy! Can you--do you--suppose anything else?"

Lady Lucy paused before replying.

"I cannot suppose it--since both you and my son--and Mr. Ferrier--have
so high an opinion of her. But it is a strange and mysterious thing that
she should have remained in this complete ignorance all these years--and
a cruel thing, of course--to everybody concerned."

Sir James nodded.

"I agree. It was a cruel thing, though it was done, no doubt, from the
tenderest motives. The suffering was bound to be not less but more,
sooner or later."

"Miss Mallory is very greatly to be pitied. But it is, of course, clear
that my son proposed to her, not knowing what it was essential that he
should know."

Sir James paused.

"We are old friends, Lady Lucy--you and I," he said at last, with
deliberation; and as he spoke he bent forward and took her hand. "I am
sure you will let me ask you a few questions."

Lady Lucy made no reply. Her hand--without any movement of withdrawal
or rebuff--gently dropped from his.

"You have been, I think, much attracted by Miss Mallory herself?"

"Very much attracted. Up to this morning I thought that she would make
an excellent wife for Oliver. But I have been acting, of course,
throughout under a false impression."

"Is it your feeling that to marry her would injure Oliver's career?"

"Certainly. But that is not what weighs with me most heavily."

"I did not for a moment believe that it would. However, let us take the
career first. This is how I look at it. If the marriage went forward,
there would no doubt be some scandal and excitement at first, when the
truth was known. But Oliver's personality and the girl's charm would
soon live it down. In this strange world I am not at all sure it might
not in the end help their future. Oliver would be thought to have done a
generous and romantic thing, and his wife's goodness and beauty would be
all the more appreciated for the background of tragedy."

Lady Lucy moved impatiently.

"Sir James--I am a plain person, with plain ideas. The case would
present itself to me very differently; and I believe that my view would
be that of the ordinary man and woman. However, I repeat, that is not
what I think of first--by any means."

"You think of the criminal taint?--the risk to Oliver--and to Oliver's
children?"

She made a sign of assent.

"Character--and the protection of character--is not that what we have
to think of--above all--in this world of temptation? We can none of us
afford to throw away the ordinary helps and safeguards. How can I
possibly aid and abet Oliver's marriage with the daughter of a woman who
first robbed her own young sister, in a peculiarly mean and cruel way,
and then committed a deliberate and treacherous murder?"

"Wait a moment!" exclaimed Sir James, holding up his hand. "Those
adjectives, believe me, are unjust."

"I know that you think so," was the animated reply. "But I remember the
case; I have my own opinion."

"They are unjust," repeated Sir James, with emphasis. "Then it is really
the horror of the thing itself--not so much its possible effect on
social position and opinion, which decides you?"

"I ask myself--I must ask myself," said his companion, with equal
emphasis, forcing the words: "can I help Oliver to marry the
daughter--of a convicted murderess--and adulteress?"

"No!" said Sir James, holding up his hand again--"_No!"_

Lady Lucy fell back in her chair. Her unwonted color had disappeared,
and the old hand lying in her lap--a hand thin to emaciation--shook
a little.

"Is not this too painful for us both, Sir James?--can we continue it? I
have my duty to think of; and yet--I cannot, naturally, speak to you
with entire frankness. Nor can I possibly regard your view as an
impartial one. Forgive me. I should not have dreamed of referring to the
matter in any other circumstances."

"Certainly, I am not impartial," said Sir James, looking up. "You know
that, of course, well enough."

He spoke in a strong full voice. Lady Lucy encountered a singular
vivacity in the gray eyes, as though the whole power of the man's
personality backed the words.

"Believe me," she said, with dignity, and not without kindness, "it is
not I who would revive such memories."

Sir James nodded quietly.

"I am not impartial; but I am well informed. It was my view which
affected the judge, and ultimately the Home Office. And since the
trial--in quite recent years--I have received a strange confirmation of
it which has never been made public. Did Oliver report this to you?"

"He told me certain facts," said Lady Lucy, unwillingly; "but I did not
see that they made much difference."

"Perhaps he did not give them the right emphasis," said Sir James,
calmly. "Will you allow _me_ to tell you the whole story?--as it
appears to me."

Lady Lucy looked distressed.

"Is it worth while," she said, earnestly, "to give yourself so much
pain? I cannot imagine that it could alter the view I take of my duty."

Sir James flushed, and sternly straightened himself. It was a well-known
gesture, and ominous to many a prisoner in the dock.

"Worth while!" he said. "Worth while!--when your son's future may depend
on the judgment you form."

The sharpness of his tone called the red also to Lady Lucy's cheek.

"Can anything that may be said now alter the irrevocable?" she asked, in
protest.

"It cannot bring the dead to life; but if you are really more
influenced in this matter by the heinousness of the crime itself, by the
moral infection, so to speak--that may spring from any kinship with
Juliet Sparling or inheritance from her--than by any dread of social
disgrace or disadvantage--if that be true!--then for Oliver's sake--for
that poor child's sake--you _ought_ to listen to me! There, I can meet
you--there, I have much to say."

He looked at her earnestly. The slight, involuntary changes of
expression in Lady Lucy, as he was speaking, made him say to himself:
"She is _not_ indifferent to the social stigma--she deceives herself!"
But he made no sign of his perception; he held her to her word.

She paused, in evident hesitation, saying at last, with some coldness:

"If you wish it, Sir James, of course I am quite ready to listen. I
desire to do nothing harshly."

"I will not keep you long."

Bending forward, his hands on his knees, his eyes upon the ground, he
thought a moment. When he began to speak, it was in a quiet and
perfectly colorless tone.

"I knew Juliet Wentworth first--when she was seventeen. I was on the
Midland Circuit, and went down to the Milchester Assizes. Her father was
High Sheriff, and asked me, with other barristers of the Circuit, not
only to his official dinner in the county town, but to luncheon at his
house, a mile or two away. There I saw Miss Wentworth. She made a deep
impression on me. After the Assizes were over, I stayed at her father's
house and in the neighborhood. Within a month I proposed to her. She
refused me. I merely mention these circumstances for the sake of
reporting my first impressions of her character. She was very young, and
of an extraordinarily nervous and sensitive organization. She used to
remind me of Horace's image of the young fawn trembling and starting in
the mountain paths at the rustling of a leaf or the movement of a
lizard. I felt then that her life might very well be a tragedy, and I
passionately desired to be able to protect and help her. However, she
would have nothing to do with me, and after a little while I lost sight
of her. I did happen to hear that her father, having lost his first
wife, had married again, that the girl was not happy at home, and had
gone off on a long visit to some friends in the United States. Then for
years I heard nothing. One evening, about ten years after my first
meeting with her, I read in the evening papers the accounts of a
'Supposed Murder at Brighton.' Next morning Riley & Bonner retained me
for the defence. Mr. Riley came to see me, with Mr. Sparling, the
husband of the incriminated lady, and it was in the course of my
consultation with them that I learned who Mrs. Sparling was. I had to
consider whether to take up the case or not; I saw at once it would be a
fight for her life, and I accepted it."

"What a terrible--terrible--position!" murmured Lady Lucy, who was
shading her eyes with her hand.

Sir James took no notice. His trained mind and sense were now wholly
concerned with the presentation of his story.

"The main facts, as I see them, were these. Juliet Wentworth had
married--four years before this date--a scholar and archæologist whom
she had met at Harvard during her American stay. Mr. Sparling was an
Englishman, and a man of some means who was devoting himself to
exploration in Asia Minor. The marriage was not really happy, though
they were in love with each other. In both there was a temperament
touched with melancholy, and a curious incapacity to accept the common
facts of life. Both hated routine, and were always restless for new
experience. Mrs. Sparling was brilliant in society. She was wonderfully
handsome, in a small slight way; her face was not unlike Miss Curran's
picture of Shelley--the same wildness and splendor in the eyes, the same
delicacy of feature, the same slight excess of breadth across the
cheek-bones, and curly mass of hair. She was odd, wayward,
eccentric--yet always lovable and full of charm. He was a fine creature
in many ways, but utterly unfit for practical life. His mind was always
dreaming of buried treasure--the treasure of the archæologist: tombs,
vases, gold ornaments, papyri; he had the passion of the excavator
and explorer.

"They came back to England from America shortly after their marriage,
and their child was born. The little girl was three years old when
Sparling went off to dig in a remote part of Asia Minor. His wife
resented his going; but there is no doubt that she was still deeply in
love with him. She herself took a little house at Brighton for the
child's sake. Her small startling beauty soon made her remarked, and her
acquaintances rapidly increased. She was too independent and
unconventional to ask many questions about the people that amused her;
she took them as they came--"

"Sir James!--dear Sir James." Lady Lucy raised a pair of imploring
hands. "What good can it do that you should tell me all this? It shows
that this poor creature had a wild, undisciplined character. Could any
one ever doubt it?"

"Wild? undisciplined?" repeated Sir James. "Well, if you think that you
have disposed of the mystery of it by those adjectives! For me--looking
back--she was what life and temperament and heredity had made her. Up
to this point it was an innocent wildness. She could lose herself in art
or music; she did often the most romantic and generous things; she
adored her child; and but for some strange kink in the tie that bound
them, she would have adored her husband. Well!"--he shrugged his
shoulders mournfully--"there it is: she was alone--she was
beautiful--she had no doubt a sense of being neglected--she was
thirsting for some deeper draught of life than had yet been hers--and by
the hideous irony of fate she found it--in gambling!--and in the
friendship which ruined her!"

Sir James paused. Rising from his chair, he began to pace the large
room. The immaculate butler came in, made up the fire, and placed the
tea: domestic and comfortable rites, in grim contrast with the story
that held the minds of Lady Lucy and her guest. She sat motionless
meanwhile; the butler withdrew, and the tea remained untouched.

"Sir Francis and Lady Wing--the two fiends who got possession of
her--had been settled at Brighton for about a year. Their debts had
obliged them to leave London, and they had not yet piled up a sufficient
mountain of fresh ones to drive them out of Brighton. The man was the
disreputable son of a rich and hard-working father who, in the usual
way, had damned his son by removing all incentives to work, and turning
him loose with a pile of money. He had married an adventuress--a girl
with a music-hall history, some beauty, plenty of vicious ability, and
no more conscience than a stone. They were the centre of a gambling and
racing set; but Lady Wing was also a very fine musician, and it was
through this talent of hers that she and Juliet Sparling became
acquainted. They met, first, at a charity concert! Mrs. Sparling had a
fine voice, Lady Wing accompanied her. The Wings flattered her, and
professed to adore her. Her absent whimsical character prevented her
from understanding what kind of people they were; and in her great
ignorance of the world, combined with her love of the romantic and the
extreme, she took the persons who haunted their house for Bohemians,
when she should have known them--the majority of them--for scoundrels.
You will remember that baccarat was then the rage. The Wings played it
incessantly, and were very skilful in the decoying and plunder of young
men. Juliet Sparling was soon seized by the excitement of the game, and
her beauty, her evident good breeding and good faith, were of
considerable use to the Wings' _ménage_. Very soon she had lost all the
money that her husband had left to her credit, and her bankers wrote to
notify her that she was overdrawn. A sudden terror of Sparling's
displeasure seized her; she sold a bracelet, and tried to win back what
she had lost. The result was only fresh loss, and in a panic she played
on and on, till one disastrous night she got up from the baccarat-table
heavily in debt to one or two persons, including Sir Francis Wing. With
the morning came a letter from her husband, remonstrating in a rather
sharp tone on what her own letters--and probably an account from some
other source--had told him of her life at Brighton; insisting on the
need for economy, owing to his own heavy expenses in the great
excavation he was engaged upon; and expressing the peremptory hope that
she would make the money he had left her last for another two months--"

Sir James lingered in his walk. He stared out of window at the square
garden for a few moments, then turned to look frowning at his companion.

"Then came her temptation. Her father had died a year before, leaving
her the trustee of her only sister, who was not yet of age. It had taken
some little time to wind up his affairs; but on the day after she
received her husband's letter of remonstrance, six thousand pounds out
of her father's estate was paid into her banking account. By this time
she was in one of those states of excitement and unreasoning terror to
which she had been liable from her childhood. She took the trust money
in order to pay the debts, and then gambled again in order to replace
the trust money. Her motive throughout was the motive of the hunted
creature. She was afraid of confessing to her husband, especially by
letter. She believed he would cast her off--and in her despair and
remorse she clung to his affection, and to the hope of his coming home,
as she had never yet done.

"In less than a month--in spite of ups and downs of fortune, probably
skilfully contrived by Francis Wing and his accomplices--for there can
be no question that the play was fraudulent--she had lost four thousand
out of the six; and it is clear that more than once she thought of
suicide as the only way out, and nothing but the remembrance of the
child restrained her. By this time Francis Wing, who was a most
handsome, well-bred, and plausible villain, was desperately in love with
her--if one can use the word love for such a passion. He began to lend
her money in small sums. She was induced to look upon him as her only
friend, and forced by the mere terror of the situation in which she
found herself to propitiate and play him as best she might. One day, in
an unguarded moment of remorse, she let him guess what had happened
about the trust money. Thenceforward she was wholly in his power. He
pressed his attentions upon her; and she, alternately civil and
repellent, as her mood went, was regarded by some of the guests in the
house as not unlikely to respond to them in the end. Meanwhile he had
told his wife the secret of the trust money for his own purposes. Lady
Wing, who was an extremely jealous woman, believed at this time that he
was merely pretending a passion for Mrs. Sparling in order the more
securely to plunder what still remained of the six thousand pounds. She
therefore aided and abetted him; and _her_ plan, no doubt, was to wait
till they and their accomplices had absorbed the last of Mrs. Sparling's
money, and then to make a midnight flitting, leaving their victim to
her fate.

"The _dénouement_, however, came with frightful rapidity. Brides and
bridegrooms in France, except of the very high classes, are not much in
the habit of making those honeymoon excursions so universal in this
country. A day spent in visiting Versailles or St.
Cloud, or even the public places of the city, is generally all that
precedes the settling down into the habits of daily life. In the present
instance St. Denis was selected, from the circumstance of Natalie's
having a younger sister at school there; and also because she had a
particular desire to see the Abbey.

The wedding was to take place on a Thursday; and on the Wednesday evening,
having spent some hours most agreeably with Natalie, Antoine de
Chaulieu returned to spend his last night in his bachelor apartments.
His wardrobe and other small possessions, had already been packed up
and sent to his future home; and there was nothing left in his room now,
but his new wedding suit, which he inspected with considerable satisfaction
before he undressed and lay down to sleep.
Sleep, however, was somewhat slow to visit him; and the clock
had struck one, before he closed his eyes. When he opened them again, it
was broad daylight; and his first thought was, had he overslept
himself! He sat up in bed to look at the clock which was exactly
opposite, and as he did so, in the large mirror over the fireplace,
he perceived a figure standing behind him. As the dilated eyes met his
own, he saw it was the face of Jacques Rollet. Overcome with horror he
sunk back on his pillow, and it was some minutes before he ventured
to look again in that direction; when he did so, the figure had
disappeared.

The sudden revulsion of feeling such a vision was calculated to occasion
in a man elate with joy, may be conceived! For some time after the death
of his former foe, he had been visited by not unfrequent twinges of
conscience; but of late, borne along by success, and the hurry of
Parisian life, these unpleasant remembrances had grown rarer, till at
length they had faded away altogether. Nothing had been further
from his thoughts than Jacques Rollet, when he closed his eyes on
the preceding night, nor when he opened them to that sun which was
to shine on what he expected to be the happiest day of his life! Where
were the high-strung nerves now! The elastic frame! The bounding
heart!

Heavily and slowly he arose from his bed, for it was time to do so; and
with a trembling hand and quivering knees, he went through the
processes of the toilet, gashing his cheek with the razor, and
spilling the water over his well polished boots.

When he was dressed, scarcely venturing to cast a glance in the
mirror as he passed it, he quitted the room and descended the stairs,
taking the key of the door with him for the purpose of leaving it
with the porter; the man, however, being absent, he laid it on the
table in his lodge, and with a relaxed and languid step proceeded
on his way to the church, where presently arrived the fair Natalie
and her friends.

"Now I ask you to notice two points in the story as I have told it. My
cross-examination of Wing served its purpose as an exposure of the
man--except in one direction. He swore that Mrs. Sparling had made
dishonorable advances to him, and had finally become his mistress, in
order to buy his silence on the trust money and the continuance of his
financial help. On the other hand, the case for the defence was that--as
I have stated--it was in the maddened state of feeling, provoked by his
attack upon her honor, and made intolerable by the wife's taunts and
threats, that Juliet Sparling struck the fatal blow. At the trial the
judge believed me; the jury--and a large part of the public--you, I have
no doubt among them--believed Wing. The jury were probably influenced by
some of the evidence given by the fellow-guests in the house, which
seemed to me simply to amount to this--that a woman in the strait in
which Juliet Sparling was will endeavor, out of mortal fear, to keep the
ruffian who has her in his power in a good-humor."

"However, I have now confirmatory evidence for my theory of the
matter--evidence which has never been produced--and which I tell you now
simply because the happiness of her child--and of your son--is
at stake."

Lady Lucy moved a little. The color returned to her cheeks. Sir James,
however, gave her no time to interrupt. He stood before her, smiting
one hand against another, to emphasize his words, as he continued:

"Francis Wing lived for some eighteen years after Mrs. Sparling's death.
Then, just as the police were at last on his track as the avengers of a
long series of frauds, he died at Antwerp in extreme poverty and
degradation. The day before he died he dictated a letter to me, which
reached me, through a priest, twenty-four hours after his death. For his
son's sake, he invited me to regard it as confidential. If Mrs. Sparling
had been alive I should, of course, have taken no notice of the request.
But she had been dead for eighteen years; I had lost sight completely of
Sparling and the child, and, curiously enough, I knew something of
Wing's son. He was about ten years old at the death of his mother, and
was then rescued from his father by the Wing kindred and decently
brought up. At the time the letter reached me he was a promising young
man of eight-and-twenty, he had just been called to the Bar, and he was
in the chambers of a friend of mine. By publishing Wing's confession I
could do no good to the dead, and I might harm the living. So I held my
tongue. Whether, now, I should still hold it is, no doubt, a question.

"However, to go back to the statement. Wing declared to me in this
letter that Juliet Sparling's relation to him had been absolutely
innocent, that he had persecuted her with his suit, and she had never
given him a friendly word, except out of fear. On the fatal evening he
had driven her out of her mind, he said, by his behavior in the garden;
she was not answerable for her actions; and his evidence at the trial
was merely dictated either by the desire to make his own case look less
black or by the fiendish wish to punish Juliet Sparling for her
loathing of him.

"But he confessed something else!--more important still. I must go back
a little. You will remember my version of the dagger incident? I
represented Mrs. Sparling as finding the dagger on the wall as she was
pushed or dragged up against the panelling by her antagonist--as it
were, under her hand. Wing swore at the trial that the dagger was not
there, and had never been there. The house belonged to an old traveller
and sportsman who had brought home arms of different sorts from all
parts of the world. The house was full of them. There were two
collections of them on the wall of the dining-room, one in the hall, and
one or two in the gallery. Wing declared that the dagger used was taken
by Juliet Sparling from the hall trophy, and must have been carried
up-stairs with a deliberate purpose of murder. According to him, their
quarrel in the garden had been a quarrel about money matters, and Mrs.
Sparling had left him, in great excitement, convinced that the chief
obstacle in the way of her complete control of Wing and his money lay in
the wife. There again--as to the weapon--I had no means of refuting him.
As far as the appearance--after the murder--of the racks holding the
arms was concerned, the weapon might have been taken from either place.
And again--on the whole--the jury believed Wing. The robbery of the
sister's money--the incredible rapidity of Juliet Sparling's
deterioration--had set them against her. Her wild beauty, her proud and
dumb misery in the dock, were of a kind rather to alienate the plain man
than to move him. They believed her capable of anything--and it was
natural enough.

"But Wing confessed to me that he knew perfectly well that the dagger
belonged to the stand in the gallery. He had often examined the arms
there, and was quite certain of the fact. He swore this to the priest.
Here, again, you can only explain his evidence by a desire for revenge."

Sir James paused. As he moved a little away from his companion his
expression altered. It was as though he put from him the external
incidents and considerations with which he had been dealing, and the
vivacity of manner which fitted them. Feelings and forces of another
kind emerged, clothing themselves in the beauty of an incomparable
voice, and in an aspect of humane and melancholy dignity.

He turned to Lady Lucy.

"Now then," he said, gently, "I am in a position to put the matter to
you finally, as--before God--it appears to me. Juliet Sparling--as I
said to Oliver last night--was not a bad woman! She sinned deeply, but
she was never false to her husband in thought or deed; none of her
wrong-doing was deliberate; she was tortured by remorse; and her
murderous act was the impulse of a moment, and partly in self-defence.
It was wholly unpremeditated; and it killed her no less than her victim.
When, next day, she was removed by the police, she was already a dying
woman. I have in my possession a letter--written to me by her--after her
release, in view of her impending death, by the order of the Home
Office--a few days before she died. It is humble--it is
heart-rending--it breathes the sincerity of one who had turned all her
thoughts from earth; but it thanked me for having read her aright; and
if ever I could have felt a doubt of my own interpretation of the
case--but, thank God, I never did!--that letter would have shamed it
out of me! Poor soul, poor soul! She sinned, and she suffered--agonies,
beyond any penalty of man's inflicting. Will you prolong her punishment
in her child?"

Lady Lucy had covered her face with her hand. He saw her breath flutter
in her breast. And sitting down beside her, blanched by the effort he
had made, and by the emotion he had at last permitted himself, yet
fixing his eyes steadily on the woman before him, he waited for
her reply.


CHAPTER XII


Lady Lucy did not reply at once. She slowly drew forward the neglected
tea-table, made tea, and offered it to Sir James. He took it
impatiently, the Irish blood in him running hot and fast; and when she
had finished her cup, and still the silence lasted, except for the
trivial question-and-answer of the tea-making, he broke in upon it with
a somewhat peremptory--

"Well?"

Lady Lucy clasped her hands on her lap. The hand which had been so far
bare was now gloved like the other, and something in the spectacle of
the long fingers, calmly interlocked and clad in spotless white kid,
increased the secret exasperation in her companion.

"Believe me, dear Sir James," she said at last, lifting her clear brown
eyes, "I am very grateful to you. It must have been a great effort for
you to tell me this awful story, and I thank you for the confidence you
have reposed in me."

Sir James pushed his chair back.

"I did it, of course, for a special reason," he said, sharply. "I hope I
have given you cause to change your mind."

She shook her head slowly.

"What have you proved to me? That Mrs. Sparling's crime was not so
hideous as some of us supposed?--that she did not fall to the lowest
depths of all?--and that she endured great provocation? But could
anything really be more vile than the history of those weeks of
excitement and fraud?--of base yielding to temptation?--of cruelty to
her husband and child?--even as you have told it? Her conduct led
directly to adultery and violence. If, by God's mercy, she was saved
from the worst crimes imputed to her, does it make much difference to
the moral judgment we must form?"

He looked at her in amazement.

"No difference!--between murder and a kind of accident?--between
adultery and fidelity?"

Lady Lucy hesitated--then resumed, with stubbornness: "You put it--like
an advocate. But look at the indelible facts--look at the future. Denis,
being announced, furnished an excuse for hastily leaving the table.
Looking at his watch, he declared it was late; and Natalie, who saw how
eager he was to be gone, threw her shawl over her shoulders, and
bidding her friends _good morning_, they hurried away.A woman does not gamble, steal, and
take life in a moment of violence without some exceptional flaw in
temperament and will, and we see again and again how such flaws reappear
in the descendants of weak and wicked people. Then again--Oliver must
renounce and throw away all that is implied in family memories and
traditions. His wife could never speak to her children and his of her
own mother and bringing up. They would be kept in ignorance, as she
herself was kept, till the time came that they must know. Say what you
will, Juliet Sparling was condemned to death for murder in a notorious
case--after a trial which also branded her as a thief. Think of a boy at
Eton or Oxford--a girl in her first youth--hearing for the first
time--perhaps in some casual way--the story of the woman whose blood ran
in theirs!--What a cloud on a family!--what a danger and drawback for
young lives!"

Her delicate features, under the crown of white hair, were once more
flooded with color, and the passion in her eyes held them steady under
Sir James's penetrating look. Through his inner mind there ran the cry:
"Pharisee!--Hypocrite!"

But he fought on.

"Lady Lucy!--your son loves this girl--remember that! And in herself you
admit that she is blameless--all that you could desire for his
wife--remember that also."

"I remember both. But I was brought up by people who never admitted that
any feeling was beyond our control or ought to be indulged--against
right and reason."

"Supposing Oliver entirely declines to take your view?--supposing he
marries Miss Mallory?"

"He will not break my heart," she said, drawing a quicker breath. "He
will get over it."

"But if he persists?"

"He must take the consequences. I cannot aid and abet him."

"And the girl herself? She has accepted him. She is young, innocent,
full of tender and sensitive feeling. Is it possible that you should not
weigh her claim against your fears and scruples?"

"I feel for her most sincerely."

Sir James suddenly threw out a restless foot, which caught Lady Lucy's
fox terrier, who was snoozing under the tea-table. He hastily
apologized, and the speaker resumed:

"But, in my opinion, she would do a far nobler thing if she regarded
herself as bound to some extent to bear her mother's burden--to pay her
mother's debt to society. It will be worth while explaining, that the
circle in each page is made to represent some object in connection with
the story; and, that as some of them have proved rather puzzling, to
Juvenile admirers has been left the task of "finding them out."But to enter a family with an
unstained record, bearing with her such a name and such associations,
would be, in my opinion, a wrong and selfish act!"

Lady Lucy drew herself to her full height. In the dusk of the declining
afternoon the black satin and white ruffles of her dress, her white head
in its lace cap, her thin neck and shoulders, her tall slenderness, and
the rigidity of her attitude, made a formidable study in personality.
Sir James's whole soul rose in one scornful and indignant protest. But
he felt himself beaten. The only hope lay in Oliver himself.

He rose slowly from his chair.

"It is useless, I see, to try and argue the matter further. But I warn
you: I do not believe that Oliver will obey you, and--forgive me Lady
Lucy!--but--frankly--I hope he will not. Nor will he suffer too
severely, even if you, his mother, desert him. Miss Mallory has some
fortune--"

"Oliver will not live upon his wife!"

"He may accept her aid till he has found some way of earning money. What
amazes me--if you will allow me the liberty of an old friend--is that
you should think a woman justified in coercing a son of mature age in
such a matter!"

His tone, his manner pierced Lady Lucy's pride. She threw back her head
nervously, but her tone was calm:

"A woman to whom property has been intrusted must do her best to see
that the will and desires of those who placed it in her hands are
carried out!"

"Well, well!"--Sir James looked for his stick--"I am sorry for
Oliver--but"--he straightened himself--"it will make a bigger man
of him."

Lady Lucy made no reply, but her expression was eloquent of a patience
which her old friend might abuse if he would.

"Does Ferrier know? Have you consulted him?" asked Sir James, turning
abruptly.

"He will be here, I think, this afternoon--as usual," said Lady Lucy,
evasively. "And, of course, he must know what concerns us so deeply."

As she spoke the hall-door bell was heard.

"That is probably he." She looked at her companion uncertainly. "Don't
go, Sir James--unless you are really in a hurry."

