"There's a Mr Rainsby on the seventh floor. He's a broker down on
Wall Street. Short man with an impediment in his speech."

Jill snapped the clasp of her bag.

"Never mind," she said. "I must have made a mistake. I was quite sure
that this was the address, but it evidently isn't. Thank you so much.
I'm so sorry to have bothered you."

She walked away, leaving the Terror of Paraguay and all points west
speechless: for people who said "Thank you so much" to him were even
rarer than those who said "please." He followed her with an
affectionate eye till she was out of sight, then, restoring his
chewing-gum to circulation, returned to the perusal of his paper. A
momentary suggestion presented itself to his mind that what Jill had
really wanted was Mr Willoughby on the eighth floor, but it was too
late to say so now: and soon, becoming absorbed in the narrative of a
spirited householder in Kansas who had run amuck with a hatchet and
slain six, he dismissed the matter from his mind.


3.

Jill walked back to Fifth Avenue, crossed it, and made her way
thoughtfully along the breezy street which, flanked on one side by
the Park and on the other by the green-roofed Plaza Hotel and the
apartment houses of the wealthy, ends in the humbler and more
democratic spaces of Columbus Circle. She perceived that she was in
that position, familiar to melodrama, of being alone in a great city.
The reflection brought with it a certain discomfort. The bag that
dangled from her wrist contained all the money she had in the world,
the very broken remains of the twenty dollars which Uncle Chris had
sent her at Brookport. She had nowhere to go, nowhere to sleep, and
no immediately obvious means of adding to her capital. It was a
situation which she had not foreseen when she set out to walk to
Brookport station.

She pondered over the mystery of Uncle Chris' disappearance, and
found no solution. The thing was inexplicable. She was as sure of the
address he had given in his letter as she was of anything in the
world. Yet at that address nothing had been heard of him. His name
was not even known. These were deeper waters than Jill was able to
fathom.

She walked on, aimlessly. Presently she came to Columbus Circle, and,
crossing Broadway at the point where that street breaks out into an
eruption of automobile stores, found herself suddenly hungry,
opposite a restaurant whose entire front was a sheet of plate glass.
On the other side of this glass, at marble-topped tables, apparently
careless of their total lack of privacy, sat the impecunious,
lunching, their every mouthful a spectacle for the passer-by. It
reminded Jill of looking at fishes in an aquarium. In the center of
the window, gazing out in a distrait manner over piles of apples and
grape-fruit, a white-robed ministrant at a stove juggled ceaselessly
with buckwheat cakes. He struck the final note in the candidness of
the establishment, a priest whose ritual contained no mysteries.
Spectators with sufficient time on their hands to permit them to
stand and watch were enabled to witness a New York mid-day meal in
every stage of its career, from its protoplasmic beginnings as a
stream of yellowish-white liquid poured on top of the stove to its
ultimate Nirvana in the interior of the luncher in the form of an
appetising cake. It was a spectacle which no hungry girl could
resist. Jill went in, and, as she made her way among the tables, a
voice spoke her name.

"Miss Mariner!"

Jill jumped, and thought for a moment that the thing must have been
an hallucination. It was impossible that anybody in the place should
have called her name. Except for Uncle Chris, wherever he might be,
she knew no one in New York. Then the voice spoke again, competing
valiantly with a clatter of crockery so uproarious as to be more like
something solid than a mere sound.

"I couldn't believe it was you!"

A girl in blue had risen from the nearest table, and was staring at
her in astonishment, Jill recognized her instantly. Those big,
pathetic eyes, like a lost child's, were unmistakable. It was the
parrot girl, the girl whom she and Freddie Rooke had found in the
drawing-room, at Ovington Square that afternoon when the foundations
of the world had given way and chaos had begun.

"Good gracious!" cried Jill. "I thought you were in London!"

That feeling of emptiness and panic, the result of her interview with
the Guatemalan general at the apartment house, vanished magically.
She sat down at this unexpected friend's table with a light heart.

"Whatever are you doing in New York?" asked the girl. "I never knew
you meant to come over."

"It was a little sudden. Still, here I am. And I'm starving. What are
those things you're eating?"

"Buckwheat cakes."

"Oh, yes. I remember Uncle Chris talking about them on the boat. I'll
have some."

"But when did you come over?"

"I landed about ten days ago. I've been down at a place called
Brookport on Long Island. How funny running into you like this!"

"I was surprised that you remembered me."

"I've forgotten your name," admitted Jill frankly. "But that's
nothing. I always forget names."

"My name's Nelly Bryant."

"Of course. And you're on the stage, aren't you?"

"Yes. I've just got work with Goble and Cohn. . . . Hullo, Phil!"

A young man with a lithe figure and smooth black hair brushed
straight back from his forehead had paused at the table on his way to
the cashier's desk.

"Hello, Nelly."

"I didn't know you lunched here."

"Don't often. Been rehearsing with Joe up at the Century Roof, and
had a quarter of an hour to get a bite. Can I sit down?"

"Sure. This is my friend, Miss Mariner."

The young man shook hands with Jill, flashing an approving glance at
her out of his dark, restless eyes.

"Pleased to meet you."

"This is Phil Brown," said Nelly. "He plays the straight for Joe
Widgeon. They're the best jazz-and-hokum team on the Keith Circuit."

"Oh, hush!" said Mr Brown modestly. "You always were a great little
booster, Nelly."

"Well, you know you are! Weren't you held over at the Palace last
time! Well, then!"

"That's true," admitted the young man. "Maybe we didn't gool 'em, eh?
Stop me on the street and ask me! Only eighteen bows second house
Saturday!"

Jill was listening, fascinated.

"I can't understand a word," she said. "It's like another language."

"You're from the other side, aren't you?" asked Mr Brown.

"She only landed a week ago," said Nelly.

"I thought so from the accent," said Mr Brown. "So our talk sort of
goes over the top, does it? Well, you'll learn American soon, if you
stick around."

"I've learned some already," said Jill. The relief of meeting Nelly
had made her feel very happy. She liked this smooth-haired young man.
"A man on the train this morning said to me, 'Would you care for the
morning paper, sister?' I said, 'No, thanks, brother, I want to look
out of the window and think!'"

"You meet a lot of fresh guys on trains," commented Mr Brown
austerely. "You want to give 'em the cold-storage eye." He turned to
Nelly. "Did you go down to Ike, as I told you?"

"Yes."

"Did you cop?"

"Yes. I never felt so happy in my life. I'd waited over an hour on
that landing of theirs, and then Johnny Miller came along, and I
yelled in his ear that I was after work, and he told me it would be
all right. He's awfully good to girls who've worked in shows for him
before. If it hadn't been for him I might have been waiting there
still."

"Who," enquired Jill, anxious to be abreast of the conversation, "is
Ike?"

"Mr Goble. Where I've just got work. Goble and Cohn, you know."

"I never heard of them!"

The young man extended his hand.

"Put it there!" he said. "They never heard of me! At least, the
fellow I saw when I went down to the office hadn't! Can you beat it?"

"Oh, did you go down there, too?" asked Nelly.

"Sure. Joe wanted to get in another show on Broadway. He'd sort of
got tired of vodevil. Say, I don't want to scare you, Nelly, but, if
you ask me, that show they're putting out down there is a citron! I
don't think Ike's got a cent of his own money in it. My belief is
that he's running it for a lot of amateurs. Why, say, listen! Joe and
I blow in there to see if there's anything for us, and there's a tall
guy in tortoiseshell cheaters sitting in Ike's office. Said he was
the author and was engaging the principals. We told him who we were,
and it didn't make any hit with him at all. He said he had never
heard of us. And, when we explained, he said no, there wasn't going
to be any of our sort of work in the show. Said he was making an
effort to give the public something rather better than the usual sort
of thing. No specialties required. He said it was an effort to
restore the Gilbert and Sullivan tradition. Say, who are these
Gilbert and Sullivan guys, anyway? They get written up in the papers
all the time, and I never met any one who'd run across them. If you
want my opinion, that show down there is a comic opera!"

"For heaven's sake!" Nelly had the musical comedy performer's horror
of the older-established form of entertainment. "Why, comic opera
died in the year one!"

"Well, these guys are going to dig it up. That's the way it looks to
me." He lowered his voice. "Say, I saw Clarice last night," he said
in a confidential undertone. "It's all right."

"It is?"

"We've made it up. It was like this . . ."

His conversation took an intimate turn. He expounded for Nelly's
benefit the inner history, with all its ramifications, of a recent
unfortunate rift between himself and "the best little girl in
Flatbush,"--what he had said, what she had said, what her sister had
said, and how it all come right in the end. Jill might have felt a
little excluded, but for the fact that a sudden and exciting idea had
come to her. She sat back, thinking. . . . After all, what else was
she to do? She must do something. . . .

She bent forward and interrupted Mr Brown in his description of a
brisk passage of arms between himself and the best little girl's
sister, who seemed to be an unpleasant sort of person in every way.

"Mr Brown."

"Hello?"

"Do you think there would be any chance for me if I asked for work at
Goble and Cohn's?"

"You're joking!" cried Nelly.

"I'm not at all."

"But what do you want with work?"

"I've got to find some. And right away, too."

"I don't understand."

Jill hesitated. She disliked discussing her private affairs, but
there was obviously no way of avoiding it. Nelly was round-eyed and
mystified, and Mr Brown had manifestly no intention whatever of
withdrawing tactfully. He wanted to hear all.

"I've lost my money," said Jill.

"Lost your money! Do you mean . . . ?"

"I've lost it all. Every penny I had in the world."

"Tough!" interpolated Mr Brown judicially. "I broke once way out in a
tank-town in Oklahoma. The manager skipped with our salaries. Last we
saw of him he was doing the trip to Canada in nothing flat."

"But how?" gasped Nelly.

"It happened about the time we met in London. Do you remember Freddie
Rooke, who was at our house that after-noon?"

A dreamy look came into Nelly's eyes. There had not been an hour
since their parting when she had not thought of that immaculate
sportsman. It would have amazed Freddie, could he have known, but to
Nelly Bryant he was the one perfect man in an imperfect world.

"Do I!" she sighed ecstatically.

Mr Brown shot a keen glance at her.

"Aha!" he cried facetiously. "Who is he, Nelly? Who is this blue-eyed
boy?"

"If you want to know," said Nelly, defiance in her tone, "he's the
fellow who gave me fifty pounds, with no strings tied to it,--get
that!--when I was broke in London! If it hadn't been for him, I'd be
there still."

"Did he?" cried Jill. "Freddie!"

"Yes. Oh, Gee!" Nelly sighed once more. "I suppose I'll never see him
again in this world."

"Introduce me to him, if you do," said Mr Brown. "He sounds just the
sort of little pal I'd like to have!"

"You remember hearing Freddie say something about losing money in a
slump on the Stock Exchange," proceeded Jill. "Well, that was how I
lost mine. It's a long story, and it's not worth talking about, but
that's how things stand, and I've got to find work of some sort, and
it looks to me as if I should have a better chance of finding it on
the stage than anywhere else."

"I'm terribly sorry."

"Oh, it's all right. How much would these people Goble and Cohn give
me if I got an engagement?"

"Only forty a week."

"Forty dollars a week! It's wealth! Where are they?"

"Over at the Gotham Theatre in Forty-second Street."

"I'll go there at once."

"But you'll hate it. You don't realize what it's like. You wait hours
and hours and nobody sees you."

"Why shouldn't I walk straight in and say that I've come for work?"

Nelly's big eyes grew bigger.

"But you couldn't!"

"Why not?"

"Why, you couldn't!"

"I don't see why."

Mr Brown intervened with decision.

"You're dead right," he said to Jill approvingly. "If you ask me,
that's the only sensible thing to do. Where's the sense of hanging
around and getting stalled? Managers are human guys, some of 'em.
Probably, if you were to try it, they'd appreciate a bit of gall. It
would show 'em you'd got pep. You go down there and try walking
straight in. They can't eat you. It makes me sick when I see all
those poor devils hanging about outside these offices, waiting to get
noticed and nobody ever paying any attention to them. You push the
office-boy in the face if he tries to stop you, and go in and make
'em take notice. And, whatever you do, don't leave your name and
address! That's the old, moth-eaten gag they're sure to try to pull
on you. Tell 'em there's nothing doing. Say you're out for a quick
decision! Stand 'em on their heads!"

Jill got up, fired by this eloquence. She called for her check.

"Good-bye," she said. "I'm going to do exactly as you say. Where can
I find you afterwards?" she said to Nelly.

"You aren't really going?"

"I am!"

Nelly scribbled on a piece of paper.

"Here's my address. I'll be in all evening."

"I'll come and see you. Good-bye, Mr Brown. And thank you."

"You're welcome!" said Mr Brown.

Nelly watched Jill depart with wide eyes.

"Why did you tell her to do that?" she said.

"Why not?" said Mr Brown. "I started something, didn't I? Well, I
guess I'll have to be leaving, too. Got to get back to rehearsal.
Say, I like that friend of yours, Nelly. There's no yellow streak
about her! I wish her luck!"


CHAPTER TEN


1.

THE offices of Messrs Goble and Cohn were situated, like everything
else in New York that appertains to the drama, in the neighborhood of
Times Square. They occupied the fifth floor of the Gotham Theatre on
West Forty-second Street. As there was no elevator in the building
except the small private one used by the two members of the firm,
Jill walked up the stairs, and found signs of a thriving business
beginning to present themselves as early as the third floor, where
half a dozen patient persons of either sex had draped themselves like
roosting fowls upon the banisters. There were more on the fourth
floor, and the landing of the fifth, which served the firm as a
waiting-room, was quite full. It is the custom of theatrical
managers--the lowest order of intelligence, with the possible
exception of the _limax maximus_ or garden slug, known to science--to
omit from their calculations the fact that they are likely every day
to receive a large number of visitors, whom they will be obliged to
keep waiting; and that these people will require somewhere to wait.
Such considerations never occur to them. Messrs Goble and Cohn had
provided for those who called to see them one small bench on the
landing, conveniently situated at the intersecting point of three
draughts, and had let it go at that.

Nobody, except perhaps the night-watchman, had ever seen this bench
empty. At whatever hour of the day you happened to call, you would
always find three wistful individuals seated side by side with their
eyes on the tiny ante-room where sat the office-boy, the
telephone-girl, and Mr Goble's stenographer. Beyond this was the door
marked "Private," through which, as it opened to admit some careless,
debonair, thousand-dollar-a-week comedian who sauntered in with a
jaunty "Hello, Ike!" or some furred and scented female star, the rank
and file of the profession were greeted, like Moses on Pisgah, with a
fleeting glimpse of the promised land, consisting of a large desk and
a section of a very fat man with spectacles and a bald head or a
younger man with fair hair and a double chin.

The keynote of the mass meeting on the landing was one of determined,
almost aggressive smartness. The men wore bright overcoats with bands
round the waist, the women those imitation furs which to the
uninitiated eye appear so much more expensive than the real thing.
Everybody looked very dashing and very young, except about the eyes.
Most of the eyes that glanced at Jill were weary. The women were
nearly all blondes, blondness having been decided upon in the theatre
as the color that brings the best results. The men were all so much
alike that they seemed to be members of one large family,--an
illusion which was heightened by the scraps of conversation, studded
with "dears," "old mans," and "honeys," which came to Jill's ears. A
stern fight for supremacy was being waged by a score or so of lively
and powerful young scents.

For a moment Jill was somewhat daunted by the spectacle, but she
recovered almost immediately. The exhilarating and heady influence of
New York still wrought within her. The Berserk spirit was upon her,
and she remembered the stimulating words of Mr Brown, of Brown and
Widgeon, the best jazz-and-hokum team on the Keith Circuit. "Walk
straight in!" had been the burden of his inspiring address. She
pushed her way through the crowd until she came to the small
ante-room.

In the ante-room were the outposts, the pickets of the enemy. In one
corner a girl was hammering energetically and with great speed on a
typewriter: a second girl, seated at a switchboard, was having an
argument with Central which was already warm and threatened to
descend shortly to personalities: on a chair tilted back so that it
rested against the wall, a small boy sat eating candy and reading the
comic page of an evening newspaper. All three were enclosed, like
zoological specimens, in a cage formed by a high counter terminating
in brass bars.

Beyond these watchers on the threshold was the door marked "Private."
Through it, as Jill reached the outer defences, filtered the sound of
a piano.

Those who have studied the subject have come to the conclusion that
the boorishness of theatrical managers' office-boys cannot be the
product of mere chance. Somewhere, in some sinister den in the
criminal districts of the town, there is a school where small boys
are trained for these positions, where their finer instincts are
rigorously uprooted and rudeness systematically inculcated by
competent professors. Of this school the candy-eating Cerberus of
Messrs Goble and Cohn had been the star scholar. Quickly seeing his
natural gifts, his teachers had given him special attention. When he
had graduated, it had been amidst the cordial good wishes of the
entire faculty. They had taught him all they knew, and they were
proud of him. They felt that he would do them credit.

This boy raised a pair of pink-rimmed eyes to Jill, sniffed--for like
all theatrical managers' office-boys he had a permanent cold in the
head--bit his thumb-nail, and spoke. He was a snub-nosed boy. His
ears and hair were vermilion. His name was Ralph. He had seven
hundred and forty-three pimples.

"Woddyerwant?" enquired Ralph, coming within an ace of condensing the
question into a word of one syllable.

"I want to see Mr Goble."

"Zout!" said the Pimple King, and returned to his paper.

There will, no doubt, always be class distinctions. Sparta had her
kings and her helots, King Arthur's Round Table its knights and its
scullions, America her Simon Legree and her Uncle Tom. But in no
nation and at no period of history has any one ever been so brutally
superior to any one else as is the Broadway theatrical office-boy to
the caller who wishes to see the manager. Thomas Jefferson held these
truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that
among these rights are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Theatrical office-boys do not see eye to eye with Thomas. From their
pinnacle they look down on the common herd, the _canaille_, and
despise them. They coldly question their right to live.

Jill turned pink. Mr Brown, her guide and mentor, foreseeing this
situation, had, she remembered, recommended "pushing the office-boy
in the face": and for a moment she felt like following his advice.
Prudence, or the fact that he was out of reach behind the brass bars,
restrained her. Without further delay she made for the door of the
inner room. That was her objective, and she did not intend to be
diverted from it. Her fingers were on the handle before any of those
present divined her intention. Then the stenographer stopped typing
and sat with raised fingers, aghast. The girl at the telephone broke
off in mid-sentence and stared round over her shoulder. Ralph, the
office-boy, outraged, dropped his paper and constituted himself the
spokesman of the invaded force.

"Hey!"

Jill stopped and eyed the lad militantly.

"Were you speaking to me?"

"Yes, I _was_ speaking to you!"

"Don't do it again with your mouth full," said Jill, turning to the
door.

The belligerent fire in the office-boy's pink-rimmed eyes was
suddenly dimmed by a gush of water. It was not remorse that caused
him to weep, however. In the heat of the moment he had swallowed a
large, jagged piece of candy, and he was suffering severely.

"You can't go in there!" he managed to articulate, his iron will
triumphing over the flesh sufficiently to enable him to speak.

"I am going in there!"

"That's Mr Goble's private room."

"Well, I want a private talk with Mr Goble."

Ralph, his eyes still moist, felt that the situation was slipping
from his grip. This sort of thing had never happened to him before.

"I tell ya he _zout!_"

Jill looked at him sternly.

"You wretched child!" she said, encouraged by a sharp giggle from the
neighborhood of the switchboard. "Do you know where little boys go
who don't speak the truth? I can hear him playing the piano. Now he's
singing! And it's no good telling me he's busy. If he was busy, he
wouldn't have time to sing. If you're as deceitful as this at your
age, what do you expect to be when you grow up? You're an ugly little
boy, you've got red ears, and your collar doesn't fit! I shall speak
to Mr Goble about you."

With which words Jill opened the door and walked in.

"Good afternoon," she said brightly.

After the congested and unfurnished discomfort of the landing, the
room in which Jill found herself had an air of cosiness and almost of
luxury. It was a large room, solidly upholstered. Along the further
wall, filling nearly the whole of its space, stood a vast and
gleaming desk, covered with a litter of papers which rose at one end
of it to a sort of mountain of play-scripts in buff covers. There was
a bookshelf to the left. Photographs covered the walls. Near the
window was a deep leather lounge: to the right of this stood a small
piano, the music-stool of which was occupied by a young man with
untidy black hair that needed cutting. On top of the piano, taking
the eye immediately by reason of its bold brightness, was balanced a
large cardboard poster. Much of its surface was filled by a picture
of a youth in polo costume bending over a blonde goddess in a
bathing-suit. What space was left displayed the legend:

          ISAAC GOBLE AND JACOB COHN
                   PRESENT
             THE ROSE OF AMERICA
             (A Musical Fantasy)

        BOOK AND LYRICS BY OTIS PILKINGTON
           MUSIC BY ROLAND TREVIS

Turning her eyes from this, Jill became aware that something was
going on at the other side of the desk: and she perceived that a
second young man, the longest and thinnest she had ever seen, was in
the act of rising to his feet, length upon length like an unfolding
snake. At the moment of her entry he had been lying back in an
office-chair, so that only a merely nominal section of his upper
structure was visible. Now he reared his impressive length until his
head came within measurable distance of the ceiling. He had a hatchet
face and a receding chin, and he gazed at Jill through what she
assumed were the "tortoiseshell cheaters" referred to by her recent
acquaintance, Mr Brown.

"Er . . . ?" said this young man enquiringly in a high, flat voice.

Jill, like many other people, had a brain which was under the
alternating control of two diametrically opposite forces. It was like
an automobile steered in turn by two drivers, the one a dashing,
reckless fellow with no regard for the speed limits, the other a
timid novice. All through the proceedings up to this point the dasher
had been in command. He had whisked her along at a break-neck pace,
ignoring obstacles and police regulations. Now, having brought her to
this situation, he abruptly abandoned the wheel and turned it over to
his colleague, the shrinker. Jill, greatly daring a moment ago, now
felt an overwhelming shyness.

She gulped, and her heart beat quickly. The thin man towered over
her. The black-haired pianist shook his locks at her like Banquo.

"I . . ." she began.

Then, suddenly, womanly intuition came to her aid. Something seemed
to tell her that these men were just as scared as she was. And, at
the discovery, the dashing driver resumed his post at the wheel, and
she began to deal with the situation with composure.

"I want to see Mr Goble."

"Mr Goble is out," said the long young man, plucking nervously at the
papers on the desk. Jill had affected him powerfully.

"Out!" She felt she had wronged the pimpled office-boy.

"We are not expecting him back this afternoon. Is there anything I
can do?"

He spoke tenderly. This weak-minded young man--at school his coarse
companions had called him Simp--was thinking that he had never seen
anything like Jill before. And it was true that she was looking very
pretty, with her cheeks flushed and her eyes sparkling. She touched a
chord in the young man which seemed to make the world a
flower-scented thing, full of soft music. Often as he had been in
love at first sight before in his time, Otis Pilkington could not
recall an occasion on which he had been in love at first sight more
completely than now. When she smiled at him, it was as if the gates
of heaven had opened. He did not reflect how many times, in similar
circumstances, these same gates had opened before; and that on one
occasion when they had done so it had cost him eight thousand dollars
to settle the case out of court. One does not think of these things
at such times, for they strike a jarring note. Otis Pilkington was in
love. That was all he knew, or cared to know.

"Won't you take a seat, Miss . . ."

"Mariner," prompted Jill. "Thank you."

"Miss Mariner. May I introduce Mr Roland Trevis?"

The man at the piano bowed. His black hair heaved upon his skull like
seaweed in a ground swell.

"My name is Pilkington. Otis Pilkington."

The uncomfortable silence which always follows introductions was
broken by the sound of the telephone-bell on the desk. Otis
Pilkington, who had moved out into the room and was nowhere near the
desk, stretched forth a preposterous arm and removed the receiver.

"Yes? Oh, will you say, please, that I have a conference at present."
Jill was to learn that people in the theatrical business never
talked: they always held conferences. "Tell Mrs Peagrim that I shall
be calling later in the afternoon, but cannot be spared just now." He
replaced the receiver. "Aunt Olive's secretary," he murmured in a
soft aside to Mr Trevis. "Aunt Olive wanted me to go for a ride." He
turned to Jill. "Excuse me. Is there anything I can do for you, Miss
Mariner?"

Jill's composure was now completely restored. This interview was
turning out so totally different from anything she had expected. The
atmosphere was cosy and social. She felt as if she were back in
Ovington Square, giving tea to Freddie Rooke and Ronny Devereux and
the rest of her friends of the London period. All that was needed to
complete the picture was a tea-table in front of her. The business
note hardly intruded on the proceedings at all. Still, as business
was the object of her visit, she felt that she had better approach
it.

"I came for work."

"Work!" cried Mr Pilkington. He, too, appeared to be regarding the
interview as purely of a social nature.

"In the chorus," explained Jill.

Mr Pilkington seemed shocked. He winced away from the word as though
it pained him.

"There is no chorus in 'The Rose of America,'" he said.

"I thought it was a musical comedy."

Mr Pilkington winced again.

"It is a musical _fantasy!_" he said. "But there will be no chorus.
We shall have," he added, a touch of rebuke in his voice, "the
services of twelve refined ladies of the ensemble."

Jill laughed.

"It does sound much better, doesn't it!" she said. "Well, am I
refined enough, do you think?"

"I shall be only too happy if you will join us," said Mr Pilkington
promptly.

The long-haired composer looked doubtful. He struck a note up in the
treble, then whirled round on his stool.

"If you don't mind my mentioning it, Otie, we have twelve girls
already."

"Then we must have thirteen," said Otis Pilkington firmly.

"Unlucky number," argued Mr Trevis.

"I don't care. We must have Miss Mariner. You can see for yourself
that she is exactly the type we need."

He spoke feelingly. Ever since the business of engaging a company had
begun, he had been thinking wistfully of the evening when "The Rose
of America" had had its opening performance--at his aunt's house at
Newport last Summer--with an all-star cast of society favorites and
an ensemble recruited entirely from debutantes and matrons of the
Younger Set. That was the sort of company he had longed to assemble
for the piece's professional career, and until this afternoon he had
met with nothing but disappointment. Jill seemed to be the only girl
in theatrical New York who came up to the standard he would have
liked to demand.

"Thank you very much," said Jill.

There was another pause. The social note crept into the atmosphere
again. Jill felt the hostess' desire to keep conversation
circulating.

"I hear," she said, "that this piece is a sort of Gilbert and
Sullivan opera."

Mr Pilkington considered the point.

"I confess," he said, "that, in writing the book, I had Gilbert
before me as a model. Whether I have in any sense succeeded in . . ."

"The book," said Mr Trevis, running his fingers over the piano, "is
as good as anything Gilbert ever wrote."

"Oh come, Rolie!" protested Mr Pilkington modestly.

"Better," insisted Mr Trevis. "For one thing, it is up-to-date."

"I _do_ try to strike the modern tone," murmured Mr Pilkington.

"And you have avoided Gilbert's mistake of being too fanciful."

"He was fanciful," admitted Mr Pilkington. "The music," he added, in
a generous spirit of give and take, "has all Sullivan's melody with a
newness of rhythm peculiarly its own. You will like the music."

"It sounds," said Jill amiably, "as though the piece is bound to be a
tremendous success."

"We hope so," said Mr Pilkington. "We feel that the time has come
when the public is beginning to demand something better than what it
has been accustomed to. People are getting tired of the brainless
trash and jingly tunes which have been given them by men like Wallace
Mason and George Bevan. They want a certain polish. . . . It was just
the same in Gilbert and Sullivan's day. They started writing at a
time when the musical stage had reached a terrible depth of inanity.
The theatre was given over to burlesques of the most idiotic
description. The public was waiting eagerly to welcome something of a
higher class. It is just the same today. But the managers will not
see it. 'The Rose of America' went up and down Broadway for months,
knocking at managers' doors."

"It should have walked in without knocking, like me," said Jill. She
got up. "Well, it was very kind of you to see me when I came in so
unceremoniously. But I felt it was no good waiting outside on that
landing. I'm so glad everything is settled. Good-bye."

"Good-bye, Miss Mariner." Mr Pilkington took her outstretched hand
devoutly. "There is a rehearsal called for the ensemble at--when is
it, Rolie?"

"Eleven o'clock, day after tomorrow, at Bryant Hall."

"I'll be there," said Jill. "Good-bye, and thank you very much."

The silence which had fallen upon the room as she left it, was broken
by Mr Trevis.

"Some pip!" observed Mr Trevis.

Otis Pilkington awoke from day-dreams with a start.

"What did you say?"

"That girl . . . I said she was some pippin!"

"Miss Mariner," said Mr Pilkington icily, "is a most charming,
refined, cultured, and vivacious girl, if you mean that."

"Yes," said Mr Trevis. "That was what I meant!"


2.

Jill walked out into Forty-second Street, looking about her with the
eye of a conqueror. Very little change had taken place in the aspect
of New York since she had entered the Gotham Theatre, but it seemed a
different city to her. An hour ago, she had been a stranger, drifting
aimlessly along its rapids. Now she belonged to New York, and New
York belonged to her. She had faced it squarely, and forced from it
the means of living. She walked on with a new jauntiness in her
stride.

The address which Nelly had given her was on the east side of Fifth
Avenue. She made her way along Forty-second Street. It seemed the
jolliest, alivest street she had ever encountered. The rattle of the
Elevated as she crossed Sixth Avenue was music, and she loved the
crowds that jostled her with every step she took.

She reached the Fifth Avenue corner just as the policeman out in the
middle of the street swung his Stop-and-Go post round to allow the
up-town traffic to proceed on its way. A stream of automobiles which
had been dammed up as far as the eye could reach began to flow
swiftly past. They moved in a double line, red limousines, blue
limousines, mauve limousines, green limousines. She stood waiting for
the flood to cease, and, as she did so, there purred past her the
biggest and reddest limousine of all. It was a colossal vehicle with
a polar-bear at the steering-wheel and another at his side. And in
the interior, very much at his ease, his gaze bent courteously upon a
massive lady in a mink coat, sat Uncle Chris.

For a moment he was so near to her that, but for the closed window,
she could have touched him. Then the polar-bear at the wheel, noting
a gap in the traffic, stepped on the accelerator and slipped neatly
through. The car moved swiftly on and disappeared.

Jill drew a deep breath. The Stop-and-Go sign swung round again. She
crossed the avenue, and set out once more to find Nelly Bryant. It
occurred to her, five minutes later, that a really practical and
quick-thinking girl would have noted the number of the limousine.


CHAPTER ELEVEN


1.

The rehearsals of a musical comedy--a term which embraces "musical
fantasies"--generally begin in a desultory sort of way at that
curious building, Bryant Hall, on Sixth Avenue just off Forty-second
Street. There, in a dusty, uncarpeted room, simply furnished with a
few wooden chairs and some long wooden benches, the chorus--or, in
the case of "The Rose of America," the ensemble--sit round a piano
and endeavor, with the assistance of the musical director, to get the
words and melodies of the first-act numbers into their heads. This
done, they are ready for the dance director to instil into them the
steps, the groupings, and the business for the encores, of which that
incurable optimist always seems to expect there will be at least six.
Later, the principals are injected into the numbers. And finally,
leaving Bryant Hall and dodging about from one unoccupied theatre to
another, principals and chorus rehearse together, running through the
entire piece over and over again till the opening night of the
preliminary road tour.

To Jill, in the early stages, rehearsing was just like being back at
school. She could remember her first school-mistress, whom the
musical director somewhat resembled in manner and appearance,
hammering out hymns on a piano and leading in a weak soprano an
eager, baying pack of children, each anxious from motives of pride to
out-bawl her nearest neighbor.

The proceedings began on the first morning with the entrance of Mr
Saltzburg, the musical director, a brisk, busy little man with
benevolent eyes behind big spectacles, who bustled over to the piano,
sat down, and played a loud chord, designed to act as a sort of bugle
blast, rallying the ladies of the ensemble from the corners where
they sat in groups, chatting. For the process of making one another's
acquaintance had begun some ten minutes before with mutual
recognitions between those who knew each other from having been
together in previous productions. There followed rapid introductions
of friends. Nelly Bryant had been welcomed warmly by a pretty girl
with red hair, whom she introduced to Jill as Babe: Babe had a
willowy blonde friend, named Lois: and the four of them had seated
themselves on one of the benches and opened a conversation; their
numbers being added to a moment later by a dark girl with a Southern
accent and another blonde. Elsewhere other groups had formed, and the
room was filled with a noise like the chattering of starlings. In a
body by themselves, rather forlorn and neglected, half a dozen solemn
and immaculately dressed young men were propping themselves up
against the wall and looking on, like men in a ball-room who do not
dance.

Jill listened to the conversation without taking any great part in it
herself. She felt as she had done on her first day at school, a
little shy and desirous of effacing herself. The talk dealt with
clothes, men, and the show business, in that order of importance.
Presently one of the young men sauntered diffidently across the room
and added himself to the group with the remark that it was a fine
day. He was received a little grudgingly, Jill thought, but by
degrees succeeded in assimilating himself. A second young man drifted
up; reminded the willowy girl that they had worked together in the
western company of "You're the One"; was recognized and introduced;
and justified his admission to the circle by a creditable imitation
of a cat-fight. Five minutes later he was addressing the Southern
girl as "honey," and had informed Jill that he had only joined this
show to fill in before opening on the three-a-day with the swellest
little song-and-dance act which he and a little girl who worked in
the cabaret at Geisenheimer's had fixed up.

On this scene of harmony and good-fellowship Mr Saltzburg's chord
intruded jarringly. There was a general movement, and chairs and
benches were dragged to the piano. Mr Saltzburg causing a momentary
delay by opening a large brown music-bag and digging in it like a
terrier at a rat-hole, conversation broke out again.

Mr Saltzburg emerged from the bag, with his hands full of papers,
protesting.

"Childrun! Chil-_drun!_ If you please, less noise and attend to me!"
He distributed sheets of paper. "Act One, Opening Chorus. I will play
the melody three--four times. Follow attentively. Then we will sing
it la-la-la, and after that we will sing the words. So!"

He struck the yellow-keyed piano a vicious blow, producing a tinny
and complaining sound. Bending forward with his spectacles almost
touching the music, he plodded determinedly through the tune, then
encored himself, and after that encored himself again. When he had
done this, he removed his spectacles and wiped them. There was a
pause.

"Izzy," observed the willowy young lady chattily, leaning across Jill
and addressing the Southern girl's blonde friend, "has promised me a
sunburst!"

A general stir of interest and a coming close together of heads.

"What! Izzy!"

"Sure, Izzy."

"Well!"

"He's just landed the hat-check privilege at the St Aurea!"

"You don't say!"

"He told me so last night and promised me the sunburst. He was,"
admitted the willowy girl regretfully, "a good bit tanked at the
time, but I guess he'll make good." She mused awhile, a rather
anxious expression clouding her perfect profile. She looked like a
meditative Greek Goddess. "If he doesn't," she added with maidenly
dignity, "it's the las' time _I_ go out with the big stiff. I'd tie a
can to him quicker'n look at him!"

A murmur of approval greeted this admirable sentiment.

"Childrun!" protested Mr Saltzburg. "Chil-drun! Less noise and
chatter of conversation. We are here to work! We must not waste time!
So! Act One, Opening Chorus. Now, all together. La-la-la . . ."

"La-la-la . . ."

"Tum-tum-tumty-tumty . . ."

"Tum-tum-tumty . . ."

Mr Saltzburg pressed his hands to his ears in a spasm of pain.

"No, no, no! Sour! Sour! Sour! . . . Once again. La-la-la . . ."

A round-faced girl with golden hair and the face of a wondering
cherub interrupted, speaking with a lisp.

"Mithter Thalzburg."

"Now what is it, Miss Trevor?"

"What sort of a show is this?"

"A musical show," said Mr Saltzburg severely, "and this is a
rehearsal of it, not a conversazione. Once more, please . . ."

The cherub was not to be rebuffed.

"Is the music good, Mithter Thalzburg?"

"When you have rehearsed it, you shall judge for yourself. Come, now
. . ."

"Is there anything in it as good as that waltz of yours you played us
when we were rehearthing 'Mind How You Go?' You remember. The one
that went . . ."

A tall and stately girl, with sleepy brown eyes and the air of a
duchess in the servants' hall, bent forward and took a kindly
interest in the conversation.

"Oh, have you composed a varlse, Mr Saltzburg?" she asked with
pleasant condescension. "How interesting, really! Won't you play it
for us?"

The sentiment of the meeting seemed to be unanimous in favor of
shelving work and listening to Mr Saltzburg's waltz.

"Oh, Mr Saltzburg, do!"

"Please!"

"Some one told me it was a pipterino!"

"I cert'nly do love waltzes!"

"Please, Mr Saltzburg!"

Mr Saltzburg obviously weakened. His fingers touched the keys
irresolutely.

"But, childrun!"

"I am sure it would be a great pleasure to all of us," said the
duchess graciously, "if you would play it. There is nothing I enjoy
more than a good varlse."

Mr Saltzburg capitulated. Like all musical directors he had in his
leisure moments composed the complete score of a musical play and
spent much of his time waylaying librettists on the Rialto and trying
to lure them to his apartment to listen to it, with a view to
business. The eternal tragedy of a musical director's life is
comparable only to that of the waiter who, himself fasting, has to
assist others to eat, Mr Saltzburg had lofty ideas on music, and his
soul revolted at being compelled perpetually to rehearse and direct
the inferior compositions of other men. Far less persuasion than he
had received today was usually required to induce him to play the
whole of his score.

"You wish it?" he said. "Well, then! This waltz, you will understand,
is the theme of a musical romance which I have composed. It will be
sung once in the first act by the heroine, then in the second act as
a duet for heroine and hero. I weave it into the finale of the second
act, and we have an echo of it, sung off stage, in the third act.
What I play you now is the second-act duet. The verse is longer. So!
The male voice begins."

A pleasant time was had by all for ten minutes.

"Ah, but this is not rehearsing, childrun!" cried Mr Saltzburg
remorsefully at the end of that period. "This is not business. Come
now, the opening chorus of act one, and please this time keep on the
key. Before, it was sour, sour. Come! La-la-la . . ."

"Mr Thalzburg!"

"Miss Trevor?"

"There was an awfully thweet fox-trot you used to play us. I do wish
. . ."

"Some other time, some other time! Now we must work. Come! La-la-la
. . ."

"I wish you could have heard it, girls," said the cherub regretfully.
"Honetht, it wath a lalapalootha!"

The pack broke into full cry.

"Oh, Mr Saltzburg!"

"Please, Mr Saltzburg!"

"Do play the fox-trot, Mr Saltzburg!"

"If it is as good as the varlse," said the duchess, stooping once
more to the common level, "I am sure it must be very good indeed."
She powdered her nose. "And one so rarely hears musicianly music
nowadays, does one?"

"Which fox-trot?" asked Mr Saltzburg weakly.

"Play 'em all!" decided a voice on the left.

"Yes, play 'em all," bayed the pack.

"I am sure that that would be charming," agreed the duchess,
replacing her powder-puff.

Mr Saltzburg played 'em all. This man by now seemed entirely lost to
shame. The precious minutes that belonged to his employers and should
have been earmarked for "The Rose of America" flitted by. The ladies
and gentlemen of the ensemble, who should have been absorbing and
learning to deliver the melodies of Roland Trevis and the lyrics of
Otis Pilkington, lolled back in their seats. The yellow-keyed piano
rocked beneath an unprecedented onslaught. The proceedings had begun
to resemble not so much a rehearsal as a home evening, and grateful
glances were cast at the complacent cherub. She had, it was felt,
shown tact and discretion.

Pleasant conversation began again.

". . . And I walked a couple of blocks, and there was exactly the same
model in Schwartz and Gulderstein's window at twenty-six fifty . . ."

". . . He got on at Forty-second Street, and he was kinda fresh from
the start. I could see he was carrying a package. At Sixty-sixth he
came sasshaying right down the car and said 'Hello, patootie!' Well,
I drew myself up . . ."

". . . 'Even if you are my sister's husband,' I said to him. Oh, I
suppose I got a temper. It takes a lot to arouse it, y'know, but I
c'n get pretty mad . . ."

". . . You don't know the half of it, dearie, you don't know the half
of it! A one-piece bathing suit! Well, you could call it that, but
the cop on the beach said it was more like a baby's sock. And when . . ."

". . . So I said 'Listen, Izzy, that'll be about all from you! My
father was a gentleman, though I don't suppose you know what that
means, and I'm not accustomed . . .'"

"Hey!"

A voice from the neighborhood of the door had cut into the babble
like a knife into butter; a rough, rasping voice, loud and
compelling, which caused the conversation of the members of the
ensemble to cease on the instant. Only Mr Saltzburg, now in a perfect
frenzy of musicianly fervor, continued to assault the decrepit piano,
unwitting of an unsympathetic addition to his audience.

"What I play you now is the laughing trio from my second act. It is a
building number. It is sung by tenor, principal comedian, and
soubrette. On the second refrain four girls will come out and two
boys. The girls will dance with the two men, the boys with the
soubrette. So! On the encore, four more girls and two more boys.
Third encore, solo-dance for specialty dancer, all on stage beating
time by clapping their hands. On repeat, all sing refrain once more,
and off-encore, the three principals and specialty dancer dance the
dance with entire chorus. It is a great building number, you
understand. It is enough to make the success of any musical play, but
can I get a hearing? No! If I ask managers to listen to my music,
they are busy! If I beg them to give me a libretto to set, they
laugh--ha! Having arrived at the summit, we enjoyed, for a
few minutes only, the serenity of the sky. The eye ranged over a vast
extent of country: looking down to the north was the sea, and to
the south, the fertile valley of Caracas.

The barometer was at 20 inches 7.6 lines; the thermometer at 13.7
degrees.

We were at thirteen hundred and fifty toises of elevation.
We gazed on an extent of sea, the radius of which was thirty-six
leagues. Persons who are affected by looking downward from a
considerable height should remain at the centre of the small flat
which crowns the eastern summit of the Silla.

The mountain is not very remarkable for height: it is nearly eighty
toises lower than the Canigou; but it is distinguished among all the
mountains I have visited by an enormous precipice on the side
next the sea. The coast forms only a narrow border; and looking
from the summit of the pyramid on the houses of Caravalleda, this
wall of rocks seems, by an optical illusion, to be nearly perpendicular.
The real slope of the declivity appeared to me, according to an exact
calculation, 53 degrees 28 minutes.* (* Observations of the latitude
give for the horizontal distance between the foot of the mountain
near Caravalleda, and the vertical line passing through its summit,
scarcely 1000 toises.)

The mean slope of the peak of Teneriffe is scarcely 12 degrees 30
minutes.

A precipice of six or seven thousand feet, like that of the Silla
of Caracas, is a phenomenon far more rare than is generally believed
by those who cross mountains without measuring their height, their
bulk, and their slope.

Since the experiments on the fall of bodies, and on their deviation
to the south-east, have been resumed in several parts of Europe, a
rock of two hundred and fifty toises of perpendicular elevation has
been in vain sought for among all the Alps of Switzerland.

The declivity of Mont Blanc towards the Allee Blanche does not even
reach an angle of 45 degrees; though in the greater number of
geological works, Mont Blanc is described as perpendicular on the
south side.

At the Silla of Caracas, the enormous northern cliff is partly
covered with vegetation, notwithstanding the extreme steepness of
its slope. Tufts of befaria and andromedas appear as if suspended
from the rock. The little valley which separates the domes towards the
south, stretches in the direction of the sea.

Alpine plants fill this hollow; and, not confined to the ridge of
the mountain, they follow the sinuosities of the ravine. It would
seem as if torrents were concealed under that fresh foliage; and
the disposition of the plants, the grouping of so many inanimate
objects, give the landscape all the charm of motion and of life.

Seven months had now elapsed since we had been on the summit of
the peak of Teneriffe, whence we surveyed a space of the globe
equal to a fourth part of France.

The apparent horizon of the sea is there six leagues farther distant
than at the top of the Silla, and yet we saw that horizon, at least
for some time, very distinctly.

It was strongly marked, and not confounded with the adjacent strata
of air.

At the Silla, which is five hundred and fifty toises lower than the
peak of Teneriffe, the horizon, though nearer, continued invisible
towards the north and north-north-east.

Following with the eye the surface of the sea, which was smooth as
glass, we were struck with the progressive diminution of the
reflected light.

Where the visual ray touched the last limit of that surface, the water
was lost among the superposed strata of air.

This appearance has something in it very extraordinary.

We expect to see the horizon level with the eye; but, instead of
distinguishing at this height a marked limit between the two elements,
the more distant strata of water seem to be transformed into vapour,
and mingled with the aerial ocean.

I observed the same appearance, not in one spot of the horizon alone,
but on an extent of more than a hundred and sixty degrees,
along the Pacific, when I found myself for the first time on
the pointed rock that commands the crater of Pichincha; a volcano, the
elevation of which exceeds that of Mont Blanc.* (* See Views of
Nature, Bohn's edition, page 358.) The visibility of a very distant
horizon depends, when there is no mirage, upon two distinct
things: the quantity of light received on that part of the sea
where the visual ray terminates; and the extinction of the reflected
light during its passage through the intermediate strata of air.

It may happen, notwithstanding the serenity of the sky and the
transparency of the atmosphere, that the ocean is feebly illuminated
at thirty or forty leagues' distance; or that the strata of air
nearest the earth may extinguish a great deal of the light, by
absorbing the rays that traverse them.

The rounded peak, or western dome of the Silla, concealed from us
the view of the town of Caracas; but we distinguished the nearest
houses, the villages of Chacao and Petare, the coffee plantations,
and the course of the Rio Guayra, a slender streak of water reflecting
a silvery light.

The narrow band of cultivated ground was pleasingly contrasted with
the wild and gloomy aspect of the neighbouring mountains.

Whilst contemplating these grand scenes, we feel little regret that
the solitudes of the New World are not embellished with the monuments
of antiquity.

But we could not long avail ourselves of the advantage arising from
the position of the Silla, in commanding all the neighbouring
summits. While we were examining with our glasses that part of the
sea, the horizon of which was clearly defined, and the chain of
the mountains of Ocumare, behind which begins the unknown world
of the Orinoco and the Amazon, a thick fog from the plains rose
to the elevated regions, first filling the bottom of the valley of
Caracas.

The vapours, illumined from above, presented a uniform tint of a milky
white. The valley seemed overspread with water, and looked
like an arm of the sea, of which the adjacent mountains formed the
steep shore.

In vain we waited for the slave who carried Ramsden's great sextant.
Eager to avail myself of the favourable state of the sky, I resolved
to take a few solar altitudes with a sextant by Troughton of two
inches radius. The disk of the sun was half-concealed by the mist.
The difference of longitude between the quarter of the Trinidad and
the eastern peak of the Silla appears scarcely to exceed 0 degrees
3 minutes 22 seconds.* (* The difference of longitude between the Silla
and La Guayra, according to Fidalgo, is 0 degrees 6 minutes 40
seconds.)
Whilst, seated on the rock, I was determining the dip of the needle,
I found my hands covered with a species of hairy bee, a little smaller
than the honey-bee of the north of Europe. These insects make their
nests in the ground.

They seldom fly; and, from the slowness of their movements, I should
have supposed they were benumbed by the cold of the mountains.

The people, in these regions, call them angelitos (little angels),
because they very seldom sting.

They are no doubt of the genus Apis, of the division melipones.

It has been erroneously affirmed that these bees, which are peculiar
to the New World, are destitute of all offensive weapons.

Their sting is indeed comparatively feeble, and they use it seldom;
but a person, not fully convinced of the harmlessness of these
angelitos, can scarcely divest himself of a sensation of fear. I
must confess, that, whilst engaged in my astronomical observations,
I was often on the point of letting my instruments fall, when I felt
my hands and face covered with these hairy bees.
Our guides assured us that they attempt to defend themselves only when
irritated by being seized by their legs. I was not tempted
to try the experiment on myself.

The dip of the needle at the Silla was one centesimal degree less
than in the town of Caracas. In collecting the observations which I
made during calm weather and in very favourable circumstances,
on the mountains as well as along the coast, it would at first seem,
that we discover, in that part of the globe, a certain influence of
the heights on the dip of the needle, and the intensity of the
magnetical forces; but we must remark, that the dip at Caracas is
much greater than could be supposed, from the situation of the town,
and that the magnetical phenomena are modified by the proximity of
certain rocks, which constitute so many particular centres or little
systems of attraction.* (* I have seen fragments of quartz traversed
by parallel bands of magnetic iron, carried into the valley of
Caracas by the waters descending from the Galipano and the Cerro
de Avila.

This banded magnetic iron-ore is found also in the Sierra Nevada of
Merida. Between the two peaks of the Silla, angular fragments
of cellular quartz are found, covered with red oxide of iron. They
do not act on the needle.

This oxide is of a cinnabar-red colour.)
The temperature of the atmosphere varied on the summit of the Silla
from eleven to fourteen degrees, according as the weather was calm or
windy.

Every one knows how difficult it is to verify, on the summit of a
mountain, the temperature, which is to serve for the barometric
calculation.

The wind was east, which would seem to prove that the trade-winds extend
in this latitude much higher than fifteen hundred toises.

Von Buch had observed that, at the peak of Teneriffe, near the
northern limit of the trade-winds, there exists generally at the
elevation of one thousand nine hundred toises, a contrary current
from the west.

The Academy of Sciences recommended the men of science who accompanied
the unfortunate La Perouse, to employ small air-balloons for the
purpose of ascertaining at sea the extent of the trade-winds within
the tropics.

Such experiments are very difficult. Small balloons do not
in general reach the height of the Silla; and the light clouds
which are sometimes perceived at an elevation of three or four
thousand toises, for instance, the fleecy clouds, called by the
French moutons, remain almost fixed, or have such a slow motion,
that it is impossible to judge of the direction of the wind.

During the short space of time that the sky was serene at the
zenith, I found the blue of the atmosphere sensibly deeper than on
the coasts. It is probable that, in the months of July and August,
the difference between the colour of the sky on the coasts and on
the summit of the Silla is still more considerable, but the
meteorological phenomenon with which M.

Bonpland and myself were most struck during the hour we passed on
the mountain, was the apparent dryness of the air, which seemed to
increase as the fog augmented.

This fog soon became so dense that it would have been imprudent to
remain longer on the edge of a precipice of seven or eight
thousand feet deep.* (* In the direction of north-west the slopes
appear more accessible; and I have been told of a path frequented
by smugglers, which leads to Caravalleda, between the two peaks of
the Silla.

From the eastern peak I took the bearings of the western peak, 64
degrees 40 minutes south-west; and of the houses, which I was told
belonged to Caravalleda, 55 degrees 20 minutes north-west.
) We descended the eastern dome of the Silla, and gathered in our
descent a gramen, which not only forms a new and very remarkable
genus, but which, to our great astonishment, we found again some
time after on the summit of the volcano of Pichincha, at the distance
of four hundred leagues from the Silla, in the southern hemisphere.*
(* Aegopogon cenchroides.)

The Lichen floridus, so common in the north of Europe, covered the
branches of the befaria and the Gualtheria odorata, descending
even to the roots of these shrubs.

Examining the mosses which cover the rocks of gneiss in the
valley between the two peaks, I was surprised at finding real
pebbles,--rounded fragments of quartz.* (* Fragments of brown
copper-ore were found mixed with these pebbles, at an elevation
of 1170 toises.)

It may be conceived that the valley of Caracas was once an inland lake,
before the Rio Guayra found an issue to the east near Caurimare,
at the foot of the hill of Auyamas, and before the ravine of Tipe
opened on the west, in the direction of Gatia and Cabo Blanco.

But how can we imagine that these waters could ascend as high as the
Silla, when the mountains opposite this peak, those of Ocumare,
were too low to prevent their overflow into the llanos? The pebbles
could not have been brought by torrents from more elevated points,
since there is no height that commands the Silla. Must we admit that
they have been heaved up, like all the mountains which border the
coast.

It was half after four in the afternoon when we finished our
observations.

Satisfied with the success of our journey, we forgot that there
might be danger in descending in the dark, steep declivities covered
by a smooth and slippery turf.

The mist concealed the valley from us; but we distinguished the double
hill of La Puerta, which, like all objects lying almost perpendicularly
beneath the eye, appeared extremely near. We relinquished our design
of passing the night between the two summits of the Silla, and having
again found the path we had cut through the thick wood of heliconia,
we soon arrived at the Pejual, the region of odoriferous and resinous
plants. The beauty of the befarias, and their branches covered with
large purple flowers, again rivetted our attention. When, in these
climates, a botanist gathers plants to form his herbal, he becomes
difficult in his choice in proportion to the luxuriance of vegetation.
He casts away those which have been first cut, because they appear
less beautiful than those which were out of reach. Though loaded
with plants before quitting the Pejual, we still regretted not having
made a more ample harvest.

We tarried so long in this spot, that night surprised us as we
entered the savannah, at the elevation of upwards of nine hundred
toises.

As there is scarcely any twilight in the tropics, we pass suddenly
from bright daylight to darkness. The moon was on the horizon;
but her disk was veiled from time to time by thick clouds, drifted
by a cold and rough wind.

Rapid slopes, covered with yellow and dry grass, now seen in shade,
and now suddenly illumined, seemed like precipices, the depth of
which the eye sought in vain to measure.

We proceeded onwards, in single file, and endeavoured to support
ourselves by our hands, lest we should roll down.

The guides, who carried our instruments, abandoned us successively,
to sleep on the mountain.

Among those who remained with us was a Congo black, who evinced
great address, bearing on his head a large dipping-needle:
he held it constantly steady, notwithstanding the extreme declivity
of the rocks.

The fog had dispersed by degrees in the bottom of the valley; and
the scattered lights we perceived below us caused a double illusion.

The steeps appeared still more dangerous than they really were; and,
during six hours of continual descent, we seemed to be always
equally near the farms at the foot of the Silla.

We heard very distinctly the voices of men and the notes of
guitars.
Sound is generally so well propagated upwards, that in a balloon
at the elevation of three thousand toises, the barking of dogs is
sometimes heard.* (* Gay-Lussac's account of his ascent on the 15th
of September, 1805.)

We did not arrive till ten at night at the bottom of the valley.

We were overcome with fatigue and thirst, having walked for
fifteen hours, nearly without stopping. The soles of our feet were
cut and torn by the asperities of a rocky soil and the hard and dry
stalks of the gramina, for we had been obliged to pull off our boots,
the soles having become too slippery. On declivities devoid of shrubs
or ligneous herbs, which may be grasped by the hand, the danger
of the descent is diminished by walking barefoot.

In order to shorten the way, our guides conducted us from the Puerta
de la Silla to the farm of Gallegos by a path leading to a reservoir
of water, called el Tanque.

They missed their way, however; and this last descent, the steepest
of all, brought us near the ravine of Chacaito.

The noise of the cascades gave this nocturnal scene a grand and
wild character.

We passed the night at the foot of the Silla. Our friends at Caracas
had been able to distinguish us with glasses on the summit of the
eastern peak.

They felt interested in hearing the account of our expedition, but
they were not satisfied with the result of our measurement, which
did not assign to the Silla even the elevation of the highest summit
of the Pyrenees.* (* It was formerly believed that the height of
the Silla of Caracas scarcely differed from that of the peak of
Teneriffe.)

One cannot blame the national feeling which suggests exaggerated
ideas of the monuments of nature, in a country in which the monuments
of art are nothing; nor can we wonder that the inhabitants of Quito
and Riobamba, who have prided themselves for ages on the height of
Chimborazo, mistrust those measurements which elevate the mountains
of Himalaya above all the colossal Cordilleras?

During our journey to the Silla, and in all our excursions in the
valley of Caracas, we were very attentive to the lodes and indications
of ore which we found in the strata of gneiss. No regular diggings
having been made, we could only examine the fissures, the ravines,
and the land-slips occasioned by torrents in the rainy season.

The rock of gneiss, passing sometimes into a granite of new formation,
sometimes into mica-slate,* (* Especially at great elevations.)
belongs in Germany to the most metalliferous rocks; but in the New
Continent, the gneiss has not hitherto been remarked as very rich
in ores worth working.

The most celebrated mines of Mexico and Peru are found in the primitive
and transition schists, in the trap-porphyries, the grauwakke,
and the alpine limestones. In several spots of the valley of
Caracas, the gneiss contains a small quantity of gold, disseminated
in small veins of quartz, sulphuretted silver, azure copper-ore,
and galena; but it is doubtful whether these different metalliferous
substances are not too poor to encourage any attempt at working
them. Such attempts were, however, made at the conquest of the
province, about the middle of the sixteenth century.

From the promontory of Paria to beyond cape Vela, the early navigators
had seen gold ornaments and gold dust, in the possession of the
inhabitants of the coast. They penetrated into the interior of the
country, to discover whence the precious metal came; and though the
information obtained in the province of Coro, and the markets of Curiana
and Cauchieto,* (* The Spaniards found, in 1500, in the country
of Curiana (now Coro), little birds, frogs, and other ornaments made
of gold. Those who had cast these figures lived at Cauchieto, a
place nearer the Rio de la Hacha.

I have seen ornaments resembling those described by Peter Martyr
of Anghiera (which indicate tolerable skill in goldsmiths' work),
among the remains of the ancient inhabitants of Cundinamarca.

The same art appears to have been practised in places along the coasts,
and also farther to the south, among the mountains of New Grenada.)
clearly proved that real mineral wealth was to be found only to
the west and south-west of Coro (that is to say, in the mountains
near those of New Grenada), the whole province of Caracas was
nevertheless eagerly explored.

A governor, newly arrived on that coast, could recommend himself
to the Spanish court only by boasting of the mines of his province;
and in order to take from cupidity what was most ignoble and
repulsive, the thirst of gold was justified by the purpose to which
it was pretended the riches acquired by fraud and violence might
be employed.

"Gold," says Christopher Columbus, in his last letter* (Lettera
rarissima data nelle Indie nella isola di Jamaica a 7 Julio dei 1503.

--"Le oro e metallo sopra gli altri excellentissimo; e dell' oro
si fanno li tesori e chi lo tiene fa e opera quanto vuole nel mondo[?]

, e finel[?]mente aggionge a mandare le anime al Paradiso.") to
King Ferdinand, "gold is a thing so much the more necessary to
your majesty, because, in order to fulfil the ancient prophecy,
Jerusalem is to be rebuilt by a prince of the Spanish monarchy.

Gold is the most excellent of metals. What becomes of those precious
stones, which are sought for at the extremities of the globe? They
are sold, and are finally converted into gold.

With gold we not only do whatever we please in this world, but we
can even employ it to snatch souls from Purgatory, and to people
Paradise."

She is always complaining that I
am not a business man like my late uncle. Mr Waddesleigh Peagrim made
a fortune in smoked hams." Mr Pilkington looked at the Japanese
prints, and shuddered slightly. "Right up to the time of his death he
was urging me to go into the business. I could not have endured it.
But, when I heard those two men discussing the play, I almost wished
that I had done so."

Jill was now completely disarmed. She would almost have patted this
unfortunate young man's head, if she could have reached it.

"I shouldn't worry about the piece," she said. "I've read somewhere
or heard somewhere that it's the surest sign of a success when actors
don't like a play."

Mr Pilkington drew his chair an imperceptible inch nearer.

"How sympathetic you are!"

Jill perceived with chagrin that she had been mistaken after all. It
_was_ the love-light. The tortoiseshell-rimmed spectacles sprayed it
all over her like a couple of searchlights. Otis Pilkington was
looking exactly like a sheep, and she knew from past experience that
that was the infallible sign. When young men looked like that, it was
time to go.

"I'm afraid I must be off," she said. "Thank you so much for giving
me tea. I shouldn't be a bit afraid about the play. I'm sure it's
going to be splendid. Good-bye."

"You aren't going already?"

"I must. I'm very late as it is. I promised . . ."

Whatever fiction Jill might have invented to the detriment of her
soul was interrupted by a ring at the bell. The steps of Mr
Pilkington's Japanese servant crossing the hall came faintly to the
sitting-room.

"Mr Pilkington in?"

Otis Pilkington motioned pleadingly to Jill.

"Don't go!" he urged. "It's only a man I know. He has probably come
to remind me that I am dining with him tonight. He won't stay a
minute. Please don't go."

Jill sat down. She had no intention of going now. The cheery voice at
the front door had been the cheery voice of her long-lost uncle,
Major Christopher Selby.


CHAPTER TWELVE


1.

Uncle Chris walked breezily into the room, flicking a jaunty glove.
He stopped short on seeing that Mr Pilkington was not alone.

"Oh, I beg your pardon! I understood . . ." He peered at Jill
uncertainly. Mr Pilkington affected a dim, artistic lighting-system
in his studio, and people who entered from the great outdoors
generally had to take time to accustom their eyes to it. "If you're
engaged . . ."

"Er--allow me . . . Miss Mariner . . . Major Selby."

"Hullo, Uncle Chris!" said Jill.

"God bless my soul!" ejaculated that startled gentleman adventurer,
and collapsed onto a settee as if his legs had been mown from under
him.

"I've been looking for you all over New York," said Jill.

Mr Pilkington found himself unequal to the intellectual pressure of
the conversation.

"Uncle Chris?" he said with a note of feeble enquiry in his voice.

"Major Selby is my uncle."

"Are you sure?" said Mr Pilkington. "I mean . . ."

Not being able to ascertain, after a moment's self-examination, what
he did mean, he relapsed into silence.

"Whatever are you doing here?" asked Uncle Chris.

"I've been having tea with Mr Pilkington."

"But . . . but why Mr Pilkington?"

"Well, he invited me."

"But how do you know him?"

"We met at the theatre."

"Theatre?"

Otis Pilkington recovered his power of speech.

"Miss Mariner is rehearsing with a little play in which I am
interested," he explained.

Uncle Chris half rose from the settee. He blinked twice in rapid
succession. Jill had never seen him so shaken from his customary
poise.

"Don't tell me you have gone on the stage, Jill!"

"I have. I'm in the chorus . . ."

"Ensemble," corrected Mr Pilkington softly.

"I'm in the ensemble of a piece called 'The Rose of America.' We've
been rehearsing for ever so long."

Uncle Chris digested this information in silence for a moment. He
pulled at his short mustache.

"Why, of course!" he said at length. Jill, who know him so well,
could tell by the restored ring of cheeriness in his tone that he was
himself again. He had dealt with this situation in his mind and was
prepared to cope with it. The surmise was confirmed the next instant
when he rose and stationed himself in front of the fire. Mr
Pilkington detested steam-heat and had scoured the city till he had
found a studio apartment with an open fireplace. Uncle Chris spread
his legs and expanded his chest. "Of course," he said. "I remember
now that you told me in your letter that you were thinking of going
on the stage. My niece," explained Uncle Chris to the attentive Mr
Pilkington, "came over from England on a later boat. I was not
expecting her for some weeks. Hence my surprise at meeting her here.
Of course. You told me that you intended to go on the stage, and I
strongly recommended you to begin at the bottom of the ladder and
learn the ground-work thoroughly before you attempted higher
flights."

"Oh, that was it?" said Mr Pilkington. He had been wondering.

"There is no finer training," resumed Uncle Chris, completely at his
ease once more, "than the chorus. How many of the best-known
actresses in America began in that way! Dozens. Dozens. If I were
giving advice to any young girl with theatrical aspirations, I should
say 'Begin in the chorus!' On the other hand," he proceeded, turning
to Pilkington, "I think it would be just as well if you would not
mention the fact of my niece being in that position to Mrs
Waddesleigh Peagrim. She might not understand."

"Exactly," assented Mr Pilkington.

"The term 'chorus' . . ."

"I dislike it intensely myself."

"It suggests . . ."

"Precisely."

Uncle Chris inflated his chest again, well satisfied.

"Capital!" he said. "Well, I only dropped in to remind you, my boy,
that you and your aunt are dining with me tonight. I was afraid a
busy man like you might forget."

"I was looking forward to it," said Mr Pilkington, charmed at the
description.

"You remember the address? Nine East Forty-First Street. I have
moved, you remember."

"So that was why I couldn't find you at the other place," said Jill.
"The man at the door said he had never heard of you."

"Stupid idiot!" said Uncle Chris testily. "These New York
hall-porters are recruited entirely from homes for the feeble-minded.
I suppose he was a new man. Well, Pilkington, my boy, I shall expect
you at seven o'clock. Goodbye till then. Come, Jill."

"Good-bye, Mr Pilkington," said Jill.

"Good-bye for the present, Miss Mariner," said Mr Pilkington, bending
down to take her hand. The tortoiseshell spectacles shot a last soft
beam at her.

As the front door closed behind them, Uncle Chris heaved a sigh of
relief.

"Whew! I think I handled that little contretemps with diplomacy! A
certain amount of diplomacy, I think!"

"If you mean," said Jill severely, "that you told some disgraceful
fibs . . ."

"Fibs, my dear,--or shall we say, artistic mouldings of the unshapely
clay of truth--are the . . . how shall I put it? . . . Well, anyway,
they come in dashed handy. It would never have done for Mrs Peagrim
to have found out that you were in the chorus. If she discovered that
my niece was in the chorus, she would infallibly suspect me of being
an adventurer. And while," said Uncle Chris meditatively, "of course
I _am_, it is nice to have one's little secrets. The good lady has
had a rooted distaste for girls in that perfectly honorable but
maligned profession ever since our long young friend back there was
sued for breach of promise by a member of a touring company in his
sophomore year at college. We all have our prejudices. That is hers.
However, I think we may rely on our friend to say nothing about the
matter . . . But why did you do it? My dear child, whatever induced
you to take such a step?"

Jill laughed.

"That's practically what Mr Miller said to me when we were rehearsing
one of the dances this afternoon, only he put it differently." She
linked her arm in his. "What else could I do? I was alone in New York
with the remains of that twenty dollars you sent me and no more in
sight."

"But why didn't you stay down at Brookport with your Uncle Elmer?"

"Have you ever seen my Uncle Elmer?"

"No. Curiously enough, I never have."

"If you had, you wouldn't ask. Brookport! Ugh! I left when they tried
to get me to understudy the hired man, who had resigned."

"What!"

"Yes, they got tired of supporting me in the state to which I was
accustomed--I don't blame them!--so they began to find ways of making
me useful about the home. I didn't mind reading to Aunt Julia, and I
could just stand taking Tibby for walks. But, when it came to
shoveling snow, I softly and silently vanished away."

"But I can't understand all this. I suggested to your
uncle--diplomatically--that you had large private means."

"I know you did. And he spent all his time showing me over houses and
telling me I could have them for a hundred thousand dollars cash
down." Jill bubbled. "You should have seen his face when I told him
that twenty dollars was all I had in the world!"

"You didn't tell him that!"

"I did."

Uncle Chris shook his head, like an indulgent father disappointed in
a favorite child.

"You're a dear girl, Jill, but really you do seem totally lacking in
. . . how shall I put it?--finesse. Your mother was just the same. A
sweet woman, but with no diplomacy, no notion of _handling_ a
situation. I remember her as a child giving me away hopelessly on one
occasion after we had been at the jam-cupboard. She did not mean any
harm, but she was constitutionally incapable of a tactful negative at
the right time." Uncle Chris brooded for a moment on the past. "Oh,
well, it's a very fine trait, no doubt, though inconvenient. I don't
blame you for leaving Brookport if you weren't happy there. But I
wish you had consulted me before going on the stage."

"Shall I strike this man?" asked Jill of the world at large. "How
could I consult you? My darling, precious uncle, don't you realize
that you had vanished into thin air, leaving me penniless? I had to
do something. And, now that we are on the subject, perhaps you will
explain your movements. Why did you write to me from that place on
Fifty-Seventh Street if you weren't there?"

Uncle Chris cleared his throat.

"In a sense . . . when I wrote . . . I was there."

"I suppose that means something, but it's beyond me. I'm not nearly
as intelligent as you think, Uncle Chris, so you'll have to explain."

"Well, it was this way, my dear. I was in a peculiar position you
must remember. I had made a number of wealthy friends on the boat and
it is possible that--unwittingly--I have them the impression that I
was as comfortably off as themselves. At any rate, that is the
impression they gathered, and it hardly seemed expedient to correct
it. For it is a deplorable trait in the character of the majority of
rich people that they only--er--expand,--they only show the best and
most companionable side of themselves to those whom they imagine to
be as wealthy as they are. Well, of course, while one was on the
boat, the fact that I was sailing under what a purist might have
termed false colors did not matter. The problem was how to keep up
the--er--innocent deception after we had reached New York. A woman
like Mrs Waddesleigh Peagrim--a ghastly creature, my dear, all front
teeth and exuberance, but richer than the Sub-Treasury--looks askance
at a man, however agreeable, if he endeavors to cement a friendship
begun on board ship from a cheap boarding-house on Amsterdam Avenue.
It was imperative that I should find something in the nature of what
I might call a suitable base of operations. Fortune played into my
hands. One of the first men I met in New York was an old
soldier-servant of mine, to whom I had been able to do some
kindnesses in the old days. In fact--it shows how bread cast upon the
waters returns to us after many days--it was with the assistance of a
small loan from me that he was enabled to emigrate to America. Well,
I met this man, and, after a short conversation, he revealed the fact
that he was the hall-porter at that apartment-house which you
visited, the one on Fifty-Seventh Street. At this time of the year, I
knew, many wealthy people go south, to Florida and the Carolinas, and
it occurred to me that there might be a vacant apartment in his
building. There was. I took it."

"But how on earth could you afford to pay for an apartment in a place
like that?"

Uncle Chris coughed.

"I didn't say I paid for it. I said I took it. That is, as one might
say, the point of my story. My old friend, grateful for favors
received and wishing to do me a good turn consented to become my
accomplice in another--er--innocent deception. I gave my friends the
address and telephone number of the apartment-house, living the while
myself in surroundings of a somewhat humbler and less expensive
character. I called every morning for letters. If anybody rang me up
on the telephone, the admirable man answered in the capacity of my
servant, took a message, and relayed it on to me at my boarding-house.
If anybody called, he merely said that I was out. There wasn't a
flaw in the whole scheme, my dear, and its chief merit was its
beautiful simplicity."

"Then what made you give it up? Conscience?"

"Conscience never made me give up _anything_," said Uncle Chris
firmly. "No, there were a hundred chances to one against anything
going wrong, and it was the hundredth that happened. When you have
been in New York longer, you will realize that one peculiarity of the
place is that the working-classes are in a constant state of flux. On
Monday you meet a plumber. Ah! you say, A plumber! Capital! On the
following Thursday you meet him again, and he is a car-conductor.
Next week he will be squirting soda in a drug-store. It's the fault
of these dashed magazines, with their advertisements of
correspondence courses--Are You Earning All You Should?--Write To Us
and Learn Chicken-Farming By Mail . . . It puts wrong ideas into the
fellows' heads. It unsettles them. It was so in this case. Everything
was going swimmingly, when my man suddenly conceived the idea that
destiny had intended him for a chauffeur-gardener, and he threw up
his position!"

"Leaving you homeless!"

"As you say, homeless--temporarily. But, fortunately,--I have been
amazingly lucky all through; it really does seem as if you cannot
keep a good man down--fortunately my friend had a friend who was
janitor at a place on East Forty-First Street, and by a miracle of
luck the only apartment in the building was empty. It is an
office-building, but, like some of these places, it has one small
bachelor's apartment on the top floor."

"And you are the small bachelor?"

"Precisely. My friend explained matters to his friend--a few
financial details were satisfactorily arranged--and here I am,
perfectly happy with the cosiest little place in the world, rent
free. I am even better off than I was before, as a matter of fact,
for my new ally's wife is an excellent cook, and I have been enabled
to give one or two very pleasant dinners at my new home. It lends
verisimilitude to the thing if you can entertain a little. If you are
never in when people call, they begin to wonder. I am giving dinner
to your friend Pilkington and Mrs Peagrim there tonight. Homey,
delightful, and infinitely cheaper than a restaurant."

"And what will you do when the real owner of the place walks in in
the middle of dinner?"

"Out of the question. The janitor informs me that he left for England
some weeks ago, intending to make a stay of several months."

"Well, you certainly think of everything."

"Whatever success I may have achieved," replied Uncle Chris, with the
dignity of a Captain of Industry confiding in an interviewer, "I
attribute to always thinking of everything."

Jill gurgled with laughter. There was that about her uncle which
always acted on her moral sense like an opiate, lulling it to sleep
and preventing it from rising up and becoming critical. If he had
stolen a watch and chain, he would somehow have succeeded in
convincing her that he had acted for the best under the dictates of a
benevolent altruism.

"What success _have_ you achieved?" she asked, interested. "When you
left me, you were on your way to find a fortune. Did you find it?"

"I have not actually placed my hands upon it yet," admitted Uncle
Chris. "But it is hovering in the air all round me. I can hear the
beating of the wings of the dollar-bills as they flutter to and fro,
almost within reach. Sooner or later I shall grab them. I never
forget, my dear, that I have a task before me,--to restore to you the
money of which I deprived you. Some day--be sure--I shall do it. Some
day you will receive a letter from me, containing a large sum--five
thousand--ten thousand--twenty thousand--whatever it may be, with the
simple words 'First Instalment'." He repeated the phrase, as if it
pleased him. "First Instalment!"

Jill hugged his arm. She was in the mood in which she used to listen
to him ages ago telling her fairy stories.

"Go on!" she cried. "Go on! It's wonderful! Once upon a time Uncle
Chris was walking along Fifth Avenue, when he happened to meet a poor
old woman gathering sticks for firewood. She looked so old and tired
that he was sorry for her, so he gave her ten cents which he had
borrowed from the janitor, and suddenly she turned into a beautiful
girl and said 'I am a fairy! In return for your kindness I grant you
three wishes!' And Uncle Chris thought for a moment, and said, 'I
want twenty thousand dollars to send to Jill!' And the fairy said,
'It shall be attended to. And the next article?'"

"It is all very well to joke," protested Uncle Chris, pained by this
flippancy, "but let me tell you that I shall not require magic
assistance to become a rich man. Do you realize that at houses like
Mrs Waddesleigh Peagrim's I am meeting men all the time who have only
to say one little word to make me a millionaire? They are fat, gray
men with fishy eyes and large waistcoats, and they sit smoking cigars
and brooding on what they are going to do to the market next day. If
I were a mind-reader I could have made a dozen fortunes by now. I sat
opposite that old pirate, Bruce Bishop, for over an hour the very day
before he and his gang sent Consolidated Pea-Nuts down twenty points!
If I had known what was in the wind, I doubt if I could have
restrained myself from choking his intentions out of the fellow.
Well, what I am trying to point out is that one of these days one of
these old oysters will have a fleeting moment of human pity and
disgorge some tip on which I can act. It is that reflection that
keeps me so constantly at Mrs Peagrim's house." Uncle Chris shivered
slightly. "A fearsome woman, my dear! Weighs a hundred and eighty
pounds and as skittish as a young lamb in springtime! She makes me
dance with her!" Uncle Chris' lips quivered in a spasm of pain, and
he was silent for a moment. "Thank heaven I was once a footballer!"
he said reverently.

"But what do you live on?" asked Jill. "I know you are going to be a
millionaire next Tuesday week, but how are you getting along in the
meantime?"

Uncle Chris coughed.

"Well, as regards actual living expenses, I have managed by a shrewd
business stroke to acquire a small but sufficient income. I live in a
boarding-house--true--but I contrive to keep the wolf away from its
door,--which, by the by, badly needs a lick of paint. Have you ever
heard of Nervino?"

"I don't think so. It sounds like a patent medicine."

"It is a patent medicine." Uncle Chris stopped and looked anxiously
at her. "Jill, you're looking pale, my dear."

"Am I? We had rather a tiring rehearsal."

"Are you sure," said Uncle Chris seriously, "that it is only that?
Are you sure that your vitality has not become generally lowered by
the fierce rush of metropolitan life? Are you aware of the things
that can happen to you if you allow the red corpuscles of your blood
to become devitalised? I had a friend . . ."

"Stop! You're scaring me to death!"

Uncle Chris gave his mustache a satisfied twirl. "Just what I meant
to do, my dear. And, when I had scared you sufficiently--you wouldn't
wait for the story of my consumptive friend! Pity! It's one of my
best!--I should have mentioned that I had been having much the same
trouble myself until lately, but the other day I happened to try
Nervino, the great specific . . . I was giving you an illustration of
myself in action, my dear. I went to these Nervino people--happened
to see one of their posters and got the idea in a flash--I went to
them and said, 'Here am I, a presentable man of persuasive manners
and a large acquaintance among the leaders of New York Society. What
would it be worth to you to have me hint from time to time at dinner
parties and so forth that Nervino is the rich man's panacea?' I put
the thing lucidly to them. I said, 'No doubt you have a thousand
agents in the city, but have you one who does not look like an agent
and won't talk like an agent? Have you one who is inside the houses
of the wealthy, at their very dinner-tables, instead of being on the
front step, trying to hold the door open with his foot? That is the
point you have to consider.' They saw the idea at once. We arranged
terms--not as generous as I could wish, perhaps, but quite ample. I
receive a tolerably satisfactory salary each week, and in return I
spread the good word about Nervino in the gilded palaces of the rich.
Those are the people to go for, Jill. They have been so busy
wrenching money away from the widow and the orphan that they haven't
had time to look after their health. You catch one of them after
dinner, just as he is wondering if he was really wise in taking two
helpings of the lobster Newburg, and he is clay in your hands. I draw
my chair up to his and become sympathetic and say that I had
precisely the same trouble myself until recently and mention a dear
old friend of mine who died of indigestion, and gradually lead the
conversation round to Nervino. I don't force it on them. I don't even
ask them to try it. I merely point to myself, rosy with health, and
say that I owe everything to it, and the thing is done. They thank me
profusely and scribble the name down on their shirt-cuffs. And there
your are! I don't suppose," said Uncle Chris philosophically, "that
the stuff can do them any actual harm."

They had come to the corner of Forty-first Street. Uncle Chris felt
in his pocket and produced a key.

"If you want to go and take a look at my little nest, you can let
yourself in. It's on the twenty-second floor. Don't fail to go out on
the roof and look at the view. It's worth seeing. It will give you
some idea of the size of the city. A wonderful, amazing city, my
dear, full of people who need Nervino. I shall go on and drop in at
the club for half an hour. They have given me a fortnight's card at
the Avenue. Capital place. Here's the key."

Jill turned down Forty-first Street, and came to a mammoth structure
of steel and stone which dwarfed the modest brown houses beside it
into nothingness. It was curious to think of a private apartment
nestling on the summit of this mountain. She went in, and the
elevator shot her giddily upwards to the twenty-second floor. She
found herself facing a short flight of stone steps, ending in a door.
She mounted the steps, tried the key, and, turning it, entered a
hall-way. Proceeding down the passage, she reached a sitting-room.

It was a small room, but furnished with a solid comfort which soothed
her. For the first time since she had arrived in New York, she had
the sense of being miles away from the noise and bustle of the city.
There was a complete and restful silence. She was alone in a nest of
books and deep chairs, on which a large grandfather-clock looked down
with that wide-faced benevolence peculiar to its kind. So peaceful
was this eyrie, perched high up above the clamor and rattle of
civilization, that every nerve in her body seemed to relax in a
delicious content. It was like being in Peter Pan's house in the
tree-tops.


2.

Jill possessed in an unusual degree that instinct for exploration
which is implanted in most of us. She was frankly inquisitive, and
could never be two minutes in a strange room without making a tour of
it and examining its books, pictures, and photographs. Almost at once
she began to prowl.

The mantelpiece was her first objective. She always made for other
people's mantelpieces, for there, more than anywhere else, is the
character of a proprietor revealed. This mantelpiece was sprinkled
with photographs, large, small, framed and unframed. In the center of
it, standing all alone and looking curiously out of place among its
large neighbors, was a little snapshot.

It was dark by the mantelpiece. Jill took the photograph, to the
window, where the fading light could fall on it. Why, she could not
have said, but the thing interested her. There was mystery about it.
It seemed in itself so insignificant to have the place of honor.

The snapshot had evidently been taken by an amateur, but it was one
of those lucky successes which happen at rare intervals to amateur
photographers to encourage them to proceed with their hobby. It
showed a small girl in a white dress cut short above slim, black
legs, standing in the porch of an old house, one hand swinging a
sunbonnet, the other patting an Irish terrier which had planted its
front paws against her waist and was looking up into her face with
that grave melancholy characteristic of Irish terriers. The sunlight
was evidently strong, for the child's face was puckered in a twisted
though engaging grin. Jill's first thought was "What a jolly kid!"
And then, with a leaping of the heart that seemed to send something
big and choking into her throat, she saw that it was a photograph of
herself.

With a swooping hound memory raced hack over the years. She could
feel the hot sun on her face, hear the anxious voice of Freddie
Rooke--then fourteen and for the first time the owner of a
camera--imploring her to stand just like that because he wouldn't be
half a minute only some rotten thing had stuck or something. Then the
sharp click, the doubtful assurance of Freddie that he thought it was
all right if he hadn't forgotten to shift the film (in which case she
might expect to appear in combination with a cow which he had snapped
on his way to the house), and the relieved disappearance of Pat, the
terrier, who didn't understand photography. How many years ago had
that been? She could not remember. But Freddie had grown to
long-legged manhood, she to an age of discretion and full-length
frocks, Pat had died, the old house was inhabited by strangers . . .
and here was the silent record of that sun-lit afternoon, three
thousand miles away from the English garden in which it had come into
existence.

The shadows deepened. The top of the great building swayed gently,
causing the pendulum of the grandfather-clock to knock against the
sides of its wooden case. Jill started. The noise, coming after the
dead silence, frightened her till she realized what it was. She had a
nervous feeling of not being alone. It was as if the shadows held
goblins that peered out at the intruder. She darted to the
mantelpiece and replaced the photograph. She felt like some heroine
of a fairy-story meddling with the contents of the giant's castle.
Soon there would come the sound of a great footstep, thud--thud . . .

_Thud._

Jill's heart gave another leap. She was perfectly sure she had heard
a sound. It had been just like the banging of a door. She braced
herself, listening, every muscle tense. And then, cleaving the
stillness, came a voice from down the passage--

     "Just see them Pullman porters,
      Dolled up with scented waters
      Bought with their dimes and quarters!
         See, here they come! Here they come!"

For an instant Jill could not have said whether she was relieved or
more frightened than ever. True, that numbing sense of the uncanny
had ceased to grip her, for Reason told her that spectres do not sing
rag-time songs. On the other hand, owners of apartments do, and she
would almost as readily have faced a spectre as the owner of this
apartment. Dizzily, she wandered how in the world she was to explain
her presence. Suppose he turned out to be some awful, choleric person
who would listen to no explanations.

     "Oh, see those starched-up collars!
      Hark how their captain hollers
         'Keep time! Keep time!'
      It's worth a thousand dollars
      To see those tip-collectors . . ."

Very near now. Almost at the door.

     "Those upper-berth inspectors,
      Those Pullman porters on parade!"

A dim, shapeless figure in the black of the doorway, scrabbling of
fingers on the wall.

"Where are you, dammit?" said the voice, apparently addressing the
electric-light switch.

Jill shrank back, desperate fingers pressing deep into the back of an
arm-chair. Light flashed from the wall at her side. And there, in the
doorway, stood Wally Mason in his shirt-sleeves.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN


1.

In these days of rapid movement, when existence has become little
more than a series of shocks of varying intensity, astonishment is
the shortest-lived of all the emotions. The human brain has trained
itself to elasticity and recovers its balance in the presence of the
unforeseen with a speed almost miraculous. The man who says 'I _am_
surprised!' really means 'I was surprised a moment ago, but now I
have adjusted myself to the situation.' There was an instant in which
Jill looked at Wally and Wally at Jill with the eye of total
amazement, and then, almost simultaneously, each began--the process
was sub-conscious--to regard this meeting not as an isolated and
inexplicable event, but as something resulting from a perfectly
logical chain of circumstances. Jill perceived that the presence in
the apartment of that snap-shot of herself should have prepared her
for the discovery that the place belonged to someone who had known
her as a child, and that there was no reason for her to be stunned by
the fact that this someone was Wally Mason. Wally, on his side, knew
that Jill was in New York; and had already decided, erroneously, that
she had found his address in the telephone directory and was paying
an ordinary call. It was, perhaps, a little unusual that she should
have got into the place without ringing the front door bell and that
she should be in his sitting-room in the dark, but these were minor
aspects of the matter. To the main fact, that here she was, he had
adjusted his mind, and, while there was surprise in his voice when he
finally spoke, it was not the surprise of one who suspects himself of
seeing visions.

"Hello!" he said.

"Hullo!" said Jill.

It was not a very exalted note on which to pitch the conversation,
but it had the merit of giving each of them a little more time to
collect themselves.

"This is . . . I wasn't expecting you!" said Wally.

"I wasn't expecting _you!_" said Jill.

There was another pause, in which Wally, apparently examining her
last words and turning them over in his mind found that they did not
square with his preconceived theories.

"You weren't expecting me?"

"I certainly was not!"

"But . . . but you knew I lived here?"

Jill shook her head. Wally reflected for an instant, and then put his
finger, with a happy inspiration, on the very heart of the mystery.

"Then how on earth did you get here?"

He was glad he had asked that. The sense of unreality which had come
to him in the first startling moment of seeing her and vanished under
the influence of logic had returned as strong as ever. If she did not
know he lived in this place, how in the name of everything uncanny
had she found her way here? A momentary wonder as to whether all this
was not mixed up with telepathy and mental suggestion and all that
sort of thing came to him. Certainly he had been thinking of her all
the time since their parting at the Savoy Hotel that night three
weeks had more back . . . No, that was absurd. There must be some
sounder reason for her presence. He waited for her to give it.

Jill for the moment felt physically incapable of giving it. She
shrank from the interminable explanation which confronted her as a
weary traveller shrinks from a dusty, far-stretching desert. She
simply could not go into all that now. So she answered with a
question.

"When did you land in New York?"

"This afternoon. We were supposed to dock this morning, but the boat
was late." Wally perceived that he was pushed away from the main
point, and jostled his way to it. "But what are you doing here?"

"It's such a long story."

Her voice was plaintive. Remorse smote Wally. It occurred to him that
he had not been sufficiently sympathetic. Not a word had he said on
the subject of her change of fortunes. He had just stood and gaped
and asked questions. After all, what the devil did it matter how she
came to be here? He had anticipated a long and tedious search for her
through the labyrinth of New York, and here Fate had brought her to
his very door, and all he could do was to ask why, instead of being
thankful. He perceived that he was not much of a fellow.

"Never mind," he said. "You can tell me what you feel like it." He
looked at her eagerly. Time seemed to have wiped away that little
misunderstanding under the burden of which they had parted. "It's too
wonderful finding you like this!" He hesitated. "I heard
about--everything," he said awkwardly.

"My--" Jill hesitated too. "My smash?"

"Yes. Freddie Rooke told me. I was terribly sorry."

"Thank you," said Jill.

There was a pause. They were both thinking of that other disaster
which had happened. The presence of Derek Underhill seemed to stand
like an unseen phantom between them. Finally Wally spoke at random,
choosing the first words that came into his head in his desire to
break the silence.

"Jolly place, this, isn't it?"

Jill perceived that an opening for those tedious explanations had
been granted her.

"Uncle Chris thinks so," she said demurely.

Wally looked puzzled.

"Uncle Chris? Oh, your uncle?"

"Yes."

"But--he has never been here."

"Oh, yes. He's giving a dinner party here tonight!"

"He's . . . what did you say?"

"It's all right. I only began at the end of the story instead of the
beginning. I'll tell you the whole thing, then . . . then I suppose
you will be terribly angry and make a fuss."

"I'm not much of a lad, as Freddie Rooke would say, for making
fusses. And I can't imagine being terribly angry with you."

"Well, I'll risk it. Though, if I wasn't a brave girl, I should leave
Uncle Chris to explain for himself and simply run away."

"Anything is better than that. It's a miracle meeting you like this,
and I don't want to be deprived of the fruits of it. Tell me
anything, but don't go."

"You'll be furious."

"Not with you."

"I should hope not with me. I've done nothing. I am the innocent
heroine. But I'm afraid you will be very angry with Uncle Chris."

"If he's your uncle, that passes him. Besides, he once licked the
stuffing out of me with a whangee. That forms a bond. Tell me all."

Jill considered. She had promised to begin at the beginning, but it
was difficult to know what was the beginning.

"Have you ever heard of Captain Kidd?" she asked at length.

"You're wandering from the point, aren't you?"

"No, I'm not. _Have_ you heard of Captain Kidd?"

"The pirate? Of course."

"Well, Uncle Chris is his direct lineal descendant. That really
explains the whole thing."

Wally looked at her enquiringly.

"Could you make it a little easier?" he said.

"I can tell you everything in half a dozen words, if you like. But it
will sound awfully abrupt."

"Go ahead."

"Uncle Chris has stolen your apartment."

Wally nodded slowly.

"I see. Stolen my apartment."

"Of course you can't possibly understand. I shall have to tell you
the whole thing, after all."

Wally listened with flattering attention as she began the epic of
Major Christopher Selby's doings in New York. Whatever his emotions,
he certainly was not bored.

"So that's how it all happened," concluded Jill.

For a moment Wally said nothing. He seemed to be digesting what he
had heard.

"I see," he said at last. "It's a variant of those advertisements
they print in the magazines. 'Why pay rent? Own somebody else's
home!'"

"That _does_ rather sum it up," said Jill.

Wally burst into a roar of laughter.

"He's a corker!"

Jill was immensely relieved. For all her courageous bearing, she had
not relished the task of breaking the news to Wally. She knew that he
had a sense of humor, but a man may have a sense of humor and yet not
see anything amusing in having his home stolen in his absence.

"I'm so glad you're not angry."

"Of course not."

"Most men would be."

"Most men are chumps."

"It's so wonderful that it happened to be you. Suppose it had been an
utter stranger! What could I have done?"

"It would have been the same thing. You would have won him over in
two minutes. Nobody could resist you."

"That's very sweet of you."

"I can't help telling the truth. Washington was just the same."

"Then you don't mind Uncle Chris giving his dinner-party here
tonight?"

"He has my blessing."

"You really are an angel," said Jill gratefully. "From what he said,
I think he looks on it as rather an important function. He has
invited a very rich woman, who has been showing him a lot of
hospitality,--a Mrs Peagrim . . ."

"Mrs Waddesleigh Peagrim?"

"Yes? Why, do you know her?"

"Quite well. She goes in a good deal for being Bohemian and knowing
people who write and paint and act and so on. That reminds me. I gave
Freddie Rooke a letter of introduction to her."

"Freddie Rooke!"

"Yes. He suddenly made up his mind to come over. He came to me for
advice about the journey. He sailed a couple of days before I did. I
suppose he's somewhere in New York by now, unless he was going on to
Florida. He didn't tell me what his plans were."

Jill was conscious of a sudden depression. Much as she liked Freddie,
he belonged to a chapter in her life which was closed and which she
was trying her hardest to forget. It was impossible to think of
Freddie without thinking of Derek, and to think of Derek was like
touching an exposed nerve. The news that Freddie was in New York
shocked her. New York had already shown itself a city of chance
encounters. Could she avoid meeting Freddie?

She knew Freddie so well. There was not a dearer or a better-hearted
youth in the world, but he had not that fine sensibility which pilots
a man through the awkwardnesses of life. He was a blunderer. Instinct
told her that, if she met Freddie, he would talk of Derek, and, if
thinking of Derek was touching an exposed nerve, talking of him would
like pressing on that nerve with a heavy hand. She shivered.

Wally was observant.

"There's no need to meet him, if you don't want to," he said.

"No," said Jill doubtfully.

"New York's a large place. By the way," he went on, "to return once
more to the interesting subject of my lodger, does your uncle sleep
here at nights, do you know?"

Jill looked at him gratefully. He was no blunderer. Her desire to
avoid Freddie Rooke was, he gave her tacitly to understand, her
business, and he did not propose to intrude on it. She liked him for
dismissing the subject so easily.

"No, I think he told me he doesn't."

"Well, that's something, isn't it! I call that darned nice of him! I
wonder if I could drop back here somewhere about eleven o'clock. Are
the festivities likely to be over by then? If I know Mrs Peagrim, she
will insist on going off to one of the hotels to dance directly after
dinner. She's a confirmed trotter."

"I don't know how to apologize," began Jill remorsefully.

"Please don't. It's absolutely all right." His eye wandered to the
mantelpiece, as it had done once or twice during the conversation. In
her hurry Jill had replaced the snapshot with its back to the room,
and Wally had the fidgety air of a man whose most cherished
possession is maltreated. He got up now and, walking across, turned
the photograph round. He stood for a moment, looking at it.

Jill had forgotten the snapshot. Curiosity returned to her.

"Where _did_ you get that?" she asked.

Wally turned.

"Oh, did you see this?"

"I was looking at it just before you nearly frightened me to death by
appearing so unexpectedly."

"Freddie Rooke sold it to me fourteen years ago."

"Fourteen years ago!"

"Next July," added Wally. "I gave him five shillings for it."

"Five shillings! The little brute!" cried Jill indignantly "It must
have been all the money you had in the world!"

"A trifle more, as a matter of fact. All the money I had in the world
was three-and-six. But by a merciful dispensation of Providence the
curate had called that morning and left a money-box for subscriptions
to the village organ-fund . . . It's wonderful what you can do with a
turn for crime and the small blade of a pocket-knife! I don't think I
have ever made money quicker!" He looked at the photograph again.
"Not that it seemed quick at the moment. I died at least a dozen
agonizing deaths in the few minutes I was operating. Have you ever
noticed how slowly time goes when you are coaxing a shilling and a
sixpence out of somebody's money-box? Centuries! But I was
forgetting. Of course you've had no experience."

"You poor thing!"

"It was worth it."

"And you've had it ever since!"

"I wouldn't part with it for all Mrs Waddesleigh Peagrim's millions,"
said Wally with sudden and startling vehemence, "if she offered me
them." He paused. "She hasn't, as a matter of fact."

There was a silence. Jill looked at Wally furtively, as he returned
to his seat. She was seeing him with new eyes. It was as if this
trifling incident had removed some sort of a veil. He had suddenly
become more alive. For an instant she had seen right into him, to the
hidden deeps of his soul. She felt shy and embarrassed.

"Pat died," she said, at length. She felt the necessity of saying
something.

"I liked Pat."

"He picked up some poison, poor darling . . . How long ago those days
seem, don't they!"

"They are always pretty vivid to me. I wonder who has that old house
of yours now."

"I heard the other day," said Jill more easily. The odd sensation of
embarrassment was passing. "Some people called . . . what was the
name? . . . Debenham, I think."

Silence fell again. It was broken by the front-door bell, like an
alarm-clock that shatters a dream.

Wally got up.

"Your uncle," he said.

"You aren't going to open the door?"

"That was the scheme."

"But he'll get such a shock when he sees you."

"He must look on it in the light of rent. I don't see why I shouldn't
have a little passing amusement from this business."

He left the room. Jill heard the front door open. She waited
breathlessly. Pity for Uncle Chris struggled with the sterner feeling
that it served him right.

"Hullo!" she heard Wally say.

"Hullo-ullo-ullo!" replied an exuberant voice. "Wondered if I'd find
you in, and all that sort of thing. I say, what a deuce of a way up
it is here. Sort of gets a chap into training for going to heaven,
what? I mean, what?"

Jill looked about her like a trapped animal. It was absurd, she felt,
but every nerve in her body cried out against the prospect of meeting
Freddie. His very voice had opened old wounds and set them throbbing.

She listened in the doorway. Out of sight down the passage, Freddie
seemed by the sounds to be removing his overcoat. She stole out and
darted like a shadow down the corridor that led to Wally's bedroom.
The window of the bedroom opened onto the wide roof which Uncle Chris
had eulogized. She slipped noiselessly out, closing the window behind
her.


2.

"I say, Mason, old top," said Freddie, entering the sitting-room, "I
hope you don't mind my barging in like this but the fact is things
are a bit thick. I'm dashed worried and I didn't know another soul I
could talk it over with. As a matter of fact, I wasn't sure you were
in New York at all but I remembered hearing you say in London that
you went popping back almost at once, so I looked you up in the
telephone book and took a chance. I'm dashed glad you _are_ back.
When did you arrive?"

"This afternoon."

"I've been here two or three days. Well, it's a bit of luck catching
you. You see, what I want to ask your advice about . . ."

Wally looked at his watch. He was not surprised to find that Jill had
taken to flight. He understood her feelings perfectly, and was
anxious to get rid of the inopportune Freddie as soon as possible.

"You'll have to talk quick, I'm afraid," he said. "I've lent this
place to a man for the evening, and he's having some people to
dinner. What's the trouble?"

"It's about Jill."

"Jill?"

"Jill Mariner, you know. You remember Jill? You haven't forgotten my
telling you all that? About her losing her money and coming over to
America?"

"No. I remember you telling me that."

Freddie seemed to miss something in his companion's manner, some note
of excitement and perturbation.

"Of course," he said, as if endeavoring to explain this to himself,
"you hardly knew her, I suppose. Only met once since you were kids
and all that sort of thing. But I'm a pal of hers and I'm dashed
upset by the whole business, I can tell you. It worries me, I mean to
say. Poor girl, you know, landed on her uppers in a strange country.
Well, I mean, it worries me. So the first thing I did when I got here
was to try to find her. That's why I came over, really, to try to
find her. Apart from anything else, you see, poor old Derek is dashed
worried about her."

"Need we bring Underhill in?"

"Oh, I know you don't like him and think he behaved rather rummily
and so forth, but that's all right now."

"It is, is it?" said Wally drily.

"Oh, absolutely. It's all on again."

"What's all on again?"

"Why, I mean he wants to marry Jill. I came over to find her and tell
her so."

Wally's eyes glowed.

"If you have come over as an ambassador . . ."

"That's right. Jolly old ambassador. Very word I used myself."

"I say, if you have come over as an ambassador with the idea of
reopening negotiations with Jill on behalf of that infernal swine . . ."

"Old man!" protested Freddie, pained. "Pal of mine, you know."

"If he is, after what's happened, your mental processes are beyond me."

"My what, old son?"

"Your mental processes."

"Oh, ah!" said Freddie, learning for the first time that he had any.

Wally looked at him intently. There was a curious expression on his
rough-hewn face.

"I can't understand you, Freddie. If ever there was a fellow who
might have been expected to take the only possible view of
Underhill's behavior in this business, I should have said it was you.
You're a public-school man. You've mixed all the time with decent
people. You wouldn't do anything that wasn't straight yourself to
save your life, it seems to have made absolutely no difference in
your opinion of this man Underhill that he behaved like an utter cad
to a girl who was one of your best friends. You seem to worship him
just as much as ever. And you have travelled three thousand miles to
bring a message from him to Jill--Good God! _Jill!_--to the effect,
as far as I understand it, that he has thought it over and come to
the conclusion that after all she may possibly be good enough for
him!"

Freddie recovered the eye-glass which the raising of his eyebrows had
caused to fall, and polished it in a crushed sort of way. Rummy, he
reflected, how chappies stayed the same all their lives as they were
when they were kids. Nasty, tough sort of chap Wally Mason had been
as a boy, and here he was, apparently, not altered a bit. At least,
the only improvement he could detect was that, whereas in the old
days Wally, when in an ugly mood like this, would undoubtedly have
kicked him, he now seemed content with mere words. All the same, he
was being dashed unpleasant. And he was all wrong about poor old
Derek. This last fact he endeavored to make clear.

"You don't understand," he said. "You don't realize. You've never met
Lady Underhill, have you?"

"What has she got to do with it?"

"Everything, old bean, everything. If it hadn't been for her, there
wouldn't have been any trouble of any description, sort, or order.
But she barged in and savaged poor old Derek till she absolutely made
him break off the engagement."

"If you call him 'poor old Derek' again, Freddie," said Wally
viciously, "I'll drop you out of the window and throw your hat after
you! If he's such a gelatine-backboned worm that his mother can . . ."

"You don't know her, old thing! She's the original hellhound!"

"I don't care what . . ."

"Must be seen to be believed," mumbled Freddie.

"I don't care what she's like! Any man who could . . ."

"Once seen, never forgotten!"

"Damn you! Don't interrupt every time I try to get a word in!"

"Sorry, old man! Shan't occur again!"

Wally moved to the window, and stood looking out. He had had much
more to say on the subject of Derek Underhill, but Freddie's
interruptions had put it out of his head, and he felt irritated and
baffled.

"Well, all I can say is," he remarked savagely, "that, if you have
come over here as an ambassador to try and effect a reconciliation
between Jill and Underhill, I hope to God you'll never find her."

Freddie emitted a weak cough, like a very far-off asthmatic old
sheep. He was finding Wally more overpowering every moment. He had
rather forgotten the dear old days of his childhood, but this
conversation was beginning to refresh his memory: and he was
realizing more vividly with every moment that passed how very
Wallyish Wally was,--how extraordinarily like the Wally who had
dominated his growing intellect when they were both in Eton suits.
Freddie in those days had been all for peace, and he was all for
peace now. He made his next observation diffidently.

"I _have_ found her!"

Wally spun round.

"What!"

"When I say that, I don't absolutely mean. I've seen her. I mean I
know where she is. That's what I came round to see you about. Felt I
must talk it over, you know. The situation seems to me dashed rotten
and not a little thick. The fact is, old man, she's gone on the
stage. In the chorus, you know. And, I mean to say, well, if you
follow what I'm driving at, what, what?"

"In the chorus!"

"In the chorus!"

"How do you know?"

Freddie groped for his eye-glass, which had fallen again.

He regarded it a trifle sternly. He was fond of the little chap, but
it was always doing that sort of thing. The whole trouble was that,
if you wanted to keep it in its place, you simply couldn't register
any sort of emotion with the good old features: and, when you were
chatting with a fellow like Wally Mason, you had to be registering
something all the time.

"Well, that was a bit of luck, as a matter of fact. When I first got
here, you know, it seemed to me the only thing to do was to round up
a merry old detective and put the matter in his hands, like they do
in stories. You know! Ring at the bell. 'And this, if I mistake not,
Watson, is my client now.' And then in breezes client and spills the
plot. I found a sleuth in the classified telephone directory, and
toddled round. Rummy chaps, detectives! Ever met any? I always
thought they were lean, hatchet-faced Johnnies with inscrutable
smiles. This one looked just like my old Uncle Ted, the one who died
of apoplexy. Jovial, puffy-faced bird, who kept bobbing up behind a
fat cigar. Have you ever noticed what whacking big cigars these
fellows over here smoke? Rummy country, America. You ought to have
seen the way this blighter could shift his cigar right across his
face without moving his jaw-muscles. Like a flash! Most remarkable
thing you ever saw, I give you my honest word! He . . ."

"Couldn't you keep your Impressions of America for the book you're
going to write, and come to the point?" said Wally rudely.

"Sorry, old chap," said Freddie meekly. "Glad you reminded me. Well
. . . Oh, yes. We had got as far as the jovial old human bloodhound,
hadn't we? Well, I put the matter before this chappie. Told him I
wanted to find a girl, showed him a photograph, and so forth. I say,"
said Freddie, wandering off once more into speculation, "why is it
that coves like that always talk of a girl as 'the little lady'? This
chap kept saying 'We'll find the little lady for you!' Oh, well,
that's rather off the rails, isn't it? It just floated across my mind
and I thought I'd mention it. Well, this blighter presumably nosed
about and made enquiries for a couple of days, but didn't effect
anything that you might call substantial. I'm not blaming him, mind
you. I shouldn't care to have a job like that myself. I mean to say,
when you come to think of what a frightful number of girls there are
in this place, to have to . . . well, as I say, he did his best but
didn't click; and then this evening, just before I came here, I met a
girl I had known in England--she was in a show over there--a girl
called Nelly Bryant . . ."

"Nelly Bryant? I know her."

"Yes? Fancy that! She was in a thing called 'Follow the Girl' in
London. Did you see it by any chance? Topping show! There was one
scene where the . . ."

"Get on! Get on! I wrote it,"

"You wrote it?" Freddie beamed simple-hearted admiration. "My dear
old chap, I congratulate you! One of the ripest and most all-wool
musical comedies I've ever seen. I went twenty-four times. Rummy I
don't remember spotting that you wrote it. I suppose one never looks
at the names on the programme. Yes, I went twenty-four times. The
first time I went was with a couple of chappies from . . ."

"Listen, Freddie!" said Wally feverishly. "On some other occasion I
should dearly love to hear the story of your life, but just now . . ."

"Absolutely, old man. You're perfectly right. Well, to cut a long
story short, Nelly Bryant told me that she and Jill were rehearsing
with a piece called 'The Rose of America.'"

"'The Rose of America!'"

"I think that was the name of it."

"That's Ike Goble's show. He called me up on the phone about it half
an hour ago. I promised to go and see a rehearsal of it tomorrow or
the day after. And Jill's in that?"

"Yes. How about it? I mean, I don't know much about this sort of
thing, but do you think it's the sort of thing Jill ought to be
doing?"

Wally was moving restlessly about the room. Freddie's news had
disquieted him. Mr Goble had a reputation.

"I know a lot about it," he replied, "and it certainly isn't." He
scowled at the carpet. "Oh, damn everybody!"

Freddie paused to allow him to proceed, if such should be his wish,
but Wally had apparently said his say. Freddie went on to point out
an aspect of the matter which was troubling him greatly.

"I'm sure poor old Derek wouldn't like her being in the chorus!"

Wally started so violently that for a moment Freddie was uneasy.

"I mean Underhill," he corrected himself hastily.

"Freddie," said Wally, "you're an awfully good chap, but I wish you
would exit rapidly now! Thanks for coming and telling me, very good
of you. This way out!"

"But, old man . . . !"

"Now what?"

"I thought we were going to discuss this binge and decide what to do
and all that sort of thing."

"Some other time. I want to think about it."

"Oh, you will think about it?"

"Yes, I'll think about it."

"Topping! You see, you're a brainy sort of feller, and you'll
probably hit something."

"I probably shall, if you don't go."

"Eh? Oh, ah, yes!" Freddie struggled into his coat. More than ever
did the adult Wally remind him of the dangerous stripling of years
gone by. "Well, cheerio!"

"Same to you!"

"You'll let me know if you scare up some devilish fruity wheeze,
won't you? I'm at the Biltmore."

"Very good place to be. Go there now."

"Right ho! Well, toodle-oo!"

"The elevator is at the foot of the stairs," said Wally. "You press
the bell and up it comes. You hop in and down you go. It's a great
invention! Good night!"

"Oh, I say. One moment . . ."

"Good _night!_" said Wally.

He closed the door, and ran down the passage.

"Jill!" he called. He opened the bedroom window and stepped out.
"Jill!"

There was no reply.

"Jill!" called Wally once again, but again there was no answer.

Wally walked to the parapet, and looked over. Below him the vastness
of the city stretched itself in a great triangle, its apex the
harbor, its sides the dull silver of the East and Hudson rivers.
Directly before him, crowned with its white lantern, the Metropolitan
Tower reared its graceful height to the stars. And all around, in the
windows of the tall buildings that looked from this bastion on which
he stood almost squat, a million lights stared up at him, the
unsleeping eyes of New York. It was a scene of which Wally, always
sensitive to beauty, never tired: but tonight it had lost its appeal.
A pleasant breeze from the Jersey shore greeted him with a quickening
whisper of springtime and romance, but it did not lift the heaviness
of his heart. He felt depressed and apprehensive.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN


1.

Spring, whose coming the breeze had heralded to Wally as he smoked
upon the roof, floated graciously upon New York two mornings later.
The city awoke to a day of blue and gold and to a sense of hard times
over and good times to come. In a million homes, a million young men
thought of sunny afternoons at the Polo Grounds; a million young
women of long summer Sundays by the crowded waves of Coney Island. In
his apartment on Park Avenue, Mr Isaac Goble, sniffing the gentle air
from the window of his breakfast-room, returned to his meal and his
_Morning Telegraph_ with a resolve to walk to the theatre for
rehearsal: a resolve which had also come to Jill and Nelly Bryant,
eating stewed prunes in their boarding-house in the Forties. On the
summit of his sky-scraper, Wally Mason, performing Swedish exercises
to the delectation of various clerks and stenographers in the upper
windows of neighboring buildings, felt young and vigorous and
optimistic; and went in to his shower-bath thinking of Jill. And it
was of Jill, too, that young Mr Pilkington thought, as he propped his
long form up against the pillows and sipped his morning cup of tea.
He had not yet had an opportunity of inspecting the day for himself,
but his Japanese valet, who had been round the corner for papers, had
spoken well of it; and even in his bedroom the sunlight falling on
the carpet gave some indication of what might be expected outside.
For the first time in several days a certain moodiness which had
affected Otis Pilkington left him, and he dreamed happy daydreams.

The gaiety of Otis was not, however, entirely or even primarily due
to the improvement in the weather. It had its source in a
conversation which had taken place between himself and Jill's Uncle
Chris on the previous night. Exactly how it had come about, Mr
Pilkington was not entirely clear, but, somehow, before he was fully
aware of what he was saying, he had begun to pour into Major Selby's
sympathetic ears the story of his romance. Encouraged by the other's
kindly receptiveness, he had told him all--his love for Jill, his
hopes that some day it might be returned, the difficulties
complicating the situation owing to the known prejudices of Mrs
Waddesleigh Peagrim concerning girls who formed the personnel of
musical comedy ensembles. To all these outpourings Major Selby had
listened with keen attention, and finally had made one of those
luminous suggestions, so simple yet so shrewd, which emanate only
from your man of the world. It was Jill's girlish ambition, it seemed
from Major Selby's statement, to become a force in the motion-picture
world. The movies were her objective. When she had told him of this,
said Uncle Chris, he had urged her, speaking in her best interests,
to gain experience by joining in the humblest capacity the company of
some good musical play, where she could learn from the best masters
so much of the technique of the business. That done, she could go
about her life-work, fortified and competent.

What, he broke off to ask, did Pilkington think of the idea?

Pilkington thought the idea splendid. Miss Mariner, with her charm
and looks, would be wonderful in the movies.

There was, said Uncle Chris, a future for a girl in the movies.

Mr Pilkington agreed cordially. A great future.

"Look at Mary Pickford!" said Uncle Chris. "Millions a year!"

Mr Pilkington contemplated Miss Pickford, and agreed again. He
instanced other stars--lesser luminaries, perhaps, but each with her
thousands a week. There was no doubt about it--a girl's best friend
was the movies.

"Observe," proceeded Uncle Chris, gathering speed and expanding his
chest as he spread his legs before the fire, "how it would simplify
the whole matter if Jill were to become a motion-picture artist and
win fame and wealth in her profession. And there can be no reasonable
doubt, my boy, that she would. As you say, with her appearance and
her charm . . . Which of these women whose names you see all along
Broadway in electric lights can hold a candle to her? Once started,
with the proper backing behind her, her future would be assured. And
then. . . . Of course, as regards her feelings I cannot speak, as I
know nothing of them, but we will assume that she is not indifferent
to you . . . what then? You go to your excellent aunt and announce
that you are engaged to be married to Jill Mariner. There is a
momentary pause. 'Not _the_ Jill Mariner?' falters Mrs Peagrim. 'Yes,
the famous Miss Mariner!' you reply. Well, I ask you, my boy, can you
see her making an objection? Such a thing would be absurd. No, I can
see no flaw in the project whatsoever." Here Uncle Chris, as he had
pictured Mrs Peagrim doing, paused for a moment. "Of course, there
would be the preliminaries."

"The preliminaries?"

Uncle Chris' voice became a melodious coo. He beamed upon Mr
Pilkington.

"Well, think for yourself, my boy! These things cannot be done
without money. I do not propose to allow my niece to waste her time
and her energy in the rank and file of the profession, waiting years
for a chance that might never come. There is plenty of room at the
top, and that, in the motion-picture profession, is the place to
start. If Jill is to become a motion-picture artist, a special
company must be formed to promote her. She must be made a feature, a
star, from the beginning. That is why I have advised her to accept
her present position temporarily, in order that she may gain
experience. She must learn to walk before she runs. She must study
before she soars. But when the moment arrives for her to take the
step, she must not be hampered by lack of money. Whether," said Uncle
Chris, smoothing the crease of his trousers, "you would wish to take
shares in the company yourself . . ."

"Oo . . . !"

". . . is a matter," proceeded Uncle Chris, ignoring the
interruption, "for you yourself to decide. Possibly you have other
claims on your purse. Possibly this musical play of yours has taken
all the cash you are prepared to lock up. Possibly you may consider
the venture too speculative. Possibly . . . there are a hundred
reasons why you may not wish to join us. But I know a dozen men--I
can go down Wall Street tomorrow and pick out twenty men--who will be
glad to advance the necessary capital. I can assure you that I
personally shall not hesitate to risk--if one can call it
risking--any loose cash which I may have lying idle at my banker's."

He rattled the loose cash which he had lying idle in his
trouser-pocket--fifteen cents in all--and stopped to flick a piece of
fluff off his coat-sleeve. Mr Pilkington was thus enabled to insert a
word.

"How much would you want?" he enquired.

"That," said Uncle Chris meditatively, "is a little hard to say. I
should have to look into the matter more closely in order to give you
the exact figures. But let us say for the sake of argument that you
put up--what shall we say?--a hundred thousand? fifty thousand? . . .
no, we will be conservative. Perhaps you had better not begin with
more than ten thousand. You can always buy more shares later. I don't
suppose I shall begin with more than ten thousand myself."

"I could manage ten thousand all right."

"Excellent. We make progress, we make progress. Very well, then. I go
to my Wall Street friends--I would give you their names, only for the
present, till something definite has been done, that would hardly be
politic--I go to my Wall Street friends, and tell them about the
scheme, and say 'Here is ten thousand dollars! What is your
contribution?' It puts the affair on a business-like basis, you
understand. Then we really get to work. But use your own judgment my
boy, you know. Use your own judgment. I would not think of persuading
you to take such a step, if you felt at all doubtful. Think it over.
Sleep on it. And, whatever you decide to do, on no account say a word
about it to Jill. It would be cruel to raise her hopes until we are
certain that we are in a position to enable her to realize them. And,
of course, not a word to Mrs Peagrim."

"Of course."

"Very well, then, my boy." said Uncle Chris affably. "I will leave
you to turn the whole thing over in your mind. Act entirely as you
think best. How is your insomnia, by the way? Did you try Nervino?
Capital! There's nothing like it. It did wonders for _me!_
Good-night, good-night!"

Otis Pilkington had been turning the thing over in his mind, with an
interval for sleep, ever since. And the more he thought of it, the
better the scheme appeared to him. He winced a little at the thought
of the ten thousand dollars, for he came of prudent stock and had
been brought up in habits of parsimony, but, after all, he reflected,
the money would be merely a loan. Once the company found its feet, it
would be returned to him a hundred-fold. And there was no doubt that
this would put a completely different aspect on his wooing of Jill,
as far as his Aunt Olive was concerned. Why, a cousin of his--young
Brewster Philmore--had married a movie-star only two years ago, and
nobody had made the slightest objection. Brewster was to be seen with
his bride frequently beneath Mrs Peagrim's roof. Against the higher
strata of Bohemia Mrs Peagrim had no prejudice at all. Quite the
reverse, in fact. She liked the society of those whose names were
often in the papers and much in the public mouth. It seemed to Otis
Pilkington, in short, that Love had found a way. He sipped his tea
with relish, and when the Japanese valet brought in the toast all
burned on one side, chided him with a gentle sweetness which, one may
hope, touched the latter's Oriental heart and inspired him with a
desire to serve this best of employers more efficiently.

At half-past ten, Otis Pilkington removed his dressing-gown and began
to put on his clothes to visit the theatre. There was a
rehearsal-call for the whole company at eleven. As he dressed, his
mood was as sunny as the day itself.

And the day, by half-past ten, was as sunny as ever Spring day had
been in a country where Spring comes early and does its best from the
very start, The blue sky beamed down on a happy city. To and fro the
citizenry bustled, aglow with the perfection of the weather.
Everywhere was gaiety and good cheer, except on the stage of the
Gotham Theatre, where an early rehearsal, preliminary to the main
event, had been called by Johnson Miller in order to iron some of the
kinks out of the "My Heart and I" number, which, with the assistance
of the male chorus, the leading lady was to render in act one.

On the stage of the Gotham gloom reigned--literally, because the
stage was wide and deep and was illumined only by a single electric
light: and figuratively, because things were going even worse than
usual with the "My Heart and I" number, and Johnson Miller, always of
an emotional and easily stirred temperament, had been goaded by the
incompetence of his male chorus to a state of frenzy. At about the
moment when Otis Pilkington shed his flowered dressing-gown and
reached for his trousers (the heather-mixture with the red twill),
Johnson Miller was pacing the gangway between the orchestra pit and
the first row of the orchestra chairs, waving one hand and clutching
his white locks with the other, his voice raised the while in
agonized protest.

"Gentlemen, you silly idiots," complained Mr Miller loudly, "you've
had three weeks to get these movements into your thick heads, and you
haven't done a damn thing right! You're all over the place! You don't
seem able to turn without tumbling over each other like a lot of
Keystone Kops! What's the matter with you? You're not doing the
movements I showed you; you're doing some you have invented
yourselves, and they are rotten! I've no doubt you think you can
arrange a number better than I can, but Mr Goble engaged me to be the
director, so kindly do exactly as I tell you. Don't try to use your
own intelligence, because you haven't any. I'm not blaming you for
it. It wasn't your fault that your nurses dropped you on your heads
when you were babies. But it handicaps you when you try to think."

Of the seven gentlemanly members of the male ensemble present, six
looked wounded by this tirade. They had the air of good men
wrongfully accused. They appeared to be silently calling on Heaven to
see justice done between Mr. Miller and themselves. The seventh, a
long-legged young man in faultlessly-fitting tweeds of English cut,
seemed, on the other hand, not so much hurt as embarrassed. It was
this youth who now stepped down to the darkened footlights and spoke
in a remorseful and conscience-stricken manner.

"I say!"

Mr Miller, that martyr to deafness, did not hear the pathetic bleat.
He had swung off at right angles and was marching in an overwrought
way up the central aisle leading to the back of the house, his india
rubber form moving in convulsive jerks. Only when he had turned and
retraced his steps did he perceive the speaker and prepare to take
his share in the conversation.

"What?" he shouted. "Can't hear you!"

"I say, you know, it's my fault, really."

"What?"

"I mean to say, you know . . ."

"What? Speak up, can't you?"

Mr Saltzburg, who had been seated at the piano, absently playing a
melody from his unproduced musical comedy, awoke to the fact that the
services of an interpreter were needed. He obligingly left the
music-stool and crept, crablike, along the ledge of the stage-box. He
placed his arm about Mr Miller's shoulders and his lips to Mr
Miller's left ear, and drew a deep breath.

"He says it is his fault!"

Mr Miller nodded adhesion to this admirable sentiment.

"I know they're not worth their salt!" he replied.

Mr Saltzburg patiently took in a fresh stock of breath.

"This young man says it is his fault that the movement went wrong!"

"Tell him I only signed on this morning, laddie," urged the
tweed-clad young man.

"He only joined the company this morning!"

This puzzled Mr Miller.

"How do you mean, warning?" he asked.

Mr Saltzburg, purple in the face, made a last effort.

"This young man is new," he bellowed carefully, keeping to words of
one syllable. "He does not yet know the steps. He says this is his
first day here, so he does not yet know the steps. When he has been
here some more time he will know the steps. But now he does not know
the steps."

"What he means," explained the young man in tweeds helpfully, "is
that I don't know the steps."

"He does not know the steps!" roared Mr Saltzburg.

"I know he doesn't know the steps," said Mr Miller. "Why doesn't he
know the steps? He's had long enough to learn them."

"He is new!"

"Hugh?"

"New!"

"Oh, new?"

"Yes, new!"

"Why the devil is he new?" cried Mr Miller, awaking suddenly to the
truth and filled with a sense of outrage. "Why didn't he join with
the rest of the company? How can I put on chorus numbers if I am
saddled every day with new people to teach? Who engaged him?"

"Who engaged you?" enquired Mr Saltzburg of the culprit.

"Mr Pilkington."

"Mr Pilkington," shouted Mr Saltzburg.

"When?"

"When?"

"Last night."

"Last night."

Mr Miller waved his hands in a gesture of divine despair, spun round,
darted up the aisle, turned, and bounded back. "What can I do?" he
wailed. "My hands are tied! I am hampered! I am handicapped! We open
in two weeks, and every day I find somebody new in the company to
upset everything I have done. I shall go to Mr Goble and ask to be
released from my contract. I shall . . . Come along, come along, come
along now!" he broke off suddenly. "Why are we wasting time? The
whole number once more. The whole number once more from the
beginning!"

The young man tottered back to his gentlemanly colleagues, running a
finger in an agitated manner round the inside of his collar. He was
not used to this sort of thing. In a large experience of amateur
theatricals he had never encountered anything like it. In the
breathing-space afforded by the singing of the first verse and
refrain by the lady who played the heroine of "The Rose of America,"
he found time to make an enquiry of the artist on his right.

"I say! Is he always like this?"

"Who? Johnny?"

"The sportsman with the hair that turned white in a single night. The
barker on the skyline. Does he often get the wind up like this?"

His colleague smiled tolerantly.

"Why, that's nothing!" he replied. "Wait till you see him really cut
loose! That was just a gentle whisper!"

"My God!" said the newcomer, staring into a bleak future. The leading
lady came to the end of her refrain, and the gentlemen of the
ensemble, who had been hanging about up-stage, began to curvet nimbly
down towards her in a double line; the new arrival, with an eye on his
nearest neighbor, endeavouring to curvet as nimbly as the others. A
clapping of hands from the dark auditorium indicated--inappropriately--
that he had failed to do so. Mr Miller could be perceived--dimly--
with all his fingers entwined in his hair.

"Clear the stage!" yelled Mr Miller. "Not you!" he shouted, as the
latest addition to the company began to drift off with the others.
"You stay!"

"Me?"

"Yes, you. I shall have to teach you the steps by yourself, or we
shall get nowhere. Go on-stage. Start the music again, Mr Saltzburg.
Now, when the refrain begins, come down. Gracefully! Gracefully!"

The young man, pink but determined, began to come down gracefully.
And it was while he was thus occupied that Jill and Nelly Bryant,
entering the wings which were beginning to fill up as eleven o'clock
approached, saw him.

"Whoever is that?" said Nelly.

"New man," replied one of the chorus gentlemen. "Came this morning."

Nelly turned to Jill.

"He looks just like Mr Rooke!" she exclaimed.

"He _is_ Mr Rooke!" said Jill.

"He can't be!"

"He _is_!"

"But what is he doing here?"

Jill bit her lip.

"That's just what I'm going to ask him myself," she said.


2.

The opportunity for a private conversation with Freddie did not occur
immediately. For ten minutes he remained alone on the stage,
absorbing abusive tuition from Mr Miller: and at the end of that
period a further ten minutes was occupied with the rehearsing of the
number with the leading lady and the rest of the male chorus. When,
finally, a roar from the back of the auditorium announced the arrival
of Mr Goble and at the same time indicated Mr Goble's desire that the
stage should be cleared and the rehearsal proper begin, a wan smile
of recognition and a faint "What ho!" was all that Freddie was able
to bestow upon Jill, before, with the rest of the _ensemble_, they
had to go out and group themselves for the opening chorus. It was
only when this had been run through four times and the stage left
vacant for two of the principals to play a scene that Jill was able
to draw the Last of the Rookes aside in a dark corner and put him to
the question.

"Freddie, what are you doing here?"

Freddie mopped his streaming brow. Johnson Miller's idea of an
opening chorus was always strenuous. On the present occasion, the
ensemble were supposed to be guests at a Long Island house-party, and
Mr Miller's conception of the gathering suggested that he supposed
house-party guests on Long Island to consist exclusively of victims
of St Vitus' dance. Freddie was feeling limp, battered, and
exhausted: and, from what he had gathered, the worst was yet to come.

"Eh?" he said feebly.

"What are you doing here?"

"Oh, ah, yes! I see what you mean! I suppose you're surprised to find
me in New York, what?"

"I'm not surprised to find you in New York. I knew you had come over.
But I am surprised to find you on the stage, being bullied by Mr
Miller."

"I say," said Freddie in an awed voice. "He's a bit of a nut, that
lad, what! He reminds me of the troops of Midian in the hymn. The
chappies who prowled and prowled around. I'll bet he's worn a groove
in the carpet. Like a jolly old tiger at the Zoo at feeding time.
Wouldn't be surprised at any moment to look down and find him biting
a piece out of my leg!"

Jill seized his arm and shook it.

"Don't _ramble_, Freddie! Tell me how you got here."

"Oh, that was pretty simple. I had a letter of introduction to this
chappie Pilkington who's running this show, and, we having got
tolerably pally in the last few days, I went to him and asked him to
let me join the merry throng. I said I didn't want any money and the
little bit of work I would do wouldn't make any difference, so he
said 'Right ho!' or words to that effect, and here I am."

"But why? You can't be doing this for fun, surely?"

"Fun!" A pained expression came into Freddie's face. "My idea of fun
isn't anything in which jolly old Miller, the bird with the snowy
hair, is permitted to mix. Something tells me that that lad is going
to make it his life-work picking on me. No, I didn't do this for fun.
I had a talk with Wally Mason the night before last, and he seemed to
think that being in the chorus wasn't the sort of thing you ought to
be doing, so I thought it over and decided that I ought to join the
troupe too. Then I could always be on the spot, don't you know, if
there was any trouble. I mean to say, I'm not much of a chap and all
that sort of thing, but still I might come in handy one of these
times. Keep a fatherly eye on you, don't you know, and what not!"

Jill was touched.

"You're a dear, Freddie!"

"I thought, don't you know, it would make poor old Derek a bit easier
in his mind."

Jill froze.

"I don't want to talk about Derek, Freddie, please."

"Oh, I know what you must be feeling. Pretty sick, I'll bet, what?
But if you could see him now . . ."

"I don't want to talk about him!"

"He's pretty cut up, you know. Regrets bitterly and all that sort of
thing. He wants you to come back again."

"I see! He sent you to fetch me?"

"That was more or less the idea."

"It's a shame that you had all the trouble. You can get
messenger-boys to go anywhere and do anything nowadays. Derek ought
to have thought of that."

Freddie looked at her doubtfully.

"You're spoofing, aren't you? I mean to say, you wouldn't have liked
that!"

"I shouldn't have disliked it any more than his sending you."

"Oh, but I wanted to pop over. Keen to see America and so forth."

Jill looked past him at the gloomy stage. Her face was set, and her
eyes sombre.

"Can't you understand, Freddie? You've known me a long time. I should
have thought that you would have found out by now that I have a
certain amount of pride. If Derek wanted me back, there was only one
thing for him to do--come over and find me himself."

"Rummy! That's what Mason said, when I told him. You two don't
realize how dashed busy Derek is these days."

"Busy!"

Something in her face seemed to tell Freddie that he was not saying
the right thing, but he stumbled on.

"You've no notion how busy he is. I mean to say, elections coming on
and so forth. He daren't stir from the metrop."

"Of course I couldn't expect him to do anything that might interfere
with his career, could I?"

"Absolutely not. I knew you would see it!" said Freddie, charmed at
her reasonableness. All rot, what you read about women being
unreasonable. "Then I take it it's all right, eh?"

"All right?"

"I mean you will toddle home with me at the earliest opp. and make
poor old Derek happy?"

Jill laughed discordantly.

"Poor old Derek!" she echoed. "He has been badly treated, hasn't he?"

"Well, I wouldn't say that," said Freddie doubtfully. "You see,
coming down to it, the thing was more or less his fault, what?"

"More or less!"

"I mean to say . . ."

"More or less!"

Freddie glanced at her anxiously. He was not at all sure now that he
liked the way she was looking or the tone in which she spoke. He was
not a keenly observant young man, but there did begin at this point
to seep through to his brain-centers a suspicion that all was not
well.

"Let me pull myself together!" said Freddie warily to his immortal
soul. "I believe I'm getting the raspberry!" And there was silence
for a space.

The complexity of life began to weigh upon Freddie. Life was like one
of those shots at squash which seem so simple till you go to knock
the cover off the ball, when the ball sort of edges away from you and
you miss it. Life, Freddie began to perceive, was apt to have a nasty
back-spin on it. He had never had any doubt when he had started, that
the only difficult part of his expedition to America would be the
finding of Jill. Once found, he had presumed that she would be
delighted to hear his good news and would joyfully accompany him home
on the next boat. It appeared now, however, that he had been too
sanguine. Optimist as he was, he had to admit that, as far as could
be ascertained with the naked eye, the jolly old binge might be said
to have sprung a leak.

He proceeded to approach the matter from another angle.

"I say!"

"Yes?"

"You do love old Derek, don't you? I mean to say, you know what I
mean, _love_ him and all that sort of rot?"

"I don't know!"

"You don't know! Oh, I say, come now! You must _know!_ Pull up your
socks, old thing . . . I mean, pull yourself together! You either
love a chappie or you don't."

Jill smiled painfully.

"How nice it would be if everything were as simple and
straightforward as that. Haven't you ever heard that the dividing
line between love and hate is just a thread? Poets have said so a
great number of times."

"Oh, poets!" said Freddie, dismissing the genus with a wave of the
hand. He had been compelled to read Shakespeare and all that sort of
thing at school, but it had left him cold, and since growing to man's
estate he had rather handed the race of bards the mitten. He liked
Doss Chiderdoss' stuff in the _Sporting Times_, but beyond that he
was not much of a lad for poets.

"Can't you understand a girl in my position not being able to make up
her mind whether she loves a man or despises him?"

Freddie shook his head.

"No," he said. "It sounds dashed silly to me!"

"Then what's the good of talking?" cried Jill. "It only hurts."

"But--won't you come back to England?"

"No."

"Oh, I say! Be a sport! Take a stab at it!"

Jill laughed again--another of those grating laughs which afflicted
Freddie with a sense of foreboding and failure. Something had
undoubtedly gone wrong with the works. He began to fear that at some
point in the conversation--just where he could not say--he had been
less diplomatic than he might have been.

"You speak as if you were inviting me to a garden-party! No, I won't
take a stab at it. You've a lot to learn about women, Freddie!"

"Women _are_ rum!" conceded that perplexed ambassador.

Jill began to move away.

"Don't go!" urged Freddie.

"Why not? What's the use of talking any more? Have you ever broken an
arm or a leg, Freddie?"

"Yes," said Freddie, mystified. "As a matter of fact, my last year at
Oxford, playing soccer for the college in a friendly game, some
blighter barged into me and I came down on my wrist. But . . ."

"It hurt?"

"Like the deuce!"

"And then it began to get better, I suppose. Well, used you to hit it
and twist it and prod it, or did you leave it alone to try and heal?
I won't talk any more about Derek! I simply won't! I'm all smashed up
inside, and I don't know if I'm ever going to get well again, but at
least I'm going to give myself a chance. I'm working as hard as ever
I can, and I'm forcing myself not to think of him. I'm in a sling,
Freddie, like your wrist, and I don't want to be prodded. I hope we
shall see a lot of each other while you're over here--you always were
the greatest dear in the world--but you mustn't mention Derek again,
and you mustn't ask me to go home. If you avoid those subjects, we'll
be as happy as possible. And now I'm going to leave you to talk to
poor Nelly. She has been hovering round for the last ten minutes,
waiting for a chance to speak to you. She worships you, you know!"

Freddie started violently.

"Oh, I say! What rot!"

Jill had gone, and he was still gaping after her, when Nelly Bryant
moved towards him--shyly, like a worshiper approaching a shrine.

"Hello, Mr Rooke!" said Nelly.

"Hullo-ullo-ullo!" said Freddie.

Nelly fixed her large eyes on his face. A fleeting impression passed
through Freddie's mind that she was looking unusually pretty this
morning: nor was the impression unjustified. Nelly was wearing for
the first time a Spring suit which was the outcome of hours of
painful selection among the wares of a dozen different stores, and
the knowledge that the suit was just right seemed to glow from her
like an inner light. She felt happy: and her happiness had lent an
unwonted color to her face and a soft brightness to her eyes.

"How nice it is, your being here!"

Freddie waited for the inevitable question, the question with which
Jill had opened their conversation; but it did not come. He was
surprised, but relieved. He hated long explanations, and he was very
doubtful whether loyalty to Jill could allow him to give them to
Nelly. His reason for being where he was had to do so intimately with
Jill's most private affairs. A wave of gratitude to Nelly swept
through him when he realised that she was either incurious or else
too delicate-minded to show inquisitiveness.

As a matter of fact, it was delicacy that kept Nelly silent. Seeing
Freddie here at the theatre, she had, as is not uncommon with
fallible mortals, put two and two together and made the answer four
when it was not four at all. She had been deceived by circumstantial
evidence. Jill, whom she had left in England wealthy and secure, she
had met again in New York penniless as the result of some Stock
Exchange cataclysm in which, she remembered with the vagueness with
which one recalls once-heard pieces of information, Freddie Rooke had
been involved. True, she seemed to recollect hearing that Freddie's
losses had been comparatively slight, but his presence in the chorus
of "The Rose of America" seemed to her proof that after all the must
have been devastating. She could think of no other reason except loss
of money which could have placed Freddie in the position in which she
now found him, so she accepted it; and, with the delicacy which was
innate in her and which a hard life had never blunted, decided,
directly she saw him, to make no allusion to the disaster.

Such was Nelly's view of the matter, and sympathy gave to her manner
a kind of maternal gentleness which acted on Freddie, raw from his
late encounter with Mr Johnson Miller and disturbed by Jill's
attitude in the matter of poor old Derek, like a healing balm. His
emotions were too chaotic for analysis, but one thing stood out clear
from the welter--the fact that he was glad to be with Nelly as he had
never been glad to be with a girl before, and found her soothing as
he had never supposed a girl could be soothing.

They talked desultorily of unimportant things, and every minute found
Freddie more convinced that Nelly was not as other girls. He felt
that he must see more of her.

"I say," he said. "When this binge is over . . . when the rehearsal
finishes, you know, how about a bite to eat?"

"I should love it. I generally go to the Automat."

"The how-much? Never heard of it."

"In Times Square. It's cheap, you know."

"I was thinking of the Cosmopolis."

"But that's so expensive."

"Oh, I don't know. Much the same as any of the other places, isn't
it?"

Nelly's manner became more motherly than ever. She bent forward and
touched his arm affectionately.

"You haven't to keep up any front with me," she said gently. "I don't
care whether you're rich or poor or what. I mean, of course I'm
awfully sorry you've lost your money, but it makes it all the easier
for us to be real pals, don't you think so?"

"Lost my money!"

"Well, I know you wouldn't be here if you hadn't. I wasn't going to
say anything about it, but, when you talked of the Cosmopolis, I just
had to. You lost your money in the same thing Jill Mariner lost hers,
didn't you? I was sure you had, the moment I saw you here. Who cares?
Money isn't everything!"

Astonishment kept Freddie silent for an instant: after that he
refrained from explanations of his own free will. He accepted the
situation and rejoiced in it. Like many other wealthy and modest
young men, he had always had a sneaking suspicion at the back of his
mind that any girl who was decently civil to him was so from mixed
motives--or more likely, motives that were not even mixed. Well,
dash it, here was a girl who seemed to like him although under the
impression that he was broke to the wide. It was an intoxicating
experience. It made him feel a better chap. It fortified his
self-respect.

"You know," he said, stammering a little, for he found a sudden
difficulty in controlling his voice. "You're a dashed good sort!"

"I'm awfully glad you think so."

There was a silence--as far, at least, as he and she were concerned.
In the outer world, beyond the piece of scenery under whose shelter
they stood, stirring things, loud and exciting things, seemed to be
happening. Some sort of an argument appeared to be in progress. The
rasping voice of Mr Goble was making itself heard from the unseen
auditorium. These things they sensed vaguely, but they were too
occupied with each other to ascertain details.

"What was the name of that place again?" asked Freddie. "The
what-ho-something?"

"The Automat?"

"That's the little chap! We'll go there, shall we?"

"The food's quite good. You go and help yourself out of
slot-machines, you know."

"My favorite indoor sport!" said Freddie with enthusiasm. "Hullo!
What's up? It sounds as if there were dirty work at the cross-roads!"

The voice of the assistant stage-manager was calling--sharply
excited, agitation in every syllable.

"All the gentlemen of the chorus on the stage, please! Mr Goble wants
all the chorus--gentlemen on the stage!"

"Well, cheerio for the present," said Freddie. "I suppose I'd better
look into this." He made his way onto the stage.


3.

There is an insidious something about the atmosphere of a rehearsal
of a musical play which saps the finer feelings of those connected
with it. Softened by the gentle beauty of the Spring weather, Mr
Goble had come to the Gotham Theatre that morning in an excellent
temper, firmly intending to remain in an excellent temper all day.
Five minutes of "The Rose of America" had sent him back to the
normal: and at ten minutes past eleven he was chewing his cigar and
glowering at the stage with all the sweetness gone from his soul.
When Wally Mason arrived at a quarter past eleven and dropped into
the seat beside him, the manager received him with a grunt and even
omitted to offer him a cigar. And when a New York theatrical manager
does that, it is a certain sign that his mood is of the worst.

One may find excuses for Mr Goble. "The Rose of America" would have
tested the equanimity of a far more amiable man: and on Mr Goble what
Otis Pilkington had called its delicate whimsicality jarred
profoundly. He had been brought up in the lower-browed school of
musical comedy, where you shelved the plot after the opening number
and filled in the rest of the evening by bringing on the girls in a
variety of exotic costumes, with some good vaudeville specialists to
get the laughs. Mr Goble's idea of a musical piece was something
embracing trained seals, acrobats, and two or three teams of skilled
buck-and-wing dancers, with nothing on the stage, from a tree to a
lamp-shade, which could not suddenly turn into a chorus-girl. The
austere legitimateness of "The Rose of America" gave him a pain in
the neck. He loathed plot, and "The Rose of America" was all plot.

Why, then, had the earthy Mr. Goble consented to associate himself
with the production of this intellectual play? Because he was
subject, like all other New York managers, to intermittent spasms of
the idea that the time is ripe for a revival of comic opera.
Sometimes, lunching in his favorite corner in the Cosmopolis
grill-room, he would lean across the table and beg some other manager
to take it from him that the time was ripe for a revival of comic
opera--or more cautiously, that pretty soon the time was going to be
ripe for a revival of comic opera. And the other manager would nod
his head and thoughtfully stroke his three chins and admit that, sure
as God made little apples, the time was darned soon going to be ripe
for a revival of comic opera. And then they would stuff themselves
with rich food and light big cigars and brood meditatively.

With most managers these spasms, which may be compared to twinges of
conscience, pass as quickly as they come, and they go back to coining
money with rowdy musical comedies, quite contented. But Otis
Pilkington, happening along with the script of "The Rose of America"
and the cash to back it, had caught Mr Goble in the full grip of an
attack, and all the arrangements had been made before the latter
emerged from the influence. He now regretted his rash act.

"Say, listen," he said to Wally, his gaze on the stage, his words
proceeding from the corner of his mouth, "you've got to stick around
with this show after it opens on the road. We'll talk terms later.
But we've got to get it right, don't care what it costs. See?"

"You think it will need fixing?"

Mr Goble scowled at the unconscious artists, who were now going
through a particularly arid stretch of dialogue.

"Fixing! It's all wrong! It don't add up right! You'll have to
rewrite it from end to end."

"Well, I've got some ideas about it. I saw it played by amateurs last
summer, you know. I could make a quick job of it, if you want me to.
But will the author stand for it?"

Mr Goble allowed a belligerent eye to stray from the stage, and
twisted it round in Wally's direction.

"Say, listen! He'll stand for anything I say. I'm the little guy that
gives orders round here. I'm the big noise!"

As if in support of this statement he suddenly emitted a terrific
bellow. The effect was magical. The refined and painstaking artists
on the stage stopped as if they had been shot. The assistant
stage-director bent sedulously over the footlights, which had now
been turned up, shading his eyes with the prompt script.

"Take that over again!" shouted Mr Goble. "Yes, that speech about
life being like a water-melon. It don't sound to me as though it
meant anything." He cocked his cigar at an angle, and listened
fiercely. He clapped his hands. The action stopped again. "Cut it!"
said Mr Goble tersely.

"Cut the speech, Mr Goble?" queried the obsequious assistant
stage-director.

"Yes. Cut it. It don't mean nothing!"

Down the aisle, springing from a seat at the back, shimmered Mr
Pilkington, wounded to the quick.

"Mr Goble! Mr Goble!"

"Well?"

"That is the best epigram in the play."

"The best what?"

"Epigram. The best epigram in the play."

Mr. Goble knocked the ash off his cigar. "The public don't want
epigrams. The public don't like epigrams. I've been in the show
business fifteen years, and I'm telling you! Epigrams give them a
pain under the vest. All right, get on."

Mr Pilkington fluttered agitatedly. This was his first experience of
Mr Goble in the capacity of stage-director. It was the latter's
custom to leave the early rehearsals of the pieces with which he was
connected to a subordinate producer, who did what Mr Goble called the
breaking-in. This accomplished, he would appear in person, undo most
of the other's work, make cuts, tell the actors how to read their
lines, and generally enjoy himself. Producing plays was Mr Goble's
hobby. He imagined himself to have a genius in that direction, and it
was useless to try to induce him to alter any decision to which he
might have come. He regarded those who did not agree with him with
the lofty contempt of an Eastern despot.

Of this Mr Pilkington was not yet aware.

"But, Mr Goble . . . !"

The potentate swung irritably round on him.

"What is it? What is it? Can't you see I'm busy?"

"That epigram . . ."

"It's out!"

"But . . . !"

"It's out!"

"Surely," protested Mr Pilkington almost tearfully, "I have a voice
. . ."

"Sure you have a voice," retorted Mr Goble, "and you can use it any
old place you want, except in my theatre. Have all the voice you
like! Go round the corner and talk to yourself! Sing in your bath!
But don't come using it here, because I'm the little guy that does
all the talking in this theatre! That fellow gets my goat," he added
complainingly to Wally, as Mr Pilkington withdrew like a foiled
python. "He don't know nothing about the show business, and he keeps
butting in and making fool suggestions. He ought to be darned glad
he's getting his first play produced and not trying to teach me how
to direct it." He clapped his hands imperiously. The assistant
stage-manager bent over the footlights. "What was that that guy said?
Lord Finchley's last speech. Take it again."

The gentleman who was playing the part of Lord Finchley, an English
character actor who specialized in London "nuts," raised his
eyebrows, annoyed. Like Mr Pilkington, he had never before come into
contact with Mr Goble as stage-director, and, accustomed to the
suaver methods of his native land, he was finding the experience
trying. He had not yet recovered from the agony of having that
water-melon line cut out of his part. It was the only good line, he
considered, that he had. Any line that is cut out of an actor's part
is always the only good line he has.

"The speech about Omar Khayyam?" he enquired with suppressed
irritation.

"I thought that was the way you said it. All wrong! It's Omar _of_
Khayyam."

"I think you will find that Omar Khayyam is the--ah--generally
accepted version of the poet's name," said the portrayer of Lord
Finchley, adding beneath his breath. "You silly ass!"

"You say Omar _of_ Khayyam," bellowed Mr Goble. "Who's running this
show, anyway?"

"Just as you please."

Mr Goble turned to Wally.

"These actors . . ." he began, when Mr Pilkington appeared again at
his elbow.

"Mr Goble! Mr Goble!"

"What is it _now?_"

"Omar Khayyam was a Persian poet. His name was Khayyam."

"That wasn't the way _I_ heard it," said Mr Goble doggedly. "Did
_you?_" he enquired of Wally. "I thought he was born at Khayyam."

"You're probably quite right," said Wally, "but, if so, everybody
else has been wrong for a good many years. It's usually supposed that
the gentleman's name was Omar Khayyam. Khayyam, Omar J. Born 1050
A.D., educated privately and at Bagdad University. Represented Persia
in the Olympic Games of 1072, winning the sitting high-jump and the
egg-and-spoon race. The Khayyams were quite a well-known family in
Bagdad, and there was a lot of talk when Omar, who was Mrs Khayyam's
pet son, took to drink writing poetry. They had had it all fixed for
him to go into his father's date business."

Mr Goble was impressed. He had a respect for Wally's opinion, for
Wally had written "Follow the Girl" and look what a knock-out that
had been. He stopped the rehearsal again.

"Go back to that Khayyam speech!" he said, interrupting Lord Finchley
in mid-sentence.

The actor whispered a hearty English oath beneath his breath. He had
been up late last night, and, in spite of the fair weather, he was
feeling a trifle on edge.

"'In the words of Omar of Khayyam' . . ."

Mr Goble clapped his hands.

"Cut that 'of,'" he said. "The show's too long, anyway."

And, having handled a delicate matter in masterly fashion, he leaned
back in his chair and chewed the end off another cigar.

For some minutes after this the rehearsal proceeded smoothly. If Mr
Goble did not enjoy the play, at least he made no criticisms except
to Wally. To him he enlarged from time to time on the pain which "The
Rose of America" caused him.

"How I ever came to put on junk like this beats me," confessed Mr
Goble frankly.

"You probably saw that there was a good idea at the back of it,"
suggested Wally. "There is, you know. Properly handled, it's an idea
that could be made into a success."

"What would you do with it?"

"Oh, a lot of things," said Wally warily. In his younger and callower
days he had sometimes been rash enough to scatter views on the
reconstruction of plays broadcast, to find them gratefully absorbed
and acted upon and treated as a friendly gift. His affection for Mr
Goble was not so overpowering as to cause him to give him ideas for
nothing now. "Any time you want me to fix it for you, I'll come
along. About one and a half per cent of the gross would meet the
case, I think."

Mr Goble faced him, registering the utmost astonishment and horror.

"One and a half per cent for fixing a show like this? Why, darn it,
there's hardly anything to do to it! It's--it's--in!"

"You called it junk just now."

"Well, all I meant was that it wasn't the sort of thing I cared for
myself. The public will eat it! Take it from me, the time is just
about ripe for a revival of comic opera."

"This one will want all the reviving you can give it. Better use a
pulmotor."

"But that long boob, that Pilkington . . . he would never stand for
my handing you one and a half per cent."

"I thought _you_ were the little guy who arranged things round here."

"But he's got money in the show."

"Well, if he wants to get any out, he'd better call in somebody to
rewrite it. You don't have to engage me if you don't want to. But I
know I could make a good job of it. There's just one little twist the
thing needs and you would have quite a different piece."

"What's that?" enquired Mr Goble casually.

"Oh, just a little . . . what shall I say? . . . a little touch of
what-d'you-call-it and a bit of thingummy. You know the sort of
thing! That's all it wants."

Mr Goble gnawed his cigar, baffled.

"You think so, eh?" he said at length.

"And perhaps a suspicion of je-ne-sais-quoi," added Wally.

Mr Goble worried his cigar, and essayed a new form of attack.

"You've done a lot of work for me," he said. "Good work!"

"Glad you liked it," said Wally.

"You're a good kid! I like having you around. I was half thinking of
giving you a show to do this Fall. Corking book. French farce. Ran
two years in Paris. But what's the good, if you want the earth?"

"Always useful, the earth. Good thing to have."

"See here, if you'll fix up this show for half of one per cent, I'll
give you the other to do."

"You shouldn't slur your words so. For a moment I thought you said
'half of one per cent.' One and a half of course you really said."

"If you won't take half, you don't get the other."

"All right," said Wally. "There are lots of other managers in New
York. Haven't you seen them popping about? Rich, enterprising men,
and all of them love me like a son."

"Make it one per cent," said Mr Goble, "and I'll see if I can fix it
with Pilkington."

"One and a half."

"Oh, damn it, one and a half, then," said Mr Goble morosely. "What's
the good of splitting straws?"

"Forgotten Sports of the Past--Splitting the Straw. All right. If you
drop me a line to that effect, legibly signed with your name, I'll
wear it next my heart. I shall have to go now. I have a date.
Good-bye. Glad everything's settled and everybody's happy."

For some moments after Wally had left, Mr Goble sat hunched up in his
orchestra-chair, smoking sullenly, his mood less sunny than ever.
Living in a little world of sycophants, he was galled by the off-hand
way in which Wally always treated him. There was something in the
latter's manner which seemed to him sometimes almost contemptuous. He
regretted the necessity of having to employ him. There was, of
course, no real necessity why he should have employed Wally. New York
was full of librettists who would have done the work equally well for
half the money, but, like most managers, Mr Goble had the mental
processes of a sheep. "Follow the Girl" was the last outstanding
musical success in New York theatrical history: Wally had written it:
therefore nobody but Wally was capable of rewriting "The Rose of
America." The thing had for Mr Goble the inevitability of Fate.
Except for deciding mentally that Wally had swelled head, there was
nothing to be done.

Having decided that Wally had swelled head and not feeling much
better, Mr Goble concentrated his attention on the stage. A good deal
of action had taken place there during recently concluded business
talk, and the unfortunate Finchley was back again, playing another of
his scenes. Mr Goble glared at Lord Finchley. He did not like him, and
he did not like the way he was speaking his lines.

The part of Lord Finchley was a non-singing role. It was a type part.
Otis Pilkington had gone to the straight stage to find an artist, and
had secured the not uncelebrated Wentworth Hill, who had come over
from London to play in an English comedy which had just closed. The
newspapers had called the play thin, but had thought that Wentworth
Hill was an excellent comedian. Mr Hill thought so too, and it was
consequently a shock to his already disordered nerves when a bellow
from the auditorium stopped him in the middle of one of his speeches
and a rasping voice informed him that he was doing it all wrong.

"I beg your pardon?" said Mr. Hill, quietly but dangerously, stepping
to the footlights.

"All wrong!" repeated Mr Goble.

"Really?" Wentworth Hill, who a few years earlier had spent several
terms at Oxford University before being sent down for aggravated
disorderliness, had brought little away with him from that seat of
learning except the Oxford manner. This he now employed upon Mr Goble
with an icy severity which put the last touch to the manager's
fermenting state of mind. "Perhaps you would be kind enough to tell
me just how you think that part should be played?"

Mr Goble marched down the aisle.

"Speak out to the audience," he said, stationing himself by the
orchestra pit. "You're turning your head away all the darned time."

"I may be wrong," said Mr Hill, "but I have played a certain amount,
don't you know, in pretty good companies, and I was always under the
impression that one should address one's remarks to the person one
was speaking to, not deliver a recitation to the gallery. I was
taught that that was the legitimate method."

The word touched off all the dynamite in Mr Goble. Of all things in
the theatre he detested most the "legitimate method." His idea of
producing was to instruct the cast to come down to the footlights and
hand it to 'em. These people who looked up stage and talked to the
audience through the backs of their necks revolted him.

"Legitimate! That's a hell of a thing to be! Where do you get that
legitimate stuff? You aren't playing Ibsen!"

"Nor am I playing a knockabout vaudeville sketch."

"Don't talk back at me!"

"Kindly don't shout at _me!_ Your voice is unpleasant enough without
your raising it."

Open defiance was a thing which Mr Goble had never encountered
before, and for a moment it deprived him of breath. He recovered it,
however, almost immediately.

"You're fired!"

"On the contrary," said Mr Hill, "I'm resigning." He drew a
green-covered script from his pocket and handed it with an air to the
pallid assistant stage-director. Then, more gracefully than ever
Freddie Rooke had managed to move downstage under the tuition of
Johnson Miller, he moved upstage to the exit. "I trust that you will
be able to find someone who will play the part according to your
ideas!"

"I'll find," bellowed Mr Goble at his vanishing back, "a chorus-man
who'll play it a damned sight better than you!" He waved to the
assistant stage-director. "Send the chorus-men on the stage!"

"All the gentlemen of the chorus on the stage, please!" shrilled the
assistant stage-director, bounding into the wings like a retriever.

"Mr Goble wants all the chorus-gentlemen on the stage!"

There was a moment, when the seven male members of "The Rose of
America" ensemble lined up self-consciously before his gleaming eyes,
when Mr Goble repented of his brave words. An uncomfortable feeling
passed across his mind that Fate had called his bluff and that he
would not be able to make good. All chorus-men are exactly alike, and
they are like nothing else on earth. Even Mr Goble, anxious as he was
to overlook their deficiencies, could not persuade himself that in
their ranks stood even an adequate Lord Finchley. And then, just as a
cold reaction from his fervid mood was about to set in, he perceived
that Providence had been good to him. There, at the extreme end of
the line, stood a young man who, as far as appearance went, was the
ideal Lord Finchley,--as far as appearance went, a far better Lord
Finchley than the late Mr Hill. He beckoned imperiously.

"You at the end!"

"Me?" said the young man.

"Yes, you. What's your name?"

"Rooke. Frederick Rooke, don't you know."

"You're English, aren't you?"

"Eh? Oh, yes, absolutely!"

"Ever played a part before?"

"Part? Oh, I see what you mean. Well, in amateur theatricals, you
know, and all that sort of rot."

His words were music to Mr Goble's ears. He felt that his Napoleonic
action had justified itself by success. His fury left him. If he had
been capable of beaming, one would have said that he beamed at
Freddie.

"Well, you play the part of Lord Finchley from now on. Come to my
office this afternoon for your contract. Clear the stage. We've
wasted enough time."

Five minutes later, in the wings, Freddie, receiving congratulations
from Nelly Bryant, asserted himself.

"_Not_ the Automat today, I think, what! Now that I'm a jolly old
star and all that sort of thing, it can't be done. Directly this is
over we'll roll round to the Cosmopolis. A slight celebration is
indicated, what? Right ho! Rally round, dear heart, rally round!"


CHAPTER FIFTEEN


1.

The lobby of the Hotel Cosmopolis is the exact center of New York,
the spot where at certain hours one is sure of meeting everybody one
knows. The first person that Nelly and Freddie saw, as they passed
through the swing doors, was Jill. She was seated on the chair by the
big pillar in the middle of the hall.

"What ho!" said Freddie. "Waiting for someone?"

"Hullo, Freddie. Yes, I'm waiting for Wally Mason. I got a note from
him this morning, asking me to meet him here. I'm a little early. I
haven't congratulated you yet. You're wonderful!"

"Thanks, old girl. Our young hero is making pretty hefty strides in
his chosen profesh, what! Mr Rooke, who appears quite simple and
unspoiled by success, replied to our representative's enquiry as to
his future plans that he proposed to stagger into the grill-room and
imbibe about eighteen dollars' worth of lunch. Yes, it is a bit of
all right, taking it by and large, isn't it? I mean to say, the
salary, the jolly old salary, you know . . . quite a help when a
fellow's lost all his money!"

Jill was surprised to observe that the Last of the Rookes was
contorting his face in an unsightly manner that seemed to be an
attempt at a wink, pregnant with hidden meaning. She took her cue
dutifully, though without understanding.

"Oh, yes," she replied.

Freddie seemed grateful. With a cordial "Cheerio!" he led Nelly off
to the grill-room.

"I didn't know Jill knew Mr Mason," said Nelly, as they sat down at
their table.

"No?" said Freddie absently, running an experienced eye over the
bill-of-fare. He gave an elaborate order. "What was that? Oh,
absolutely! Jill and I and Wally were children together."

"How funny you should all be together again like this."

"Yes. Oh, good Lord!"

"What's the matter?"

"It's nothing. I meant to send a cable to a pal of mine in England.
I'll send it after lunch."

Freddie took out his handkerchief, and tied a knot in it. He was
slightly ashamed of the necessity of taking such a precaution, but it
was better to be on the safe side. His interview with Jill at the
theatre had left him with the conviction that there was only one
thing for him to do, and that was to cable poor old Derek to forget
impending elections and all the rest of it and pop over to America at
once. He knew that he would never have the courage to re-open the
matter with Jill himself. As an ambassador he was a spent force. If
Jill was to be wooed from her mood of intractability, Derek was the
only man to do it. Freddie was convinced that, seeing him in person,
she would melt and fall into his arms. Too dashed absurd, Freddie
felt, two loving hearts being separated like this and all that sort
of thing. He replaced his handkerchief in his pocket, relieved, and
concentrated himself on the entertainment of Nelly. A simple task,
for, the longer he was with this girl, the easier did it seem to talk
to her.

Jill, left alone in the lobby, was finding the moments pass quite
pleasantly. She liked watching the people as they came in. One or two
of the girls of the company fluttered in like birds, were swooped
upon by their cavaliers, and fluttered off to the grill-room. The
red-headed Babe passed her with a genial nod, and, shortly after,
Lois Denham, the willowy recipient of sunbursts from her friend Izzy
of the hat-checks, came by in company with a sallow, hawk-faced young
man with a furtive eye, whom Jill took--correctly--to be Izzy
himself. Lois was looking pale and proud, and from the few words
which came to Jill's ears as they neared her, seemed to be annoyed at
having been kept waiting.

It was immediately after this that the swing-doors revolved rather
more violently than usual, and Mr Goble burst into view.

There was a cloud upon Mr Goble's brow, seeming to indicate that his
grievance against life had not yet been satisfactorily adjusted: but
it passed as he saw Jill, and he came up to her with what he would
probably have claimed to be an ingratiating smile.

"Hello!" said Mr Goble. "All alone?"

Jill was about to say that the condition was merely temporary when
the manager went on.

"Come and have a bit of lunch."

"Thank you very much," said Jill, with the politeness of dislike,
"but I'm waiting for someone."

"Chuck him!" advised Mr Goble cordially.

"No, thanks, I couldn't, really."

The cloud began to descend again upon Mr Goble's brow. He was
accustomed to having these invitations of his treated as royal
commands.

"Come along!"

"I'm afraid it's impossible."

Mr Goble subjected her to a prolonged stare, seemed about to speak,
changed his mind, and swung off moodily in the direction of the
grill-room. He was not used to this sort of treatment.

He had hardly gone, when Wally appeared.

"What was he saying to you?" demanded Wally abruptly, without
preliminary greeting.

"He was asking me to lunch."

Wally was silent for a moment. His good-natured face wore an unwonted
scowl.

"He went in there, of course?" he said, pointing to the grill-room.

"Yes."

"Then let's go into the other room," said Wally. He regained his
good-humor. "It was awfully good of you to come. I didn't know
whether you would be able to."

"It was very nice of you to invite me."

Wally grinned.

"How perfect our manners are! It's a treat to listen! How did you
know that that was the one hat in New York I wanted you to wear?"

"Oh, these things get about. Do you like it?"

"It's wonderful. Let's take this table, shall we?"


2.

They sat down. The dim, tapestry-hung room soothed Jill. She was
feeling a little tired after the rehearsal. At the far end of the
room an orchestra was playing a tune that she remembered and liked.
Her mind went back to the last occasion on which she and Wally had
sat opposite each other at a restaurant. How long ago it seemed! She
returned to the present to find Wally speaking to her.

"You left very suddenly the other night," said Wally.

"I didn't want to meet Freddie."

Wally looked at her commiseratingly.

"I don't want to spoil your lunch," he said, "but Freddie knows all.
He has tracked you down. He met Nelly Bryant, whom he seems to have
made friends with in London, and she told him where you were and what
you were doing. For a girl who fled at his mere approach the night
before last, you don't seem very agitated by the news," he said, as
Jill burst into a peal of laughter.

"You haven't heard?"

"Heard what?"

"Freddie got Mr Pilkington to put him in the chorus of the piece. He
was rehearsing when I arrived at the theatre this morning, and having
a terrible time with Mr Miller. And, later on, Mr Goble had a quarrel
with the man who was playing the Englishman, and the man threw up his
part and Mr Goble said he could get any one in the chorus to play it
just as well, and he chose Freddie. So now Freddie is one of the
principals, and bursting with pride!"

Wally threw his head back and uttered a roar of appreciation which
caused a luncher at a neighboring table to drop an oyster which he
was poising in mid-air.

"Don't make such a noise!" said Jill severely. "Everyone's looking at
you."

"I must! It's the most priceless thing I ever heard. I've always
maintained and I always will maintain that for pure lunacy nothing
can touch the musical comedy business. There isn't anything that
can't happen in musical comedy. 'Alice in Wonderland' is nothing to
it."

"Have you felt that, too? That's exactly how I feel. It's like a
perpetual 'Mad Hatter's Tea-Party.'"

"But what on earth made Freddie join the company at all?"

A sudden gravity descended upon Jill. The words had reminded her of
the thing which she was perpetually striving to keep out of her
thoughts.

"He said he wanted to be there to keep an eye on me."

Gravity is infectious. Wally's smile disappeared. He, too, had been
recalled to thoughts which were not pleasant.

Wally crumbled his roll. There was a serious expression on his face.

"Freddie was quite right. I didn't think he had so much sense."

"Freddie was not right," flared Jill. The recollection of her
conversation with that prominent artist still had the power to fire
her independent soul. "I'm not a child. I can look after myself. What
I do is my own business."

"I'm afraid you're going to find that your business is several
people's business. I am interested in it myself. I don't like your
being on the stage. Now bite my head off!"

"It's very kind of you to bother about me . . ."

"I said 'Bite my head off!' I didn't say 'Freeze me!' I take the
license of an old friend who in his time has put worms down your
back, and I repeat--I don't like your being on the stage."

"I shouldn't have thought you would have been so"--Jill sought for a
devastating adjective--"so mid-Victorian!"

"As far as you are concerned, I'm the middest Victorian in existence.
Mid is my middle name." Wally met her indignant gaze squarely.
"I-do-not-like-your-being-on-the-stage! Especially in any company
which Ike Goble is running."

"Why Mr Goble particularly?"

"Because he is not the sort of man you ought to be coming in contact
with."

"What nonsense!"

"It isn't nonsense at all. I suppose you've read a lot about the
morals of theatrical managers . . ."

"Yes. And it seemed to be exaggerated and silly."

"So it is. There's nothing wrong with most of them. As a general
thing, they are very decent fellows,--extraordinarily decent if you
think of the position they are in. I don't say that in a business way
there's much they won't try to put over on you. In the theatre, when
it comes to business, everything goes except biting and gouging.
'There's never a law of God or man runs north of fifty-three.' If you
alter that to 'north of Forty-first Street,' it doesn't scan as well,
but it's just as true. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that
the Golden Rule is suspended there. You get used to it after you have
been in the theatre for awhile, and, except for leaving your watch
and pocketbook at home when you have to pay a call on a manager and
keeping your face to him so that he can't get away with your back
collar-stud, you don't take any notice of it. It's all a game. If a
manager swindles you, he wins the hole and takes the honor. If you
foil him, you are one up. In either case, it makes no difference to
the pleasantness of your relations. You go on calling him by his
first name, and he gives you a couple of cigars out of his waistcoat
pocket and says you're a good kid. There is nothing personal in it.
He has probably done his best friend out of a few thousand dollars
the same morning, and you see them lunching together after the
ceremony as happily as possible. You've got to make allowances for
managers. They are the victims of heredity. When a burglar marries a
hat-check girl, their offspring goes into the theatrical business
automatically, and he can't shake off the early teaching which he
imbibed at his father's knee. But morals . . ."

Wally broke off to allow the waiter to place a fried sole before him.
Waiters always select the moment when we are talking our best to
intrude themselves.

"As regards morals," resumed Wally, "that is a different matter. Most
managers are respectable, middle-aged men with wives and families.
They are in the business to make money, and they don't want anything
else out of it. The girls in their companies are like so many clerks
to them, just machines that help to bring the money in. They don't
know half a dozen of them to speak to. But our genial Ike is not like
that." Wally consumed a mouthful of sole. "Ike Goble is a bad
citizen. He paws! He's a slinker and a prowler and a leerer. He's a
pest and a worm! He's fat and soft and flabby. He has a greasy soul,
a withered heart, and an eye like a codfish. Not knocking him, of
course!" added Wally magnanimously. "Far be it from me to knock
anyone! But, speaking with the utmost respect and viewing him in the
most favorable light, he is a combination of tom-cat and the things
you see when you turn over a flat stone! Such are the reasons why I
am sorry that you are in his company."

Jill had listened to this diatribe with a certain uneasiness.

Her brief encounters with Mr Goble told her that every word was
probably true. She could still feel the unpleasant sensation of being
inspected by the eye which Wally had compared--quite justly--to that
of a codfish. But her pride forbade any admission of weakness.

"I can take care of myself," she said.

"I don't doubt it," said Wally. "And you could probably take care of
yourself if you fell into a muddy pond. But I shouldn't like to stand
on the bank and watch you doing it. I know what girls in the chorus
have to go through. Hanging about for hours in draughts, doing
nothing, while the principals go through their scenes, and yelled at
if they try to relieve the tedium of captivity with a little light
conversation . . ."

"Yes," admitted Jill. "There has been a good lot of that."

"There always is. I believe if the stage-carpenter was going to stick
a screw in a flat, they would call a chorus-rehearsal to watch him do
it . . . Jill, you must get out of it. It's no life for you. The work
. . ."

"I like the work."

"While it's new, perhaps, but . . ."

Jill interrupted him passionately.

"Oh, can't you understand!" she cried. "I want the work. I need it. I
want something to do, something to occupy my mind. I hate talking
about it, but you know how things are with me. Freddie must have told
you. Even if he didn't, you must have guessed, meeting me here all
alone and remembering how things were when we last met. You must
understand! Haven't you ever had a terrible shock or a dreadful
disappointment that seemed to smash up the whole world? And didn't
you find that the only possible thing to do was to work and work and
work as hard as ever you could? When I first came to America, I
nearly went mad. Uncle Chris sent me down to a place on Long Island,
and I had nothing to do all day but think. I couldn't stand it. I ran
away and came to New York and met Nelly Bryant and got this work to
do. It saved me. It kept me busy all day and tired me out and didn't
give me time to think. The harder it is, the better it suits me. It's
an antidote. I simply wouldn't give it up now. As for what you were
saying, I must put up with that. The other girls do, so why shouldn't
I?"

"They are toughened to it."

"Then I must get toughened to it. What else is there for me to do? I
must do something."

"Marry me!" said Wally, reaching across the table and putting his
hand on hers. The light in his eyes lit up his homely face like a
lantern.


3.

The suddenness of it startled Jill into silence. She snatched her
hand away and drew back, looking at him in wonderment. She was
confusedly aware of a babble of sound,--people talking, people
laughing, the orchestra playing a lively tune. All her senses seemed
to have become suddenly more acute. She was intensely alive to small
details. Then, abruptly, the whole world condensed itself into two
eyes that were fastened upon hers,--compelling eyes which she felt a
panic desire to avoid.

She turned her head away, and looked out into the restaurant. It
seemed incredible that all these people, placidly intent upon their
food and their small talk, should not be staring at her, wondering
what she was going to say; nudging each other and speculating. Their
detachment made her feel alone and helpless. She was nothing to them
and they did not care what happened to her, just as she had been
nothing to those frozen marshes down at Brookport. She was alone in
an indifferent world, with her own problems to settle for herself.

Other men had asked Jill to marry them,--a full dozen of them, here
and there in country houses and at London before she had met and
loved Derek Underhill: but that she had had in the way of experience
had prepared her for Wally. These others had given her time to
marshal her forces, to collect herself, to weigh them thoughtfully in
the balance. Before speaking, they had signalled their devotion in a
hundred perceptible ways--by their pinkness, their stammering
awkwardness, by the glassy look in their eyes. They had not shot a
proposal at her like a bullet from out of the cover of a conversation
that had nothing to do with their emotions at all.

Yet, now that the shock of it was dying away, she began to remember
signs she would have noticed, speeches which ought to have warned
her . . .

"Wally!" she gasped.

She found that he affected her in an entirely different fashion from
the luckless dozen of those London days. He seemed to matter more, to
be more important, almost--though she rebelled at the word--more
dangerous.

"Let me take you out of it all! You aren't fit for this sort of life.
I can't bear to see you . . ."

Jill bent forward and touched his hand. He started as though he had
been burned. The muscles of his throat were working.

"Wally, it's--" She paused for a word. "Kind" was horrible. It would
have sounded cold, almost supercilious. "Sweet" was the sort of thing
she could imagine Lois Penham saying to her friend Izzy. She began
her sentence again. "You're a dear to say that, but . . ."

Wally laughed chokingly.

"You think I'm altruistic? I'm not. I'm just as selfish and
self-centered as any other man who wants a thing very badly. I'm as
altruistic as a child crying for the moon. I want you to marry me
because I love you, because there never was anybody like you, because
you're the whole world, because I always have loved you. I've been
dreaming about you for a dozen years, thinking about you, wondering
about you--wondering where you were, what you were doing, how you
looked. I used to think that it was just sentimentality, that you
merely stood for a time of my life when I was happier than I have
ever been since. I used to think that you were just a sort of peg on
which I was hanging a pleasant sentimental regret for days which
could never come back. You were a memory that seemed to personify all
the other memories of the best time of my life. You were the goddess
of old associations. Then I met you in London, and it was different.
I wanted you--_you!_ I didn't want you because you recalled old times
and were associated with dead happiness, I wanted _you!_ I knew I
loved you directly you spoke to me at the theatre that night of the
fire. I loved your voice and your eyes and your smile and your
courage. And then you told me you were engaged. I might have expected
it, but I couldn't keep my jealousy from showing itself, and you
snubbed me as I deserved. But now . . . things are different now.
Everything's different, except my love."

Jill turned her face to the wall beside her. A man at the next table,
a corpulent red-faced man, had begun to stare. He could have heard
nothing, for Wally had spoken in a low voice; but plainly he was
aware that something more interesting was happening at their table
than at any of the other tables, and he was watching with a bovine
inquisitiveness which affected Jill with a sense of outrage. A moment
before, she had resented the indifference of the outer world. Now,
this one staring man seemed like a watching multitude. There were
tears in her eyes, and she felt that the red-faced man suspected it.

"Wally . . ." Her voice broke. "It's impossible."

"Why? Why, Jill?"

"Because . . . Oh, it's impossible!"

There was a silence.

"Because . . ." He seemed to find a difficulty in speaking, "Because
of Underhill?"

Jill nodded. She felt wretched. The monstrous incongruity of her
surroundings oppressed her. The orchestra dashed into a rollicking
melody, which set her foot tapping in spite of herself. At a near-by
table somebody was shouting with laughter. Two waiters at a
service-stand were close enough for her to catch snatches of their
talk. They were arguing about an order of fried potatoes. Once again
her feelings veered round, and she loathed the detachment of the
world. Her heart ached for Wally. She could not look at him, but she
knew exactly what she would see if she did,--honest, pleading eyes
searching her face for something which she could not give.

"Yes," she said.

The table creaked. Wally was leaning further forward. He seemed like
something large and pathetic,--a big dog in trouble. She hated to be
hurting him. And all the time her foot tapped accompaniment to the
rag-time tune.

"But you can't live all your life with a memory," said Wally.

Jill turned and faced him. His eyes seemed to leap at her, and they
were just as she had pictured them.

"You don't understand," she said gently. "You don't understand."

"It's ended. It's over."

Jill shook her head.

"You can't still love him, after what has happened!"

"I don't know," said Jill unhappily.

The words seemed to bewilder Wally as much as they had bewildered
Freddie.

"You don't know!"

Jill shut her eyes tight. Wally quivered. It was a trick she had had
as a child. In perplexity, she had always screwed up her eyes just
like that, as if to shut herself up in herself.

"Don't talk for a minute, Wally," she said. "I want to think."

Her eyes opened.

"It's like this," she said. He had seen her look at him exactly the
same way a hundred times. "I don't suppose I can make you understand,
but this is how it is. Suppose you had a room, and it was full of
things. Furniture. And there wasn't any space left. You--you couldn't
put anything else in till you had taken all that out, could you? It
might not be worth anything, but it would still be there taking up
all the room."

Wally nodded.

"Yes," he said. "I see."

"My heart's full, Wally dear. I know it's just lumber that's choking
it up, but it's difficult to get it out. It takes time getting it
out. I put it in, thinking it was wonderful furniture, the most
wonderful in the world, and--I was cheated. It was just lumber. But
it's there. It's still there. It's there all the time. And what am I
to do?"

The orchestra crashed, and was silent. The sudden stillness seemed to
break a spell. The world invaded the little island where they sat. A
chattering party of girls and men brushed past them. The waiter,
judging that they had been there long enough, slipped a strip of
paper, decorously turned upside down, in front of Wally. He took the
money, and went away to get change.

Wally turned to Jill.

"I understand," he said. "All this hasn't happened, and we're just as
good pals as before?"

"Yes."

"But . . ." He forced a laugh . . . "mark my words, a time may come,
and then . . . !"

"I don't know," said Jill.

"A time may come," repeated Wally. "At any rate, let me think so. It
has nothing to do with me. It's for you to decide, absolutely. I'm
not going to pursue you with my addresses! If ever you get that room
of yours emptied, you won't have to hang out a 'To Let' sign. I shall
be waiting and you will know where to find me. And, in the meantime,
yours to command, Wallace Mason. Is that clear?"

"Quite clear." Jill looked at him affectionately. "There's nobody I'd
rather open that room to than you, Wally. You know that."

"Is that the solemn truth?"

"The solemn truth!"

"Then," said Wally, "in two minutes you will see a startled waiter.
There will be about fourteen dollars change out of that twenty he
took away. I'm going to give it all to him."

"You mustn't!"

"Every cent!" said Wally firm. "And the young Greek brigand who stole
my hat at the door is going to get a dollar! That, as our ascetic and
honorable friend Goble would say, is the sort of little guy _I_ am!"

           *        *        *

The red-faced man at the next table eyed them as they went out,
leaving behind them a waiter who clutched totteringly for support at
the back of a chair.

"Had a row," he decided, "but made it up."

He called for a toothpick.


CHAPTER SIXTEEN


1.

On the boardwalk at Atlantic City, that much-enduring seashore resort
which has been the birthplace of so many musical plays, there stands
an all-day and all-night restaurant, under the same management and
offering the same hospitality as the one in Columbus Circle at which
Jill had taken her first meal on arriving in New York. At least, its
hospitality is noisy during the waking and working hours of the day;
but there are moments when it has an almost cloistral peace, and the
customer, abashed by the cold calm of its snowy marble and the silent
gravity of the white-robed attendants, unconsciously lowers his voice
and tries to keep his feet from shuffling, like one in a temple. The
members of the chorus of "The Rose of America," dropping in by ones
and twos at six o'clock in the morning about two weeks after the
events recorded in the last chapter, spoke in whispers and gave their
orders for breakfast in a subdued undertone.

The dress-rehearsal had just dragged its weary length to a close. It
is the custom of the dwellers in Atlantic City, who seem to live
entirely for pleasure, to attend a species of vaudeville
performance--incorrectly termed a sacred concert--on Sunday nights:
and it had been one o'clock in the morning before the concert scenery
could be moved out of the theatre and the first act set of "The Rose
of America" moved in. And, as by some unwritten law of the drama no
dress-rehearsal can begin without a delay of at least an hour and a
half, the curtain had not gone up on Mr Miller's opening chorus till
half past two. There had been dress-parades, conferences,
interminable arguments between the stage-director and a mysterious
man in shirtsleeves about the lights, more dress-parades, further
conferences, hitches with regard to the sets, and another outbreak of
debate on the subject of blues, ambers, and the management of the
"spot," which was worked by a plaintive voice, answering to the name
of Charlie, at the back of the family circle. But by six o'clock a
complete, if ragged, performance had been given, and the chorus, who
had partaken of no nourishment since dinner on the previous night,
had limped off round the corner for a bite of breakfast before going
to bed.

They were a battered and a draggled company, some with dark circles
beneath their eyes, others blooming with the unnatural scarlet of the
make-up which they had been too tired to take off. The Duchess,
haughty to the last, had fallen asleep with her head on the table.
The red-headed Babe was lying back in her chair, staring at the
ceiling. The Southern girl blinked like an owl at the morning
sunshine out on the boardwalk.

The Cherub, whose triumphant youth had brought her almost fresh
through a sleepless night, contributed the only remark made during
the interval of waiting for the meal.

"The fascination of a thtage life! Why girls leave home!" She looked
at her reflection in the little mirror of her vanity-bag. "It _is_ a
face!" she murmured reflectively. "But I should hate to have to go
around with it long!"

A sallow young man, with the alertness peculiar to those who work on
the night-shifts of restaurants, dumped a tray down on the table with
a clatter. The Duchess woke up. Babe took her eyes off the ceiling.
The Southern girl ceased to look at the sunshine. Already, at the
mere sight of food, the extraordinary recuperative powers of the
theatrical worker had begun to assert themselves. In five minutes
these girls would be feeling completely restored and fit for
anything.

Conversation broke out with the first sip of coffee, and the calm of
the restaurant was shattered. Its day had begun.

"It's a great life if you don't weaken," said the Cherub, hungrily
attacking her omelette. "And the wortht is yet to come! I thuppose
all you old dears realithe that this show will have to be rewritten
from end to end, and we'll be rehearthing day and night all the time
we're on the road."

"Why?" Lois Denham spoke with her mouth full. "What's wrong with it?"

The Duchess took a sip of coffee.

"Don't make me laugh!" she pleaded. "What's wrong with it? What's
right with it, one would feel more inclined to ask!"

"One would feel thtill more inclined," said the Cherub, "to athk why
one was thuch a chump as to let oneself in for this sort of thing
when one hears on all sides that waitresses earn thixty dollars a
month."

"The numbers are all right," argued Babe. "I don't mean the melodies,
but Johnny has arranged some good business."

"He always does," said the Southern girl. "Some more buckwheat cakes,
please. But what about the book?"

"I never listen to the book."

The Cherub laughed.

"You're too good to yourself! I listened to it right along and take
it from me it's sad! Of courthe they'll have it fixed. We can't open
in New York like this. My professional reputation wouldn't thtand it!
Didn't you thee Wally Mason in front, making notes? They've got him
down to do the rewriting."

Jill, who had been listening in a dazed way to the conversation,
fighting against the waves of sleep which flooded over her, woke up.

"Was Wally--was Mr Mason there?"

"Sure. Sitting at the back."

Jill couldn't have said whether she was glad or sorry. She had not
seen Wally since that afternoon when they lunched together at the
Cosmopolis, and the rush of the final weeks of rehearsals had given
her little opportunity for thinking of him. At the back of her mind
had been the feeling that sooner or later she would have to think of
him, but for two weeks she had been too tired and too busy to
re-examine him as a factor in her life. There had been times when the
thought of him had been like the sunshine on a winter day, warming
her with almost an impersonal glow in moments of depression. And then
some sharp, poignant memory of Derek would come to blot him out. She
remembered the image she had used to explain Derek to Wally, and the
truth of it came home to her more strongly than ever. Whatever Derek
might have done, he was in her heart and she could not get him out.

She came out of her thoughts to find that the talk had taken another
turn.

"And the wortht of it is," the Cherub was saying, "we shall rehearthe
all day and give a show every night and work ourselves to the bone,
and then, when they're good and ready, they'll fire one of us!"

"That's right!" agreed the Southern girl.

"They couldn't!" Jill cried.

"You wait!" said the Cherub. "They'll never open in New York with
thirteen girls. Ike's much too thuperstitious."

"But they wouldn't do a thing like that after we've all worked so
hard!"

There was a general burst of sardonic laughter. Jill's opinion of the
chivalry of theatrical managers seemed to be higher than that of her
more experienced colleagues. "They'll do anything," the Cherub
assured her. "You don't know the half of it, dearie," scoffed Lois
Denham. "You don't know the half of it!"

"Wait till you've been in as many shows as I have," said Babe,
shaking her red locks. "The usual thing is to keep a girl slaving her
head off all through the road-tour and then fire her before the New
York opening."

"But it's a shame! It isn't fair!"

"If one is expecting to be treated fairly," said the Duchess with a
prolonged yawn, "one should not go into the show-business."

And, having uttered this profoundly true maxim, she fell asleep
again.

The slumber of the Duchess was the signal for a general move. Her
somnolence was catching. The restorative effects of the meal were
beginning to wear off. There was a call for a chorus-rehearsal at
four o'clock, and it seemed the wise move to go to bed and get some
sleep while there was time. The Duchess was roused from her dreams by
means of a piece of ice from one of the tumblers; checks were paid;
and the company poured out, yawning and chattering, into the sunlight
of the empty boardwalk.

Jill detached herself from the group, and made her way to a seat
facing the ocean. Tiredness had fallen upon her like a leaden weight,
crushing all the power out of her limbs, and the thought of walking
to the boarding-house where, from motives of economy, she was sharing
a room with the Cherub, paralyzed her.

It was a perfect morning, clear and cloudless, with the warm
freshness of a day that means to be hotter later on. The sea sparkled
in the sun. Little waves broke lazily on the gray sand. Jill closed
her eyes, for the brightness of sun and water was trying; and her
thoughts went back to what the Cherub had said.

If Wally was really going to rewrite the play, they would be thrown
together. She would be obliged to meet him, and she was not sure that
she was ready to meet him. Still, he would be somebody to talk to on
subjects other than the one eternal topic of the theatre, somebody
who belonged to the old life. She had ceased to regard Freddie Rooke
in this light: for Freddie, solemn with his new responsibilities as a
principal, was the most whole-hearted devotee of "shop" in the
company. Freddie nowadays declined to consider any subject for
conversation that did not have to do with "The Rose of America" in
general and his share in it in particular. Jill had given him up, and
he had paired off with Nelly Bryant. The two were inseparable. Jill
had taken one or two meals with them, but Freddie's professional
monologues, of which Nelly seemed never to weary, were too much for
her. As a result she was now very much alone. There were girls in the
company whom she liked, but most of them had their own intimate
friends, and she was always conscious of not being really wanted. She
was lonely, and, after examining the matter as clearly as her tired
mind would allow, she found herself curiously soothed by the thought
that Wally would be near to mitigate her loneliness.

She opened her eyes, blinking. Sleep had crept upon her with an
insidious suddenness, and she had almost fallen over on the seat. She
was just bracing herself to get up and begin the long tramp to the
boarding-house, when a voice spoke at her side.

"Hullo! Good morning!"

Jill looked up.

His fervid enthusiasm for one author dictated a splendid tribute
to a friend; while an irrational prejudice against another called
out a terrific diatribe against a foe.

In either case, there might be "thoughts that breathe and words
that burn"; still, there was but little of true criticism.

The matchless papers on Spenser and Homer represent one class, and
the articles on Hazlitt and Leigh Hunt the other.

While the former exhibit the tender sympathy of a poet and the
enthusiasm of a scholar, the latter reveal the uncompromising
partisan, swinging the hangman's cord, and brandishing the scourge
of scorpions.

Of the novelist's three kinds of criticism--"the slash, the tickle,
and the plaster"--he recognized and employed only the two extremes.

You must be worn out. Why
aren't you in bed?"

"I couldn't face the walk. I suppose I ought to be going, though."

She half rose, then sank back again. The glitter of the water
hypnotized her. She closed her eyes again. She could hear Wally
speaking, then his voice grew suddenly faint and far off, and she
ceased to fight the delicious drowsiness.

Jill awoke with a start. She opened her eyes, and shut them again at
once. The sun was very strong now. It was one of those prematurely
warm days of early Spring which have all the languorous heat of late
summer. She opened her eyes once more, and found that she was feeling
greatly refreshed. She also discovered that her head was resting on
Wally's shoulder.

"Have I been asleep?"

Wally laughed.

"You have been having what you might call a nap." He massaged his
left arm vigorously. "You needed it. Do you feel more rested now?"

"Good gracious! Have I been squashing your poor arm all the time? Why
didn't you move?"

"I was afraid you would fall over. You just shut your eyes and
toppled sideways."

"What's the time?"

Wally looked at his watch.

"Just on ten."

"Ten!" Jill was horrified. "Why, I have been giving you cramp for
about three hours! You must have had an awful time!"

"Oh, it was all right. I think I dozed off myself. Except that the
birds didn't come and cover us with leaves; it was rather like the
'Babes in the Wood.'"

"But you haven't had any breakfast! Aren't you starving?"

"Well, I'm not saying I wouldn't spear a fried egg with some vim if
it happened to float past. But there's plenty of time for that. Lots
of doctors say you oughtn't to eat breakfast, and Indian fakirs go
without food for days at a time in order to develop their souls.
Shall I take you back to wherever you're staying? You ought to get a
proper sleep in bed."

"Don't dream of taking me. Go off and have something to eat."

"Oh, that can wait. I'd like to see you safely home."

Jill was conscious of a renewed sense of his comfortingness. There
was no doubt about it, Wally was different from any other man she had
known. She suddenly felt guilty, as if she were obtaining something
valuable under false pretences.

"Wally!"

"Hullo?"

"You--you oughtn't to be so good to me!"

"Nonsense! Where's the harm in lending a hand--or, rather, an arm--to
a pal in trouble?"

"You know what I mean. I can't . . . that is to say . . . it isn't as
though . . . I mean . . ."

Wally smiled a tired, friendly smile.

"If you're trying to say what I think you're trying to say, don't! We
had all that out two weeks ago. I quite understand the position. You
mustn't worry yourself about it." He took her arm, and they crossed
the boardwalk. "Are we going in the right direction? You lead the
way. I know exactly how you feel. We're old friends, and nothing
more. But, as an old friend, I claim the right to behave like an old
friend. If an old friend can't behave like an old friend, how _can_
an old friend behave? And now we'll rule the whole topic out of the
conversation. But perhaps you're too tired for conversation?"

"Oh, no."

"Then I will tell you about the sad death of young Mr Pilkington."

"What!"

"Well, when I say death, I use the word in a loose sense. The human
giraffe still breathes, and I imagine, from the speed with which he
legged it back to his hotel when we parted, that he still takes
nourishment. But really he is dead. His heart is broken. We had a
conference after the dress-rehearsal, and our friend Mr Goble told
him in no uncertain words--in the whole course of my experience I
have never heard words less uncertain--that his damned rotten
high-brow false-alarm of a show--I am quoting Mr Goble--would have to
be rewritten by alien hands. And these are them! On the right, alien
right hand. On the left, alien left hand. Yes, I am the instrument
selected for the murder of Pilkington's artistic aspirations. I'm
going to rewrite the show. In fact, I have already rewritten the
first act and most of the second. Goble foresaw this contingency and
told me to get busy two weeks ago, and I've been working hard ever
since. We shall start rehearsing the new version tomorrow and open in
Baltimore next Monday with practically a different piece. And it's
going to be a pippin, believe me, said our hero modestly. A gang of
composers has been working in shifts for two weeks, and, by chucking
out nearly all of the original music, we shall have a good score. It
means a lot of work for you, I'm afraid. All the business of the
numbers will have to be re-arranged."

"I like work," said Jill. "But I'm sorry for Mr Pilkington."

"He's all right. He owns seventy per cent of the show. He may make a
fortune. He's certain to make a comfortable sum. That is, if he
doesn't sell out his interest in pique--or dudgeon, if you prefer it.
From what he said at the close of the proceedings, I fancy he would
sell out to anybody who asked him. At least, he said that he washed
his hands of the piece. He's going back to New York this
afternoon,--won't even wait for the opening. Of course, I'm sorry for
the poor chap in a way, but he had no right, with the excellent
central idea which he got, to turn out such a rotten book. Oh, by the
way!"

"Yes?"

"Another tragedy! Unavoidable, but pathetic. Poor old Freddie! He's
out!"

"Oh, no!"

"Out!" repeated Wally firmly.

"But didn't you think he was good last night?"

"He was awful! But that isn't why. Goble wanted his part rewritten as
a Scotchman, so as to get McAndrew, the fellow who made such a hit
last season in 'Hoots, Mon!' That sort of thing is always happening
in musical comedy. You have to fit parts to suit whatever good people
happen to be available at the moment. When you've had one or two
experiences of changing your Italian count to a Jewish
millionaire--invariably against time: they always want the script on
Thursday next at noon--and then changing him again to a Russian
Bolshevik, you begin to realize what is meant by the words 'Death,
where is thy sting?' My heart bleeds for Freddie, but what can one
do? At any rate he isn't so badly off as a fellow was in one of my
shows. In the second act he was supposed to have escaped from an
asylum, and the management, in a passion for realism, insisted that
he should shave his head. The day after he shaved it, they heard that
a superior comedian was disengaged and fired him. It's a ruthless
business."

"The girls were saying that one of us would be dismissed."

"Oh, I shouldn't think that's likely."

"I hope not."

"So do I. What are we stopping for?" Jill had halted in front of a
shabby-looking house, one of those depressing buildings which spring
up overnight at seashore resorts and start to decay the moment the
builders have left them.

"I live here."

"Here!" Wally looked at her in consternation. "But . . ."

Jill smiled.

"We working-girls have got to economize. Besides, it's quite
comfortable--fairly comfortable--inside, and it's only for a week."
She yawned. "I believe I'm falling asleep again. I'd better hurry in
and go to bed. Good-bye, Wally dear. You've been wonderful. Mind you
go and get a good breakfast."


2.

When Jill arrived at the theatre at four o'clock for the chorus
rehearsal, the expected blow had not fallen. No steps had apparently
been taken to eliminate the thirteenth girl whose presence in the
cast preyed on Mr. Goble's superstitious mind. But she found her
colleagues still in a condition of pessimistic foreboding. "Wait!"
was the gloomy watchword of "The Rose of America" chorus.

The rehearsal passed off without event. It lasted until six o'clock,
when Jill, the Cherub, and two or three of the other girls went to
snatch a hasty dinner before returning to the theatre to make up. It
was not a cheerful meal. Reaction had set in after the overexertion
of the previous night, and it was too early for first-night
excitement to take its place. Everybody, even the Cherub, whose
spirits seldom failed her, was depressed, and the idea of an
overhanging doom had grown. It seemed now to be merely a question of
speculating on the victim, and the conversation gave Jill, as the
last addition to the company and so the cause of swelling the ranks
of the chorus to the unlucky number, a feeling of guilt. She was glad
when it was time to go back to the theatre.

The moment she and her companions entered the dressing-room, it was
made clear to them that the doom had fallen. In a chair in the
corner, all her pretence and affectation swept away in a flood of
tears, sat the unhappy Duchess, the center of a group of girls
anxious to console but limited in their ideas of consolation to an
occasional pat on the back and an offer of a fresh pocket-handkerchief.

"It's tough, honey!" somebody was saying as Jill came in.

Somebody else said it was fierce, and a third girl declared it to be
the limit. A fourth girl, well-meaning but less helpful than she
would have liked to be, was advising the victim not to worry.

The story of the disaster was brief and easily told. The Duchess,
sailing in at the stage-door, had paused at the letter-box to see if
Cuthbert, her faithful auto-salesman, had sent her a good-luck
telegram. He had, but his good wishes were unfortunately neutralized
by the fact that the very next letter in the box was one from the
management, crisp and to the point, informing the Duchess that her
services would not be required that night or thereafter. It was the
subtle meanness of the blow that roused the indignation of "The Rose
of America" chorus, the cunning villainy with which it had been
timed.

"Poor Mae, if she'd opened tonight, they'd have had to give her two
weeks' notice or her salary. But they can fire her without a cent
just because she's only been rehearsing and hasn't given a show!"

The Duchess burst into fresh flood of tears.

"Don't you worry, honey!" I wished for a cloudless and golden day;
It came, but I looked from my window to see A giant shadow which
seemed to say, 'If you ask for the sunlight you must take me.'

Oh! a wonderful thing is the human will, When seeking one purpose,
and serving one end; But I think it is wiser to just sit still,
And accept whatever the gods may send.

THE PLAY

In the rosy light of my day's fair morning, Ere ever a storm
cloud darkened the west, Ere even a shadow of night gave warning When
life seemed only a pleasure quest, Why then all humour and comedy
scorning-- I liked high tragedy best.

I liked the challenge, the fierce fought duel, With a death or a parting
in every act.
I liked the villain to be more cruel Than the basest villain could
be in fact:
For it fed the fires of my mind with the fuel Of the things that my
life lacked.

But as time passed on, and I met real sorrow, And she played at
night on the stage--my heart, I found I could not forget on the morrow
The pain I had felt in her tragic part.
For alas! no longer I needed to borrow My grief from the actor's
art.

And as life grows older, and therefore sadder (Though sweeter maybe
with its autumn haze), I find more pleasure in watching the gladder
And lighter order of humorous plays.
Where the mirth is as mad, or maybe madder, Than the mirth of my
lost days.

I like to be forced to laugh and be merry, Though the earth
with sorrow and pain is rife:
I like for an evening at least to bury All thoughts of trouble, or
pain, or strife.
In sooth, I like to be moved to the very Emotions I miss in life.
AS WE LOOK BACK (RONDEAU)
As we look back at our lost Used-to-Be, 'The light that never was
on land or sea' Touches the distant mountain peaks with gold, And
through the glass of memory we behold Such blossoms as grow not on
any lea.
The double leaf upon the poplar tree Turns up its silver side to
you and me, And glow-worm lanterns light the lonely wold As we look
back.
No sounds we hear but echoes of young glee; No winds we feel but
west winds blowing free, From those fair isles that seem a thousandfold
More beautiful than in the days of old; And all the clouds that
hang above them flee, As we look back.The fighting spirit
which had been drained from her by the all-night rehearsal had come
back in full measure.

"What are you going to _do?_" she cried. "Aren't you going to _do_
something?"

Do? The members of "The Rose of America" ensemble looked doubtfully
at one another. Do? It had not occurred to them that there was
anything to be done. These things happened, and you regretted them,
but as for doing anything, well, what _could_ you do?

Jill's face was white and her eyes were flaming. She dominated the
roomful of girls like a little Napoleon. The change in her startled
them. Hitherto they had always looked on her as rather an unusually
quiet girl. She had always made herself unobtrusively pleasant to
them all. They all liked her. But they had never suspected her of
possessing this militant quality. Nobody spoke, but there was a
general stir. She had flung a new idea broadcast, and it was
beginning to take root. Do something? Well, if it came to that, why
not?

"We ought all to refuse to go on tonight unless they let her go on!"
Jill declared.

The stir became a movement. Enthusiasm is catching, and every girl is
at heart a rebel. And the idea was appealing to the imagination.
Refuse to give a show on the opening night! Had a chorus ever done
such a thing? They trembled on the verge of making history.

"Strike?" quavered somebody at the back.

"Yes, strike!" cried Jill.

"Hooray! That's the thtuff!" shouted the Cherub, and turned the
scale. She was a popular girl, and her adherence to the Cause
confirmed the doubters. "Thtrike!"

"Strike! Strike!"

Jill turned to the Duchess, who had been gaping amazedly at the
demonstration. She no longer wept, but she seemed in a dream.

"Dress and get ready to go on," Jill commanded. "We'll all dress and
get ready to go on. Then I'll go and find Mr Goble and tell him what
we mean to do. And, if he doesn't give in, we'll stay here in this
room, and there won't be a performance!"


3.

Mr Goble, with a Derby hat on the back of his head and an unlighted
cigar in the corner of his mouth, was superintending the erection of
the first act set when Jill found him. He was standing with his back
to the safety-curtain glowering at a blue canvas, supposed to
represent one of those picturesque summer skies which you get at the
best places on Long Island. Jill, coming down stage from the
staircase that led to the dressing-room, interrupted his line of
vision.

"Get out of the light!" bellowed Mr Goble, always a man of direct
speech, adding "Damn you!" for good measure.

"Please move to one side," interpreted the stage-director. "Mr Goble
is looking at the set."

The head carpenter, who completed the little group, said nothing.
Stage carpenters always say nothing. Long association with fussy
directors has taught them that the only policy to pursue on opening
nights is to withdraw into the silence, wrap themselves up in it, and
not emerge until the enemy has grown tired and gone off to worry
somebody else.

"It don't look right!" said Mr Goble, cocking his head on one side.

"I see what you mean, Mr Goble," assented the stage-director
obsequiously. "It has perhaps a little too much--er--not quite
enough--yes, I see what you mean!"

"It's too--damn--BLUE!" rasped Mr Goble, impatient of this
vacillating criticism. "That's what's the matter with it."

The head carpenter abandoned the silent policy of a lifetime. He felt
impelled to utter. He was a man who, when not at the theatre, spent
most of his time in bed, reading all-fiction magazines: but it so
happened that once, last summer, he had actually seen the sky; and he
considered that this entitled him to speak almost as a specialist on
the subject.

"The sky _is_ blue!" he observed huskily. "Yessir! I seen it!"

He passed into the silence again, and, to prevent a further lapse,
stopped up his mouth with a piece of chewing-gum.

Mr Goble regarded the silver-tongued orator wrathfully. He was not
accustomed to chatter-boxes arguing with him like this. He would
probably have said something momentous and crushing, but at this
point Jill intervened.

"Mr Goble."

The manager swung round on her.

"What _is_ it?"

It is sad to think how swiftly affection can change to dislike in
this world. Two weeks before, Mr Goble had looked on Jill with favor.
She had seemed good in his eyes. But that refusal of hers to lunch
with him, followed by a refusal some days later to take a bit of
supper somewhere, had altered his views on feminine charm. If it had
been left to him, as most things were about his theatre, to decide
which of the thirteen girls should be dismissed, he would undoubtedly
have selected Jill. But at this stage in the proceedings there was
the unfortunate necessity of making concessions to the temperamental
Johnson Miller. Mr Goble was aware that the dance-director's services
would be badly needed in the re-arrangement of the numbers during the
coming week or so, and he knew that there were a dozen managers
waiting eagerly to welcome him if he threw up his present job, so he
had been obliged to approach him in quite a humble spirit and enquire
which of his female chorus could be most easily spared. And, as the
Duchess had a habit of carrying her haughty languor onto the stage
and employing it as a substitute for the chorea which was Mr.
Miller's ideal, the dancer-director had chosen her. To Mr Goble's
dislike of Jill, therefore, was added now something of the fury of
the baffled potentate.

"'Jer want?" he demanded.

"Mr Goble is extremely busy," said the stage-director. "Ex-tremely."

A momentary doubt as to the best way of approaching her subject had
troubled Jill on her way downstairs, but, now that she was on the
battle-field confronting the enemy, she found herself cool,
collected, and full of a cold rage which steeled her nerves without
confusing her mind.

"I came to ask you to let Mae D'Arcy go on tonight."

"Who the hell's Mae D'Arcy?" Mr Goble broke off to bellow at a
scene-shifter who was depositing the wall of Mrs Stuyvesant van
Dyke's Long Island residence too far down stage. "Not there, you
fool! Higher up!"

"You gave her her notice this evening," said Jill.

"Well, what about it?"

"We want you to withdraw it."

"Who's 'we'?"

"The other girls and myself."

Mr Goble jerked his head so violently that the Derby hat flew off, to
be picked up, dusted, and restored by the stage-director.

"Oh, so you don't like it? Well, you know what you can do . . ."

"Yes," said Jill, "we do. We are going to strike."

"What!"

"If you don't let Mae go on, we shan't go on. There won't be a
performance tonight, unless you like to give one without a chorus."

"Are you crazy!"

"Perhaps. But we're quite unanimous."

Mr Goble, like most theatrical managers, was not good at words of
over two syllables.

"You're what?"

"We've talked it over, and we've all decided to do what I said."

Mr Goble's hat shot off again, and gambolled away into the wings,
with the stage-director bounding after it like a retriever.

"Whose idea's this?" demanded Mr Goble. His eyes were a little foggy,
for his brain was adjusting itself but slowly to the novel situation.

"Mine."

"Oh, yours! I thought as much!"

"Well," said Jill, "I'll go back and tell them that you will not do
what we ask. We will keep our make-up on in case you change your
mind."

She turned away.

"Come back!"

Jill proceeded toward the staircase. As she went, a husky voice spoke
in her ear.

"Go to it, kid! You're all right!"

The head-carpenter had broken his Trappist vows twice in a single
evening, a thing which had not happened to him since the night three
years ago, when, sinking wearily onto a seat in a dark corner for a
bit of a rest, he found that one of his assistants had placed a pot
of red paint there.


4.

To Mr Goble, fermenting and full of strange oaths, entered Johnson
Miller. The dance-director was always edgey on first nights, and
during the foregoing conversation had been flitting about the stage
like a white-haired moth. His deafness had kept him in complete
ignorance that there was anything untoward afoot, and he now
approached Mr Goble with his watch in his hand.

"Eight twenty-five," he observed. "Time those girls were on stage."

Mr Goble, glad of a concrete target for his wrath, cursed him in
about two hundred and fifty rich and well-selected words.

"Huh?" said Mr Miller, hand to ear.

Mr Goble repeated the last hundred and eleven words, the pick of the
bunch.

"Can't hear!" said Mr Miller, regretfully. "Got a cold."

The grave danger that Mr Goble, a thick-necked man, would undergo
some sort of a stroke was averted by the presence-of-mind of the
stage-director, who, returning with the hat, presented it like a
bouquet to his employer, and then his hands being now unoccupied,
formed them into a funnel and through this flesh-and-blood megaphone
endeavored to impart the bad news.

"The girls say they won't go on!"

Mr Miller nodded.

"I _said_ it was time they were on."

"They're on strike!"

"It's not," said Mr Miller austerely, "what they like, it's what
they're paid for. They ought to be on stage. We should be ringing up
in two minutes."

The stage director drew another breath, then thought better of it. He
had a wife and children, and, if dadda went under with apoplexy, what
became of the home, civilization's most sacred product? He relaxed
the muscles of his diaphragm, and reached for pencil and paper.

Mr Miller inspected the message, felt for his spectacle-case, found
it, opened it, took out his glasses, replaced the spectacle-case,
felt for his handkerchief, polished the glasses, replaced the
handkerchief, put the glasses on, and read. A blank look came into
his face.

"Why?" he enquired.

The stage director, with a nod of the head intended to imply that he
must be patient and all would come right in the future, recovered the
paper, and scribbled another sentence. Mr Miller perused it.

"Because Mae D'Arcy has got her notice?" he queried, amazed. "But the
girl can't dance a step."

The stage director, by means of a wave of the hand, a lifting of both
eyebrows, and a wrinkling of the nose, replied that the situation,
unreasonable as it might appear to the thinking man, was as he had
stated and must be faced. What, he enquired--through the medium of a
clever drooping of the mouth and a shrug of the shoulders--was to be
done about it?

Mr Miller remained for a moment in meditation.

"I'll go and talk to them," he said.

He flitted off, and the stage director leaned back against the
asbestos curtain. He was exhausted, and his throat was in agony, but
nevertheless he was conscious of a feeling of quiet happiness. His
life had been lived in the shadow of the constant fear that some day
Mr Goble might dismiss him. Should that disaster occur, he felt,
there was always a future for him in the movies.

Scarcely had Mr Miller disappeared on his peace-making errand, when
there was a noise like a fowl going through a quickset hedge, and Mr
Saltzburg, brandishing his baton as if he were conducting an unseen
orchestra, plunged through the scenery at the left upper entrance and
charged excitedly down the stage. Having taken his musicians twice
through the overture, he had for ten minutes been sitting in silence,
waiting for the curtain to go up. At last, his emotional nature
cracking under the strain of this suspense, he had left his
conductor's chair and plunged down under the stage by way of the
musician's bolthole to ascertain what was causing the delay.

"What is it? What is it? What is it? What is it?" enquired Mr
Saltzburg. "I wait and wait and wait and wait and wait. . . . We
cannot play the overture again. What is it? What has happened?"

Mr Goble, that overwrought soul, had betaken himself to the wings,
where he was striding up and down with his hands behind his back,
chewing his cigar. The stage director braced himself once more to the
task of explanation.

"The girls have struck!"

Mr Saltzburg blinked through his glasses.

"The girls?" he repeated blankly.

"Oh, damn it!" cried the stage director, his patience at last giving
way. "You know what a girl is, don't you?"

"They have what?"

"Struck! Walked out on us! Refused to go on!"

Mr Saltzburg reeled under the blow.

"But it is impossible! Who is to sing the opening chorus?"

In the presence of one to whom he could relieve his mind without fear
of consequences, the stage director became savagely jocular.

"That's all arranged," he said. "We're going to dress the carpenters
in skirts. The audience won't notice anything wrong."

"Should I speak to Mr Goble?" queried Mr Saltzburg doubtfully.

"Yes, if you don't value your life," returned the stage director.

Mr Saltzburg pondered.

"I will go and speak to the children," he said. "I will talk to them.
They know _me!_ I will make them be reasonable."

He bustled off in the direction taken by Mr Miller, his coattails
flying behind him. The stage director, with a tired sigh, turned to
face Wally, who had come in through the iron pass-door from the
auditorium.

"Hullo!" said Wally cheerfully. "Going strong? How's everybody at
home? Fine! So am I! By the way, am I wrong or did I hear something
about a theatrical entertainment of some sort here tonight?" He
looked about him at the empty stage. In the wings, on the prompt
side, could be discerned the flannel-clad forms of the gentlemanly
members of the male ensemble, all dressed up for Mrs Stuyvesant van
Dyke's tennis party. One or two of the principals were standing
perplexedly in the lower entrance. The O. P. side had been given over
by general consent to Mr Goble for his perambulations. Every now and
then he would flash into view through an opening in the scenery. "I
understood that tonight was the night for the great revival of comic
opera. Where are the comics, and why aren't they opping?"

The stage director repeated his formula once more.

"The girls have struck!"

"So have the clocks," said Wally. "It's past nine."

"The chorus refuse to go on."

"No, really! Just artistic loathing of the rotten piece, or is there
some other reason?"

"They're sore because one of them has been given her notice, and they
say they won't give a show unless she's taken back. They've struck.
That Mariner girl started it."

"She did!" Wally's interest became keener. "She would!" he said
approvingly. "She's a heroine!"

"Little devil! I never liked that girl!"

"Now there," said Wally, "is just the point on which we differ. I
have always liked her, and I've known her all my life. So, shipmate,
if you have any derogatory remarks to make about Miss Mariner, keep
them where they belong--_there!_" He prodded the other sharply in the
stomach. He was smiling pleasantly, but the stage director, catching
his eye, decided that his advice was good and should be followed. It
is just as bad for the home if the head of the family gets his neck
broken as if he succumbs to apoplexy.

"You surely aren't on their side?" he said.

"Me!" said Wally. "Of course I am. I'm always on the side of the
down-trodden and oppressed. If you know of a dirtier trick than
firing a girl just before the opening, so that they won't have to pay
her two weeks' salary, mention it. Till you do, I'll go on believing
that it is the limit. Of course I'm on the girls' side. I'll make
them a speech if they want me to, or head the procession with a
banner if they are going to parade down the boardwalk. I'm for 'em,
Father Abraham, a hundred thousand strong. And then a few! If you
want my considered opinion, our old friend Goble has asked for it and
got it. It was for this advantage that Marlborough had been
really fighting; at least, it was the only one of consequence that
Blenheim and Malplaquet secured to his country.

The reign of Louis XV. commenced in 1715.

By letters-patent which he issued on the 16th of January, 1716, he
granted permission to all the merchants in his kingdom to engage in
the African trade, provided their ships were fitted out only in the
five ports of Rouen, Rochelle, Bordeaux, Nantes, and St. Malo;
nine articles were specially framed to encourage the trade in slaves,
as by the Peace of Utrecht all the South-Sea ports were closed to
the French, and only their own colonies remained.

France no longer made great sums of money by the trade in slaves,
but her colonies began to thrive and demand a new species of labor.

The poor white emigrants were exhausted and demoralized by an
apprenticeship which had all the features of slavery, and by a
climate which will not readily permit a white man to become naturalized
even when he is free.

It is the opinion of some French anti-slavery writers that the _engagés_
might have tilled the soil of Hayti to this day, if they had
labored for themselves alone. This is doubtful; the white man can
work in almost every region of the Southern States, but he cannot
raise cotton and sugar upon those scorching plains.

It is not essential for the support of an anti-slavery argument to
suppose that he can.

Mr Goble, intercepted as he was about to turn for another walk
up-stage, eyed the deputation sourly and put the same question that
the stage director had put to Mr Saltzburg.

"Well?"

Wally came briskly to the point.

"You'll have to give in," he said, "or else go and make a speech to
the audience, the burden of which will be that they can have their
money back by applying at the box-office. These Joans of Arc have got
you by the short hairs!"

"I won't give in!"

"Then give out!" said Wally. "Or pay out, if you prefer it. Trot
along and tell the audience that the four dollars fifty in the house
will be refunded."

Mr Goble gnawed his cigar.

"I've been in the show business fifteen years . . ."

"I know. And this sort of thing has never happened to you before. One
gets new experiences."

Mr Goble cocked his cigar at a fierce angle, and glared at Wally.
Something told him that Wally's sympathies were not wholly with him.

"They can't do this sort of thing to me," he growled.

"Well, they are doing it to someone, aren't they," said Wally, "and,
if it's not you, who is it?"

"I've a damned good mind to fire them all!"

"A corking idea! I can't see a single thing wrong with it except that
it would hang up the production for another five weeks and lose you
your bookings and cost you a week's rent of this theatre for nothing
and mean having all the dresses made over and lead to all your
principals going off and getting other jobs. These trifling things
apart, we may call the suggestion a bright one."

"You talk too damn much!" said Mr Goble, eyeing him with distaste.

"Well, go on, _you_ say something. Something sensible."

"It is a very serious situation . . ." began the stage director.

"Oh, shut up!" said Mr Goble.

The stage director subsided into his collar.

"I cannot play the overture again," protested Mr Saltzburg. "I
cannot!"

At this point Mr Miller appeared. He was glad to see Mr Goble. He had
been looking for him, for he had news to impart.

"The girls," said Mr Miller, "have struck! They won't go on!"

Mr Goble, with the despairing gesture of one who realizes the
impotence of words, dashed off for his favorite walk up stage. Wally
took out his watch.

"Six seconds and a bit," he said approvingly, as the manager
returned. "A very good performance. I should like to time you over
the course in running-kit."

The interval for reflection, brief as it had been, had apparently
enabled Mr Goble to come to a decision.

"Go," he said to the stage director, "and tell 'em that fool of a
D'Arcy girl can play. We've got to get that curtain up."

"Yes, Mr Goble."

The stage director galloped off.

"Get back to your place," said the manager to Mr Saltzburg, "and play
the overture again."

"Again!"

"Perhaps they didn't hear it the first two times," said Wally.

Mr Goble watched Mr Saltzburg out of sight. Then he turned to Wally.

"That damned Mariner girl was at the bottom of this! She started the
whole thing! She told me so. Well, I'll settle _her!_ She goes
tomorrow!"

"Wait a minute," said Wally. "Wait one minute! Bright as it is, that
idea is _out!_"

"What the devil has it got to do with you?"

"Only this, that, if you fire Miss Mariner, I take that neat script
which I've prepared and I tear it into a thousand fragments. Or nine
hundred. Anyway, I tear it. Miss Mariner opens in New York, or I pack
up my work and leave."

Mr Goble's green eyes glowed.

"Oh, you're stuck on her, are you?" he sneered. "I see!"

"Listen, dear heart," said Wally, gripping the manager's arm, "I can
see that you are on the verge of introducing personalities into this
very pleasant little chat. Resist the impulse! Why not let your spine
stay where it is instead of having it kicked up through your hat?
Keep to the main issue. Does Miss Mariner open in New York or does
she lot?"

There was a tense silence. Mr Goble permitted himself a swift review
of his position. He would have liked to do many things to Wally,
beginning with ordering him out of the theatre, but prudence
restrained him. He wanted Wally's work. He needed Wally in his
business: and, in the theatre, business takes precedence of personal
feelings.

"All right!" he growled reluctantly.

"That's a promise," said Wally. "I'll see that you keep it." He
looked over his shoulder. The stage was filled with gayly-colored
dresses. The mutineers had returned to duty. "Well, I'll be getting
along. I'm rather sorry we agreed to keep clear of personalities,
because I should have liked to say that, if ever they have a
skunk-show at Madison Square Garden, you ought to enter--and win the
blue ribbon. Still, of course, under our agreement my lips are
sealed, and I can't even hint at it. Good-bye. See you later, I
suppose?"

Mr Goble, giving a creditable imitation of a living statue, was
plucked from his thoughts by a hand upon his arm. It was Mr Miller,
whose unfortunate ailment had prevented him from keeping abreast of
the conversation.

"What did he say?" enquired Mr Miller, interested. "I didn't hear
what he said!"

Mr Goble made no effort to inform him.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN


1.

Otis Pilkington had left Atlantic City two hours after the conference
which had followed the dress rehearsal, firmly resolved never to go
near "The Rose of America" again. He had been wounded in his finest
feelings. There had been a moment, when Mr Goble had given him the
choice between having the piece rewritten and cancelling the
production altogether, when he had inclined to the heroic course. But
for one thing, Mr Pilkington would have defied the manager, refused
to allow his script to be touched, and removed the play from his
hands. That one thing was the fact that, up to the day of the dress
rehearsal, the expenses of the production had amounted to the
appalling sum of thirty-two thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine
dollars, sixty-eight cents, all of which had to come out of Mr
Pilkington's pocket. The figures, presented to him in a neatly
typewritten column stretching over two long sheets of paper, had
stunned him. He had had no notion that musical plays cost so much.
The costumes alone had come to ten thousand six hundred and
sixty-three dollars and fifty cents, and somehow that odd fifty cents
annoyed Otis Pilkington as much as anything on the list. A dark
suspicion that Mr Goble, who had seen to all the executive end of the
business, had a secret arrangement with the costumer whereby he
received a private rebate, deepened his gloom. Why, for ten thousand
six hundred and sixty-three dollars and fifty cents you could dress
the whole female population of New York State and have a bit left
over for Connecticut. So thought Mr Pilkington, as he read the bad
news in the train. He only ceased to brood upon the high cost of
costuming when in the next line but one there smote his eye an item
of four hundred and ninety-eight dollars for "Clothing." Clothing!
Weren't costumes clothing? Why should he have to pay twice over for
the same thing? Mr Pilkington was just raging over this, when
something lower down in the column caught his eye. It was the
words:--

              Clothing   . . .   187.45

At this Otis Pilkington uttered a stifled cry, so sharp and so
anguished that an old lady in the next seat, who was drinking a glass
of milk, dropped it and had to refund the railway company thirty-five
cents for breakages. For the remainder of the journey she sat with
one eye warily on Mr Pilkington, waiting for his next move.

This misadventure quieted Otis Pilkington down, if it did not soothe
him. He returned blushingly to a perusal of his bill of costs, nearly
every line of which contained some item that infuriated and dismayed
him. "Shoes" ($213.50) he could understand, but what on earth was
"Academy. Rehl. $105.50"? What was "Cuts . . . $15"? And what in the
name of everything infernal was this item for "Frames," in which
mysterious luxury he had apparently indulged to the extent of
ninety-four dollars and fifty cents? "Props" occurred on the list no
fewer than seventeen times. Whatever his future, at whatever
poor-house he might spend his declining years, he was supplied with
enough props to last his lifetime.

Otis Pilkington stared blankly at the scenery that fitted past the
train winds. (Scenery! There had been two charges for scenery!
"Friedmann, Samuel . . . Scenery . . . $3711" and "Unitt and Wickes
. . . Scenery . . . $2120"). He was suffering the torments of the
ruined gamester at the roulette-table. Thirty-two thousand eight
hundred and fifty-nine dollars, sixty-eight cents! And he was out of
pocket ten thousand in addition from the check he had handed over two
days ago to Uncle Chris as his share of the investment of starting
Jill in the motion-pictures. It was terrible! It deprived one of the
power of thought.

The power of thought, however, returned to Mr Pilkington almost
immediately: for, remembering suddenly that Roland Trevis had assured
him that no musical production, except one of those elaborate
girl-shows with a chorus of ninety, could possibly cost more than
fifteen thousand dollars at an outside figure, he began to think
about Roland Trevis, and continued to think about him until the train
pulled into the Pennsylvania Station.

For a week or more the stricken financier confined himself mostly to
his rooms, where he sat smoking cigarettes, gazing at Japanese
prints, and trying not to think about "props" and "rehl." Then,
gradually, the almost maternal yearning to see his brain-child once
more, which can never be wholly crushed out of a young dramatist,
returned to him--faintly at first, then getting stronger by degrees
till it could no longer be resisted. True, he knew that when he
beheld it, the offspring of his brain would have been mangled almost
out of recognition, but that did not deter him. The mother loves her
crippled child, and the author of a musical fantasy loves his musical
fantasy, even if rough hands have changed it into a musical comedy
and all that remains of his work is the opening chorus and a scene
which the assassins have overlooked at the beginning of act two. Otis
Pilkington, having instructed his Japanese valet to pack a few simple
necessaries in a suitcase, took a cab to the Grand Central Station
and caught an afternoon train for Rochester, where his recollection
of the route planned for the tour told him "The Rose of America"
would now be playing.

Looking into his club on the way, to cash a check, the first person
he encountered was Freddie Rooke.

"Good gracious!" said Otis Pilkington. "What are you doing here?"

Freddie looked up dully from his reading. The abrupt stoppage of his
professional career--his life-work, one might almost say--had left
Freddie at a very loose end: and so hollow did the world seem to him
at the moment, so uniformly futile all its so-called allurements,
that, to pass the time, he had just been trying to read the _National
Geographic Magazine_.

"Hullo!" he said. "Well, might as well be here as anywhere, what?" he
replied to the other's question.

"But why aren't you playing?"

"They sacked me!" Freddie lit a cigarette in the sort of way in which
the strong, silent, middle-aged man on the stage lights his at the
end of act two when he has relinquished the heroine to his youthful
rival. "They've changed my part to a bally Scotchman! Well, I mean to
say, I couldn't play a bally Scotchman!"

Mr Pilkington groaned in spirit. Of all the characters in his musical
fantasy on which he prided himself, that of Lord Finchley was his
pet. And he had been burked, murdered, blotted out, in order to make
room for a bally Scotchman!

"The character's called 'The McWhustle of McWhustle' now!" said
Freddie sombrely.

The McWhustle of McWhustle! Mr Pilkington almost abandoned his trip
to Rochester on receiving this devastating piece of information.

"He comes on in act one in kilts!"

"In kilts! At Mrs Stuyvesant van Dyke's lawn-party! On Long Island!"

"It isn't Mrs Stuyvesant van Dyke any longer, either," said Freddie.
"She's been changed to the wife of a pickle manufacturer."

"A pickle manufacturer!"

"Yes. They said it ought to be a comedy part."

If agony had not caused Mr Pilkington to clutch for support at the
back of a chair, he would undoubtedly have wrung his hands.

"But it was a comedy part!" he wailed. "It was full of the subtlest,
most delicate satire on Society. They were delighted with it at
Newport! Oh, this is too much! I shall make a strong protest! I shall
insist on these parts being kept as I wrote them! I shall . . . I
must be going at once, or I shall miss my train." He paused at the
door. "How was business in Baltimore?"

"Rotten!" said Freddie, and returned to his _National Geographic
Magazine_.

Otis Pilkington tottered into his cab. He was shattered by what he
had heard. They had massacred his beautiful play, and, doing so, had
not even made a success of it by their own sordid commercial lights.
Business at Baltimore had been rotten! That meant more expense,
further columns of figures with "frames" and "rehl" in front of them!
He staggered into the station.

"Hey!" cried the taxi-driver.

Otis Pilkington turned.

"Sixty-five cents, mister, if you please! Forgetting I'm not your
private shovoor, wasn't you?"

Mr Pilkington gave him a dollar. Money--money! Life was just one long
round of paying out and paying out.


2.

The day which Mr Pilkington had selected for his visit to the
provinces was a Tuesday. "The Rose of America" had opened at
Rochester on the previous night, after a week at Atlantic City in its
original form and a week at Baltimore in what might be called its
second incarnation. Business had been bad in Atlantic City and no
better in Baltimore, and a meager first-night house at Rochester had
given the piece a cold reception, which had put the finishing touches
to the depression of the company in spite of the fact that the
Rochester critics, like those of Baltimore, had written kindly of the
play. One of the maxims of the theatre is that "out-of-town notices
don't count," and the company had refused to be cheered by them.

It is to be doubted, however, if even crowded houses would have
aroused much response from the principals and chorus of "The Rose of
America." For two weeks without a break they had been working under
forced draught, and they were weary in body and spirit. The new
principals had had to learn parts in exactly half the time usually
given for that purpose, and the chorus, after spending five weeks
assimilating one set of steps and groupings, had been compelled to
forget them and rehearse an entirely new set. From the morning after
the first performance at Atlantic City, they had not left the theatre
except for sketchy half-hour meals.

Jill, standing listlessly in the wings while the scene-shifters
arranged the second act set, was aware of Wally approaching from the
direction of the pass-door.

"Miss Mariner, I believe?" said Wally. "I suppose you know you look
perfectly wonderful in that dress? All Rochester's talking about it,
and there is some idea of running excursion trains from Troy and
Utica. A great stir it has made!"

Jill smiled. Wally was like a tonic to her during these days of
overwork. He seemed to be entirely unaffected by the general
depression, a fact which he attributed himself to the happy accident
of being in a position to sit back and watch the others toil. But in
reality Jill knew that he was working as hard as any one. He was
working all the time, changing scenes, adding lines, tinkering with
lyrics, smoothing over principals whose nerves had become strained by
the incessant rehearsing, keeping within bounds Mr Goble's passion
for being the big noise about the theatre. His cheerfulness was due
to the spirit that was in him, and Jill appreciated it. She had come
to feel very close to Wally since the driving rush of making over
"The Rose of America" had begun.

"They seemed quite calm tonight," she said. "I believe half of them
were asleep."

"They're always like that in Rochester. They cloak their deeper
feelings. They wear the mask. But you can tell from the glassy look
in their eyes that they are really seething inwardly. But what I came
round about was--(a)--to give you this letter . . ."

Jill took the letter, and glanced at the writing. It was from Uncle
Chris. She placed it on the axe over the fire-buckets for perusal
later.

"The man at the box-office gave it to me," said Wally, "when I looked
in there to find out how much money there was in the house tonight.
The sum was so small that he had to whisper it."

"I'm afraid the piece isn't a success."

"Nonsense! Of course it is! We're doing fine. That brings me to
section (b) of my discourse. I met poor old Pilkington in the lobby,
and he said exactly what you have just said, only at greater length."

"Is Mr Pilkington here?"

"He appears to have run down on the afternoon train to have a look at
the show. He is catching the next train back to New York! Whenever I
meet him, he always seems to be dashing off to catch the next train
back to New York! Poor chap! Have you ever done a murder? If you
haven't, don't! I know exactly what it feels like, and it feels
rotten! After two minutes conversation with Pilkington, I could
sympathize with Macbeth when he chatted with Banquo. He said I had
killed his play. He nearly wept, and he drew such a moving picture of
a poor helpless musical fantasy being lured into a dark alley by
thugs and there slaughtered that he almost had me in tears too. I
felt like a beetle-browed brute with a dripping knife and hands
imbrued with innocent gore."

"Poor Mr Pilkington!"

"Once more you say exactly what he said, only more crisply. I
comforted him as well as I could, told him all for the best and so
on, and he flung the box-office receipts in my face and said that the
piece was as bad a failure commercially as it was artistically. I
couldn't say anything to that, seeing what a house we've got tonight,
except to bid him look out to the horizon where the sun will shortly
shine. In other words, I told him that business was about to buck up
and that later on he would be going about the place with a sprained
wrist from clipping coupons. But he refused to be cheered, cursed me
some more for ruining his piece, and ended by begging me to buy his
share of it cheap."

"You aren't going to?"

"No, I am not--but simply and solely for the reason that, after that
fiasco in London, I raised my right hand--thus--and swore an oath
that never, as long as I lived, would I again put up a cent for a
production, were it the most obvious cinch on earth. I'm gun-shy. But
if he does happen to get hold of any one with a sporting disposition
and a few thousands to invest, that person will make a fortune. This
piece is going to be a gold-mine."

Jill looked at him in surprise. With anybody else but Wally she would
have attributed this confidence to author's vanity. But with Wally,
she felt, the fact that the piece, as played now, was almost entirely
his own work did not count. He viewed it dispassionately, and she
could not understand why, in the face of half-empty houses, he should
have such faith in it.

"But what makes you think so? We've been doing awfully badly so far."

Wally nodded.

"And we shall do awfully badly in Syracuse the last half of this
week. And why? For one thing, because the show isn't a show at all at
present. That's what you can't get these fatheads like Goble to
understand. All they go by is the box-office. Why should people flock
to pay for seats for what are practically dress rehearsals of an
unknown play? Half the principals have had to get up in their parts
in two weeks, and they haven't had time to get anything out of them.
They are groping for their lines all the time. The girls can't let
themselves go in the numbers, because they are wondering if they are
going to remember the steps. The show hasn't had time to click
together yet. It's just ragged. Take a look at it in another two
weeks! I _know!_ I don't say musical comedy is a very lofty form of
art, but still there's a certain amount of science about it. If you
go in for it long enough, you learn the tricks, and take it from me
that if you have a good cast and some catchy numbers, it's almost
impossible not to have a success. We've got an excellent cast now,
and the numbers are fine. The thing can't help being a hit.

"There's another thing to think of. It so happens that we shall go
into New York with practically nothing against us. Usually you have
half a dozen musical successes to compete with, but just at the
moment there's nothing. But the chief reason for not being
discouraged by bad houses so far is that we've been playing bad
towns. Every town on the road has its special character. Some are
good show-towns, others are bad. Nobody knows why. Detroit will take
anything. So will Washington. Whereas Cincinnati wants something very
special. Where have we been? Atlantic City, Baltimore, and here.
Atlantic City is a great place to play in the summer and for a couple
of weeks round about Easter. Also at Christmas. But for the rest of
the year, no. Too many new shows are tried out there. It makes the
inhabitants wary. Baltimore is good for a piece with a New York
reputation, but they don't want new pieces. Rochester and Syracuse
are always bad. 'Follow the Girl' died a hideous death in Rochester,
and it went on and played two years in New York and one in London. I
tell you--as I tried to tell Pilkington, only he wouldn't
listen--that this show is all right. There's a fortune in it for
somebody. But I suppose Pilkington is now sitting in the smoking-car
of an east-bound train, trying to get the porter to accept his share
in the piece instead of a tip!"

If Otis Pilkington was not actually doing that, he was doing
something like it. Sunk in gloom, he bumped up and down on an
uncomfortable seat, wondering why he had ever taken the trouble to
make the trip to Rochester. He had found exactly what he had expected
to find, a mangled caricature of his brain-child playing to a house
half empty and wholly indifferent. The only redeeming feature, he
thought vindictively, as he remembered what Roland Trevis had said
about the cost of musical productions, was the fact that the new
numbers were undoubtedly better than those which his collaborator had
originally supplied.

And "The Rose of America," after a disheartening Wednesday matinee
and a not much better reception on the Wednesday night, packed its
baggage and moved to Syracuse, where it failed just as badly. Then
for another two weeks it wandered on from one small town to another,
up and down New York State and through the doldrums of Connecticut,
tacking to and fro like a storm-battered ship, till finally the
astute and discerning citizens of Hartford welcomed it with such a
reception that hardened principals stared at each other in a wild
surmise, wondering if these things could really be: and a weary
chorus forgot its weariness and gave encore after encore with a snap
and vim which even Mr Johnson Miller was obliged to own approximated
to something like it. Nothing to touch the work of his choruses of
the old days, of course, but nevertheless fair, quite fair.

The spirits of the company revived. Optimism reigned. Principals
smiled happily and said they had believed in the thing all along. The
ladies and gentlemen of the ensemble chattered contentedly of a
year's run in New York. And the citizens of Hartford fought for
seats, and, if they could not get seats, stood up at the back.

Of these things Otis Pilkington was not aware. As Ozias Linley,
Sheridan's brother-in-law, was one morning setting out on horseback
for his curacy, a few miles from Norwich, his horse threw off one
of his shoes.

A lady, who observed the accident, thought it might impede Mr.

Linley's journey, and seeing that he himself was unconscious of it,
politely reminded him that one of his horse's shoes had just come
off.

"Thank you, madam," replied Linley; "will you then have the goodness
to put it on for me?"
Linley one day received a card to dine with the late archbishop of
Canterbury, who was then bishop of Norwich. Careless into what
hole or corner he threw his invitations, he soon lost sight of the
card, and forgot it altogether. A year revolved, when, on wiping
the dust from some papers he had stuck on the glass over the chimney,
the bishop's invitation for a certain day in the month (he did not
think of the year one instant,) stared him full in the face, and
taking it for granted that it was a recent one, he dressed himself
on the appointed day, and proceeded to the palace. But his diocesan
was not in London, a circumstance of which, though a matter of some
notoriety to the clergy of the diocese, he was quite unconscious;
and he returned dinnerless home.

* * * * *

SENTIMENT AND APPETITE.

We remember an amiable enthusiast, a worshiper of nature after the
manner of Rousseau, who, being melted into feelings of universal
philanthropy by the softness and serenity of a spring morning,
resolved, that for that day, at least, no injured animal should
pollute his board; and having recorded his vow, walked six miles
to gain a hamlet, famous for fish dinners, where, without an idea
of breaking his sentimental engagement, he regaled himself on a
small matter of crimped cod and oyster sauce--Q.

Rev.

* * * * *

FORTIFICATION.

The walls of Tenchira, in Africa, form one of the most perfect
remaining specimens of ancient fortification.There, two musical comedy artistes who were temporarily resting were
agreeing that the prima donna was a dear thing but that, contrary as
it was to their life-long policy to knock anybody, they must say that
she was beginning to show the passage of the years a trifle and ought
to be warned by some friend that her career as an ingenue was a thing
of the past. Dramatic critics, slinking in twos and threes into dark
corners, were telling each other that "The Rose of America" was just
another of those things but it had apparently got over. The general
public was of the opinion that it was a knock-out.

"Otie darling," said Mrs Waddesleigh Peagrim, leaning her ample
shoulder on Uncle Chris' perfectly fitting sleeve and speaking across
him to young Mr Pilkington, "I do congratulate you, dear. It's
perfectly delightful! I don't know when I have enjoyed a musical
piece so much. Don't you think it's perfectly darling, Major Selby?"

"Capital!" agreed that suave man of the world, who had been bored as
near extinction as makes no matter. "Congratulate you, my boy!"

"You clever, clever thing!" said Mrs Peagrim, skittishly striking her
nephew on the knee with her fan. "I'm proud to be your aunt! Aren't
you proud to know him, Mr Rooke?"

The fourth occupant of the box awoke with a start from the species of
stupor into which he had been plunged by the spectacle of the
McWhustle of McWhustle in action. There had been other dark moments
in Freddie's life. Once, back in London, Parker had sent him out into
the heart of the West End without his spats and he had not discovered
their absence till he was half-way up Bond Street. On another
occasion, having taken on a stranger at squash for a quid a game, he
had discovered too late that the latter was an ex-public-school
champion. He had felt gloomy when he had learned of the breaking-off
of the engagement between Jill Mariner and Derek Underhill, and sad
when it had been brought to his notice that London was giving Derek
the cold shoulder in consequence. But never in his whole career had
he experienced such gloom and such sadness as had come to him that
evening while watching this unspeakable person in kilts murder the
part that should have been his. And the audience, confound them, had
roared with laughter at every damn silly thing the fellow had said!

"Eh?" he replied. "Oh, yes, rather, absolutely!"

"We're _all_ proud of you, Otie darling," proceeded Mrs Peagrim. "The
piece is a wonderful success. You will make a fortune out of it. And
just think, Major Selby, I tried my best to argue the poor, dear boy
out of putting it on! I thought it was so rash to risk his money in a
theatrical venture. But then," said Mrs Peagrim in extenuation, "I
had only seen the piece when it was done at my house at Newport, and
of course it really was rather dreadful nonsense then! I might have
known that you would change it a great deal before you put it on in
New York. As I always say, plays are not written, they are rewritten!
Why, you have improved this piece a hundred per cent, Otie! I
wouldn't know it was the same play!"

She slapped him smartly once more with her fan, ignorant of the
gashes she was inflicting. Poor Mr Pilkington was suffering twin
torments, the torture of remorse and the agonized jealousy of the
unsuccessful artist. It would have been bad enough to have to sit and
watch a large audience rocking in its seats at the slap-stick comedy
which Wally Mason had substituted for his delicate social satire:
but, had this been all, at least he could have consoled himself with
the sordid reflection that he, as owner of the piece, was going to
make a lot of money out of it. Now, even this material balm was
denied him. He had sold out, and he was feeling like the man who
parts for a song with shares in an apparently goldless gold mine,
only to read in the papers next morning that a new reef has been
located. Into each life some rain must fall. Quite a shower was
falling now into young Mr. Pilkington's.

"Of course," went on Mrs Peagrim, "when the play was done at my
house, it was acted by amateurs. And you know what amateurs are! The
cast tonight is perfectly splendid. I do think that Scotchman is the
most killing creature! Don't you think he is wonderful, Mr. Rooke?"

We may say what we will against the upper strata of Society, but it
cannot be denied that breeding tells. Only by falling back for
support on the traditions of his class and the solid support of a
gentle upbringing was the Last of the Rookes able to crush down the
words that leaped to his lips and to substitute for them a politely
conventional agreement. If Mr Pilkington was feeling like a too
impulsive seller of gold-mines, Freddie's emotions were akin to those
of the Spartan boy with the fox under his vest. Nothing but
Winchester and Magdalen could have produced the smile which, though
twisted and confined entirely to his lips, flashed onto his face and
off again at his hostess' question.

"Oh, rather! Priceless!"

"Wasn't that part an Englishman before?" asked Mrs Peagrim. "I
thought so. Well, it was a stroke of genius changing it. This
Scotchman is too funny for words. And such an artist!"

Freddie rose shakily. One can stand just so much.

"Think," he mumbled, "I'll be pushing along and smoking a cigarette."

He groped his way to the door.

"I'll come with you, Freddie my boy," said Uncle Chris, who felt an
imperative need of five minutes' respite from Mrs Peagrim. "Let's get
out into the air for a moment. Uncommonly warm it is here."

Freddie assented. Air was what he felt he wanted most.

Left alone in the box with her nephew, Mrs Peagrim continued for some
moments in the same vein, innocently twisting the knife in the open
wound. It struck her from time to time that darling Otie was perhaps
a shade unresponsive, but she put this down to the nervous strain
inseparable from a first night of a young author's first play.

"Why," she concluded, "you will make thousands and thousands of
dollars out of this piece. I am sure it is going to be another 'Merry
Widow.'"

"You can't tell from a first night audience," said Mr Pilkington
sombrely, giving out a piece of theatrical wisdom he had picked up at
rehearsals.

"Oh, but you can. It's so easy to distinguish polite applause from
the real thing. No doubt many of the people down here have friends in
the company or other reasons for seeming to enjoy the play, but look
how the circle and the gallery were enjoying it! You can't tell me
that that was not genuine. They love it. How hard," she proceeded
commiseratingly, "you must have worked, poor boy, during the tour on
the road to improve the piece so much! I never liked to say so
before, but even you must agree with me now that that original
version of yours, which was done down at Newport, was the most
terrible nonsense! And how hard the company must have worked, too!
Otie," cried Mrs Peagrim, aglow with the magic of a brilliant idea,
"I will tell you what you must really do. You must give a supper and
dance to the whole company on the stage tomorrow night after the
performance."


The good portrait painter always flatters; for it is his business,
not, indeed, to alter and amend features, complexion, or mien, but to
select and fix (which it demands genius and sense to do) the best
appearance which these ever do wear.

Happy the creature of sense and passion who has always with him
that self which he could take pleasure in contemplating!

Happy--to pass graver considerations--the fair one whose countenance
continues as youthful as her attire!"But, Otie darling, I was talking to Mr Mason, when he came down to
Newport to see the piece last summer, and he told me that the
management nearly always gives a supper to the company, especially if
they have had a lot of extra rehearsing to do."

"Well, let Goble give them a supper if he wants to."

"But you know that Mr Goble, though he has his name on the programme
as the manager, has really nothing to do with it. You own the piece,
don't you?"

For a moment Mr Pilkington felt an impulse to reveal all, but
refrained. He knew his Aunt Olive too well. If she found out that he
had parted at a heavy loss with this valuable property, her whole
attitude towards him would change,--or, rather, it would revert to
her normal attitude, which was not unlike that of a severe nurse to a
weak-minded child. Even in his agony there had been a certain faint
consolation, due to the entirely unwonted note of respect in the
voice with which she had addressed him since the fall of the curtain.
He shrank from forfeiting this respect, unentitled though he was to
it.

"Yes," he said in his precise voice. "That, of course, is so."

"Well, then!" said Mrs Peagrim.

"But it seems so unnecessary! And think what it would cost."

This was a false step. Some of the reverence left Mrs Peagrim's
voice, and she spoke a little coldly. A gay and gallant spender
herself, she had often had occasion to rebuke a tendency to
over-parsimony in her nephew.

"We must not be mean, Otie!" she said.

Mr Pilkington keenly resented her choice of pronouns. "We" indeed!
Who was going to foot the bill? Both of them, hand in hand, or he
alone, the chump, the boob, the easy mark who got this sort of thing
wished on him!

"I don't think it would be possible to get the stage for a
supper-party," he pleaded, shifting his ground. "Goble wouldn't give
it to us."

"As if Mr Goble would refuse you anything after you have written a
wonderful success for his theatre! And isn't he getting his share of
the profits? Directly after the performance, you must go round and
ask him. Of course he will be delighted to give you the stage. I will
be hostess," said Mrs. Peagrim radiantly. "And now, let me see, whom
shall we invite?"

Mr Pilkington stared gloomily at the floor, too bowed down now by his
weight of cares to resent the "we," which had plainly come to stay.
He was trying to estimate the size of the gash which this
preposterous entertainment would cleave in the Pilkington bank-roll.
He doubted if it was possible to go through with it under five
hundred dollars; and, if, as seemed only too probable, Mrs Peagrim
took the matter in hand and gave herself her head, it might get into
four figures.

"Major Selby, of course," said Mrs Peagrim musingly, with a cooing
note in her voice. Long since had that polished man of affairs made a
deep impression upon her. "Of course Major Selby, for one. And Mr
Rooke. Then there are one or two of my friends who would be hurt if
they were left out. How about Mr Mason? Isn't he a friend of yours?"

Mr Pilkington snorted. He had endured much and was prepared to endure
more, but he drew the line at squandering his money on the man who
had sneaked up behind his brain-child with a hatchet and chopped its
precious person into little bits.

"He is _not_ a friend of mine," he said stiffly, "and I do not wish
him to be invited!"

Having attained her main objective, Mrs Peagrim was prepared to yield
minor points.

"Very well, if you do not like him," she said. "But I thought he was
quite an intimate of yours. It was you who asked me to invite him to
Newport last summer."

"Much," said Mr Pilkington coldly, "has happened since last summer."

"Oh, very well," said Mrs Peagrim again. "Then we will not include Mr
Mason. Now, directly the curtain has fallen, Otie dear, pop right
round and find Mr Goble and tell him what you want."


2.

It is not only twin-souls in this world who yearn to meet each other.
Between Otis Pilkington and Mr Goble there was little in common, yet,
at the moment when Otis set out to find Mr Goble, the thing which Mr
Goble desired most in the world was an interview with Otis. Since the
end of the first act, the manager had been in a state of mental
upheaval. Reverting to the gold-mine simile again, Mr Goble was in
the position of a man who has had a chance of purchasing such a mine
and now, learning too late of the discovery of the reef, is feeling
the truth of the poet's dictum that of all sad words of tongue or pen
the saddest are these--"It might have been." The electric success of
"The Rose of America" had stunned Mr Goble: and, realizing, as he
did, that he might have bought Otis Pilkington's share dirt cheap at
almost any point of the preliminary tour, he was having a bad half
hour with himself. The only ray in the darkness which brooded on his
indomitable soul was the thought that it might still be possible, by
getting hold of Mr Pilkington before the notices appeared and shaking
his head sadly and talking about the misleading hopes which young
authors so often draw from an enthusiastic first-night reception and
impressing upon him that first-night receptions do not deceive your
expert who has been fifteen years in the show-business and mentioning
gloomily that he had heard a coupla the critics roastin' the show to
beat the band . . . by doing all these things, it might still be
possible to depress Mr Pilkington's young enthusiasm and induce him
to sell his share at a sacrifice price to a great-hearted friend who
didn't think the thing would run a week but was willing to buy as a
sporting speculation, because he thought Mr Pilkington a good kid and
after all these shows that flop in New York sometimes have a chance
on the road.

Such were the meditations of Mr Goble, and, on the final fall of the
curtain amid unrestrained enthusiasm on the part of the audience, he
had despatched messengers in all directions with instructions to find
Mr Pilkington and conduct him to the presence. Meanwhile, he waited
impatiently on the empty stage.

The sudden advent of Wally Mason, who appeared at this moment, upset
Mr Goble terribly. Wally was a factor in the situation which he had
not considered. An infernal, tactless fellow, always trying to make
mischief and upset honest merchants, Wally, if present at the
interview with Otis Pilkington, would probably try to act in
restraint of trade and would blurt out some untimely truth about the
prospects of the piece. Not for the first time, Mr Goble wished Wally
a sudden stroke of apoplexy.

"Went well, eh?" said Wally amiably. He did not like Mr Goble, but on
the first night of a successful piece personal antipathies may be
sunk. Such was his effervescent good-humor at the moment that he was
prepared to treat Mr Goble as a man and a brother.

"H'm!" replied Mr Goble doubtfully, paving the way.

"What are you h'ming about?" demanded Wally, astonished. "The thing's
a riot."

"You never know," responded Mr Goble in the minor key.

"Well!" Wally stared. "I don't know what more you want. The audience
sat up on its hind legs and squealed, didn't they?"

"I've an idea," said Mr Goble, raising his voice as the long form of
Mr Pilkington crossed the stage towards them, "that the critics will
roast it. If you ask _me_," he went on loudly, "it's just the sort of
show the critics will pan the life out of. I've been fifteen years in
the . . ."

"Critics!" cried Wally. "Well, I've just been talking to Alexander of
the _Times_, and he said it was the best musical piece he had ever
seen and that all the other men he had talked to thought the same."

Mr Goble turned a distorted face to Mr Pilkington. He wished that
Wally would go. But Wally, he reflected bitterly, was one of those
men who never go. He faced Mr Pilkington and did the best he could.

"Of course it's got a _chance_," he said gloomily. "Any show has got
a _chance!_ But I don't know . . . I don't know . . ."

Mr Pilkington was not interested in the future prospects of "The Rose
of America." He had a favor to ask, and he wanted to ask it, have it
refused if possible, and get away. It occurred to him that, by
substituting for the asking of a favor a peremptory demand, he might
save himself a thousand dollars.

"I want the stage after the performance tomorrow night, for a supper
to the company," he said brusquely.

He was shocked to find Mr Goble immediately complaisant.

"Why, sure," said Mr Goble readily. "Go as far as you like!" He took
Mr Pilkington by the elbow and drew him up-stage, lowering his voice
to a confidential undertone. "And now, listen," he said, "I've
something I want to talk to you about. Between you and I and the
lamp-post, I don't think this show will last a month in New York. It
don't add up right! There's something all wrong about it."

Mr Pilkington assented with an emphasis which amazed the manager. "I
quite agree with you! If you had kept it the way it was originally . . ."

"Too late for that!" sighed Mr Goble, realizing that his star was in
the ascendant. He had forgotten for the moment that Mr Pilkington was
an author. "We must make the best of a bad job! Now, you're a good
kid and I wouldn't like you to go around town saying that I had let
you in. It isn't business, maybe, but, just because I don't want you
to have any kick coming, I'm ready to buy your share of the thing and
call it a deal. After all, it may get money on the road. It ain't
likely, but there's a chance, and I'm willing to take it. Well,
listen, I'm probably robbing myself, but I'll give you fifteen
thousand, if you want to sell."

A hated voice spoke at his elbow.

"I'll make you a better offer than that," said Wally. "Give me your
share of the show for three dollars in cash and I'll throw in a pair
of sock-suspenders and an Ingersoll. Is it a go?"

Mr Goble regarded him balefully.

"Who told you to butt in?" he enquired sourly.

"Conscience!" replied Wally. "Old Henry W. Conscience! I refuse to
stand by and see the slaughter of the innocents. Why don't you wait
till he's dead before you skin him!" He turned to Mr Pilkington.
"Don't you be a fool!" he said earnestly. "Can't you see the thing is
the biggest hit in years? Do you think Jesse James here would be
offering you a cent for your share if he didn't know there was a
fortune in it? Do you imagine . . . ?"

"It is immaterial to me," interrupted Otis Pilkington loftily, "what
Mr Goble offers. I have already sold my interest!"

"What!" cried Mr Goble.

"When?" cried Wally.

"I sold it half way through the road-tour," said Mr Pilkington, "to a
lawyer, acting on behalf of a client whose name I did not learn."

In the silence which followed this revelation, another voice spoke.

"I should like to speak to you for a moment, Mr Goble, if I may." It
was Jill, who had joined the group unperceived.

She promised to become my wife, But whispered, 'Papa is my jailer.'

'We must be very sly, you see, For Papa will not list to reason.

You must not come to call on me Until he's gone from home a season.

'I'll send you word, now don't forget, Take this as pledge, I will
remember.' She gave me a perfumed cigarette, And turned and left
me with September.

To-day she sent her 'cards' to me.
'My presence asked' to see her marry That millionaire old banker
C--- She _has_ my 'presents,' so I'll tarry.

And still I feel a keen regret (About the jewels that I gave her)
I've smoked the little cigarette-- It had a most delicious
flavour.

AN AUTUMN DAY
Leaden skies and a lonesome shadow Where summer has passed with her
gorgeous train; Snow on the mountain, and frost on the meadow-- A
white face pressed to the window pane; A cold mist falling, a bleak
wind calling, And oh!

but life seems vain.

Rain is better than golden weather, When the heart is dulled with
a dumb despair.

Dead leaves lie where they walked together, The hammock is gone,
and the rustic chair.

Let bleak snows cover the whole world over-- It will never again
seem fair.

Time laughs lightly at youth's sad 'Never,' Summer shall come again,
smiling once more, High o'er the cold world the sun shines for
ever, Hearts that seemed dead are alive at the core.

Oh, but the pain of it--oh, but the gain of it, After the shadows
pass o'er.

WISHES

Whatever you want, if you wish for it long, With constant yearning
and fervent desire, If your wish soars upward on wings so strong
That they never grow languid and never tire,--
Why, over the storm clouds and out of the dark It shall come flying
some day to you.

As the dove with the olive branch flew to the ark, And the dream
you have cherished--it shall come true.

But lest much rapture shall make you mad, Or too bright sunshine should
strike you blind, Along with your blessing a something sad Shall
come like a shadow that follows behind.

Where did you get ten thousand dollars?" Light
broke upon Mr Goble. The thing became clear to him. "Damn it!" he
cried. "I might have known you had some man behind you! You'd never
have been so darned fresh if you hadn't had some John in the
background, paying the bills! Well, of all the . . ."

He broke off abruptly, not because he had said all that he wished to
say, for he had only touched the fringe of his subject, but because
at this point Wally's elbow smote him in the parts about the third
button of his waistcoat and jarred all the breath out of him.

"Be quiet!" said Wally dangerously. He turned to Jill. "Jill, you
don't mind telling me how you got ten thousand dollars, do you?"

"Of course not, Wally. Uncle Chris sent it to me. Do you remember
giving me a letter from him at Rochester? The check was in that."

Wally stared.

"Your uncle! But he hasn't any money!"

"He must have made it somehow."

"But he couldn't! How could he?"

Otis Pilkington suddenly gave tongue. He broke in on them with a loud
noise that was half a snort and half a yell. Stunned by the
information that it was Jill who had bought his share in the piece,
Mr Pilkington's mind had recovered slowly and then had begun to work
with a quite unusual rapidity. During the preceding conversation he
had been doing some tense thinking, and now he saw all.

"It's a swindle! It's a deliberate swindle!" shrilled Mr Pilkington.
The tortoiseshell-rimmed spectacles flashed sparks. "I've been made a
fool of! I've been swindled! I've been robbed!"

Jill regarded him with wide eyes.

"What do you mean?"

"You know what I mean!"

"I certainly do not! You were perfectly willing to sell the piece."

"I'm not talking about that! You know what I mean! I've been robbed!"

Wally snatched at his arm as it gyrated past him in a gesture of
anguish which rivalled the late efforts in that direction of Mr
Goble, who was now leaning against the safety-curtain trying to get
his breath back.

"Don't be a fool," said Wally curtly. "Talk sense! You know perfectly
well that Miss Mariner wouldn't swindle you."

"She may not have been in it," conceded Mr Pilkington. "I don't know
whether she was or not. But that uncle of her swindled me out of ten
thousand dollars! The smooth old crook!"

"Don't talk like that about Uncle Chris!" said Jill, her eyes
flashing. "Tell me what you mean."

"Yes, come on, Pilkington," said Wally grimly. "You've been
scattering some pretty serious charges about. Let's hear what you
base them on. Be coherent for a couple of seconds."

Mr Goble filled his depleted lungs.

"If you ask me . . ." he began.

"We don't," said Wally curtly. "This has nothing to do with you.
Well," he went on, "we're waiting to hear what this is all about."

Mr Pilkington gulped. Like most men of weak intellect who are preyed
on by the wolves of the world, he had ever a strong distaste for
admitting that he had been deceived. He liked to regard himself as a
shrewd young man who knew his way about and could take care of
himself.

"Major Selby," he said, adjusting his spectacles, which emotion had
caused to slip down his nose, "came to me a few weeks ago with a
proposition. He suggested the formation of a company to start Miss
Mariner in the motion-pictures."

"What!" cried Jill.

"In the motion-pictures," repeated Mr Pilkington. "He wished to know
if I cared to advance any capital towards the venture. I thought it
over carefully and decided that I was favorably disposed towards the
scheme. I . . ." Mr Pilkington gulped again. "I gave him a check for
ten thousand dollars!"

"Of all the fools!" said Mr Goble with a sharp laugh. He caught
Wally's eye and subsided once more.

Mr Pilkington's fingers strayed agitatedly to his spectacles.

"I may have been a fool," he cried shrilly, "though I was perfectly
willing to risk the money, had it been applied to the object for
which I gave it. But when it comes to giving ten thousand dollars
just to have it paid back to me in exchange for a very valuable
piece, of theatrical property . . . my own money . . . handed back to
me . . . !"

Words failed Mr Pilkington.

"I've been deliberately swindled!" he added after a moment, harking
back to the main motive.

Jill's heart was like lead. She could not doubt for an instant the
truth of what the victim had said. Woven into every inch of the
fabric, plainly hall-marked on its surface, she could perceive the
signature of Uncle Chris. If he had come and confessed to her
himself, she could not have been more certain that he had acted
precisely as Mr Pilkington had charged. There was that same
impishness, that same bland unscrupulousness, that same pathetic
desire to do her a good turn however it might affect anybody else
which, if she might compare the two things, had caused him to pass
her off on unfortunate Mr Mariner of Brookport as a girl of wealth
with tastes in the direction of real estate.

Wally was not so easily satisfied.

"You've no proof whatever . . ."

Jill shook her head.

"It's true, Wally. I know Uncle Chris. It must be true."

"But, Jill . . . !"

"It must be. How else could Uncle Chris have got the money?"

Mr Pilkington, much encouraged by this ready acquiescence in his
theories, got under way once more.

"The man's a swindler! A swindler! He's robbed me! I have been
robbed! He never had any intention of starting a motion-picture
company. He planned it all out . . . !"

Jill cut into the babble of his denunciations. She was sick at heart,
and she spoke almost listlessly.

"Mr Pilkington!" The victim stopped. "Mr Pilkington, if what you say
is true, and I'm afraid there is no doubt that it is, the only thing
I can do is to give you back your property. So will you please try to
understand that everything is just as it was before you gave my uncle
the money. You've got back your ten thousand dollars and you've got
back your piece, so there's nothing more to talk about."

Mr Pilkington, dimly realizing that the financial aspect of the
affair had been more or less satisfactorily adjusted was nevertheless
conscious of a feeling that he was being thwarted. He had much more
to say about Uncle Chris and his methods of doing business, and it
irked him to be cut short like this.

"Yes, but I do think. . . . That's all very well, but I have by no
means finished . . ."

"Yes, you have," said Wally.

"There's nothing more to talk about," repeated Jill. "I'm sorry this
should have happened, but you've nothing to complain about now, have
you? Good night."

And she turned quickly away, and walked towards the door.

"But I hadn't _finished!_" wailed Mr Pilkington, clutching at Wally.
He was feeling profoundly aggrieved. If it is bad to be all dressed
up and no place to go, it is almost worse to be full of talk and to
have no one to talk it to. Otis Pilkington had at least another
twenty minutes of speech inside him on the topic of Uncle Chris, and
Wally was the nearest human being with a pair of ears.

Wally was in no mood to play the part of confidant. He pushed Mr
Pilkington earnestly in the chest and raced after Jill. Mr
Pilkington, with the feeling that the world was against him, tottered
back into the arms of Mr Goble, who had now recovered his breath and
was ready to talk business.

"Have a good cigar," said Mr Goble, producing one. "Now, see here,
let's get right down to it. If you'd care to sell out for twenty
thousand . . ."

"I would _not_ care to sell out for twenty thousand!" yelled the
overwrought Mr Pilkington. "I wouldn't sell out for a million! You're
a swindler! You want to rob me! You're a crook!"

"Yes, yes," assented Mr Goble gently. "But, all joking aside, suppose
I was to go up to twenty-five thousand . . . ?" He twined his fingers
lovingly in the slack of Mr Pilkington's coat. "Come now! You're a
good kid! Shall we say twenty-five thousand?"

"We will _not_ say twenty-five thousand! Let me go!"

"Now, now, _now!_" pleaded Mr Goble. "Be sensible! don't get all
worked up! Say, _do_ have a good cigar!"

"I _won't_ have a good cigar!" shouted Mr Pilkington.

He detached himself with a jerk, and stalked with long strides up the
stage. Mr Goble watched him go with a lowering gaze. A heavy sense of
the unkindness of fate was oppressing Mr Goble. If you couldn't gyp a
bone-headed amateur out of a piece of property, whom could you gyp?
Mr Goble sighed. It hardly seemed to him worth while going on.


4.

Out in the street Wally had overtaken Jill, and they faced one
another in the light of a street lamp. Forty-first Street at midnight
is a quiet oasis. They had it to themselves.

Jill was pale, and she was breathing quickly, but she forced a smile.

"Well, Wally," she said. "My career as a manager didn't last long,
did it?"

"What are you going to do?"

Jill looked down the street.

"I don't know," she said. "I suppose I shall have to start trying to
find something."

"But . . ."

Jill drew him suddenly into the dark alley-way leading to the
stage-door of the Gotham Theatre's nearest neighbor: and, as she did
so, a long, thin form, swathed in an overcoat and surmounted by an
opera-hat, flashed past.

"I don't think I could have gone through another meeting with Mr
Pilkington," said Jill. "It wasn't his fault, and he was quite
justified, but what he said about Uncle Chris rather hurt."

Wally, who had ideas of his own similar to those of Mr Pilkington on
the subject of Uncle Chris and had intended to express them,
prudently kept them unspoken.

"I suppose," he said, "there is no doubt . . . ?"

"There can't be. Poor Uncle Chris! He is like Freddie. He means
well!"

There was a pause. They left the alley and walked down the street.

"Where are you going now?" asked Wally.

"I'm going home."

"Where's home?"

"Forty-ninth Street. I live in a boarding-house there." A sudden
recollection of the boarding-house at which she had lived in Atlantic
City smote Wally, and it turned the scale. He had not intended to
speak, but he could not help himself.

"Jill!" he cried. "It's no good. I must say it! I want to get you out
of all this. I want to take care of you. Why should you go on living
this sort of life, when. . . . Why won't you let me . . . ?"

He stopped. Even as he spoke, he realized the futility of what he was
saying. Jill was not a girl to be won with words.

They walked on in silence for a moment. They crossed Broadway, noisy
with night traffic, and passed into the stillness on the other side.

"Wally," said Jill at last.

She was looking straight in front of her. Her voice was troubled.

"Yes?"

Jill hesitated.

"Wally, you wouldn't want me to marry you if you knew you weren't the
only man in the world that mattered to me, would you?"

They had reached Sixth Avenue before Wally replied.

"No!" he said.

For an instant, Jill could not have said whether the feeling that
shot through her like the abrupt touching of a nerve was relief or
disappointment. Then suddenly she realized that it was disappointment.
It was absurd to her to feel disappointed, but at that moment she
would have welcomed a different attitude in him. If only this problem
of hers could be taken forcefully out of her hands, what a relief it
would be. If only Wally, masterfully insistent, would batter down her
hesitations and _grab_ her, knock her on the head and carry her off
like a caveman, care less about her happiness and concentrate on his
own, what a solution it would be. . . . But then he wouldn't be Wally.
. . . Nevertheless, Jill gave a little sigh. Her new life had changed
her already. It had blunted the sharp edge of her independence.
Tonight she was feeling the need of some one to lean on--some one
strong and cosy and sympathetic who would treat her like a little girl
and shield her from all the roughness of life. The fighting spirit had
gone out of her, and she was no longer the little warrior facing the
world with a brave eye and a tilted chin. She wanted to cry and be
petted.

"No!" said Wally again. There had been the faintest suggestion of a
doubt when he had spoken the word before, but now it shot out like a
bullet. "And I'll tell you why. I want _you_--and, if you married me
feeling like that, it wouldn't be you. I want Jill, the whole Jill,
and nothing but Jill, and, if I can't have that, I'd rather not have
anything. So he and the youngsters angled for imaginary trouts, with
imaginary rods, lines, and flies, out of imaginary boats
floating in imaginary lochs. And whether there were silly nibbles or
sturdy bites, all agreed that they had glorious sport.

"With sports like these were all their cares beguiled; The sports
of children satisfy the child."

And--the poet might have added--they often do much to satisfy the
child of larger growth.

It was thus that the old man kept alive the embers of his youth.

Charles Lamb once, considering whom of the world's vanished worthies
he would rather evoke, singled out Fulke Greville, and also--if
our memory is correct--Sir Thomas Browne.
You're a fighter, and you mean to fight your own battle. It
might happen that, if I kept after you and badgered you and nagged
you, one of these days, when you were feeling particularly all alone
in the world and tired of fighting for yourself, you might consent to
marry me. But it wouldn't do. Even if you reconciled yourself to it,
it wouldn't do. I suppose, the cave-woman sometimes felt rather
relieved when everything was settled for her with a club, but I'm
sure the caveman must have had a hard time ridding himself of the
thought that he had behaved like a cad and taken a mean advantage. I
don't want to feel like that. I couldn't make you happy if I felt
like that. Much better to have you go on regarding me as a friend . . .
knowing that, if ever your feelings do change, that I am right there,
waiting."

"But by that time _your_ feelings will have changed."

Wally laughed.

"Never!"

"You'll meet some other girl . . ."

"I've met every girl in the world! None of them will do!" The
lightness came back into Wally's voice. "I'm sorry for the poor
things, but they won't do! Take 'em away! There's only one girl in
the world for me--oh, confound it! why is it that one always thinks
in song-titles! Well, there it is. I'm not going to bother you. We're
pals. And, as a pal, may I offer you my bank-roll?"

"No!" said Jill. She smiled up at him. "I believe you would give me
your coat if I asked you for it!"

Wally stopped.

"Do you want it? Here you are!"

"Wally, behave! There's a policeman looking at you!"

"Oh, well, if you won't! It's a good coat, all the same."

They turned the corner, and stopped before a brown-stone house, with
a long ladder of untidy steps running up to the front door.

"Is this where you live?" Wally asked. He looked at the gloomy place
disapprovingly. "You do choose the most awful places!"

"I don't choose them. They're thrust on me. Yes, this is where I
live. If you want to know the exact room, it's the third window up
there over the front door. Well, good night."

"Good night," said Wally. He paused. "Jill."

"Yes?"

"I know it's not worth mentioning, and it's breaking our agreement to
mention it, but you do understand, don't you?"

"Yes, Wally dear, I understand."

"I'm round the corner, you know, waiting! And, if you ever do change,
all you've got to do is just to come to me and say 'It's all right!'
. . ."

Jill laughed a little shakily.

"That doesn't sound very romantic!"

"Not sound romantic! If you can think of any three words in the
language that sound more romantic, let me have them! Well, never mind
how they sound, just say them, and watch the result! But you must get
to bed. Good night."

"Good night, Wally."

She passed in through the dingy door. It closed behind her, and Wally
stood for some moments staring at it with a gloomy repulsion. He
thought he had never seen a dingier door.

Then he started to walk back to his apartment. He walked very
quickly, with clenched hands. He was wondering if after all there was
not something to be said for the methods of the caveman when he went
a-wooing. Twinges of conscience the caveman may have had when all was
over, but at least he had established his right to look after the
woman he loved.


CHAPTER NINETEEN


1.

"They tell me . . . I am told . . . I am informed . . . No, one
moment, Miss Frisby."

Mrs Peagrim wrinkled her fair forehead. It has been truly said that
there is no agony like the agony of literary composition, and Mrs.
Peagrim was having rather a bad time getting the requisite snap and
ginger into her latest communication to the press. She bit her lip,
and would have passed her twitching fingers restlessly through her
hair but for the thought of the damage which such an action must do
to her coiffure. Miss Frisby, her secretary, an anaemic and negative
young woman, waited patiently, pad on knee, and tapped her teeth with
her pencil.

"Please do not make that tapping noise, Miss Frisby," said the
sufferer querulously. "I cannot think. Otie, dear, can't you suggest
a good phrase? You ought to be able to, being an author."

Mr Pilkington, who was strewn over an arm-chair by the window, awoke
from his meditations, which, to judge from the furrow just above the
bridge of his tortoiseshell spectacles and the droop of his weak
chin, were not pleasant. It was the morning after the production of
"The Rose of America," and he had passed a sleepless night, thinking
of the harsh words he had said to Jill. Could she ever forgive him?
Would she have the generosity to realize that a man ought not to be
held accountable for what he says in the moment when he discovers
that he has been cheated, deceived, robbed,--in a word, hornswoggled?
He had been brooding on this all night, and he wanted to go on
brooding now. His aunt's question interrupted his train of thought.

"Eh?" he said vaguely, gaping.

"Oh, don't be so absent-minded!" snapped Mrs Peagrim, not
unjustifiably annoyed. "I am trying to compose a paragraph for the
papers about our party tonight, and I can't get the right phrase . . .
Read what you've written, Miss Frisby."

Miss Frisby, having turned a pale eye on the pothooks and twiddleys
in her note-book, translated them in a pale voice.

"'Surely of all the leading hostesses in New York Society there can
be few more versatile than Mrs Waddlesleigh Peagrim. I am amazed
every time I go to her delightful home on West End Avenue to see the
scope and variety of her circle of intimates. Here you will see an
ambassador with a fever . . .'"

"With a _what?In fact, the lion-hearted lady had not heart to look herself in the
face for the last twenty years of her life; but we nowhere learn
that she quarrelled with Holbein's portraitures of her youth, or
those of her stately prime of viraginity by De Heere and Zucchero.

"'Here you will see an ambassador with a diva from the opera,
exchanging the latest gossip from the chancelleries for intimate news
of the world behind the scenes. There, the author of the latest novel
talking literature to the newest debutante. Truly one may say that
Mrs Peagrim has revived the saloon.'"

Mrs Peagrim bit her lip.

"'Salon'."

"'Salon'," said Miss Frisby unemotionally. "'They tell me, I am told,
I am informed . . .'" She paused. "That's all I have."

"Scratch out those last words," said Mrs Peagrim irritably. "You
really are hopeless, Miss Frisby! Couldn't you see that I had stopped
dictating and was searching for a phrase? Otie, what is a good phrase
for 'I am told'?"

Mr Pilkington forced his wandering attention to grapple with the
problem.

"'I hear'," he suggested at length.

"Tchah!" ejaculated his aunt. Then her face brightened. "I have it.
Take dictation, please, Miss Frisby. 'A little bird whispers to me
that there were great doings last night on the stage of the Gotham
Theatre after the curtain had fallen on "The Rose of America" which,
as everybody knows, is the work of Mrs Peagrim's clever young nephew,
Otis Pilkington.'" Mrs Peagrim shot a glance at her clever young
nephew, to see how he appreciated the boost, but Otis' thoughts were
far away once more. He was lying on his spine, brooding, brooding.
Mrs Peagrim resumed her dictation. "'In honor of the extraordinary
success of the piece, Mrs Peagrim, who certainly does nothing by
halves, entertained the entire company to a supper-dance after the
performance. A number of prominent people were among the guests, and
Mrs Peagrim was a radiant and vivacious hostess. She has never looked
more charming. The high jinks were kept up to an advanced hour, and
every one agreed that they had never spent a more delightful
evening.' There! Type as many copies as are necessary, Miss Frisby,
and send them out this afternoon with photographs."

Miss Frisby having vanished in her pallid way, the radiant and
vivacious hostess turned on her nephew again.

"I must say, Otie," she began complainingly, "that, for a man who has
had a success like yours, you are not very cheerful. I should have
thought the notices of the piece would have made you the happiest man
in New York."

There was once a melodrama where the child of the persecuted heroine
used to dissolve the gallery in tears by saying "Happiness? What _is_
happiness, moth-aw?" Mr Pilkington did not use these actual words,
but he reproduced the stricken infant's tone with great fidelity.

"Notices! What are notices to me?"

"Oh, don't be so affected!" cried Mrs Peagrim. "Don't pretend that
you don't know every word of them by heart!"

"I have not seen the notices, Aunt Olive," said Mr Pilkington dully.

Mrs Peagrim looked at him with positive alarm. She had never been
overwhelmingly attached to her long nephew, but since his rise to
fame something resembling affection had sprung up in her, and his
attitude now disturbed her.

"You can't be well, Otie!" she said solicitously. "Are you ill?"

"I have a severe headache," replied the martyr. "I passed a wakeful
night."

"Let me go and mix you a dose of the most wonderful mixture," said
Mrs. Peagrim maternally. "Poor boy! I don't wonder, after all the
nervousness and excitement . . . You sit quite still and rest. I will
be back in a moment."

She bustled out of the room, and Mr Pilkington sagged back into his
chair. He had hardly got his meditations going once more, when the
door opened and the maid announced "Major Selby."

"Good morning," said Uncle Chris breezily, sailing down the fairway
with outstretched hand. "How are--oh!"

He stopped abruptly, perceiving that Mrs Peagrim was not present
and--a more disturbing discovery--that Otis Pilkington was. It would
be exaggeration to say that Uncle Chris was embarrassed. That
master-mind was never actually embarrassed. But his jauntiness
certainly ebbed a little, and he had to pull his mustache twice
before he could face the situation with his customary _aplomb_. He
had not expected to find Otis Pilkington here, and Otis was the last
man he wished to meet. He had just parted from Jill, who had been
rather plain-spoken with regard to the recent financial operations:
and, though possessed only of a rudimentary conscience, Uncle Chris
was aware that his next interview with young Mr Pilkington might have
certain aspects bordering on awkwardness and he would have liked time
to prepare a statement for the defence. _Barrow Street, New York
City. May 8, xx_.

CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. PREHISTORIC MAN II. THE WORLD GROWS COLD III.

END OF THE STONE AGE IV. THE EARLIEST SCHOOL OF THE HUMAN RACE V.
THE KEY OF STONE VI. THE LAND OF THE LIVING AND THE LAND OF THE
DEAD VII. THE MAKING OF A STATE VIII. THE RISE AND FALL OF EGYPT
IX. MESOPOTAMIA--THE COUNTRY BETWEEN THE RIVERS X. THE SUMERIAN
NAIL WRITERS XI. ASSYRIA AND BABYLONIA--THE GREAT SEMITIC MELTING-POT
XII. THE STORY OF MOSES XIII.He had said it was "like this," and he gave his mustache
another pull as though he were trying to drag inspiration out of it.
His blue eyes were as frank and honest as ever, and showed no trace
of the perplexity in his mind, but he had to admit to himself that,
if he managed to satisfy his hearer that all was for the best and
that he had acted uprightly and without blame, he would be doing
well.

Fortunately, the commercial side of Mr Pilkington was entirely
dormant this morning. The matter of the ten thousand dollars seemed
trivial to him in comparison with the weightier problems which
occupied his mind.

"Have you seen Miss Mariner?" he asked eagerly.

"Yes. I have just parted from her. She was upset, poor girl, of
course, exceedingly upset."

Mr Pilkington moaned hollowly.

"Is she very angry with me?"

For a moment the utter inexplicability of the remark silenced Uncle
Chris. Why Jill should be angry with Mr Pilkington for being robbed
of ten thousand dollars, he could not understand, for Jill had told
him nothing of the scene that had taken place on the previous night.
But evidently this point was to Mr Pilkington the nub of the matter,
and Uncle Chris, like the strategist he was, rearranged his forces to
meet the new development.

"Angry?" he said slowly. "Well, of course . . ."

He did not know what it was all about, but no doubt if he confined
himself to broken sentences which meant nothing light would shortly
be vouchsafed to him.

