
Picture us, my dear, afloat in the very oddest ship you can imagine.
It's not the ship, so much as the people. One does come across queer
sorts as one travels. I must say I find it hugely amusing. There's the
manager of the line--called Vinrace--a nice big Englishman, doesn't say
much--you know the sort. As for the rest--they might have come trailing
out of an old number of _Punch_. They're like people playing croquet
in the 'sixties. How long they've all been shut up in this ship I don't
know--years and years I should say--but one feels as though one had
boarded a little separate world, and they'd never been on shore, or
done ordinary things in their lives. It's what I've always said about
literary people--they're far the hardest of any to get on with. The
worst of it is, these people--a man and his wife and a niece--might have
been, one feels, just like everybody else, if they hadn't got swallowed
up by Oxford or Cambridge or some such place, and been made cranks of.
The man's really delightful (if he'd cut his nails), and the woman has
quite a fine face, only she dresses, of course, in a potato sack, and
wears her hair like a Liberty shopgirl's. They talk about art, and think
us such poops for dressing in the evening. However, I can't help that;
I'd rather die than come in to dinner without changing--wouldn't you? It
matters ever so much more than the soup. (It's odd how things like that
_do_ matter so much more than what's generally supposed to matter.
I'd rather have my head cut off than wear flannel next the skin.) Then
there's a nice shy girl--poor thing--I wish one could rake her out
before it's too late. She has quite nice eyes and hair, only, of course,
she'll get funny too. We ought to start a society for broadening the
minds of the young--much more useful than missionaries, Hester! Oh, I'd
forgotten there's a dreadful little thing called Pepper. He's just like
his name. He's indescribably insignificant, and rather queer in
his temper, poor dear. It's like sitting down to dinner with an
ill-conditioned fox-terrier, only one can't comb him out, and sprinkle
him with powder, as one would one's dog. It's a pity, sometimes, one
can't treat people like dogs! The great comfort is that we're away from
newspapers, so that Richard will have a real holiday this time. Spain
wasn't a holiday. . . .


"You coward!" said Richard, almost filling the room with his sturdy
figure.

"I did my duty at dinner!" cried Clarissa.

"You've let yourself in for the Greek alphabet, anyhow."

"Oh, my dear! Who _is_ Ambrose?"

"I gather that he was a Cambridge don; lives in London now, and edits
classics."

"Did you ever see such a set of cranks? The woman asked me if I thought
her husband looked like a gentleman!"

"It was hard to keep the ball rolling at dinner, certainly," said
Richard. "Why is it that the women, in that class, are so much queerer
than the men?"

"They're not half bad-looking, really--only--they're so odd!"

They both laughed, thinking of the same things, so that there was no
need to compare their impressions.

"I see I shall have quite a lot to say to Vinrace," said Richard. "He
knows Sutton and all that set. He can tell me a good deal about the
conditions of ship-building in the North."

"Oh, I'm glad. The men always _are_ so much better than the women."

"One always has something to say to a man certainly," said Richard.
"But I've no doubt you'll chatter away fast enough about the babies,
Clarice."

"Has she got children? She doesn't look like it somehow."

"Two. A boy and girl."

A pang of envy shot through Mrs. Dalloway's heart.

"We _must_ have a son, Dick," she said.

"Good Lord, what opportunities there are now for young men!" said
Dalloway, for his talk had set him thinking. "I don't suppose there's
been so good an opening since the days of Pitt."

"And it's yours!" said Clarissa.

"To be a leader of men," Richard soliloquised. "It's a fine career. My
God--what a career!"

The chest slowly curved beneath his waistcoat.

"D'you know, Dick, I can't help thinking of England," said his wife
meditatively, leaning her head against his chest. "Being on this ship
seems to make it so much more vivid--what it really means to be English.
One thinks of all we've done, and our navies, and the people in India
and Africa, and how we've gone on century after century, sending out
boys from little country villages--and of men like you, Dick, and it
makes one feel as if one couldn't bear _not_ to be English! Think of
the light burning over the House, Dick! When I stood on deck just now I
seemed to see it. It's what one means by London."

"It's the continuity," said Richard sententiously. A vision of English
history, King following King, Prime Minister Prime Minister, and Law Law
had come over him while his wife spoke. He ran his mind along the line
of conservative policy, which went steadily from Lord Salisbury to
Alfred, and gradually enclosed, as though it were a lasso that opened
and caught things, enormous chunks of the habitable globe.

"It's taken a long time, but we've pretty nearly done it," he said; "it
remains to consolidate."

"And these people don't see it!" Clarissa exclaimed.

"It takes all sorts to make a world," said her husband. "There would
never be a government if there weren't an opposition."

"Dick, you're better than I am," said Clarissa. "You see round, where I
only see _there_." She pressed a point on the back of his hand.

"That's my business, as I tried to explain at dinner."

"What I like about you, Dick," she continued, "is that you're always the
same, and I'm a creature of moods."

"You're a pretty creature, anyhow," he said, gazing at her with deeper
eyes.

"You think so, do you? Then kiss me."

He kissed her passionately, so that her half-written letter slid to the
ground. Picking it up, he read it without asking leave.

"Where's your pen?" he said; and added in his little masculine hand:

R.D. _loquitur_: Clarice has omitted to tell you that she looked
exceedingly pretty at dinner, and made a conquest by which she has bound
herself to learn the Greek alphabet. I will take this occasion of adding
that we are both enjoying ourselves in these outlandish parts, and only
wish for the presence of our friends (yourself and John, to wit) to make
the trip perfectly enjoyable as it promises to be instructive. . . .

Voices were heard at the end of the corridor. Mrs. Ambrose was speaking
low; William Pepper was remarking in his definite and rather acid voice,
"That is the type of lady with whom I find myself distinctly out of
sympathy. She--"

But neither Richard nor Clarissa profited by the verdict, for directly
it seemed likely that they would overhear, Richard crackled a sheet of
paper.

"I often wonder," Clarissa mused in bed, over the little white volume of
Pascal which went with her everywhere, "whether it is really good for
a woman to live with a man who is morally her superior, as Richard is
mine. It makes one so dependent. I suppose I feel for him what my mother
and women of her generation felt for Christ. It just shows that one
can't do without _something_." She then fell into a sleep, which was as
usual extremely sound and refreshing, but visited by fantastic dreams
of great Greek letters stalking round the room, when she woke up and
laughed to herself, remembering where she was and that the Greek letters
were real people, lying asleep not many yards away. Then, thinking
of the black sea outside tossing beneath the moon, she shuddered, and
thought of her husband and the others as companions on the voyage.
The dreams were not confined to her indeed, but went from one brain
to another. They all dreamt of each other that night, as was natural,
considering how thin the partitions were between them, and how strangely
they had been lifted off the earth to sit next each other in mid-ocean,
and see every detail of each other's faces, and hear whatever they
chanced to say.


Chapter IV


Next morning Clarissa was up before anyone else. She dressed, and was
out on deck, breathing the fresh air of a calm morning, and, making the
circuit of the ship for the second time, she ran straight into the lean
person of Mr. Grice, the steward. She apologised, and at the same time
asked him to enlighten her: what were those shiny brass stands for, half
glass on the top? She had been wondering, and could not guess. When he
had done explaining, she cried enthusiastically:

"I do think that to be a sailor must be the finest thing in the world!"

"And what d'you know about it?" said Mr. Grice, kindling in a strange
manner. "Pardon me. What does any man or woman brought up in England
know about the sea? They profess to know; but they don't."

The bitterness with which he spoke was ominous of what was to come.
He led her off to his own quarters, and, sitting on the edge of a
brass-bound table, looking uncommonly like a sea-gull, with her white
tapering body and thin alert face, Mrs. Dalloway had to listen to the
tirade of a fanatical man. Did she realise, to begin with, what a very
small part of the world the land was? How peaceful, how beautiful, how
benignant in comparison the sea? The deep waters could sustain Europe
unaided if every earthly animal died of the plague to-morrow. Mr. Grice
recalled dreadful sights which he had seen in the richest city of the
world--men and women standing in line hour after hour to receive a mug
of greasy soup. "And I thought of the good flesh down here waiting
and asking to be caught. I'm not exactly a Protestant, and I'm not
a Catholic, but I could almost pray for the days of popery to come
again--because of the fasts."

As he talked he kept opening drawers and moving little glass jars. Here
were the treasures which the great ocean had bestowed upon him--pale
fish in greenish liquids, blobs of jelly with streaming tresses, fish
with lights in their heads, they lived so deep.

"They have swum about among bones," Clarissa sighed.

"You're thinking of Shakespeare," said Mr. Grice, and taking down a copy
from a shelf well lined with books, recited in an emphatic nasal voice:

"Full fathom five thy father lies,

"A grand fellow, Shakespeare," he said, replacing the volume.

Clarissa was so glad to hear him say so.

"Which is your favourite play? I wonder if it's the same as mine?"

"_Henry the Fifth_," said Mr. Grice.

"Joy!" cried Clarissa. "It is!"

_Hamlet_ was what you might call too introspective for Mr. Grice, the
sonnets too passionate; Henry the Fifth was to him the model of an
English gentleman. But his favourite reading was Huxley, Herbert
Spencer, and Henry George; while Emerson and Thomas Hardy he read for
relaxation. He was giving Mrs. Dalloway his views upon the present state
of England when the breakfast bell rung so imperiously that she had to
tear herself away, promising to come back and be shown his sea-weeds.

The party, which had seemed so odd to her the night before, was already
gathered round the table, still under the influence of sleep, and
therefore uncommunicative, but her entrance sent a little flutter like a
breath of air through them all.

"I've had the most interesting talk of my life!" she exclaimed, taking
her seat beside Willoughby. "D'you realise that one of your men is a
philosopher and a poet?"

"A very interesting fellow--that's what I always say," said Willoughby,
distinguishing Mr. Grice. "Though Rachel finds him a bore."

"He's a bore when he talks about currents," said Rachel. Her eyes were
full of sleep, but Mrs. Dalloway still seemed to her wonderful.

"I've never met a bore yet!" said Clarissa.

"And I should say the world was full of them!" exclaimed Helen. But her
beauty, which was radiant in the morning light, took the contrariness
from her words.

"I agree that it's the worst one can possibly say of any one," said
Clarissa. "How much rather one would be a murderer than a bore!" she
added, with her usual air of saying something profound. "One can fancy
liking a murderer. It's the same with dogs. Some dogs are awful bores,
poor dears."

It happened that Richard was sitting next to Rachel. She was curiously
conscious of his presence and appearance--his well-cut clothes, his
crackling shirt-front, his cuffs with blue rings round them, and the
square-tipped, very clean fingers with the red stone on the little
finger of the left hand.

"We had a dog who was a bore and knew it," he said, addressing her in
cool, easy tones. "He was a Skye terrier, one of those long chaps, with
little feet poking out from their hair like--like caterpillars--no, like
sofas I should say. Well, we had another dog at the same time, a black
brisk animal--a Schipperke, I think, you call them. You can't imagine
a greater contrast. The Skye so slow and deliberate, looking up at
you like some old gentleman in the club, as much as to say, 'You don't
really mean it, do you?' and the Schipperke as quick as a knife. I liked
the Skye best, I must confess. There was something pathetic about him."

The story seemed to have no climax.

"What happened to him?" Rachel asked.

"That's a very sad story," said Richard, lowering his voice and peeling
an apple. "He followed my wife in the car one day and got run over by a
brute of a cyclist."

"Was he killed?" asked Rachel.

But Clarissa at her end of the table had overheard.

"Don't talk of it!" she cried. "It's a thing I can't bear to think of to
this day."

Surely the tears stood in her eyes?

"That's the painful thing about pets," said Mr. Dalloway; "they die. The
first sorrow I can remember was for the death of a dormouse. I regret to
say that I sat upon it. Still, that didn't make one any the less sorry.
Here lies the duck that Samuel Johnson sat on, eh? I was big for my
age."

"Then we had canaries," he continued, "a pair of ring-doves, a lemur,
and at one time a martin."

"Did you live in the country?" Rachel asked him.

"We lived in the country for six months of the year. When I say 'we' I
mean four sisters, a brother, and myself. There's nothing like coming of
a large family. Sisters particularly are delightful."

"Dick, you were horribly spoilt!" cried Clarissa across the table.

"No, no. Appreciated," said Richard.

Rachel had other questions on the tip of her tongue; or rather one
enormous question, which she did not in the least know how to put into
words. The talk appeared too airy to admit of it.

"Please tell me--everything." That was what she wanted to say. He had
drawn apart one little chink and showed astonishing treasures. It seemed
to her incredible that a man like that should be willing to talk to her.
He had sisters and pets, and once lived in the country. She stirred her
tea round and round; the bubbles which swam and clustered in the cup
seemed to her like the union of their minds.

The talk meanwhile raced past her, and when Richard suddenly stated in a
jocular tone of voice, "I'm sure Miss Vinrace, now, has secret leanings
towards Catholicism," she had no idea what to answer, and Helen could
not help laughing at the start she gave.

However, breakfast was over and Mrs. Dalloway was rising. "I always
think religion's like collecting beetles," she said, summing up the
discussion as she went up the stairs with Helen. "One person has a
passion for black beetles; another hasn't; it's no good arguing about
it. What's _your_ black beetle now?"

"I suppose it's my children," said Helen.

"Ah--that's different," Clarissa breathed. "Do tell me. You have a boy,
haven't you? Isn't it detestable, leaving them?"

It was as though a blue shadow had fallen across a pool. Their eyes
became deeper, and their voices more cordial. Instead of joining them
as they began to pace the deck, Rachel was indignant with the prosperous
matrons, who made her feel outside their world and motherless, and
turning back, she left them abruptly. She slammed the door of her room,
and pulled out her music. It was all old music--Bach and Beethoven,
Mozart and Purcell--the pages yellow, the engraving rough to the finger.
In three minutes she was deep in a very difficult, very classical fugue
in A, and over her face came a queer remote impersonal expression of
complete absorption and anxious satisfaction. Now she stumbled; now she
faltered and had to play the same bar twice over; but an invisible
line seemed to string the notes together, from which rose a shape,
a building. She was so far absorbed in this work, for it was really
difficult to find how all these sounds should stand together, and drew
upon the whole of her faculties, that she never heard a knock at the
door. It was burst impulsively open, and Mrs. Dalloway stood in the room
leaving the door open, so that a strip of the white deck and of the blue
sea appeared through the opening. The shape of the Bach fugue crashed to
the ground.

"Don't let me interrupt," Clarissa implored. "I heard you playing, and I
couldn't resist. I adore Bach!"

Rachel flushed and fumbled her fingers in her lap. She stood up
awkwardly.

"It's too difficult," she said.

"But you were playing quite splendidly! I ought to have stayed outside."

"No," said Rachel.

She slid _Cowper's_ _Letters_ and _Wuthering_ _Heights_ out of the
arm-chair, so that Clarissa was invited to sit there.

"What a dear little room!" she said, looking round. "Oh, _Cowper's
Letters_! I've never read them. Are they nice?"

"Rather dull," said Rachel.

"He wrote awfully well, didn't he?" said Clarissa; "--if one likes
that kind of thing--finished his sentences and all that. _Wuthering_
_Heights_! Ah--that's more in my line. I really couldn't exist without
the Brontes! Don't you love them? Still, on the whole, I'd rather live
without them than without Jane Austen."

Lightly and at random though she spoke, her manner conveyed an
extraordinary degree of sympathy and desire to befriend.

"Jane Austen? I don't like Jane Austen," said Rachel.

"You monster!" Clarissa exclaimed. "I can only just forgive you. Tell me
why?"

"She's so--so--well, so like a tight plait," Rachel floundered. "Ah--I
see what you mean. But I don't agree. And you won't when you're older.
At your age I only liked Shelley. I can remember sobbing over him in the
garden.

     He has outsoared the shadow of our night,
     Envy and calumny and hate and pain-- you remember?

     Can touch him not and torture not again
     From the contagion of the world's slow stain.

How divine!--and yet what nonsense!" She looked lightly round the room.
"I always think it's _living_, not dying, that counts. I really respect
some snuffy old stockbroker who's gone on adding up column after column
all his days, and trotting back to his villa at Brixton with some old
pug dog he worships, and a dreary little wife sitting at the end of the
table, and going off to Margate for a fortnight--I assure you I know
heaps like that--well, they seem to me _really_ nobler than poets whom
every one worships, just because they're geniuses and die young. But I
don't expect _you_ to agree with me!"

She pressed Rachel's shoulder.

"Um-m-m--" she went on quoting--

Unrest which men miscall delight--

"When you're my age you'll see that the world is _crammed_ with
delightful things. I think young people make such a mistake about
that--not letting themselves be happy. I sometimes think that happiness
is the only thing that counts. I don't know you well enough to say, but
I should guess you might be a little inclined to--when one's young and
attractive--I'm going to say it!--_every_thing's at one's feet." She
glanced round as much as to say, "not only a few stuffy books and Bach."

"I long to ask questions," she continued. "You interest me so much. If
I'm impertinent, you must just box my ears."

"And I--I want to ask questions," said Rachel with such earnestness that
Mrs. Dalloway had to check her smile.

"D'you mind if we walk?" she said. "The air's so delicious."

She snuffed it like a racehorse as they shut the door and stood on deck.

"Isn't it good to be alive?" she exclaimed, and drew Rachel's arm within
hers.

"Look, look! How exquisite!"

The shores of Portugal were beginning to lose their substance; but
the land was still the land, though at a great distance. They could
distinguish the little towns that were sprinkled in the folds of the
hills, and the smoke rising faintly. The towns appeared to be very small
in comparison with the great purple mountains behind them.

"Honestly, though," said Clarissa, having looked, "I don't like views.
They're too inhuman." They walked on.

"How odd it is!" she continued impulsively. "This time yesterday we'd
never met. I was packing in a stuffy little room in the hotel. We know
absolutely nothing about each other--and yet--I feel as if I _did_ know
you!"

"You have children--your husband was in Parliament?"

"You've never been to school, and you live--?"

"With my aunts at Richmond."

"Richmond?"

"You see, my aunts like the Park. They like the quiet."

"And you don't! I understand!" Clarissa laughed.

"I like walking in the Park alone; but not--with the dogs," she
finished.

"No; and some people _are_ dogs; aren't they?" said Clarissa, as if she
had guessed a secret. "But not every one--oh no, not every one."

"Not every one," said Rachel, and stopped.

"I can quite imagine you walking alone," said Clarissa: "and
thinking--in a little world of your own. But how you will enjoy it--some
day!"

"I shall enjoy walking with a man--is that what you mean?" said Rachel,
regarding Mrs. Dalloway with her large enquiring eyes.

"I wasn't thinking of a man particularly," said Clarissa. "But you
will."

"No. I shall never marry," Rachel determined.

"I shouldn't be so sure of that," said Clarissa. Her sidelong glance
told Rachel that she found her attractive although she was inexplicably
amused.

"Why do people marry?" Rachel asked.

"That's what you're going to find out," Clarissa laughed.

Rachel followed her eyes and found that they rested for a second, on the
robust figure of Richard Dalloway, who was engaged in striking a match
on the sole of his boot; while Willoughby expounded something, which
seemed to be of great interest to them both.

"There's nothing like it," she concluded. "Do tell me about the
Ambroses. Or am I asking too many questions?"

"I find you easy to talk to," said Rachel.

The short sketch of the Ambroses was, however, somewhat perfunctory, and
contained little but the fact that Mr. Ambrose was her uncle.

"Your mother's brother?"

When a name has dropped out of use, the lightest touch upon it tells.
Mrs. Dalloway went on:

"Are you like your mother?"

"No; she was different," said Rachel.

She was overcome by an intense desire to tell Mrs. Dalloway things she
had never told any one--things she had not realised herself until this
moment.

"I am lonely," she began. "I want--" She did not know what she wanted,
so that she could not finish the sentence; but her lip quivered.

But it seemed that Mrs. Dalloway was able to understand without words.

"I know," she said, actually putting one arm round Rachel's shoulder.
"When I was your age I wanted too. No one understood until I met
Richard. He gave me all I wanted. He's man and woman as well." Her eyes
rested upon Mr. Dalloway, leaning upon the rail, still talking. "Don't
think I say that because I'm his wife--I see his faults more clearly
than I see any one else's. What one wants in the person one lives with
is that they should keep one at one's best. I often wonder what I've
done to be so happy!" she exclaimed, and a tear slid down her cheek. She
wiped it away, squeezed Rachel's hand, and exclaimed:

"How good life is!" At that moment, standing out in the fresh breeze,
with the sun upon the waves, and Mrs. Dalloway's hand upon her arm, it
seemed indeed as if life which had been unnamed before was infinitely
wonderful, and too good to be true.

Here Helen passed them, and seeing Rachel arm-in-arm with a comparative
stranger, looking excited, was amused, but at the same time slightly
irritated. But they were immediately joined by Richard, who had enjoyed
a very interesting talk with Willoughby and was in a sociable mood.

"Observe my Panama," he said, touching the brim of his hat. "Are you
aware, Miss Vinrace, how much can be done to induce fine weather by
appropriate headdress? I have determined that it is a hot summer day; I
warn you that nothing you can say will shake me. Therefore I am going
to sit down. I advise you to follow my example." Three chairs in a row
invited them to be seated.

Leaning back, Richard surveyed the waves.

"That's a very pretty blue," he said. "But there's a little too much of
it. Variety is essential to a view. Thus, if you have hills you ought
to have a river; if a river, hills. The best view in the world in my
opinion is that from Boars Hill on a fine day--it must be a fine day,
mark you--A rug?--Oh, thank you, my dear . . . in that case you have
also the advantage of associations--the Past."

"D'you want to talk, Dick, or shall I read aloud?"

Clarissa had fetched a book with the rugs.

"_Persuasion_," announced Richard, examining the volume.

"That's for Miss Vinrace," said Clarissa. "She can't bear our beloved
Jane."

"That--if I may say so--is because you have not read her," said Richard.
"She is incomparably the greatest female writer we possess."

"She is the greatest," he continued, "and for this reason: she does not
attempt to write like a man. Every other woman does; on that account, I
don't read 'em."

"Produce your instances, Miss Vinrace," he went on, joining his
finger-tips. "I'm ready to be converted."

He waited, while Rachel vainly tried to vindicate her sex from the
slight he put upon it.

"I'm afraid he's right," said Clarissa. "He generally is--the wretch!"

"I brought _Persuasion_," she went on, "because I thought it was a
little less threadbare than the others--though, Dick, it's no good
_your_ pretending to know Jane by heart, considering that she always
sends you to sleep!"

"After the labours of legislation, I deserve sleep," said Richard.

"You're not to think about those guns," said Clarissa, seeing that his
eye, passing over the waves, still sought the land meditatively, "or
about navies, or empires, or anything." So saying she opened the book
and began to read:

"'Sir Walter Elliott, of Kellynch Hall, in Somersetshire, was a man
who, for his own amusement, never took up any book but the
_Baronetage_'--don't you know Sir Walter?--'There he found occupation
for an idle hour, and consolation in a distressed one.' She does write
well, doesn't she? 'There--'" She read on in a light humorous voice. She
was determined that Sir Walter should take her husband's mind off the
guns of Britain, and divert him in an exquisite, quaint, sprightly, and
slightly ridiculous world. After a time it appeared that the sun was
sinking in that world, and the points becoming softer. Rachel looked
up to see what caused the change. Richard's eyelids were closing and
opening; opening and closing. A loud nasal breath announced that he no
longer considered appearances, that he was sound asleep.

"Triumph!" Clarissa whispered at the end of a sentence. Suddenly she
raised her hand in protest. A sailor hesitated; she gave the book to
Rachel, and stepped lightly to take the message--"Mr. Grice wished
to know if it was convenient," etc. She followed him. Ridley, who had
prowled unheeded, started forward, stopped, and, with a gesture of
disgust, strode off to his study. The sleeping politician was left in
Rachel's charge. She read a sentence, and took a look at him. In sleep
he looked like a coat hanging at the end of a bed; there were all the
wrinkles, and the sleeves and trousers kept their shape though no longer
filled out by legs and arms. You can then best judge the age and state
of the coat. She looked him all over until it seemed to her that he must
protest.

He was a man of forty perhaps; and here there were lines round his eyes,
and there curious clefts in his cheeks. Slightly battered he appeared,
but dogged and in the prime of life.

"Sisters and a dormouse and some canaries," Rachel murmured, never
taking her eyes off him. "I wonder, I wonder" she ceased, her chin upon
her hand, still looking at him. A bell chimed behind them, and Richard
raised his head. Then he opened his eyes which wore for a second the
queer look of a shortsighted person's whose spectacles are lost. It
took him a moment to recover from the impropriety of having snored, and
possibly grunted, before a young lady. To wake and find oneself left
alone with one was also slightly disconcerting.

"I suppose I've been dozing," he said. "What's happened to everyone?
Clarissa?"

"Mrs. Dalloway has gone to look at Mr. Grice's fish," Rachel replied.

"I might have guessed," said Richard. "It's a common occurrence. And how
have you improved the shining hour? Have you become a convert?"

"I don't think I've read a line," said Rachel.

"That's what I always find. There are too many things to look at. I find
nature very stimulating myself. My best ideas have come to me out of
doors."

"When you were walking?"

"Walking--riding--yachting--I suppose the most momentous conversations
of my life took place while perambulating the great court at Trinity.
I was at both universities. It was a fad of my father's. He thought it
broadening to the mind. I think I agree with him. I can remember--what
an age ago it seems!--settling the basis of a future state with the
present Secretary for India. We thought ourselves very wise. I'm not
sure we weren't. We were happy, Miss Vinrace, and we were young--gifts
which make for wisdom."

"Have you done what you said you'd do?" she asked.

"A searching question! I answer--Yes and No. If on the one hand I have
not accomplished what I set out to accomplish--which of us does!--on the
other I can fairly say this: I have not lowered my ideal."

He looked resolutely at a sea-gull, as though his ideal flew on the
wings of the bird.

"But," said Rachel, "what _is_ your ideal?"

"There you ask too much, Miss Vinrace," said Richard playfully.

She could only say that she wanted to know, and Richard was sufficiently
amused to answer.

"Well, how shall I reply? In one word--Unity. Unity of aim, of dominion,
of progress. The dispersion of the best ideas over the greatest area."

"The English?"

"I grant that the English seem, on the whole, whiter than most men,
their records cleaner. But, good Lord, don't run away with the idea that
I don't see the drawbacks--horrors--unmentionable things done in our
very midst! I'm under no illusions. Few people, I suppose, have
fewer illusions than I have. Have you ever been in a factory, Miss
Vinrace!--No, I suppose not--I may say I hope not."

As for Rachel, she had scarcely walked through a poor street, and always
under the escort of father, maid, or aunts.

"I was going to say that if you'd ever seen the kind of thing that's
going on round you, you'd understand what it is that makes me and men
like me politicians. You asked me a moment ago whether I'd done what I
set out to do. Well, when I consider my life, there is one fact I
admit that I'm proud of; owing to me some thousands of girls in
Lancashire--and many thousands to come after them--can spend an hour
every day in the open air which their mothers had to spend over their
looms. I'm prouder of that, I own, than I should be of writing Keats and
Shelley into the bargain!"

It became painful to Rachel to be one of those who write Keats and
Shelley. She liked Richard Dalloway, and warmed as he warmed. He seemed
to mean what he said.

"I know nothing!" she exclaimed.

"It's far better that you should know nothing," he said paternally, "and
you wrong yourself, I'm sure. You play very nicely, I'm told, and I've
no doubt you've read heaps of learned books."

Elderly banter would no longer check her.

"You talk of unity," she said. "You ought to make me understand."

"I never allow my wife to talk politics," he said seriously. "For this
reason. It is impossible for human beings, constituted as they are, both
to fight and to have ideals. If I have preserved mine, as I am thankful
to say that in great measure I have, it is due to the fact that I have
been able to come home to my wife in the evening and to find that she
has spent her day in calling, music, play with the children, domestic
duties--what you will; her illusions have not been destroyed. She gives
me courage to go on. The strain of public life is very great," he added.

This made him appear a battered martyr, parting every day with some of
the finest gold, in the service of mankind.

"I can't think," Rachel exclaimed, "how any one does it!"

"Explain, Miss Vinrace," said Richard. "This is a matter I want to clear
up."

His kindness was genuine, and she determined to take the chance he gave
her, although to talk to a man of such worth and authority made her
heart beat.

"It seems to me like this," she began, doing her best first to recollect
and then to expose her shivering private visions.

"There's an old widow in her room, somewhere, let us suppose in the
suburbs of Leeds."

Richard bent his head to show that he accepted the widow.

"In London you're spending your life, talking, writing things, getting
bills through, missing what seems natural. The result of it all is that
she goes to her cupboard and finds a little more tea, a few lumps of
sugar, or a little less tea and a newspaper. Widows all over the country
I admit do this. Still, there's the mind of the widow--the affections;
those you leave untouched. But you waste you own."

"If the widow goes to her cupboard and finds it bare," Richard answered,
"her spiritual outlook we may admit will be affected. If I may pick
holes in your philosophy, Miss Vinrace, which has its merits, I would
point out that a human being is not a set of compartments, but an
organism. Imagination, Miss Vinrace; use your imagination; that's where
you young Liberals fail. Conceive the world as a whole. Now for your
second point; when you assert that in trying to set the house in
order for the benefit of the young generation I am wasting my higher
capabilities, I totally disagree with you. I can conceive no more
exalted aim--to be the citizen of the Empire. Look at it in this way,
Miss Vinrace; conceive the state as a complicated machine; we citizens
are parts of that machine; some fulfil more important duties; others
(perhaps I am one of them) serve only to connect some obscure parts of
the mechanism, concealed from the public eye. Yet if the meanest screw
fails in its task, the proper working of the whole is imperilled."

It was impossible to combine the image of a lean black widow, gazing out
of her window, and longing for some one to talk to, with the image of a
vast machine, such as one sees at South Kensington, thumping, thumping,
thumping. The attempt at communication had been a failure.

"We don't seem to understand each other," she said.

"Shall I say something that will make you very angry?" he replied.

"It won't," said Rachel.

"Well, then; no woman has what I may call the political instinct. You
have very great virtues; I am the first, I hope, to admit that; but I
have never met a woman who even saw what is meant by statesmanship. I am
going to make you still more angry. I hope that I never shall meet such
a woman. Now, Miss Vinrace, are we enemies for life?"

Vanity, irritation, and a thrusting desire to be understood, urged her
to make another attempt.

"Under the streets, in the sewers, in the wires, in the telephones,
there is something alive; is that what you mean? In things like
dust-carts, and men mending roads? You feel that all the time when you
walk about London, and when you turn on a tap and the water comes?"

"Certainly," said Richard. "I understand you to mean that the whole of
modern society is based upon cooperative effort. If only more people
would realise that, Miss Vinrace, there would be fewer of your old
widows in solitary lodgings!"

Rachel considered.

"Are you a Liberal or are you a Conservative?" she asked.

"I call myself a Conservative for convenience sake," said Richard,
smiling. "But there is more in common between the two parties than
people generally allow."

There was a pause, which did not come on Rachel's side from any lack of
things to say; as usual she could not say them, and was further confused
by the fact that the time for talking probably ran short. She was
haunted by absurd jumbled ideas--how, if one went back far enough,
everything perhaps was intelligible; everything was in common; for the
mammoths who pastured in the fields of Richmond High Street had turned
into paving stones and boxes full of ribbon, and her aunts.

"Did you say you lived in the country when you were a child?" she asked.

Crude as her manners seemed to him, Richard was flattered. There could
be no doubt that her interest was genuine.

"I did," he smiled.

"And what happened?" she asked. "Or do I ask too many questions?"

"I'm flattered, I assure you. But--let me see--what happened? Well,
riding, lessons, sisters. There was an enchanted rubbish heap, I
remember, where all kinds of queer things happened. Odd, what things
impress children! I can remember the look of the place to this day.
It's a fallacy to think that children are happy. They're not; they're
unhappy. I've never suffered so much as I did when I was a child."

"Why?" she asked.

"I didn't get on well with my father," said Richard shortly. "He was
a very able man, but hard. Well--it makes one determined not to sin in
that way oneself. Children never forget injustice. They forgive heaps of
things grown-up people mind; but that sin is the unpardonable sin. Mind
you--I daresay I was a difficult child to manage; but when I think what
I was ready to give! No, I was more sinned against than sinning. And
then I went to school, where I did very fairly well; and and then, as
I say, my father sent me to both universities. . . . D'you know, Miss
Vinrace, you've made me think? How little, after all, one can tell
anybody about one's life! Here I sit; there you sit; both, I doubt not,
chock-full of the most interesting experiences, ideas, emotions; yet how
communicate? I've told you what every second person you meet might tell
you."

"I don't think so," she said. "It's the way of saying things, isn't it,
not the things?"

"True," said Richard. "Perfectly true." He paused. "When I look back
over my life--I'm forty-two--what are the great facts that stand out?
What were the revelations, if I may call them so? The misery of the poor
and--" (he hesitated and pitched over) "love!"

Upon that word he lowered his voice; it was a word that seemed to unveil
the skies for Rachel.

"It's an odd thing to say to a young lady," he continued. "But have you
any idea what--what I mean by that? No, of course not. I don't use the
word in a conventional sense. I use it as young men use it. Girls are
kept very ignorant, aren't they? Perhaps it's wise--perhaps--You _don't_
know?"

He spoke as if he had lost consciousness of what he was saying.

"No; I don't," she said, scarcely speaking above her breath.

"Warships, Dick! Over there! Look!" Clarissa, released from Mr. Grice,
appreciative of all his seaweeds, skimmed towards them, gesticulating.

She had sighted two sinister grey vessels, low in the water, and bald
as bone, one closely following the other with the look of eyeless beasts
seeking their prey. Consciousness returned to Richard instantly.

"By George!" he exclaimed, and stood shielding his eyes.

"Ours, Dick?" said Clarissa.

"The Mediterranean Fleet," he answered.

"The _Euphrosyne_ was slowly dipping her flag. Richard raised his hat.
Convulsively Clarissa squeezed Rachel's hand.

"Aren't you glad to be English!" she said.

The warships drew past, casting a curious effect of discipline and
sadness upon the waters, and it was not until they were again invisible
that people spoke to each other naturally. At lunch the talk was all
of valour and death, and the magnificent qualities of British admirals.
Clarissa quoted one poet, Willoughby quoted another. Life on board a
man-of-war was splendid, so they agreed, and sailors, whenever one met
them, were quite especially nice and simple.

This being so, no one liked it when Helen remarked that it seemed to her
as wrong to keep sailors as to keep a Zoo, and that as for dying on a
battle-field, surely it was time we ceased to praise courage--"or to
write bad poetry about it," snarled Pepper.

But Helen was really wondering why Rachel, sitting silent, looked so
queer and flushed.


Chapter V


She was not able to follow up her observations, however, or to come to
any conclusion, for by one of those accidents which are liable to happen
at sea, the whole course of their lives was now put out of order.

Even at tea the floor rose beneath their feet and pitched too low again,
and at dinner the ship seemed to groan and strain as though a lash
were descending. She who had been a broad-backed dray-horse, upon whose
hind-quarters pierrots might waltz, became a colt in a field. The plates
slanted away from the knives, and Mrs. Dalloway's face blanched for
a second as she helped herself and saw the potatoes roll this way and
that. Willoughby, of course, extolled the virtues of his ship,
and quoted what had been said of her by experts and distinguished
passengers, for he loved his own possessions. Still, dinner was uneasy,
and directly the ladies were alone Clarissa owned that she would be
better off in bed, and went, smiling bravely.

Next morning the storm was on them, and no politeness could ignore it.
Mrs. Dalloway stayed in her room. Richard faced three meals, eating
valiantly at each; but at the third, certain glazed asparagus swimming
in oil finally conquered him.

"That beats me," he said, and withdrew.

"Now we are alone once more," remarked William Pepper, looking round the
table; but no one was ready to engage him in talk, and the meal ended in
silence.

On the following day they met--but as flying leaves meet in the air.
Sick they were not; but the wind propelled them hastily into rooms,
violently downstairs. They passed each other gasping on deck; they
shouted across tables. They wore fur coats; and Helen was never seen
without a bandanna on her head. For comfort they retreated to their
cabins, where with tightly wedged feet they let the ship bounce and
tumble. Their sensations were the sensations of potatoes in a sack on a
galloping horse. The world outside was merely a violent grey tumult.
For two days they had a perfect rest from their old emotions. Rachel had
just enough consciousness to suppose herself a donkey on the summit of a
moor in a hail-storm, with its coat blown into furrows; then she became
a wizened tree, perpetually driven back by the salt Atlantic gale.

Helen, on the other hand, staggered to Mrs. Dalloway's door, knocked,
could not be heard for the slamming of doors and the battering of wind,
and entered.

There were basins, of course. Mrs. Dalloway lay half-raised on a pillow,
and did not open her eyes. Then she murmured, "Oh, Dick, is that you?"

Helen shouted--for she was thrown against the washstand--"How are you?"

Clarissa opened one eye. It gave her an incredibly dissipated
appearance. "Awful!" she gasped. Her lips were white inside.

Planting her feet wide, Helen contrived to pour champagne into a tumbler
with a tooth-brush in it.

"Champagne," she said.

"There's a tooth-brush in it," murmured Clarissa, and smiled; it might
have been the contortion of one weeping. She drank.

"Disgusting," she whispered, indicating the basins. Relics of humour
still played over her face like moonshine.

"Want more?" Helen shouted. Speech was again beyond Clarissa's reach.
The wind laid the ship shivering on her side. Pale agonies crossed Mrs.
Dalloway in waves. When the curtains flapped, grey lights puffed across
her. Between the spasms of the storm, Helen made the curtain fast, shook
the pillows, stretched the bed-clothes, and smoothed the hot nostrils
and forehead with cold scent.

"You _are_ good!" Clarissa gasped. "Horrid mess!"

She was trying to apologise for white underclothes fallen and scattered
on the floor. For one second she opened a single eye, and saw that the
room was tidy.

"That's nice," she gasped.

Helen left her; far, far away she knew that she felt a kind of liking
for Mrs. Dalloway. She could not help respecting her spirit and
her desire, even in the throes of sickness, for a tidy bedroom. Her
petticoats, however, rose above her knees.

Quite suddenly the storm relaxed its grasp. It happened at tea; the
expected paroxysm of the blast gave out just as it reached its climax
and dwindled away, and the ship instead of taking the usual plunge
went steadily. The monotonous order of plunging and rising, roaring and
relaxing, was interfered with, and every one at table looked up and
felt something loosen within them. The strain was slackened and human
feelings began to peep again, as they do when daylight shows at the end
of a tunnel.

"Try a turn with me," Ridley called across to Rachel.

"Foolish!" cried Helen, but they went stumbling up the ladder. Choked
by the wind their spirits rose with a rush, for on the skirts of all the
grey tumult was a misty spot of gold. Instantly the world dropped into
shape; they were no longer atoms flying in the void, but people riding
a triumphant ship on the back of the sea. Wind and space were banished;
the world floated like an apple in a tub, and the mind of man, which had
been unmoored also, once more attached itself to the old beliefs.

Having scrambled twice round the ship and received many sound cuffs from
the wind, they saw a sailor's face positively shine golden. They looked,
and beheld a complete yellow circle of sun; next minute it was traversed
by sailing stands of cloud, and then completely hidden. By breakfast
the next morning, however, the sky was swept clean, the waves, although
steep, were blue, and after their view of the strange under-world,
inhabited by phantoms, people began to live among tea-pots and loaves of
bread with greater zest than ever.

Richard and Clarissa, however, still remained on the borderland. She did
not attempt to sit up; her husband stood on his feet, contemplated his
waistcoat and trousers, shook his head, and then lay down again. The
inside of his brain was still rising and falling like the sea on the
stage. At four o'clock he woke from sleep and saw the sunlight make a
vivid angle across the red plush curtains and the grey tweed trousers.
The ordinary world outside slid into his mind, and by the time he was
dressed he was an English gentleman again.

He stood beside his wife. She pulled him down to her by the lapel of his
coat, kissed him, and held him fast for a minute.

"Go and get a breath of air, Dick," she said. "You look quite washed
out. . . . How nice you smell! . . . And be polite to that woman. She
was so kind to me."

Thereupon Mrs. Dalloway turned to the cool side of her pillow, terribly
flattened but still invincible.

Richard found Helen talking to her brother-in-law, over two dishes of
yellow cake and smooth bread and butter.

"You look very ill!" she exclaimed on seeing him. "Come and have some
tea."

He remarked that the hands that moved about the cups were beautiful.

"I hear you've been very good to my wife," he said. "She's had an awful
time of it. You came in and fed her with champagne. Were you among the
saved yourself?"

"I? Oh, I haven't been sick for twenty years--sea-sick, I mean."

"There are three stages of convalescence, I always say," broke in the
hearty voice of Willoughby. "The milk stage, the bread-and-butter stage,
and the roast-beef stage. I should say you were at the bread-and-butter
stage." He handed him the plate.

"Now, I should advise a hearty tea, then a brisk walk on deck; and by
dinner-time you'll be clamouring for beef, eh?" He went off laughing,
excusing himself on the score of business.

"What a splendid fellow he is!" said Richard. "Always keen on
something."

"Yes," said Helen, "he's always been like that."

"This is a great undertaking of his," Richard continued. "It's a
business that won't stop with ships, I should say. We shall see him
in Parliament, or I'm much mistaken. He's the kind of man we want in
Parliament--the man who has done things."

But Helen was not much interested in her brother-in-law.

"I expect your head's aching, isn't it?" she asked, pouring a fresh cup.

"Well, it is," said Richard. "It's humiliating to find what a slave one
is to one's body in this world. D'you know, I can never work without a
kettle on the hob. As often as not I don't drink tea, but I must feel
that I can if I want to."

"That's very bad for you," said Helen.

"It shortens one's life; but I'm afraid, Mrs. Ambrose, we politicians
must make up our minds to that at the outset. We've got to burn the
candle at both ends, or--"

"You've cooked your goose!" said Helen brightly.

"We can't make you take us seriously, Mrs. Ambrose," he protested. "May
I ask how you've spent your time? Reading--philosophy?" (He saw the
black book.) "Metaphysics and fishing!" he exclaimed. "If I had to live
again I believe I should devote myself to one or the other." He began
turning the pages.

"'Good, then, is indefinable,'" he read out. "How jolly to think that's
going on still! 'So far as I know there is only one ethical writer,
Professor Henry Sidgwick, who has clearly recognised and stated this
fact.' That's just the kind of thing we used to talk about when we were
boys. I can remember arguing until five in the morning with Duffy--now
Secretary for India--pacing round and round those cloisters until we
decided it was too late to go to bed, and we went for a ride instead.
Whether we ever came to any conclusion--that's another matter. Still,
it's the arguing that counts. It's things like that that stand out in
life. Nothing's been quite so vivid since. It's the philosophers, it's
the scholars," he continued, "they're the people who pass the torch,
who keep the light burning by which we live. Being a politician doesn't
necessarily blind one to that, Mrs. Ambrose."

"No. Why should it?" said Helen. "But can you remember if your wife
takes sugar?"

She lifted the tray and went off with it to Mrs. Dalloway.

Richard twisted a muffler twice round his throat and struggled up on
deck. His body, which had grown white and tender in a dark room, tingled
all over in the fresh air. He felt himself a man undoubtedly in the
prime of life. Pride glowed in his eye as he let the wind buffet him
and stood firm. With his head slightly lowered he sheered round corners,
strode uphill, and met the blast. There was a collision. For a second
he could not see what the body was he had run into. "Sorry." "Sorry."
It was Rachel who apologised. They both laughed, too much blown about to
speak. She drove open the door of her room and stepped into its calm. In
order to speak to her, it was necessary that Richard should follow. They
stood in a whirlpool of wind; papers began flying round in circles, the
door crashed to, and they tumbled, laughing, into chairs. Richard sat
upon Bach.

"My word! What a tempest!" he exclaimed.

"Fine, isn't it?" said Rachel. Certainly the struggle and wind had given
her a decision she lacked; red was in her cheeks, and her hair was down.

"Oh, what fun!" he cried. "What am I sitting on? Is this your room? How
jolly!" "There--sit there," she commanded. Cowper slid once more.

"How jolly to meet again," said Richard. "It seems an age. _Cowper's
Letters_? . . . Bach? . . . _Wuthering Heights_? . . . Is this where
you meditate on the world, and then come out and pose poor politicians
with questions? In the intervals of sea-sickness I've thought a lot of
our talk. I assure you, you made me think."

"I made you think! But why?"

"What solitary icebergs we are, Miss Vinrace! How little we can
communicate! There are lots of things I should like to tell you
about--to hear your opinion of. Have you ever read Burke?"

"Burke?" she repeated. "Who was Burke?"

"No? Well, then I shall make a point of sending you a copy. _The_
_Speech_ _on_ _the_ _French_ _Revolution_--_The_ _American_ _Rebellion_?
Which shall it be, I wonder?" He noted something in his pocket-book.
"And then you must write and tell me what you think of it. This
reticence--this isolation--that's what's the matter with modern life!
Now, tell me about yourself. What are your interests and occupations?
I should imagine that you were a person with very strong interests. Of
course you are! Good God! When I think of the age we live in, with
its opportunities and possibilities, the mass of things to be done and
enjoyed--why haven't we ten lives instead of one? But about yourself?"

"You see, I'm a woman," said Rachel.

"I know--I know," said Richard, throwing his head back, and drawing his
fingers across his eyes.

"How strange to be a woman! A young and beautiful woman," he continued
sententiously, "has the whole world at her feet. That's true, Miss
Vinrace. You have an inestimable power--for good or for evil. What
couldn't you do--" he broke off.

"What?" asked Rachel.

"You have beauty," he said. The ship lurched. Rachel fell slightly
forward. Richard took her in his arms and kissed her. Holding her tight,
he kissed her passionately, so that she felt the hardness of his body
and the roughness of his cheek printed upon hers. She fell back in her
chair, with tremendous beats of the heart, each of which sent black
waves across her eyes. He clasped his forehead in his hands.

"You tempt me," he said. The tone of his voice was terrifying. He seemed
choked in fright. They were both trembling. Rachel stood up and went.
Her head was cold, her knees shaking, and the physical pain of the
emotion was so great that she could only keep herself moving above
the great leaps of her heart. She leant upon the rail of the ship, and
gradually ceased to feel, for a chill of body and mind crept over her.
Far out between the waves little black and white sea-birds were riding.
Rising and falling with smooth and graceful movements in the hollows of
the waves they seemed singularly detached and unconcerned.

"You're peaceful," she said. She became peaceful too, at the same
time possessed with a strange exultation. Life seemed to hold infinite
possibilities she had never guessed at. She leant upon the rail and
looked over the troubled grey waters, where the sunlight was fitfully
scattered upon the crests of the waves, until she was cold and
absolutely calm again. Nevertheless something wonderful had happened.

At dinner, however, she did not feel exalted, but merely uncomfortable,
as if she and Richard had seen something together which is hidden in
ordinary life, so that they did not like to look at each other. Richard
slid his eyes over her uneasily once, and never looked at her again.
Formal platitudes were manufactured with effort, but Willoughby was
kindled.

"Beef for Mr. Dalloway!" he shouted. "Come now--after that walk you're
at the beef stage, Dalloway!"

Wonderful masculine stories followed about Bright and Disraeli and
coalition governments, wonderful stories which made the people at the
dinner-table seem featureless and small. After dinner, sitting alone
with Rachel under the great swinging lamp, Helen was struck by her
pallor. It once more occurred to her that there was something strange in
the girl's behaviour.

"You look tired. Are you tired?" she asked.

"Not tired," said Rachel. "Oh, yes, I suppose I am tired."

Helen advised bed, and she went, not seeing Richard again. She must have
been very tired for she fell asleep at once, but after an hour or two of
dreamless sleep, she dreamt. She dreamt that she was walking down a long
tunnel, which grew so narrow by degrees that she could touch the damp
bricks on either side. At length the tunnel opened and became a vault;
she found herself trapped in it, bricks meeting her wherever she turned,
alone with a little deformed man who squatted on the floor gibbering,
with long nails. His face was pitted and like the face of an animal.
The wall behind him oozed with damp, which collected into drops and slid
down. Still and cold as death she lay, not daring to move, until she
broke the agony by tossing herself across the bed, and woke crying "Oh!"

Light showed her the familiar things: her clothes, fallen off the chair;
the water jug gleaming white; but the horror did not go at once. She
felt herself pursued, so that she got up and actually locked her door.
A voice moaned for her; eyes desired her. All night long barbarian men
harassed the ship; they came scuffling down the passages, and stopped to
snuffle at her door. She could not sleep again.


Chapter VI


"That's the tragedy of life--as I always say!" said Mrs. Dalloway.
"Beginning things and having to end them. Still, I'm not going to let
_this_ end, if you're willing." It was the morning, the sea was calm,
and the ship once again was anchored not far from another shore.

She was dressed in her long fur cloak, with the veils wound around her
head, and once more the rich boxes stood on top of each other so that
the scene of a few days back seemed to be repeated.

"D'you suppose we shall ever meet in London?" said Ridley ironically.
"You'll have forgotten all about me by the time you step out there."

He pointed to the shore of the little bay, where they could now see the
separate trees with moving branches.

"How horrid you are!" she laughed. "Rachel's coming to see me
anyhow--the instant you get back," she said, pressing Rachel's arm.
"Now--you've no excuse!"

With a silver pencil she wrote her name and address on the flyleaf of
_Persuasion_, and gave the book to Rachel. Sailors were shouldering the
luggage, and people were beginning to congregate. There were Captain
Cobbold, Mr. Grice, Willoughby, Helen, and an obscure grateful man in a
blue jersey.

"Oh, it's time," said Clarissa. "Well, good-bye. I _do_ like you," she
murmured as she kissed Rachel. People in the way made it unnecessary
for Richard to shake Rachel by the hand; he managed to look at her very
stiffly for a second before he followed his wife down the ship's side.

The boat separating from the vessel made off towards the land, and for
some minutes Helen, Ridley, and Rachel leant over the rail, watching.
Once Mrs. Dalloway turned and waved; but the boat steadily grew smaller
and smaller until it ceased to rise and fall, and nothing could be seen
save two resolute backs.

"Well, that's over," said Ridley after a long silence. "We shall never
see _them_ again," he added, turning to go to his books. A feeling of
emptiness and melancholy came over them; they knew in their hearts that
it was over, and that they had parted for ever, and the knowledge filled
them with far greater depression than the length of their acquaintance
seemed to justify. Even as the boat pulled away they could feel other
sights and sounds beginning to take the place of the Dalloways, and the
feeling was so unpleasant that they tried to resist it. For so, too,
would they be forgotten.

In much the same way as Mrs. Chailey downstairs was sweeping the
withered rose-leaves off the dressing-table, so Helen was anxious to
make things straight again after the visitors had gone. Rachel's obvious
languor and listlessness made her an easy prey, and indeed Helen had
devised a kind of trap. That something had happened she now felt pretty
certain; moreover, she had come to think that they had been strangers
long enough; she wished to know what the girl was like, partly of course
because Rachel showed no disposition to be known. So, as they turned
from the rail, she said:

"Come and talk to me instead of practising," and led the way to the
sheltered side where the deck-chairs were stretched in the sun. Rachel
followed her indifferently. Her mind was absorbed by Richard; by the
extreme strangeness of what had happened, and by a thousand feelings of
which she had not been conscious before. She made scarcely any attempt
to listen to what Helen was saying, as Helen indulged in commonplaces to
begin with. While Mrs. Ambrose arranged her embroidery, sucked her silk,
and threaded her needle, she lay back gazing at the horizon.

"Did you like those people?" Helen asked her casually.

"Yes," she replied blankly.

"You talked to him, didn't you?"

She said nothing for a minute.

"He kissed me," she said without any change of tone.

Helen started, looked at her, but could not make out what she felt.

"M-m-m'yes," she said, after a pause. "I thought he was that kind of
man."

"What kind of man?" said Rachel.

"Pompous and sentimental."

"I like him," said Rachel.

"So you really didn't mind?"

For the first time since Helen had known her Rachel's eyes lit up
brightly.

"I did mind," she said vehemently. "I dreamt. I couldn't sleep."

"Tell me what happened," said Helen. She had to keep her lips from
twitching as she listened to Rachel's story. It was poured out abruptly
with great seriousness and no sense of humour.

"We talked about politics. He told me what he had done for the poor
somewhere. I asked him all sorts of questions. He told me about his own
life. The day before yesterday, after the storm, he came in to see me.
It happened then, quite suddenly. He kissed me. I don't know why." As
she spoke she grew flushed. "I was a good deal excited," she continued.
"But I didn't mind till afterwards; when--" she paused, and saw the
figure of the bloated little man again--"I became terrified."

From the look in her eyes it was evident she was again terrified. Helen
was really at a loss what to say. From the little she knew of Rachel's
upbringing she supposed that she had been kept entirely ignorant as
to the relations of men with women. With a shyness which she felt with
women and not with men she did not like to explain simply what these
are. Therefore she took the other course and belittled the whole affair.

"Oh, well," she said, "He was a silly creature, and if I were you, I'd
think no more about it."

"No," said Rachel, sitting bolt upright, "I shan't do that. I shall
think about it all day and all night until I find out exactly what it
does mean."

"Don't you ever read?" Helen asked tentatively.

"_Cowper's_ _Letters_--that kind of thing. Father gets them for me or my
Aunts."

Helen could hardly restrain herself from saying out loud what she
thought of a man who brought up his daughter so that at the age of
twenty-four she scarcely knew that men desired women and was terrified
by a kiss. She had good reason to fear that Rachel had made herself
incredibly ridiculous.

"You don't know many men?" she asked.

"Mr. Pepper," said Rachel ironically.

"So no one's ever wanted to marry you?"

"No," she answered ingenuously.

Helen reflected that as, from what she had said, Rachel certainly would
think these things out, it might be as well to help her.

"You oughtn't to be frightened," she said. "It's the most natural thing
in the world. Men will want to kiss you, just as they'll want to marry
you. The pity is to get things out of proportion. It's like noticing
the noises people make when they eat, or men spitting; or, in short, any
small thing that gets on one's nerves."

Rachel seemed to be inattentive to these remarks.

"Tell me," she said suddenly, "what are those women in Piccadilly?"

"In Picadilly? They are prostituted," said Helen.

"It _is_ terrifying--it _is_ disgusting," Rachel asserted, as if she
included Helen in the hatred.

"It is," said Helen. "But--"

"I did like him," Rachel mused, as if speaking to herself. "I wanted to
talk to him; I wanted to know what he'd done. The women in Lancashire--"

It seemed to her as she recalled their talk that there was something
lovable about Richard, good in their attempted friendship, and strangely
piteous in the way they had parted.

The softening of her mood was apparent to Helen.

"You see," she said, "you must take things as they are; and if you want
friendship with men you must run risks. Personally," she continued,
breaking into a smile, "I think it's worth it; I don't mind being
kissed; I'm rather jealous, I believe, that Mr. Dalloway kissed you and
didn't kiss me. Though," she added, "he bored me considerably."

But Rachel did not return the smile or dismiss the whole affair, as
Helen meant her to. Her mind was working very quickly, inconsistently
and painfully. Helen's words hewed down great blocks which had stood
there always, and the light which came in was cold. After sitting for a
time with fixed eyes, she burst out:

"So that's why I can't walk alone!"

By this new light she saw her life for the first time a creeping
hedged-in thing, driven cautiously between high walls, here turned
aside, there plunged in darkness, made dull and crippled for ever--her
life that was the only chance she had--a thousand words and actions
became plain to her.

"Because men are brutes! I hate men!" she exclaimed.

"I thought you said you liked him?" said Helen.

"I liked him, and I liked being kissed," she answered, as if that only
added more difficulties to her problem.

Helen was surprised to see how genuine both shock and problem were, but
she could think of no way of easing the difficulty except by going on
talking. She wanted to make her niece talk, and so to understand why
this rather dull, kindly, plausible politician had made so deep an
impression on her, for surely at the age of twenty-four this was not
natural.

"And did you like Mrs. Dalloway too?" she asked.

As she spoke she saw Rachel redden; for she remembered silly things she
had said, and also, it occurred to her that she treated this exquisite
woman rather badly, for Mrs. Dalloway had said that she loved her
husband.

"She was quite nice, but a thimble-pated creature," Helen continued. "I
never heard such nonsense! Chitter-chatter-chitter-chatter--fish and
the Greek alphabet--never listened to a word any one said--chock-full of
idiotic theories about the way to bring up children--I'd far rather talk
to him any day. He was pompous, but he did at least understand what was
said to him."

The glamour insensibly faded a little both from Richard and Clarissa.
They had not been so wonderful after all, then, in the eyes of a mature
person.

"It's very difficult to know what people are like," Rachel remarked, and
Helen saw with pleasure that she spoke more naturally. "I suppose I was
taken in."

There was little doubt about that according to Helen, but she restrained
herself and said aloud:

"One has to make experiments."

"And they _were_ nice," said Rachel. "They were extraordinarily
interesting." She tried to recall the image of the world as a live
thing that Richard had given her, with drains like nerves, and
bad houses like patches of diseased skin. She recalled his
watch-words--Unity--Imagination, and saw again the bubbles meeting in
her tea-cup as he spoke of sisters and canaries, boyhood and his father,
her small world becoming wonderfully enlarged.

"But all people don't seem to you equally interesting, do they?" asked
Mrs. Ambrose.

Rachel explained that most people had hitherto been symbols; but that
when they talked to one they ceased to be symbols, and became--"I could
listen to them for ever!" she exclaimed. She then jumped up, disappeared
downstairs for a minute, and came back with a fat red book.

"_Who's_ _Who_," she said, laying it upon Helen's knee and turning the
pages. "It gives short lives of people--for instance: 'Sir Roland Beal;
born 1852; parents from Moffatt; educated at Rugby; passed first
into R.E.; married 1878 the daughter of T. Fishwick; served in the
Bechuanaland Expedition 1884-85 (honourably mentioned). Clubs: United
Service, Naval and Military. Recreations: an enthusiastic curler.'"

Sitting on the deck at Helen's feet she went on turning the pages and
reading biographies of bankers, writers, clergymen, sailors, surgeons,
judges, professors, statesmen, editors, philanthropists, merchants, and
actresses; what clubs they belonged to, where they lived, what games
they played, and how many acres they owned.

She became absorbed in the book.

Helen meanwhile stitched at her embroidery and thought over the things
they had said. Her conclusion was that she would very much like to show
her niece, if it were possible, how to live, or as she put it, how to be
a reasonable person. She thought that there must be something wrong in
this confusion between politics and kissing politicians, and that an
elder person ought to be able to help.

"I quite agree," she said, "that people are very interesting; only--"
Rachel, putting her finger between the pages, looked up enquiringly.

"Only I think you ought to discriminate," she ended. "It's a pity to
be intimate with people who are--well, rather second-rate, like the
Dalloways, and to find it out later."

"But how does one know?" Rachel asked.

"I really can't tell you," replied Helen candidly, after a moment's
thought. "You'll have to find out for yourself. But try and--Why don't
you call me Helen?" she added. "'Aunt's' a horrid name. I never liked my
Aunts."

"I should like to call you Helen," Rachel answered.

"D'you think me very unsympathetic?"

Rachel reviewed the points which Helen had certainly failed to
understand; they arose chiefly from the difference of nearly twenty
years in age between them, which made Mrs. Ambrose appear too humorous
and cool in a matter of such moment.

"No," she said. "Some things you don't understand, of course."

"Of course," Helen agreed. "So now you can go ahead and be a person on
your own account," she added.

The vision of her own personality, of herself as a real everlasting
thing, different from anything else, unmergeable, like the sea or the
wind, flashed into Rachel's mind, and she became profoundly excited at
the thought of living.

"I can by m-m-myself," she stammered, "in spite of you, in spite of the
Dalloways, and Mr. Pepper, and Father, and my Aunts, in spite of these?"
She swept her hand across a whole page of statesmen and soldiers.

"In spite of them all," said Helen gravely. She then put down her
needle, and explained a plan which had come into her head as they
talked. Instead of wandering on down the Amazons until she reached some
sulphurous tropical port, where one had to lie within doors all day
beating off insects with a fan, the sensible thing to do surely was to
spend the season with them in their villa by the seaside, where among
other advantages Mrs. Ambrose herself would be at hand to--"After all,
Rachel," she broke off, "it's silly to pretend that because there's
twenty years' difference between us we therefore can't talk to each
other like human beings."

"No; because we like each other," said Rachel.

"Yes," Mrs. Ambrose agreed.

That fact, together with other facts, had been made clear by their
twenty minutes' talk, although how they had come to these conclusions
they could not have said.

However they were come by, they were sufficiently serious to send Mrs.
Ambrose a day or two later in search of her brother-in-law. She
found him sitting in his room working, applying a stout blue pencil
authoritatively to bundles of filmy paper. Papers lay to left and to
right of him, there were great envelopes so gorged with papers that they
spilt papers on to the table. Above him hung a photograph of a woman's
head. The need of sitting absolutely still before a Cockney photographer
had given her lips a queer little pucker, and her eyes for the same
reason looked as though she thought the whole situation ridiculous.
Nevertheless it was the head of an individual and interesting woman, who
would no doubt have turned and laughed at Willoughby if she could have
caught his eye; but when he looked up at her he sighed profoundly. In
his mind this work of his, the great factories at Hull which showed like
mountains at night, the ships that crossed the ocean punctually, the
schemes for combining this and that and building up a solid mass of
industry, was all an offering to her; he laid his success at her feet;
and was always thinking how to educate his daughter so that Theresa
might be glad. He was a very ambitious man; and although he had not
been particularly kind to her while she lived, as Helen thought, he now
believed that she watched him from Heaven, and inspired what was good in
him.

Mrs. Ambrose apologised for the interruption, and asked whether she
might speak to him about a plan of hers. Would he consent to leave his
daughter with them when they landed, instead of taking her on up the
Amazons?

"We would take great care of her," she added, "and we should really like
it."

Willoughby looked very grave and carefully laid aside his papers.

"She's a good girl," he said at length. "There is a likeness?"--he
nodded his head at the photograph of Theresa and sighed. Helen looked
at Theresa pursing up her lips before the Cockney photographer. It
suggested her in an absurd human way, and she felt an intense desire to
share some joke.

"She's the only thing that's left to me," sighed Willoughby. "We go on
year after year without talking about these things--" He broke off. "But
it's better so. Only life's very hard."

Helen was sorry for him, and patted him on the shoulder, but she felt
uncomfortable when her brother-in-law expressed his feelings, and took
refuge in praising Rachel, and explaining why she thought her plan might
be a good one.

"True," said Willoughby when she had done. "The social conditions are
bound to be primitive. I should be out a good deal. I agreed because she
wished it. And of course I have complete confidence in you. . . . You
see, Helen," he continued, becoming confidential, "I want to bring
her up as her mother would have wished. I don't hold with these modern
views--any more than you do, eh? She's a nice quiet girl, devoted to her
music--a little less of _that_ would do no harm. Still, it's kept her
happy, and we lead a very quiet life at Richmond. I should like her to
begin to see more people. I want to take her about with me when I get
home. I've half a mind to rent a house in London, leaving my sisters at
Richmond, and take her to see one or two people who'd be kind to her
for my sake. I'm beginning to realise," he continued, stretching himself
out, "that all this is tending to Parliament, Helen. It's the only way
to get things done as one wants them done. I talked to Dalloway about
it. In that case, of course, I should want Rachel to be able to
take more part in things. A certain amount of entertaining would be
necessary--dinners, an occasional evening party. One's constituents like
to be fed, I believe. In all these ways Rachel could be of great help to
me. So," he wound up, "I should be very glad, if we arrange this visit
(which must be upon a business footing, mind), if you could see your way
to helping my girl, bringing her out--she's a little shy now,--making a
woman of her, the kind of woman her mother would have liked her to be,"
he ended, jerking his head at the photograph.

Willoughby's selfishness, though consistent as Helen saw with real
affection for his daughter, made her determined to have the girl to stay
with her, even if she had to promise a complete course of instruction
in the feminine graces. She could not help laughing at the notion
of it--Rachel a Tory hostess!--and marvelling as she left him at the
astonishing ignorance of a father.

Rachel, when consulted, showed less enthusiasm than Helen could have
wished. One moment she was eager, the next doubtful. Visions of a great
river, now blue, now yellow in the tropical sun and crossed by bright
birds, now white in the moon, now deep in shade with moving trees and
canoes sliding out from the tangled banks, beset her. Helen promised a
river. Then she did not want to leave her father. That feeling seemed
genuine too, but in the end Helen prevailed, although when she had
won her case she was beset by doubts, and more than once regretted
the impulse which had entangled her with the fortunes of another human
being.


Chapter VII


From a distance the _Euphrosyne_ looked very small. Glasses were turned
upon her from the decks of great liners, and she was pronounced a tramp,
a cargo-boat, or one of those wretched little passenger steamers where
people rolled about among the cattle on deck. The insect-like figures
of Dalloways, Ambroses, and Vinraces were also derided, both from the
extreme smallness of their persons and the doubt which only strong
glasses could dispel as to whether they were really live creatures or
only lumps on the rigging. Mr. Pepper with all his learning had been
mistaken for a cormorant, and then, as unjustly, transformed into a
cow. At night, indeed, when the waltzes were swinging in the saloon, and
gifted passengers reciting, the little ship--shrunk to a few beads
of light out among the dark waves, and one high in air upon the
mast-head--seemed something mysterious and impressive to heated partners
resting from the dance. She became a ship passing in the night--an
emblem of the loneliness of human life, an occasion for queer
confidences and sudden appeals for sympathy.

On and on she went, by day and by night, following her path, until one
morning broke and showed the land. Losing its shadow-like appearance it
became first cleft and mountainous, next coloured grey and purple, next
scattered with white blocks which gradually separated themselves, and
then, as the progress of the ship acted upon the view like a field-glass
of increasing power, became streets of houses. By nine o'clock the
_Euphrosyne_ had taken up her position in the middle of a great bay;
she dropped her anchor; immediately, as if she were a recumbent giant
requiring examination, small boats came swarming about her. She rang
with cries; men jumped on to her; her deck was thumped by feet. The
lonely little island was invaded from all quarters at once, and after
four weeks of silence it was bewildering to hear human speech. Mrs.
Ambrose alone heeded none of this stir. She was pale with suspense while
the boat with mail bags was making towards them. Absorbed in her letters
she did not notice that she had left the _Euphrosyne_, and felt no
sadness when the ship lifted up her voice and bellowed thrice like a cow
separated from its calf.

"The children are well!" she exclaimed. Mr. Pepper, who sat opposite
with a great mound of bag and rug upon his knees, said, "Gratifying."
Rachel, to whom the end of the voyage meant a complete change of
perspective, was too much bewildered by the approach of the shore to
realise what children were well or why it was gratifying. Helen went on
reading.

Moving very slowly, and rearing absurdly high over each wave, the little
boat was now approaching a white crescent of sand. Behind this was a
deep green valley, with distinct hills on either side. On the slope of
the right-hand hill white houses with brown roofs were settled, like
nesting sea-birds, and at intervals cypresses striped the hill with
black bars. Mountains whose sides were flushed with red, but whose
crowns were bald, rose as a pinnacle, half-concealing another pinnacle
behind it. The hour being still early, the whole view was exquisitely
light and airy; the blues and greens of sky and tree were intense but
not sultry. As they drew nearer and could distinguish details, the
effect of the earth with its minute objects and colours and different
forms of life was overwhelming after four weeks of the sea, and kept
them silent.

"Three hundred years odd," said Mr. Pepper meditatively at length.

As nobody said, "What?" he merely extracted a bottle and swallowed a
pill. The piece of information that died within him was to the effect
that three hundred years ago five Elizabethan barques had anchored where
the _Euphrosyne_ now floated. Half-drawn up upon the beach lay an equal
number of Spanish galleons, unmanned, for the country was still a virgin
land behind a veil. Slipping across the water, the English sailors
bore away bars of silver, bales of linen, timbers of cedar wood, golden
crucifixes knobbed with emeralds. When the Spaniards came down from
their drinking, a fight ensued, the two parties churning up the sand,
and driving each other into the surf. The Spaniards, bloated with fine
living upon the fruits of the miraculous land, fell in heaps; but the
hardy Englishmen, tawny with sea-voyaging, hairy for lack of razors,
with muscles like wire, fangs greedy for flesh, and fingers itching for
gold, despatched the wounded, drove the dying into the sea, and soon
reduced the natives to a state of superstitious wonderment. Here a
settlement was made; women were imported; children grew. All seemed to
favour the expansion of the British Empire, and had there been men
like Richard Dalloway in the time of Charles the First, the map would
undoubtedly be red where it is now an odious green. But it must be
supposed that the political mind of that age lacked imagination, and,
merely for want of a few thousand pounds and a few thousand men, the
spark died that should have been a conflagration. From the interior came
Indians with subtle poisons, naked bodies, and painted idols; from the
sea came vengeful Spaniards and rapacious Portuguese; exposed to all
these enemies (though the climate proved wonderfully kind and the earth
abundant) the English dwindled away and all but disappeared. Somewhere
about the middle of the seventeenth century a single sloop watched its
season and slipped out by night, bearing within it all that was left of
the great British colony, a few men, a few women, and perhaps a dozen
dusky children. English history then denies all knowledge of the place.
Owing to one cause and another civilisation shifted its centre to a spot
some four or five hundred miles to the south, and to-day Santa Marina is
not much larger than it was three hundred years ago. In population it is
a happy compromise, for Portuguese fathers wed Indian mothers, and their
children intermarry with the Spanish. Although they get their ploughs
from Manchester, they make their coats from their own sheep, their silk
from their own worms, and their furniture from their own cedar trees,
so that in arts and industries the place is still much where it was in
Elizabethan days.

The reasons which had drawn the English across the sea to found a small
colony within the last ten years are not so easily described, and will
never perhaps be recorded in history books. Granted facility of
travel, peace, good trade, and so on, there was besides a kind of
dissatisfaction among the English with the older countries and the
enormous accumulations of carved stone, stained glass, and rich brown
painting which they offered to the tourist. The movement in search of
something new was of course infinitely small, affecting only a handful
of well-to-do people. It began by a few schoolmasters serving their
passage out to South America as the pursers of tramp steamers. They
returned in time for the summer term, when their stories of the
splendours and hardships of life at sea, the humours of sea-captains,
the wonders of night and dawn, and the marvels of the place delighted
outsiders, and sometimes found their way into print. The country itself
taxed all their powers of description, for they said it was much bigger
than Italy, and really nobler than Greece. Again, they declared that the
natives were strangely beautiful, very big in stature, dark, passionate,
and quick to seize the knife. The place seemed new and full of new forms
of beauty, in proof of which they showed handkerchiefs which the women
had worn round their heads, and primitive carvings coloured bright
greens and blues. Somehow or other, as fashions do, the fashion spread;
an old monastery was quickly turned into a hotel, while a famous line of
steamships altered its route for the convenience of passengers.

Oddly enough it happened that the least satisfactory of Helen Ambrose's
brothers had been sent out years before to make his fortune, at any rate
to keep clear of race-horses, in the very spot which had now become so
popular. Often, leaning upon the column in the verandah, he had watched
the English ships with English schoolmasters for pursers steaming into
the bay. Having at length earned enough to take a holiday, and being
sick of the place, he proposed to put his villa, on the slope of the
mountain, at his sister's disposal. She, too, had been a little stirred
by the talk of a new world, where there was always sun and never a fog,
which went on around her, and the chance, when they were planning where
to spend the winter out of England, seemed too good to be missed.
For these reasons she determined to accept Willoughby's offer of free
passages on his ship, to place the children with their grand-parents,
and to do the thing thoroughly while she was about it.

Taking seats in a carriage drawn by long-tailed horses with pheasants'
feathers erect between their ears, the Ambroses, Mr. Pepper, and Rachel
rattled out of the harbour. The day increased in heat as they drove
up the hill. The road passed through the town, where men seemed to be
beating brass and crying "Water," where the passage was blocked by mules
and cleared by whips and curses, where the women walked barefoot,
their heads balancing baskets, and cripples hastily displayed mutilated
members; it issued among steep green fields, not so green but that the
earth showed through. Great trees now shaded all but the centre of the
road, and a mountain stream, so shallow and so swift that it plaited
itself into strands as it ran, raced along the edge. Higher they went,
until Ridley and Rachel walked behind; next they turned along a lane
scattered with stones, where Mr. Pepper raised his stick and silently
indicated a shrub, bearing among sparse leaves a voluminous purple
blossom; and at a rickety canter the last stage of the way was
accomplished.

The villa was a roomy white house, which, as is the case with most
continental houses, looked to an English eye frail, ramshackle, and
absurdly frivolous, more like a pagoda in a tea-garden than a place
where one slept. The garden called urgently for the services of
gardener. Bushes waved their branches across the paths, and the blades
of grass, with spaces of earth between them, could be counted. In the
circular piece of ground in front of the verandah were two cracked
vases, from which red flowers drooped, with a stone fountain between
them, now parched in the sun. The circular garden led to a long garden,
where the gardener's shears had scarcely been, unless now and then, when
he cut a bough of blossom for his beloved. A few tall trees shaded it,
and round bushes with wax-like flowers mobbed their heads together in
a row. A garden smoothly laid with turf, divided by thick hedges, with
raised beds of bright flowers, such as we keep within walls in England,
would have been out of place upon the side of this bare hill. There
was no ugliness to shut out, and the villa looked straight across the
shoulder of a slope, ribbed with olive trees, to the sea.

The indecency of the whole place struck Mrs. Chailey forcibly. There
were no blinds to shut out the sun, nor was there any furniture to speak
of for the sun to spoil. Standing in the bare stone hall, and surveying
a staircase of superb breadth, but cracked and carpetless, she further
ventured the opinion that there were rats, as large as terriers at
home, and that if one put one's foot down with any force one would come
through the floor. As for hot water--at this point her investigations
left her speechless.

"Poor creature!" she murmured to the sallow Spanish servant-girl who
came out with the pigs and hens to receive them, "no wonder you
hardly look like a human being!" Maria accepted the compliment with
an exquisite Spanish grace. In Chailey's opinion they would have done
better to stay on board an English ship, but none knew better than she
that her duty commanded her to stay.

When they were settled in, and in train to find daily occupation, there
was some speculation as to the reasons which induced Mr. Pepper to stay,
taking up his lodging in the Ambroses' house. Efforts had been made
for some days before landing to impress upon him the advantages of the
Amazons.

"That great stream!" Helen would begin, gazing as if she saw a visionary
cascade, "I've a good mind to go with you myself, Willoughby--only I
can't. Think of the sunsets and the moonrises--I believe the colours are
unimaginable."

"There are wild peacocks," Rachel hazarded.

"And marvellous creatures in the water," Helen asserted.

"One might discover a new reptile," Rachel continued.

"There's certain to be a revolution, I'm told," Helen urged.

The effect of these subterfuges was a little dashed by Ridley, who,
after regarding Pepper for some moments, sighed aloud, "Poor fellow!"
and inwardly speculated upon the unkindness of women.

He stayed, however, in apparent contentment for six days, playing with
a microscope and a notebook in one of the many sparsely furnished
sitting-rooms, but on the evening of the seventh day, as they sat at
dinner, he appeared more restless than usual. The dinner-table was set
between two long windows which were left uncurtained by Helen's orders.
Darkness fell as sharply as a knife in this climate, and the town then
sprang out in circles and lines of bright dots beneath them. Buildings
which never showed by day showed by night, and the sea flowed right
over the land judging by the moving lights of the steamers. The sight
fulfilled the same purpose as an orchestra in a London restaurant, and
silence had its setting. William Pepper observed it for some time; he
put on his spectacles to contemplate the scene.

"I've identified the big block to the left," he observed, and pointed
with his fork at a square formed by several rows of lights.

"One should infer that they can cook vegetables," he added.

"An hotel?" said Helen.

"Once a monastery," said Mr. Pepper.

Nothing more was said then, but, the day after, Mr. Pepper returned from
a midday walk, and stood silently before Helen who was reading in the
verandah.

"I've taken a room over there," he said.

"You're not going?" she exclaimed.

"On the whole--yes," he remarked. "No private cook _can_ cook
vegetables."

Knowing his dislike of questions, which she to some extent shared,
Helen asked no more. Still, an uneasy suspicion lurked in her mind that
William was hiding a wound. She flushed to think that her words, or her
husband's, or Rachel's had penetrated and stung. She was half-moved to
cry, "Stop, William; explain!" and would have returned to the subject at
luncheon if William had not shown himself inscrutable and chill, lifting
fragments of salad on the point of his fork, with the gesture of a man
pronging seaweed, detecting gravel, suspecting germs.

"If you all die of typhoid I won't be responsible!" he snapped.

"If you die of dulness, neither will I," Helen echoed in her heart.

She reflected that she had never yet asked him whether he had been in
love. They had got further and further from that subject instead of
drawing nearer to it, and she could not help feeling it a relief when
William Pepper, with all his knowledge, his microscope, his note-books,
his genuine kindliness and good sense, but a certain dryness of
soul, took his departure. Also she could not help feeling it sad that
friendships should end thus, although in this case to have the room
empty was something of a comfort, and she tried to console herself with
the reflection that one never knows how far other people feel the things
they might be supposed to feel.


Chapter VIII


The next few months passed away, as many years can pass away, without
definite events, and yet, if suddenly disturbed, it would be seen that
such months or years had a character unlike others. The three months
which had passed had brought them to the beginning of March. The climate
had kept its promise, and the change of season from winter to spring
had made very little difference, so that Helen, who was sitting in the
drawing-room with a pen in her hand, could keep the windows open though
a great fire of logs burnt on one side of her. Below, the sea was still
blue and the roofs still brown and white, though the day was fading
rapidly. It was dusk in the room, which, large and empty at all times,
now appeared larger and emptier than usual. Her own figure, as she sat
writing with a pad on her knee, shared the general effect of size and
lack of detail, for the flames which ran along the branches, suddenly
devouring little green tufts, burnt intermittently and sent irregular
illuminations across her face and the plaster walls. There were
no pictures on the walls but here and there boughs laden with
heavy-petalled flowers spread widely against them. Of the books fallen
on the bare floor and heaped upon the large table, it was only possible
in this light to trace the outline.

Mrs. Ambrose was writing a very long letter. Beginning "Dear Bernard,"
it went on to describe what had been happening in the Villa San Gervasio
during the past three months, as, for instance, that they had had the
British Consul to dinner, and had been taken over a Spanish man-of-war,
and had seen a great many processions and religious festivals, which
were so beautiful that Mrs. Ambrose couldn't conceive why, if people
must have a religion, they didn't all become Roman Catholics. They had
made several expeditions though none of any length. It was worth coming
if only for the sake of the flowering trees which grew wild quite near
the house, and the amazing colours of sea and earth. The earth, instead
of being brown, was red, purple, green. "You won't believe me," she
added, "there is no colour like it in England." She adopted, indeed,
a condescending tone towards that poor island, which was now advancing
chilly crocuses and nipped violets in nooks, in copses, in cosy corners,
tended by rosy old gardeners in mufflers, who were always touching
their hats and bobbing obsequiously. She went on to deride the islanders
themselves. Rumours of London all in a ferment over a General Election
had reached them even out here. "It seems incredible," she went on,
"that people should care whether Asquith is in or Austen Chamberlin out,
and while you scream yourselves hoarse about politics you let the only
people who are trying for something good starve or simply laugh at them.
When have you ever encouraged a living artist? Or bought his best work?
Why are you all so ugly and so servile? Here the servants are human
beings. They talk to one as if they were equals. As far as I can tell
there are no aristocrats."

Perhaps it was the mention of aristocrats that reminded her of Richard
Dalloway and Rachel, for she ran on with the same penful to describe her
niece.

"It's an odd fate that has put me in charge of a girl," she wrote,
"considering that I have never got on well with women, or had much to do
with them. However, I must retract some of the things that I have
said against them. If they were properly educated I don't see why they
shouldn't be much the same as men--as satisfactory I mean; though, of
course, very different. The question is, how should one educate
them. The present method seems to me abominable. This girl, though
twenty-four, had never heard that men desired women, and, until I
explained it, did not know how children were born. Her ignorance upon
other matters as important" (here Mrs. Ambrose's letter may not be
quoted) . . . "was complete. It seems to me not merely foolish but
criminal to bring people up like that. Let alone the suffering to them,
it explains why women are what they are--the wonder is they're no worse.
I have taken it upon myself to enlighten her, and now, though still a
good deal prejudiced and liable to exaggerate, she is more or less a
reasonable human being. Keeping them ignorant, of course, defeats its
own object, and when they begin to understand they take it all much too
seriously. My brother-in-law really deserved a catastrophe--which he
won't get. I now pray for a young man to come to my help; some one, I
mean, who would talk to her openly, and prove how absurd most of her
ideas about life are. Unluckily such men seem almost as rare as the
women. The English colony certainly doesn't provide one; artists,
merchants, cultivated people--they are stupid, conventional, and
flirtatious. . . ." She ceased, and with her pen in her hand sat looking
into the fire, making the logs into caves and mountains, for it had
grown too dark to go on writing. Moreover, the house began to stir as
the hour of dinner approached; she could hear the plates being chinked
in the dining-room next door, and Chailey instructing the Spanish girl
where to put things down in vigorous English. The bell rang; she rose,
met Ridley and Rachel outside, and they all went in to dinner.

Three months had made but little difference in the appearance either of
Ridley or Rachel; yet a keen observer might have thought that the girl
was more definite and self-confident in her manner than before. Her skin
was brown, her eyes certainly brighter, and she attended to what was
said as though she might be going to contradict it. The meal began with
the comfortable silence of people who are quite at their ease together.
Then Ridley, leaning on his elbow and looking out of the window,
observed that it was a lovely night.

"Yes," said Helen. She added, "The season's begun," looking at the
lights beneath them. She asked Maria in Spanish whether the hotel was
not filling up with visitors. Maria informed her with pride that there
would come a time when it was positively difficult to buy eggs--the
shopkeepers would not mind what prices they asked; they would get them,
at any rate, from the English.

"That's an English steamer in the bay," said Rachel, looking at a
triangle of lights below. "She came in early this morning."

"Then we may hope for some letters and send ours back," said Helen.

For some reason the mention of letters always made Ridley groan, and the
rest of the meal passed in a brisk argument between husband and wife
as to whether he was or was not wholly ignored by the entire civilised
world.

"Considering the last batch," said Helen, "you deserve beating. You
were asked to lecture, you were offered a degree, and some silly woman
praised not only your books but your beauty--she said he was what
Shelley would have been if Shelley had lived to fifty-five and grown
a beard. Really, Ridley, I think you're the vainest man I know," she
ended, rising from the table, "which I may tell you is saying a good
deal."

Finding her letter lying before the fire she added a few lines to it,
and then announced that she was going to take the letters now--Ridley
must bring his--and Rachel?

"I hope you've written to your Aunts? It's high time."

The women put on cloaks and hats, and after inviting Ridley to come with
them, which he emphatically refused to do, exclaiming that Rachel he
expected to be a fool, but Helen surely knew better, they turned to go.
He stood over the fire gazing into the depths of the looking-glass, and
compressing his face into the likeness of a commander surveying a field
of battle, or a martyr watching the flames lick his toes, rather than
that of a secluded Professor.

Helen laid hold of his beard.

"Am I a fool?" she said.

"Let me go, Helen."

"Am I a fool?" she repeated.

"Vile woman!" he exclaimed, and kissed her.

"We'll leave you to your vanities," she called back as they went out of
the door.

It was a beautiful evening, still light enough to see a long way down
the road, though the stars were coming out. The pillar-box was let into
a high yellow wall where the lane met the road, and having dropped the
letters into it, Helen was for turning back.

"No, no," said Rachel, taking her by the wrist. "We're going to see
life. You promised."

"Seeing life" was the phrase they used for their habit of strolling
through the town after dark. The social life of Santa Marina was carried
on almost entirely by lamp-light, which the warmth of the nights and the
scents culled from flowers made pleasant enough. The young women, with
their hair magnificently swept in coils, a red flower behind the ear,
sat on the doorsteps, or issued out on to balconies, while the young men
ranged up and down beneath, shouting up a greeting from time to time and
stopping here and there to enter into amorous talk. At the open windows
merchants could be seen making up the day's account, and older women
lifting jars from shelf to shelf. The streets were full of people, men
for the most part, who interchanged their views of the world as they
walked, or gathered round the wine-tables at the street corner, where an
old cripple was twanging his guitar strings, while a poor girl cried
her passionate song in the gutter. The two Englishwomen excited some
friendly curiosity, but no one molested them.

Helen sauntered on, observing the different people in their shabby
clothes, who seemed so careless and so natural, with satisfaction.

"Just think of the Mall to-night!" she exclaimed at length. "It's the
fifteenth of March. Perhaps there's a Court." She thought of the crowd
waiting in the cold spring air to see the grand carriages go by. "It's
very cold, if it's not raining," she said. "First there are men selling
picture postcards; then there are wretched little shop-girls with round
bandboxes; then there are bank clerks in tail coats; and then--any
number of dressmakers. People from South Kensington drive up in a
hired fly; officials have a pair of bays; earls, on the other hand, are
allowed one footman to stand up behind; dukes have two, royal dukes--so
I was told--have three; the king, I suppose, can have as many as he
likes. And the people believe in it!"

Out here it seemed as though the people of England must be shaped in the
body like the kings and queens, knights and pawns of the chessboard, so
strange were their differences, so marked and so implicitly believed in.

They had to part in order to circumvent a crowd.

"They believe in God," said Rachel as they regained each other. She
meant that the people in the crowd believed in Him; for she remembered
the crosses with bleeding plaster figures that stood where foot-paths
joined, and the inexplicable mystery of a service in a Roman Catholic
church.

"We shall never understand!" she sighed.

They had walked some way and it was now night, but they could see a
large iron gate a little way farther down the road on their left.

"Do you mean to go right up to the hotel?" Helen asked.

Rachel gave the gate a push; it swung open, and, seeing no one about and
judging that nothing was private in this country, they walked straight
on. An avenue of trees ran along the road, which was completely
straight. The trees suddenly came to an end; the road turned a corner,
and they found themselves confronted by a large square building. They
had come out upon the broad terrace which ran round the hotel and were
only a few feet distant from the windows. A row of long windows opened
almost to the ground. They were all of them uncurtained, and all
brilliantly lighted, so that they could see everything inside. Each
window revealed a different section of the life of the hotel. They drew
into one of the broad columns of shadow which separated the windows and
gazed in. They found themselves just outside the dining-room. It was
being swept; a waiter was eating a bunch of grapes with his leg across
the corner of a table. Next door was the kitchen, where they were
washing up; white cooks were dipping their arms into cauldrons, while
the waiters made their meal voraciously off broken meats, sopping up the
gravy with bits of crumb. Moving on, they became lost in a plantation
of bushes, and then suddenly found themselves outside the drawing-room,
where the ladies and gentlemen, having dined well, lay back in
deep arm-chairs, occasionally speaking or turning over the pages of
magazines. A thin woman was flourishing up and down the piano.

"What is a dahabeeyah, Charles?" the distinct voice of a widow, seated
in an arm-chair by the window, asked her son.

It was the end of the piece, and his answer was lost in the general
clearing of throats and tapping of knees.

"They're all old in this room," Rachel whispered.

Creeping on, they found that the next window revealed two men in
shirt-sleeves playing billiards with two young ladies.

"He pinched my arm!" the plump young woman cried, as she missed her
stroke.

"Now you two--no ragging," the young man with the red face reproved
them, who was marking.

"Take care or we shall be seen," whispered Helen, plucking Rachel by the
arm. Incautiously her head had risen to the middle of the window.

Turning the corner they came to the largest room in the hotel, which was
supplied with four windows, and was called the Lounge, although it was
really a hall. Hung with armour and native embroideries, furnished with
divans and screens, which shut off convenient corners, the room was less
formal than the others, and was evidently the haunt of youth. Signor
Rodriguez, whom they knew to be the manager of the hotel, stood quite
near them in the doorway surveying the scene--the gentlemen lounging in
chairs, the couples leaning over coffee-cups, the game of cards in the
centre under profuse clusters of electric light. He was congratulating
himself upon the enterprise which had turned the refectory, a cold stone
room with pots on trestles, into the most comfortable room in the house.
The hotel was very full, and proved his wisdom in decreeing that no
hotel can flourish without a lounge.

The people were scattered about in couples or parties of four, and
either they were actually better acquainted, or the informal room made
their manners easier. Through the open window came an uneven humming
sound like that which rises from a flock of sheep pent within hurdles at
dusk. The card-party occupied the centre of the foreground.

Helen and Rachel watched them play for some minutes without being able
to distinguish a word. Helen was observing one of the men intently. He
was a lean, somewhat cadaverous man of about her own age, whose profile
was turned to them, and he was the partner of a highly-coloured girl,
obviously English by birth.

Suddenly, in the strange way in which some words detach themselves from
the rest, they heard him say quite distinctly:--

"All you want is practice, Miss Warrington; courage and practice--one's
no good without the other."

"Hughling Elliot! Of course!" Helen exclaimed. She ducked her head
immediately, for at the sound of his name he looked up. The game went on
for a few minutes, and was then broken up by the approach of a wheeled
chair, containing a voluminous old lady who paused by the table and
said:--

"Better luck to-night, Susan?"

"All the luck's on our side," said a young man who until now had kept
his back turned to the window. He appeared to be rather stout, and had a
thick crop of hair.

"Luck, Mr. Hewet?" said his partner, a middle-aged lady with spectacles.
"I assure you, Mrs. Paley, our success is due solely to our brilliant
play."

"Unless I go to bed early I get practically no sleep at all," Mrs. Paley
was heard to explain, as if to justify her seizure of Susan, who got up
and proceeded to wheel the chair to the door.

"They'll get some one else to take my place," she said cheerfully. But
she was wrong. No attempt was made to find another player, and after the
young man had built three stories of a card-house, which fell down, the
players strolled off in different directions.

Mr. Hewet turned his full face towards the window. They could see that
he had large eyes obscured by glasses; his complexion was rosy, his
lips clean-shaven; and, seen among ordinary people, it appeared to be an
interesting face. He came straight towards them, but his eyes were fixed
not upon the eavesdroppers but upon a spot where the curtain hung in
folds.

"Asleep?" he said.

Helen and Rachel started to think that some one had been sitting near
to them unobserved all the time. There were legs in the shadow. A
melancholy voice issued from above them.

"Two women," it said.

A scuffling was heard on the gravel. The women had fled. They did not
stop running until they felt certain that no eye could penetrate the
darkness and the hotel was only a square shadow in the distance, with
red holes regularly cut in it.


Chapter IX


An hour passed, and the downstairs rooms at the hotel grew dim and
were almost deserted, while the little box-like squares above them were
brilliantly irradiated. Some forty or fifty people were going to bed.
The thump of jugs set down on the floor above could be heard and the
clink of china, for there was not as thick a partition between the rooms
as one might wish, so Miss Allan, the elderly lady who had been playing
bridge, determined, giving the wall a smart rap with her knuckles. It
was only matchboard, she decided, run up to make many little rooms of
one large one. Her grey petticoats slipped to the ground, and, stooping,
she folded her clothes with neat, if not loving fingers, screwed her
hair into a plait, wound her father's great gold watch, and opened the
complete works of Wordsworth. She was reading the "Prelude," partly
because she always read the "Prelude" abroad, and partly because
she was engaged in writing a short _Primer_ _of_ _English_
_Literature_--_Beowulf_ _to_ _Swinburne_--which would have a paragraph
on Wordsworth. She was deep in the fifth book, stopping indeed to pencil
a note, when a pair of boots dropped, one after another, on the floor
above her. She looked up and speculated. Whose boots were they, she
wondered. She then became aware of a swishing sound next door--a woman,
clearly, putting away her dress. It was succeeded by a gentle tapping
sound, such as that which accompanies hair-dressing. It was very
difficult to keep her attention fixed upon the "Prelude." Was it Susan
Warrington tapping? She forced herself, however, to read to the end of
the book, when she placed a mark between the pages, sighed contentedly,
and then turned out the light.

Very different was the room through the wall, though as like in shape
as one egg-box is like another. As Miss Allan read her book, Susan
Warrington was brushing her hair. Ages have consecrated this hour,
and the most majestic of all domestic actions, to talk of love between
women; but Miss Warrington being alone could not talk; she could only
look with extreme solicitude at her own face in the glass. She turned
her head from side to side, tossing heavy locks now this way now that;
and then withdrew a pace or two, and considered herself seriously.

"I'm nice-looking," she determined. "Not pretty--possibly," she drew
herself up a little. "Yes--most people would say I was handsome."

She was really wondering what Arthur Venning would say she was. Her
feeling about him was decidedly queer. She would not admit to herself
that she was in love with him or that she wanted to marry him, yet she
spent every minute when she was alone in wondering what he thought of
her, and in comparing what they had done to-day with what they had done
the day before.

"He didn't ask me to play, but he certainly followed me into the hall,"
she meditated, summing up the evening. She was thirty years of age,
and owing to the number of her sisters and the seclusion of life in a
country parsonage had as yet had no proposal of marriage. The hour of
confidences was often a sad one, and she had been known to jump into
bed, treating her hair unkindly, feeling herself overlooked by life in
comparison with others. She was a big, well-made woman, the red lying
upon her cheeks in patches that were too well defined, but her serious
anxiety gave her a kind of beauty.

She was just about to pull back the bed-clothes when she exclaimed, "Oh,
but I'm forgetting," and went to her writing-table. A brown volume lay
there stamped with the figure of the year. She proceeded to write in the
square ugly hand of a mature child, as she wrote daily year after year,
keeping the diaries, though she seldom looked at them.

"A.M.--Talked to Mrs. H. Elliot about country neighbours. She knows the
Manns; also the Selby-Carroways. How small the world is! Like her. Read
a chapter of _Miss_ _Appleby's_ _Adventure_ to Aunt E. P.M.--Played
lawn-tennis with Mr. Perrott and Evelyn M. Don't _like_ Mr. P. Have a
feeling that he is not 'quite,' though clever certainly. Beat them. Day
splendid, view wonderful. One gets used to no trees, though much too
bare at first. Cards after dinner. Aunt E. cheerful, though twingy, she
says. Mem.: _ask_ _about_ _damp_ _sheets_."

She knelt in prayer, and then lay down in bed, tucking the blankets
comfortably about her, and in a few minutes her breathing showed that
she was asleep. With its profoundly peaceful sighs and hesitations it
resembled that of a cow standing up to its knees all night through in
the long grass.

A glance into the next room revealed little more than a nose, prominent
above the sheets. Growing accustomed to the darkness, for the windows
were open and showed grey squares with splinters of starlight, one could
distinguish a lean form, terribly like the body of a dead person, the
body indeed of William Pepper, asleep too. Thirty-six, thirty-seven,
thirty-eight--here were three Portuguese men of business, asleep
presumably, since a snore came with the regularity of a great ticking
clock. Thirty-nine was a corner room, at the end of the passage, but
late though it was--"One" struck gently downstairs--a line of light
under the door showed that some one was still awake.

"How late you are, Hugh!" a woman, lying in bed, said in a peevish
but solicitous voice. Her husband was brushing his teeth, and for some
moments did not answer.

"You should have gone to sleep," he replied. "I was talking to
Thornbury."

"But you know that I never can sleep when I'm waiting for you," she
said.

To that he made no answer, but only remarked, "Well then, we'll turn out
the light." They were silent.

The faint but penetrating pulse of an electric bell could now be heard
in the corridor. Old Mrs. Paley, having woken hungry but without her
spectacles, was summoning her maid to find the biscuit-box. The maid
having answered the bell, drearily respectful even at this hour though
muffled in a mackintosh, the passage was left in silence. Downstairs all
was empty and dark; but on the upper floor a light still burnt in the
room where the boots had dropped so heavily above Miss Allan's head.
Here was the gentleman who, a few hours previously, in the shade of the
curtain, had seemed to consist entirely of legs. Deep in an arm-chair he
was reading the third volume of Gibbon's _History_ _of_ _the_ _Decline_
_and_ _Fall_ _of_ _Rome_ by candle-light. As he read he knocked the ash
automatically, now and again, from his cigarette and turned the page,
while a whole procession of splendid sentences entered his capacious
brow and went marching through his brain in order. It seemed likely
that this process might continue for an hour or more, until the entire
regiment had shifted its quarters, had not the door opened, and the
young man, who was inclined to be stout, come in with large naked feet.

"Oh, Hirst, what I forgot to say was--"

"Two minutes," said Hirst, raising his finger.

He safely stowed away the last words of the paragraph.

"What was it you forgot to say?" he asked.

"D'you think you _do_ make enough allowance for feelings?" asked Mr.
Hewet. He had again forgotten what he had meant to say.

After intense contemplation of the immaculate Gibbon Mr. Hirst smiled at
the question of his friend. He laid aside his book and considered.

"I should call yours a singularly untidy mind," he observed. "Feelings?
Aren't they just what we do allow for? We put love up there, and all the
rest somewhere down below." With his left hand he indicated the top of a
pyramid, and with his right the base.

"But you didn't get out of bed to tell me that," he added severely.

"I got out of bed," said Hewet vaguely, "merely to talk I suppose."

"Meanwhile I shall undress," said Hirst. When naked of all but his
shirt, and bent over the basin, Mr. Hirst no longer impressed one with
the majesty of his intellect, but with the pathos of his young yet ugly
body, for he stooped, and he was so thin that there were dark lines
between the different bones of his neck and shoulders.

"Women interest me," said Hewet, who, sitting on the bed with his chin
resting on his knees, paid no attention to the undressing of Mr. Hirst.

"They're so stupid," said Hirst. "You're sitting on my pyjamas."

"I suppose they _are_ stupid?" Hewet wondered.

"There can't be two opinions about that, I imagine," said Hirst,
hopping briskly across the room, "unless you're in love--that fat woman
Warrington?" he enquired.

"Not one fat woman--all fat women," Hewet sighed.

"The women I saw to-night were not fat," said Hirst, who was taking
advantage of Hewet's company to cut his toe-nails.

"Describe them," said Hewet.

"You know I can't describe things!" said Hirst. "They were much like
other women, I should think. They always are."

"No; that's where we differ," said Hewet. "I say everything's different.
No two people are in the least the same. Take you and me now."

"So I used to think once," said Hirst. "But now they're all types. Don't
take us,--take this hotel. You could draw circles round the whole lot of
them, and they'd never stray outside."

("You can kill a hen by doing that"), Hewet murmured.

"Mr. Hughling Elliot, Mrs. Hughling Elliot, Miss Allan, Mr. and Mrs.
Thornbury--one circle," Hirst continued. "Miss Warrington, Mr. Arthur
Venning, Mr. Perrott, Evelyn M. another circle; then there are a whole
lot of natives; finally ourselves."

"Are we all alone in our circle?" asked Hewet.

"Quite alone," said Hirst. "You try to get out, but you can't. You only
make a mess of things by trying."

"I'm not a hen in a circle," said Hewet. "I'm a dove on a tree-top."

"I wonder if this is what they call an ingrowing toe-nail?" said Hirst,
examining the big toe on his left foot.

"I flit from branch to branch," continued Hewet. "The world is
profoundly pleasant." He lay back on the bed, upon his arms.

"I wonder if it's really nice to be as vague as you are?" asked Hirst,
looking at him. "It's the lack of continuity--that's what's so odd bout
you," he went on. "At the age of twenty-seven, which is nearly thirty,
you seem to have drawn no conclusions. A party of old women excites you
still as though you were three."

Hewet contemplated the angular young man who was neatly brushing the
rims of his toe-nails into the fire-place in silence for a moment.

"I respect you, Hirst," he remarked.

"I envy you--some things," said Hirst. "One: your capacity for not
thinking; two: people like you better than they like me. Women like you,
I suppose."

"I wonder whether that isn't really what matters most?" said Hewet.
Lying now flat on the bed he waved his hand in vague circles above him.

"Of course it is," said Hirst. "But that's not the difficulty. The
difficulty is, isn't it, to find an appropriate object?"

"There are no female hens in your circle?" asked Hewet.

"Not the ghost of one," said Hirst.

Although they had known each other for three years Hirst had never yet
heard the true story of Hewet's loves. In general conversation it was
taken for granted that they were many, but in private the subject was
allowed to lapse. The fact that he had money enough to do no work, and
that he had left Cambridge after two terms owing to a difference with
the authorities, and had then travelled and drifted, made his life
strange at many points where his friends' lives were much of a piece.

"I don't see your circles--I don't see them," Hewet continued. "I see a
thing like a teetotum spinning in and out--knocking into things--dashing
from side to side--collecting numbers--more and more and more, till the
whole place is thick with them. Round and round they go--out there, over
the rim--out of sight."

His fingers showed that the waltzing teetotums had spun over the edge of
the counterpane and fallen off the bed into infinity.

"Could you contemplate three weeks alone in this hotel?" asked Hirst,
after a moment's pause.

Hewet proceeded to think.

"The truth of it is that one never is alone, and one never is in
company," he concluded.

"Meaning?" said Hirst.

"Meaning? Oh, something about bubbles--auras--what d'you call 'em? You
can't see my bubble; I can't see yours; all we see of each other is a
speck, like the wick in the middle of that flame. The flame goes about
with us everywhere; it's not ourselves exactly, but what we feel; the
world is short, or people mainly; all kinds of people."

"A nice streaky bubble yours must be!" said Hirst.

"And supposing my bubble could run into some one else's bubble--"

"And they both burst?" put in Hirst.

"Then--then--then--" pondered Hewet, as if to himself, "it would be an
e-nor-mous world," he said, stretching his arms to their full width, as
though even so they could hardly clasp the billowy universe, for when he
was with Hirst he always felt unusually sanguine and vague.

"I don't think you altogether as foolish as I used to, Hewet," said
Hirst. "You don't know what you mean but you try to say it."

"But aren't you enjoying yourself here?" asked Hewet.

"On the whole--yes," said Hirst. "I like observing people. I like
looking at things. This country is amazingly beautiful. Did you notice
how the top of the mountain turned yellow to-night? Really we must take
our lunch and spend the day out. You're getting disgustingly fat." He
pointed at the calf of Hewet's bare leg.

"We'll get up an expedition," said Hewet energetically. "We'll ask the
entire hotel. We'll hire donkeys and--"

"Oh, Lord!" said Hirst, "do shut it! I can see Miss Warrington and Miss
Allan and Mrs. Elliot and the rest squatting on the stones and quacking,
'How jolly!'"

"We'll ask Venning and Perrott and Miss Murgatroyd--every one we can lay
hands on," went on Hewet. "What's the name of the little old grasshopper
with the eyeglasses? Pepper?--Pepper shall lead us."

"Thank God, you'll never get the donkeys," said Hirst.

"I must make a note of that," said Hewet, slowly dropping his feet to
the floor. "Hirst escorts Miss Warrington; Pepper advances alone on a
white ass; provisions equally distributed--or shall we hire a mule? The
matrons--there's Mrs. Paley, by Jove!--share a carriage."

"That's where you'll go wrong," said Hirst. "Putting virgins among
matrons."

"How long should you think that an expedition like that would take,
Hirst?" asked Hewet.

"From twelve to sixteen hours I would say," said Hirst. "The time
usually occupied by a first confinement."

"It will need considerable organisation," said Hewet. He was now padding
softly round the room, and stopped to stir the books on the table. They
lay heaped one upon another.

"We shall want some poets too," he remarked. "Not Gibbon; no; d'you
happen to have _Modern_ _Love_ or _John_ _Donne_? You see, I contemplate
pauses when people get tired of looking at the view, and then it would
be nice to read something rather difficult aloud."

"Mrs. Paley _will_ enjoy herself," said Hirst.

"Mrs. Paley will enjoy it certainly," said Hewet. "It's one of the
saddest things I know--the way elderly ladies cease to read poetry. And
yet how appropriate this is:

     I speak as one who plumbs
       Life's dim profound,
     One who at length can sound
       Clear views and certain.

     But--after love what comes?
     A scene that lours,
       A few sad vacant hours,
       And then, the Curtain.

I daresay Mrs. Paley is the only one of us who can really understand
that."

"We'll ask her," said Hirst. "Please, Hewet, if you must go to bed, draw
my curtain. Few things distress me more than the moonlight."

Hewet retreated, pressing the poems of Thomas Hardy beneath his arm,
and in their beds next door to each other both the young men were soon
asleep.

Between the extinction of Hewet's candle and the rising of a dusky
Spanish boy who was the first to survey the desolation of the hotel in
the early morning, a few hours of silence intervened. One could almost
hear a hundred people breathing deeply, and however wakeful and restless
it would have been hard to escape sleep in the middle of so much sleep.
Looking out of the windows, there was only darkness to be seen. All over
the shadowed half of the world people lay prone, and a few flickering
lights in empty streets marked the places where their cities were
built. Red and yellow omnibuses were crowding each other in Piccadilly;
sumptuous women were rocking at a standstill; but here in the darkness
an owl flitted from tree to tree, and when the breeze lifted the
branches the moon flashed as if it were a torch. Until all people should
awake again the houseless animals were abroad, the tigers and the stags,
and the elephants coming down in the darkness to drink at pools. The
wind at night blowing over the hills and woods was purer and fresher
than the wind by day, and the earth, robbed of detail, more mysterious
than the earth coloured and divided by roads and fields. For six hours
this profound beauty existed, and then as the east grew whiter and
whiter the ground swam to the surface, the roads were revealed, the
smoke rose and the people stirred, and the sun shone upon the windows
of the hotel at Santa Marina until they were uncurtained, and the gong
blaring all through the house gave notice of breakfast.

Directly breakfast was over, the ladies as usual circled vaguely,
picking up papers and putting them down again, about the hall.

"And what are you going to do to-day?" asked Mrs. Elliot drifting up
against Miss Warrington.

Mrs. Elliot, the wife of Hughling the Oxford Don, was a short woman,
whose expression was habitually plaintive. Her eyes moved from thing to
thing as though they never found anything sufficiently pleasant to rest
upon for any length of time.

"I'm going to try to get Aunt Emma out into the town," said Susan.
"She's not seen a thing yet."

"I call it so spirited of her at her age," said Mrs. Elliot, "coming all
this way from her own fireside."

"Yes, we always tell her she'll die on board ship," Susan replied. "She
was born on one," she added.

"In the old days," said Mrs. Elliot, "a great many people were. I always
pity the poor women so! We've got a lot to complain of!" She shook her
head. Her eyes wandered about the table, and she remarked irrelevantly,
"The poor little Queen of Holland! Newspaper reporters practically, one
may say, at her bedroom door!"

"Were you talking of the Queen of Holland?" said the pleasant voice of
Miss Allan, who was searching for the thick pages of _The_ _Times_ among
a litter of thin foreign sheets.

"I always envy any one who lives in such an excessively flat country,"
she remarked.

"How very strange!" said Mrs. Elliot. "I find a flat country so
depressing."

"I'm afraid you can't be very happy here then, Miss Allan," said Susan.

"On the contrary," said Miss Allan, "I am exceedingly fond of
mountains." Perceiving _The_ _Times_ at some distance, she moved off to
secure it.

"Well, I must find my husband," said Mrs. Elliot, fidgeting away.

"And I must go to my aunt," said Miss Warrington, and taking up the
duties of the day they moved away.

Whether the flimsiness of foreign sheets and the coarseness of their
type is any proof of frivolity and ignorance, there is no doubt that
English people scarce consider news read there as news, any more than a
programme bought from a man in the street inspires confidence in what it
says. A very respectable elderly pair, having inspected the long tables
of newspapers, did not think it worth their while to read more than the
headlines.

"The debate on the fifteenth should have reached us by now," Mrs.
Thornbury murmured. Mr. Thornbury, who was beautifully clean and had
red rubbed into his handsome worn face like traces of paint on a
weather-beaten wooden figure, looked over his glasses and saw that Miss
Allan had _The_ _Times_.

The couple therefore sat themselves down in arm-chairs and waited.

"Ah, there's Mr. Hewet," said Mrs. Thornbury. "Mr. Hewet," she
continued, "do come and sit by us. I was telling my husband how much you
reminded me of a dear old friend of mine--Mary Umpleby. She was a most
delightful woman, I assure you. She grew roses. We used to stay with her
in the old days."

"No young man likes to have it said that he resembles an elderly
spinster," said Mr. Thornbury.

"On the contrary," said Mr. Hewet, "I always think it a compliment
to remind people of some one else. But Miss Umpleby--why did she grow
roses?"

"Ah, poor thing," said Mrs. Thornbury, "that's a long story. She had
gone through dreadful sorrows. At one time I think she would have lost
her senses if it hadn't been for her garden. The soil was very much
against her--a blessing in disguise; she had to be up at dawn--out
in all weathers. And then there are creatures that eat roses. But she
triumphed. She always did. She was a brave soul." She sighed deeply but
at the same time with resignation.

"I did not realise that I was monopolising the paper," said Miss Allan,
coming up to them.

"We were so anxious to read about the debate," said Mrs. Thornbury,
accepting it on behalf of her husband.

"One doesn't realise how interesting a debate can be until one has sons
in the navy. My interests are equally balanced, though; I have sons in
the army too; and one son who makes speeches at the Union--my baby!"

"Hirst would know him, I expect," said Hewet.

"Mr. Hirst has such an interesting face," said Mrs. Thornbury. "But I
feel one ought to be very clever to talk to him. Well, William?" she
enquired, for Mr. Thornbury grunted.

"They're making a mess of it," said Mr. Thornbury. He had reached the
second column of the report, a spasmodic column, for the Irish members
had been brawling three weeks ago at Westminster over a question of
naval efficiency. After a disturbed paragraph or two, the column of
print once more ran smoothly.

"You have read it?" Mrs. Thornbury asked Miss Allan.

"No, I am ashamed to say I have only read about the discoveries in
Crete," said Miss Allan.

"Oh, but I would give so much to realise the ancient world!" cried
Mrs. Thornbury. "Now that we old people are alone,--we're on our second
honeymoon,--I am really going to put myself to school again. After all
we are _founded_ on the past, aren't we, Mr. Hewet? My soldier son says
that there is still a great deal to be learnt from Hannibal. One ought
to know so much more than one does. Somehow when I read the paper, I
begin with the debates first, and, before I've done, the door always
opens--we're a very large party at home--and so one never does think
enough about the ancients and all they've done for us. But _you_ begin
at the beginning, Miss Allan."

"When I think of the Greeks I think of them as naked black men," said
Miss Allan, "which is quite incorrect, I'm sure."

"And you, Mr. Hirst?" said Mrs. Thornbury, perceiving that the gaunt
young man was near. "I'm sure you read everything."

"I confine myself to cricket and crime," said Hirst. "The worst of
coming from the upper classes," he continued, "is that one's friends are
never killed in railway accidents."

Mr. Thornbury threw down the paper, and emphatically dropped his
eyeglasses. The sheets fell in the middle of the group, and were eyed by
them all.

"It's not gone well?" asked his wife solicitously.

Hewet picked up one sheet and read, "A lady was walking yesterday in
the streets of Westminster when she perceived a cat in the window of a
deserted house. The famished animal--"

"I shall be out of it anyway," Mr. Thornbury interrupted peevishly.

"Cats are often forgotten," Miss Allan remarked.

"Remember, William, the Prime Minister has reserved his answer," said
Mrs. Thornbury.

"At the age of eighty, Mr. Joshua Harris of Eeles Park, Brondesbury, has
had a son," said Hirst.

". . . The famished animal, which had been noticed by workmen for some
days, was rescued, but--by Jove! it bit the man's hand to pieces!"

"Wild with hunger, I suppose," commented Miss Allan.

"You're all neglecting the chief advantage of being abroad," said Mr.
Hughling Elliot, who had joined the group. "You might read your news in
French, which is equivalent to reading no news at all."

Mr. Elliot had a profound knowledge of Coptic, which he concealed as far
as possible, and quoted French phrases so exquisitely that it was hard
to believe that he could also speak the ordinary tongue. He had an
immense respect for the French.

"Coming?" he asked the two young men. "We ought to start before it's
really hot."

"I beg of you not to walk in the heat, Hugh," his wife pleaded, giving
him an angular parcel enclosing half a chicken and some raisins.

"Hewet will be our barometer," said Mr. Elliot. "He will melt before I
shall." Indeed, if so much as a drop had melted off his spare ribs, the
bones would have lain bare. The ladies were left alone now, surrounding
_The_ _Times_ which lay upon the floor. Miss Allan looked at her
father's watch.

"Ten minutes to eleven," she observed.

"Work?" asked Mrs. Thornbury.

"Work," replied Miss Allan.

"What a fine creature she is!" murmured Mrs. Thornbury, as the square
figure in its manly coat withdrew.

"And I'm sure she has a hard life," sighed Mrs. Elliot.

"Oh, it _is_ a hard life," said Mrs. Thornbury. "Unmarried
women--earning their livings--it's the hardest life of all."

"Yet she seems pretty cheerful," said Mrs. Elliot.

"It must be very interesting," said Mrs. Thornbury. "I envy her her
knowledge."

"But that isn't what women want," said Mrs. Elliot.

"I'm afraid it's all a great many can hope to have," sighed Mrs.
Thornbury. "I believe that there are more of us than ever now. Sir
Harley Lethbridge was telling me only the other day how difficult it is
to find boys for the navy--partly because of their teeth, it is true.
And I have heard young women talk quite openly of--"

"Dreadful, dreadful!" exclaimed Mrs. Elliot. "The crown, as one may call
it, of a woman's life. I, who know what it is to be childless--" she
sighed and ceased.

"But we must not be hard," said Mrs. Thornbury. "The conditions are so
much changed since I was a young woman."

"Surely _maternity_ does not change," said Mrs. Elliot.

"In some ways we can learn a great deal from the young," said Mrs.
Thornbury. "I learn so much from my own daughters."

"I believe that Hughling really doesn't mind," said Mrs. Elliot. "But
then he has his work."

"Women without children can do so much for the children of others,"
observed Mrs. Thornbury gently.

"I sketch a great deal," said Mrs. Elliot, "but that isn't really an
occupation. It's so disconcerting to find girls just beginning doing
better than one does oneself! And nature's difficult--very difficult!"

"Are there not institutions--clubs--that you could help?" asked Mrs.
Thornbury.

"They are so exhausting," said Mrs. Elliot. "I look strong, because of
my colour; but I'm not; the youngest of eleven never is."

"If the mother is careful before," said Mrs. Thornbury judicially,
"there is no reason why the size of the family should make any
difference. And there is no training like the training that brothers and
sisters give each other. I am sure of that. I have seen it with my own
children. My eldest boy Ralph, for instance--"

But Mrs. Elliot was inattentive to the elder lady's experience, and her
eyes wandered about the hall.

"My mother had two miscarriages, I know," she said suddenly. "The first
because she met one of those great dancing bears--they shouldn't be
allowed; the other--it was a horrid story--our cook had a child and
there was a dinner party. So I put my dyspepsia down to that."

"And a miscarriage is so much worse than a confinement," Mrs. Thornbury
murmured absentmindedly, adjusting her spectacles and picking up _The_
_Times_. Mrs. Elliot rose and fluttered away.

When she had heard what one of the million voices speaking in the paper
had to say, and noticed that a cousin of hers had married a clergyman at
Minehead--ignoring the drunken women, the golden animals of Crete,
the movements of battalions, the dinners, the reforms, the fires, the
indignant, the learned and benevolent, Mrs. Thornbury went upstairs to
write a letter for the mail.

The paper lay directly beneath the clock, the two together seeming to
represent stability in a changing world. Mr. Perrott passed through;
Mr. Venning poised for a second on the edge of a table. Mrs. Paley was
wheeled past. Susan followed. Mr. Venning strolled after her. Portuguese
military families, their clothes suggesting late rising in untidy
bedrooms, trailed across, attended by confidential nurses carrying noisy
children. As midday drew on, and the sun beat straight upon the roof,
an eddy of great flies droned in a circle; iced drinks were served under
the palms; the long blinds were pulled down with a shriek, turning all
the light yellow. The clock now had a silent hall to tick in, and an
audience of four or five somnolent merchants. By degrees white figures
with shady hats came in at the door, admitting a wedge of the hot summer
day, and shutting it out again. After resting in the dimness for a
minute, they went upstairs. Simultaneously, the clock wheezed one, and
the gong sounded, beginning softly, working itself into a frenzy, and
ceasing. There was a pause. Then all those who had gone upstairs came
down; cripples came, planting both feet on the same step lest they
should slip; prim little girls came, holding the nurse's finger; fat old
men came still buttoning waistcoats. The gong had been sounded in the
garden, and by degrees recumbent figures rose and strolled in to eat,
since the time had come for them to feed again. There were pools and
bars of shade in the garden even at midday, where two or three visitors
could lie working or talking at their ease.

Owing to the heat of the day, luncheon was generally a silent meal, when
people observed their neighbors and took stock of any new faces there
might be, hazarding guesses as to who they were and what they did. Mrs.
Paley, although well over seventy and crippled in the legs, enjoyed her
food and the peculiarities of her fellow-beings. She was seated at a
small table with Susan.

"I shouldn't like to say what _she_ is!" she chuckled, surveying a tall
woman dressed conspicuously in white, with paint in the hollows of her
cheeks, who was always late, and always attended by a shabby female
follower, at which remark Susan blushed, and wondered why her aunt said
such things.

Lunch went on methodically, until each of the seven courses was left in
fragments and the fruit was merely a toy, to be peeled and sliced as
a child destroys a daisy, petal by petal. The food served as an
extinguisher upon any faint flame of the human spirit that might survive
the midday heat, but Susan sat in her room afterwards, turning over and
over the delightful fact that Mr. Venning had come to her in the garden,
and had sat there quite half an hour while she read aloud to her aunt.
Men and women sought different corners where they could lie unobserved,
and from two to four it might be said without exaggeration that the
hotel was inhabited by bodies without souls. Disastrous would have been
the result if a fire or a death had suddenly demanded something heroic
of human nature, but tragedies come in the hungry hours. Towards four
o'clock the human spirit again began to lick the body, as a flame licks
a black promontory of coal. Mrs. Paley felt it unseemly to open her
toothless jaw so widely, though there was no one near, and Mrs. Elliot
surveyed her found flushed face anxiously in the looking-glass.

Half an hour later, having removed the traces of sleep, they met each
other in the hall, and Mrs. Paley observed that she was going to have
her tea.

"You like your tea too, don't you?" she said, and invited Mrs. Elliot,
whose husband was still out, to join her at a special table which she
had placed for her under a tree.

"A little silver goes a long way in this country," she chuckled.

She sent Susan back to fetch another cup.

"They have such excellent biscuits here," she said, contemplating a
plateful. "Not sweet biscuits, which I don't like--dry biscuits . . .
Have you been sketching?"

"Oh, I've done two or three little daubs," said Mrs. Elliot, speaking
rather louder than usual. "But it's so difficult after Oxfordshire,
where there are so many trees. The light's so strong here. Some people
admire it, I know, but I find it very fatiguing."

"I really don't need cooking, Susan," said Mrs. Paley, when her niece
returned. "I must trouble you to move me." Everything had to be moved.
Finally the old lady was placed so that the light wavered over her,
as though she were a fish in a net. Susan poured out tea, and was just
remarking that they were having hot weather in Wiltshire too, when Mr.
Venning asked whether he might join them.

"It's so nice to find a young man who doesn't despise tea," said Mrs.
Paley, regaining her good humour. "One of my nephews the other day asked
for a glass of sherry--at five o'clock! I told him he could get it at
the public house round the corner, but not in my drawing room."

"I'd rather go without lunch than tea," said Mr. Venning. "That's not
strictly true. I want both."

Mr. Venning was a dark young man, about thirty-two years of age, very
slapdash and confident in his manner, although at this moment obviously
a little excited. His friend Mr. Perrott was a barrister, and as Mr.
Perrott refused to go anywhere without Mr. Venning it was necessary,
when Mr. Perrott came to Santa Marina about a Company, for Mr. Venning
to come too. He was a barrister also, but he loathed a profession which
kept him indoors over books, and directly his widowed mother died he was
going, so he confided to Susan, to take up flying seriously, and become
partner in a large business for making aeroplanes. The talk rambled on.
It dealt, of course, with the beauties and singularities of the place,
the streets, the people, and the quantities of unowned yellow dogs.

"Don't you think it dreadfully cruel the way they treat dogs in this
country?" asked Mrs. Paley.

"I'd have 'em all shot," said Mr. Venning.

"Oh, but the darling puppies," said Susan.

"Jolly little chaps," said Mr. Venning. "Look here, you've got nothing
to eat." A great wedge of cake was handed Susan on the point of a
trembling knife. Her hand trembled too as she took it.

"I have such a dear dog at home," said Mrs. Elliot.

"My parrot can't stand dogs," said Mrs. Paley, with the air of one
making a confidence. "I always suspect that he (or she) was teased by a
dog when I was abroad."

"You didn't get far this morning, Miss Warrington," said Mr. Venning.

"It was hot," she answered. Their conversation became private, owing
to Mrs. Paley's deafness and the long sad history which Mrs. Elliot had
embarked upon of a wire-haired terrier, white with just one black spot,
belonging to an uncle of hers, which had committed suicide. "Animals do
commit suicide," she sighed, as if she asserted a painful fact.

"Couldn't we explore the town this evening?" Mr. Venning suggested.

"My aunt--" Susan began.

"You deserve a holiday," he said. "You're always doing things for other
people."

"But that's my life," she said, under cover of refilling the teapot.

"That's no one's life," he returned, "no young person's. You'll come?"

"I should like to come," she murmured.

At this moment Mrs. Elliot looked up and exclaimed, "Oh, Hugh! He's
bringing some one," she added.

"He would like some tea," said Mrs. Paley. "Susan, run and get some
cups--there are the two young men."

"We're thirsting for tea," said Mr. Elliot. "You know Mr. Ambrose,
Hilda? We met on the hill."

"He dragged me in," said Ridley, "or I should have been ashamed. I'm
dusty and dirty and disagreeable." He pointed to his boots which were
white with dust, while a dejected flower drooping in his buttonhole,
like an exhausted animal over a gate, added to the effect of length and
untidiness. He was introduced to the others. Mr. Hewet and Mr. Hirst
brought chairs, and tea began again, Susan pouring cascades of water
from pot to pot, always cheerfully, and with the competence of long use.

"My wife's brother," Ridley explained to Hilda, whom he failed to
remember, "has a house here, which he has lent us. I was sitting on a
rock thinking of nothing at all when Elliot started up like a fairy in a
pantomime."

"Our chicken got into the salt," Hewet said dolefully to Susan. "Nor is
it true that bananas include moisture as well as sustenance."

Hirst was already drinking.

"We've been cursing you," said Ridley in answer to Mrs. Elliot's kind
enquiries about his wife. "You tourists eat up all the eggs, Helen
tells me. That's an eye-sore too"--he nodded his head at the hotel.
"Disgusting luxury, I call it. We live with pigs in the drawing-room."

"The food is not at all what it ought to be, considering the price,"
said Mrs. Paley seriously. "But unless one goes to a hotel where is one
to go to?"

"Stay at home," said Ridley. "I often wish I had! Everyone ought to stay
at home. But, of course, they won't."

Mrs. Paley conceived a certain grudge against Ridley, who seemed to be
criticising her habits after an acquaintance of five minutes.

"I believe in foreign travel myself," she stated, "if one knows one's
native land, which I think I can honestly say I do. I should not allow
any one to travel until they had visited Kent and Dorsetshire--Kent for
the hops, and Dorsetshire for its old stone cottages. There is nothing
to compare with them here."

"Yes--I always think that some people like the flat and other people
like the downs," said Mrs. Elliot rather vaguely.

Hirst, who had been eating and drinking without interruption, now lit
a cigarette, and observed, "Oh, but we're all agreed by this time that
nature's a mistake. She's either very ugly, appallingly uncomfortable,
or absolutely terrifying. I don't know which alarms me most--a cow or a
tree. I once met a cow in a field by night. The creature looked at me.
I assure you it turned my hair grey. It's a disgrace that the animals
should be allowed to go at large."

"And what did the cow think of _him_?" Venning mumbled to Susan, who
immediately decided in her own mind that Mr. Hirst was a dreadful young
man, and that although he had such an air of being clever he probably
wasn't as clever as Arthur, in the ways that really matter.

"Wasn't it Wilde who discovered the fact that nature makes no allowance
for hip-bones?" enquired Hughling Elliot. He knew by this time exactly
what scholarships and distinction Hirst enjoyed, and had formed a very
high opinion of his capacities.

But Hirst merely drew his lips together very tightly and made no reply.

Ridley conjectured that it was now permissible for him to take his
leave. Politeness required him to thank Mrs. Elliot for his tea, and to
add, with a wave of his hand, "You must come up and see us."

The wave included both Hirst and Hewet, and Hewet answered, "I should
like it immensely."

The party broke up, and Susan, who had never felt so happy in her life,
was just about to start for her walk in the town with Arthur, when Mrs.
Paley beckoned her back. She could not understand from the book how
Double Demon patience is played; and suggested that if they sat down and
worked it out together it would fill up the time nicely before dinner.


Chapter X


Among the promises which Mrs. Ambrose had made her niece should she stay
was a room cut off from the rest of the house, large, private--a room in
which she could play, read, think, defy the world, a fortress as well as
a sanctuary. Rooms, she knew, became more like worlds than rooms at the
age of twenty-four. Her judgment was correct, and when she shut the door
Rachel entered an enchanted place, where the poets sang and things fell
into their right proportions. Some days after the vision of the hotel
by night she was sitting alone, sunk in an arm-chair, reading a
brightly-covered red volume lettered on the back _Works_ _of_ _Henrik_
_Ibsen_. Music was open on the piano, and books of music rose in two
jagged pillars on the floor; but for the moment music was deserted.

Far from looking bored or absent-minded, her eyes were concentrated
almost sternly upon the page, and from her breathing, which was slow but
repressed, it could be seen that her whole body was constrained by the
working of her mind. At last she shut the book sharply, lay back, and
drew a deep breath, expressive of the wonder which always marks the
transition from the imaginary world to the real world.

"What I want to know," she said aloud, "is this: What is the truth?
What's the truth of it all?" She was speaking partly as herself, and
partly as the heroine of the play she had just read. The landscape
outside, because she had seen nothing but print for the space of two
hours, now appeared amazingly solid and clear, but although there were
men on the hill washing the trunks of olive trees with a white liquid,
for the moment she herself was the most vivid thing in it--an heroic
statue in the middle of the foreground, dominating the view. Ibsen's
plays always left her in that condition. She acted them for days at a
time, greatly to Helen's amusement; and then it would be Meredith's turn
and she became Diana of the Crossways. But Helen was aware that it was
not all acting, and that some sort of change was taking place in the
human being. When Rachel became tired of the rigidity of her pose on the
back of the chair, she turned round, slid comfortably down into it, and
gazed out over the furniture through the window opposite which opened on
the garden. (Her mind wandered away from Nora, but she went on thinking
of things that the book suggested to her, of women and life.)

During the three months she had been here she had made up considerably,
as Helen meant she should, for time spent in interminable walks round
sheltered gardens, and the household gossip of her aunts. But Mrs.
Ambrose would have been the first to disclaim any influence, or indeed
any belief that to influence was within her power. She saw her less shy,
and less serious, which was all to the good, and the violent leaps and
the interminable mazes which had led to that result were usually not
even guessed at by her. Talk was the medicine she trusted to, talk about
everything, talk that was free, unguarded, and as candid as a habit of
talking with men made natural in her own case. Nor did she encourage
those habits of unselfishness and amiability founded upon insincerity
which are put at so high a value in mixed households of men and women.
She desired that Rachel should think, and for this reason offered books
and discouraged too entire a dependence upon Bach and Beethoven and
Wagner. But when Mrs. Ambrose would have suggested Defoe, Maupassant, or
some spacious chronicle of family life, Rachel chose modern books, books
in shiny yellow covers, books with a great deal of gilding on the back,
which were tokens in her aunt's eyes of harsh wrangling and disputes
about facts which had no such importance as the moderns claimed for
them. But she did not interfere. Rachel read what she chose, reading
with the curious literalness of one to whom written sentences are
unfamiliar, and handling words as though they were made of wood,
separately of great importance, and possessed of shapes like tables or
chairs. In this way she came to conclusions, which had to be remodelled
according to the adventures of the day, and were indeed recast as
liberally as any one could desire, leaving always a small grain of
belief behind them.

Ibsen was succeeded by a novel such as Mrs. Ambrose detested, whose
purpose was to distribute the guilt of a woman's downfall upon the right
shoulders; a purpose which was achieved, if the reader's discomfort
were any proof of it. She threw the book down, looked out of the window,
turned away from the window, and relapsed into an arm-chair.

The morning was hot, and the exercise of reading left her mind
contracting and expanding like the main-spring of a clock, and the
small noises of midday, which one can ascribe to no definite cause, in
a regular rhythm. It was all very real, very big, very impersonal, and
after a moment or two she began to raise her first finger and to let
it fall on the arm of her chair so as to bring back to herself some
consciousness of her own existence. She was next overcome by the
unspeakable queerness of the fact that she should be sitting in an
arm-chair, in the morning, in the middle of the world. Who were the
people moving in the house--moving things from one place to another? And
life, what was that? It was only a light passing over the surface and
vanishing, as in time she would vanish, though the furniture in the
room would remain. Her dissolution became so complete that she could
not raise her finger any more, and sat perfectly still, listening and
looking always at the same spot. It became stranger and stranger. She
was overcome with awe that things should exist at all. . . . She forgot
that she had any fingers to raise. . . . The things that existed were
so immense and so desolate. . . . She continued to be conscious of these
vast masses of substance for a long stretch of time, the clock still
ticking in the midst of the universal silence.

"Come in," she said mechanically, for a string in her brain seemed to
be pulled by a persistent knocking at the door. With great slowness the
door opened and a tall human being came towards her, holding out her arm
and saying:

"What am I to say to this?"

The utter absurdity of a woman coming into a room with a piece of paper
in her hand amazed Rachel.

"I don't know what to answer, or who Terence Hewet is," Helen continued,
in the toneless voice of a ghost. She put a paper before Rachel on which
were written the incredible words:


DEAR MRS. AMBROSE--I am getting up a picnic for next Friday, when we
propose to start at eleven-thirty if the weather is fine, and to make
the ascent of Monte Rosa. It will take some time, but the view should
be magnificent. It would give me great pleasure if you and Miss Vinrace
would consent to be of the party.--

Yours sincerely, TERENCE HEWET


Rachel read the words aloud to make herself believe in them. For the
same reason she put her hand on Helen's shoulder.

"Books--books--books," said Helen, in her absent-minded way. "More new
books--I wonder what you find in them. . . ."

For the second time Rachel read the letter, but to herself. This
time, instead of seeming vague as ghosts, each word was astonishingly
prominent; they came out as the tops of mountains come through a mist.
_Friday_--_eleven-thirty_--_Miss_ _Vinrace_. The blood began to run in
her veins; she felt her eyes brighten.

"We must go," she said, rather surprising Helen by her decision. "We
must certainly go"--such was the relief of finding that things still
happened, and indeed they appeared the brighter for the mist surrounding
them.

"Monte Rosa--that's the mountain over there, isn't it?" said Helen; "but
Hewet--who's he? One of the young men Ridley met, I suppose. Shall I say
yes, then? It may be dreadfully dull."

She took the letter back and went, for the messenger was waiting for her
answer.

The party which had been suggested a few nights ago in Mr. Hirst's
bedroom had taken shape and was the source of great satisfaction to Mr.
Hewet, who had seldom used his practical abilities, and was pleased
to find them equal to the strain. His invitations had been universally
accepted, which was the more encouraging as they had been issued against
Hirst's advice to people who were very dull, not at all suited to each
other, and sure not to come.

"Undoubtedly," he said, as he twirled and untwirled a note signed Helen
Ambrose, "the gifts needed to make a great commander have been absurdly
overrated. About half the intellectual effort which is needed to review
a book of modern poetry has enabled me to get together seven or eight
people, of opposite sexes, at the same spot at the same hour on the same
day. What else is generalship, Hirst? What more did Wellington do on the
field of Waterloo? It's like counting the number of pebbles of a path,
tedious but not difficult."

He was sitting in his bedroom, one leg over the arm of the chair, and
Hirst was writing a letter opposite. Hirst was quick to point out that
all the difficulties remained.

"For instance, here are two women you've never seen. Suppose one of them
suffers from mountain-sickness, as my sister does, and the other--"

"Oh, the women are for you," Hewet interrupted. "I asked them solely for
your benefit. What you want, Hirst, you know, is the society of young
women of your own age. You don't know how to get on with women, which is
a great defect, considering that half the world consists of women."

Hirst groaned that he was quite aware of that.

But Hewet's complacency was a little chilled as he walked with Hirst to
the place where a general meeting had been appointed. He wondered why
on earth he had asked these people, and what one really expected to get
from bunching human beings up together.

"Cows," he reflected, "draw together in a field; ships in a calm; and
we're just the same when we've nothing else to do. But why do we do
it?--is it to prevent ourselves from seeing to the bottom of things"
(he stopped by a stream and began stirring it with his walking-stick
and clouding the water with mud), "making cities and mountains and whole
universes out of nothing, or do we really love each other, or do we,
on the other hand, live in a state of perpetual uncertainty, knowing
nothing, leaping from moment to moment as from world to world?--which
is, on the whole, the view _I_ incline to."

He jumped over the stream; Hirst went round and joined him, remarking
that he had long ceased to look for the reason of any human action.

Half a mile further, they came to a group of plane trees and the
salmon-pink farmhouse standing by the stream which had been chosen as
meeting-place. It was a shady spot, lying conveniently just where the
hill sprung out from the flat. Between the thin stems of the plane trees
the young men could see little knots of donkeys pasturing, and a tall
woman rubbing the nose of one of them, while another woman was kneeling
by the stream lapping water out of her palms.

As they entered the shady place, Helen looked up and then held out her
hand.

"I must introduce myself," she said. "I am Mrs. Ambrose."

Having shaken hands, she said, "That's my niece."

Rachel approached awkwardly. She held out her hand, but withdrew it.
"It's all wet," she said.

Scarcely had they spoken, when the first carriage drew up.

The donkeys were quickly jerked into attention, and the second carriage
arrived. By degrees the grove filled with people--the Elliots, the
Thornburys, Mr. Venning and Susan, Miss Allan, Evelyn Murgatroyd, and
Mr. Perrott. Mr. Hirst acted the part of hoarse energetic sheep-dog. By
means of a few words of caustic Latin he had the animals marshalled, and
by inclining a sharp shoulder he lifted the ladies. "What Hewet fails to
understand," he remarked, "is that we must break the back of the
ascent before midday." He was assisting a young lady, by name Evelyn
Murgatroyd, as he spoke. She rose light as a bubble to her seat. With a
feather drooping from a broad-brimmed hat, in white from top to toe,
she looked like a gallant lady of the time of Charles the First leading
royalist troops into action.

"Ride with me," she commanded; and, as soon as Hirst had swung himself
across a mule, the two started, leading the cavalcade.

"You're not to call me Miss Murgatroyd. I hate it," she said. "My name's
Evelyn. What's yours?"

"St. John," he said.

"I like that," said Evelyn. "And what's your friend's name?"

"His initials being R. S. T., we call him Monk," said Hirst.

"Oh, you're all too clever," she said. "Which way? Pick me a branch.
Let's canter."

She gave her donkey a sharp cut with a switch and started forward. The
full and romantic career of Evelyn Murgatroyd is best hit off by her
own words, "Call me Evelyn and I'll call you St. John." She said that
on very slight provocation--her surname was enough--but although a great
many young men had answered her already with considerable spirit she
went on saying it and making choice of none. But her donkey stumbled to
a jog-trot, and she had to ride in advance alone, for the path when
it began to ascend one of the spines of the hill became narrow
and scattered with stones. The cavalcade wound on like a jointed
caterpillar, tufted with the white parasols of the ladies, and the
panama hats of the gentlemen. At one point where the ground rose
sharply, Evelyn M. jumped off, threw her reins to the native boy, and
adjured St. John Hirst to dismount too. Their example was followed by
those who felt the need of stretching.

"I don't see any need to get off," said Miss Allan to Mrs. Elliot just
behind her, "considering the difficulty I had getting on."

"These little donkeys stand anything, _n'est-ce_ _pas_?" Mrs. Elliot
addressed the guide, who obligingly bowed his head.

"Flowers," said Helen, stooping to pick the lovely little bright flowers
which grew separately here and there. "You pinch their leaves and then
they smell," she said, laying one on Miss Allan's knee.

"Haven't we met before?" asked Miss Allan, looking at her.

"I was taking it for granted," Helen laughed, for in the confusion of
meeting they had not been introduced.

"How sensible!" chirped Mrs. Elliot. "That's just what one would always
like--only unfortunately it's not possible." "Not possible?" said Helen.
"Everything's possible. Who knows what mayn't happen before night-fall?"
she continued, mocking the poor lady's timidity, who depended implicitly
upon one thing following another that the mere glimpse of a world
where dinner could be disregarded, or the table moved one inch from its
accustomed place, filled her with fears for her own stability.

Higher and higher they went, becoming separated from the world. The
world, when they turned to look back, flattened itself out, and was
marked with squares of thin green and grey.

"Towns are very small," Rachel remarked, obscuring the whole of Santa
Marina and its suburbs with one hand. The sea filled in all the angles
of the coast smoothly, breaking in a white frill, and here and there
ships were set firmly in the blue. The sea was stained with purple and
green blots, and there was a glittering line upon the rim where it met
the sky. The air was very clear and silent save for the sharp noise of
grasshoppers and the hum of bees, which sounded loud in the ear as they
shot past and vanished. The party halted and sat for a time in a quarry
on the hillside.

"Amazingly clear," exclaimed St. John, identifying one cleft in the land
after another.

Evelyn M. sat beside him, propping her chin on her hand. She surveyed
the view with a certain look of triumph.

"D'you think Garibaldi was ever up here?" she asked Mr. Hirst. Oh, if
she had been his bride! If, instead of a picnic party, this was a party
of patriots, and she, red-shirted like the rest, had lain among grim
men, flat on the turf, aiming her gun at the white turrets beneath them,
screening her eyes to pierce through the smoke! So thinking, her foot
stirred restlessly, and she exclaimed:

"I don't call this _life_, do you?"

"What do you call life?" said St. John.

"Fighting--revolution," she said, still gazing at the doomed city. "You
only care for books, I know."

"You're quite wrong," said St. John.

"Explain," she urged, for there were no guns to be aimed at bodies, and
she turned to another kind of warfare.

"What do I care for? People," he said.

"Well, I _am_ surprised!" she exclaimed. "You look so awfully serious.
Do let's be friends and tell each other what we're like. I hate being
cautious, don't you?"

But St. John was decidedly cautious, as she could see by the sudden
constriction of his lips, and had no intention of revealing his soul to
a young lady. "The ass is eating my hat," he remarked, and stretched out
for it instead of answering her. Evelyn blushed very slightly and then
turned with some impetuosity upon Mr. Perrott, and when they mounted
again it was Mr. Perrott who lifted her to her seat.

"When one has laid the eggs one eats the omelette," said Hughling
Elliot, exquisitely in French, a hint to the rest of them that it was
time to ride on again.

The midday sun which Hirst had foretold was beginning to beat down
hotly. The higher they got the more of the sky appeared, until the
mountain was only a small tent of earth against an enormous blue
background. The English fell silent; the natives who walked beside the
donkeys broke into queer wavering songs and tossed jokes from one to the
other. The way grew very steep, and each rider kept his eyes fixed on
the hobbling curved form of the rider and donkey directly in front of
him. Rather more strain was being put upon their bodies than is quite
legitimate in a party of pleasure, and Hewet overheard one or two
slightly grumbling remarks.

"Expeditions in such heat are perhaps a little unwise," Mrs. Elliot
murmured to Miss Allan.

But Miss Allan returned, "I always like to get to the top"; and it was
true, although she was a big woman, stiff in the joints, and unused to
donkey-riding, but as her holidays were few she made the most of them.

The vivacious white figure rode well in front; she had somehow possessed
herself of a leafy branch and wore it round her hat like a garland. They
went on for a few minutes in silence.

"The view will be wonderful," Hewet assured them, turning round in his
saddle and smiling encouragement. Rachel caught his eye and smiled too.
They struggled on for some time longer, nothing being heard but the
clatter of hooves striving on the loose stones. Then they saw that
Evelyn was off her ass, and that Mr. Perrott was standing in the
attitude of a statesman in Parliament Square, stretching an arm of stone
towards the view. A little to the left of them was a low ruined wall,
the stump of an Elizabethan watch-tower.

"I couldn't have stood it much longer," Mrs. Elliot confided to Mrs.
Thornbury, but the excitement of being at the top in another moment and
seeing the view prevented any one from answering her. One after another
they came out on the flat space at the top and stood overcome with
wonder. Before them they beheld an immense space--grey sands running
into forest, and forest merging in mountains, and mountains washed by
air, the infinite distances of South America. A river ran across the
plain, as flat as the land, and appearing quite as stationary. The
effect of so much space was at first rather chilling. They felt
themselves very small, and for some time no one said anything. Then
Evelyn exclaimed, "Splendid!" She took hold of the hand that was next
her; it chanced to be Miss Allan's hand.

"North--South--East--West," said Miss Allan, jerking her head slightly
towards the points of the compass.

Hewet, who had gone a little in front, looked up at his guests as if to
justify himself for having brought them. He observed how strangely the
people standing in a row with their figures bent slightly forward
and their clothes plastered by the wind to the shape of their bodies
resembled naked statues. On their pedestal of earth they looked
unfamiliar and noble, but in another moment they had broken their rank,
and he had to see to the laying out of food. Hirst came to his help, and
they handed packets of chicken and bread from one to another.

As St. John gave Helen her packet she looked him full in the face and
said:

"Do you remember--two women?"

He looked at her sharply.

"I do," he answered.

"So you're the two women!" Hewet exclaimed, looking from Helen to
Rachel.

"Your lights tempted us," said Helen. "We watched you playing cards, but
we never knew that we were being watched."

"It was like a thing in a play," Rachel added.

"And Hirst couldn't describe you," said Hewet.

It was certainly odd to have seen Helen and to find nothing to say about
her.

Hughling Elliot put up his eyeglass and grasped the situation.

"I don't know of anything more dreadful," he said, pulling at the joint
of a chicken's leg, "than being seen when one isn't conscious of it. One
feels sure one has been caught doing something ridiculous--looking at
one's tongue in a hansom, for instance."

Now the others ceased to look at the view, and drawing together sat down
in a circle round the baskets.

"And yet those little looking-glasses in hansoms have a fascination of
their own," said Mrs. Thornbury. "One's features look so different when
one can only see a bit of them."

"There will soon be very few hansom cabs left," said Mrs. Elliot. "And
four-wheeled cabs--I assure you even at Oxford it's almost impossible to
get a four-wheeled cab."

"I wonder what happens to the horses," said Susan.

"Veal pie," said Arthur.

"It's high time that horses should become extinct anyhow," said Hirst.
"They're distressingly ugly, besides being vicious."

But Susan, who had been brought up to understand that the horse is the
noblest of God's creatures, could not agree, and Venning thought Hirst
an unspeakable ass, but was too polite not to continue the conversation.

"When they see us falling out of aeroplanes they get some of their own
back, I expect," he remarked.

"You fly?" said old Mr. Thornbury, putting on his spectacles to look at
him.

"I hope to, some day," said Arthur.

Here flying was discussed at length, and Mrs. Thornbury delivered an
opinion which was almost a speech to the effect that it would be quite
necessary in time of war, and in England we were terribly behind-hand.
"If I were a young fellow," she concluded, "I should certainly qualify."
It was odd to look at the little elderly lady, in her grey coat and
skirt, with a sandwich in her hand, her eyes lighting up with zeal
as she imagined herself a young man in an aeroplane. For some reason,
however, the talk did not run easily after this, and all they said was
about drink and salt and the view. Suddenly Miss Allan, who was
seated with her back to the ruined wall, put down her sandwich,
picked something off her neck, and remarked, "I'm covered with little
creatures." It was true, and the discovery was very welcome. The ants
were pouring down a glacier of loose earth heaped between the stones of
the ruin--large brown ants with polished bodies. She held out one on the
back of her hand for Helen to look at.

"Suppose they sting?" said Helen.

"They will not sting, but they may infest the victuals," said Miss
Allan, and measures were taken at once to divert the ants from their
course. At Hewet's suggestion it was decided to adopt the methods of
modern warfare against an invading army. The table-cloth represented the
invaded country, and round it they built barricades of baskets, set
up the wine bottles in a rampart, made fortifications of bread and dug
fosses of salt. When an ant got through it was exposed to a fire of
bread-crumbs, until Susan pronounced that that was cruel, and rewarded
those brave spirits with spoil in the shape of tongue. Playing this game
they lost their stiffness, and even became unusually daring, for Mr.
Perrott, who was very shy, said, "Permit me," and removed an ant from
Evelyn's neck.

"It would be no laughing matter really," said Mrs. Elliot confidentially
to Mrs. Thornbury, "if an ant did get between the vest and the skin."

The noise grew suddenly more clamorous, for it was discovered that a
long line of ants had found their way on to the table-cloth by a back
entrance, and if success could be gauged by noise, Hewet had every
reason to think his party a success. Nevertheless he became, for no
reason at all, profoundly depressed.

"They are not satisfactory; they are ignoble," he thought, surveying
his guests from a little distance, where he was gathering together the
plates. He glanced at them all, stooping and swaying and gesticulating
round the table-cloth. Amiable and modest, respectable in many ways,
lovable even in their contentment and desire to be kind, how mediocre
they all were, and capable of what insipid cruelty to one another!
There was Mrs. Thornbury, sweet but trivial in her maternal egoism; Mrs.
Elliot, perpetually complaining of her lot; her husband a mere pea in
a pod; and Susan--she had no self, and counted neither one way nor the
other; Venning was as honest and as brutal as a schoolboy; poor old
Thornbury merely trod his round like a horse in a mill; and the less
one examined into Evelyn's character the better, he suspected. Yet these
were the people with money, and to them rather than to others was given
the management of the world. Put among them some one more vital, who
cared for life or for beauty, and what an agony, what a waste would they
inflict on him if he tried to share with them and not to scourge!

"There's Hirst," he concluded, coming to the figure of his friend; with
his usual little frown of concentration upon his forehead he was peeling
the skin off a banana. "And he's as ugly as sin." For the ugliness of
St. John Hirst, and the limitations that went with it, he made the rest
in some way responsible. It was their fault that he had to live alone.
Then he came to Helen, attracted to her by the sound of her laugh. She
was laughing at Miss Allan. "You wear combinations in this heat?" she
said in a voice which was meant to be private. He liked the look of her
immensely, not so much her beauty, but her largeness and simplicity,
which made her stand out from the rest like a great stone woman, and
he passed on in a gentler mood. His eye fell upon Rachel. She was lying
back rather behind the others resting on one elbow; she might have been
thinking precisely the same thoughts as Hewet himself. Her eyes were
fixed rather sadly but not intently upon the row of people opposite her.
Hewet crawled up to her on his knees, with a piece of bread in his hand.

"What are you looking at?" he asked.

She was a little startled, but answered directly, "Human beings."


Chapter XI


One after another they rose and stretched themselves, and in a few
minutes divided more or less into two separate parties. One of these
parties was dominated by Hughling Elliot and Mrs. Thornbury, who, having
both read the same books and considered the same questions, were now
anxious to name the places beneath them and to hang upon them stores
of information about navies and armies, political parties, natives and
mineral products--all of which combined, they said, to prove that South
America was the country of the future.

Evelyn M. listened with her bright blue eyes fixed upon the oracles.

"How it makes one long to be a man!" she exclaimed.

Mr. Perrott answered, surveying the plain, that a country with a future
was a very fine thing.

"If I were you," said Evelyn, turning to him and drawing her glove
vehemently through her fingers, "I'd raise a troop and conquer some
great territory and make it splendid. You'd want women for that. I'd
love to start life from the very beginning as it ought to be--nothing
squalid--but great halls and gardens and splendid men and women. But
you--you only like Law Courts!"

"And would you really be content without pretty frocks and sweets and
all the things young ladies like?" asked Mr. Perrott, concealing a
certain amount of pain beneath his ironical manner.

"I'm not a young lady," Evelyn flashed; she bit her underlip. "Just
because I like splendid things you laugh at me. Why are there no men
like Garibaldi now?" she demanded.

"Look here," said Mr. Perrott, "you don't give me a chance. You think we
ought to begin things fresh. Good. But I don't see precisely--conquer a
territory? They're all conquered already, aren't they?"

"It's not any territory in particular," Evelyn explained. "It's the
idea, don't you see? We lead such tame lives. And I feel sure you've got
splendid things in you."

Hewet saw the scars and hollows in Mr. Perrott's sagacious face relax
pathetically. He could imagine the calculations which even then went on
within his mind, as to whether he would be justified in asking a woman
to marry him, considering that he made no more than five hundred a
year at the Bar, owned no private means, and had an invalid sister to
support. Mr. Perrott again knew that he was not "quite," as Susan stated
in her diary; not quite a gentleman she meant, for he was the son of a
grocer in Leeds, had started life with a basket on his back, and now,
though practically indistinguishable from a born gentleman, showed his
origin to keen eyes in an impeccable neatness of dress, lack of freedom
in manner, extreme cleanliness of person, and a certain indescribable
timidity and precision with his knife and fork which might be the relic
of days when meat was rare, and the way of handling it by no means
gingerly.

The two parties who were strolling about and losing their unity now
came together, and joined each other in a long stare over the yellow and
green patches of the heated landscape below. The hot air danced across
it, making it impossible to see the roofs of a village on the plain
distinctly. Even on the top of the mountain where a breeze played
lightly, it was very hot, and the heat, the food, the immense space, and
perhaps some less well-defined cause produced a comfortable drowsiness
and a sense of happy relaxation in them. They did not say much, but felt
no constraint in being silent.

"Suppose we go and see what's to be seen over there?" said Arthur to
Susan, and the pair walked off together, their departure certainly
sending some thrill of emotion through the rest.

"An odd lot, aren't they?" said Arthur. "I thought we should never
get 'em all to the top. But I'm glad we came, by Jove! I wouldn't have
missed this for something."

"I don't _like_ Mr. Hirst," said Susan inconsequently. "I suppose he's
very clever, but why should clever people be so--I expect he's awfully
nice, really," she added, instinctively qualifying what might have
seemed an unkind remark.

"Hirst? Oh, he's one of these learned chaps," said Arthur indifferently.
"He don't look as if he enjoyed it. You should hear him talking to
Elliot. It's as much as I can do to follow 'em at all. . . . I was never
good at my books."

With these sentences and the pauses that came between them they reached
a little hillock, on the top of which grew several slim trees.

"D'you mind if we sit down here?" said Arthur, looking about him. "It's
jolly in the shade--and the view--" They sat down, and looked straight
ahead of them in silence for some time.

"But I do envy those clever chaps sometimes," Arthur remarked. "I don't
suppose they ever . . ." He did not finish his sentence.

"I can't see why you should envy them," said Susan, with great
sincerity.

"Odd things happen to one," said Arthur. "One goes along smoothly
enough, one thing following another, and it's all very jolly and plain
sailing, and you think you know all about it, and suddenly one doesn't
know where one is a bit, and everything seems different from what it
used to seem. Now to-day, coming up that path, riding behind you, I
seemed to see everything as if--" he paused and plucked a piece of
grass up by the roots. He scattered the little lumps of earth which were
sticking to the roots--"As if it had a kind of meaning. You've made the
difference to me," he jerked out, "I don't see why I shouldn't tell you.
I've felt it ever since I knew you. . . . It's because I love you."

Even while they had been saying commonplace things Susan had been
conscious of the excitement of intimacy, which seemed not only to lay
bare something in her, but in the trees and the sky, and the progress of
his speech which seemed inevitable was positively painful to her, for no
human being had ever come so close to her before.

She was struck motionless as his speech went on, and her heart gave
great separate leaps at the last words. She sat with her fingers curled
round a stone, looking straight in front of her down the mountain over
the plain. So then, it had actually happened to her, a proposal of
marriage.

Arthur looked round at her; his face was oddly twisted. She was drawing
her breath with such difficulty that she could hardly answer.

"You might have known." He seized her in his arms; again and again and
again they clasped each other, murmuring inarticulately.

"Well," sighed Arthur, sinking back on the ground, "that's the most
wonderful thing that's ever happened to me." He looked as if he were
trying to put things seen in a dream beside real things.

There was a long silence.

"It's the most perfect thing in the world," Susan stated, very gently
and with great conviction. It was no longer merely a proposal of
marriage, but of marriage with Arthur, with whom she was in love.

In the silence that followed, holding his hand tightly in hers, she
prayed to God that she might make him a good wife.

"And what will Mr. Perrott say?" she asked at the end of it.

"Dear old fellow," said Arthur who, now that the first shock was over,
was relaxing into an enormous sense of pleasure and contentment. "We
must be very nice to him, Susan."

He told her how hard Perrott's life had been, and how absurdly devoted
he was to Arthur himself. He went on to tell her about his mother, a
widow lady, of strong character. In return Susan sketched the portraits
of her own family--Edith in particular, her youngest sister, whom she
loved better than any one else, "except you, Arthur. . . . Arthur," she
continued, "what was it that you first liked me for?"

"It was a buckle you wore one night at sea," said Arthur, after
due consideration. "I remember noticing--it's an absurd thing to
notice!--that you didn't take peas, because I don't either."

From this they went on to compare their more serious tastes, or rather
Susan ascertained what Arthur cared about, and professed herself very
fond of the same thing. They would live in London, perhaps have a
cottage in the country near Susan's family, for they would find it
strange without her at first. Her mind, stunned to begin with, now flew
to the various changes that her engagement would make--how delightful it
would be to join the ranks of the married women--no longer to hang on to
groups of girls much younger than herself--to escape the long solitude
of an old maid's life. Now and then her amazing good fortune overcame
her, and she turned to Arthur with an exclamation of love.

They lay in each other's arms and had no notion that they were observed.
Yet two figures suddenly appeared among the trees above them. "Here's
shade," began Hewet, when Rachel suddenly stopped dead. They saw a man
and woman lying on the ground beneath them, rolling slightly this
way and that as the embrace tightened and slackened. The man then sat
upright and the woman, who now appeared to be Susan Warrington, lay back
upon the ground, with her eyes shut and an absorbed look upon her face,
as though she were not altogether conscious. Nor could you tell from her
expression whether she was happy, or had suffered something. When Arthur
again turned to her, butting her as a lamb butts a ewe, Hewet and Rachel
retreated without a word. Hewet felt uncomfortably shy.

"I don't like that," said Rachel after a moment.

"I can remember not liking it either," said Hewet. "I can remember--"
but he changed his mind and continued in an ordinary tone of voice,
"Well, we may take it for granted that they're engaged. D'you think
he'll ever fly, or will she put a stop to that?"

But Rachel was still agitated; she could not get away from the sight
they had just seen. Instead of answering Hewet she persisted.

"Love's an odd thing, isn't it, making one's heart beat."

"It's so enormously important, you see," Hewet replied. "Their lives are
now changed for ever."

"And it makes one sorry for them too," Rachel continued, as though she
were tracing the course of her feelings. "I don't know either of them,
but I could almost burst into tears. That's silly, isn't it?"

"Just because they're in love," said Hewet. "Yes," he added after a
moment's consideration, "there's something horribly pathetic about it, I
agree."

And now, as they had walked some way from the grove of trees, and had
come to a rounded hollow very tempting to the back, they proceeded
to sit down, and the impression of the lovers lost some of its force,
though a certain intensity of vision, which was probably the result of
the sight, remained with them. As a day upon which any emotion has been
repressed is different from other days, so this day was now different,
merely because they had seen other people at a crisis of their lives.

"A great encampment of tents they might be," said Hewet, looking in
front of him at the mountains. "Isn't it like a water-colour too--you
know the way water-colours dry in ridges all across the paper--I've been
wondering what they looked like."

His eyes became dreamy, as though he were matching things, and reminded
Rachel in their colour of the green flesh of a snail. She sat beside him
looking at the mountains too. When it became painful to look any longer,
the great size of the view seeming to enlarge her eyes beyond their
natural limit, she looked at the ground; it pleased her to scrutinise
this inch of the soil of South America so minutely that she noticed
every grain of earth and made it into a world where she was endowed with
the supreme power. She bent a blade of grass, and set an insect on the
utmost tassel of it, and wondered if the insect realised his strange
adventure, and thought how strange it was that she should have bent that
tassel rather than any other of the million tassels.

"You've never told me you name," said Hewet suddenly. "Miss Somebody
Vinrace. . . . I like to know people's Christian names."

"Rachel," she replied.

"Rachel," he repeated. "I have an aunt called Rachel, who put the life
of Father Damien into verse. She is a religious fanatic--the result of
the way she was brought up, down in Northamptonshire, never seeing a
soul. Have you any aunts?"

"I live with them," said Rachel.

"And I wonder what they're doing now?" Hewet enquired.

"They are probably buying wool," Rachel determined. She tried to
describe them. "They are small, rather pale women," she began, "very
clean. We live in Richmond. They have an old dog, too, who will only
eat the marrow out of bones. . . . They are always going to church.
They tidy their drawers a good deal." But here she was overcome by the
difficulty of describing people.

"It's impossible to believe that it's all going on still!" she
exclaimed.

The sun was behind them and two long shadows suddenly lay upon the
ground in front of them, one waving because it was made by a skirt, and
the other stationary, because thrown by a pair of legs in trousers.

"You look very comfortable!" said Helen's voice above them.

"Hirst," said Hewet, pointing at the scissorlike shadow; he then rolled
round to look up at them.

"There's room for us all here," he said.

When Hirst had seated himself comfortably, he said:

"Did you congratulate the young couple?"

It appeared that, coming to the same spot a few minutes after Hewet and
Rachel, Helen and Hirst had seen precisely the same thing.

"No, we didn't congratulate them," said Hewet. "They seemed very happy."

"Well," said Hirst, pursing up his lips, "so long as I needn't marry
either of them--"

"We were very much moved," said Hewet.

"I thought you would be," said Hirst. "Which was it, Monk? The thought
of the immortal passions, or the thought of new-born males to keep the
Roman Catholics out? I assure you," he said to Helen, "he's capable of
being moved by either."

Rachel was a good deal stung by his banter, which she felt to be
directed equally against them both, but she could think of no repartee.

"Nothing moves Hirst," Hewet laughed; he did not seem to be stung at
all. "Unless it were a transfinite number falling in love with a finite
one--I suppose such things do happen, even in mathematics."

"On the contrary," said Hirst with a touch of annoyance, "I consider
myself a person of very strong passions." It was clear from the way he
spoke that he meant it seriously; he spoke of course for the benefit of
the ladies.

"By the way, Hirst," said Hewet, after a pause, "I have a terrible
confession to make. Your book--the poems of Wordsworth, which if you
remember I took off your table just as we were starting, and certainly
put in my pocket here--"

"Is lost," Hirst finished for him.

"I consider that there is still a chance," Hewet urged, slapping himself
to right and left, "that I never did take it after all."

"No," said Hirst. "It is here." He pointed to his breast.

"Thank God," Hewet exclaimed. "I need no longer feel as though I'd
murdered a child!"

"I should think you were always losing things," Helen remarked, looking
at him meditatively.

"I don't lose things," said Hewet. "I mislay them. That was the reason
why Hirst refused to share a cabin with me on the voyage out."

"You came out together?" Helen enquired.

"I propose that each member of this party now gives a short biographical
sketch of himself or herself," said Hirst, sitting upright. "Miss
Vinrace, you come first; begin."

Rachel stated that she was twenty-four years of age, the daughter of a
ship-owner, that she had never been properly educated; played the piano,
had no brothers or sisters, and lived at Richmond with aunts, her mother
being dead.

"Next," said Hirst, having taken in these facts; he pointed at Hewet. "I
am the son of an English gentleman. I am twenty-seven," Hewet began. "My
father was a fox-hunting squire. He died when I was ten in the hunting
field. I can remember his body coming home, on a shutter I suppose, just
as I was going down to tea, and noticing that there was jam for tea, and
wondering whether I should be allowed--"

"Yes; but keep to the facts," Hirst put in.

"I was educated at Winchester and Cambridge, which I had to leave after
a time. I have done a good many things since--"

"Profession?"

"None--at least--"

"Tastes?"

"Literary. I'm writing a novel."

"Brothers and sisters?"

"Three sisters, no brother, and a mother."

"Is that all we're to hear about you?" said Helen. She stated that she
was very old--forty last October, and her father had been a solicitor in
the city who had gone bankrupt, for which reason she had never had much
education--they lived in one place after another--but an elder brother
used to lend her books.

"If I were to tell you everything--" she stopped and smiled. "It would
take too long," she concluded. "I married when I was thirty, and I have
two children. My husband is a scholar. And now--it's your turn," she
nodded at Hirst.

"You've left out a great deal," he reproved her. "My name
is St. John Alaric Hirst," he began in a jaunty tone of voice.
"I'm twenty-four years old. I'm the son of the Reverend Sidney
Hirst, vicar of Great Wappyng in Norfolk. Oh, I got scholarships
everywhere--Westminster--King's. I'm now a fellow of King's. Don't it
sound dreary? Parents both alive (alas). Two brothers and one sister.
I'm a very distinguished young man," he added.

"One of the three, or is it five, most distinguished men in England,"
Hewet remarked.

"Quite correct," said Hirst.

"That's all very interesting," said Helen after a pause. "But of course
we've left out the only questions that matter. For instance, are we
Christians?"

"I am not," "I am not," both the young men replied.

"I am," Rachel stated.

"You believe in a personal God?" Hirst demanded, turning round and
fixing her with his eyeglasses.

"I believe--I believe," Rachel stammered, "I believe there are things
we don't know about, and the world might change in a minute and anything
appear."

At this Helen laughed outright. "Nonsense," she said. "You're not a
Christian. You've never thought what you are.--And there are lots of
other questions," she continued, "though perhaps we can't ask them yet."
Although they had talked so freely they were all uncomfortably conscious
that they really knew nothing about each other.

"The important questions," Hewet pondered, "the really interesting ones.
I doubt that one ever does ask them."

Rachel, who was slow to accept the fact that only a very few things can
be said even by people who know each other well, insisted on knowing
what he meant.

"Whether we've ever been in love?" she enquired. "Is that the kind of
question you mean?"

Again Helen laughed at her, benignantly strewing her with handfuls of
the long tasselled grass, for she was so brave and so foolish.

"Oh, Rachel," she cried. "It's like having a puppy in the house having
you with one--a puppy that brings one's underclothes down into the
hall."

But again the sunny earth in front of them was crossed by fantastic
wavering figures, the shadows of men and women.

"There they are!" exclaimed Mrs. Elliot. There was a touch of
peevishness in her voice. "And we've had _such_ a hunt to find you. Do
you know what the time is?"

Mrs. Elliot and Mr. and Mrs. Thornbury now confronted them; Mrs. Elliot
was holding out her watch, and playfully tapping it upon the face.
Hewet was recalled to the fact that this was a party for which he was
responsible, and he immediately led them back to the watch-tower, where
they were to have tea before starting home again. A bright crimson scarf
fluttered from the top of the wall, which Mr. Perrott and Evelyn were
tying to a stone as the others came up. The heat had changed just so
far that instead of sitting in the shadow they sat in the sun, which
was still hot enough to paint their faces red and yellow, and to colour
great sections of the earth beneath them.

"There's nothing half so nice as tea!" said Mrs. Thornbury, taking her
cup.

"Nothing," said Helen. "Can't you remember as a child chopping up hay--"
she spoke much more quickly than usual, and kept her eye fixed upon
Mrs. Thornbury, "and pretending it was tea, and getting scolded by the
nurses--why I can't imagine, except that nurses are such brutes, won't
allow pepper instead of salt though there's no earthly harm in it.
Weren't your nurses just the same?"

During this speech Susan came into the group, and sat down by Helen's
side. A few minutes later Mr. Venning strolled up from the opposite
direction. He was a little flushed, and in the mood to answer
hilariously whatever was said to him.

"What have you been doing to that old chap's grave?" he asked, pointing
to the red flag which floated from the top of the stones.

"We have tried to make him forget his misfortune in having died three
hundred years ago," said Mr. Perrott.

"It would be awful--to be dead!" ejaculated Evelyn M.

"To be dead?" said Hewet. "I don't think it would be awful. It's quite
easy to imagine. When you go to bed to-night fold your hands so--breathe
slower and slower--" He lay back with his hands clasped upon his breast,
and his eyes shut, "Now," he murmured in an even monotonous voice, "I
shall never, never, never move again." His body, lying flat among them,
did for a moment suggest death.

"This is a horrible exhibition, Mr. Hewet!" cried Mrs. Thornbury.

"More cake for us!" said Arthur.

"I assure you there's nothing horrible about it," said Hewet, sitting up
and laying hands upon the cake.

"It's so natural," he repeated. "People with children should make them
do that exercise every night. . . . Not that I look forward to being
dead."

"And when you allude to a grave," said Mr. Thornbury, who spoke almost
for the first time, "have you any authority for calling that ruin
a grave? I am quite with you in refusing to accept the common
interpretation which declares it to be the remains of an Elizabethan
watch-tower--any more than I believe that the circular mounds or
barrows which we find on the top of our English downs were camps. The
antiquaries call everything a camp. I am always asking them, Well then,
where do you think our ancestors kept their cattle? Half the camps in
England are merely the ancient pound or barton as we call it in my part
of the world. The argument that no one would keep his cattle in such
exposed and inaccessible spots has no weight at all, if you reflect that
in those days a man's cattle were his capital, his stock-in-trade, his
daughter's dowries. Without cattle he was a serf, another man's man. . . ."
His eyes slowly lost their intensity, and he muttered a few
concluding words under his breath, looking curiously old and forlorn.

Hughling Elliot, who might have been expected to engage the old
gentleman in argument, was absent at the moment. He now came up holding
out a large square of cotton upon which a fine design was printed in
pleasant bright colours that made his hand look pale.

"A bargain," he announced, laying it down on the cloth. "I've just
bought it from the big man with the ear-rings. Fine, isn't it? It
wouldn't suit every one, of course, but it's just the thing--isn't it,
Hilda?--for Mrs. Raymond Parry."

"Mrs. Raymond Parry!" cried Helen and Mrs. Thornbury at the same moment.

They looked at each other as though a mist hitherto obscuring their
faces had been blown away.

"Ah--you have been to those wonderful parties too?" Mrs. Elliot asked
with interest.

Mrs. Parry's drawing-room, though thousands of miles away, behind a vast
curve of water on a tiny piece of earth, came before their eyes. They
who had had no solidity or anchorage before seemed to be attached to it
somehow, and at once grown more substantial. Perhaps they had been in
the drawing-room at the same moment; perhaps they had passed each other
on the stairs; at any rate they knew some of the same people. They
looked one another up and down with new interest. But they could do no
more than look at each other, for there was no time to enjoy the fruits
of the discovery. The donkeys were advancing, and it was advisable to
begin the descent immediately, for the night fell so quickly that it
would be dark before they were home again.

Accordingly, remounting in order, they filed off down the hillside.
Scraps of talk came floating back from one to another. There were jokes
to begin with, and laughter; some walked part of the way, and picked
flowers, and sent stones bounding before them.

"Who writes the best Latin verse in your college, Hirst?" Mr. Elliot
called back incongruously, and Mr. Hirst returned that he had no idea.

The dusk fell as suddenly as the natives had warned them, the hollows
of the mountain on either side filling up with darkness and the path
becoming so dim that it was surprising to hear the donkeys' hooves still
striking on hard rock. Silence fell upon one, and then upon another,
until they were all silent, their minds spilling out into the deep blue
air. The way seemed shorter in the dark than in the day; and soon the
lights of the town were seen on the flat far beneath them.

Suddenly some one cried, "Ah!"

In a moment the slow yellow drop rose again from the plain below; it
rose, paused, opened like a flower, and fell in a shower of drops.

"Fireworks," they cried.

Another went up more quickly; and then another; they could almost hear
it twist and roar.

"Some Saint's day, I suppose," said a voice. The rush and embrace of
the rockets as they soared up into the air seemed like the fiery way in
which lovers suddenly rose and united, leaving the crowd gazing up at
them with strained white faces. But Susan and Arthur, riding down the
hill, never said a word to each other, and kept accurately apart.

Then the fireworks became erratic, and soon they ceased altogether, and
the rest of the journey was made almost in darkness, the mountain being
a great shadow behind them, and bushes and trees little shadows which
threw darkness across the road. Among the plane-trees they separated,
bundling into carriages and driving off, without saying good-night, or
saying it only in a half-muffled way.

It was so late that there was no time for normal conversation between
their arrival at the hotel and their retirement to bed. But Hirst
wandered into Hewet's room with a collar in his hand.

"Well, Hewet," he remarked, on the crest of a gigantic yawn, "that was a
great success, I consider." He yawned. "But take care you're not landed
with that young woman. . . . I don't really like young women. . . ."

Hewet was too much drugged by hours in the open air to make any reply.
In fact every one of the party was sound asleep within ten minutes or
so of each other, with the exception of Susan Warrington. She lay for
a considerable time looking blankly at the wall opposite, her hands
clasped above her heart, and her light burning by her side. All
articulate thought had long ago deserted her; her heart seemed to have
grown to the size of a sun, and to illuminate her entire body, shedding
like the sun a steady tide of warmth.

"I'm happy, I'm happy, I'm happy," she repeated. "I love every one. I'm
happy."


Chapter XII


When Susan's engagement had been approved at home, and made public to
any one who took an interest in it at the hotel--and by this time the
society at the hotel was divided so as to point to invisible chalk-marks
such as Mr. Hirst had described, the news was felt to justify some
celebration--an expedition? That had been done already. A dance then.
The advantage of a dance was that it abolished one of those long
evenings which were apt to become tedious and lead to absurdly early
hours in spite of bridge.

Two or three people standing under the erect body of the stuffed leopard
in the hall very soon had the matter decided. Evelyn slid a pace or two
this way and that, and pronounced that the floor was excellent.
Signor Rodriguez informed them of an old Spaniard who fiddled at
weddings--fiddled so as to make a tortoise waltz; and his daughter,
although endowed with eyes as black as coal-scuttles, had the same
power over the piano. If there were any so sick or so surly as to prefer
sedentary occupations on the night in question to spinning and watching
others spin, the drawing-room and billiard-room were theirs. Hewet made
it his business to conciliate the outsiders as much as possible. To
Hirst's theory of the invisible chalk-marks he would pay no attention
whatever. He was treated to a snub or two, but, in reward, found obscure
lonely gentlemen delighted to have this opportunity of talking to
their kind, and the lady of doubtful character showed every symptom of
confiding her case to him in the near future. Indeed it was made quite
obvious to him that the two or three hours between dinner and bed
contained an amount of unhappiness, which was really pitiable, so many
people had not succeeded in making friends.

It was settled that the dance was to be on Friday, one week after the
engagement, and at dinner Hewet declared himself satisfied.

"They're all coming!" he told Hirst. "Pepper!" he called, seeing William
Pepper slip past in the wake of the soup with a pamphlet beneath his
arm, "We're counting on you to open the ball."

"You will certainly put sleep out of the question," Pepper returned.

"You are to take the floor with Miss Allan," Hewet continued, consulting
a sheet of pencilled notes.

Pepper stopped and began a discourse upon round dances, country dances,
morris dances, and quadrilles, all of which are entirely superior to the
bastard waltz and spurious polka which have ousted them most unjustly
in contemporary popularity--when the waiters gently pushed him on to his
table in the corner.

The dining-room at this moment had a certain fantastic resemblance to a
farmyard scattered with grain on which bright pigeons kept descending.
Almost all the ladies wore dresses which they had not yet displayed, and
their hair rose in waves and scrolls so as to appear like carved wood in
Gothic churches rather than hair. The dinner was shorter and less formal
than usual, even the waiters seeming to be affected with the general
excitement. Ten minutes before the clock struck nine the committee made
a tour through the ballroom. The hall, when emptied of its furniture,
brilliantly lit, adorned with flowers whose scent tinged the air,
presented a wonderful appearance of ethereal gaiety.

"It's like a starlit sky on an absolutely cloudless night," Hewet
murmured, looking about him, at the airy empty room.

"A heavenly floor, anyhow," Evelyn added, taking a run and sliding two
or three feet along.

"What about those curtains?" asked Hirst. The crimson curtains were
drawn across the long windows. "It's a perfect night outside."

"Yes, but curtains inspire confidence," Miss Allan decided. "When the
ball is in full swing it will be time to draw them. We might even open
the windows a little. . . . If we do it now elderly people will imagine
there are draughts."

Her wisdom had come to be recognised, and held in respect. Meanwhile as
they stood talking, the musicians were unwrapping their instruments, and
the violin was repeating again and again a note struck upon the piano.
Everything was ready to begin.

After a few minutes' pause, the father, the daughter, and the son-in-law
who played the horn flourished with one accord. Like the rats who
followed the piper, heads instantly appeared in the doorway. There
was another flourish; and then the trio dashed spontaneously into the
triumphant swing of the waltz. It was as though the room were instantly
flooded with water. After a moment's hesitation first one couple, then
another, leapt into mid-stream, and went round and round in the eddies.
The rhythmic swish of the dancers sounded like a swirling pool. By
degrees the room grew perceptibly hotter. The smell of kid gloves
mingled with the strong scent of flowers. The eddies seemed to circle
faster and faster, until the music wrought itself into a crash, ceased,
and the circles were smashed into little separate bits. The couples
struck off in different directions, leaving a thin row of elderly people
stuck fast to the walls, and here and there a piece of trimming or a
handkerchief or a flower lay upon the floor. There was a pause, and then
the music started again, the eddies whirled, the couples circled round
in them, until there was a crash, and the circles were broken up into
separate pieces.

When this had happened about five times, Hirst, who leant against a
window-frame, like some singular gargoyle, perceived that Helen Ambrose
and Rachel stood in the doorway. The crowd was such that they could
not move, but he recognised them by a piece of Helen's shoulder and a
glimpse of Rachel's head turning round. He made his way to them; they
greeted him with relief.

"We are suffering the tortures of the damned," said Helen.

"This is my idea of hell," said Rachel.

Her eyes were bright and she looked bewildered.

Hewet and Miss Allan, who had been waltzing somewhat laboriously, paused
and greeted the newcomers.

"This _is_ nice," said Hewet. "But where is Mr. Ambrose?"

"Pindar," said Helen. "May a married woman who was forty in October
dance? I can't stand still." She seemed to fade into Hewet, and they
both dissolved in the crowd.

"We must follow suit," said Hirst to Rachel, and he took her resolutely
by the elbow. Rachel, without being expert, danced well, because of a
good ear for rhythm, but Hirst had no taste for music, and a few dancing
lessons at Cambridge had only put him into possession of the anatomy of
a waltz, without imparting any of its spirit. A single turn proved to
them that their methods were incompatible; instead of fitting into each
other their bones seemed to jut out in angles making smooth turning an
impossibility, and cutting, moreover, into the circular progress of the
other dancers.

"Shall we stop?" said Hirst. Rachel gathered from his expression that he
was annoyed.

They staggered to seats in the corner, from which they had a view of the
room. It was still surging, in waves of blue and yellow, striped by the
black evening-clothes of the gentlemen.

"An amazing spectacle," Hirst remarked. "Do you dance much in London?"
They were both breathing fast, and both a little excited, though each
was determined not to show any excitement at all.

"Scarcely ever. Do you?"

"My people give a dance every Christmas."

"This isn't half a bad floor," Rachel said. Hirst did not attempt to
answer her platitude. He sat quite silent, staring at the dancers. After
three minutes the silence became so intolerable to Rachel that she was
goaded to advance another commonplace about the beauty of the night.
Hirst interrupted her ruthlessly.

"Was that all nonsense what you said the other day about being a
Christian and having no education?" he asked.

"It was practically true," she replied. "But I also play the piano very
well," she said, "better, I expect than any one in this room. You are
the most distinguished man in England, aren't you?" she asked shyly.

"One of the three," he corrected.

Helen whirling past here tossed a fan into Rachel's lap.

"She is very beautiful," Hirst remarked.

They were again silent. Rachel was wondering whether he thought her also
nice-looking; St. John was considering the immense difficulty of talking
to girls who had no experience of life. Rachel had obviously never
thought or felt or seen anything, and she might be intelligent or
she might be just like all the rest. But Hewet's taunt rankled in his
mind--"you don't know how to get on with women," and he was determined
to profit by this opportunity. Her evening-clothes bestowed on her just
that degree of unreality and distinction which made it romantic to speak
to her, and stirred a desire to talk, which irritated him because he
did not know how to begin. He glanced at her, and she seemed to him
very remote and inexplicable, very young and chaste. He drew a sigh, and
began.

"About books now. What have you read? Just Shakespeare and the Bible?"

"I haven't read many classics," Rachel stated. She was slightly
annoyed by his jaunty and rather unnatural manner, while his masculine
acquirements induced her to take a very modest view of her own power.

"D'you mean to tell me you've reached the age of twenty-four without
reading Gibbon?" he demanded.

"Yes, I have," she answered.

"Mon Dieu!" he exclaimed, throwing out his hands. "You must begin
to-morrow. I shall send you my copy. What I want to know is--" he looked
at her critically. "You see, the problem is, can one really talk to you?
Have you got a mind, or are you like the rest of your sex? You seem to
me absurdly young compared with men of your age."

Rachel looked at him but said nothing.

"About Gibbon," he continued. "D'you think you'll be able to appreciate
him? He's the test, of course. It's awfully difficult to tell about
women," he continued, "how much, I mean, is due to lack of training,
and how much is native incapacity. I don't see myself why you shouldn't
understand--only I suppose you've led an absurd life until now--you've
just walked in a crocodile, I suppose, with your hair down your back."

The music was again beginning. Hirst's eye wandered about the room in
search of Mrs. Ambrose. With the best will in the world he was conscious
that they were not getting on well together.

"I'd like awfully to lend you books," he said, buttoning his gloves,
and rising from his seat. "We shall meet again. I'm going to leave you
now."

He got up and left her.

Rachel looked round. She felt herself surrounded, like a child at a
party, by the faces of strangers all hostile to her, with hooked noses
and sneering, indifferent eyes. She was by a window, she pushed it open
with a jerk. She stepped out into the garden. Her eyes swam with tears
of rage.

"Damn that man!" she exclaimed, having acquired some of Helen's words.
"Damn his insolence!"

She stood in the middle of the pale square of light which the window
she had opened threw upon the grass. The forms of great black trees rose
massively in front of her. She stood still, looking at them, shivering
slightly with anger and excitement. She heard the trampling and swinging
of the dancers behind her, and the rhythmic sway of the waltz music.

"There are trees," she said aloud. Would the trees make up for St. John
Hirst? She would be a Persian princess far from civilisation, riding her
horse upon the mountains alone, and making her women sing to her in the
evening, far from all this, from the strife and men and women--a
form came out of the shadow; a little red light burnt high up in its
blackness.

"Miss Vinrace, is it?" said Hewet, peering at her. "You were dancing
with Hirst?"

"He's made me furious!" she cried vehemently. "No one's any right to be
insolent!"

"Insolent?" Hewet repeated, taking his cigar from his mouth in surprise.
"Hirst--insolent?"

"It's insolent to--" said Rachel, and stopped. She did not know exactly
why she had been made so angry. With a great effort she pulled herself
together.

"Oh, well," she added, the vision of Helen and her mockery before her,
"I dare say I'm a fool." She made as though she were going back into the
ballroom, but Hewet stopped her.

"Please explain to me," he said. "I feel sure Hirst didn't mean to hurt
you."

When Rachel tried to explain, she found it very difficult. She could not
say that she found the vision of herself walking in a crocodile with her
hair down her back peculiarly unjust and horrible, nor could she explain
why Hirst's assumption of the superiority of his nature and experience
had seemed to her not only galling but terrible--as if a gate had
clanged in her face. Pacing up and down the terrace beside Hewet she
said bitterly:

"It's no good; we should live separate; we cannot understand each other;
we only bring out what's worst."

Hewet brushed aside her generalisation as to the natures of the two
sexes, for such generalisations bored him and seemed to him generally
untrue. But, knowing Hirst, he guessed fairly accurately what had
happened, and, though secretly much amused, was determined that Rachel
should not store the incident away in her mind to take its place in the
view she had of life.

"Now you'll hate him," he said, "which is wrong. Poor old Hirst--he
can't help his method. And really, Miss Vinrace, he was doing his best;
he was paying you a compliment--he was trying--he was trying--" he could
not finish for the laughter that overcame him.

Rachel veered round suddenly and laughed out too. She saw that there was
something ridiculous about Hirst, and perhaps about herself.

"It's his way of making friends, I suppose," she laughed. "Well--I shall
do my part. I shall begin--'Ugly in body, repulsive in mind as you are,
Mr. Hirst--"

"Hear, hear!" cried Hewet. "That's the way to treat him. You see, Miss
Vinrace, you must make allowances for Hirst. He's lived all his life
in front of a looking-glass, so to speak, in a beautiful panelled room,
hung with Japanese prints and lovely old chairs and tables, just one
splash of colour, you know, in the right place,--between the windows
I think it is,--and there he sits hour after hour with his toes on the
fender, talking about philosophy and God and his liver and his heart and
the hearts of his friends. They're all broken. You can't expect him to
be at his best in a ballroom. He wants a cosy, smoky, masculine
place, where he can stretch his legs out, and only speak when he's got
something to say. For myself, I find it rather dreary. But I do respect
it. They're all so much in earnest. They do take the serious things very
seriously."

The description of Hirst's way of life interested Rachel so much that
she almost forgot her private grudge against him, and her respect
revived.

"They are really very clever then?" she asked.

"Of course they are. So far as brains go I think it's true what he said
the other day; they're the cleverest people in England. But--you ought
to take him in hand," he added. "There's a great deal more in him than's
ever been got at. He wants some one to laugh at him. . . . The idea of
Hirst telling you that you've had no experiences! Poor old Hirst!"

They had been pacing up and down the terrace while they talked, and now
one by one the dark windows were uncurtained by an invisible hand, and
panes of light fell regularly at equal intervals upon the grass. They
stopped to look in at the drawing-room, and perceived Mr. Pepper writing
alone at a table.

"There's Pepper writing to his aunt," said Hewet. "She must be a very
remarkable old lady, eighty-five he tells me, and he takes her for
walking tours in the New Forest. . . . Pepper!" he cried, rapping on the
window. "Go and do your duty. Miss Allan expects you."

When they came to the windows of the ballroom, the swing of the dancers
and the lilt of the music was irresistible.

"Shall we?" said Hewet, and they clasped hands and swept off
magnificently into the great swirling pool. Although this was only the
second time they had met, the first time they had seen a man and woman
kissing each other, and the second time Mr. Hewet had found that a young
woman angry is very like a child. So that when they joined hands in the
dance they felt more at their ease than is usual.

It was midnight and the dance was now at its height. Servants were
peeping in at the windows; the garden was sprinkled with the white
shapes of couples sitting out. Mrs. Thornbury and Mrs. Elliot sat side
by side under a palm tree, holding fans, handkerchiefs, and brooches
deposited in their laps by flushed maidens. Occasionally they exchanged
comments.

"Miss Warrington _does_ look happy," said Mrs. Elliot; they both smiled;
they both sighed.

"He has a great deal of character," said Mrs. Thornbury, alluding to
Arthur.

"And character is what one wants," said Mrs. Elliot. "Now that young
man is _clever_ enough," she added, nodding at Hirst, who came past with
Miss Allan on his arm.

"He does not look strong," said Mrs. Thornbury. "His complexion is
not good.--Shall I tear it off?" she asked, for Rachel had stopped,
conscious of a long strip trailing behind her.

"I hope you are enjoying yourselves?" Hewet asked the ladies.

"This is a very familiar position for me!" smiled Mrs. Thornbury. "I
have brought out five daughters--and they all loved dancing! You love it
too, Miss Vinrace?" she asked, looking at Rachel with maternal eyes. "I
know I did when I was your age. How I used to beg my mother to let me
stay--and now I sympathise with the poor mothers--but I sympathise with
the daughters too!"

She smiled sympathetically, and at the same time rather keenly, at
Rachel.

"They seem to find a great deal to say to each other," said Mrs. Elliot,
looking significantly at the backs of the couple as they turned away.
"Did you notice at the picnic? He was the only person who could make her
utter."

"Her father is a very interesting man," said Mrs. Thornbury. "He has one
of the largest shipping businesses in Hull. He made a very able reply,
you remember, to Mr. Asquith at the last election. It is so interesting
to find that a man of his experience is a strong Protectionist."

She would have liked to discuss politics, which interested her more than
personalities, but Mrs. Elliot would only talk about the Empire in a
less abstract form.

"I hear there are dreadful accounts from England about the rats," she
said. "A sister-in-law, who lives at Norwich, tells me it has been quite
unsafe to order poultry. The plague--you see. It attacks the rats, and
through them other creatures."

"And the local authorities are not taking proper steps?" asked Mrs.
Thornbury.

"That she does not say. But she describes the attitude of the educated
people--who should know better--as callous in the extreme. Of course,
my sister-in-law is one of those active modern women, who always takes
things up, you know--the kind of woman one admires, though one does not
feel, at least I do not feel--but then she has a constitution of iron."

Mrs. Elliot, brought back to the consideration of her own delicacy, here
sighed.

"A very animated face," said Mrs. Thornbury, looking at Evelyn M. who
had stopped near them to pin tight a scarlet flower at her breast. It
would not stay, and, with a spirited gesture of impatience, she thrust
it into her partner's button-hole. He was a tall melancholy youth, who
received the gift as a knight might receive his lady's token.

"Very trying to the eyes," was Mrs. Eliot's next remark, after watching
the yellow whirl in which so few of the whirlers had either name or
character for her, for a few minutes. Bursting out of the crowd, Helen
approached them, and took a vacant chair.

"May I sit by you?" she said, smiling and breathing fast. "I suppose I
ought to be ashamed of myself," she went on, sitting down, "at my age."

Her beauty, now that she was flushed and animated, was more expansive
than usual, and both the ladies felt the same desire to touch her.

"I _am_ enjoying myself," she panted. "Movement--isn't it amazing?"

"I have always heard that nothing comes up to dancing if one is a good
dancer," said Mrs. Thornbury, looking at her with a smile.

Helen swayed slightly as if she sat on wires.

"I could dance for ever!" she said. "They ought to let themselves go
more!" she exclaimed. "They ought to leap and swing. Look! How they
mince!"

"Have you seen those wonderful Russian dancers?" began Mrs. Elliot. But
Helen saw her partner coming and rose as the moon rises. She was half
round the room before they took their eyes off her, for they could not
help admiring her, although they thought it a little odd that a woman of
her age should enjoy dancing.

Directly Helen was left alone for a minute she was joined by St. John
Hirst, who had been watching for an opportunity.

"Should you mind sitting out with me?" he asked. "I'm quite incapable
of dancing." He piloted Helen to a corner which was supplied with two
arm-chairs, and thus enjoyed the advantage of semi-privacy. They sat
down, and for a few minutes Helen was too much under the influence of
dancing to speak.

"Astonishing!" she exclaimed at last. "What sort of shape can she think
her body is?" This remark was called forth by a lady who came past them,
waddling rather than walking, and leaning on the arm of a stout man with
globular green eyes set in a fat white face. Some support was necessary,
for she was very stout, and so compressed that the upper part of her
body hung considerably in advance of her feet, which could only trip in
tiny steps, owing to the tightness of the skirt round her ankles. The
dress itself consisted of a small piece of shiny yellow satin, adorned
here and there indiscriminately with round shields of blue and green
beads made to imitate hues of a peacock's breast. On the summit of a
frothy castle of hair a purple plume stood erect, while her short neck
was encircled by a black velvet ribbon knobbed with gems, and golden
bracelets were tightly wedged into the flesh of her fat gloved arms. She
had the face of an impertinent but jolly little pig, mottled red under a
dusting of powder.

St. John could not join in Helen's laughter.

"It makes me sick," he declared. "The whole thing makes me sick. . . .
Consider the minds of those people--their feelings. Don't you agree?"

"I always make a vow never to go to another party of any description,"
Helen replied, "and I always break it."

She leant back in her chair and looked laughingly at the young man.
She could see that he was genuinely cross, if at the same time slightly
excited.

"However," he said, resuming his jaunty tone, "I suppose one must just
make up one's mind to it."

"To what?"

"There never will be more than five people in the world worth talking
to."

Slowly the flush and sparkle in Helen's face died away, and she looked
as quiet and as observant as usual.

"Five people?" she remarked. "I should say there were more than five."

"You've been very fortunate, then," said Hirst. "Or perhaps I've been
very unfortunate." He became silent.

"Should you say I was a difficult kind of person to get on with?" he
asked sharply.

"Most clever people are when they're young," Helen replied.

"And of course I am--immensely clever," said Hirst. "I'm infinitely
cleverer than Hewet. It's quite possible," he continued in his curiously
impersonal manner, "that I'm going to be one of the people who really
matter. That's utterly different from being clever, though one can't
expect one's family to see it," he added bitterly.

Helen thought herself justified in asking, "Do you find your family
difficult to get on with?"

"Intolerable. . . . They want me to be a peer and a privy councillor.
I've come out here partly in order to settle the matter. It's got to be
settled. Either I must go to the bar, or I must stay on in Cambridge. Of
course, there are obvious drawbacks to each, but the arguments certainly
do seem to me in favour of Cambridge. This kind of thing!" he waved his
hand at the crowded ballroom. "Repulsive. I'm conscious of great powers
of affection too. I'm not susceptible, of course, in the way Hewet
is. I'm very fond of a few people. I think, for example, that there's
something to be said for my mother, though she is in many ways so
deplorable. . . . At Cambridge, of course, I should inevitably become
the most important man in the place, but there are other reasons why I
dread Cambridge--" he ceased.

"Are you finding me a dreadful bore?" he asked. He changed curiously
from a friend confiding in a friend to a conventional young man at a
party.

"Not in the least," said Helen. "I like it very much."

"You can't think," he exclaimed, speaking almost with emotion, "what
a difference it makes finding someone to talk to! Directly I saw you I
felt you might possibly understand me. I'm very fond of Hewet, but he
hasn't the remotest idea what I'm like. You're the only woman I've ever
met who seems to have the faintest conception of what I mean when I say
a thing."

The next dance was beginning; it was the Barcarolle out of Hoffman,
which made Helen beat her toe in time to it; but she felt that after
such a compliment it was impossible to get up and go, and, besides
being amused, she was really flattered, and the honesty of his conceit
attracted her. She suspected that he was not happy, and was sufficiently
feminine to wish to receive confidences.

"I'm very old," she sighed.

"The odd thing is that I don't find you old at all," he replied. "I feel
as though we were exactly the same age. Moreover--" here he hesitated,
but took courage from a glance at her face, "I feel as if I could talk
quite plainly to you as one does to a man--about the relations between
the sexes, about . . . and . . ."

In spite of his certainty a slight redness came into his face as he
spoke the last two words.

She reassured him at once by the laugh with which she exclaimed, "I
should hope so!"

He looked at her with real cordiality, and the lines which were drawn
about his nose and lips slackened for the first time.

"Thank God!" he exclaimed. "Now we can behave like civilised human
beings."

Certainly a barrier which usually stands fast had fallen, and it was
possible to speak of matters which are generally only alluded to between
men and women when doctors are present, or the shadow of death. In five
minutes he was telling her the history of his life. It was long, for it
was full of extremely elaborate incidents, which led on to a discussion
of the principles on which morality is founded, and thus to several very
interesting matters, which even in this ballroom had to be discussed in
a whisper, lest one of the pouter pigeon ladies or resplendent merchants
should overhear them, and proceed to demand that they should leave the
place. When they had come to an end, or, to speak more accurately, when
Helen intimated by a slight slackening of her attention that they had
sat there long enough, Hirst rose, exclaiming, "So there's no reason
whatever for all this mystery!"

"None, except that we are English people," she answered. She took his
arm and they crossed the ball-room, making their way with difficulty
between the spinning couples, who were now perceptibly dishevelled,
and certainly to a critical eye by no means lovely in their shapes. The
excitement of undertaking a friendship and the length of their talk,
made them hungry, and they went in search of food to the dining-room,
which was now full of people eating at little separate tables. In the
doorway they met Rachel, going up to dance again with Arthur Venning.
She was flushed and looked very happy, and Helen was struck by the fact
that in this mood she was certainly more attractive than the generality
of young women. She had never noticed it so clearly before.

"Enjoying yourself?" she asked, as they stopped for a second.

"Miss Vinrace," Arthur answered for her, "has just made a confession;
she'd no idea that dances could be so delightful."

"Yes!" Rachel exclaimed. "I've changed my view of life completely!"

"You don't say so!" Helen mocked. They passed on.

"That's typical of Rachel," she said. "She changes her view of life
about every other day. D'you know, I believe you're just the person I
want," she said, as they sat down, "to help me complete her education?
She's been brought up practically in a nunnery. Her father's too absurd.
I've been doing what I can--but I'm too old, and I'm a woman. Why
shouldn't you talk to her--explain things to her--talk to her, I mean,
as you talk to me?"

"I have made one attempt already this evening," said St. John. "I
rather doubt that it was successful. She seems to me so very young and
inexperienced. I have promised to lend her Gibbon."

"It's not Gibbon exactly," Helen pondered. "It's the facts of life, I
think--d'you see what I mean? What really goes on, what people feel,
although they generally try to hide it? There's nothing to be frightened
of. It's so much more beautiful than the pretences--always more
interesting--always better, I should say, than _that_ kind of thing."

She nodded her head at a table near them, where two girls and two
young men were chaffing each other very loudly, and carrying on an arch
insinuating dialogue, sprinkled with endearments, about, it seemed, a
pair of stockings or a pair of legs. One of the girls was flirting a fan
and pretending to be shocked, and the sight was very unpleasant, partly
because it was obvious that the girls were secretly hostile to each
other.

"In my old age, however," Helen sighed, "I'm coming to think that it
doesn't much matter in the long run what one does: people always go
their own way--nothing will ever influence them." She nodded her head at
the supper party.

But St. John did not agree. He said that he thought one could really
make a great deal of difference by one's point of view, books and so
on, and added that few things at the present time mattered more than the
enlightenment of women. He sometimes thought that almost everything was
due to education.

In the ballroom, meanwhile, the dancers were being formed into squares
for the lancers. Arthur and Rachel, Susan and Hewet, Miss Allan and
Hughling Elliot found themselves together.

Miss Allan looked at her watch.

"Half-past one," she stated. "And I have to despatch Alexander Pope
to-morrow."

"Pope!" snorted Mr. Elliot. "Who reads Pope, I should like to know?
And as for reading about him--No, no, Miss Allan; be persuaded you will
benefit the world much more by dancing than by writing." It was one of
Mr. Elliot's affectations that nothing in the world could compare
with the delights of dancing--nothing in the world was so tedious as
literature. Thus he sought pathetically enough to ingratiate himself
with the young, and to prove to them beyond a doubt that though married
to a ninny of a wife, and rather pale and bent and careworn by his
weight of learning, he was as much alive as the youngest of them all.

"It's a question of bread and butter," said Miss Allan calmly. "However,
they seem to expect me." She took up her position and pointed a square
black toe.

"Mr. Hewet, you bow to me." It was evident at once that Miss Allan was
the only one of them who had a thoroughly sound knowledge of the figures
of the dance.

After the lancers there was a waltz; after the waltz a polka; and then
a terrible thing happened; the music, which had been sounding regularly
with five-minute pauses, stopped suddenly. The lady with the great dark
eyes began to swathe her violin in silk, and the gentleman placed his
horn carefully in its case. They were surrounded by couples imploring
them in English, in French, in Spanish, of one more dance, one only; it
was still early. But the old man at the piano merely exhibited his watch
and shook his head. He turned up the collar of his coat and produced
a red silk muffler, which completely dashed his festive appearance.
Strange as it seemed, the musicians were pale and heavy-eyed; they
looked bored and prosaic, as if the summit of their desire was cold meat
and beer, succeeded immediately by bed.

Rachel was one of those who had begged them to continue. When they
refused she began turning over the sheets of dance music which lay upon
the piano. The pieces were generally bound in coloured covers, with
pictures on them of romantic scenes--gondoliers astride on the crescent
of the moon, nuns peering through the bars of a convent window, or young
women with their hair down pointing a gun at the stars. She remembered
that the general effect of the music to which they had danced so gaily
was one of passionate regret for dead love and the innocent years of
youth; dreadful sorrows had always separated the dancers from their past
happiness.

"No wonder they get sick of playing stuff like this," she remarked
reading a bar or two; "they're really hymn tunes, played very fast, with
bits out of Wagner and Beethoven."

"Do you play? Would you play? Anything, so long as we can dance to it!"
From all sides her gift for playing the piano was insisted upon, and
she had to consent. As very soon she had played the only pieces of dance
music she could remember, she went on to play an air from a sonata by
Mozart.

"But that's not a dance," said some one pausing by the piano.

"It is," she replied, emphatically nodding her head. "Invent the steps."
Sure of her melody she marked the rhythm boldly so as to simplify the
way. Helen caught the idea; seized Miss Allan by the arm, and whirled
round the room, now curtseying, now spinning round, now tripping this
way and that like a child skipping through a meadow.

"This is the dance for people who don't know how to dance!" she cried.
The tune changed to a minuet; St. John hopped with incredible swiftness
first on his left leg, then on his right; the tune flowed melodiously;
Hewet, swaying his arms and holding out the tails of his coat, swam down
the room in imitation of the voluptuous dreamy dance of an Indian maiden
dancing before her Rajah. The tune marched; and Miss Allen advanced with
skirts extended and bowed profoundly to the engaged pair. Once
their feet fell in with the rhythm they showed a complete lack of
self-consciousness. From Mozart Rachel passed without stopping to old
English hunting songs, carols, and hymn tunes, for, as she had observed,
any good tune, with a little management, became a tune one could dance
to. By degrees every person in the room was tripping and turning in
pairs or alone. Mr. Pepper executed an ingenious pointed step derived
from figure-skating, for which he once held some local championship;
while Mrs. Thornbury tried to recall an old country dance which she had
seen danced by her father's tenants in Dorsetshire in the old days. As
for Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, they gallopaded round and round the room with
such impetuosity that the other dancers shivered at their approach. Some
people were heard to criticise the performance as a romp; to others it
was the most enjoyable part of the evening.

"Now for the great round dance!" Hewet shouted. Instantly a gigantic
circle was formed, the dancers holding hands and shouting out, "D'you
ken John Peel," as they swung faster and faster and faster, until the
strain was too great, and one link of the chain--Mrs. Thornbury--gave
way, and the rest went flying across the room in all directions, to
land upon the floor or the chairs or in each other's arms as seemed most
convenient.

Rising from these positions, breathless and unkempt, it struck them for
the first time that the electric lights pricked the air very vainly, and
instinctively a great many eyes turned to the windows. Yes--there was
the dawn. While they had been dancing the night had passed, and it had
come. Outside, the mountains showed very pure and remote; the dew was
sparkling on the grass, and the sky was flushed with blue, save for the
pale yellows and pinks in the East. The dancers came crowding to the
windows, pushed them open, and here and there ventured a foot upon the
grass.

"How silly the poor old lights look!" said Evelyn M. in a curiously
subdued tone of voice. "And ourselves; it isn't becoming." It was true;
the untidy hair, and the green and yellow gems, which had seemed so
festive half an hour ago, now looked cheap and slovenly. The complexions
of the elder ladies suffered terribly, and, as if conscious that a cold
eye had been turned upon them, they began to say good-night and to make
their way up to bed.

Rachel, though robbed of her audience, had gone on playing to herself.
From John Peel she passed to Bach, who was at this time the subject of
her intense enthusiasm, and one by one some of the younger dancers
came in from the garden and sat upon the deserted gilt chairs round the
piano, the room being now so clear that they turned out the lights. As
they sat and listened, their nerves were quieted; the heat and soreness
of their lips, the result of incessant talking and laughing, was
smoothed away. They sat very still as if they saw a building with spaces
and columns succeeding each other rising in the empty space. Then they
began to see themselves and their lives, and the whole of human life
advancing very nobly under the direction of the music. They felt
themselves ennobled, and when Rachel stopped playing they desired
nothing but sleep.

Susan rose. "I think this has been the happiest night of my life!" she
exclaimed. "I do adore music," she said, as she thanked Rachel. "It just
seems to say all the things one can't say oneself." She gave a nervous
little laugh and looked from one to another with great benignity, as
though she would like to say something but could not find the words in
which to express it. "Every one's been so kind--so very kind," she said.
Then she too went to bed.

The party having ended in the very abrupt way in which parties do end,
Helen and Rachel stood by the door with their cloaks on, looking for a
carriage.

"I suppose you realise that there are no carriages left?" said St. John,
who had been out to look. "You must sleep here."

"Oh, no," said Helen; "we shall walk."

"May we come too?" Hewet asked. "We can't go to bed. Imagine lying among
bolsters and looking at one's washstand on a morning like this--Is that
where you live?" They had begun to walk down the avenue, and he turned
and pointed at the white and green villa on the hillside, which seemed
to have its eyes shut.

"That's not a light burning, is it?" Helen asked anxiously.

"It's the sun," said St. John. The upper windows had each a spot of gold
on them.

"I was afraid it was my husband, still reading Greek," she said. "All
this time he's been editing _Pindar_."

They passed through the town and turned up the steep road, which was
perfectly clear, though still unbordered by shadows. Partly because
they were tired, and partly because the early light subdued them, they
scarcely spoke, but breathed in the delicious fresh air, which seemed
to belong to a different state of life from the air at midday. When they
came to the high yellow wall, where the lane turned off from the road,
Helen was for dismissing the two young men.

"You've come far enough," she said. "Go back to bed."

But they seemed unwilling to move.

"Let's sit down a moment," said Hewet. He spread his coat on the ground.
"Let's sit down and consider." They sat down and looked out over the
bay; it was very still, the sea was rippling faintly, and lines of green
and blue were beginning to stripe it. There were no sailing boats as
yet, but a steamer was anchored in the bay, looking very ghostly in the
mist; it gave one unearthly cry, and then all was silent.

Rachel occupied herself in collecting one grey stone after another
and building them into a little cairn; she did it very quietly and
carefully.

"And so you've changed your view of life, Rachel?" said Helen.

Rachel added another stone and yawned. "I don't remember," she said, "I
feel like a fish at the bottom of the sea." She yawned again. None of
these people possessed any power to frighten her out here in the dawn,
and she felt perfectly familiar even with Mr. Hirst.

"My brain, on the contrary," said Hirst, "is in a condition of abnormal
activity." He sat in his favourite position with his arms binding his
legs together and his chin resting on the top of his knees. "I see
through everything--absolutely everything. Life has no more mysteries
for me." He spoke with conviction, but did not appear to wish for an
answer. Near though they sat, and familiar though they felt, they seemed
mere shadows to each other.

"And all those people down there going to sleep," Hewet began dreamily,
"thinking such different things,--Miss Warrington, I suppose, is now on
her knees; the Elliots are a little startled, it's not often _they_ get
out of breath, and they want to get to sleep as quickly as possible;
then there's the poor lean young man who danced all night with
Evelyn; he's putting his flower in water and asking himself, 'Is this
love?'Book-plates having been briefly referred to above, a few words
as to their styles and uses may here be pertinent. The name "book-plate"
is a clumsy and misleading title, suggesting to the uninitiated
the illustrations or plates which embellish the text of a book.

The name _Ex libris_, two latin words used for book-plate in all
European languages, is clearer, but still not exact, as a definition
of the thing, signifying simply "out of books."

A book-plate is the owner's or the library's distinctive mark of ownership,
pasted upon the inside cover, whether it be a simple name-label,
or an elaborately engraved heraldic or pictorial device.

The earliest known book-plates date back to the fifteenth century, and
are of German origin, though English plates are known as early
as 1700. In France, specimens appear for the first time between 1600
and 1650.

Foreign book-plates are, as a rule, heraldic in design, as are also
the early American plates, representing the coat of arms or family
crest of the owner of the books, with a motto of some kind.

The fashion of collecting these owners' marks, as such, irrespective
of the books containing them, is a recent and very possibly a passing
mania.

Still, there is something of interest in early American plates, and
in those used by distinguished men, aside from the collector's fad.
Some of the first American engravers showed their skill in these
designs, and a signed and dated plate engraved by Nathaniel Hurd, for
example, of Boston, is of some historic value as an example of early
American art. He engraved many plates about the middle of the last century,
and died in 1777. Paul Revere, who was an engraver, designed and
executed some few plates, which are rare, and highly prized,
more for his name than for his skill, for, as generally known, he was a
noted patriot of the Revolutionary period, belonging by his acts to
the heroic age of American history.

A book of George Washington's containing his book-plate has an added
interest, though the plate itself is an armorial design, not at all well
executed. Its motto is "_exitus acta probat_"--the event justifies the
deed. From its rarity and the high price it commands, it has probably
been the only American book-plate ever counterfeited. At an auction
sale of books in Washington in 1863, this counterfeit plate had been
placed in many books to give a fictitious value, but the fraud was
discovered and announced by the present writer, just before the
books were sold. Yet the sale was attended by many attracted to bid upon
books said to have been owned by Washington, and among them the late
Dr. W. F. Poole, then librarian of the Boston Athenaeum, which
possesses most of the library authentically known to have been at Mount
Vernon.

John Adams and John Quincy Adams used book-plates, and James Monroe and
John Tyler each had a plain name-label. These are all of our
presidents known to have used them, except General Garfield, who
had a printed book-plate of simple design, with the motto "_inter
folia fructus_."

Eleven of the signers of the Declaration of Independence are known
to have had these signs of gentle birth--for in the early years of
the American Colonies, it was only the families of aristocratic
connection and scholarly tastes who indulged in what may be termed
a superfluous luxury.

The plates used among the Southern settlers were generally ordered
from England, and not at all American.

The Northern plates were more frequently of native design and execution,
and therefore of much greater value and interest, though far
inferior in style of workmanship and elaboration of ornament to the
best European ones.

The ordinary library label is also a book-plate, and some of the early
libraries and small collections have elaborate designs.

The early Harvard College library plate was a large and fine piece of
engraving by Hurd.

The Harvard Library had some few of this fine engraved label printed
in red ink, and placed in the rarer books of the library--as a
reminder that the works containing the rubricated book-plates were
not to be drawn out by students.

The learned bibliophile and librarian of Florence, Magliabecchi,
who died in 1714, devised for his library of thirty thousand volumes,
which he bequeathed to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, a book-plate
representing his own profile on a medal surrounded with books and
oak boughs, with the inscription--"Antonius Magliabecchius Florentinus."

Some book-plates embody designs of great beauty.

The late George Bancroft's, engraved on copper, represented a
winged cherub (from Raphael) gazing sun-ward, holding a tablet with
the inscription "_Eis phaos_," toward the light.

Some French book-plates aim at humor or caricature.

One familiar example represents an old book-worm mounted on a tall
ladder in a library, profoundly absorbed in reading, and utterly
unconscious that the room beneath him is on fire.

To those who ask of what possible utility it can be to cultivate so
unfruitful a pursuit as the devising or the collecting of book-plates,
it may be pertinent to state the claim made in behalf of the amateurs of
this art, by a connoisseur, namely, "Book-plates foster the study
of art, history, genealogy, and human character." On this theory, we
may add, the coat of arms or family crest teaches heraldry; the mottoes
or inscriptions chosen cultivate the taste for language and sententious
literature; the engraving appeals to the sense of the artistic; the
names of early or ancient families who are often thus commemorated
teach biography, history, or genealogy; while the great variety of
sentiments selected for the plates illustrate the character and
taste of those selecting them.

On the other hand, it must be said that the coat of arms fails to
indicate individual taste or genius, and might better be supplanted
by original and characteristic designs, especially such as relate
to books, libraries, and learning.

CHAPTER 5.

THE ENEMIES OF BOOKS.

We have seen in former chapters how the books of a library are
acquired, how they are prepared for the shelves, or for use, and
how they are or should be bound.

Let us now consider the important questions which involve the care,
the protection, and the preservation of the books.

Every librarian or book owner should be something more than a
custodian of the books in his collection.

He should also exercise perpetual vigilance with regard to their safety
and condition. The books of every library are beset by dangers and by
enemies. Some of these are open and palpable; others are secret, illusive,
little suspected, and liable to come unlooked for and without
warning. Some of these enemies are impersonal and immaterial, but
none the less deadly; others are personally human in form, but most
inhuman in their careless and brutal treatment of books. How far and how
fatally the books of many libraries have been injured by these
ever active and persistent enemies can never be adequately told. But we
may point out what the several dangers are which beset them, and how far
the watchful care of the librarian and his assistants may fore-stall
or prevent them.

One of the foremost of the inanimate enemies of books is dust. In some
libraries the atmosphere is dust-laden, to a degree which seems
incredible until you witness its results in the deposits upon books,
which soil your fingers, and contaminate the air you breathe, as you
brush or blow it away. Peculiarly liable to dust are library rooms located
in populous towns, or in business streets, and built close to the
avenues of traffic. Here, the dust is driven in at the windows and doors
by every breeze that blows.

It is an omnipresent evil, that cannot be escaped or very largely
remedied. As preventive measures, care should be taken not to build
libraries too near the street, but to have ample front and side yards
to isolate the books as far as may be consistent with convenient
access.

Where the library is already located immediately on the street, a
subscription for sprinkling the thoroughfare with water, the year
round, would be true economy.

In some cities, the evils of street dust are supplemented by the
mischiefs of coal smoke, to an aggravated degree. Wherever soft coal is
burned as the principal fuel, a black, fuliginous substance goes
floating through the air, and soils every thing it touches. It
penetrates into houses and public buildings, often intensified by
their own interior use of the same generator of dirt, and covers the books
of the library with its foul deposits. You may see, in the public
libraries of some western cities, how this perpetual curse of coal smoke
has penetrated the leaves of all the books, resisting all efforts to
keep it out, and slowly but surely deteriorating both paper and bindings.
Here, preventive measures are impossible, unless some device for
consuming the coal smoke of chimneys and factories were made compulsory,
or the evil somewhat mitigated by using a less dangerous fuel within
the library.

But, aside from these afflictions of dust, in its most aggravated
form, every library and every room in any building is subject to its
persistent visitations. Wherever carpets or rugs cover the floors,
there dust has an assured abiding-place, and it is diffused throughout
the apartment in impalpable clouds, at every sweeping of the floors.
Hence it would be wise to adopt in public libraries a floor-covering
like linoleum, or some substance other than woolen, which would be
measurably free from dust, while soft enough to deaden the sound of
feet upon the floors. Even with this preventive precaution, there will
always be dust enough, and too much for comfort, or for the health of
the books. Only a thorough dusting, carried on if possible daily, can
prevent an accumulation of dust, at once deleterious to the
durability of the books, and to the comfort both of librarians and
readers. Dust is an insidious foe, stealing on its march silently
and unobserved, yet, however impalpable in the atmosphere of a library,
it will settle upon the tops of every shelf of books, it will
penetrate their inner leaves, it will lodge upon the bindings,
soiling books and readers, and constituting a perpetual annoyance.

It is not enough to dust the tops of the books periodically; a more
full and radical remedy is required, to render library books presentable.
At no long intervals, there should be a thorough library cleaning, as
drastic and complete as the house-cleaning which neat housewives
institute twice a year, with such wholesome results. The books are to
be taken down from the shelves, and subjected to a shaking-up
process, which will remove more of the dust they have absorbed than any
brush can reach.
To do this effectually, take them, if of moderate thickness, by the
half-dozen at a time from the shelf, hold them loosely on a table, their
fronts downward, backs uppermost, then with a hand at either side
of the little pile, strike them smartly together a few times, until
the dust, which will fly from them in a very palpable cloud, ceases to
fall. Then lay them on their ends, with the tops uppermost on the table,
and repeat the concussion in that posture, when you will eliminate a
fresh crop of dust, though not so thick as the first. After this, let
each volume of the lot be brushed over at the sides and back with a
soft (never stiff) brush, or else with a piece of cotton or woolen
cloth, and so restored clean to the shelves. While this thorough
method of cleansing will take time and pains, it will pay in the long
run. It will not eliminate all the dust (which in a large collection
is a physical impossibility) but it will reduce it to a minimum.
Faithfully carried out, as a periodical supplement to a daily dusting
of the books as they stand on the shelves, it will immensely relieve
the librarian or book-owner, who can then, (and then only) feel
that he has done his whole duty by his books.

Another dangerous enemy of the library book is damp, already briefly
referred to. Books kept in any basement room, or near any wall, absorb
moisture with avidity; both paper and bindings becoming mildewed,
and often covered with blue mould. If long left in this perilous
condition, sure destruction follows; the glue or paste which fastens
the cover softens, the leather loses its tenacity, and the leaves slowly
rot, until the worthless volumes smell to heaven. Books thus injured
may be partially recovered, before the advanced stage of decomposition,
by removal to a dry atmosphere, and by taking the volumes apart,
drying the sheets, and rebinding--a very expensive, but necessary
remedy, provided the books are deemed worth preserving.

But a true remedy is the preventive one. No library should
ever be kept, even in part, in a basement story, nor should any books
ever be located near the wall of a building. All walls absorb, retain,
and give out moisture, and are dangerous and oft-times fatal neighbors
to books. Let the shelves be located at right angles to every wall--with
the end nearest to it at least twelve to eighteen inches removed, and
the danger will be obviated.

A third enemy of the book is heat. Most libraries are unfortunately
over-heated,--sometimes from defective means of controlling the temperature,
and sometimes from carelessness or want of thought in the attendant.
A high temperature is very destructive to books. It warps their covers,
so that volumes unprotected by their fellows, or by a book support,
tend to curl up, and stay warped until they become a nuisance.
It also injures the paper of the volumes by over-heating, and weakening
the tenacity of the leaves held together by the glue on the back,
besides drying to an extreme the leather, till it cracks or crumbles
under the heat. The upper shelves or galleries of any library are most
seriously affected by over-heating, because the natural law causes
the heat to rise toward the ceiling. If you put your hand on some books
occupying the highest places in some library rooms, in mid-winter,
when the fires are kept at their maximum, the heat of the volume will
almost burn your fingers. If these books were sentient beings, and
could speak, would they not say--"our sufferings are intolerable?"

The remedy is of course a preventive one; never to suffer the library to
become over-heated, and to have proper ventilation on every floor,
communicating with the air outside. Seventy degrees Fahrenheit is a
safe and proper maximum temperature for books and librarian.

The mischief arising from gas exhalations is another serious source
of danger to books. In many well-lighted libraries, the heat itself
from the numerous gas-burners is sufficient to injure them, and there is
besides a sulphuric acid escaping from the coal-gas fluid, in combustion,
which is most deleterious to bindings. The only remedy appears to be,
where libraries are open evenings, to furnish them with electric
lights.

This improved mode of illumination is now so perfected, and so
widely diffused, that it may be reckoned a positive boon to public
libraries, in saving their books from one of their worst and most
destructive enemies.

Another of the potent enemies of books is fire. I refer, not to
over-heating the rooms they occupy, but to the risk they continually
run, in most libraries, of total destruction. The chronicle of burned
libraries would make a long and melancholy record, on which there
is no space here to enter. Irreparable losses of manuscripts and early
printed books, and precious volumes printed in small editions, have
arisen from men's neglect of building our book-repositories
fire-proof. In all libraries not provided with iron or steel shelves,
there is perpetual danger.
Thornbury had received a great many letters. She was completely
engrossed in them. When she had finished a page she handed it to her
husband, or gave him the sense of what she was reading in a series of
short quotations linked together by a sound at the back of her throat.
"Evie writes that George has gone to Glasgow. 'He finds Mr. Chadbourne
so nice to work with, and we hope to spend Christmas together, but I
should not like to move Betty and Alfred any great distance (no, quite
right), though it is difficult to imagine cold weather in this heat. . . .
Eleanor and Roger drove over in the new trap. . . . Eleanor certainly
looked more like herself than I've seen her since the winter. She has
put Baby on three bottles now, which I'm sure is wise (I'm sure it is
too), and so gets better nights. . . . My hair still falls out. I find
it on the pillow! But I am cheered by hearing from Tottie Hall Green.
. . . Muriel is in Torquay enjoying herself greatly at dances. She _is_
going to show her black put after all.' . . . A line from Herbert--so
busy, poor fellow! Ah! Margaret says, 'Poor old Mrs. Fairbank died
on the eighth, quite suddenly in the conservatory, only a maid in the
house, who hadn't the presence of mind to lift her up, which they think
might have saved her, but the doctor says it might have come at any
moment, and one can only feel thankful that it was in the house and not
in the street (I should think so!). The pigeons have increased terribly,
just as the rabbits did five years ago . . .'" While she read her
husband kept nodding his head very slightly, but very steadily in sign
of approval.

Near by, Miss Allan was reading her letters too. They were not
altogether pleasant, as could be seen from the slight rigidity which
came over her large fine face as she finished reading them and replaced
them neatly in their envelopes. The lines of care and responsibility
on her face made her resemble an elderly man rather than a woman. The
letters brought her news of the failure of last year's fruit crop in New
Zealand, which was a serious matter, for Hubert, her only brother, made
his living on a fruit farm, and if it failed again, of course, he would
throw up his place, come back to England, and what were they to do with
him this time? The journey out here, which meant the loss of a term's
work, became an extravagance and not the just and wonderful holiday due
to her after fifteen years of punctual lecturing and correcting essays
upon English literature. Emily, her sister, who was a teacher also,
wrote: "We ought to be prepared, though I have no doubt Hubert will be
more reasonable this time." And then went on in her sensible way to say
that she was enjoying a very jolly time in the Lakes. "They are looking
exceedingly pretty just now. I have seldom seen the trees so forward at
this time of year. We have taken our lunch out several days. Old Alice
is as young as ever, and asks after every one affectionately. The days
pass very quickly, and term will soon be here. Political prospects _not_
good, I think privately, but do not like to damp Ellen's enthusiasm.
Lloyd George has taken the Bill up, but so have many before now, and we
are where we are; but trust to find myself mistaken. Anyhow, we have our
work cut out for us. . . . Surely Meredith lacks the _human_ note one
likes in W. W.?" she concluded, and went on to discuss some questions of
English literature which Miss Allan had raised in her last letter.

At a little distance from Miss Allan, on a seat shaded and made
semi-private by a thick clump of palm trees, Arthur and Susan
were reading each other's letters. The big slashing manuscripts of
hockey-playing young women in Wiltshire lay on Arthur's knee, while
Susan deciphered tight little legal hands which rarely filled more than
a page, and always conveyed the same impression of jocular and breezy
goodwill.

"I do hope Mr. Hutchinson will like me, Arthur," she said, looking up.

"Who's your loving Flo?" asked Arthur.

"Flo Graves--the girl I told you about, who was engaged to that dreadful
Mr. Vincent," said Susan. "Is Mr. Hutchinson married?" she asked.

Already her mind was busy with benevolent plans for her friends, or
rather with one magnificent plan--which was simple too--they were all to
get married--at once--directly she got back. Marriage, marriage that was
the right thing, the only thing, the solution required by every one she
knew, and a great part of her meditations was spent in tracing every
instance of discomfort, loneliness, ill-health, unsatisfied ambition,
restlessness, eccentricity, taking things up and dropping them again,
public speaking, and philanthropic activity on the part of men and
particularly on the part of women to the fact that they wanted to marry,
were trying to marry, and had not succeeded in getting married. If, as
she was bound to own, these symptoms sometimes persisted after marriage,
she could only ascribe them to the unhappy law of nature which decreed
that there was only one Arthur Venning, and only one Susan who could
marry him. Her theory, of course, had the merit of being fully supported
by her own case. She had been vaguely uncomfortable at home for two or
three years now, and a voyage like this with her selfish old aunt,
who paid her fare but treated her as servant and companion in one, was
typical of the kind of thing people expected of her. Directly she
became engaged, Mrs. Paley behaved with instinctive respect, positively
protested when Susan as usual knelt down to lace her shoes, and appeared
really grateful for an hour of Susan's company where she had been used
to exact two or three as her right. She therefore foresaw a life of far
greater comfort than she had been used to, and the change had already
produced a great increase of warmth in her feelings towards other
people.

It was close on twenty years now since Mrs. Paley had been able to lace
her own shoes or even to see them, the disappearance of her feet having
coincided more or less accurately with the death of her husband, a man
of business, soon after which event Mrs. Paley began to grow stout.
She was a selfish, independent old woman, possessed of a considerable
income, which she spent upon the upkeep of a house that needed seven
servants and a charwoman in Lancaster Gate, and another with a garden
and carriage-horses in Surrey. Susan's engagement relieved her of the
one great anxiety of her life--that her son Christopher should "entangle
himself" with his cousin. Now that this familiar source of interest was
removed, she felt a little low and inclined to see more in Susan
than she used to. She had decided to give her a very handsome wedding
present, a cheque for two hundred, two hundred and fifty, or possibly,
conceivably--it depended upon the under-gardener and Huths' bill for
doing up the drawing-room--three hundred pounds sterling.

She was thinking of this very question, revolving the figures, as she
sat in her wheeled chair with a table spread with cards by her side. The
Patience had somehow got into a muddle, and she did not like to call for
Susan to help her, as Susan seemed to be busy with Arthur.

"She's every right to expect a handsome present from me, of course," she
thought, looking vaguely at the leopard on its hind legs, "and I've no
doubt she does! Money goes a long way with every one. The young are very
selfish. If I were to die, nobody would miss me but Dakyns, and she'll
be consoled by the will! However, I've got no reason to complain. . . .
I can still enjoy myself. I'm not a burden to any-one. . . . I like a
great many things a good deal, in spite of my legs."

Being slightly depressed, however, she went on to think of the only
people she had known who had not seemed to her at all selfish or fond of
money, who had seemed to her somehow rather finer than the general run;
people she willingly acknowledged, who were finer than she was. There
were only two of them. One was her brother, who had been drowned before
her eyes, the other was a girl, her greatest friend, who had died in
giving birth to her first child. These things had happened some fifty
years ago.

"They ought not to have died," she thought. "However, they did--and we
selfish old creatures go on." The tears came to her eyes; she felt a
genuine regret for them, a kind of respect for their youth and beauty,
and a kind of shame for herself; but the tears did not fall; and she
opened one of those innumerable novels which she used to pronounce good
or bad, or pretty middling, or really wonderful. "I can't think how
people come to imagine such things," she would say, taking off her
spectacles and looking up with the old faded eyes, that were becoming
ringed with white.

Just behind the stuffed leopard Mr. Elliot was playing chess with Mr.
Pepper. He was being defeated, naturally, for Mr. Pepper scarcely took
his eyes off the board, and Mr. Elliot kept leaning back in his chair
and throwing out remarks to a gentleman who had only arrived the night
before, a tall handsome man, with a head resembling the head of an
intellectual ram. After a few remarks of a general nature had passed,
they were discovering that they knew some of the same people, as indeed
had been obvious from their appearance directly they saw each other.

"Ah yes, old Truefit," said Mr. Elliot. "He has a son at Oxford. I've
often stayed with them. It's a lovely old Jacobean house. Some exquisite
Greuzes--one or two Dutch pictures which the old boy kept in the
cellars. Then there were stacks upon stacks of prints. Oh, the dirt in
that house! He was a miser, you know. The boy married a daughter of
Lord Pinwells. I know them too. The collecting mania tends to run in
families. This chap collects buckles--men's shoe-buckles they must be,
in use between the years 1580 and 1660; the dates mayn't be right, but
fact's as I say. Your true collector always has some unaccountable
fad of that kind. On other points he's as level-headed as a breeder of
shorthorns, which is what he happens to be. Then the Pinwells, as you
probably know, have their share of eccentricity too. Lady Maud, for
instance--" he was interrupted here by the necessity of considering his
move,--"Lady Maud has a horror of cats and clergymen, and people with
big front teeth. I've heard her shout across a table, 'Keep your mouth
shut, Miss Smith; they're as yellow as carrots!' across a table, mind
you. To me she's always been civility itself. She dabbles in literature,
likes to collect a few of us in her drawing-room, but mention a
clergyman, a bishop even, nay, the Archbishop himself, and she gobbles
like a turkey-cock. I've been told it's a family feud--something to do
with an ancestor in the reign of Charles the First. Yes," he continued,
suffering check after check, "I always like to know something of the
grandmothers of our fashionable young men. In my opinion they preserve
all that we admire in the eighteenth century, with the advantage, in the
majority of cases, that they are personally clean. Not that one would
insult old Lady Barborough by calling her clean. How often d'you think,
Hilda," he called out to his wife, "her ladyship takes a bath?"

"I should hardly like to say, Hugh," Mrs. Elliot tittered, "but wearing
puce velvet, as she does even on the hottest August day, it somehow
doesn't show."

"Pepper, you have me," said Mr. Elliot. "My chess is even worse than I
remembered." He accepted his defeat with great equanimity, because he
really wished to talk.

He drew his chair beside Mr. Wilfrid Flushing, the newcomer.

"Are these at all in your line?" he asked, pointing at a case in front
of them, where highly polished crosses, jewels, and bits of embroidery,
the work of the natives, were displayed to tempt visitors.

"Shams, all of them," said Mr. Flushing briefly. "This rug, now, isn't
at all bad." He stopped and picked up a piece of the rug at their feet.
"Not old, of course, but the design is quite in the right tradition.
Alice, lend me your brooch. See the difference between the old work and
the new."

A lady, who was reading with great concentration, unfastened her brooch
and gave it to her husband without looking at him or acknowledging the
tentative bow which Mr. Elliot was desirous of giving her. If she
had listened, she might have been amused by the reference to old Lady
Barborough, her great-aunt, but, oblivious of her surroundings, she went
on reading.

The clock, which had been wheezing for some minutes like an old man
preparing to cough, now struck nine. The sound slightly disturbed
certain somnolent merchants, government officials, and men of
independent means who were lying back in their chairs, chatting,
smoking, ruminating about their affairs, with their eyes half shut;
they raised their lids for an instant at the sound and then closed them
again. They had the appearance of crocodiles so fully gorged by their
last meal that the future of the world gives them no anxiety whatever.
The only disturbance in the placid bright room was caused by a large
moth which shot from light to light, whizzing over elaborate heads of
hair, and causing several young women to raise their hands nervously and
exclaim, "Some one ought to kill it!"

Absorbed in their own thoughts, Hewet and Hirst had not spoken for a
long time.

When the clock struck, Hirst said:

"Ah, the creatures begin to stir. . . ." He watched them raise
themselves, look about them, and settle down again. "What I abhor most
of all," he concluded, "is the female breast. Imagine being Venning and
having to get into bed with Susan! But the really repulsive thing is
that they feel nothing at all--about what I do when I have a hot bath.
They're gross, they're absurd, they're utterly intolerable!"

So saying, and drawing no reply from Hewet, he proceeded to think about
himself, about science, about Cambridge, about the Bar, about Helen and
what she thought of him, until, being very tired, he was nodding off to
sleep.

Suddenly Hewet woke him up.

"How d'you know what you feel, Hirst?"

"Are you in love?" asked Hirst. He put in his eyeglass.

"Don't be a fool," said Hewet.

"Well, I'll sit down and think about it," said Hirst. "One really ought
to. If these people would only think about things, the world would be a
far better place for us all to live in. Are you trying to think?"

That was exactly what Hewet had been doing for the last half-hour, but
he did not find Hirst sympathetic at the moment.

"I shall go for a walk," he said.

"Remember we weren't in bed last night," said Hirst with a prodigious
yawn.

Hewet rose and stretched himself.

"I want to go and get a breath of air," he said.

An unusual feeling had been bothering him all the evening and forbidding
him to settle into any one train of thought. It was precisely as if he
had been in the middle of a talk which interested him profoundly when
some one came up and interrupted him. He could not finish the talk, and
the longer he sat there the more he wanted to finish it. As the talk
that had been interrupted was a talk with Rachel, he had to ask himself
why he felt this, and why he wanted to go on talking to her. Hirst would
merely say that he was in love with her. But he was not in love with
her. Did love begin in that way, with the wish to go on talking? No. It
always began in his case with definite physical sensations, and these
were now absent, he did not even find her physically attractive.
There was something, of course, unusual about her--she was young,
inexperienced, and inquisitive, they had been more open with each other
than was usually possible. He always found girls interesting to talk to,
and surely these were good reasons why he should wish to go on talking
to her; and last night, what with the crowd and the confusion, he had
only been able to begin to talk to her. What was she doing now? Lying on
a sofa and looking at the ceiling, perhaps. He could imagine her doing
that, and Helen in an arm-chair, with her hands on the arm of it,
so--looking ahead of her, with her great big eyes--oh no, they'd be
talking, of course, about the dance. But suppose Rachel was going away
in a day or two, suppose this was the end of her visit, and her
father had arrived in one of the steamers anchored in the bay,--it was
intolerable to know so little. Therefore he exclaimed, "How d'you know
what you feel, Hirst?" to stop himself from thinking.

But Hirst did not help him, and the other people with their aimless
movements and their unknown lives were disturbing, so that he longed for
the empty darkness. The first thing he looked for when he stepped out
of the hall door was the light of the Ambroses' villa. When he had
definitely decided that a certain light apart from the others higher up
the hill was their light, he was considerably reassured. There seemed
to be at once a little stability in all this incoherence. Without any
definite plan in his head, he took the turning to the right and walked
through the town and came to the wall by the meeting of the roads, where
he stopped. The booming of the sea was audible. The dark-blue mass of
the mountains rose against the paler blue of the sky. There was no moon,
but myriads of stars, and lights were anchored up and down in the dark
waves of earth all round him. He had meant to go back, but the single
light of the Ambroses' villa had now become three separate lights, and
he was tempted to go on. He might as well make sure that Rachel was
still there. Walking fast, he soon stood by the iron gate of their
garden, and pushed it open; the outline of the house suddenly appeared
sharply before his eyes, and the thin column of the verandah cutting
across the palely lit gravel of the terrace. He hesitated. At the back
of the house some one was rattling cans. He approached the front; the
light on the terrace showed him that the sitting-rooms were on that
side. He stood as near the light as he could by the corner of the house,
the leaves of a creeper brushing his face. After a moment he could hear
a voice. The voice went on steadily; it was not talking, but from the
continuity of the sound it was a voice reading aloud. He crept a little
closer; he crumpled the leaves together so as to stop their rustling
about his ears. It might be Rachel's voice. He left the shadow and
stepped into the radius of the light, and then heard a sentence spoken
quite distinctly.

"And there we lived from the year 1860 to 1895, the happiest years of
my parents' lives, and there in 1862 my brother Maurice was born, to the
delight of his parents, as he was destined to be the delight of all who
knew him."

The voice quickened, and the tone became conclusive rising slightly in
pitch, as if these words were at the end of the chapter. Hewet drew
back again into the shadow. There was a long silence. He could just
hear chairs being moved inside. He had almost decided to go back, when
suddenly two figures appeared at the window, not six feet from him.

"It was Maurice Fielding, of course, that your mother was engaged to,"
said Helen's voice. She spoke reflectively, looking out into the dark
garden, and thinking evidently as much of the look of the night as of
what she was saying.

"Mother?" said Rachel. Hewet's heart leapt, and he noticed the fact. Her
voice, though low, was full of surprise.

"You didn't know that?" said Helen.

"I never knew there'd been any one else," said Rachel. She was clearly
surprised, but all they said was said low and inexpressively, because
they were speaking out into the cool dark night.

"More people were in love with her than with any one I've ever known,"
Helen stated. "She had that power--she enjoyed things. She wasn't
beautiful, but--I was thinking of her last night at the dance. She
got on with every kind of person, and then she made it all so
amazingly--funny."

It appeared that Helen was going back into the past, choosing her words
deliberately, comparing Theresa with the people she had known since
Theresa died.

"I don't know how she did it," she continued, and ceased, and there was
a long pause, in which a little owl called first here, then there, as it
moved from tree to tree in the garden.

"That's so like Aunt Lucy and Aunt Katie," said Rachel at last. "They
always make out that she was very sad and very good."

"Then why, for goodness' sake, did they do nothing but criticize her
when she was alive?" said Helen. Very gentle their voices sounded, as if
they fell through the waves of the sea.

"If I were to die to-morrow . . ." she began.

The broken sentences had an extraordinary beauty and detachment in
Hewet's ears, and a kind of mystery too, as though they were spoken by
people in their sleep.

"No, Rachel," Helen's voice continued, "I'm not going to walk in the
garden; it's damp--it's sure to be damp; besides, I see at least a dozen
toads."

"Toads? Those are stones, Helen. Come out. It's nicer out. The flowers
smell," Rachel replied.

Hewet drew still farther back. His heart was beating very quickly.
Apparently Rachel tried to pull Helen out on to the terrace, and
helen resisted. There was a certain amount of scuffling, entreating,
resisting, and laughter from both of them. Then a man's form appeared.
Hewet could not hear what they were all saying. In a minute they had
gone in; he could hear bolts grating then; there was dead silence, and
all the lights went out.

He turned away, still crumpling and uncrumpling a handful of leaves
which he had torn from the wall. An exquisite sense of pleasure and
relief possessed him; it was all so solid and peaceful after the ball
at the hotel, whether he was in love with them or not, and he was not in
love with them; no, but it was good that they should be alive.

After standing still for a minute or two he turned and began to walk
towards the gate. With the movement of his body, the excitement, the
romance and the richness of life crowded into his brain. He shouted out
a line of poetry, but the words escaped him, and he stumbled among lines
and fragments of lines which had no meaning at all except for the beauty
of the words. He shut the gate, and ran swinging from side to side down
the hill, shouting any nonsense that came into his head. "Here am I,"
he cried rhythmically, as his feet pounded to the left and to the right,
"plunging along, like an elephant in the jungle, stripping the branches
as I go (he snatched at the twigs of a bush at the roadside), roaring
innumerable words, lovely words about innumerable things, running
downhill and talking nonsense aloud to myself about roads and leaves
and lights and women coming out into the darkness--about women--about
Rachel, about Rachel." He stopped and drew a deep breath. The night
seemed immense and hospitable, and although so dark there seemed to
be things moving down there in the harbour and movement out at sea.
He gazed until the darkness numbed him, and then he walked on quickly,
still murmuring to himself. "And I ought to be in bed, snoring
and dreaming, dreaming, dreaming. Dreams and realities, dreams and
realities, dreams and realities," he repeated all the way up the avenue,
scarcely knowing what he said, until he reached the front door. Here he
paused for a second, and collected himself before he opened the door.

His eyes were dazed, his hands very cold, and his brain excited and yet
half asleep. Inside the door everything was as he had left it except
that the hall was now empty. There were the chairs turning in towards
each other where people had sat talking, and the empty glasses on little
tables, and the newspapers scattered on the floor. As he shut the door
he felt as if he were enclosed in a square box, and instantly shrivelled
up. It was all very bright and very small. He stopped for a minute by
the long table to find a paper which he had meant to read, but he was
still too much under the influence of the dark and the fresh air to
consider carefully which paper it was or where he had seen it.

As he fumbled vaguely among the papers he saw a figure cross the tail of
his eye, coming downstairs. He heard the swishing sound of skirts, and
to his great surprise, Evelyn M. came up to him, laid her hand on the
table as if to prevent him from taking up a paper, and said:

"You're just the person I wanted to talk to." Her voice was a little
unpleasant and metallic, her eyes were very bright, and she kept them
fixed upon him.

"To talk to me?" he repeated. "But I'm half asleep."

"But I think you understand better than most people," she answered, and
sat down on a little chair placed beside a big leather chair so that
Hewet had to sit down beside her.

"Well?" he said. He yawned openly, and lit a cigarette. He could not
believe that this was really happening to him. "What is it?"

"Are you really sympathetic, or is it just a pose?" she demanded.

"It's for you to say," he replied. "I'm interested, I think." He still
felt numb all over and as if she was much too close to him.

"Any one can be interested!" she cried impatiently. "Your friend Mr.
Hirst's interested, I daresay however, I do believe in you. You look
as if you'd got a nice sister, somehow." She paused, picking at some
sequins on her knees, and then, as if she had made up her mind, she
started off, "Anyhow, I'm going to ask your advice. D'you ever get into
a state where you don't know your own mind? That's the state I'm in now.
You see, last night at the dance Raymond Oliver,--he's the tall dark
boy who looks as if he had Indian blood in him, but he says he's not
really,--well, we were sitting out together, and he told me all about
himself, how unhappy he is at home, and how he hates being out here.
They've put him into some beastly mining business. He says it's
beastly--I should like it, I know, but that's neither here nor there.
And I felt awfully sorry for him, one couldn't help being sorry for him,
and when he asked me to let him kiss me, I did. I don't see any harm
in that, do you? And then this morning he said he'd thought I meant
something more, and I wasn't the sort to let any one kiss me. And we
talked and talked. I daresay I was very silly, but one can't help liking
people when one's sorry for them. I do like him most awfully--" She
paused. "So I gave him half a promise, and then, you see, there's Alfred
Perrott."

"Oh, Perrott," said Hewet.

"We got to know each other on that picnic the other day," she continued.
"He seemed so lonely, especially as Arthur had gone off with Susan, and
one couldn't help guessing what was in his mind. So we had quite a long
talk when you were looking at the ruins, and he told me all about his
life, and his struggles, and how fearfully hard it had been. D'you know,
he was a boy in a grocer's shop and took parcels to people's houses in
a basket? That interested me awfully, because I always say it doesn't
matter how you're born if you've got the right stuff in you. And he told
me about his sister who's paralysed, poor girl, and one can see she's a
great trial, though he's evidently very devoted to her. I must say I do
admire people like that! I don't expect you do because you're so clever.
Well, last night we sat out in the garden together, and I couldn't help
seeing what he wanted to say, and comforting him a little, and telling
him I did care--I really do--only, then, there's Raymond Oliver. What I
want you to tell me is, can one be in love with two people at once, or
can't one?"

She became silent, and sat with her chin on her hands, looking very
intent, as if she were facing a real problem which had to be discussed
between them.

"I think it depends what sort of person you are," said Hewet. He
looked at her. She was small and pretty, aged perhaps twenty-eight or
twenty-nine, but though dashing and sharply cut, her features expressed
nothing very clearly, except a great deal of spirit and good health.

"Who are you, what are you; you see, I know nothing about you," he
continued.

"Well, I was coming to that," said Evelyn M. She continued to rest her
chin on her hands and to look intently ahead of her. "I'm the daughter
of a mother and no father, if that interests you," she said. "It's not a
very nice thing to be. It's what often happens in the country. She was
a farmer's daughter, and he was rather a swell--the young man up at the
great house. He never made things straight--never married her--though
he allowed us quite a lot of money. His people wouldn't let him. Poor
father! I can't help liking him. Mother wasn't the sort of woman who
could keep him straight, anyhow. He was killed in the war. I believe
his men worshipped him. They say great big troopers broke down and cried
over his body on the battlefield. I wish I'd known him. Mother had all
the life crushed out of her. The world--" She clenched her fist. "Oh,
people can be horrid to a woman like that!" She turned upon Hewet.

"Well," she said, "d'you want to know any more about me?"

"But you?" he asked, "Who looked after you?"

"I've looked after myself mostly," she laughed. "I've had splendid
friends. I do like people! That's the trouble. What would you do if you
liked two people, both of them tremendously, and you couldn't tell which
most?"

"I should go on liking them--I should wait and see. Why not?"

"But one has to make up one's mind," said Evelyn. "Or are you one of the
people who doesn't believe in marriages and all that? Look here--this
isn't fair, I do all the telling, and you tell nothing. Perhaps you're
the same as your friend"--she looked at him suspiciously; "perhaps you
don't like me?"

"I don't know you," said Hewet.

"I know when I like a person directly I see them! I knew I liked you the
very first night at dinner. Oh dear," she continued impatiently, "what
a lot of bother would be saved if only people would say the things they
think straight out! I'm made like that. I can't help it."

"But don't you find it leads to difficulties?" Hewet asked.

"That's men's fault," she answered. "They always drag it in-love, I
mean."

"And so you've gone on having one proposal after another," said Hewet.

"I don't suppose I've had more proposals than most women," said Evelyn,
but she spoke without conviction.

"Five, six, ten?" Hewet ventured.

Evelyn seemed to intimate that perhaps ten was the right figure, but
that it really was not a high one.

"I believe you're thinking me a heartless flirt," she protested. "But
I don't care if you are. I don't care what any one thinks of me. Just
because one's interested and likes to be friends with men, and talk to
them as one talks to women, one's called a flirt."

"But Miss Murgatroyd--"

"I wish you'd call me Evelyn," she interrupted.

"After ten proposals do you honestly think that men are the same as
women?"

"Honestly, honestly,--how I hate that word! It's always used by prigs,"
cried Evelyn. "Honestly I think they ought to be. That's what's so
disappointing. Every time one thinks it's not going to happen, and every
time it does."

"The pursuit of Friendship," said Hewet. "The title of a comedy."

"You're horrid," she cried. "You don't care a bit really. You might be
Mr. Hirst."

"Well," said Hewet, "let's consider. Let us consider--" He paused,
because for the moment he could not remember what it was that they had
to consider. He was far more interested in her than in her story, for as
she went on speaking his numbness had disappeared, and he was conscious
of a mixture of liking, pity, and distrust. "You've promised to marry
both Oliver and Perrott?" he concluded.

"Not exactly promised," said Evelyn. "I can't make up my mind which I
really like best. Oh how I detest modern life!" she flung off. "It must
have been so much easier for the Elizabethans! I thought the other day
on that mountain how I'd have liked to be one of those colonists, to cut
down trees and make laws and all that, instead of fooling about with all
these people who think one's just a pretty young lady. Though I'm not.
I really might _do_ something." She reflected in silence for a minute.
Then she said:

"I'm afraid right down in my heart that Alfred Perrot _won't_ do. He's
not strong, is he?"

"Perhaps he couldn't cut down a tree," said Hewet. "Have you never cared
for anybody?" he asked.

"I've cared for heaps of people, but not to marry them," she said. "I
suppose I'm too fastidious. All my life I've wanted somebody I could
look up to, somebody great and big and splendid. Most men are so small."

"What d'you mean by splendid?" Hewet asked. "People are--nothing more."

Evelyn was puzzled.

"We don't care for people because of their qualities," he tried to
explain. "It's just them that we care for,"--he struck a match--"just
that," he said, pointing to the flames.

"I see what you mean," she said, "but I don't agree. I do know why I
care for people, and I think I'm hardly ever wrong. I see at once what
they've got in them. Now I think you must be rather splendid; but not
Mr. Hirst."

Hewlet shook his head.

"He's not nearly so unselfish, or so sympathetic, or so big, or so
understanding," Evelyn continued.

Hewet sat silent, smoking his cigarette.

"I should hate cutting down trees," he remarked.

"I'm not trying to flirt with you, though I suppose you think I am!"
Evelyn shot out. "I'd never have come to you if I'd thought you'd merely
think odious things of me!" The tears came into her eyes.

"Do you never flirt?" he asked.

"Of course I don't," she protested. "Haven't I told you? I want
friendship; I want to care for some one greater and nobler than I am,
and if they fall in love with me it isn't my fault; I don't want it; I
positively hate it."

Hewet could see that there was very little use in going on with the
conversation, for it was obvious that Evelyn did not wish to say
anything in particular, but to impress upon him an image of herself,
being, for some reason which she would not reveal, unhappy, or insecure.
He was very tired, and a pale waiter kept walking ostentatiously into
the middle of the room and looking at them meaningly.

"They want to shut up," he said. "My advice is that you should tell
Oliver and Perrott to-morrow that you've made up your mind that you
don't mean to marry either of them. I'm certain you don't. If you
change your mind you can always tell them so. They're both sensible men;
they'll understand. And then all this bother will be over." He got up.

But Evelyn did not move. She sat looking up at him with her bright eager
eyes, in the depths of which he thought he detected some disappointment,
or dissatisfaction.

"Good-night," he said.

"There are heaps of things I want to say to you still," she said. "And
I'm going to, some time. I suppose you must go to bed now?"

"Yes," said Hewet. "I'm half asleep." He left her still sitting by
herself in the empty hall.

"Why is it that they _won't_ be honest?" he muttered to himself as he
went upstairs. Why was it that relations between different people were
so unsatisfactory, so fragmentary, so hazardous, and words so dangerous
that the instinct to sympathise with another human being was an instinct
to be examined carefully and probably crushed? What had Evelyn really
wished to say to him? What was she feeling left alone in the empty
hall? The mystery of life and the unreality even of one's own sensations
overcame him as he walked down the corridor which led to his room. It
was dimly lighted, but sufficiently for him to see a figure in a bright
dressing-gown pass swiftly in front of him, the figure of a woman
crossing from one room to another.


Chapter XV


Whether too slight or too vague the ties that bind people casually
meeting in a hotel at midnight, they possess one advantage at least over
the bonds which unite the elderly, who have lived together once and so
must live for ever. Slight they may be, but vivid and genuine, merely
because the power to break them is within the grasp of each, and there
is no reason for continuance except a true desire that continue they
shall. When two people have been married for years they seem to become
unconscious of each other's bodily presence so that they move as if
alone, speak aloud things which they do not expect to be answered, and
in general seem to experience all the comfort of solitude without its
loneliness. The joint lives of Ridley and Helen had arrived at this
stage of community, and it was often necessary for one or the other to
recall with an effort whether a thing had been said or only thought,
shared or dreamt in private. At four o'clock in the afternoon two or
three days later Mrs. Ambrose was standing brushing her hair, while
her husband was in the dressing-room which opened out of her room, and
occasionally, through the cascade of water--he was washing his face--she
caught exclamations, "So it goes on year after year; I wish, I wish, I
wish I could make an end of it," to which she paid no attention.

"It's white? Or only brown?" Thus she herself murmured, examining a hair
which gleamed suspiciously among the brown. She pulled it out and laid
it on the dressing-table. She was criticising her own appearance, or
rather approving of it, standing a little way back from the glass and
looking at her own face with superb pride and melancholy, when her
husband appeared in the doorway in his shirt sleeves, his face half
obscured by a towel.

"You often tell me I don't notice things," he remarked.

"Tell me if this is a white hair, then?" she replied. She laid the hair
on his hand.

"There's not a white hair on your head," he exclaimed.

"Ah, Ridley, I begin to doubt," she sighed; and bowed her head under
his eyes so that he might judge, but the inspection produced only a kiss
where the line of parting ran, and husband and wife then proceeded to
move about the room, casually murmuring.

"What was that you were saying?" Helen remarked, after an interval of
conversation which no third person could have understood.

"Rachel--you ought to keep an eye upon Rachel," he observed
significantly, and Helen, though she went on brushing her hair, looked
at him. His observations were apt to be true.

"Young gentlemen don't interest themselves in young women's education
without a motive," he remarked.

"Oh, Hirst," said Helen.

"Hirst and Hewet, they're all the same to me--all covered with spots,"
he replied. "He advises her to read Gibbon. Did you know that?"

Helen did not know that, but she would not allow herself inferior to her
husband in powers of observation. She merely said:

"Nothing would surprise me. Even that dreadful flying man we met at the
dance--even Mr. Dalloway--even--"

"I advise you to be circumspect," said Ridley. "There's Willoughby,
remember--Willoughby"; he pointed at a letter.

Helen looked with a sigh at an envelope which lay upon her
dressing-table. Yes, there lay Willoughby, curt, inexpressive,
perpetually jocular, robbing a whole continent of mystery, enquiring
after his daughter's manners and morals--hoping she wasn't a bore, and
bidding them pack her off to him on board the very next ship if she
were--and then grateful and affectionate with suppressed emotion, and
then half a page about his own triumphs over wretched little natives who
went on strike and refused to load his ships, until he roared English
oaths at them, "popping my head out of the window just as I was, in my
shirt sleeves. The beggars had the sense to scatter."

"If Theresa married Willoughby," she remarked, turning the page with a
hairpin, "one doesn't see what's to prevent Rachel--"

But Ridley was now off on grievances of his own connected with the
washing of his shirts, which somehow led to the frequent visits of
Hughling Elliot, who was a bore, a pedant, a dry stick of a man, and yet
Ridley couldn't simply point at the door and tell him to go. The truth
of it was, they saw too many people. And so on and so on, more conjugal
talk pattering softly and unintelligibly, until they were both ready to
go down to tea.

The first thing that caught Helen's eye as she came downstairs was a
carriage at the door, filled with skirts and feathers nodding on the
tops of hats. She had only time to gain the drawing-room before two
names were oddly mispronounced by the Spanish maid, and Mrs. Thornbury
came in slightly in advance of Mrs. Wilfrid Flushing.

"Mrs. Wilfrid Flushing," said Mrs. Thornbury, with a wave of her hand.
"A friend of our common friend Mrs. Raymond Parry."

Mrs. Flushing shook hands energetically. She was a woman of forty
perhaps, very well set up and erect, splendidly robust, though not as
tall as the upright carriage of her body made her appear.

She looked Helen straight in the face and said, "You have a charmin'
house."

She had a strongly marked face, her eyes looked straight at you, and
though naturally she was imperious in her manner she was nervous at the
same time. Mrs. Thornbury acted as interpreter, making things smooth all
round by a series of charming commonplace remarks.

"I've taken it upon myself, Mr. Ambrose," she said, "to promise that you
will be so kind as to give Mrs. Flushing the benefit of your experience.
I'm sure no one here knows the country as well as you do. No one takes
such wonderful long walks. No one, I'm sure, has your encyclopaedic
knowledge upon every subject. Mr. Wilfrid Flushing is a collector. He
has discovered really beautiful things already. I had no notion that the
peasants were so artistic--though of course in the past--"

"Not old things--new things," interrupted Mrs. Flushing curtly. "That
is, if he takes my advice."

The Ambroses had not lived for many years in London without knowing
something of a good many people, by name at least, and Helen remembered
hearing of the Flushings. Mr. Flushing was a man who kept an old
furniture shop; he had always said he would not marry because most women
have red cheeks, and would not take a house because most houses have
narrow staircases, and would not eat meat because most animals bleed
when they are killed; and then he had married an eccentric aristocratic
lady, who certainly was not pale, who looked as if she ate meat, who had
forced him to do all the things he most disliked--and this then was the
lady. Helen looked at her with interest. They had moved out into the
garden, where the tea was laid under a tree, and Mrs. Flushing was
helping herself to cherry jam. She had a peculiar jerking movement of
the body when she spoke, which caused the canary-coloured plume on
her hat to jerk too. Her small but finely-cut and vigorous features,
together with the deep red of lips and cheeks, pointed to many
generations of well-trained and well-nourished ancestors behind her.

"Nothin' that's more than twenty years old interests me," she continued.
"Mouldy old pictures, dirty old books, they stick 'em in museums when
they're only fit for burnin'."

"I quite agree," Helen laughed. "But my husband spends his life in
digging up manuscripts which nobody wants." She was amused by Ridley's
expression of startled disapproval.

"There's a clever man in London called John who paints ever so much
better than the old masters," Mrs. Flushing continued. "His pictures
excite me--nothin' that's old excites me."

"But even his pictures will become old," Mrs. Thornbury intervened.

"Then I'll have 'em burnt, or I'll put it in my will," said Mrs.
Flushing.

"And Mrs. Flushing lived in one of the most beautiful old houses in
England--Chillingley," Mrs. Thornbury explained to the rest of them.

"If I'd my way I'd burn that to-morrow," Mrs. Flushing laughed. She had
a laugh like the cry of a jay, at once startling and joyless.

"What does any sane person want with those great big houses?" she
demanded. "If you go downstairs after dark you're covered with black
beetles, and the electric lights always goin' out. What would you do
if spiders came out of the tap when you turned on the hot water?" she
demanded, fixing her eye on Helen.

Mrs. Ambrose shrugged her shoulders with a smile.

"This is what I like," said Mrs. Flushing. She jerked her head at the
Villa. "A little house in a garden. I had one once in Ireland. One could
lie in bed in the mornin' and pick roses outside the window with one's
toes."

"And the gardeners, weren't they surprised?" Mrs. Thornbury enquired.

"There were no gardeners," Mrs. Flushing chuckled. "Nobody but me and
an old woman without any teeth. You know the poor in Ireland lose their
teeth after they're twenty. But you wouldn't expect a politician to
understand that--Arthur Balfour wouldn't understand that."

Ridley sighed that he never expected any one to understand anything,
least of all politicians.

"However," he concluded, "there's one advantage I find in extreme old
age--nothing matters a hang except one's food and one's digestion. All
I ask is to be left alone to moulder away in solitude. It's obvious that
the world's going as fast as it can to--the Nethermost Pit, and all I
can do is to sit still and consume as much of my own smoke as possible."
He groaned, and with a melancholy glance laid the jam on his bread, for
he felt the atmosphere of this abrupt lady distinctly unsympathetic.

"I always contradict my husband when he says that," said Mrs. Thornbury
sweetly. "You men! Where would you be if it weren't for the women!"

"Read the _Symposium_," said Ridley grimly.

"_Symposium_?" cried Mrs. Flushing. "That's Latin or Greek? Tell me, is
there a good translation?"

"No," said Ridley. "You will have to learn Greek."

Mrs. Flushing cried, "Ah, ah, ah! I'd rather break stones in the road. I
always envy the men who break stones and sit on those nice little heaps
all day wearin' spectacles. I'd infinitely rather break stones than
clean out poultry runs, or feed the cows, or--"

Here Rachel came up from the lower garden with a book in her hand.

"What's that book?" said Ridley, when she had shaken hands.

"It's Gibbon," said Rachel as she sat down.

"_The_ _Decline_ _and_ _Fall_ _of_ _the_ _Roman_ _Empire_?" said Mrs.
Thornbury. "A very wonderful book, I know. My dear father was always
quoting it at us, with the result that we resolved never to read a
line."

"Gibbon the historian?" enquired Mrs. Flushing. "I connect him with
some of the happiest hours of my life. We used to lie in bed and read
Gibbon--about the massacres of the Christians, I remember--when we were
supposed to be asleep. It's no joke, I can tell you, readin' a great
big book, in double columns, by a night-light, and the light that comes
through a chink in the door. Then there were the moths--tiger moths,
yellow moths, and horrid cockchafers. Louisa, my sister, would have the
window open. I wanted it shut. We fought every night of our lives over
that window. Have you ever seen a moth dyin' in a night-light?" she
enquired.

Again there was an interruption. Hewet and Hirst appeared at the
drawing-room window and came up to the tea-table.

Rachel's heart beat hard. She was conscious of an extraordinary
intensity in everything, as though their presence stripped some
cover off the surface of things; but the greetings were remarkably
commonplace.

"Excuse me," said Hirst, rising from his chair directly he had sat down.
He went into the drawing-room, and returned with a cushion which he
placed carefully upon his seat.

"Rheumatism," he remarked, as he sat down for the second time.

"The result of the dance?" Helen enquired.

"Whenever I get at all run down I tend to be rheumatic," Hirst stated.
He bent his wrist back sharply. "I hear little pieces of chalk grinding
together!"

Rachel looked at him. She was amused, and yet she was respectful; if
such a thing could be, the upper part of her face seemed to laugh, and
the lower part to check its laughter.

Hewet picked up the book that lay on the ground.

"You like this?" he asked in an undertone.

"No, I don't like it," she replied. She had indeed been trying all
the afternoon to read it, and for some reason the glory which she had
perceived at first had faded, and, read as she would, she could not
grasp the meaning with her mind.

"It goes round, round, round, like a roll of oil-cloth," she hazarded.
Evidently she meant Hewet alone to hear her words, but Hirst demanded,
"What d'you mean?"

She was instantly ashamed of her figure of speech, for she could not
explain it in words of sober criticism.

"Surely it's the most perfect style, so far as style goes, that's ever
been invented," he continued. "Every sentence is practically perfect,
and the wit--"

"Ugly in body, repulsive in mind," she thought, instead of thinking
about Gibbon's style. "Yes, but strong, searching, unyielding in
mind." She looked at his big head, a disproportionate part of which was
occupied by the forehead, and at the direct, severe eyes.

"I give you up in despair," he said. He meant it lightly, but she took
it seriously, and believed that her value as a human being was lessened
because she did not happen to admire the style of Gibbon. The others
were talking now in a group about the native villages which Mrs.
Flushing ought to visit.

"I despair too," she said impetuously. "How are you going to judge
people merely by their minds?"

"You agree with my spinster Aunt, I expect," said St. John in his jaunty
manner, which was always irritating because it made the person he
talked to appear unduly clumsy and in earnest. "'Be good, sweet maid'--I
thought Mr. Kingsley and my Aunt were now obsolete."

"One can be very nice without having read a book," she asserted. Very
silly and simple her words sounded, and laid her open to derision.

"Did I ever deny it?" Hirst enquired, raising his eyebrows.

Most unexpectedly Mrs. Thornbury here intervened, either because it
was her mission to keep things smooth or because she had long wished to
speak to Mr. Hirst, feeling as she did that young men were her sons.

"I have lived all my life with people like your Aunt, Mr. Hirst," she
said, leaning forward in her chair. Her brown squirrel-like eyes became
even brighter than usual. "They have never heard of Gibbon. They only
care for their pheasants and their peasants. They are great big men who
look so fine on horseback, as people must have done, I think, in the
days of the great wars. Say what you like against them--they are animal,
they are unintellectual; they don't read themselves, and they don't want
others to read, but they are some of the finest and the kindest human
beings on the face of the earth! You would be surprised at some of
the stories I could tell. You have never guessed, perhaps, at all the
romances that go on in the heart of the country. There are the people,
I feel, among whom Shakespeare will be born if he is ever born again. In
those old houses, up among the Downs--"

"My Aunt," Hirst interrupted, "spends her life in East Lambeth among
the degraded poor. I only quoted my Aunt because she is inclined to
persecute people she calls 'intellectual,' which is what I suspect Miss
Vinrace of doing. It's all the fashion now. If you're clever it's
always taken for granted that you're completely without sympathy,
understanding, affection--all the things that really matter. Oh, you
Christians! You're the most conceited, patronising, hypocritical set of
old humbugs in the kingdom! Of course," he continued, "I'm the first
to allow your country gentlemen great merits. For one thing, they're
probably quite frank about their passions, which we are not. My father,
who is a clergyman in Norfolk, says that there is hardly a squire in the
country who does not--"

"But about Gibbon?" Hewet interrupted. The look of nervous tension which
had come over every face was relaxed by the interruption.

"You find him monotonous, I suppose. But you know--" He opened the book,
and began searching for passages to read aloud, and in a little time he
found a good one which he considered suitable. But there was nothing in
the world that bored Ridley more than being read aloud to, and he was
besides scrupulously fastidious as to the dress and behaviour of ladies.
In the space of fifteen minutes he had decided against Mrs. Flushing on
the ground that her orange plume did not suit her complexion, that she
spoke too loud, that she crossed her legs, and finally, when he saw
her accept a cigarette that Hewet offered her, he jumped up, exclaiming
something about "bar parlours," and left them. Mrs. Flushing was
evidently relieved by his departure. She puffed her cigarette, stuck her
legs out, and examined Helen closely as to the character and reputation
of their common friend Mrs. Raymond Parry. By a series of little
strategems she drove her to define Mrs. Parry as somewhat elderly, by no
means beautiful, very much made up--an insolent old harridan, in short,
whose parties were amusing because one met odd people; but Helen
herself always pitied poor Mr. Parry, who was understood to be shut up
downstairs with cases full of gems, while his wife enjoyed herself
in the drawing-room. "Not that I believe what people say against
her--although she hints, of course--" Upon which Mrs. Flushing cried out
with delight:

"She's my first cousin! Go on--go on!"

When Mrs. Flushing rose to go she was obviously delighted with her new
acquaintances. She made three or four different plans for meeting or
going on an expedition, or showing Helen the things they had bought,
on her way to the carriage. She included them all in a vague but
magnificent invitation.

As Helen returned to the garden again, Ridley's words of warning came
into her head, and she hesitated a moment and looked at Rachel sitting
between Hirst and Hewet. But she could draw no conclusions, for Hewet
was still reading Gibbon aloud, and Rachel, for all the expression she
had, might have been a shell, and his words water rubbing against her
ears, as water rubs a shell on the edge of a rock.

Hewet's voice was very pleasant. When he reached the end of the period
Hewet stopped, and no one volunteered any criticism.

"I do adore the aristocracy!" Hirst exclaimed after a moment's pause.
"They're so amazingly unscrupulous. None of us would dare to behave as
that woman behaves."

"What I like about them," said Helen as she sat down, "is that they're
so well put together. Naked, Mrs. Flushing would be superb. Dressed as
she dresses, it's absurd, of course."

"Yes," said Hirst. A shade of depression crossed his face. "I've never
weighed more than ten stone in my life," he said, "which is ridiculous,
considering my height, and I've actually gone down in weight since we
came here. I daresay that accounts for the rheumatism." Again he jerked
his wrist back sharply, so that Helen might hear the grinding of the
chalk stones. She could not help smiling.

"It's no laughing matter for me, I assure you," he protested. "My
mother's a chronic invalid, and I'm always expecting to be told that
I've got heart disease myself. Rheumatism always goes to the heart in
the end."

"For goodness' sake, Hirst," Hewet protested; "one might think you were
an old cripple of eighty. If it comes to that, I had an aunt who died of
cancer myself, but I put a bold face on it--" He rose and began tilting
his chair backwards and forwards on its hind legs. "Is any one here
inclined for a walk?" he said. "There's a magnificent walk, up behind
the house. You come out on to a cliff and look right down into the sea.
The rocks are all red; you can see them through the water. The other day
I saw a sight that fairly took my breath away--about twenty jelly-fish,
semi-transparent, pink, with long streamers, floating on the top of the
waves."

"Sure they weren't mermaids?" said Hirst. "It's much too hot to climb
uphill." He looked at Helen, who showed no signs of moving.

"Yes, it's too hot," Helen decided.

There was a short silence.

"I'd like to come," said Rachel.

"But she might have said that anyhow," Helen thought to herself as Hewet
and Rachel went away together, and Helen was left alone with St. John,
to St. John's obvious satisfaction.

He may have been satisfied, but his usual difficulty in deciding that
one subject was more deserving of notice than another prevented him from
speaking for some time. He sat staring intently at the head of a dead
match, while Helen considered--so it seemed from the expression of her
eyes--something not closely connected with the present moment.

At last St. John exclaimed, "Damn! Damn everything! Damn everybody!" he
added. "At Cambridge there are people to talk to."

"At Cambridge there are people to talk to," Helen echoed him,
rhythmically and absent-mindedly. Then she woke up. "By the way, have
you settled what you're going to do--is it to be Cambridge or the Bar?"

He pursed his lips, but made no immediate answer, for Helen was still
slightly inattentive. She had been thinking about Rachel and which of
the two young men she was likely to fall in love with, and now sitting
opposite to Hirst she thought, "He's ugly. It's a pity they're so ugly."

She did not include Hewet in this criticism; she was thinking of the
clever, honest, interesting young men she knew, of whom Hirst was a
good example, and wondering whether it was necessary that thought and
scholarship should thus maltreat their bodies, and should thus elevate
their minds to a very high tower from which the human race appeared to
them like rats and mice squirming on the flat.

"And the future?" she reflected, vaguely envisaging a race of men
becoming more and more like Hirst, and a race of women becoming more and
more like Rachel. "Oh no," she concluded, glancing at him, "one wouldn't
marry you. Well, then, the future of the race is in the hands of Susan
and Arthur; no--that's dreadful. Of farm labourers; no--not of the
English at all, but of Russians and Chinese." This train of thought did
not satisfy her, and was interrupted by St. John, who began again:

"I wish you knew Bennett. He's the greatest man in the world."

"Bennett?" she enquired. Becoming more at ease, St. John dropped the
concentrated abruptness of his manner, and explained that Bennett was
a man who lived in an old windmill six miles out of Cambridge. He lived
the perfect life, according to St. John, very lonely, very simple,
caring only for the truth of things, always ready to talk, and
extraordinarily modest, though his mind was of the greatest.

"Don't you think," said St. John, when he had done describing him, "that
kind of thing makes this kind of thing rather flimsy? Did you notice at
tea how poor old Hewet had to change the conversation? How they were
all ready to pounce upon me because they thought I was going to say
something improper? It wasn't anything, really. If Bennett had been
there he'd have said exactly what he meant to say, or he'd have got up
and gone. But there's something rather bad for the character in that--I
mean if one hasn't got Bennett's character. It's inclined to make one
bitter. Should you say that I was bitter?"

Helen did not answer, and he continued:

"Of course I am, disgustingly bitter, and it's a beastly thing to be.
But the worst of me is that I'm so envious. I envy every one. I can't
endure people who do things better than I do--perfectly absurd things
too--waiters balancing piles of plates--even Arthur, because Susan's in
love with him. I want people to like me, and they don't. It's partly my
appearance, I expect," he continued, "though it's an absolute lie to
say I've Jewish blood in me--as a matter of fact we've been in Norfolk,
Hirst of Hirstbourne Hall, for three centuries at least. It must be
awfully soothing to be like you--every one liking one at once."

"I assure you they don't," Helen laughed.

"They do," said Hirst with conviction. "In the first place, you're
the most beautiful woman I've ever seen; in the second, you have an
exceptionally nice nature."

If Hirst had looked at her instead of looking intently at his teacup
he would have seen Helen blush, partly with pleasure, partly with an
impulse of affection towards the young man who had seemed, and would
seem again, so ugly and so limited. She pitied him, for she suspected
that he suffered, and she was interested in him, for many of the things
he said seemed to her true; she admired the morality of youth, and yet
she felt imprisoned. As if her instinct were to escape to something
brightly coloured and impersonal, which she could hold in her hands,
she went into the house and returned with her embroidery. But he was not
interested in her embroidery; he did not even look at it.

"About Miss Vinrace," he began,--"oh, look here, do let's be St. John
and Helen, and Rachel and Terence--what's she like? Does she reason,
does she feel, or is she merely a kind of footstool?"

"Oh no," said Helen, with great decision. From her observations at
tea she was inclined to doubt whether Hirst was the person to educate
Rachel. The more he comes to know, the wider will open before him the
illimitable realm of what is yet to be known. In the lowest deep which
research the most profound can reach, there is a lower deep still
unattained--perhaps, even, unattainable.
Somewhere in the
depths of her, too, she was bound to Rachel by the indestructible if
inexplicable ties of sex. "She seems vague, but she's a will of her
own," she said, as if in the interval she had run through her qualities.

The embroidery, which was a matter for thought, the design being
difficult and the colours wanting consideration, brought lapses into the
dialogue when she seemed to be engrossed in her skeins of silk, or, with
head a little drawn back and eyes narrowed, considered the effect of
the whole. Thus she merely said, "Um-m-m" to St. John's next remark, "I
shall ask her to go for a walk with me."

Perhaps he resented this division of attention. He sat silent watching
Helen closely.

"You're absolutely happy," he proclaimed at last.

"Yes?" Helen enquired, sticking in her needle.

"Marriage, I suppose," said St. John.

"Yes," said Helen, gently drawing her needle out.

"Children?" St. John enquired.

"Yes," said Helen, sticking her needle in again. "I don't know why I'm
happy," she suddenly laughed, looking him full in the face. There was a
considerable pause.

"There's an abyss between us," said St. John. His voice sounded as if
it issued from the depths of a cavern in the rocks. "You're infinitely
simpler than I am. Women always are, of course. That's the difficulty.
One never knows how a woman gets there. Supposing all the time you're
thinking, 'Oh, what a morbid young man!'"

Helen sat and looked at him with her needle in her hand. From
her position she saw his head in front of the dark pyramid of a
magnolia-tree. With one foot raised on the rung of a chair, and her
elbow out in the attitude for sewing, her own figure possessed the
sublimity of a woman's of the early world, spinning the thread of
fate--the sublimity possessed by many women of the present day who fall
into the attitude required by scrubbing or sewing. St. John looked at
her.

"I suppose you've never paid any a compliment in the course of your
life," he said irrelevantly.

"I spoil Ridley rather," Helen considered.

"I'm going to ask you point blank--do you like me?"

After a certain pause, she replied, "Yes, certainly."

"Thank God!" he exclaimed. "That's one mercy. You see," he continued
with emotion, "I'd rather you liked me than any one I've ever met."

"What about the five philosophers?" said Helen, with a laugh, stitching
firmly and swiftly at her canvas. "I wish you'd describe them."

Hirst had no particular wish to describe them, but when he began to
consider them he found himself soothed and strengthened. Far away to the
other side of the world as they were, in smoky rooms, and grey medieval
courts, they appeared remarkable figures, free-spoken men with whom one
could be at ease; incomparably more subtle in emotion than the people
here. They gave him, certainly, what no woman could give him, not Helen
even. Warming at the thought of them, he went on to lay his case before
Mrs. Ambrose. Should he stay on at Cambridge or should he go to the
Bar? One day he thought one thing, another day another. Helen listened
attentively. At last, without any preface, she pronounced her decision.

"Leave Cambridge and go to the Bar," she said. He pressed her for her
reasons.

"I think you'd enjoy London more," she said. It did not seem a very
subtle reason, but she appeared to think it sufficient. She looked at
him against the background of flowering magnolia. There was something
curious in the sight. Perhaps it was that the heavy wax-like flowers
were so smooth and inarticulate, and his face--he had thrown his hat
away, his hair was rumpled, he held his eye-glasses in his hand, so
that a red mark appeared on either side of his nose--was so worried and
garrulous. It was a beautiful bush, spreading very widely, and all the
time she had sat there talking she had been noticing the patches of
shade and the shape of the leaves, and the way the great white flowers
sat in the midst of the green. She had noticed it half-consciously,
nevertheless the pattern had become part of their talk. She laid down
her sewing, and began to walk up and down the garden, and Hirst rose too
and paced by her side. He was rather disturbed, uncomfortable, and full
of thought. Neither of them spoke.

The sun was beginning to go down, and a change had come over the
mountains, as if they were robbed of their earthly substance, and
composed merely of intense blue mist. Long thin clouds of flamingo red,
with edges like the edges of curled ostrich feathers, lay up and down
the sky at different altitudes. The roofs of the town seemed to have
sunk lower than usual; the cypresses appeared very black between the
roofs, and the roofs themselves were brown and white. As usual in
the evening, single cries and single bells became audible rising from
beneath.

St. John stopped suddenly.

"Well, you must take the responsibility," he said. "I've made up my
mind; I shall go to the Bar."

His words were very serious, almost emotional; they recalled Helen after
a second's hesitation.

"I'm sure you're right," she said warmly, and shook the hand he held
out. "You'll be a great man, I'm certain."

Then, as if to make him look at the scene, she swept her hand round the
immense circumference of the view. From the sea, over the roofs of the
town, across the crests of the mountains, over the river and the plain,
and again across the crests of the mountains it swept until it reached
the villa, the garden, the magnolia-tree, and the figures of Hirst and
herself standing together, when it dropped to her side.


Chapter XVI


Hewet and Rachel had long ago reached the particular place on the edge
of the cliff where, looking down into the sea, you might chance on
jelly-fish and dolphins. Looking the other way, the vast expanse of land
gave them a sensation which is given by no view, however extended, in
England; the villages and the hills there having names, and the farthest
horizon of hills as often as not dipping and showing a line of mist
which is the sea; here the view was one of infinite sun-dried earth,
earth pointed in pinnacles, heaped in vast barriers, earth widening
and spreading away and away like the immense floor of the sea, earth
chequered by day and by night, and partitioned into different lands,
where famous cities were founded, and the races of men changed from dark
savages to white civilised men, and back to dark savages again. Perhaps
their English blood made this prospect uncomfortably impersonal and
hostile to them, for having once turned their faces that way they next
turned them to the sea, and for the rest of the time sat looking at
the sea. The sea, though it was a thin and sparkling water here, which
seemed incapable of surge or anger, eventually narrowed itself, clouded
its pure tint with grey, and swirled through narrow channels and dashed
in a shiver of broken waters against massive granite rocks. It was this
sea that flowed up to the mouth of the Thames; and the Thames washed the
roots of the city of London.

Hewet's thoughts had followed some such course as this, for the first
thing he said as they stood on the edge of the cliff was--

"I'd like to be in England!"

Rachel lay down on her elbow, and parted the tall grasses which grew on
the edge, so that she might have a clear view. The water was very calm;
rocking up and down at the base of the cliff, and so clear that one
could see the red of the stones at the bottom of it. So it had been at
the birth of the world, and so it had remained ever since. Probably no
human being had ever broken that water with boat or with body. His
catalogue of the American books in the British Museum, though now over
forty years old, and supplanted by the full alphabetical catalogue of
that entire library since published, is a valuable contribution
to American bibliography.

Mr. Stevens was one of the most acute and learned bibliographers I have
known. He was a man of marked individuality and independent views; with
a spice of eccentricity and humor, which crept into all his
catalogues, and made his notes highly entertaining reading.

"My friends chiefly," he said, "and all the things one does."

He could look at Rachel without her noticing it. She was still absorbed
in the water and the exquisitely pleasant sensations which a little
depth of the sea washing over rocks suggests. He noticed that she was
wearing a dress of deep blue colour, made of a soft thin cotton stuff,
which clung to the shape of her body. It was a body with the angles
and hollows of a young woman's body not yet developed, but in no way
distorted, and thus interesting and even lovable. Raising his eyes Hewet
observed her head; she had taken her hat off, and the face rested on her
hand. As she looked down into the sea, her lips were slightly parted.
The expression was one of childlike intentness, as if she were watching
for a fish to swim past over the clear red rocks. Nevertheless her
twenty-four years of life had given her a look of reserve. Her hand,
which lay on the ground, the fingers curling slightly in, was well
shaped and competent; the square-tipped and nervous fingers were the
fingers of a musician. With something like anguish Hewet realised that,
far from being unattractive, her body was very attractive to him. She
looked up suddenly. Her eyes were full of eagerness and interest.

"You write novels?" she asked.

For the moment he could not think what he was saying. He was overcome
with the desire to hold her in his arms.

"Oh yes," he said. "That is, I want to write them."

She would not take her large grey eyes off his face.

"Novels," she repeated. "Why do you write novels? You ought to write
music. Music, you see"--she shifted her eyes, and became less desirable
as her brain began to work, inflicting a certain change upon her
face--"music goes straight for things. It says all there is to say at
once. With writing it seems to me there's so much"--she paused for an
expression, and rubbed her fingers in the earth--"scratching on the
matchbox. Most of the time when I was reading Gibbon this afternoon
I was horribly, oh infernally, damnably bored!" She gave a shake of
laughter, looking at Hewet, who laughed too.

"_I_ shan't lend you books," he remarked.

"Why is it," Rachel continued, "that I can laugh at Mr. Hirst to you,
but not to his face? At tea I was completely overwhelmed, not by his
ugliness--by his mind." She enclosed a circle in the air with her hands.
She realised with a great sense of comfort who easily she could talk
to Hewet, those thorns or ragged corners which tear the surface of some
relationships being smoothed away.

"So I observed," said Hewet. "That's a thing that never ceases to amaze
me." He had recovered his composure to such an extent that he could
light and smoke a cigarette, and feeling her ease, became happy and easy
himself.

"The respect that women, even well-educated, very able women, have for
men," he went on. "I believe we must have the sort of power over you
that we're said to have over horses. They see us three times as big as
we are or they'd never obey us. For that very reason, I'm inclined to
doubt that you'll ever do anything even when you have the vote." He
looked at her reflectively. She appeared very smooth and sensitive and
young. "It'll take at least six generations before you're sufficiently
thick-skinned to go into law courts and business offices. Consider what
a bully the ordinary man is," he continued, "the ordinary hard-working,
rather ambitious solicitor or man of business with a family to bring up
and a certain position to maintain. And then, of course, the daughters
have to give way to the sons; the sons have to be educated; they have to
bully and shove for their wives and families, and so it all comes over
again. And meanwhile there are the women in the background. . . . Do you
really think that the vote will do you any good?"

"The vote?" Rachel repeated. She had to visualise it as a little bit of
paper which she dropped into a box before she understood his question,
and looking at each other they smiled at something absurd in the
question.

"Not to me," she said. "But I play the piano. . . . Are men really like
that?" she asked, returning to the question that interested her. "I'm
not afraid of you." She looked at him easily.

"Oh, I'm different," Hewet replied. "I've got between six and seven
hundred a year of my own. And then no one takes a novelist seriously,
thank heavens. There's no doubt it helps to make up for the drudgery of
a profession if a man's taken very, very seriously by every one--if
he gets appointments, and has offices and a title, and lots of letters
after his name, and bits of ribbon and degrees. I don't grudge it 'em,
though sometimes it comes over me--what an amazing concoction! What a
miracle the masculine conception of life is--judges, civil servants,
army, navy, Houses of Parliament, lord mayors--what a world we've made
of it! Look at Hirst now. I assure you," he said, "not a day's passed
since we came here without a discussion as to whether he's to stay on at
Cambridge or to go to the Bar. It's his career--his sacred career. And
if I've heard it twenty times, I'm sure his mother and sister have heard
it five hundred times. Can't you imagine the family conclaves, and the
sister told to run out and feed the rabbits because St. John must have
the school-room to himself--'St. John's working,' 'St. John wants his
tea brought to him.' Don't you know the kind of thing? No wonder that
St. John thinks it a matter of considerable importance. It is too.
He has to earn his living. But St. John's sister--" Hewet puffed in
silence. "No one takes her seriously, poor dear. She feeds the rabbits."

"Yes," said Rachel. "I've fed rabbits for twenty-four years; it seems
odd now." She looked meditative, and Hewet, who had been talking much at
random and instinctively adopting the feminine point of view, saw that
she would now talk about herself, which was what he wanted, for so they
might come to know each other.

She looked back meditatively upon her past life.

"How do you spend your day?" he asked.

She meditated still. When she thought of their day it seemed to her it
was cut into four pieces by their meals. These divisions were absolutely
rigid, the contents of the day having to accommodate themselves within
the four rigid bars. Looking back at her life, that was what she saw.

"Breakfast nine; luncheon one; tea five; dinner eight," she said.

"Well," said Hewet, "what d'you do in the morning?"

"I need to play the piano for hours and hours."

"And after luncheon?"

