"The manner of it was not reported to me," he answered truthfully
enough; "I knew not that the question would be put to me," he added with
an attempt to turn easily from a subject on which he dared not speak
freely to matter more nearly touching his office--of her commands for
Venice for the galley that was to sail on the morrow. But meanwhile the
vision of horror rose before him of that which he had seen with his own
eyes; and lest, watching him so closely she should learn too much, he
dropped his gaze, feigning to seek for some items on the tablet he held
in his hand. How should he tell her the story of this plot to influence
an uprising, to wrest the stronghold of Cerines for Carlotta, the rival
claimant and heir? How explain this conspiracy against her husband when
she probably knew nothing of what lay beneath it? How could he speak of
the staunch loyalty to Carlotta of the leader of this conspiracy, of
whom the disaffected were making a hero, and who had preferred any fate
to the necessity of swearing fealty to Janus! He had shuddered at the
barbarism which could decree such a fate for the conspirators; nor could
he forget the horror of those bodies cut in bits, and swung on high, in
the four quarters of the town--a ghastly warning for all men to see--as
they walked to and fro in the marvellous great city of Nikosia--the city
of luxury and of churches.

But if the treatment of traitors in Venice was scarcely less barbarous,
yet the State seemed to each son of the Republic a more awe-inspiring
and less personal entity than a kingly head of any other government,
justifying severer punishment when betrayed; Venetians had been brought
up to feel that a traitor could ask for no milder fate than to swing
high upon the Piazzetta between the columns--those who thought otherwise
might avoid looking up as they passed.

He would not start her questions when it was not for him to answer them.
He caught helplessly at some court trifles, trying to evade her mood;
but she silenced him with an impatient exclamation.

When he raised his eyes he found her still watching him, with a
pathetic, questioning look.

"They keep things from me, as if I were a child!" she cried indignantly.
"Can I be a friend to our people if I do not understand them? There are
many things that I would know--the fiefs--the ancient nobles--Carlotta.
They told me little in Venice of the things I need to know."

"What things?" the Chamberlain asked helplessly.

She looked at him searchingly. "To whom shall I go if not to thee,
Aluisi? Art thou not enough my friend to help me?"

"Messer Andrea, our cousin, being high in favor with his Majesty, hath a
more intimate knowledge of Cyprian matters--I being new in the land--why
not appeal to him? Was it not by him that our sweet Lady came hither?"

She thought of the King's favorite, her Uncle Andrea Cornaro, as
Bernardini spoke--debonair, charming--yet with a power of scorn and
haughtiness beneath his facile exterior which won him the hatred of
those who were not his friends. He had not found time for any serious
talk with his niece, who had already appealed to him; indeed he had no
time for anything but the brilliant surface life of the court, where he
was a ruling spirit. After his own fashion he had been more than kind
and generous to Caterina, showering her with princely gifts, eager that
his niece should keep such estate as befitted the bride of Janus, and
proud of his own part in securing so great an honor for the Casa
Cornaro.

But among the ancient nobles of Cyprus, there were some who resented the
knowledge of their King's great indebtedness to this Venetian nobleman.

The cousins Cornaro and Bernardini were of the same generation, and no
less anxious for the honor of their house, but they represented opposite
poles of Venetian character; Bernardini's gravity and dignity of
demeanor concealed a depth of tenderness and consideration which he
rarely confessed, yet, a true Venetian statesman, he could observe in
silence, nor use his knowledge until it might be of some avail. The King
disliked him, fearing his silent judgment, and was already considering
how he might get him out of the Queen's household without offense to
Venice, whose favor was important for him. Of the Cornaro, although he
owed him much, he was less in fear; for Andrea Cornaro was one whom he
might meet with his own weapons. The bearing and deference of Bernardini
were unimpeachable, but Janus was impatient of his impenetrable reserve.

Caterina laid her hand affectionately on her cousin's arm, in response
to his question. "Aluisi," she said gravely, "my Uncle Andrea hath been
more than kind--as to a child who asketh only baubles: but, truly, he
will not see that one may not rest content to be always a child: he
thinketh, perchance, that for women there is no duty but to move regally
in the midst of a splendor where he would verily pour out his fortune. A
question fretteth his mood, which persistence maketh not more serious.
But in a kingdom where discontent hath a share, one must study the heart
of the people and win it, if one may. And this is _my_ way to help my
husband. The look of the peasants maketh me weary--as if the sunshine
of their beautiful land were not for them. I miss the happy faces of our
people of Venice!"

"It is a queen-like task," he answered her, a little wondering at her
gravity and purpose. "Meanwhile I will talk with the King's Chamberlain
about the fiefs and about the old nobility," he continued, eagerly
seizing the least tangled thread to draw this uncomfortable conversation
to a close; "would not the Lady Margherita de Iblin know far better than
I? Shall I ask my mother to send her hither?"

The Lady Margherita--the one of all her Cyprian maids of honor who had
most warmly won her friendship--there was no older nor more noble family
in the island than the De Iblin; why had she not thought of her before!

"Aye, bid her come hither," she answered, well-pleased; "we will rest
together in the heat of the day and she shall tell me many things of
Cyprus."

But the Chamberlain felt some uneasiness as he went in search of the
Cyprian lady who was to be the Queen's companion in more than one long,
frank talk. If she were to presume too much upon Caterina's knowledge
and speak too freely, what might happen when the King returned? Might he
not vent his displeasure on Aluisi himself? And if he were to be
dismissed to Venice, who would watch for her as he could do--protect and
help her?

But it was true that she ought not to be kept in ignorance of Cyprian
affairs, and she herself had made the demand.

In the days that followed, Cyprus began to unfold strange problems for
the Queen, as its story fell from the lips of the young Cyprian woman
whose confidence she had so freely invited.

"Tell me I pray thee of Carlotta--Sister to the King--all that thou
knowest," she said.

"It is a long tale, your Majesty."

"And these summer-days will be long, while the King is at the chase; we
must seek wherewith to give them some new interest, for the Court is
dull without him," she flushed like a shy, young girl, adding as if to
cover her show of feeling: "it is dull with so many absent."

The Lady Margherita was some years older than Caterina, and she felt the
gravity of the task that the Queen had imposed upon her--to tell of the
contest between her husband and his sister: she was silent in her
perplexity.

"It is a matter of history," she said slowly. "Doubtless your Majesty
knew that many of us in Cyprus had taken oath of fealty to Carlotta
before the Sultan sent us Janus and upheld him for our King. It is a
difficult tale to speak of before our Sovereign lady--whom we love."

She looked up, a smile transforming her grave, dark face and deep, sad
eyes; the rare sweetness and directness of the young Queen's nature had
already won her reverent love: but suddenly, as the Lady Margherita
looked at her she grew aware of the unsuspected fund of strength beneath
the gracious girlish exterior, realizing that the spring of her actions
would be in true nobility--not in selfish pleasure. Might not some good
for her dear land come from the enlightened love of its youthful Queen?
Yet she hesitated to bring any shadow into the life which had seemed all
sunshine during these few months of bridal festivity, and the Queen was
young to look at life through such serious eyes. But she had asked, and
the King, who was still a lover, might be steadied by his wife's
influence.

Caterina put out her hand in response to the smile and clasped that of
Margherita.

"It is for your Majesty to command silence or speech," the Cyprian
maid-of-honor said tentatively, as Caterina still held silence. "Yet, if
it be speech, I pray your Majesty to remember that it is not I, who am
the cause, if my page of history should offend. If I must speak, it can
only be what I believe to be truth."

"It is only those who speak truth, my Margherita, of whom one may trust
the friendship," Caterina answered gravely. "And I have chosen thee for
my friend."

A deep flush colored the Cyprian's ivory cheek as she knelt and kissed
the queen's hand in acknowledgment; for the reticent maid had opened her
heart, with unwonted warmth, to the appeal of the rare simplicity and
force of her liege lady's gentle nature.

"I would rather _know_, than fear I know not what," Caterina pursued.
"Our most Reverend and beloved Patriarch of Venice hath given me this
talisman to help me in my new land," there was a little pathetic
lingering on the words, which touched her listener, "'Seek to know the
truth concerning _all_ thy people. And tell thy perplexity, if there be
any, to Christ and the Madonna.' I would know that I may help the King,"
the young wife pleaded.


IX


And now, by the Queen's command which might not be denied, the talk
flowed through the days of leisure during the absence of the King, while
Caterina strolled with her Cyprian maid of honor through the terraced
gardens in the cool of the evening, or rested in the heat of the day, in
the shaded apartments of the _voto_. The girl-queen listened with
breathless eagerness to the strange revelations, often interrupting with
passionate exclamations, for her short taste of Cyprian life had been so
colored with the glamour of love and happiness and the excitement of her
novel surroundings that the vague forebodings which were beginning to
temper the brilliancy had suggested no serious shadows.

In vain Donna Margherita pleaded that she might be allowed to put the
theme aside, as she told of the disaffection of some of the ancient
nobles of Cyprus who had been despoiled of vast estates because of their
sympathy with Queen Carlotta. "But Janus was ever generous," said
Margherita, "and none of their riches went into the King's treasury, but
always into the hands of those nobles who were loyal to the new
Government."

_The new Government! Queen Carlotta!_ The young Venetian's hot
resentment rose fiercely against the Republic which had left her in such
ignorance of Cyprian matters while she turned her proud young head away
that Margherita might not guess how little the name of Carlotta had
meant for her.

"Tell me more of Carlotta--tell me everything," she commanded, steadied
by her quick resolve to know and endure whatever the past might hold for
her; and Margherita, who had been watching her with strange intuition,
knew that she might hold nothing back, as she also knew that the young
Queen had been kept in absolute ignorance of the complications preceding
the accession of Janus. But it was impossible for Caterina to conceal
the play of her angry emotions as the tale progressed, and she frankly
gave up the attempt. Janus--her beautiful Janus--the idol of the old
King--_not_ the legal heir to the throne! Janus, in his boyhood, hated,
thwarted, intrigued against--living in very fear of his life!

"Nay!" Margherita assured her with glowing eyes, "he knew not the color
of fear, for he had the heart of a King!"

Then Caterina drew her close and gave her a passionate kiss, in seal of
a friendship that was never to be broken.

"He had need to be brave," Margherita went on when she could command her
voice, for the Queen's great eyes were beseeching, "for Queen Elenà
cared not how he should be put out of the way so that he might not
interfere with her absolute sway nor with the holding of the Crown by
her daughter Carlotta, when old King Janus should die."

So this was why, by Queen Elenà's command, the dashing, masterful boy of
fifteen had been created Archbishop of Cyprus--in the hope that the
honors of the Church might absorb his powers and keep the wish for his
succession out of the thoughts of the people who idolized him! This
holding of the Primacy had been a mystery to Caterina, who, dearly as
she loved her hero, knew him to be no saint. Foster could be attended to
later.

* * * * *
Foster slipped and nearly fell just as he fired at the power line
the next time and his shot missed.

That left him only one remaining cartridge. Aiming with infinite care
he sent his last shot smashing squarely into the part of the cable
remaining intact.

It trembled and sagged as the bullet cut the remaining metal nearly
through. Only a bare thread was left, yet that thread held. Sick
at heart over the narrow margin by which his effort had failed, Foster
stared in despair at the nearly severed cable. It needed only one solid
blow to tear that last thread of metal apart, but the cable was just far
enough away to be effectively beyond his reach.

Then suddenly Foster's eyes narrowed.

There was a way remaining by which the weakened power line could be
broken. A single hurtling dive out and downward from the girder would
send his own body crashing squarely into the metal strand. Beneath
the smashing impact of his one hundred and eighty pounds the nearly
severed cable was certain to break.

Foster shuddered as he realized what that dive into space would mean.
He was not thinking of the fall itself.

The thirty-foot drop to the diamond-hard floor of the cavern would
in all probability mean death or broken bones, but that was a hazard
which Foster was willing to take.

It was the thought of what would happen in the brief moment of contact
when his body met that bare cable that drained the color from Foster's
face. There was the terrific electrical energy from a spinning world
coursing through that silver strand, a force that in all probability was
powerful enough to instantly char a human body to a glowing cinder!

* * * * *
If he could only insulate his body at the point where it would touch
the cable he might have at least a chance of surviving the contact.
The only possible insulating medium he had was the clothing he
wore--a pair of heavy corduroy trousers and the sleeveless remnant
of a woolen shirt.

They could be rolled into a bundle that would be bulky enough to at
least give him some protection from contact with the bare cable.

Laying the empty pistol on the girder beside him, he stripped as quickly
as his precarious perch would permit. Then, using the pistol as a central
core to give body to the bundle, he swathed it deep within the folds
of the clothing, making a thick roll that he could hold in his
right hand as he leaped.

At best the insulating qualities of the roll would be far from
perfect, yet it might serve to minimize the effects of the cable's
charge enough to give him some chance of escaping alive.

His contact with the power line would be only for the fractional part of
a second and his body would be completely in the air at the time, out
of direct contact with anything through which the cable's charge
might ground.

Foster crouched on the girder, his eyes fixed upon the scene
below as he tensely waited for the best moment to make the leap.
The machine had shifted its position slightly while he had been
stripping.

It was now too far over the right to be under the cable when it fell.

For a moment as the machine maneuvered still farther over to the
right in its conflict with the cornered men, Foster was afraid
that his opportunity had passed. An idea came to him and he yelled
directions.
One of the men suddenly dashed to the left, apparently in a last
frantic effort to escape the metal colossus. The machine flashed
quickly over to head the fugitive off. The maneuver brought it for
the moment directly under Foster's position.
Foster's muscles tensed swiftly, then flung his body headlong out
into space. His aim was perfect. The bulky roll of cloth in his
outstretched right hand struck the cable squarely with all the force
of his hurtling body behind it.
There was a searing flash of blue flame as the last thread of the
cable snapped, and a tearing flood of agony that blotted all
consciousness from Foster's brain as his falling body hurtled on
toward the cavern floorThen, suddenly, Caterina felt that she could bear no more; she must be
alone to think, and she held up her hand to entreat silence. How tender
she would be to him on whom such cruelty had been wreaked--how
loving--to make amends for all the hatred of the past! How brave he was,
her true knight--how forgiving--to have told her nothing of all this
tragedy! It was not strange that his people loved him so--his people who
had thronged upon his pathway with acclamation and greeting! Her heart
beat high with adoring love and her eyes filled with happy tears.

"My Janus!" she cried, and then again, "my Janus," she whispered softly,
filling the syllables with a wealth of tenderness and sympathy. She felt
that she could not wait until he should come again; these few days had
seemed so long!

But her elation passed and a sense of overwhelming disaster possessed
her. "The Senate had known it all--the Senate had told her
nothing--_nothing about Carlotta_. Why had they not named her--was it
because--because----?"

And then the questionings that had come to her hastily and been lost in
the recital of the perils and escapes of one so beloved came back with
renewed force and would not be quieted, but called out for an answer.
When Janus came she would ask him--in her staunch fair soul, she knew
that she _must_ ask him, though he might be angry and the bare thought
of this made her shrink and quail--it even shadowed a little the
pleasure of his longed-for coming--for he had always been so knightly to
her. But yet, she could not wait! A great horror came over her of the
old Queen, who had been painted as without principle and of wild
passions--shrinking from nothing so that she might gain her will, and
she was glad in her soul that Elenà was not the mother of her Janus,
while she struggled with her Venetian pride and promised herself to be
the truer to him for his wrongs. And so the night wore on; and between
her longing and her trouble there was no sleep for her while the day
delayed.

A vague shape of terror seemed to hover between her and her vision of
the future that had been so golden. Where was Carlotta? Might she not
come again and strive to win back her crown? Were the nobles many who
would uphold her?

Nay; but it was Janus whom the people loved--Janus! who had been crowned
their king, with all solemn ceremony in Alexandria, by order of the
Suzerain of Cyprus--to oppose him was rebellion! Janus--her beloved--so
winsome, so masterful! Then, slowly out of the darkness rose the noble
face of Lorenzo the Giustinian, full of quiet and strength--her mother's
face, loving, comforting--both asking her best of her; and the Question
grew in her soul. "Perhaps Carlotta's right was greater--_could it be
greater_ than her husband's?"


X


All day the queen had been restless and depressed, starting at the sound
of a footfall only to drop her eyes again in disappointment and relapse
into unquiet revery; the weight of empire hung heavily upon her girlish
spirit and she was unutterably lonely in the absence of Janus which
seemed so unduly prolonged. It was the latest day that he had named for
his possible absence, and still no courier had come to announce his
return.

The noon had been unusually sultry, the stifling heat of the upper
chambers oppressed her and the ceaseless, rasping whir of the cicala
smote her with weariness, but she resisted the attempt of her ladies to
detain her in the cooler atmosphere of the _voto_, for in these
underground chambers she could have no sight of the great plain beyond
the boundaries of the palace-gardens--and she preferred remaining in the
halls that overlooked the terraces--turning her eyes often in the
direction of the forest.

It was like a pall upon them all to see their young mistress, usually so
gracious and responsive, wholly absorbed in her troubled revery; but
to-day her maidens played their sweetest strains upon their silvery
lutes, without her answering smile; the gentlemen of her court sought in
vain for some diversion to distract her; even the Lady Margherita could
do nothing for her pleasure, while she watched in unobtrusive
tenderness, feeling that quiet, however unsatisfying, was more welcome
than speech.

The pages, at a sign from the Lady Margherita, had dipped their fronds
of feather in the great vases of mountain-snow that stood between the
columns, and waved them about the chamber; the queen followed their
movements with a fleeting smile as this breath of coolness reached her,
then fixed her eyes again, with a despairing look, upon the distant
forest.

"She wearieth for the King," her maidens said low to each other, "and
verily he may come to-night, for the days have already numbered more
than he giveth of wont to the chase."

"She is not like herself," the Lady Ecciva de Montferrat whispered to
her young Venetian companion, Eloisà Contarini, as the company strolled
out upon the terraces at a sign from the Lady Beata Bernardini whose
loving motherly eyes saw that Caterina needed rest and solitude. "She is
strange and pale to-day--like one who hath seen a vision." Lady Ecciva
spoke with deep seriousness, for superstition was a vital part of the
Cyprian nature, belonging alike to peasant and noble.

"How meanest thou--_a vision_?" Eloisà questioned, startled.

The other turned to see that they were not followed and answered in an
awe-struck tone: "_The vision of the Melusina--the fate of the
Lusignans!_ Didst thou not hear her shriek from the Castle of Lusignan
in the dead of night?"

"_The Melusina?_ Ecciva, who is _the_ '_Melusina_?'"

"She is the evil genius of the House of Lusignan," Ecciva explained to
her excited companion, "all Cyprus knoweth that when the Melusina crieth
three times from the towers of the ancient Château of Lusignan, in far
France, it meaneth death, or some great misfortune to a ruler of this
house."

"And thou--didst hear this lamentation verily, Ecciva? I should have
died from fear!"

"Yea, thou being from Venice--not knowing that it bodeth not harm for
thee--it is misfortune only for some ruler of their house of Lusignan."

"And that is naught to thee!" the Venetian girl exclaimed in
astonishment. "Thy King--is he nothing to thee?"

"One knoweth not," the other answered nonchalantly. "There is
Carlotta--both of the house of Lusignan; and she might be kinder than
King Janus who seized the fiefs of my father because he came not forth
to do him homage when he landed with his army from Alexandria."

Eloisà drew herself impetuously away from her companion who was watching
her through long, half-closed eyes.

"Thou then--why art thou here?" she exclaimed indignantly, "in service
of my beloved Lady, who is so good and fair, if thou lovest her not--nor
the King!"

The youthful Dama Ecciva laughed lightly:

"Thou art a veritable _turco_ for fierceness, Eloisà! I have naught
against her Majesty, who truly is most fair and gracious--quite other
than Carlotta--whom I love not at all! And if I held some grudge against
the King for seizing of my father's lands (which broke his heart before
he died) one cannot long be churlish in presence of our Janus, who hath
a matchless fashion of grace with him, so that all think to have won his
favor. Verily, that is a King for Cyprus!--he mindeth one of Cinyras. I
must tell thee the tale of our hero of Cyprus some day, Eloisà."

"Aye: but tell me now--how camest thou at Court if the King hath wronged
thy house?"

"Such eyes thou hast!--like a frightened child! I know not if I shall
reach thy comprehension, were I to answer thee--but I, being only
daughter to my father, Gualtier of Montferrat, who had no son--plead
with my mother to send me hither when I came of age, to do homage
loyally to King Janus, and claim our fiefs of him again--I being his
vassal by right of long generations past--there was no other way."

"A vassal so loyal doth honor to him and thee!" the warm-blooded
Venetian maid cried scornfully, with a toss of her dainty head.

Again the Lady Ecciva laughed lightly, but no shadow of discomposure
marred the exquisite outlines of the beautiful, cold face: the skin,
delicate and fine as ivory, showed no flush of color: her eyes and
tresses were dark as night--the eye-brows slender, yet marking a perfect
arc--the eyes beneath them tantalizing, inscrutable--the mouth rosy as
that of a child--the fingers long, sinuous, emphasizing her speech with
movements so unconscious that sometimes they betrayed what her words
left unguessed.

"I do not understand thy vassalship," the Lady Eloisà said with
hesitation--yet eager to know more of her companion's attitude toward
the Queen; they had wandered far down the terrace to the basin where the
swans were floating, opalescent in the sunset light.

Dama Ecciva broke off some oleander blossoms and flung them at the royal
birds with teasing motion, watching them contentedly as, one by one,
they floated away with ruffled plumage and sounds of protest.

"It is a right of our house for many generations," she explained; "being
allied with royalty through the elder branch of the Montferrats, I am a
_dama di maridaggio_ by birth, and since there is no son of our house to
offer homage in return for our fiefs, the duty was mine to do service to
our King and claim our lands of him again. It was a simple ceremony--to
bend the knee and kiss his hand, and make some empty vows--to see my
mother Lady of her lands once more."

"Aye, it were well--if thy vows were not so 'empty,'" Eloisà protested.
"How shouldst thou speak so coldly of thy vision, if thou hadst one
spark of loyalty?"

"It was not _my_ vision," her companion answered nonchalantly; "I slept
the night through, the better to enjoy the day, which, verily, was not
worth taking such trouble for,--so stupid hath it been!"

"But the vision?" Eloisà questioned impatiently--"there was no vision!
Thou hast said it but to frighten me!"

"It is her Majesty who hath had the vision--one can tell it but to look
at her: and for the three fatal shrieks--the shrieks to curdle one's
blood--Josefa told of them but now. _Some_ one hath heard them; but
they hush it in the court for it meaneth disaster."

"I may not stay with thee!" Eloisà cried turning away in hot
displeasure; "not for fear--for I do not believe thy vision: but because
I hate thy mocking spirit and thy so strange loyalty--_dama di
maridaggio_!"

The Lady Ecciva calmly resumed her pastime of swan-teasing as her
impulsive companion, flushed and panting, began to climb the long flight
of marble steps that led back to the palace-plateau.

"I think I am better companioned this heavenly night without thy
preaching," she said serenely, as Eloisà, half repenting her quickness,
turned back to wave her a farewell, "for the breezes are comforting
after the day, and fret me not with questions. And for my
_loyalty_"--she lingered mockingly on the word--"my loyalty will serve
King Janus well enough, unless he seeketh to enforce his rights to my
displeasure."

"How to thy 'displeasure'? What 'rights'?"

"His right of Lord of the fiefs--for our lands are gifts of the
Crown--to choose a husband for his _dama di maridaggio_ who suiteth not
her fancy."

"Nay, verily, Ecciva, he is a noble gentleman--he would not press thee
too hard, thou wouldst protest."

"Aye, I should protest--I _would_ protest. And so he hath no scheme to
marry me with the miserable Neapolitan noble who held our lands while we
were dispossessed, I care not! But it were good to know what fancy might
seize him--our charming Janus! For he is a man of many moods and some
favorite of the Soldan may next be friend to him!"

The evening breezes were slowly waking over the torrid land, bringing
needed refreshment after the long sultriness of the day: the air was
laden with delicious odors--fragrance of rose and jessamine and orange
blooms; birds of brilliant plumage called to each other in jubilant
notes as they flitted hither and thither among the pomegranate blossoms
which burned, like tongues of flame, among the thickets of green.

Back through the long alleys of wonderful trees where many a clinging
vine trailed masses of riotous color, it was pleasant to hear mirthful
voices ringing freely after the dull day's repression, or echoing back
more faintly from adventurous wanderers in the farther shrubberies. This
garden of delights which Janus had made for his bride, environing this
palace of Potamia, was alive with charm--rippling with stolen streams,
more costly than molten silver at the summer's height, which kept it in
such vesture of luxuriant bloom as only a monarch might command.

But Eloisà sped quickly up from terrace to terrace, scarcely pausing to
answer the persiflage with which her companion sought to detain her; she
was overwrought and unhappy, in spite of herself; she had no faith in
the vision of Ecciva; she felt hurt and outraged by her coldness, and
she was hastening back for one look in the true and noble face of the
Lady of the Bernardini, who mothered all these young Venetian maids of
honor in the court of Caterina, craving to express her deep loyalty to
the Queen herself by some immediate act of silent homage.

Only the Lady of the Bernardini and Margherita de Iblin were with
Caterina in the loggia, just without the palace, as Eloisà came flying
up the steps and falling on her knees covered the young Queen's hand
with passionate kisses.

"What is it, _carina mia_?" Caterina asked in alarm; "thou bringest
news? There is a courier?"

"_Niente--niente, Serenissima_--only to be near the one I love!" the
girl cried fervently; and then grew suddenly quiet, in full content
after this needed avowal.

"Poverina, thou art lonely for thy Venice, and thy people," the Queen
murmured in her own soft Italian tongue, while her fingers strayed
caressingly through the glory of red-gold hair which fell unbound about
the maid, in the fashion of those days for one of noble birth and tender
age.

But presently she withdrew her hand and motioned Eloisà to a corner
among the cushions on the curving marble slab, grotesquely wrought with
talismanic symbols, which outlined the end of the loggia where they sat.
"Thou art come à-propos: for the Lady Margherita hath promised us a tale
of ancient Cyprus, and we of Venice wish to know these legends of our
beautiful island."

"Nay, beloved Sovereign Lady;--it is not legend but simple historic
truth, which your Majesty hath granted me permission to narrate--a tale
of love and loyalty of the annals of our house; and out of it hath come
this Cyprian proverb: '_Quel che Iblin è non si può trovar._' 'Such an
one as Iblin may no man find!'" Dama Margherita, usually so pale and
grave, was flushed and eager; her deep eyes sparkled; her breath came
fast.

The name of Joan of Iblin was revered in Cyprus and the Queen turned
towards Margherita with some comprehension of her pride in the nobility
of this ancestor who had spent himself in loyal service for the early
Kings of Cyprus, touching her hand with a light pressure, smiling her
approbation.

No feast at any court in those days was complete without this diversion
of recitation, when the nation's heroes, or some passage from its
greater classics, furnished the theme; or when some improvisator wove a
tissue of myth and legend, embroidered with fact, which won its way
through confiding ages as historic truth, till the time, growing
sophisticated, laid it heroically aside for a curio. And Cyprus stood
high among the Eastern nations in literary reputation. Was not its poet
Enclos earliest among the Greek prophetic singers? Was not the "Cypria"
celebrated among the epics of antiquity, a precursor to the Iliad
itself? Was any land more fertile than Cyprus in food for poets?

The Cypriotes no longer knew whether Cinyras were god, or man, or myth;
whether he were the son of Apollo, or of Pygmalion and the bewitching
ivory image of the sculptor's dead wife; or, in very truth, that
splendid prince of Agamemnon's time, as sung by Homer in the Iliad,
winning laurels at the siege of Troy. This hero of the "_Cypria_," was
he, in verity the great High Priest of the island and chief of the
stately race of the _Cinyradæ_ who had ruled the people long in State
and Sanctuary, and filled their realm with stately temples? The
Cypriotes drew breath in an atmosphere of myth and poetry and felt the
recital of the feats of their heroes to be no less a duty than a
delight.

The improvisatorial faculty so often bestowed upon this imaginative
people was greatly prized, and not infrequently it descended from father
to son, as an inheritance, winning for its possessor something of the
reverence granted to a prophet.

Dama Margherita de Iblin possessed this gift, though only in moments of
deep feeling was she willing to exercise it: but to-night she was
strangely moved out of sympathy for the Queen, whose evident anxiety
filled her with foreboding and whom she eagerly longed to divert.

"Since your Majesty hath graciously commanded the story of Joan of
Iblin, Lord of Beirut and Governor of Jerusalem--a tale of our dear land
when it was young--I will tell it after the fashion of my people," she
said, rising with her sudden resolve, her strong, dark face grown
beautiful from the play of noble emotions.

She stood for a moment, her tall figure in its sweeping folds swaying in
slow rhythmic cadence--her attitude and gesture full of grace and
dignity--irresistibly compelling--as in low, penetrating monotone she
began her chant.

The music-maidens stole noiselessly forth upon the loggia, accompanying
the noble improvisatrice with lute and rhythmic posture; the night
deepened and the stars came out, and still her hearers listened
breathlessly, as in moments of emotion the chant leaped wildly to meet
the urgency of her thought, or deepened in melting tenderness to its
pathos; for such was the intensity of Margherita's emotion and dramatic
quality that she endued each character with an almost startling
vitality--or had she put her auditors under some magic spell with the
compelling gaze of her deep eyes? They felt as if living in that past
time, partakers in its very action, and they surrendered themselves to
her power.

It was the tale of an infant heir of Cyprus, when the realm was young
and the Emperor Frederick was her Suzerain, and with a sweep of her
magnetic fingers Margherita showed the babe lying helpless and appealing
before his uncle the noble Lord of Iblin, to whom the widowed Queen had
confided him during his tutelage. The guardian's faith and devotion were
sketched in rapid strokes; and when the tiny King had been crowned and
his knights and barons of Cyprus and Jerusalem had sworn him fealty, the
souls of her listeners swelled indignant within them as Dama Margherita
thrilled forth the challenge of the Emperor to the Lord of Iblin to lay
down his trust and surrender the child with the customs of Cyprus to
him--their Suzerain--until the boy should be of age.

"_Not so--most gracious Lord and Emperor!_" Joan of Iblin had made
dauntless answer; "_for my tutelage is by order of the Queen, his
mother, who holdeth the regency justly, and by the laws of Cyprus and of
Jerusalem--which, with all courtesy, I will defend. I make appeal unto
the courts for this our right!_"

Her sympathetic auditors verily _heard_ the tramp of armies in the wild
chant of Margherita when the Emperor had replied with scorn and insult,
trampling on the rights of Cyprus; they could have sworn that they saw
the Emperor's hosts gathering on the plains as they watched the
impetuous motions of all those beckoning maiden hands; and then,
advancing in quiet dignity, sure of their right, the old-time knights
and barons of Cyprus and Jerusalem, moving to the measure of a quaint,
Christian psalm: and so fully had her listeners yielded themselves to
her potent spell, that but hearkening to her recital, they quailed and
trembled when she told that the enemies of the Lord of Iblin came by
night and sought to whisper treachery to his staunch soul, while in
tones that scarcely broke the hush, the false words of the tempter
reached their consciousness, quivering through them, as if they
themselves were guilty of this treachery:

"_Ye are more in number than the hosts of the Emperor--kill him while he
sleepeth! For we will see that his guards wake not._"

Then fell a deep, throbbing silence, tingling with a sense of shame,
broken by a sudden discord of the lutes and the wild burst of ringing
scorn.

"_Shall we, Christian men of Cyprus, do this iniquity!_"

Again, the whispered voice of the tempter: "_Aye! for the Emperor is
false; he hath taken thine own sons for hostages and keepeth not his
promise but in his camp entreateth them shamefully; and in the courts,
which shall judge of this thy cause, doth seek to malign thee._"

Once more came the voice of Joan of Iblin, invincible:

"_We have sworn fealty to the Emperor--we are true men--be others
untrue._"

And then in unison--swift, sure, triumphant--the words vibrated on the
air: "_We have sworn fealty to the Emperor--we are true men--be others
untrue._"

The voices in the garden had long since ceased, and one by one the
wanderers had gathered on the terrace, waiting in responsive silence the
conclusion of the tale they loved. Among them the Bernardini stood
entranced. He had been strolling alone, filled with anxious thoughts
which had brought him to a mood easily wrought upon, and from the
silence of the garden to come suddenly upon this scene of picturesque
action was a surprise that gave it added power.

He stood as if fascinated, never moving his gaze from the lithe figure
of Margherita, whose every motion revealed new grace and unsuspected
depths of feeling. Margherita, whom he had thought so grave and cold! So
intently was he watching her that he realized no others in the vivid
pantomime until the music maidens had gathered closely about her with
hushed lutes and a mysterious silence fell--as of night upon the
plain--spreading with the slow movement of the down-turned palms of all
that girlish throng--the graceful, swaying figures scarce advancing, yet
seeming to encompass the plain.

Between these interludes of dramatic rendering, the thread of the story
was held in a quick, clear monotone easily followed. The hushed tramp of
a great army withdrawing in the night--not from fear, but to honor their
vows--the words of Iblin: "_We will not fight our Emperor, for our men
are more than his: which having seen, it will now perchance please him
to accept our terms of honorable peace._" The Emperor's acceptance of
the terms from fear or wile, or because of new wars pressing in his own
lands: his promise to leave the customs of the realm to Cyprus: and
then, as Suzerain, his swift summons to the Lord of Iblin to join him in
Crusade with men and arms. But the friends of the faithful guardian
close round him and the chant of Margherita grows fierce and ominous:

"_Beware! He meaneth treachery. It is no summons--save to entrap thee._"

But the answer rings out loyally in the knightly faith of those early
days, while the deep, contralto tones electrify her audience: "_Shall we
show fear of our Emperor, or fail to bring him aid in holy warfare of
Crusade--we, who are Christian knights? Faith begetteth Faith!_"

Then the Cypriotes fare them forth to do the bidding of their dauntless
leader,--all the knights and nobles of Cyprus and Jerusalem, the
youthful King and the sons of the Lord of Iblin--with interchange of
gifts and feasting and homage as of leal men to their Suzerain: with
much pledging of faith, from each to each, after the manner of those
days--against the background of that noble chorus following from afar in
massive, chanted solemn tones--

     "_Faith begetteth Faith._"

But now, to the cities of Cyprus, left destitute of defense while their
nobles were gone to honor the Emperor's command, came a band of
mercenaries of the Emperor's sending, who stole the customs and by
their lawless acts frightened the people who fled for safety to the
convents, denouncing Frederick as false and craven; while the governors
sent by him, in despite of his solemn treaty, made havoc in the land,
proclaiming in every city:

"_Let not the Lord of Iblin set foot in this land of Cyprus--by order of
the Emperor!_"

Suddenly the indignant cries of the whole listening company mingled in
confusion with the inspired voice of the improvisatrice and the
descriptive music of the lutes.

Caterina sprang to her feet, not knowing what she did: "Bring back the
Lord of Iblin!" she cried. "Bring the noble Joan back! Save this people
of Cyprus!"

At the sound of her voice the lords and ladies of her court came
crowding up the steps of the loggia from the terrace, clinging around
her, kissing her hands with fervent words of loyalty and pleasure,
before she realized that she was in the _Now_, or that she had cried out
in her excitement. But this was the Cypriotes' story of stories, and her
unconscious action had bound them to her.

But Dama Margherita, still in her trance of song, waved them to quiet
again as they stood grouped about the Queen, in the very mood of the
closing scene, creating an atmosphere of restrained passion, through
which the voice of the improvisatrice throbbed and pulsated like their
own hear-beats.

But now the tones of the improvisatrice are low and quiet, and her
motions assert the dignity of a life nobly lived. For Joan of Iblin has
returned from Crusade, has conquered the intruders and restored quiet
to the realm. But, thereafter, siege is laid to his own castle and fief
of Beirut, and now, gray-haired and full of honors, his time of service
drawing to a close, his trust fulfilled and the young monarch come to
his majority, he implores his royal ward to assemble his full court, and
kneeling in their presence before the youth whom he had served from
tenderest infancy, he prays:

"_If I have served thee well, my nephew and my monarch--now come to
thine own--because I loved thee well, yet loving honor more:_

"_If I have fought for thee in keeping of my trust, and dared the enmity
of the Emperor our Suzerain,--and for thy sake:_

"_Now, by my love for thee--for I am old and the cities of my fiefs are
doomed;_

"_Send, if it seemeth good to thee and to these, the knights and barons
of thy realm, and save my lands--that they be not wrested from me when
my strength is spent!_"

The true-hearted Prince threw loving arms about him, with words of
comfort and with promises, and would have raised him. But the Lord of
Iblin would bring his speech to its conclusion and have his say before
them all, thus kneeling--as if it were a rendering of his trust, a
fitting close to a so loyal life.

The words of his Swan-Song had been chanted in full, rare, solemn
harmony--the lutes in gracious melody accompanying, like an undertone of
love--slow tears down dropping from the eyes of Margherita.

And one by one, as the chant proceeded, through her strange magnetic
power, her listeners _saw_ a knight step forth from the circle and drop
to his knees, swearing fealty to the King and the Lord of Iblin, until
all were kneeling. Then the chanting voices hushed and the rapid motions
ceased: and under that spell they saw, as in a vision, luminous in the
darkness, the kneeling knights of that early court of Cyprus, and in
their midst, the gray-haired Joan of Iblin and the boyish monarch, in
his young, rosy strength--a vision of love and loyalty!

Aluisi Bernardini breathed a sigh of content as he moved quickly away
with a sense of his responsibility being shared; for it was only now
that he felt that he knew Margherita, and she would be ever near the
Queen, a Cypriote of the Cypriotes, but loyal to her heart's core. He
could have kissed the hem of her trailing robe as it floated towards
him, stirred by the motion of his passing--for in the maiden's tale she
had revealed herself to him: it was not of her grace and talent, nor of
the poem that he thought--but on the surety of her staunchness of
soul--of her consecration: he heard her voice again ringing in the
words:

     "_We are true men: be others untrue!_"


XI


A Little page who had been leaning on the marble parapet beyond the
terrace, came stealthily and beckoned to a comrade on the steps of the
loggia.

"A troop of horse were coming across the plain," he explained in low,
agitated tones, as the other reached his side, and followed him back to
the post where he had been watching. "I saw them all the time Dama
Margherita was reciting--Holy Mother, but it was long!--I thought the
King was coming, and it was I that should carry the news to her
Majesty--I came near crying out! But I could not see his orange plume,
and I waited. They came slowly--_Santissima Vergine!_ _He was not
there!_"

He clutched his comrade's doublet with a trembling hand and turned an
ashen face towards him.

"What ailest thee, Tristan?--thou who art already a damoiseau and shalt
be a true knight? Thou art verily dreaming--I see nothing."

"They are gone within--in the first great court of the palace--those who
came. They were the King's gentlemen--_all_ the King's gentlemen--Messer
Andrea among them. I thought the champing would have roused the Queen
who hath been watching all the day. I am not afraid----" he gasped; "but
it was so horrible!--Thou knowest, Guido, Messer Andrea never leaveth
the King."

The boy's eyes were dark with fear.

"He will come with the others--he will surely, surely come," Guido
asseverated.

They clasped each other close and pressed their fresh cheeks together,
trembling so that they could scarcely speak, yet struggling to be brave,
as became little pages that should be knights.

"They were so long," poor Tristan said in a choking whisper, "and it was
so still--_so still_--no music, and they returning from the chase!
And--when they came nearer, I thought I saw his horse, but I could not
see a rider--and I thought, I thought--perhaps because it _was_
dark--and I ran down the front of the palace to get nearer when they
crossed the bridge. Ah, but the tramp was dreadful! And--and--it was his
horse, and a squire leading him--and--behind them--oh Guido!--_Then I
knew_."

"We will be knights, Tristan mio," Guido whispered, wiping away his
comrade's tears while his own were falling; and then, straining each
other convulsively, they broke down in sobs together.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dama Ecciva stole up the steps from the terrace, and catching Eloisà's
hand, dragged her forcibly away.

"Come quickly," she whispered, with chattering teeth, "_Santa Maria
Vergine!_ I am so frightened. Oh, the poor, poor Queen! That was why she
hath been so strange--she hath truly seen the vision. Poverina, it
breaks one's heart! And he but a week away! So gay and debonair, and
beautiful as a god!"

There was no mistaking her wild eyes.

"Tell me!" Eloisà gasped.

"I was there in the pergola, and I saw them come--the _frati_ from the
Troödos in the midst of the troop of horse--with--with IT.--Oh
Eloisà, _it was true!_--They are telling her now."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a stir in the great audience-chamber back of the loggia where
Caterina sat--a sound of hesitant feet, as of many who came unwillingly,
unutterably weary from the dull weight of evil tidings.

The muffled footsteps roused her from her revery and she turned her head
and saw them coming. Her heart stood still for fear.

Messer Andrea came before the others, falteringly--as if youth had died
out of him: he was pale and strange and no words fell from his blanched
lips during that long instant while he crossed the interminable stretch
between them, and Caterina waited, with all her tortured soul crying out
for Janus.

Then the King's favorite, with the cruel story written in his anguished
eyes, turned them full upon hers for one moment, that she might
_know_--then bowed his head upon his breast and opened his arms, as if
he fain would shelter her--

"Caterina----" he said--"Child----"


XII

In the first dazed days that followed, between the necessary adjustment
of matters of state, and the many ceremonies incident upon the King's
sudden death, there was scant time to discuss the rapid happenings; even
in the court-circle they scarcely knew what was passing--still less how
it had come about. It was said that Janus had died of malignant fever,
due to the terrible malaria of the coasts where he had been hunting. Yet
some hinted that there were natural poisons, as of the marshes, and
others--more fatal: but this was with bated breath and kept well without
the innermost circle of the court, for no one really _knew_. It was easy
to talk of poison, but far less easy to make assertions implicating
those who might be innocent; and, meanwhile, the complications
surrounding the throne of Cyprus demanded infinite wisdom and despatch.

Almost before the Queen could lift her head after the shock of her
husband's death, the nobles and barons of the realm had penetrated to
her private boudoir and sworn her fealty, with a tenderness and
reverence that deeply touched her. By the will which the King had left,
Caterina Veneta was now Queen of Cyprus, with a Council of Seven
appointed to assist her; and every Venetian who held a post in the
Government was restless until the young widow of Janus, who had been
crowned with all due ceremony in the Cathedral of Nikosia at the time of
her marriage, had publicly received the full seal of her authority.

So quickly death had fallen upon the brilliant, pleasure-loving young
monarch--so without warning--that it seemed to those of his court like
some dread nightmare from which they might presently awake to a new
morning, fair and gay as those they had known so little time ago, before
the music and the mirth, the jewels and the festal robes that befit a
court had given place to the gloom and mourning of these horrible days.
As in a dream they had taken part in the sumptuous funeral ceremonies,
feeling still that it could not be true--he was too young, too brave,
too gay, too gracious, to have come so soon to this! And if to some of
those young nobles it was rather the shock of the loss of a boon
companion than a serious grief, there were many among them who, for the
few bright words that cost him little--a smile--the grasp of his ready
hand--permission to come and shine about him--now brought their tribute
of adoring tears.

Meanwhile, in the halls of the palace, time moved with slow and halting
footsteps: the stricken Queen came rarely among her circle of ladies,
and only for short intervals, and the talk, however varied, was but upon
one absorbing theme.

It was known that soon after the funeral, the Queen seeking how she
might do highest honor in preparing the permanent tomb, had been told of
the priceless sarcophagus of oriental jasper--the gift in early ages of
the Emperor of the East to Santa Soffia in Nikosia, and she had sent an
envoy to the brothers of the convent to ask that it be surrendered for
the tomb of Janus, their king, promising whatever compensation they
should ask.

"Ah, but it will be magnificent, that tomb under the dome of our own San
Nicolò! It will stand on the precious mosaic pavement from Alexandria,
on columns of ivory chased with gold. Dama Margherita hath seen the
design which hath been made for her Majesty by the curator of our
library of art."

"I also," said the little Contarini, timidly, for she was proud of the
favor of the Queen whom she devotedly loved: "It was most beautiful; and
the Serenissima la Regina held it long, as if she could not put it
away."

But a hand was raised to hush the topic:

"Speak no more thereof; for word hath come but now that the request of
her Majesty hath been denied."

There was a chorus of indignant protest:

"It could not be, when she so grieveth! They have no hearts--those
_frati_ of Santa Soffia!"

"The Queen will not endure this refusal without reason!"

"There was no reason that should be told," their informer whispered low
to one of them. "For love of the Queen, hush the topic."

But an elderly member of the Queen's Council who had been passing
through the great Hall and had paused near them, taking no part in the
conversation, now came forward, after a moment's hesitation.

"_I_ speak that you may forget it," he said: "for it seemeth to be a
pleasing theme of discussion among you--yet should be so no more--a mere
extravaganza of fancy that our girl-queen might wisely abandon."

"Signore!" exclaimed the Lady of the Bernardini, rising indignantly, "I
maintain the dignity of our Sovereign Lady's Court, while she perforce,
from sore affliction, must be absent. All speech must be as in her
presence."

The Councillor, resenting the reproof, gave a slight cold bow, studying
her curiously, and pondering whether he dared go further.

"The matter is of interest," he pursued, after a moment's pause, "for
they _gave_ their reason, these monks of Santa Soffia, and scrupled
not--being willing to keep their treasure."

"Signore Consiglière----!" Dama Margherita exclaimed beseechingly.

But if the monks of Santa Soffia had a reason for their conduct, he also
had for his, and would not be stayed.

"They gave their reason; that the precious gift should not be desecrated
to _hold relics that were subject to excommunication_," he said with
painful distinctness, and would not linger for any explanation.

"It is shameful--such a reason so calmly told by a member of our Queen's
Council! He should unsay the words!" one of the maids of honor cried
hotly. "There could be no color for it: the Signor Fabrici hath proven
that he loveth not the Regina!"

"It was unholy speech," said Dama Margherita crossing herself, "which
had not been, save for the Consiglière: it hath no shade of truth; may
the Holy Madonna forgive him--and us, who have listened to slander."

"Cara Dama Margherita," said the little Contarini consolingly, "if we
have listened--it is not with our hearts!"

"Thou art wise, carina: and we who love her will see that the ill word
goeth not beyond."

But the speech of the Consiglière had caused such consternation that it
could not be immediately dismissed; and one of the elder ladies of the
Court was obliged to explain it, for "excommunication" was a word of
evil omen.

"The word is a slander," she said. "But it is known that the Holy Father
hath had small friendship for King Janus since he declined alliance with
the niece of His Holiness, who was not one to please our young King's
delicate fancy, though His Holiness strove to have his will--first by
promises and then by threats."

They pressed closely about her, with exclamations of interest and
astonishment, for this gray-haired noble woman, Madama de Thénouris, had
not been one of those to retail gossip and they might not question her
strange tale; they knew that she had some serious purpose in this
unwonted freedom of speech.

"This was known by some of us in Cyprus before the marriage of our
King--yet was kept hushed, lest trouble should grow from mention of the
displeasure of the Holy Father; but no threat of excommunication hath
reached this court. My children, I am trusting you with confidences--for
it is a time of trouble for our most gracious Lady and we of her court
must know truth from slander that we may stand for her."

Each one came and laid her hand, in silent pledge, in that of the
gray-haired speaker.

"Later, not long since," she continued, "there came from Rome a
tale--maliciously whispered about by Fabrici--not to be believed--that
by some act of renunciation of the Christian Faith, Janus won the favor
of the Sultan when he sent him hither to regain his throne. The
Consiglière Fabrici went with others to the monks of Santa Soffia, and
if he told this matter there, so as he hath whispered it in the court of
Cyprus, it may well be that the _frati_ reasoned thus."

"Is it true, Madama, that an ambassador is already come from the Sultan
to acknowledge Caterina as Queen of Cyprus, and that there shall be some
gathering of the court to-night to receive his homage?"

"Aye; such a gathering as one may have in these sad days, my children."

"And Carlotta?" another asked eagerly--"Ecciva--tell them what thou hast
spoken of Carlotta."

"That she, in very person, hath sailed from Rhodes to meet the Admiral
of Venice on his fleet--to throw herself on his mercy, as _heir of
Cyprus_, to ask his help, to place her on the throne, _from the long
friendship between the islands_." She told it with a little note of
triumph, for it was strange news.

"Carlotta! To seek aid from Venice!--It cannot be true!"

"Aye; it is verily true," Madama de Thénouris said quietly--"as Ecciva
hath told it; for a report hath come from Messer Mocenigo, himself. But
that is like Carlotta, who leaveth no imagining of her brain untried.
She hath even the courage to urge her near connection with Venice
_through her brother Janus the King, by his marriage with Caterina
Veneta_!"

"She hath lost her reason, one would say: there can be no more to fear
from Carlotta!"

"No more to _hope_ from Carlotta," some one corrected in an undertone;
but the voice sounded unfamiliar in the group and when they looked to
see who might have spoken, there was no one to whom they could assign
it.

Eloisà Contarini turned to the young Dama Ecciva de Montferrat with her
impulsive question:

"Who was it, Ecciva?"

"Nay, I was about to ask--I also."

Dama Margherita turned and looked at her steadily; the girl gazed back
at her with narrowing eyelids, slightly shrugging her shoulders as she
finally dropped her eyes.

"But Carlotta?" one of the Venetian maids of honor questioned, impatient
for the tale: "she knew not of the will of his Majesty the King?"

"Nay; and she had hope of being first to carry news of his death to the
Admiral of Venice;--a most strange hope of any favor from such a
quarter!"

"The answer of the Mocenigo was a marvel of courtesy, as it hath been
reported, and worthy of a diplomat," Madama de Thénouris continued.
"Most graciously he assured the Princess that Venice held her friendship
gladly and would not fail of anything that she might do to prove her
loyalty to this Crown of Cyprus. Yet now, the Daughter of the Republic,
Caterina Veneta, being left by the Will of Janus Queen of Cyprus, Venice
must first uphold the rights of Caterina, and might show her Eccellenza,
the Princess Carlotta, no favor that could prejudice the sovereignty of
the Queen."

"And then?"

"And then came further pleading from Carlotta, with a new tissue of
reasons. But finally the Mocenigo told her plainly: 'The reasons which
avail in kingdoms are arms--not questions of legality.'"

"It is a theme for a comedy! And Carlotta----?"

"Hath sailed again with new wisdom for Rhodes; or, perchance to plan
some enterprise that bespeaketh her less mad."

"She is not mad--but brave!" cried the Dama Ecciva boldly.

"It is enough of Carlotta," said the Lady of the Bernardini, rising to
break up the talk.

But she beckoned to Dama Margherita to remain, as the others were
leaving the hall, and gave her a charge in a low tone.

"See to it that these tales add not to the weariness of our beloved Lady
who hath already enough of grief to bear; and the time is full of
dangers for her. I count much upon thine influence with the younger
maids to keep her from breaking her heart," she added with hesitation,
but with a smile which conveyed her confidence in the Lady Margherita,
"and to hold them loyal."

She laid a detaining hand upon the younger woman's shoulder as she
spoke the last words, uncertain whether to confide in her further, and
Margherita, having given her assurance, still waited.

"For this question of excommunication," the Lady of the Bernardini said
at last--"lest it should be bruited about by the enemies of the
Queen--_it hath no color of truth_. My Son, the Lord Chamberlain, hath
confided to me--(I am trusting thee, Dama Margherita, that thou mayest
_know_ it to be so, for the peace of mind of our poor, young Queen, and
so mayest lead others to thy belief--yet speak no hint of this my
confidence). My Son, the Chamberlain, hath seen in the most revered
chronicle of State of this kingdom, the _Libro delle Rimembranze_, the
copy of a letter sent by King Janus to His Holiness, to accredit his
Reverence the Archbishop of Nikosia, brother to this same Signor Jean
Perez Fabrici the Consiglière, who spoke with us but now--as Ambassador
to His Holiness: and the manner of this letter leaveth no room for doubt
that he wrote as a son of the Church, in all confidence of favor. He
calleth His Holiness '_Santissimo e Beatissimo Padre!_' and the
signature of this letter (which it is noted that he wrote with his own
hand) was _'Devotus vester Filius, Rex Jacobus Cipri_.'"


XIII


"Madre Mia!" he said with deep tenderness, "I think it is not possible
to hold the knowledge from her longer. It must be told to-night."

They were in the loggia overlooking the splendid stretch of terraced
gardens, now flooded with moonlight; they had been standing there, quite
silent, for a long time, each feeling that there was something to be
spoken and suffered--each praying to defer the moment.

"Oh, Aluisi--no!"

Her tone was an entreaty: but he only put out his hand and laid it
tenderly upon hers: the beautiful, tapering fingers trembled under his
touch, then slowly quieted, for there was a rare sympathy between them.

"I have done everything," he continued in a low voice, without looking
at her, "but they will not wait--matters of State, they say, to be
passed upon--a Queen must give her signature when it is needed."

He came closer, suddenly turning upon her a gaze which compelled her
startled comprehension. "They would be quite willing to pass the measure
_without_ her signature," he added, in a still lower tone. "It has come
to that--we must think of her rights and protect her _against her
Councillors_!"

"She has had so much to bear, poor child--so young--and her heart is
broken already with sorrow for her husband. For she had faith in him.
And now!--Have they no feeling for her?"

"Madre, carissima, thou knowest not Rizzo; he is the most powerful among
them, and the most ill-disposed. 'Let her take the Prince of Naples,' he
hath said openly before the Councillors, 'and give us a man to reign
over us.'"

"And Janus but two weeks dead!" The Lady Beata gave an involuntary cry
of horror. "But Fabrici, the Archbishop?" she asked after a moment, "may
he not influence them to be more gentle with her--having a brother in
the Council?"

Aluisi shook his head sorrowfully. "Nay, Mother--I know not which is
worse. Venice, at his election, would have prevented it, but could not,
because he represented this intriguing power of Naples which hath not
ceased from effort to have its will of Cyprus, since the betrothal of
Caterina--which also it sought to overthrow."

"How knowest thou?"

He laid his finger on his lips--"If we were yet in Venice, I might not
answer thee; but here--and it is for me and thee alone--it was I upon
whom the Signoria laid the task of drawing up their monitory letter to
Janus to hold him to his contract."

"Oh, if thou hadst not done it! I would rather thou hadst not written
it!" she said with a low moan.

"Aye--Mother: and I--even then I knew that it must be happier for the
child if that contract might be broken. Though if I had dreamed of
_this_ I could not have doomed one of our Casa Cornaro to such
suffering and dishonor. But thou knowest the pride of Venice: if not
_my_ hand, another's would have written it: and I then--we should not
have been here to shield her."

"But the Archbishop Fabrici cannot hold malice against Caterina. He hath
all the church of Cyprus in his command; he _must_ be friendly to the
Queen."

But Aluisi's face gave her no hope, as she turned to him.

"Fabrici, for another cause, holdeth the queen in deep disfavor," he
said, "for that he, having been sent by Janus on some embassy of marriage
for the child Zarla, came into the Chamber of Counts of the Kingdom--not
many days since--and with much grossness of speech would have discussed
the matter at length in that presence; which we, of her household--she
being in the first grief of her young widowhood--prevented, through
members of the Queen's Council, better disposed."

"It was well, Aluisi: it seemeth even now too soon--too cruel--to add
this shadow to her grief: and but for thee, she must have known thereof
that day. For she seeketh already to take up the burden of the State and
questioneth daily of the Secretary of the King of that which passeth in
the Council. 'That I may rule my people,' she sayeth sadly, 'and those
who loved the King will help me!' With what a tender grace she sayeth
'_my people_!'"

"Madre mia, thou who lovest her and art so wise--shall I leave this
parchment with thee? Thou best canst spare her in what must be told. I
have had made this copy of certain clauses of the Will of Janus, which
may not longer wait official reading before the Council in the Chamber
of the Counts and in presence of the Queen. Thinkest thou not it would
be too hard for her to learn first of its provisions before them all?"

"Thou art right, Aluisi--always right. But her faith in him is deep; how
shall I make her believe it?"

"I know not," he answered with a groan, and crushing the parchment in
his hand. Then he smoothed it out remorsefully and gave it to her. "It
is a faithful copy; there is no other argument. Thou wilt go to her
now--for it _must_ be."

With bowed head he led her to the door of the Queen's ante-chamber. "I
am here," he said, "if need should be."

She still hesitated. "It may be long, for I know not how to tell her."

"Thank Heaven that she hath one like thee to care for her," he answered,
gently forcing her through the doorway as he held her hand. "For I do
think the Council would willingly have her away."

In the ante-chamber scattered groups of court-ladies in deepest
mourning, were talking in low tones. They all rose as the Lady Beata
entered: but she, with only an inclination of her head passed on hastily
into the inner chamber which was the private boudoir of the Queen.

Caterina was quite alone, lying back on a low couch near an open window,
through which the moonlight streamed in long pale rays; while many soft
lights of perfumed oils, burning low in lamps of ivory, made only
moonlight within the chamber. She held the miniature of Janus pressed
against her cheek, and as the Lady Beata came towards her she tried to
welcome her with a quivering smile.

"I sent them all away, Zia mia: sometimes it seems less hard to bear
when I am quite alone."

The Lady Beata bent over her, stroking her hair caressingly, striving
for courage to break the silence.

"Caterina mia," she said at last, "it is needful to give some thought to
matters of government--the Council will not wait. Hast thou the
strength?"

"I _must_ have strength," she answered with instant resolution, rising
and laying aside the miniature with a lingering look. "Wilt thou call
Aluisi? He ever maketh me understand. It is so new to me," she pleaded
feebly, as the Lady Beata did not move.

"Carina, it will be best alone; Aluisi hath asked me to speak with thee.
If--if thou wilt read this parchment"--the Lady Beata held it out to
her--"it is the Will of the late King, Aluisi hath bidden me give it
thee."

"There is no need," Caterina answered listlessly, as the Lady Beata
opened it and put it into her hand, "the provisions have been told me."

But the other persisted. "To-morrow--for the Council say that they will
not longer wait; it will be read before the Counts of the Chamber, and
they would have the Queen take oath of fealty to Cyprus."

"I shall have the strength when to-morrow cometh," Caterina answered
wearily, and making a motion to return the parchment.

"There are other clauses; Aluisi thought it might be better to read
them here--alone--before--before----" Her face was blanched and pained,
and her words came with difficulty.

The young Queen looked at her in surprise, then, after a moment's
indecision, dropped her eyes upon the page and read the short clauses
through; then once more--as if she did not understand--then again, a
scarlet flush growing as she read.

The parchment contained but three short clauses: King Janus left his
kingdom to his wife Caterina, who was to reign, with their child, if
there should be one; or alone, if the child should die.

He provided a Council of seven to assist her with the Government:

In case of her death and the death of the child, the kingdom should
descend to each of the three other children of Janus, in the order
named. The unwedded mother of these children was not mentioned and
Caterina had never dreamed of their existence.

She stood trembling--her face slowly paling to a marble whiteness.
"_Mater Dolorosa!_" she gasped, with a moan of pain, instantly
repressed.

The Lady Beata put her arm around her to steady her; but Caterina drew
herself away, standing upright.

"Call back the Chamberlain!" she cried, imperiously; and stood
waiting--panting--until he entered the room.

Then she drew up her slight figure in defiance, her eyes flashing in her
white, white face--her voice ringing scorn as she pointed to the
document which had dropped from her hand.

"How should I believe this--this _baseness_ of my husband--your King?"
she cried. "Who hath _dared_ to fashion it?"

"Beloved Sovereign Lady"--he answered her, and for very pity could say
no more.

She turned from one to the other with an impatient, questioning,
imperious gesture.

They came nearer--slowly--silently turning upon her such faces of love
and sorrow and comprehension that the fire in her eyes died in anguish.

A quiver shot through her, but she struggled to stand, motioning them
away again when they would have helped her--she must drink this cup of
bitterness alone. "How should I believe it?" she repeated brokenly,
still studying their faces.--"How _should_ I believe it--ye are not
faithless to him--to me----?"

There was no need to answer her: again they looked their unspeakable
compassion.

But as Caterina's eyes rested upon the parchment once more, a sudden
hope came to her. "The will of the King was written in his own hand,"
she cried eagerly. "Thou hast said it, Aluisi; this is not the writing
of the king!"

"Nay, beloved Sovereign Lady," the Chamberlain made answer, as he picked
it up, and held it before her; "this is but a memorandum made for your
Majesty's convenience, but attested under the seal of the kingdom. The
original Will is in the keeping of the Lord of the Privy Seals, awaiting
your command. It was thought that your Majesty would wish to see it
before the Council should be assembled."

She understood and bowed her head in silence, while all hope died out of
her face.

Aluisi advisedly used the ceremonious form by which he was accustomed to
address the Queen in public, hoping to hint to her of some necessary
preparation to control the meeting of the Council that could not, in any
event, be long deferred.

They lingered wistfully, seeking vainly for words that might not hurt
her; but Caterina looked at them beseechingly, with dim eyes--her lips
moving without sound.

The Lady Beata understood.

"I go now to pray the dear Christ for thee--the Man of Sorrows," she
said with inexpressible tenderness. "And later--Carinissima--I will come
again, and thou wilt rest."

So young--so sorely stricken--she knelt in the cold moonlight alone--her
hands clasped in passionate repression on her throbbing heart--"Mater
Dei!" she moaned: "Death--and then _this_!--If but it need not have been
told me! If I might but have kept the _memory_ of my happiness!"

Only the stars and the pitying angels looked down on the fierce conflict
of grief and love and disillusion with which her desolate young soul
wrestled alone through the long, midnight vigil. How should she separate
these two beautiful faiths which had been enthroned as one in the happy
depths of her guileless heart, without perilling her very trust in God!

Yet, as the sad day dawned over the hills and sea, she knew that God was
still in His Heaven, behind the clouds--while she clung as a drowning
mariner--the more desperately for her weakness--to the spar of this
faith in the wreck of her happiness, though the love to which her whole
being had moved in rhythmic content was as a lost star, glimmering
uncertainly behind the mists.

But through the desolate night-watches the Lady of the Bernardini in the
ante-chamber of the Queen had been agonizing in prayer for her until
thought was spent; and now she had moved out upon the loggia and stood
there waiting for the dawn that seemed long-deferred, in a
half-conscious wonder that there were no sorrows great enough to stay
Nature's punctual recurrences--that to-day and to-morrow there would
still be dawns and sunsets, whatever happened to the souls of men.

In the silver line that etched the dark mountain crests against the pale
monotone of the sky, single firs stood forth saliently, while dim in the
distance, vast shapes, clothed in perpetual snows, held wraith-like
watch over the smiling plains below, where life and bloom were possible.

Athwart the low, confused twittering of bird-notes which had infused the
solemn silence with a vague hint of life, strident sounds grew
dominant--a crow calling to his mate from tree to tree--a short, sharp
symphony of swallows--a cock announcing the coming of the dawn.

Then motion broke in upon the majesty; hurried rushes of flight across
the sky--beatings of wings--pulsings and ecstasies and triumphs of
bird-life--and the Day was new.

Faint twitterings in the copses deepened to melody--to canticles of
rejoicing; tints of turquoise and opal crept into the shadows and gold
into the greens: the night-dews gleamed upon the firs and grasses, while
a luminous haze dimmed the dark glint of the waters to pearly gray,
softened the grimness of the mountain-faces and wrapped them--sea and
mountains, as soul and body in a vision of mystery, a prelude to the
blaze of golden glory that was suddenly outpoured on land and sea.

Yet the heavenly splendor was but for a moment; it faded in sudden
gloom, as a bell from the inner chamber called the Lady of the
Bernardini to attend the Queen.

       *       *       *       *       *

When at early morning, the Chamberlain was summoned to the Queen's
presence, the change in her beautiful face smote him to the heart: every
line had been chiselled by pain--ennobled by a high resolve--by a strong
new-born will, rendered selfless; and in her eyes a soul--tried by fire
and suddenly grown to a great height--looked forth, luminous.

Instinctively, he dropped his eyes and fell upon his knees, as if in the
presence of some heavenly spirit, his hot tears falling upon the fragile
hand she held out to him, which he clasped, unconsciously, in both his
own, with a grasp so like a vise that it would have smitten her with
sharp pain had she been capable at that moment of any physical emotion.

"Beloved Cousin and Queen!" he cried, when he could find his voice, "we
love and revere you; we would give our _lives_ to help you!"

She made an effort to speak, but no words came; she could only bow her
head to accept his homage, while his asseverations of loyalty and love
and impotent help came crowding upon his first utterance--the
immoderate outpouring of a deep, knightly soul, unused to confess
itself--the barriers of reserve once overcome by the stinging sense of
the irreparable wrong of which the revelation to this guileless,
confiding girlish nature had suddenly wrenched every memory that once
had been happiness, out of her young life--yet, in the very immensity of
her anguish, had searched to the inmost truth of her woman's fibre and,
in the fierce unfolding, had found it wholly noble.

As he knelt, still protesting, yet out of his great reverence, using no
word to wound her--the more compassionate because he might not denounce
the one who had wronged her--it was as if he were looking up to a
beloved daughter, immeasurably above him, who yet had need of his
knightly protection. He did not know that he was speaking--he did not
know what passed--only that deep in his soul he prayed to comfort her.

Slowly, with expression, the hot passion melted into a softer mood; his
grasp relaxed and she withdrew her hand, seamed and marred with red
lines where he had unconsciously tortured it; yet in her misery she was
grateful to be reached across the awful gulf of loneliness that
separated her from the world by a sense that such loyalty yet remained
to her.

She laid her hand lightly on his head, the fingers moving for a
moment--half in caress--half in benediction, while he felt her almost
imperceptible gesture dismissing this unusual audience where soul had
faced soul on the brink of a great catastrophe; and he rose to meet the
strange, luminous, unsmiling gaze of the great dark eyes which yesterday
had been almost the eyes of a child.

She pointed to the loggia, where the morning breeze came freshly laden
with the fragrance of myriad blossoms that were just opening to the
gladness of the sunrise--a sunrise over the beautiful, fabled slopes of
Cyprus--while shadows still lay on the flower-gemmed plains that
stretched between them and the sea. Ah, yes, the cool, blue, restless
sea stretched far between her island realm and the proud Venetian home
from whence she had sailed a happy girl--one little year before--to meet
her radiant visions of the future; and now, in all the splendor of the
morning, for her the light of life had died forever on the hills of
hope.

It was to this loggia that Janus had first led her when he brought her
to this summer palace of Potamia, that she might see what a vision of
beauty he had prepared for his bride--the far-reaching terraced gardens
with their brilliancy of exotics, rivalling the plumage of the peacocks
that proudly flaunted their jewelled eyes among them--the pergolas of
precious marbles from which the vines flung out a wealth of bloom,
luring the birds to a perpetual feast of song; and behind them,
spreading up to the deep groves of varied greens upon the hillsides, the
snow of countless blossoms lay whiter than the wings of the swans,
floating at leisure in silver pools among the beds of color. It was here
that Janus had spoken words she had dreamed eternally and sacredly her
own: Mother of Consolation, she must remember them no more!

She had not thought of this when the sense of suffocation had impelled
her to seek the air, to rush where it might blow over her and through
her, lift her hair about her throbbing temples and help her to forget.
Oh God--Omnipotent and Merciful--can one never forget!

A sob broke in her throat, but she made no sound, as she turned to
re-enter her audience-chamber--the sumptuous audience-chamber where she
might feel herself less a woman and more a queen.

But Aluisi, obeying her slight motion, had already passed between the
marble columns of the portico, out into the sunshine, and stood
confronting her--her friend, her cousin, and a Councillor of her realm.

The thought gave her courage, and after a moment's struggle, she grew
calm again, listening gravely to the question of State he had wished to
open to her before it should be discussed in full Council.

He spoke at first with averted gaze, feigning to be attracted by the
beauty of the morning, that he might give her time to recover herself:
but as he turned his face to hers for her reply, she put the matter
aside with an imperious gesture.

"To-day, Aluisi, I have graver matter to command my thought: the Council
shall _wait_ until I give orders for its assembling--thou, meanwhile,
using all courtesy in its delay and the enforcement of--of my
command--the Queen's command--so only that it be enforced. These methods
are new to me," she added, with a sudden softened appeal in her tone;
"thou wilt know the way to compass it--for my sake--for it must be
done."

"It shall be done," he assented uncompromisingly; but in surprise,
knowing only too well the imperious methods of the Council appointed to
assist her in her government and the temper of the men who composed that
body--for Janus had not been great in his knowledge of men; and possibly
the only one of the seven who had been strictly devoted to the King, had
died shortly after his appointment, and the place had been filled with
one less favorable to the present rule of Cyprus. Fabrici was known to
be in sympathy with Naples; Rizzo, Chief of Council, strong,
domineering, unscrupulous, was perhaps the creature of Ferdinand, King
of Naples. "It shall be done," he said again, having vowed to help her.

"For, until I have had speech with the holiest man among the priests
that may be found in all this kingdom of Cyprus," she said with a
decision that amazed him, "I will treat of no matter of State, however
urgent. Nay, Aluisi--my cousin"--as she noted his start of surprise--"to
thee alone--who must be my counsellor in days of desolation--pray Heaven
more dark than thou shalt ever dream of--I will confide that out of this
night of vigil hath come this resolution which I dare not break. Seek
thou the man."

He had already turned to fulfil her quest which might be long in the
doing--and these impatient Councillors would be hard to hold; yet he had
no thought of parleying with this girl-queen, so suddenly grown to a
full stature.

But her voice, even and low, arrested him. "He must be Greek in birth,"
she said, "and of the Greek Church, which my people love. But above
all--_he must be a man to trust_."

He turned when he had crossed the great audience-chamber, under the
entrance colonnade of huge porphyry columns, wrought with barbaric
symbols of earlier dynasties and guarded by colossal Assyrian bulls--she
seemed so young and tender to leave, even for a day, in those
surroundings unguarded, at the mercy of that Council of Seven whom he
had reason to distrust--in her kingdom seamed with dissensions of which
she had, as yet, small comprehension; of which, perhaps, she did not
even dream--with her shattered happiness behind her and loneliness
before, and this great responsibility pressing its leaden weight upon
her fair young head.

He longed to throw her a last reassuring glance--to leave with her the
absolute faith that with every power of his being he would uphold and
steady her in the rough and desolate way.

For since he came from Venice he had not ceased his vigilant study of
the complications of Cyprus, that when her need came he might be ready.

He never forgot the vision of the girl-queen in her sweeping widow's
robes, across the great space between them, in the sunshine of the
loggia--her hand extended as if to hasten or to bless him--a wonderful,
unearthly light and strength in her face; and, for one moment as she met
his gaze and understood the full depth of his devotion, the ghost of a
smile--as if it had been granted him to bring her in this hour of
martyrdom one little ray of human comfort.


XIV


Hagios Johannes, the holiest man in Cyprus, stood waiting in the vast,
empty presence-chamber of the young Queen; for, since the sudden death
of Janus, there had been no court-life in this palace of Potamia, and
the gloom hung most heavily over the more sumptuous halls of ceremony.

Hagios Johannes--_the holy John_--they called this prior of the House of
Priests from Troödos--the Mountain of the Holy Cross--after the name of
the earlier Saint who had made the spot famous for the holiness of his
living, for his boundless charity and the wisdom of his judgments, so
that the people had gone to him in ceaseless procession with their sins
and woes in the days of primitive Christianity in Cyprus, and had
returned to their peasant homes the stronger to endure and to renounce.
Johannes the Lesser, this one called himself--being truly great and
devout of heart, so that his vision was wise and true as that of Hagios
Johannes the Greater.

A curtain at the further end of the audience-chamber parted to admit a
stately figure in mourning-robes, as the Lady Beata of the Bernardini
advanced to meet him, bringing the message that the Queen would receive
him in an inner cabinet.

"She is very worn and tired, most Reverend Father, and in years so near
to childhood that the nobility and strength of her resolve are
marvellous. And the comfort that she seeketh of thee she doth most
sorely need."

The eyes of this strong and faithful friend gleamed with unshed tears as
she turned them upon the prior, in tender appeal.

But to Hagios Johannes all courts were strange; the life of his mountain
overflowed with possibilities of ministration which busied all his
powers, and it was the first time that he had ever entered any of the
palaces of the luxurious Kings of Cyprus--of which, perhaps, this summer
palace of Potamia was the most sumptuous. The long corridors of precious
marbles, with intricate carvings and gleamings of gold and mosaic
displeased him, though he had no knowledge of their worth or beauty; but
he stood aghast at the magnificence of the audience-chamber, and the
huge Assyrian bulls which guarded the entrance gave a hint of pagan
power and oppression which instantly angered him.

The appeal of the gracious Lady Beata but roused his indignation.

He was a stern, wild figure with his flowing beard, his long hair
falling straight and unkempt about his brown throat; and his sombre
monk's garment was wrought on breast and shoulders with a salient cross
of natural thorns--the symbol of those monks of Troödos--the Mountain of
the Holy Cross; and the Lady Beata trembled for the interview that was
to be, as he answered her rudely:

"The dwellers in palaces of ivory have naught to do with wild men of the
mountains who live close to nature and care only for suffering humanity.
I have Christ's work to do; let others bring her rose-leaves and honeyed
words."

She laid a gentle, detaining hand upon him as he thrust aside the
curtain of the inner chamber.

"Most Reverend Father, are not the words of our Lord and Saviour, as
well for those who suffer in palaces, as for the wanderers and poor upon
the earth?

"Are not the wounds of the spirit as deep in anguish as those of the
physical man?

"May not the burdens of rulers be greater than those of the ruled?--Have
compassion upon our Queen!"

"Christ knoweth not kings," he answered her, as he shook off her light
touch--"save only those who bow to Him: and the mighty among
men--aye--even he who calleth himself His Vicar upon earth--are puffed
up with pride and know in their hearts no virtue in this--His sacred
symbol." He pressed his rough hand hard against the thorns upon his
breast as he spoke. "Hath not he--this false and sumptuous Vicar--but
now asserted that we, of the Holy Greek Church have no part in the
Communion of the Holy Catholic Church on earth? Did Christ call the
Latins only?" he ended fiercely.

It was a grievance that rankled; and Hagios Johannes had not learned the
gracious art of self-control, being accustomed to feel that whatever he
thought or wished was good--his hatred as well as that which appealed to
him--since he honestly sought nothing for himself, despising riches and
station from the depths of his soul, with an open scorn for the great
ones of earth and an imperious assertion of his own methods and
judgments which he would have denounced in any earthly ruler, however
wise. He never dreamed himself an autocrat over that continuous stream
of pilgrims who made their way into the House of Priests on Troödos:
they were chiefly peasants, rude in ways and understanding, whose
accustomedness to absolute methods and short words made their obedience
the swifter; and the few more learned ones who came to consult him knew
that in his heart he was faithful and seldom treasured the offense
against him--though they may have decried his wisdom. But these came
more rarely as his absolutism grew upon him, and the prophet of the
mountains came down to the cities of the plains only to see the luxury
of them--the sin and godliness of them, and to denounce them, in
unmeasured words.

Within his soul, although he did not confess it to himself, the
generations of men were separated by a wide impassable gulf--the rich
and ruling class, the godless, on one side; the poor, the suffering and
lowly--the to-be-saved,--on the other, and none ever passed across the
deep abyss. He would have challenged any man who counted _him, Father
Johannes_, in his hempen garment studded with thorns, among the rulers
of men!

The youthful Queen, weary and worn indeed from the perplexities and
struggle of the two long nights and days that had elapsed since she had
sent her Councillor on his quest of "the holiest man in Cyprus," rose
from her couch as the prior entered and advanced to meet him with a
gracious reverence.

But he, unconscious of any rudeness, spoke at once, without turning his
eyes upon her, and offering no homage.

"I am a plain man from the Mountain of the Holy Cross, your Majesty; I
know naught of the ways of Courts. The matter should be great that
calleth me from my work. Let it be presented, that I may be dismissed."

She was almost too weak to stand, and the rebuff smote her to the quick;
her lip trembled slightly, but she only stretched out her hand to her
beloved friend, drawing her close and leaning lightly upon her shoulder,
that she might feel the support of loving companionship in her great
need.

Father Johannes had been vaguely conscious of some movement in the
chamber and involuntarily he turned towards this royal lady whom, as
yet, he had never seen, but whose urgent summons had roused his
indignation.

She looked so young and fair and simple in her heavy folds of
mourning--so worn from vigil, with the lines of anguish and of a strange
strength written in her white girl-face--that she might have been the
vision of some youthful saint, wearing the rough cross of Troödos upon
her breast, beneath her robe: and for a moment, the holy man was
startled--did such heavenly visions, in truth, visit the palaces of the
great?

There was a moment of stillness in which his wonder grew.

The breeze blew faintly in through the great arched openings, behind
which rose the mountain chain that led to his own Troödos; there were
the groves of pine, darkly green, below the hills, with their deep
solitudes for prayer and meditation between the vast gnarled trunks; and
the group of the two noble women before him--severely simple--was a
vision of love and womanly grace and spiritual need; the younger one,
all pleading and pain, clinging to the elder who closely enfolded her,
her face strong in the strength of love. It was not like any life that
he had ever seen--this holy man, whose personal life had been solitary
and whose knowledge of human love, as it is known in happy homes, had
died long years ago with the passing of the mother who had borne him in
her heart. It might be that he needed such a vision to redeem his spirit
from the harshness which sin and pride in high places, and want and
crime and poverty of spirit among ignoble ones, had made him grow to
think the whole of life!

He was very weary and his vision was not clear; for the previous day had
been a solemn fast, and he had walked far and long since the early
morning, that he might be the less delayed. He felt like kneeling where
he stood--if perchance it should be a vision!--But he only bowed his
head and waited--and his weakness passed.

The younger one--the maiden with that strange mystery of pain and
strength in her white face, was coming towards him.

"Father," she said, "hath none offered thee refreshment? Thou must
indeed be weary, for the way is long. Zia, let us be served here--in
sight of the great forest that will seem like home to our good Padre."

"Nay, nay," he interposed quickly, with an effort to shake off this
incomprehensible spell and return to his wonted mood of protest, "for I
have never banqueted in the palace of a Queen--your Majesty."

"Let it be brought," Caterina said, turning to the Lady Beata, "a simple
meal; for I myself have need, having tasted nothing since the long vigil
of the night--being too sore from my great perplexity." For she divined
that she must be alone with the prior to melt his mood, which grieved
her; but she had not the less faith in his judgment for his hatred of
royalty, and at all costs she had the grace to crave for truth in the
questions she would ask of him.

"My Father," she said with winning gentleness when they were alone, "we
will speak together as father and daughter--it will be better so, for I
was not born to Majesty, and I have sent to ask of thee thy counsel, for
life is difficult. And for my hospitality--is it not offered to the
pilgrim in thy House of Priests of the Troödista? Hath not our Lord
Himself commanded the giving of the cup of water?"

He was startled at her learning: surely it was rare that women out of
holy orders had such knowledge of Christian traditions. He looked at her
reverently, still wondering, and would have spoken to excuse his rough
speech, but that he knew not how to frame a thought so strange and new.

She motioned him to a seat where a table had been spread under the deep
arches that looked toward the forest. There were wines and fruits in
tempting chalices of rainbow glass and low baskets of ivory and
chiselled silver, cooling with snow from the mountain; figs from
Lefcara; _caistas_, golden and delicious, emitting a fragrance of
glorified nectarine that rivalled the perfume of the wine itself;
pomegranates--the gift of a goddess to the thirsty Cyprian land,
planted, as was well known, by the royal hand of Aphrodite herself, each
fruit holding a fair refreshment for a torrid Cyprian day in its
sparkling, semilucent, ruby pulp: ortolans from the sea-coast, steeped
in wine.

The table was a slab of oriental alabaster, polished like a jewel,
upheld by griffins with outthrust tongues curiously contorted and
entwined. But beyond the silken curtains of the palace-windows the
forest and the hills, with a wandering breath of coolness from the
mountain-breeze, drew and welcomed him, with some faint, new perception
of the oneness of God's earth.

She had banished with a glance the maiden who stood waiting with her
lute to give the customary accompaniment to the meal, and they were
quite alone.

He crumbled his bread and swallowed his wine like a hungry man, drawing
the wild, purple figs nearer, unconscious of the dainties which she did
not press upon him, while he tasted the familiar food--the food which
his Lord Christ had blessed to man's uses. So, also, the luxury of the
service passed unnoticed, as he fixed his eyes on the distant darks of
his own forest, with the "Troödista" rising on a peak far, far
away--that haven of distressed souls to whom he was a father of
consolation. Her fingers toyed with the fruit that lay untasted before
her, while the difficulty of speech struggled within her. Yet he felt,
subtly, as he kept his eyes upon the hills, that he was in sight of the
shadow of a soul in pain, and he waited--for once, oblivious of the
distance between a palace and a convent.

"Thou art born a Greek, my Father?" she questioned. "Thou art a priest
of the Greek Church--which my people love?"

The commanding habit of a lifetime was strong upon him and again his
resentment rose to quench the softer mood which was possessing him, and
of which he was afraid.

"I knew not that I had been summoned from my work for Christ to answer
of myself," he said sternly. "If thou hast need of counsel, tell it
quickly."

Again her lip quivered at the hurt, but she put it aside bravely, as she
rose and moved backward for a pace further into the shadow. "I ask it
for my people's sake--I being their Queen," she said, "and knowing that
my people are rather Greek in feeling, I would do naught to hurt them."

How tenderly the words "my people" fell from the lips of this young,
Venetian woman, who seemed almost a child--had their imperious Grecian
Queen, Elenà Paléologue ever so uttered them? Had she not named a boy to
the highest See in the gift of their church--with no thought of
fitness--but solely that he might be put aside lest he come between her
and her greed of domination? Had she not plotted murder and whatever
else might lie between her and the accomplishment of her will? His heart
melted within him, and he rose and followed Caterina into the chamber.

"The most Holy Father of Rome hath of late been prejudiced against the
King--my husband--and I sought for one who might give me counsel,
unprejudiced."

If she had been a wily diplomat she could not better have wielded the
prior's mood than by this unconscious utterance.

"So help me God, I will strive to help thee in counsel," he answered
fervently. "But are there not men, set apart as Councillors for the
realm, to aid one so young in the ruling of her kingdom?"

"Aye, Father," she admitted sadly, "but it is to steady mine own
judgment _to judge of theirs_--that I have sent for thee. The question
is not for Court Councillors, but for one who hath no part nor lot in
this matter--who is often in meditation on holy matters, and hath won
wisdom."

He made a motion of deprecation, but she went on speaking in her clear,
even voice, still questioning: "Thou knowest well the history of the
kings of Lusignan?"

He bowed his head in assent.

"And the history of the life of the King--my husband?" She dwelt on the
word with inexpressible tenderness--the slight pause that followed it
was like unuttered music.

Did she know? Was it possible that she knew? he asked himself.

But the question came again.

"And the provisions of his will--for myself and for--for others?" A wave
of color had flushed her cheek and brow.

He looked at her searchingly, seeking for words that might best comfort.
"I know them," he said, "the provisions of the will having been told me
by your Majesty's messenger: and I, being a Greek, and the friend of the
people, that which toucheth them, toucheth me. My daughter, the sins of
the race descend from father to son, and are in the blood; and there
hath been no loving care of holy women about his childhood--which should
be remembered and win forgiveness."

"It is no question of forgiveness," she answered proudly, "of which I
would speak with thee--_that_ lieth between our Holy Mother in Heaven
and the souls of those who suffer." She seemed to dismiss the subject
with an imperious wave of her slight hand. "It is a question of human
judgment in which that of a holy man may avail, but in which this
knowledge is necessary--else had it not been spoken of."

She paused for a moment to gather strength, while the old man watched
her in growing wonder--so young--so wronged--so tender--so brave--so
strong to endure!

Hagios Johannes the elder had been known through the long years of his
canonization as _Lampadisti_, the _illumined_: and as the prior
listened, he prayed with fervor that the wisdom of his sainted
predecessor might descend upon his soul.

"My Father," she resumed with a great effort, "I knew not of this
history of the last of our Kings of Cyprus, until my marriage had been
made.... I knew not of any right of Carlotta, being _own_ daughter to
the King, the father of my husband"--again that tremulous pause of
unuttered music--"to contest the crown with him, until I learned it in
Cyprus, these few weeks past."

Her head drooped lower, but she went on resolutely. "I knew not, until I
came to Cyprus--for they who knew and should have told me, held the
knowledge from me--that any might question the right of Janus--my
husband--to this kingdom of Cyprus--he being only son to the King. For I
knew not that his mother was _not_ the Queen, until I came hither."

She paused again to gather strength, lifting her guileless great eyes to
his, in agonized appeal, while he watched her dumbly.

"And now, my Father," she said, throwing back her head with sudden
vigor, and with the dignity of a great resolve, "this is my question,
which hath come to me in the watches of the night and will not be
denied, and for which I have summoned thee. I--being wife to Janus, who
hath been crowned King of this people--and I, with him, crowned Queen;
and by his will left Queen of Cyprus--with Council, appointed by him, to
help me rule; shall I, a Christian woman--a Venetian and _not_ a
Cyprian--his widow--_hold this kingdom against Carlotta_, who is
daughter to the King, the father of my husband--and to the rightful
Queen, Elenà--his father's lawful wife?"

He was dumbfounded and could not answer her at once; but while he sought
for words he bowed his head in mute reverence.

"My daughter," he said at length, "hath this question been put to thee
by any men of Cyprus?"

"Nay, Father; but it hath come to me in these sad nights, because I fain
would do the _right_--that which is well for my people: and life is very
difficult."

"My people," again, uttered with the accent of a mother who folds her
child to her heart--it was a revelation; but he must probe more deeply
before he could answer her.

"And this palace--and all the palaces of this estate?" he asked slowly,
as if he could not comprehend her. "Thou wouldst renounce this splendor
when none hath asked it of thee?"

"I would even bear the weight of it, if it be _right_," she said,
"though rest were sweeter."

"Thou wouldst be free, perchance, to seek thy home in Venice?"

"Nay, nay!" she exclaimed, shrinking from him--"never Venice
again--since she hath sent me hither, knowing all, and told me not. I
cannot go back to Venice!"

He pondered gravely.

"Then what is thy will, my daughter?"

"To do the right!" she cried vehemently; "out of my own great sorrow to
expiate the wrong! May it not be, my Father, if I shrink not from the
right at any cost?"

"I will consider," he said, "since thy will is strong for this
sacrifice."

"Sacrifice!" she cried, in her amazement breaking all reserve. "Oh,
Father! To call _this_ 'sacrifice,' when the very light of life is gone
from me! He was so beautiful and gracious--with such a light in his
eyes--and I thought--oh, I _thought_ we were so happy! And now--oh, God,
it breaks my heart--I _loved_ him!"

"Daughter----"

"May not the suffering of one atone for another's sin?" she questioned
feverishly.

"Nay--leave that thought, it is too heavy for thee: and not revealed to
men, that they may declare it."

"Pray for him, Father! Thou wilt pray for him--thou and all those who
come to thee. There will be many, many prayers and God will hear. For
his people loved him--none could stay from loving him, he was so
winsome. Mother of Mercies, thou wilt take my anguish for his
atonement!--_Oh I suffer!_"

The words came in a low moan, wrung from her unaware. Father Johannes
caught the small hands which she had flung out before her clenched, in
her passionate struggle for control, and with faltering motions of
unaccustomed gentleness, he soothed her until she had grown quieter and
he could unclasp them. Then he spoke strange words, out of a great
compassion:

"Christ knoweth; for He is Love--and He will save!"

"There is more," she gasped with her spent voice--"but I dare not name
it--the thought of it is torture. But it is not true; Madonna mia! it
_is not_ true!"

The strong man could bear no more; he groaned in spirit and ground his
hands against his breast--his lip curling with scorn at the pain of his
own torn flesh. "Tell it!" he commanded; "it _cannot_ be true."

She looked at him, hope dawning in her stricken face. "The words they
speak--they who are his enemies--that he had forsworn his faith: it is
not true."

"It is the very machination of the Evil One!" he thundered. "I know the
slander and the man who fathered it, for spite. And may Heaven forgive
its maker--for he hath need--standing high in the holy place of Earth. I
_know_ it is not true!"

He looked his faith into her eyes until he had banished her terror, and
she put out her wan hand, grateful, for his assurance.

Then he turned from her abruptly and wandered away to weigh her
question, looking into the depths of the great forest while he pondered
and prayed to be enlightened. He must have sight of his own solitudes if
he would keep his judgment free, and though she called to him, timidly,
thinking he had forgotten her, he made no answer, being not yet ready.
Surely, it could not be God's will that so fine a spirit should resign
her claim to their uneasy crown!

It was long before he returned to her side, for the shadows were
lengthening and a crimson light flamed in the West.

"Daughter," he said with deep solemnity, "it hath come to me with full
light in answer to thy question, that thou, being crowned Queen and
consecrated in the Duomo of Nikosia, together with King Janus, thy
husband--whom this people loved--and decreed by him to hold this realm,
which--for the first time in many years, and by his hand, is now united
under one sovereign, that thy duty biddeth thee hold and rule it against
all other claimants--were it even Carlotta who hath once been called its
Queen.

"Rule thou this people with the fear of Heaven in thy true heart--so God
shall make thee wise!"

She came slowly, as to a heavy task, and knelt before him, with clasped
hands, kissing the crucifix which he held out to her; the red light
streamed through the arches with a fierce illumination.

"Father--and Janus!" she cried--"hear my vow!

"To do for my people as Heaven and the Madonna shall teach me: to bear
them in my heart and seek their happiness; to live for them alone! And
if harm hath been--oh God, if harm hath been done--to nerve me to the
more strenuous duty, that wrong may be forgiven!"


XV


It was a moonless night in June, with lowering clouds and a threat of
distant thunder echoing from the far mountains.

A crowd was gathering, low-voiced and eager, in the Piazza San Nicolò: a
crowd chiefly of the people, and the faces and costumes of many races
came out grotesquely under the spasmodic glare of the torches which
flared about the standard of Cyprus, in the centre of the square--the
standard was tied with mourning and wreathed with cypress. There were
many women--here and there a peasant with a child slumbering in her
arms, or clinging sleepily to the tawny silk scarf woven under her own
mulberry trees. Here and there, with the fitful motion of the wind, the
light touched the fair hair of a chance peasant from the province of _La
Kythrea_ into gleams of gold that a Venetian patrician might envy, or
brought into sudden relief the smothered passion of some beautiful, dark
Greek face. But the women were chiefly of the lower Cypriote
peasant-type, heavy-featured and unemotional. There was a sprinkling of
monkish cowls and of the red fez from the Turkish village of Afdimou
which lay in seeming friendliness of relation close to the village of
Ormodos, whose population was wholly Greek.

In front of the long façade of the palace of Famagosta a cordon of
soldiers stood motionless, while before them the mounted guard paced
slowly to and fro; and across the Piazza, with that impatient, surging
crowd between, was faintly heard the steady footfall of the sentinels,
measuring and remeasuring with unemotional precision their narrow beat
before the entrance to the world-famed fortress of Famagosta.

A group of nobles in eager, low-voiced converse crossed the square,
pressed through the cordon of soldiers and gave the password and the
great door was opened to admit them and closed again.

Two burghers picked out a face among them, as the torches of their
escorts flared.

"That was Marin Rizzo, Counsellor to the Queen; a man of
power--unscrupulous."

"And more a friend--I have heard it whispered in Nikosia--to Naples than
to Cyprus."

"Hast evidence for thy speech?" the other questioned eagerly in a lower
tone.

"It is for that we must watch; the time is threatening."

"But Messer Andrea Cornaro was with him: he will know how to guard the
interests of the Queen, having been so great a favorite with our Janus,
and one for management, despite his courtly ways! Without our Messer
Andrea, his niece had never been our Queen."

"Nay--nor if His Holiness had had his will. I had the tale from a source
to trust, though the story was kept hushed. It would take one like our
Janus, with his royal ways, to scorn the flattering offers of His
Holiness! There were also threats!"

"Nay; threats would never move him, except to see the comedy thereof and
make his mood the pleasanter! But I had not dreamed him saint enough for
the Holy Father to sue to him for an alliance."

"Ah, friend, the ways of those above us be strange! But it was for this,
I take it, that His Holiness--who hath a temper most uncommon
earthly--sent none to represent him at the Coronation of the King."

The other shrugged his shoulders. "It lacked for naught in splendor; it
was a day for Cyprus and for Nikosia."

"_Vanitas Vanitatum_," droned a friar of the Latin Church who had been
standing near enough to catch echoes of their speech.

Both men glanced towards him and instinctively moved away.

"Aye; little it matters now--coronation honors or splendors for him! But
he had a way with him!"

"And he was one for daring!"

They crossed themselves and lapsed into silence, as their eyes sought
the banners drooping, shrouded, before the palace-gates, near the statue
of their dead King--a very Apollo for beauty--the pedestal heaped high
with withered tokens of loyalty and mourning.

But the mass of the waiting crowd were silent, scarcely exchanging a
whispered confidence;--so still that the long, low boom of the surf upon
the shore reached them distinctly, like a responsive heart-throb. They
could hear the storm-waves outside the port dashing wildly against the
rock-bound coast, with fierce suggestions of strife. But they knew that
within their sheltered harbor their waiting galleys rode at anchor,
ready to sail at a moment's notice--for Venice, for Rome, for
Egypt--though the flags they bore were still at half-mast, with their
King but a month dead.

There was a sense of suppressed excitement in the hush of the throng;
almost, one might have said, an atmosphere of prayer. For the great bell
of San Nicolò--the bell with that wonderful voice of melody--was ringing
softly, as for vespers; continuously, as if the people had not answered
to the call. Yet many a low-voiced "Ave" responded to the chime as now
and again some toil-worn hand lifted the rosary that hung from a girdle,
or clasped a rude cross closer.

Restless under the chiming, some simple mother who had fought for her
place in the crowd before the palace, deep in her heart besought the
blessed Madonna to forgive her because she would not yield it to kneel
at the altar in the Duomo; while leaning over the little one slumbering
on her breast, she kissed it with a meaning holy as prayer, and did not
dream that the angels were watching.

The only steady light in all the square was the soft gleam, as of
moonlight, streaming through the windows of the Duomo out into the mist,
and here and there among the crowd some face turned towards it and was
heartened.

For back of the splendid marble columns of the peristyle, when the light
from some torch flashed suddenly upon their polished surfaces, the long
lines of palace-windows lay dark; and it was growing late.

"They say that the holy sisters keep vigil this night in the Convent of
the Blessed Santa Croce," murmured a woman's voice.

"Aye," another answered her reverently, "for the love of Santa Elenà and
the Holy Relic, they will bless our beautiful Lady!"

The theme unsealed their peasant tongues, for this relic brought from
the East by the Mother of Constantine, was the glory of Cyprus, and
their speech flowed more freely.

"The most Reverend our Archbishop should send for that Santa Croce in
procession, to bring it hither--for truly it can do anything!" another
woman cried eagerly. She crossed herself and bowed devoutly as she
spoke. "For all the world knoweth that once, when it had been lost and
the good pater would prove if he had really found it, he held it in the
heart of the fire until it glowed like the very flame itself. But when
he drew it forth, it was burned not at all--_Santissima Vergine!_--but
wood as before--being too holy to burn. A miracle! And then----"

"I also know the miracle about Queen Alixe," another woman interposed,
eager to show her knowledge of the marvel of the Relic, "for my sister
dwelleth by the gate of the Convent of the Troödos, and she hath much
learning of the most blessed Relic;--how that Queen Alixe laid the bit
on her tongue--she who could never speak fairly--more like a blockhead
of a stammering peasant than a Royal lady--may Heaven forgive me! And
how for ever after, her speech flowed freely, so that all might
understand her. It must be good to be in Cyprus."

"Holy Mother! but it should be lonely in the great palace," a young
peasant-mother confided to her nearest neighbor, as she shifted the baby
to her other arm and arranged her wrappings tenderly, with hands that
looked too rough for such loving ministration. She was thinking of her
Gioan who would be waiting for her with a gruff greeting when she
returned, but who was good to her, if he often scolded when the porridge
was burned. But men were that way about women's work, and never knew
that an angel would forget when the baby cried. "_But_ she was growing
heavy, blessed be the Madonna! Why wasn't there a light?--It would be
good if one might sleep!"

A mounted messenger came out from the fort and dashed across the square;
the crowd holding breath, parting silently before him, but surging
tumultuously back, to wait--though they were very weary and the shifting
clouds were dropping rain. But there were yet no lights in the palace
windows.

It was growing darker and the wind was rising; a quick flurry of drops
extinguished some of the torches, and in the greater gloom the voice of
the wind wailed like an evil omen. But still the women would not
go--waiting for that sign of _the light in the palace windows_.

Only they pressed closer to each other and crossed themselves in terror,
with smothered ejaculations and adjurations, shuddering from the
superstitions that enthralled their simple natures; for at this season,
in Cyprus rain was most unwonted, surely a sign of Heaven's displeasure!
Still they waited in the darkness of the night, with shivering hearts,
with the wind growling like angry fiends out beyond the harbor and down
from the environing hills--upheld to this costly tribute of devotion by
the dumb, dog-like loyalty which their beautiful young Queen had roused
within them, by a smile on her wedding-day and the sorrow that had
quenched it.

"It is good, _va_, to see the light in the Duomo! There is many a good
candle burning for her at the shrine of Our Lady of Mercy, this night."

"An' there were none for ourselves, we should find one for her!"

"Not a woman of our _casal_ but held a candle in her hand as we came in
at the gate of the city; for the silkworms have given us silk and enough
to spin this year; and if they had not, we would not grudge it to her.
For she hath a smile like an angel. May our Holy Mother bless her for
them both."

"And beautiful--beautiful so that it warms the heart! Dost thou remember
the day when she came out of the Duomo, beautiful as the Madonna
herself--may our Blessed Lady in Heaven forgive me!--with a necklace and
a crown flashing fire, that our Holy Mother of Jesus might wear on the
Feast of the Annunciation?--and the smile on her face?--and the King
beside her----? Ah, but it was a wedding--Holy Saints!--and they ought
to be happy--the great ones!"

"Hush then!--But surely 'tis a sin that they left the mourning upon the
banner to-night, one should have more respect! If I could get into the
Duomo for a drop of Holy water--Sancta Maria!"

But the crowd had swelled to hopeless density, and both women threw out
their hands with the magical gesture that never failed to exorcise the
evil spirits brought near by such an omen. Then they touched each other
reassuringly, and crossed themselves and were silent again.

For a beautiful Greek, not of their own class, stepped out from her
group of attendants, and knelt on the pavement, stretching out her hands
towards the dark palace with a prayer--they could hear her
murmuring,--"For _her_ sake--for the sake of the innocent one who hath
been wronged--Holy Mother of Angels, grant us one of her blood to rule
this land!"

Her heavy veil of mourning fell aside as she hastily rose and joined her
attendants, disappearing in the crowd.

"Madama da Patras! Could it be Madama da Patras, mother to the King,
kneeling on the pavement in the night!"

"Her heart is broken with grief, and she thought not to be seen, poor
lady."

Two nobles were wending their way with difficulty across the Piazza,
they lingered a moment, arrested by the words of the prayer.

"This night may make the difference between anarchy and peace for
Cyprus," one of them said to his companion, as they resumed their
struggle.

"Aye--Cyprus for the Cypriotes,--instead of Genoa, or Venice, or
Naples."

"Or Queen Carlotta?"

"_Maledetto!--Who spoke?_"

But the challenge was unanswered. The noble who had dared to name aloud
the daughter of their last Queen--the sister of their late King--had
been lost in the darkness before the trusty guard, _sent from Venice_,
could make sure of him.

"The fellow should be thrust through for his insolence. A Cyprian master
is good enough for Cyprus," they confided to each other, as they made
pause again, emerging from the crowd at the other end of the piazza,
before the gate of the fortress.

"What matters it?" his comrade answered him nonchalantly, "for canst
thou tell me the color of a Cypriote now? and his native tongue may be
liker that of Spain or Venice than of France or Greece. My Lord of
Piscopia hath the color of Venice."

"But of the very household of our Queen:--speak soft! Our
Queen?--Perchance this night may be her undoing--how runs King Giacomo's
will? Yea, for the matter of the fiefs, she hath been royal with her
gifts--a matter not so lordly when confiscation cometh thus easily."

"But she hath a royal way with her, as of one born to the throne, and
for that matter it were not strange for one of the house of
Cornelii--they held their heads proudly enough in Venice, I am told; and
her mother was of the blood of a Comnenus--more royal than a Lusignan,
if not so well tempered."

"Aye; she is well enough."

"And she hath a grace that hath verily won the people; never was there
such a crowd in the time of any other Queen. See how they throng before
her gates to-night--poor simple souls--conquered by a smile that
costeth naught."

"Nay; it is not strange; for the people entered little into the thought
of Queen Carlotta, or Queen Elenà. There is no harm in her; she is a
good child, and beautiful enough to be a saint; with too little
understanding of the ways of our court: too great a saint for Janus--by
every blessed saint of Cyprus! But I had rather she had more earthliness
and wile than be the pawn of Venice. A Cyprian for the Cypriotes! Our
Janus were better;--a Lusignan--not too much a saint--not a child nor a
woman neither--but masterful: less the pawn of Venice."

"As well of Venice with her fleets and commerce, as of Naples--if it be
not a Cyprian. How sayest thou? And it was King Janus himself who gave
Pelendria--that most royal and bountiful fief of a prince of
Lusignan--into the hands of that parvenu of Naples, _Rizzo_! The King
verily guessed not his quality when he named him to such estate! He
would outrule monarchs."

"_Pace!_"

Close to them, in the crowd, they heard the sound of a soldier's lance
rasping the pavement as he stood at rest. One not far off seemed to
answer his signal.

The storm was growing fiercer; the sullen mutterings of the wind broke
into a shriek, with a terrible downpour of rain; but the rushing crowd
was stayed by a cry of joy that rose above the tumult--a cry of love
from the heart of the people--

"Mater Beatissima! _A light in the palace window!_"

A candle flamed in a dark window--two--more--a light in every casement!

The gates of the palace were thrown wide and a splendid mounted corps
rode forth amidst a flare of torches--white plumes of rejoicing waving
from their casques--white banners raised high on the points of their
lances--while the herald, in full armor with vizor up, bore proudly
before the people the silken banner with the arms of Cyprus blazoned
upon it--the white, royal banner of a Prince of Galilee.

The waiting people went wild with joy, for the bells of all the churches
of Famagosta were pealing a jubilee, and the night rang with shouts of
homage for the Prince of Galilee, the heir to the crown of Cyprus:

For an infant prince had just opened his unconscious eyes upon his
troubled earthly heritage.


XVI


White banners of rejoicing floated from every stronghold and palace
throughout Cyprus, to publish the birth of the infant prince; but a hush
had lain for many days over the city of Famagosta.

In the Cathedral of San Nicolò, the Archbishop of Nikosia, primate of
all Cyprus, ministered in solemn state among a throng of lesser
dignitaries, priests, and acolytes. His sumptuous robes of office, of
cloth of gold broidered with costly pearls, flashed forth a marvellous
radiance from the light of countless candles bought with the precious
copper bits of the peasants who came from the provinces far and near. As
they gathered about the steps of the altar they carefully drew their
dingy work-worn garments back, lest their touch should sully the
splendid Persian carpet spread for the Reverendissimo, little dreaming
that the hint of sorrowing love in their stolid faces robed them with
nobility and turned their hard-earned copper _carcie_ into a golden
gift.

In the many churches throughout the kingdom the humble people were
kneeling, praying their unlettered prayers for the beautiful young
Queen, with the more faith that the Holy Mother would listen because one
so great as the Archbishop of Nikosia ministered in person before their
sacred image of San Nicolò. For had it not been the booty of a
slaughtered Eastern city, won by Peter the Valiant in most holy warfare
of Crusade, which His Holiness of Rome would fain have counted among the
treasures of the One True Church within the Eternal City?

In the grim stone corridors of the impregnable fortress of Famagosta, a
crowd of humble pilgrims from the Troödos knelt, breathlessly fingering
their rosaries, while the monks of the Holy House upon the Mountain
moved among the scattered groups, holding each one his Cross of Thorns,
and reciting his low "Ave," that the people might follow in hushed
whispers.

But within the little Chapel of the Fortress, Hagios Johannes wrestled
alone in prayer; it leaped from his heart with groans and sobs that
might not be restrained.

Surely the merciful Father in Heaven would leave this pure spirit to
rule the distressed people of Cyprus:--"Were they found too sinful to
win so great a boon?--'_Let the priests, the ministers of the people,
weep between the porch and the altar!_'--My God, it is Thy word, spoken
by Thy prophet of old!" He pressed his hands against the crosses on his
breast and shoulders, lashing himself in a sort of frenzy from the
passion of his thought, not knowing that his blood trickled in slow
drops upon the very steps of the altar--the blood of man, defiling the
purity of that slab of onyx brought from the Temple at Jerusalem by the
first of the Kings of Lusignan.

The fortress, not the Palace of Famagosta, had been the birthplace of
the little Prince of Galilee; a wise precaution, possibly, in view of
the diversities of sympathy to be found among the nobles of Cyprus. In
the innermost of the apartments set apart for the Royal use, a grave
assemblage of learned men had gathered--men of many races and tongues,
of various schools of science, diverse in doctrines and ideals--all,
with the exception of Maestro Gentile, the court physician, strangers to
the patient whom they were called to treat in a critical moment. As a
matter of science the case had a certain value for them, which was not
lessened by the fact of the patient's quality; but to Maestro Gentile
alone was the hopeless condition of the young Queen a matter of deep
personal concern. They came from France, from Greece, from the famous
University of Bologna; the Sultan of Egypt had sent a sage learned in
all the lore of that ancient civilization; and a wise Arab had brought
to this consultation the secrets of every herb that grew; while a holy
man from Persia, steeped in the wisdom of the Zend Avestar and in the
doctrines of Zarathrustra, stood ready to use his mystic comfort in
behalf of the sufferer. The consultation had dragged its slow length
through the hot August afternoon, while the strange faces came and went
about the couch where the young Queen lay moaning and tossing; the
single being under that roof who loved her as her own soul and would
have given her life for hers, was waiting alone in the great
ante-chamber, listening for every footfall, every motion within--filling
each moment with an intensity of prayer.

The great men had barred her from the sick-room while they made their
diagnosis, lest the intricacies of the symptoms should declare
themselves less positively in the presence of a nature without learning
in any method of their art. "There was fever," they said; "it would
excite the patient to have one of her own household so near her in this
extremity; her strength must be carefully treasured."

But all wore faces of gloom, speaking with hushed voices, as, one by
one, they came forth from the darkened chamber, yet with a sense of
relief that all had been done that could be done and the weakness might
now be left to run its course, "For there is no hope," they said.

The Lady Beata had questioned each face silently; but when the last one
passed, bringing the same sense of doom, "Can _nothing_ more be done?"
she asked with clasped hands.

They shook their heads, gravely, with decorous looks of sympathy,
repeating their short refrain, like a knell.

"Then I will go to her," she answered, "that she may see a face of love
when she passes," and pushing them all aside, she resolutely entered the
sick-chamber, signing to Maestro Gentile to follow her; but the protest
from the group of learned men was less than she had feared, since the
Queen was now so ill that nothing could cure or harm.

The fair young mother, fever flushed, with wandering eyes, lay tossing
on the silken cushions of her low couch--broken words feebly struggling
from the parted lips in pathetic tones, "Madonna--I am so tired--_so_
tired--take me----"

There was no recognition in her eyes, as the Lady Beata leaned over her,
startled at the words, her soul wrung with sympathy.

"Why can they do nothing?" she asked in low authoritative tones of the
physician.

"The will is gone," he answered sorrowfully; "she hath lost all desire
of life; she will not rally, being too weak for the effort, and having
no consciousness to help herself."

There was a hunted, frightened look in Caterina's face; the words came
again, more faintly--"tired--take me----"

"She shall _not_ die until she hath known this joy which Heaven hath
sent her!" the Lady Beata cried with conviction and a sudden sense of
power. "We will save her--thou, Maestro Gentile--and I--who love her.
Give her only some potion for her strengthening, I beseech thee, caro
Maestro;--life is flickering--she _must_ not die yet."

"There is no hope," he answered her again; but he gave the strengthening
draught, for he could not resist her imploring eyes.

The Lady Beata had been moving noiselessly, throwing wide the curtains;
a faint, pitying evening breeze stole into the chamber. She came now and
knelt beside the couch.

"Bring the little Prince hither with all possible haste, from his
chamber," she said without lifting her eyes from Caterina's face. "We
must rouse her!"

And now the Maestro went without further question, to do her bidding,
although the child, and all that belonged to him had been kept out of
sight and sound of the invalid, through these days of danger, lest an
emotion should snap the slender thread of life.

"Bring none with thee," she said, "save only the peasant-nurse; for we
must be alone."

Quite alone, with death so near, out of the marvellous great strength
in her heart, the Lady Beata laid her firm, cool touch on the restless
hands, scarcely restraining them--yet the spasmodic movements grew
quieter; she smiled into her eyes, until the strain of the frightened
gaze relaxed; she folded her close in the arms of her deep tenderness
and _willed_ her back to life with the strenuousness of a great
purpose--for was there not the little wailing child to live for, to give
her sight of the love and happiness for which she was starving!

Closer and closer yet she folded her, with light caressing motions on
hair and brow, calling to her with all sweet names that deep-hearted
women know, in tones so like a dream that they caught the wandering
consciousness and lighted it with a faint, far hope.

Time is not when such momentous issues are pending. Whether the moments
passed into hours, or whether each instant were so fraught with its
intensity of hope and fear that every heart-throb seemed an eternity,
the yearning watchers never knew. Slowly--or was it swiftly?--Just as
hope was dying in despair--a breath of peace, like the wafting of the
wings of some heavenly messenger, stirred softly among them, dropping
balm on the face of the sleeper.

They bent above her breathlessly; the pale eyelids fluttered and
unclosed.

Her breath came gently and broke in a restful sigh; she lay quietly
within the shielding arms that had held her back from the dread abyss;
the light of recognition was dawning in her eyes.

The Lady Beata trembled for joy; but she scarce dared move or speak;
she kept her eyes fixed on the dear, fragile face,--deep in her heart
that ceaseless prayer for life.

Maestro Gentile was dumb with awe:--it was a miracle! He stood watching,
intent to help--holding his breath lest he should work some harm, while
he kept guard over the nurse who held the sleeping child; he was so
completely under the spell of that wonder-working will that he needed
scarce a sign to work with her.

But the Lady Beata was no thaumaturgist; only a loving woman, standing
where science had failed, translating another's desperate need from her
own depths of sympathy--arresting the oncoming shadow because of her
faith and her great love.

"Now!" she exclaimed under her breath.

She laid the infant on its mother's breast; its dainty breath came and
went upon her face with the fragrance of a violet. She uncurled a little
crumpled, rose-leaf palm and pressed it close upon the mother's
cheek--never moving her gaze, with the will of life strong within it,
from the eyes in which recognition had dawned with a strange, sweet
surprise. A smile was brooding on lips and eyes. One baby-hand lay
clasped in Caterina's--the wee pink fingers closed on hers like the
tendrils of a vine.

The Lady Beata's heart throbbed to breaking, but her voice came low and
calm--stilled with the passion of her gladness, as Caterina's eyes
smiled into hers:

"It is thine own little son, who hath need of thy love:--God's wonderful
gift of joy that only mothers know!"


XVII


With whatever magnificence of pageantry the ceremonies of the Baptism
and Coronation of the infant Prince of Galilee were surrounded--and
under the tutelage of Venice and the auspices of Cyprus which aspired to
the splendor of an Eastern Empire, there could be nothing lacking--there
were nobler aspects of that brilliant festival which those who witnessed
never forgot.

The Embassies which had been despatched to all friendly courts had
returned with deputations of rejoicing; a fleet from Venice and ships
from the East had brought costly gifts of welcome and men, high in
dignity, charged to represent their governments: and the Admiral
Morenigo, with two Provveditori had arrived to stand sponsors for the
Grandson of the Republic. In the vast banquet-hall of the palace,
decorated with all its ancient heraldic devices and trophies of Crusades
and Eastern victories, the Coronation Feast was spread, where presently
the knights of the noblest families of the kingdom would count it an
honor to serve: and the splendid city of Famagosta was gay with the
suites and banners of foreign guests.

But, for all that, it was the _People's Day_--for the young Queen had
willed it so.

"Let proclamation be made throughout the land," she had said, "that all,
of every degree, may share the festivities, and come to pay their homage
to the infant King. And bid the mothers bring their little ones."

The people thronged from far and near until Famagosta could hold no
more; from Nikosia, from Larnaca and Limasol and Kerynea and other
cities and districts of Cyprus, came great deputations of burghers, with
those peasants from the nearer _casals_ and hamlets whom the invitation
of their gracious Sovereign Lady had reached and who were not restrained
by the unwillingness of their nobles: for there were still some among
the ancient families of the island who looked with disfavor upon Janus
and his successors.

The Queen had not shown herself to the people since the birth of her
little son; and they knelt along her pathway as she passed across the
Piazza San Nicolò, from the palace to the Duomo, holding their children
up that she might bless them--for it was a miracle! She had come back
from Death's door to rule and bless their land!

     "Sancta Maria!"

Before her on the golden cushion of state were borne the sceptre and the
quaint Royal Crown of Cyprus of the time of their first king, Guy de
Lusignan--heavy and far too rough for her delicate brows to endure; and
the Councillors and Counts of the kingdom, the knights and nobles and
ladies of the court made a brave array. But the people,--the
peasants,--half-dazed by their unaccustomed nearness to such
magnificence, not feeling as did the people of Venice that the fêtes of
the kingdom were meant for them, had looked on stolidly at all the
bravery of the passing procession and at the glitter of the
insignia,--showing no sign of greeting until a white, girlish figure
stood under the palace portal.

"_Panagia mou!_ Holy Virgin!" The familiar ejaculation came,
half-suppressed, in a whisper of awe, from hundreds of voices. For the
words of the Cyprian peasant were few, and this appeal to their most
revered image of the Virgin sufficed for the expression of their deepest
emotions. Was it, in truth their Queen--or the blessed Madonna herself,
who came forth from the palace arches in her sweeping robes, white and
gleaming, her royal mantle of cloth of gold and her jewelled crown--like
the beautiful ivory image in the Duomo of Santa Croce?--Very pale and
fair and sad she was, yet with a smile in her eyes, as she turned from
side to side to answer their greetings, which now broke forth
rapturously.

The color flushed her pale face when their cries of loyalty arose, and
she turned and took the little Prince of Galilee from her Eccellenza,
the Royal Governess the Dama Margherita de Iblin, holding him high,
close-pressed to her cheek for all the people to see, with a great glory
of mother-love in her shining eyes. They rent the air with their sobs
and shouts.

The child lay smiling on his mother's arm--serene and very beautiful; it
was in truth a holy picture.

The populace forgot that it was their Queen; as never before, that any
distance of caste lay between them--they forgot their native awkwardness
and dread of the great ones--they thronged nearer, unafraid--only to
touch her--to kiss some hem of her floating garments--to look in the
face of the little child who was to be their King!

And when the mother and the child were gone into the shadows of the
Duomo, so thronged with noble guests and with all the splendid Hierarchy
of Cyprus that there was scarce room for the royal procession to pass to
the High-Altar beyond the tomb of Janus, the hearts of the people in the
Piazza joined in the chorus of love and benediction of the choirs
within, as, with new hints of devotion in their patient faces, they
folded their own little ones closer with some vague, struggling,
incomprehensible sense of aspiration--they were one with their Royal
Lady and the Blessed Madonna, in the sacred mystery of Motherhood.

In the spacious apse the Hierarchy and the Royal Court were ranged for
the ceremonial, and back of them a low three-arched opening at one side
of the apse, supported on columns of polished porphyry clasped with
grotesquely hammered copper, gave glimpses of palms waving in the great
Court of the Tombs; gave glimpses also of the Monks of Troödos who had
come hither with all their numbers, to witness the solemn services of
the dedication of their infant king to his high trust.

And just within the portal, in strange contrast to the pomp of his
surroundings, stood Hagios Johannes Lampadisti, "the Illumined"--a wild,
stern figure, in his sombre robes--unchanged for any highest
festival--with the symbol of solemn sacrifice on his breast, beyond all
thought of admiration or of reproach for the splendor about him, his
prophetic gaze fastened on the face of the Queen with imperious
intensity--one hand slightly extended towards her, holding out his cross
of thorns.

When the solemn rites were over and the Queen had received her child
again from the arms of the Archbishop of Nikosia, Hagios Johannes,
never moving his eyes from her face came forward with slow movements,
and Caterina, with a sudden, uncontrollable impulse, lifting her eyes
beheld the mystic gaze of Hagios Johannes and knelt down before the
altar, straining her baby close to her breast.

"Dear Christ in Heaven!" she cried, in the dialect of the people. "I
give him to Thee!--I give _my All_ to Thee! He and I, we will live for
Thee; and for this People of Cyprus!--so Thou and the Blessed Mother be
our helpers."

The Queen's Councillors in their splendid robes of office, looked in
amazement to see their Queen forget her state in such a presence, and
outrage every precedent by crying out in the unlearned language of the
people, before this stately company; and the face of the dignified
Primate flamed with wrath at this unseemliness. But Caterina, noting
nothing, turned to receive their homage for the infant King, for whom as
by an inspiration, she had publicly offered these vows, from the depths
of her heart.

As the procession moved out into the sunshine of the Piazza, she held
the child up again to the eager, waiting throng--the light gleaming on
the tiny coronet above his baby-cap as she spread out his dimpled hands
with a motion of welcome, saying quite simply:

"This is your King. Love him, dear people of Cyprus!"

And she would not give the infant back to the Royal Governess, but
carried him herself in her own arms across the Piazza, held up for the
people to see--which never before had a queen of Cyprus been known to
do. But there was a light in her face which silenced those who would
have spoken of ways more seemly, and it was a triumphal procession to
the palace. But she paused before the peristyle, turning to face the
people again.

"There is welcome for every Cypriote," she said, "men, women and little
children, who come this day to pay homage to their infant King; and good
cheer in the palace for all," and signing to the attendants that they
should be made to enter she passed in, smiling, before them.

The child lay in his cradle in the splendid _Sala Regia_, under the
canopy blazoned with the arms of Cyprus--a little, helpless, smiling
child--guarded by the Councillors and Counts of the kingdom; and near
him stood the Queen with all her court, who for this day only had put
off their mourning that no suggestion of gloom nor any hint of evil omen
might shadow the royal baptismal and coronation fêtes. The ladies were
dazzling in gems and heirlooms of broideries and brocades; the knights
and barons of the realm were glittering with orders--here and there,
above his costly armor, one showed the red cross of the Crusade, or wore
the emblem of the Knights of San Giovanni. But the people, who never
before had entered those palace doors, came surging--not afraid--nor
shrinking from the novelty and splendor nor curious for it; they came to
pledge their fealty to the baby-prince--a little child like their
own--whose gentle mother asked their love--than which no monarch may
bring a gift more royal.


XVIII


"Is there aught to fear, Aluisi?--Thou seemest overgrave," the Lady
Beata asked anxiously as her son came late, one evening into her private
boudoir in their suite in the palace; he looked unusually weary and
depressed.

"There is always much to fear," he answered, with no brightening of his
anxious face in response to his mother's smile.

"But not now--surely not now! She hath won the heart of the
people--these fêtes were a triumph--they almost gladdened her. And now,
poor child, she hath the little one to bring her comfort."

"Aye, Madre mia; she hath perchance won the love of the simple folk; but
it is a powerless love."

"Aluisi!--thou art not like thyself to scorn it."

"I may well be not like myself in so strange a land," he answered
bitterly. "But I know not scorn; nor hopeless trust, neither."

His mother watched him wondering, as he, who was usually so
self-contained, strode impatiently about the chamber, as if its limits
fretted him.

"A few cries of loyalty--a group of peasants kneeling--make a pretty
showing--a tribute to bring her comfort--but it is the chaff before the
wind, when danger cometh. And she hath never spoken of the many fiefs
from which they came not--withheld by command of their jealous nobles.
This peasantry hath no initiative--no aggressiveness. How wouldst thou
that they should save her when danger cometh?"

"What danger, Aluisi?"

"The ever-present danger from without and within," he answered
despondently. "One knoweth not from whence the first blow shall come."

She was silent for a moment, seeking how she might pursue the theme
without further irritating him.

"If the peasants are powerless," she said, "the burghers are strong. And
they came in throngs to the coronation."

"Aye, Mother; they are our hope: I thank thee for thy word."

A silence fell again between them, and his face grew less anxious.

"The burden is heavy for thee," she said, as he came and stood near her
low couch. "It will ease thee to speak of it, if thou mayest not dismiss
it. It is not this last attempt of Carlotta that troubles thee? _That_
hath been crushed?--without renewal?"

He gave a short laugh.

"One knoweth not," he answered, with an attempt at playfulness that
showed no color of mirth. "These two hours have I been within. Cornaro
was with me. Another _mahona_ may have chanced to land, coming from
Africa with some other Valentine to do Carlotta's bidding and assert her
claim to this uneasy crown of Cyprus; _this_ Valentine of Montolipho,
poor youth, having no longer a brain to work her schemes.--But danger
from within is less easy to quell."

She had never seen him so uneasy: but she tried to control her
apprehension since he needed all her strength.

"What saith Andrea Cornaro? Doth he share thy fear?" she asked in a low
even tone.

"We spoke together but now of his Grace, the Archbishop, who verily wore
a face that boded no good to the child nor his mother--even as he held
him in baptism that day--sealing him with the sign of the Holy
Cross!--And to-day, in Council--verily Cyprus hath need of a new
Council----" he broke off suddenly.

"The Archbishop is not of the Council, Aluisi!"

"But his brother, the Count Carpasso, is more to fear," he cried
wrathfully. "They are men of one mind and both creatures of that
treacherous King of Naples. If Janus had had more wit, he would have
left Gioan Peres Fabrici to this day, bargaining for his cargoes of
grain, instead of naming him to the Council of the Realm and lavishing
the honors of the kingdom upon this faithless favorite."

"Faithless--my son? It is an evil word."

The quiet interruption arrested the angry flow of his speech.

"I pray that he be not found faithless," he said more quietly, "when he
hath a chance to prove his quality. But one would think a man so favored
of the King would seek, at every turn, to prove his loyalty before the
Queen--in which I find him not overanxious."

"It is thou, perchance, who art overanxious, from the greatness of thine
own loyalty, and the burden it hath brought thee."

"Aye--am I!--Where there is cause for mistrust it maketh cowards of us,
when faith were better. Thou knowest, gentle Mother, that this Valentine
confessed, before his death, that he but heralded a larger craft sent
from Rhodes, with knights and gentlemen and letters favoring _Carlotta_!
And Gioan Peres Fabrici, Captain of our galley, sent with speed by
prayer of us of Venice to bring them hither to confess themselves,
_found them not_. He returned, _with speed_--and _found them not_. What
thinkest thou, my Mother? Is it my judgment that is gone from too great
anxiety?--Or may a valiant captain not see a brigantine armed upon the
water?--a ship--a brig, scarce smaller than his own, perchance--that he
should let them slip?"

"Why should he let them slip?--And Valentine may not have spoken truth."

"One speaketh truth, or naught--with death so near. And for thy
question--I know not why----" He seemed to be evolving knotty reasons,
as he sat, with stern brows, deep in thought. With an effort he roused
himself and went on with his tale.

"But yesterday, in Council--for Cornaro and I, we had discussed the
matter of the royal residence together, thinking it suited not with the
Queen's dignity to remain longer in the fortress--a most mournful palace
for one so young and who hath need of some distraction about her to keep
her from oversadness. But Rizzo, being Chief of Council, would hear
naught of the Queen's return to the Palace. Fabrici also spoke against
it."

"It is strange:--but they gave no reason?"

"They gave a reason--one of their own making: that there was a matter
of more moment before the Council; that the Queen's pleasure might
wait."

"Aluisi! What saidst thou?"

"Cornaro lost patience and answered roundly: that he, being by his late
Majesty created Auditor of the realm, and by him greatly trusted--it
behooved him as much to uphold the Queen's dignity as to have his word
in the choice of the residence and aught else pertaining to the costs of
the royal household. And that the Chamberlain of the Queen--I having
upheld the demand made by him--was like to know what best might suit her
Majesty."

"And then?" the Lady Beata questioned, much agitated.

"'Ye are like to know what best might suit Her Majesty--_both being of
Venice_,' Rizzo made answer; and _dismissed the Council_."

Neither of them spoke for a few moments.

"How will Andrea accept this insolence?" the Lady Beata questioned.

"There _is_ more--far more than that for anxiety," Aluisi said,
dismissing her question with an impatient gesture. "I would that the
Queen and the child were here--in their own palace--or that we were
there. The question hath turned to one of larger import than the good
pleasure of the Queen; or the wisdom of holding the Queen and the Prince
Royal in a fortress, when the land is not at war--as if her own people
might not be trusted with her life. But the argument did not touch the
Council--not more than the whim of us--_of Venice_"--he spoke bitterly.
"Before, it was expedient. _Now_----"

"Now?" his Mother urged.

"There may be some scheme behind it, and I would we were there. She hath
none of her own beside her, if trouble should come."

"She hath Dama Margherita--who loveth her well."

"Dama Margherita," Bernardini echoed, and a feeling of peace came over
him.

But the Lady Beata sat pondering, in troubled silence. What could it
mean? Caterina had taken up her residence in the fortress before her
illness; it had been thought wise, although it had not been publicly
declared. A few of her maids of honor and Lady Beata, Chief Lady of her
Court, had gone with her. But before the baptism, her suite had returned
to the palace, that all might be as usual for the reception of the royal
guests; the Queen had lingered from day to day, partly that she might
escape the crowd and keep more quiet until the festivities were over.
But now--was it of her own choice? Why did she not return?

"And now--what wilt thou do?" the Lady of the Bernardini asked at
length, turning towards her son, failing to see what course of action
might be wisest. "May we not go to her to-night?"

"It is too late: the gates are closed; it could do but harm to rouse
them for us to pass, with no cause but our anxieties to offer. But
to-morrow, we will compass it.

"Meanwhile I have done what may be done to bring hither more who are of
our ways of thinking; for who should care for her, if not we '_of
Venice_?'" It was evident that the thrust rankled. "I saw our Consul
yesterday, who seemed not overanxious from what I told him--therefore _I
told him not all_--I trust he hath not been tampered with by this most
wily 'Council to the Queen!' but before the night had fallen, I sent a
letter of warning to Mocenigo who, with his fleet, will be at anchor off
the coast of Rhodes--to pray that he will come, or will send our
Provveditore Vettore Soranzo to await the need."

His Mother grasped his wrist--her eyes dilating. "It must be long before
they can come," she said, in a whisper.

"Not many days," he answered reassuringly; "and I have sent by a trusty
Cypriote who will make full speed to bring me back the message that
meaneth large reward for him. My warning must reach Mocenigo before any
message sent from Cyprus to Venice might get to him again."

"Is there aught else that may be done?"

"I have given command to put my fastest brig in trim, and to-morrow she
will sail with merchandise for Venice; all day she hath been lading in
the port. The message in my special cypher, known only to the Secretary
of the Ten, is ready here." He drew the missive from his breast, as he
spoke, replacing it instantly. "Marco Bembo will sail with it on the
morrow, which he may well do without suspicion, having come hither for
the ceremonies now over. The brig will leave the port with all due
tranquillity; and afterward will make all possible speed."

"There could be nothing more," she said rising; "thou hast thought of
all."

"I thought also to have some one watching--ready to appeal to the
burghers, if need should be: and I have sent but now a most secret
message by my own trusty squire to his Eccellenza, Mutio di Costanzo, to
tell him what hath chanced. He being Governor and Admiral of Cyprus,
hath so great power that it should not be left for the Queen's Council
to reach him first--if there should be scheming. Being Vice-Roy of
Nikosia, he will have the will of the citizens for his following--if
need should be. And his loyalty is sure: it was he, who with our _bailò_
of Venice received Caterina's oath of allegiance, after the death of
Janus; and he will not fail her."

"Thou hast a right to thy weariness," his Mother said, laying her firm
white hand with a weight of tenderness for a moment on his head. "Thou
mindest me of thy father--so full of carefulness to be before in any
cause that he held dear. I would thou wert not lost to Venice--it was my
hope for thee--thou wouldst have been a power in her Councils."

"We would not be false to our own for any fancied glory that might be
possible for us," he answered more lightly than he had yet spoken: but
he knew that his Mother's ambitions for him were not fulfilled in this
mission to Cyprus--that she had sacrificed her heart's desire for him.

He caught her beautiful white hand and spread it tenderly out upon his
own--a hand that it had taken generations to fashion--made to command,
yet knowing when to yield--modelled with exquisite lines of grace,
goodness, courtesy, power--a hand of character, yet with delicate
flushes of pink in finger tip and palm, with a touch as tender as
strong.

"It is too hard for thee, Madre mia, away from thine old home," he said
tenderly. "There is room in the brig for thee to-morrow, if thou wilt:
and Marco for thine escort."

She shook her head: "It would be harder to live without my boy," she
said resolutely. "Now think on sleep, of which thou hast need--and----"
She half-framed the name of Margherita, yet would not utter it.

He smiled at the wistful look in her face; for he understood. "Nay,
Madre mia; such thoughts are not for me. I am a general in an alien
camp, with scarce wit enough for my tangled duty."

Then he bent his knee, and kissed her hand, in knightly fashion of the
time, as doing her reverence, whom in his heart he loved, and left
her--a little comforted by his long confidential talk.

But the Lady Beata stood for a while motionless where her son had left
her, before the long window that faced the splendid peristyle of the
palace. Between the great spaces of the columns she saw the Piazza
beyond them flooded with moonlight--white and still and absolutely
deserted. There were no human sounds save the monotonous tread of the
sentinels pacing to and fro before the palace; and across the Piazza,
those of the guard before the closed entrance of the Fortress of
Famagosta where their Queen and the infant Prince were in residence,
echoed them back. From the Duomo San Nicolò shone the faint twilight
glimmer of the tall candles that were ceaselessly burning about the
tomb of Janus--each pale flame wafting a prayer for absolution from the
broken heart of the Queen, who before her illness had brought them daily
with her own hands: and far down upon the shore was dimly heard the
ceaseless flow of the waves, keeping rhythmic beat to the passing
moments in the mystery of the night.


XIX


The moon had waned and the night was starless when the chimes of San
Nicolò told three of the morning in low melodious tones like a voice
from dreamland, breaking no slumber.

Suddenly the sharp wild clangor of the great alarum-bell of Famagosta
crashed through the silence.

The citizens sprang from their sleep with cries of terror and rushed to
the windows; but, alas, they had _not_ dreamed that dreaded danger
signal which kept up its fateful toll. Already men, fully armed, were
hurrying through the streets that led to the Piazza; whence came echoes
of voices talking in quick, awe-struck tones--the flash of torches--a
horseman dashing down from the castle to the walls at the port--sounds
of excited action ringing back from the ramparts--the quick gallop of a
cavalier rushing to join his command.

What might it mean!

Commander Saplana moved calmly out among his mounted suite, fully
equipped, from the Castle into the Piazza; yet there had not been many
moments in which to make ready since the first notes of that wild alarum
had sounded!

Those among the citizens entitled to bear arms were quickly accoutred
and dashed out to mingle with the throng.

"What is it?" men questioned of each other--but no one knew.

Had the Genoese returned to storm by night this post of vantage so long
their own--and still so coveted?

Were the Turks upon them?

Was it some intrigue of Ferdinand of Naples?

Was it treason?

Was it Carlotta come from Rhodes, with men-at-arms, to surprise them?

There was stealthy talk of a foreign galley in the port.

Some one had noted strange sailors in the throng: one might not be sure
of the letters on their caps, because of the darkness: but they were
Christians--not Turks--thanks be to the Madonna!

"But the Queen is safe, _Sanctissima Vergine_! The Queen is in the
Castle."

"There is His Excellency, Maestro Gentle, physician to Her Majesty, he
passeth but now, the glimmer of his mail beneath his cloak! Holy saints!
A gray-haired man, rushing out into the night--thinking first of the
Queen and of her safety! The Madonna will be good to her!"

The old court physician gave the password at the castle-gate and
entered.

The Signor Andrea Cornaro rode forth from his palace, fully armed, and
with him Marco Bembo, cousin to the Queen--surely, they would know! The
citizens called to them urgently for some explanation of the tumult, but
they passed swiftly by to the palace of the Bailò, the Venetian
Resident.

But the Bailò gave them no comfort.

"I know naught of the trouble," he answered them, "save that warning
hath been sent me by His Excellency, the Count of Tripoli, that it were
wiser that I keep within."

"Then art thou the more needed!" burst from the lips of Cornaro, made
desperate by this coolness; "for it well may be that the Count of
Tripoli is a traitor set high in trust!"

But the Bailò listened to their importunate pleadings as if it were a
trifle.

"Come with us swiftly to the Queen! By all the saints in heaven!--she
should have her own about her in this danger--whate'er it be!"

"Nay," he said, and would not move. "This is a place of intrigue--and
warning hath been sent me. It is, perchance, some one who seeketh my
life."

There was no time to parley.

"Haste thee to the royal palace," the elder man said to his nephew, as
they galloped away, "and bring from thence, with all speed, the Queen's
Chamberlain, the Bernardini--there is none more loyal. Let none hinder
thee."

"I serve our house and our honor!" young Marco called back to him, as he
put his horse to the spur.

"I go at once to Caterina," his uncle answered reassuringly, turning the
head of his good steed towards the castle--a place of security indeed--a
fortress famed as impregnable.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Royal Palace was doubly guarded--as never before, and Marco when he
reached it, plead in vain for admission.

"By order of the Council of the Realm, no man might enter."

"Then take, I pray thee, this message to His Excellency, the Chamberlain
of the Queen, and bid him come hither--it is for life or death."

A golden coin, with the head of Janus stamped upon it, glittered in his
palm. The valiant guard received the gift and refused the message.

"No man shall enter, nor leave this palace to-night: by order of the
Council of the Realm."

"I bring an order from His Excellency, Andrea Cornaro, Auditor of Her
Majesty, and member of the Council of the Realm," Marco pleaded
desperately.

"_Our_ orders are of the _Chief of Council_, the Signor Marin
Rizzo--whom to disobey this night _is death_."

The foremost guard of the line had led the defense: and among them all
there was no motion to favor this young cousin of their Queen. He was a
knight, and brave at arms--but to have fought that band meant certain
death; and at the castle, one might, perchance, help the Queen!

"There are some with Caterina to help her," he thought in his loyal
heart, as baffled at the palace, he pushed his way across the Piazza and
reached the entrance to the castle, "and here she is surely safe."

The Count of Zaffo, her aged Councillor and friend, had risen from a
sick-bed to go to her; he had been first to enter the castle-court. "So
ill, that he scarce could hold himself upon his palfrey," some one told
the young knight in the crowd, in answer to his question.

"The old Councillor scarce could strike a blow for her," thought Marco;
"but it is good that he should be within: for his devotion to Caterina
is known. And Messer Andrea is there!"

He drew breath more freely for this gleam of comfort, as he gave the
usual password.

But the guard was obdurate.

"It is not the password for this night, my Lord."

"I pray thee--I am cousin to Her Majesty, and _must_ have speech with
her."

"Eccellenza; by order of the castellan, none may pass, save those who
give the word."

"Then call me hither the castellan."

"The password hath been given by the Chief of the Council of the Realm;
and without it, the gates may not be opened," the castellan answered
without preamble, when he appeared for an instant before the slide in
the great gate--as quickly closed, though he had recognized a member of
the Queen's family.

"Had his uncle known the password and forgotten to give it to him?"
The extra-illustrator is nearly always the person responsible for the
decrepit condition of many of the books which 'unfortunately lack
the rare portrait,' or have, 'as usual,' some valuable plate or
map lacking.

Were this professional despoiler, or his minions, the ruthless booksellers,
to destroy the sad wrecks which result from their piratical
depredations, all would be well.

But they set these poor maimed hulks adrift again, to seek salvage from
some deluded collector, or some impoverished or ignorant librarian.

"It is curious that the very volume in which our reverend friend
Dibdin so heartily condemns these inexcusable bandits, should be seized
on as a receptacle for their ill-gotten prizes. May the spectre of
Thomas Frognall Dibdin haunt the souls of these impious rascals, and
torture them with never-ceasing visions of unobtainable and rare
portraits, non-existent autographs, and elusive engravings in
general!

They even dare to profane your sacred work, the _Biblia_ of book-lovers,
by the 'insertion' of crudities invented by their fiendish imagination.
They have committed the 'unpardonable sin' of bibliophilism. Not only
do they carry on this wicked work, but actually flaunt their base
crimes in the face of their innocent brethren.

Hearken to this:--
"DIBDIN, T.F. _Bibliomania._ London, 1811. Extended to five volumes, with
extra printed titles, and having eight hundred engravings
inserted, comprising views, old titles(!)

, vignettes, and six hundred and seventy-five portraits of authors,
actors, poets, sovereigns, artists, prelates, &c., &c., 250 guineas."

Limited space prevents me from making any remarks upon the other five
"symptoms," none of which are of any special interest, except to
collectors to whose eccentricities they particularly relate.

As to "Autograph Editions," the craze for these continues without
abatement. To me, this has always been one of the unsolved mysteries of
the book-mania. I can readily appreciate how a collector would prize an
author's inscribed copy of some choice edition, but why intelligent
people should be allured into the belief that an author's
stereotyped autograph displayed upon a front page gives any added
value to a set of subscription books, will to me, I fear, forever
remain a disentangled enigma.

       I was once applied to by an agent representing a $6000 "Autograph
Edition" of Jean Jacques Rousseau.

Having never seen Rousseau's autograph, I asked that it be shown me.
"Oh," said the agent, "Rousseau himself don't sign the copies, but
the set will be signed by the publishers." Would not a much less
expensive and more expeditious way of obtaining publishers' autographs
be found in writing a postal card of inquiry for the "prices and terms"
on their publications?

Gilpin has left the following quaint account of the eccentric old bibliomaniac,
Henry Hastings, the uncompanionable neighbor of Anthony Cooper, Earl of
Shaftesbury. The accompanying pen-and-ink sketch represents Louis
Maynelle's idealization of this interesting character; it was made
especially for this volume:--
"Mr. Hastings was low of stature, but strong and active, of a ruddy
complexion, with flaxen hair. His clothes were always of green cloth.

His house was of the old fashion; in the midst of a large park,
well stocked with deer, rabbits, and fish-ponds.

He had a long narrow bowling green in it, and used to play with round
sand bowls.

Here too he had a banqueting room built, like a stand in a large tree.

[Illustration]
"He kept all sorts of hounds that ran buck, fox, hare, otter, and badger;
and had hawks of all kinds, both long and short winged. His great hall
was commonly strewed with marrow-bones, and full of hawk-perches,
hounds, spaniels, and terriers.

The upper end of it was hung with fox-skins of this and the last year's
killing. Here and there a polecat was intermixed and hunter's poles in
great abundance.
The parlour was a large room, completely furnished in the same style.

On a broad hearth, paved with brick, lay some of the choicest
terriers, hounds and spaniels.

One or two of the great chairs had litters of cats in them, which
were not to be disturbed.

Of these, three or four always attended him at dinner, and a little
white wand lay by his trencher, to defend it if they were too
troublesome.

In the windows, which were very large, lay his arrows, cross-bows,
and other accoutrements.

The corners of the room were filled with his best hunting and hawking
poles.

His oyster table stood at the lower end of the room, which was in constant
use twice a day, all the year round; for he never failed to eat oysters
both at dinner and supper, with which the neighbouring town of
Pool supplied him.

He
kept his hand upon the bridle and remained standing, while he looked
searchingly from Rizzo to Tripoli, the Governor of Famagosta.

"What is this tumult?" he repeated angrily, seeing them not quick to
answer.

"Nay, Friend, how knowest thou not? being of the Council--as we:" Rizzo
answered with a hint of provocation in his tone. "It is but some
difference of the soldiers as to rations and pay: it threatened mutiny
and had to be met. It will be put down. Mount then, your Excellency."

"'Rations,' and 'pay,'" Cornaro answered scornfully, "to rouse the city
and 'put it down'--at dead of night!"

"Aye: since they chose this time for their own deed of darkness, we
men-at-arms may not be dainty about the hour of retribution."

"The Queen--my niece," said Andrea, taking a sudden resolution and
throwing the reins across his horse's neck; "I will first go to her.
Later I wait thy pleasure, Signor Rizzo; on the ramparts, or where thou
wilt.--This is no lightsome night for a woman--a mere girl."

"'A woman'--'a mere girl'!"--the Chief of Council began tauntingly.

Cornaro's hand was upon his sword.

"_Scusi!_" Rizzo said, suavely, being not yet ready for the break. "I
meant no disrespect--but she is young to rule. If thou wilt take thy
horse, we will first seek the Queen, who would speak with thee. Nay--not
by that court--the winding mount is quieter."

The Count of Tripoli and his companions had already left them and passed
into the first court, in eager converse; but Cornaro was scarcely in the
saddle before a sudden great uproar in the streets of the city beyond
the fort arrested them. Cries, as of many men in concert, proclaiming
Alfonso, son of Ferdinand of Naples, Prince of Galilee and Heir to the
Crown of Cyprus--"by order of the _Council of the Realm_:" deafening
shouts and threats of the citizens, protesting:--sounds of clashes of
arms, terrorizing the people:--the sudden crash of the alarum bell,
bursting forth anew to drown their protests:--

Then again the traitorous cries, passing off through the more distant
streets of the city:

"_Viva Alfonso--Prince of Galilee and Heir to the Crown of Cyprus!_"

"What meaneth this insolence!" Cornaro cried, white with passion and
instantly drawing his sword.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Neapolitan was not braver than the Venetian--but with an infinitely
cooler brain, well-skilled in villany and intrigue and troubled by no
sense of honor, he seized his opportunity, and when his victim's arm was
raised, he dealt him a desperate blow on the head which hurled him, with
stunning force from his horse. And then, upon the pavement of the
castle-court, having him at disadvantage and senseless from the blow,
the valiant Chief of Council, cruelly and like no loyal knight, summoned
his mercenaries to his aid and dispatched his enemy with quick
sword-thrusts, bidding them toss the lifeless body into the moat that
circled the castle walls.

The faithful horse was the solitary mourner who watched his unconscious
master while life was ebbing and sought to comfort him with mournful
whinnies of almost human affection.

       *       *       *       *       *

Had the young knight Marco Bembo but known of his uncle's barbarous
murder, and that the white-haired Councillor Zaffo lay foully
slaughtered in the first court of the castle because of his great crime
of loyalty to the Queen, he might have paused before he attempted to
force an entrance to the fortress. And yet he would not--being loyal as
the venerable Councillor himself, and as full of bravery as Andrea
Cornaro; the thought of the Queen's greater need would but have spurred
his courage.

The young Venetian had reached the second court without molestation,
when he turned to silence the cry that came from a swaggering band of
sailors who had followed him and were shouting for "Alfonso--Prince of
Galilee!" They fell upon him at the signal from Rizzo which marked him
guilty--for was he not a Venetian?

"_E tu, traditor!_"

The words rang out unanswered, save by his desperate sword.

They were but six, and he was standing against treason, for the Queen
and the honor of his house!

He fought them all, without a groan, until his strength was spent; and
they, eager to do the will of this ruffianly king-maker, who was winning
a fresh coronet for their Prince of Naples--this man of force who would
make much booty possible--fought six to one, and spared not.

And then, by bidding of their Chief, they flung the palpitating,
tortured, lifeless remnant of what--one little hour before--had been a
loyal, noble, winsome man, dreaming of duty and high achievement--into
the horror of the moat by the pitiful wreck of Andrea Cornaro--the two
murdered for the double crimes of relationship and loyalty to the
trembling girl-Queen.


XX


His Grace, the Archbishop, was among the first to respond to the summons
of the alarum, having his mind filled with weighty matters of life and
death which had rendered him sleepless--some of which he had discussed
confidentially with General Saplana, who had been one of those most
distinguished and trusted by the late King.

With Saplana the Commander of Famagosta, and with his own brother Gioan
Peres Fabrici, as with some other members of the Queen's Council, many
details of the conspiracy which was now being brought to so satisfactory
a conclusion, had been arranged. They knew that the Neapolitan galley
would be in port that night to support the uprising and the proclamation
that should be made, if fortune favored. They knew of Ferdinand's
untiring machinations to win a hold upon this much contested Crown of
Cyprus; and none knew better how from the moment that the coveted
alliance between Janus and a Princess of Naples had been frustrated by
the Venetian marriage, Ferdinand had not ceased from intrigues to that
end, secretly and zealously supported by certain men who were holding
important positions of trust in the Government of Cyprus.

Andrea Cornaro, by whose means his niece had come to her throne, would
be the most formidable individual opponent in any scheme for the benefit
of Naples, and it became important to remove him; yet it could not be
done without some apparent excuse--because of his relationship to the
Queen, and because unless success were complete, they might have cause
to dread the strong galleys of Venice. So the wily Primate--keeping
perhaps his own counsel as to the fabricator of the plot--invented a
scheme which he asserted that the unconscious Cornaro intended to carry
into effect that night by which, _when the great bell of the Castle
should sound the call to arms, the Venetians in Famagosta, under
Visconti and his band of Italian soldiers were to rise up and murder
every Cyprian member of the Council of the Realm_. "Therefore let every
man be armed and ready for the defense of Cyprus when the call shall be
heard. And spare not the traitors!" he urged upon the Commander of the
fortress.

"And if Visconti's men could be under restraint this night," the
Archbishop suggested casually, "and if that Chamberlain of the Queen's
could be under trusty guard within the palace--not to make suggestions
in a matter more to your understanding than mine, your Excellency--but I
know the man--a troublesome one and proud and silent--my brother liketh
him little. After the Cornaro he is most to fear."

Thus Aluisi Bernardini found himself with his mother, close prisoner in
the Royal palace, on the night when his Queen most sorely needed the
help he would have perilled his life to give.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Queen had been restless and could not sleep, being greatly troubled
by a missive which the Archbishop had that morning delivered into her
hands and which contained a reprimand of no gentle nature, purporting to
come from His Holiness of Rome, who charged the Queen and certain
gentlemen of her kingdom with being 'wicked and ungrateful,' and
assuring her that they were everywhere so regarded, for 'certain reasons
well known to the writer,' which were not named.

She had put the letter aside, meaning to discuss it with her Chamberlain
in the morning; but in the darkness and solitariness of her chamber, it
assumed new proportions, and she finally sent to pray the Lady
Margherita to come to her, and they sat far into the night--Dama
Margherita trying in vain to comfort her with her assurance that she did
not believe the letter to be genuine.

"His Holiness could not speak without reason," she asserted; "and having
reasons, why should he not give them--that the fault might be confessed
and atoned for?--_There are no reasons._ It is the work of some one who
seeketh to annoy."

Dama Margherita had a positive way of seeing things, which was often
helpful to Caterina's more gracious nature.

"Cara Margherita--it was His Grace himself who gave the letter into my
hand."

But Dama Margherita had no reverence for the Archbishop of Nikosia.

"I think, your Majesty, that letter is not genuine," she repeated,
uncompromisingly.

"But--Margherita--the most reverend, the Archbishop would not----"

Caterina broke off with a vivid flush and left the sentence unfinished,
remembering that there had been a previous Archbishop of Nikosia whose
code had not been fashioned by her ideals.

Dama Margherita had but just withdrawn when the uproar in the streets
began and she rushed back at once to her Lady's side. The sounds came
muffled through the massive walls of the castle for there was no outlook
on the Piazza; it was the low muttering of a storm, none the less
terrible because undeclared. But there could be no mistaking the dread
clangor of the bell, and the two young, helpless women clung to each
other in trembling silence.

Caterina was the first to recover her composure; she made a pathetic
effort to steady her voice as she spoke.

"Margherita, I must know at once what this meaneth. If one of the
Council would come to me--there is always one in the Castle--my Uncle
Andrea--or the Councillor Zaffo--I would they had not sent Aluisi and
the Zia back to the palace!--and--and--_I will go to the Boy_."

"Dear Lady," Margherita besought her. "Let me rather bring him hither.
The Council will be coming at once--they would rather find you here. I
will come with the Prince and his _aya_, so soon as I shall have found
one of the Council. Your Majesty will not fear to be left alone?"

"No: _No!_" Caterina hastened her with a motion of her hand. "The others
will be here; thou wilt hasten with the child--and then thou wilt leave
me no more!"

But Dama Margherita was already far down the narrow stone corridor,
beyond hearing the confession of failing courage which would have
brought her instantly back, when a tapestry was thrust hastily aside,
and Maestro Gentile, the old white-haired physician, fully armed, but
with the air of a hunted man, tottered into the room.

"They seek my life," he gasped, "I know not why. I came through the
terror lest your Majesty should need me--for it is a night!--San Nicolò
save us!"

"Madonna mia!" the Queen cried piteously with clasped hands, "I do not
understand!"

"It is the time for reckoning, fair Majesty; and those who have the
power shall rule."

The Archbishop of Nikosia had entered the Queen's apartment unperceived
and stood watching her with eyes of triumph.

She shrank from him with a sudden comprehension of his false nature,
while he offered his explanation in a voice that struck her sensitive
soul like a blow.

Instinctively she drew nearer to the old physician as if craving some
stay, and laid her hand affectionately on his arm; then she pointed to
the door: "Leave us at least the courtesy of our apartment!" she
exclaimed indignantly to the Archbishop; "your Grace came unannounced."

"I came to bring your Majesty news of import," he began, taking no
notice of her command. "His Majesty of Naples----"

Was he indeed about to confess his connection with the intriguing King
of Naples, of which there had been more than one rumor? Aluisi had
bidden her weigh the Primate's counsels before accepting them.

"We will hear your news in presence of the Councillors of the Realm,
whom I have already summoned," the Queen interrupted, raising her
fragile hand with a motion of silence--her slight trembling figure held
erect by force of will, her head thrown back--her eyes flashing
scorn--her voice steadied by a supreme effort.

He paused, half in admiration, half in triumph, gloating over the
success of the conspiracy of which he had been the master-mind, while he
picked the words in which he would announce it to his victim, as one
might choose the pebbles for a sling--the smoothest and the sharpest.

"It is scarce fitting that your Majesty should be last to hear what is
already proclaimed throughout Famagosta," he said, "that Alfonso of
Naples hath been created Prince of Galilee and Heir to Cyprus."

She looked at him with a scorn that burned. "Is your Grace a _man_," she
said, "to use this speech? Or do I not hear aright--from the horror of
this night?"

Then she turned to Maestro Gentile, compassionate and protecting.

"It cannot be that any should seek thy life," she said. "Thou art my
friend:--I will shield thee here--_Madonna Sanctissima_! I cannot
think--let us pray that this horror pass!"

She put her hands over her eyes and sank upon her knees, and Maestro
Gentile knelt beside her.

There was a rush of footsteps, as of pursuers coming swiftly up the
secret passage by which the physician had entered the royal apartments;
in another second the hanging was torn aside and Rizzo, dark and
ferocious, panting like some savage with the madness of the deeds
already done--his eyes glaring upon his prey--with an oath at finding
them so engaged, thrust the young Queen violently away, and sprang at
the physician crying out in a voice of frenzy, as he dealt him two
desperate blows with his iron gauntleted fists.

"_E tu traditor!_"

It was the inglorious watchword--the signal of the brutal captain of
this unequal fight; and the mercenaries following his lead, fell upon
the old man and held him down while Rizzo stripped him of his sword,
which, despite his years, he might have wielded too deftly.

There was a second's reaction from the exhaustion of the rapid chase,
and while they drew breath, the physician who had been protected from
serious harm by the corslet worn under his long mantle, had watched his
opportunity, and with the agility of a hunted man, he started to his
feet and escaped into the corridor, running for his life, on and up to
the ramparts.

The Queen threw herself before the doorway, in agonized pleading for the
life of her friend. But the clinging hands and streaming tears, the
heroism of the girl facing all those frenzied men alone, were as nothing
to their wrath at the delay--and in a moment they had passed her in hot
pursuit.

She listened, every faculty tense to detach the sounds of this tragedy
from that other, jangling from without. She heard the footsteps of the
ruffians overtaking him; she heard their demoniacal cries, echoing
back;--his faint words--"_What have I done that ye seek my life_,"--but
the voice came no more--only sounds of struggle, growing dimmer, as
they dragged him farther away upon the ramparts--then silence--and the
misery of it burning in her brain.

She staggered back against the doorway where she stood.

Then suddenly, came a flash of agonized revelation--the consciousness
that this was but one link in the dark scheme of revolt, and with it
came the acute revival of all her powers--the sharpening of every
faculty of heart and brain.

"My Boy!" she cried--her voice thrilled through the castle--"_Madonna
Dolorosa_--_My Child!_" and with the fleetness of a deer she turned and
sped with flying feet, down the corridor to the chamber of the little
Prince.

So lithe--so brave--so beautiful--so tortured--so resolute--she was a
thing to curb and hold! Alvigi Fabrici, the tool of Ferdinand, would
have liked to follow her and see the panting vision of her face, when
she reached the cradle of her child--_and found him gone_.

But there was already silence in the corridor: no faintest echo of
flying feet--no vaguest rustle of fluttering robes--a moment had
sufficed for the mother's startled quest.


XXI


It was dawn after that night of tragedy.

From sheer exhaustion of passion the turmoil in the streets had
subsided; the cries of indignant protest had ceased and the populace
accepted their fate in sullen acquiescence, knowing themselves not
strong enough to contest without aid those intriguing Councillors of the
Realm who were entrenched behind the impregnable fortress of Famagosta
where they held close captive the Sovereign they had sworn to defend and
obey.

The Piazza was deserted: the malcontents who had gathered to mutter at
the horror of the moat where the victims of the night had been tossed
unburied, had been dispersed by threat of arms; the sentinels nodded at
their posts--scarce knowing whose power they were upholding, nor by what
name men called their masters. Here and there throughout the city, a
little knot of the graver burghers might be found lingering to discuss
the situation in attitudes of helpless dejection, and scattering with
their problems all unsolved. They were too insignificant to dread, and
for the moment the triumphant conspirators were content to leave the
city without further imposition or molestation to such rest as a
merciful nature might vouchsafe.

They were content to yield this lull in the storm, because it gave them
needful quiet in which to mature fresh intrigues, to insure their
triumph. Those men of Venice of the Queen's household, who would most
strenuously have resisted them, had been quieted forever, it was true;
but, as dawn lightened over the ghastly faces upturned beneath the
windows of the poor young Queen, an unconfessed tremor stole into the
doughty breasts of Rizzo and Fabrici, in the place where most men wear
their hearts, and they got them together, in friendly converse, to
ponder what should come next.

For Venice was mightier than Naples--and the password they had so
successfully wielded for a night--"_à bas Venezia_"--might not suffice
to hold for the young Alfonso the dignity of _Prince of Galilee_, which
they had proclaimed for him throughout the protesting city; it might
even have a baneful ring, when news of the night's murders should reach
the Republic. A plausible reason for the death must be contrived and
sent forward with letters signed by the Queen's own hand, under the
Royal Seal of Cyprus, accompanied with decorous lamentations and
condolences on the part of her Councillors--such as one Government is
wont to offer to another at the death of any distinguished patrician.

For the Chief of Council, Rizzo di Marin and his Grace the Archbishop of
Nikosia, no rest was needful: the consciousness of triumph stirred the
blood in their veins like strong wine, and with a sense of exhilaration
sharpening all their intellectual faculties, they prepared, in a few
hours, work that might ordinarily have required the consideration of
days. When they closed their conference they had contrived a sheaf of
pretty documents which did more honor to their astuteness than to their
loyalty, and which, with the signature of the Queen, would put them in
possession of all the strongholds on the coast and many positions of
vantage throughout the island, including the splendid city of
Nikosia--which had shown much dangerous friendliness for Queen Caterina.
It was a marvellous bold scheme--a bloodless victory for Alfonso, Prince
of Naples; and Rizzo grew grimly merry as he discussed it with His
Grace.

His malignant eyes rested fondly on this order for the surrender of the
famous stronghold of Cerines to a nephew of General Saplana, the
treacherous Commander of Famagosta; with two such fortresses they should
command the coast, and their empire in Cyprus was assured. It was a work
of genius, this little parchment--he could scarcely bear to fold it out
of his sight in the pouch that he wore next to his heart of stone.

And this--to the magnificent Lord Admiral Mutio di Costanzo, Vice-Roy of
Nikosia and friend to Caterina, who had received her oath of allegiance
after the death of Janus--so high he stood among the nobles of
Cyprus--Rizzo's eyes fairly gleamed as he gloated over it--this order
commanding him to yield up the splendid city of Nikosia, with his
fortress of Costanza and the fleets of the island, to those who should
present this parchment with the little signature of _Caterina Regina_.
He, Rizzo, would take the governorship of this city of Nikosia--or,
perhaps, the command of the fleets--he knew not which--that was a trifle
to decide since all would be in his power: and of course he should
instantly re-man the galleys. He allowed himself a moment's vision of
this stately Knight Mutio de Costanzo, with his escort of
cavaliers--the forty of his noble house entitled to wear the Golden
Spurs--surrendering his holdings at the Queen's command, to those whom
Rizzo should elect--_Rizzo_, who had heard himself called "that parvenu
of Naples"--and the vision filled him with delight.

Then he folded the other orders without a glance, they touched upon
minor points of vantage and entered properly into his scheme--the cities
of Limisso and, perhaps, of Costanzo--but that might be requiring too
much of the noble Lord of Costanzo, this could wait; he crumpled it in
his hand. As for this _Castel Dio d'Amore_, it was well.

Still another paper he folded in his pouch. That one must go first
beneath her signature lest the pretty little Queen should rebel.--But
she should not rebel!--By all the saints and devils, it was a good
night's work!

And for that session he wrote no more.

When the pouch, compact and hard, lay closely over the place of his
heart, it stirred a thought, and he laughed a short wild laugh, with no
melody in it. He did not know his own laugh, and it startled him.

"Perhaps," he thought, "when he should have presided over the
investiture of these cities and strongholds of Cyprus in the interests
of Naples and Alfonso, 'Prince of Galilee'--installing his own creatures
in all those places of power--if Naples were not properly subservient
and grateful--he, _holding the key to the land_--perhaps----"

It was a vision that pleased him even better than that of the noble Lord
Mutio di Costanzo, surrounded by his escort of cavaliers,
golden-spurred, delivering the keys of the city of Nikosia. But he
forgot to confide this last tantalizing, supremest vision to His Grace
the Archbishop.

These documents had been prepared in the underground Chamber of
Conference of the Fortress, where secrets might be freely uttered
because of the double walls of massive masonry: where flaring torches
fastened high in the chamber, scattered the ghostly shadows, and ample
potations of the fine wine of the "Commanderie" sustained their courage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, a slender figure with vizor down, showing a tunic of mail
between the folds of a dark mantle, came out from the Fortress, and
stepping forth into the gray of the dawn, crossed to the Palazzo Reale,
with slow, uncertain footsteps.

"Open!--In the name of the Queen's Council!"

The words came in muffled tones from behind the vizor--uncertain, like
the footsteps, yet impossible to disregard.

"The password for this night?" the guard demanded.

It was given at once, but with visible repugnance--"_à bas Venezia!_"

"Are ye many?"

"But one."

The bars were instantly drawn back and the young knight entered the
first court of the palace.

"Halt! Declare for whom thou standest. That password is already outworn:
for they of the Queen's Council be of two minds."

As if from a sense of suffocation the cloak was torn off showing a suit
of armor too heavy for the slight limbs; and the helmet was loosened
with supple, nervous fingers, disclosing a face pale, strong and
soulful. The face might have been that of a man--an artist, or a poet;
but the hair, lying in loose, dusky waves about the brows, and low, in
rich clinging coils at the back of the shapely head, could only belong
to a woman.

A sudden wrath flamed in her deep eyes.

"If they of the Queen's Council be of two minds they are craven, though
I, a woman say it! But the Queen's guard, in the Queen's palace, can
have but one mind--_to uphold her cause!_"

There was no other voice in all Cyprus so tender, so compelling, so
magnetic, so all-convincing; the voice revealed her.

"Dama Margherita de Iblin!" was echoed about the court in surprise. The
news spread. The men-at-arms came thronging about her with reiterated
assurances of loyalty; it was good to confess their faith to her.

"We hold this palace for our Queen," they said, "and for no traitorous
Council. May the holy Saints in Heaven curse them roundly who forced us
to do their bidding, when we thought ourselves serving Her Majesty!"

"How came ye so many here?" she asked in astonishment, as they still
gathered from the farther courts--a number far greater than the usual
Palace-guard--chiefly a company of knights and men entitled to bear
arms, but among them many of the more peaceful citizens.

"Whom serve ye all?" She looked keenly from face to face: her words
seemed a challenge.

"Caterina Regina!" they cried in concert, with every man's right hand
upraised, calling Heaven to witness.

One, with signs of authority stepped forward to explain.

"Eccellenza, we are in command of the Lord Chamberlain Bernardini, who,
since he fought his way through the false guard placed before this
palace to serve the treachery of the Council, hath not ceased to gather
men of metal throughout the city, till enough shall come to claim the
Queen's release. For the cries of the women and unarmed weaklings
clamoring under the walls of the fortress for her release, are but
impotent wails to tickle the pride of those fiends of Naples."

"Bring me to the Bernardini, for I must speak with him on matter, it may
be, of life, or death."

"Eccellentissima, the Lord Chamberlain hath not stayed his foot since
this horror began--nor may we see his face until he hath done the
possible to gather strength for an uprising to chase these devils of
Naples."

"Dear men!" she cried, "it is a task!--I speak, not to stay your loyal
hands, but to open your eyes that ye be prepared and fail not. The
Commander of Famagosta hath men and arms behind those impregnable walls,
and all the wicked strength of his cunning Council to direct
them,--Rizzo and Fabrici--masters in intrigue--and the men of the
galleys of Naples at the tower in the port, commanding land and sea.
Without more force it is impossible!"

In referring to this class of book-buyers, Roswell Field says, "The
book-lover, so-called, who lacks any of the thrills that go with the
_establishment_ as well as the enjoyment of a library in all of its
appointments has deprived himself of many of the most pleasurable
literary and semi-literary emotions. That bibliophile never pats
his horse or his dog.

To him his books are merely tools of trade, accessories to knowledge,
to be pawed over, thrown away and replaced by new copies when worn
out.

He glories in the fact that his books are his servants rather than his
companions, and he affects to despise and laugh at the sentimental relation
which others have established with their books. Look out for that man!
He is not of us; he is not of the elect; there is as little of warmth
and the genial glow of fellowship in his library as in the middle
gallery of the catacombs in the Appian Way.

His very books cry out against him; but he hears them not, for he is
deaf as well as blind."

One of the busiest men in New York City, whose name is familiar in
financial circles throughout the civilized world, is one of the most
voracious collectors of the age.

He probably transacts more business in a day than half a dozen ordinarily
busy men, and yet finds time to give his personal attention to
every minute detail of his vast collections, to which are added
hundreds, and probably thousands, of items every year.

This is only one of many such examples among our busiest men.

I have often heard persons lament in a pensive and apologetic sort
of way, "Yes, I have a great weakness for fine books."

The very presence of this mis-called weakness, however, is unmistakable
proof of great mental strength, and those who suffer from it may
find solace in the fact that the giants of commerce, leading
statesmen, and great men of affairs in general are frequently thus
afflicted all through the periods of their greatest activity and
success.

What can possibly afford a more agreeable relaxation from the toils and
perplexities of the day than to recline in an easy chair before an open
grate fire in the library, surrounded by the silently reposing tomes
which record and preserve the noblest thoughts of past and present
generations?

Surely no enjoyment in the home or office can be more delectable
and unfailing in assuaging the worry and solicitude of a strenuous
life than the silent companionship of books.

It is a noteworthy fact that a large percentage of the leading stock
brokers, bankers, active statesmen, and sedulous lawyers are
bibliophiles.

I attribute this to the fact that all of these vocations are extremely
taxing upon the nervous system, and those men who are busily engaged
in them are, during the intermittent hours of rest and recreation,
naturally inclined to seek the most enjoyable and refreshing
diversions; for, as Horace says,--
. . . nunc veterum libris, nunc somno et inertibus horis Ducere
sollicitae jocunda oblivia vitae.

Along with old books, or a nap, and divine hours of leisure-- To taste
thus forgetfulness--sweet, in the midst of life's troubles.

In an article written for The Bibliophile Society's (1903) Year Book,
Caroline Ticknor says, "The true book-lover loves his books for their
helpfulness, for their companionship; but he regards them as well for
their elegant settings." She also observes that "strange as the anomaly
may seem, there are still many persons of ample means, and some
education, who, although they would be horrified at the very thought
of admitting to the home a cheap rug or vase, to destroy the harmony
and bring discord and confusion into the luxuriance of the furnishings,
yet will nonchalantly tolerate the incongruity of a miserable
fragment of a library made up of the cheapest and meanest editions
to be found in the market, such as would be scorned by those of the
most limited means and plebeian tastes.

These will be found inappropriately housed amid the most sumptuous
surroundings.

A single rug to adorn the floor, or a single vase resting on a
mantle, will often be found to have cost ten times as much as the
whole home library. And yet the intellects of these people have been
nurtured and trained in their youth by the brilliant thoughts of
ancient and modern writers!

Even the favorite author, be it Shakespeare, Dickens, Longfellow,
Tennyson, or some other, is frequently represented by a half dozen
or so disconsolate-looking volumes, the remainder of the set either
never having been bought, or else, if bought, thrown aside, or
strewn around the attic, or abandoned as a child would discard a
toy which afforded it no further amusement.

She closed her eyes and turned her
head away, imploring them by a gesture to leave her. She had exhausted
every argument to induce them to restore her child or even to disclose
his whereabouts--she had pleaded as only a mother may, but in vain; and
worn by the unequal contest and all unnerved, she now feared to anger
them further with impotent protests lest she should tempt them to
cruelty towards her child.

The Archbishop took a step towards her, pausing for a moment,
irresolute, before attempting further coercion. But the cold glitter in
the eyes of his companion urged him to conclude his task, and he spread
a paper open on the table beside her.

From pity, or from wile, if not from shame, he assumed a tone of
deference as he explained:

"Your Majesty, it will be needful at once to send advices to Venice,
bearing our condolences for the sad fate of our noble Messrs Andrea
Cornaro, and the young Seigneur Marco Bembo."

The names roused her: she had been told of their fate, but everything
had been forgotten in the later anguish. Now she remembered with a sharp
sting of pain, and she turned her face toward the speaker, waiting to
hear why they stayed to torment her.

"It will be well for your Majesty to sign this writing, which we have
prepared to explain to the Signoria the tragic ending of the quarrel of
their Excellencies with a band of laborers whom they had refused to
pay."

Caterina had been gazing fixedly at the Archbishop while he spoke,
trying to understand. Now she made a supreme effort to shake off her
lethargy, seeming for the moment so like her usual self that the two
conspirators trembled for their schemes.

"The Council hath not found our signature needful for their
extraordinary action of the night," she said. "This letter is of less
consequence. We pray you to leave us."

Rizzo strove to hearten his colleague with a glance, as the Archbishop
produced the casket which held the Royal Signet and placed it open on
the table beside the letter which the Queen had thrust aside, and which
lacked only the royal signature to be complete. It had been folded and
superscribed with all due formality and homage.

"_Serenissimo Principe et Domine excellentissimo, Domine Nicolò
Marcello, Dei gratia inclito duci Venetiarum, etc., Domine
colendissimo._"

The broad band of white-dressed skin by which it was to be closed was
already fastened to the letter, though it hung loose with the silken
fillets of blue and white which were to attach the great Seal of Janus
the III--the helpless infant king whom his wily ministers had stolen
from his mother's arms.

Rizzo, opening the casket, stood for a moment gloating over the mastery
he was to achieve with this little instrument of the Great Seal of the
Kingdom--his triumphant gaze fastened on his scarlet treasure--a pretty
toy of wax for such a ruffian to find of consequence, bearing the
escutcheons of Jerusalem, of Cyprus, of Armenia and Lusignan, with the
naked sword of Peter the Valiant for a crest; and for _border,
encircling_ the Seal, the legend punctuated by heraldic roses--

"_Jacobus, Dei Gratia, 22 us Rex Jherusalem, Cipri et Armenia._"

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Rizzo, Rex!_"

The Chief of Council syllabled the sweet morsel of his outrageous
thought without utterance. There was no further need for any keeper of
the Privy Seals; there was no longer any need for anyone but Rizzo in
this Council of the Realm!

But Dama Margherita, closely watching and fearing treachery, stole
nearer to the table, standing over the open letter which she had read
from end to end before the Chief of Council, in his absorption, had
perceived her action. Now he felt her condemnatory eyes upon him, like
the merciless gaze of a fate, and he would not look towards her while he
rudely seized the letter and pushed it nearer to the Queen.

"It is well for your Majesty to understand," he said imperatively, "that
this matter is not one for choice--but of necessity."

"We do not understand," the Queen answered haughtily, but already her
voice showed failing strength.

"Guards!" cried the Lady Margherita with tingling cheeks, to the men who
stood just within the doorway, "arrest these intruders!--They trouble
the Queen's peace."

Unconsciously the men took a step forward--the words had rung out like a
command: but Rizzo, with a face of insolent mastery, made a motion which
arrested them, and they knew that their impulse had been a momentary
madness.

"The Child----" Rizzo began in icy tones, speaking with slow emphasis,
his eyes fixed upon the Queen.

The mother sprang to her feet, alert on the instant, her strength
surging back tumultuously--every faculty tense.

"The child is safe--_while your Majesty is careful to fulfil our
pleasure_."

"My Lords," cried Dama Margherita, fearlessly, "the writing on this
parchment is not true."

The hand of the Chief of Council fell to his sword, as if he would have
struck her down--then--remembering that she was but a woman, in spite of
her splendid courage, he withdrew it with a shower of muttered oaths.

"It is the writing which Her Majesty will sign to insure the safety of
her child," he asserted, in uncompromising tones.

The Queen turned from one pitiless face to the other and knew that there
was no hope for her.

"My God, I shall go mad!" she moaned, as she seized the pen with
trembling fingers, unconscious that she had spoken: then in a last,
desperate appeal, she cried to Fabrici:

"Most Reverend Father, by your hopes of Heaven, I implore you--give me
my boy again! _il mio dilettissimo figlio!_ See, I sign the parchment!"
and with feverish strokes she wrote her name; then with hands strained
tightly together, awaited her answer.

Fabrici moved uncomfortably, turning his gaze away from the stricken,
overwrought face: his cruel triumph began to seem unworthy.

But Rizzo calmly affixed the Royal Seal, covering it with the small
wooden case prepared for its protection and knotting it firmly in place
with the silken fillets--so careful lest a bruise should show upon the
fair, waxen surface--he who could crush a woman's heart to breaking, or
watch the life-blood dripping from some cruel wound that he had made, as
lightly as he would drop the red wax for his stolen signet--it was all
one to his deadly purpose.

"Thanks, your Majesty," he said, "there are yet other documents to be
signed," and he laid them before her.

"My child!" she cried in extremity; "have mercy--restore him to me--I
have fulfilled your pleasure!"

"Your Majesty hath forgotten these," said Rizzo, "and the penalty--if
they are left unsigned."

       *       *       *       *       *

Again she seized the pen and wrote her name as with her
life-blood--great veins starting out on her white forehead, her eyes dim
and blurred, her heart beating so that she scarce could trace the words
that seemed an irony:

"_Caterina, Regina!_"

"At last!" she gasped, as the pen fell from her hand--"_Madre
Sanctissima_--they will bring my boy!"

"It is enough that he is safe," the Chief of Council answered her. "We
did not promise more."

The Archbishop, stout-hearted though he was, felt his soul quail within
him, as he glanced at the figure of this young mother agonizing for her
child--his Sovereign to whom he had sworn fealty. He turned away from
her to strengthen his resolve, taking a few paces forward, thinking
perhaps of that "_act of homage_," over his own signature, duly
witnessed, sealed and recorded in the Libro delle Rimembranze, "_Homagio
et fideltà che è obligato a fare a la Magiestà sua, segondo le lege et
usanze di questo regno_."

("Homage and faith, which he is obliged to swear to Her Majesty,
according to the laws and customs of this realm.")

Margherita turned to Fabrici, who seemed to her less inhuman than Rizzo,
for she had noticed the slight weakening in his attitude. "Pardon me,
your Grace," she said in a tone of quiet deference; "hath the learned
body of the Queen's Council no knowledge of the crime of lese-majesty?"

Fabrici made no answer, being conscious-stricken; but Rizzo turned upon
her with blazing eyes.

"Beware!" he stormed, "a man, for less, hath paid the forfeit of his
life."

"Life were worth little," she answered undaunted, "if one must forfeit
it for speaking truth--or for so poor attempt as mine to spare our Queen
in such extremity."

He had looked to see her cower and shrink as men had often done under
the glare of his angry gaze; but she stood before him tall, straight and
calm--so near that he might have felled her to the ground; there was no
fear in her deep eyes while she gave him back his look of hatred,
unflinching; dimly he realized that this woman had measured the manhood
in him and found it beneath her scorn.

Then--as if he had not been--she turned her gaze from him.

"Your Grace," she said proudly, "it is for the last time,--your
Queen--whom you have sworn to uphold--and I--Margherita, of the most
ancient noble house of the de Iblin, who have ever served their
Sovereigns with their life--we _demand_ our Prince of you; and all
Cyprus is with us!"

But if these dastardly usurpers were inexorable, heaven, more merciful,
sent the respite of unconsciousness to quiet the mother's anguish just
as she could bear no more. Rizzo was speaking when she tottered and
fell into the shielding arms of Margherita.

"We may need the infant," he was explaining pitilessly, "to force a deed
of renunciation in favor of Alfonso, _Prince of Galilee_."

"A sword thrust were more merciful," cried Margherita, now roused to a
passion of scorn. "How may a man dare perjure his soul to bring her to
this!"

Rizzo having nothing further to gain from the interview left the chamber
precipitately, muttering oaths; but the Archbishop lingered, from a dim,
dawning sense of compunction, watching helplessly while Dama Margherita
ministered to the victim of these Councillors who had been created to
assist their youthful Queen in her weary task of ruling.

"More air!" Dama Margherita ordered of the guards, pointing to the
closely barred windows. "Strong wine--and one of Her Majesty's ladies to
aid me--I may not leave her for an instant. The Lady of the Bernardini
were best--will your Grace give the order? We must needs save her life
while she hath yet a favor to grant."


XXIII


It was the _festa_ of San Triphilio, patron-saint of the city of
Nikosia; the great church on the bluff beside the castle was filled with
the sickly flames of paltry candles brought by the peasants from far and
near. From the quaint tower on the castle-wall one might see them coming
in little processions, winding through the forest that clothed the
plains below--pausing on the banks of the stream Pedea, to gather
water-bloom and rushes to scatter before the shrine of San Triphilio, in
memory of the early days when the city had sprung from the marshes to
stand--fair and firm upon the hillside above them, beautiful to
behold--girt about with impregnable walls and gateways, guarded by its
famous citadel, and fortified within by churches dedicated to many
saints.

To-day the gates stood hospitably open, to welcome the people who came
and went unchallenged through them, wearing their holiday faces and
bearing their burden of bloom and green--lotus flowers for the altars,
and rushes to scatter on the steps before them--pausing before they
entered the sacred precincts to lave their hands in the 'Fountain of
Ablution.'

It was truly a _festa_ of the people, and the Cyprian peasants who were
a gentle, superstitious, ignorant race, devoutly subject to their
priests and trained to the letter of their religious rites, came in from
the mountains and the neighboring villages in numbers but rarely seen
in the city: a motley throng--yet no shepherd among them was too poor to
wear the boot of dark-green leather reaching to the knee--the _bodine_
roughly fashioned and tough enough to protect them from the bites of the
serpents which infested the island.

Here and there some shepherd was leading with pardonable pride a sheep
who gave a more than usual promise of fine wool, its extraordinary tail,
bushy with soft long fleece, carefully spread out on the tiny cart to
which it was harnessed for its own protection. It came, meek-eyed and
wondering, if a little weary, to this _festa_ of San Triphilio, to whom
its first shearing would be vowed, as a special tribute to the saint and
a talisman to shield the flocks upon the mountains.

The shepherd might draw himself away, perchance, with a mingling of
caste-feeling and of superstition, from some poorer villager of the sect
of the "Linobambaki"--a dark, unkempt figure, with his scarlet fez, his
string of undressed poultry hanging from his shoulder, even on this day
of _festa_ when the saints give all good Christians holiday! But he,
poor man, was neither Christian nor pagan--a wonder that the good Lord
made him so!--(expressed with devout crossing and genuflexion)--and he
would sell a fowl on a holiday for the asking and the few copper
_carcie_ that it would bring him, as though he were quite all Mussulman
and not half Christian, as his contemptuous nickname signified--a
mixture of royal linen and plebeian cotton! His touch might well defile
the sacred sheep!

Here was a picturesque peasant-priest from the province of Ormidia, who
had left his work in the fields and was moving among the crowd with a
slow dignity of motion and the mien of some antique statue--with
sheep-skin garments of no shape, nor fashion, nor color, to mark his
date--his hair flowing in loose waves to the throat, from under the
high, conical hat, his full curling beard and moustache obscuring the
lines of the face and intensifying its impassiveness--only in the eyes,
without curiosity, a mild look of question at the strangeness of the
ways and sights of cities--such as some shepherd-god might
wear,--reserving judgment.

To-day, also, some stray brother of the lower order of the Knights
Hospitallers might be seen among the throng,--a white star, eight
pointed on the breast of the black gown with which in early ages he had
been invested by the Patriarch of Jerusalem: and near him some Crusader,
with the red cross on his silver mail.

The burghers, too, were abroad in the arcades of the streets of Nikosia,
gathering in groups before the Palazzo Reale which had been the
residence of the kings of the island until Janus had removed his capital
to Famagosta.

But Nikosia had always been a cradle of loyalty in spite of a floating
population of strangers who came thronging to visit her monuments and
palaces--to see the wonder of her merchandise gathered from the riches
of her own fertile land--fruits and wines and silks and jewels,
broideries of gold and silver wrought by her peasant women among their
vines--exquisite vessels of beaten copper from the famous mines which
had baptised this island of Cyprus. But there were carpets also from
Persia, and fabulous Eastern stuffs--linens from Egypt, gossamer-fine;
and carvings of ivory and gold, and drugs and spices from Arabia. There
were slaves too--most fair to look upon--everything that might minister
to the luxury of a great city, as there were churches, of many
religions, and altars to many saints.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a troop of horsemen dashed rapidly through the open gates and
into the heart of the city among all the loitering holiday-wanderers,
rousing them to instant strenuousness.

"There is news!" some one cried startled. "They have come to pause at
the palace of the Vice-Roy. The leader is already within--he hath not
waited for his gentlemen to announce him!"

"Aye, there is news:--may the Saints have mercy!" one of the burghers
answered to the quick questions of the visitors from the hamlets. "And
it is strange news, I wot--Heaven help us! For that was our own
Seigneur, Pietro Davilla, new created a Knight of St. John, and gone but
this morning, with all the gentlemen and squires of his household, to
pay his homage--a leal Knight to Her Majesty. It must be some dread
matter that hath chanced to turn him from such duty and purpose ere he
could reach Famagosta."

"That was the Seigneur Davilla, on the black champing steed? one of the
Councillors of the Realm?" a stranger asked.

"Aye, man; thou art in luck to see our Seigneur with all his bravery of
men and horse! That was he who entered the palace of the Vice-Roy."

"And that other--all armed, with vizor down--the steed that bore him
foaming with haste, as if his hoof had scarce touched ground?"

"I know not: but he weareth the colors of the Royal House. He hath the
look of some spent herald. See, they summon him from within! It must be
that he bringeth tidings from Famagosta. Pray Heaven it is well with Her
Majesty!"

"And with our Prince!"

"_Viva la Regina!_"

"Heaven save the Queen and the Infant King!"

A tumult of _vivas_ broke from the excited throng who were on edge with
unquiet expectation.

And while they still waited watching the signs of commotion through the
palace portals, they beguiled their impatience with bits of broken
talk--strange surmises--asseverations of loyalty--distrust of the
foreigners who filled important offices in the Government, especially of
the Council of the Realm, which they looked upon with unconcealed
displeasure. For they of Nikosia were desperately loyal and somewhat
sore, withal, that King Janus had seen fit to remove the capital from
their splendid city of Nikosia, which from the beginning of the Lusignan
dynasty, had held this supremacy.

"For that Janus had captured Famagosta from Genoa, a feat of prowess for
his youth--and so would make his boast on it--keeping it ever in mind,"
an elderly citizen explained to the crowd with a singular mingling of
admiration and disapproval. "And mayhap he might have lived to learn
more wisdom--may God have mercy on his soul!--if it had pleased His
Majesty to dwell in our Palazzo Reale of Nikosia, where one may breathe
the air of Heaven, instead of a pestiferous malaria from the marshes of
Famagosta."

"It would be well that Her Majesty came hither to dwell," said one of
the burghers eagerly; "and the Prince--because of the noisome air and
water of Famagosta."

"Aye; and because of other things," interposed a stalwart man who had
just issued from the palace of the Vice-Roy and joined the waiting
throng. "That she may dwell among a loyal people and away from the
Council of the Realm _which one may not trust_."

He spoke in tones of bitter wrath, startling the others by his hint of
danger.

"How 'the Council of the Realm'?" another citizen questioned, astonished
and half indignant. "Is not our Seigneur Pietro Davilla one of them?"

"Aye--he is one--but a noble of Nikosia--our loyal city. And because of
his loyalty--lest he be thought one with their foul purposes--he hath
returned in haste. I spoke with one of his gentlemen but now. Nay, bide
your time." For the crowd turned upon him with an avalanche of
ejaculations and questions: "it will be proclaimed from the Palazzo
Reale."

"But, Stefano--the _Council of the Realm_?" one of his listeners
persisted.

"There are too many foreigners in the Council: and that black-browed
fiend of Naples is the worst of them!"

"Be not so daring, man! Hast thou no fear?" a stranger in the crowd
exclaimed warningly; "we shall all be arrested for rebels."

"Fear!" a citizen echoed--"_Santa Vergine!_ That was our Stefano!--thou
knowest him not."

But Stefano was one who spoke when it pleased him: he deigned no reply,
but fixed an intent gaze on the balcony of the palace, while the crowd
fell to talk among themselves, still waiting eagerly for news.

Stefano Caduna, this man of the people, was, in truth an idol in
Nikosia: rugged, commanding, with an air and tone of authority, the
people looked to him for leadership. While they were speaking he moved
quickly forward, the crowd making way for him at his quiet gesture--the
strong hand, slightly raised.

"_Pace!_" he commanded, with a motion toward the palace of the Vice-Roy,
and an instant hush fell upon the throng.

A band of knights, fully armed, came forth and stood before the palace
portal, while their banner-bearers unrolled the standards of the Queen
and the Prince--a challenge to the eager cries of loyalty which greeted
them. Mounted messengers were dashing with orders up to the citadel and
down to the city-gates. The Vice-Roy himself had come to the balcony
above the portal and stood watching the messengers anxiously, as if he
would speed them beyond their possible. Then he turned to the crowd of
eager, upturned faces, now quieted once more, by an imperative motion
from Stefano.

Mutio di Costanzo, Admiral of Cyprus and Vice-Roy of Nikosia, Lord of
the city and fortress of Costanza, one of a long line of knights, was a
gentleman of honor devoted to the Crown and a loyal friend to the Queen:
he held the confidence of the people and deserved it well.

An inarticulate murmur of devotion stirred the crowd as he stood for a
moment quite silent before them, too overcome by emotion to trust
himself to speech. When he spoke, his voice was calm, far-reaching and
authoritative.

"Citizens of Nikosia," he said, "I bring you black news of perfidy to
our Queen and infant King."

He was interrupted by deafening cries of anger and alarm; but Stefano
commanded silence.

"I know," the Admiral continued, his noble face a shade less stern,
"that every heart and arm in Nikosia is hot for her defense."

And now Stefano let the passion of loyalty have sway. But the Admiral
had more to say.

"The gates of the city will be instantly closed and closely guarded; no
man will be allowed to enter who doth not declare for the Queen--_who is
captive_ in the _Fortress of Famagosta_."

The shock of the news held them dumb while they listened. "The Council
of Nikosia will sit at once to discuss measures for her release; the
forces of Nikosia and of the citadel will immediately report, fully
armed. The traitors are _Rizzo di Marin and others of the Council of the
Realm who have insolently proclaimed Alfonso of Naples as Prince of
Galilee and Heir to the Crown of Cyprus_."

But now their voices came back to them, sputtering, uncontrolled; a
babel of sounds arose, cries of loyalty--of fear--of indignation and
wrath and fervor of affection--of hatred for the Council. Questionings,
denunciations, curses that made one's hair stand on end--

Only for a moment.

Then the voice of the Admiral was heard again, stilling the chaos as by
magic.

"Every man to his post. Let order prevail, for love of our Queen! We
have stern work before us."

And below, among the people, Stefano Caduna boiling with suppressed
anger, which deepened his voice to an ominous calm--as of the lull
before an earthquake--saw that the orders of the Vice-Roy were instantly
obeyed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stefano was in the very heart of the action in Nikosia during the days
that followed; the people furious at the outrage to their Queen, swore
that it should be people against nobles, if there were need, in her
defense; and assembling in great numbers, at the house of Stefano, they
chose a 'Council of the People' and made him its chief.

And well it was for the peace of Nikosia that Stefano was gifted with
that rare power which marks some men for mediators in time of storm. He
stood between the nobles and the people, trusted by both parties--a man
of force and judgment--reticent, comprehending, swift to see his way and
scorning subterfuge.

He it was who headed a delegation of the people to urge their petition
that the Queen should be rescued with all speed and brought for safety
within their walled and loyal city, and who rested not until the
Vice-Roy with all his knights and all the forces that could be spared
from the defense of Nikosia and of the citadel which they were holding
for Her Majesty, had ridden forth to Famagosta.

Stefano commanded the guard at the gates of Nikosia--as also the force
of the entire city, during the absence of the Vice-Roy: and he could be
swerved nor fooled by no entreaties nor orders from any noble in the
land. "No man entereth," he explained in that terrible cold iron voice
of his, "save only he who sweareth to live and die in defense of Her
Majesty."

He it was, also, who, waiting for no parleying, thundered a refusal to
surrender the city to those who brought the demand from the Fortress of
Famagosta, signed in trembling letters by the Queen's own hand,
"_Caterina Regina_."

"Nay, but Her Majesty shall write the letters from her own
palace--freely--that we, her loyal, servitors may know her will,--or
ever we surrender her city of Nikosia." And so, sent back the envoys of
Rizzo--foiled.

And when some days later, yet others came--a company of mounted
noblemen, demanding entrance in the Queen's name to deliver her answer
to the letter sent by the Council of the People from Nikosia and to take
their oath of loyalty--Stefano, still unbelieving, not knowing how it
fared in Famagosta, gave his unvarying answer:

"No man entereth, save only he who sweareth to live and die in the
Queen's defense."

"We are content to swear," they answered him.

But still he gave no order to open the gates, but rode forth himself
with the captains of the Council of the People, fully armed, to meet
them, dismounting as they approached and offering all courteous
salutations of the time--yet with reluctant speech--fearing to grant
unwise credence, lest this should be some new perfidy.

"Think not to deceive us with fair words," said Stefano, "who hold this
city for our Queen; but if with most solemn oath ye swear to live and
die in her defense, we make you welcome."

"On most fair honor of a Knight," they answered him, "in the name of San
Giovanni!"

"Call hither the Chaplain with the Holy Book!" said Stefano.

And so without the city, Stefano Caduna, man of the people, received the
most solemn oath of these knights and nobles, envoys of the Queen,
bareheaded and on bended knee before him, ere he would consent to unbar
the gates of Nikosia to receive Her Majesty's own messengers.


XXIV


The immediate liberation of the Queen had seemed a well-nigh hopeless
quest to the body of brave men who were on their way to Famagosta, to
pledge the loyalty of their city of Nikosia, so soon as news of the
conspiracy had been proclaimed, and they had deemed it rather to be won
by strategy than prowess. For the Cyprian forces were few and were
chiefly intrenched in the fortress of Famagosta--the most formidable of
all the strongholds of Cyprus--leaving no trained men at arms in the
city itself, which thus lay unprotected, close under the vigilance of
the now hostile Citadel, whose commander, Saplana, had been a favorite
of the King but was now among the traitors. The Count of Tripoli was
foremost among the leaders of this intrigue and he was Governor of the
city of Famagosta! And scattered among this Cyprian corps to see the
orders enforced, was a band of mercenaries _brought from Naples by
Rizzo_!

The situation in Famagosta had been briefly indicated in the despatch
which the courier of Bernardini had urged his spent and panting steed to
deliver in Nikosia; there were also certain dark hints of rumors current
among the outraged populace, that Rizzo, Chief-of-the-Council appointed
to help the Queen, might soon be master of all the strongholds of the
island, having forced letters from the Queen commanding their surrender
to the envoys of the Chief-of-Council.

Outside the cities news travels slowly, as all men know. For along the
highways there are no marke-places whence it may be proclaimed--there is
no eager populace to tell it from mouth to mouth, and these treacherous
orders might even reach the forts and be obeyed in all good faith, by
their Commanders before they could have any suspicion of the revolt of
the Council.

Of the wisdom and foresight of the Queen's Venetian Chamberlain the
Admiral had ample proof; since the Bernardini's message of alarm, sent
the night before the mutiny, had arrived only a few hours before it had
been followed by his second despatch, in swift and terrible
justification.

Because of these rumors Mutio di Costanzo, Admiral of Cyprus, had
ordered messages of warning sent to the chief citadels, as he had been
able, before he left Nikosia; and also because of them, he rode to-day
with a so scanty following not having dared to leave any points of
vantage without sufficient guard.

He turned and surveyed his little band of Knights with frowning
brows--his invincible Knights of the Golden Spurs--they seemed so few in
the face of the perplexities of his problem.

Not that any thought of personal danger for himself or for them, in the
few against the many, entered into his difficulties; but that the facts
made failure a possibility; and there must be no failure.

He raised his visor and each man saw his leader's face as the face of a
conqueror.

"_Coraggio_, Signori!" he cried; "our cause is just! God and San
Giovanni make strong our arms!"

Well might he be proud of this noble company pressing forward silently,
but with quickening pace, at sight of the urgency in their leader's
face.

No noble house of Cyprus could boast more ancient lineage, nor so many
knights entitled to wear the golden spurs, nor more honorable trophies
of the valor dear to knightly hearts. They rode all in full armor, some
bearing their famous shields of crimson with the quaint heraldic lion
rampant on his golden bar--the device which all men knew had been
granted them for extraordinary proof of prowess centuries before.

For this noble family the ancient city of Costanza had been named; and
the quaint church of Santa Maria di Costanza, rich in relics and in
decoration, had been the private chapel of their historic Castle.

To the assuring rhythm of their strenuous tramp the Admiral turned again
to his unsolved problems. For the galleys of Cyprus had hitherto been
kept armed by force, but recently their crews had been disbanded, in
obedience to a strange clause in the will of King Janus. Now, as Mutio
di Costanzo went on his way, wrapped in meditations that were not
cheering, the question came to him--"_Why?_"

Janus, whatever his gifts, had been no judge of men--possibly from too
strong reliance in his own power to conquer them by his personal charm.
Had this disbanding been deftly suggested to the facile King by his
friend, the arch-schemer of Naples?

Was the wily Rizzo, even in those days, planning to leave Cyprus
defenceless?

The Admiral gnashed his teeth and sent up a smothered cry to all the
saints that his wrath might not unnerve him to the point of losing his
iron grip upon himself.

But the situation was not rendered less galling by the reflection that
the port of Famagosta--the sole harbor of importance in the island--was
covered by the citadel commanded by a traitor; that just within the port
a galley flaunting the colors of Naples, rode complacently; and that
there were no longer any Cyprian ships-of-war ready for attack.

But retribution must be near; for he knew that Bernardini had sent
warning followed by immediate details of the revolt, by secret
messengers, concealed in trading-ships to the Venetian fleet off the
African coast, and strong help must be at hand. To risk failure by a
premature attack, for want of patience to endure a temporary disgrace,
would be unmanly weakness. The Madonna be praised, the Chamberlain of
the Queen was a man of resource; the people of the cities were devoted
to her, and the end might be nearer than seemed possible.

The Admiral was impatient for the conference with Bernardini who had
implored him to come without delay.

"At all hazards we shall hold the city-gate," the Chamberlain had
written in the first hours of that dark dawn. "With citadel and port in
command of the traitors and the Queen in their keeping, this post may
have no importance in their eyes. _But our help must come from
without._"

And now the little band of faithful knights were coming in sight of the
city-walls--massive and splendid--a monument to the Lusignans.

"For our Queen and Cyprus!" the Admiral said solemnly, his hand upon his
sword.

The tone of the utterance made it a command.

"So help us God our Seigneur, and San Giovanni!" the knights answered
him in a breath, nerving themselves to attack and success: but they came
silently and with no sounds of battle--by order of their chief--not
knowing whether to expect welcome or conflict, or whether secrecy might
be well.

At the tramp of their horses' feet the warden had advanced to the grille
of reconnoitre and withdrawn the small stone shutter for inspection; his
head appeared behind the bars, but he wore no tell-tale colors:

"Open! in the name of the Queen! to Her Majesty's faithful vassals!"

The Admiral spoke low--for secrecy might be the very discretion of
valor: but fearlessly, for the words were a signal, and every knight
stood ready.

"Who challengeth? Speak low."

Was it the word of caution, or a ruse de guerre?

"One of Nikosia."

The Admiral gave the password which Bernardini had sent in that hasty
note, and listened, trembling as a brave man may with impatience to be
within and at his post of duty, while one by one the bolts were
withdrawn, the portcullises were raised, and the signal to advance was
given--quite silently: the finger of the guard who had been detailed to
accompany them, was upon his lips.

Not until he had conducted them beyond, into the city, did he speak: "We
know not what echoes there may be within those walls," he said, pointing
back to the ponderous gateway with its many vaulted passages.

Then impatient, the Admiral asked for news.

"Your Excellencies are expected: the citizens await you:" it was said in
a tone that meant more than courtesy: Mutio di Costanzo scanned him
narrowly.

"From whom dost hold thy orders?" he asked.

"From the Signor Bernardini, commander of the city," the man answered
readily.

"Then speak."

"The Signor Bernardini hath this night rescued our infant Prince from
the galley of Naples----" He supplemented the statement with an angry
oath coupled with Rizzo's name. "We know not where our Signor hath
hidden him."

"And the Queen?"

The guard shook his head.

"The Signor hath waited for help to come: it is said that her rescue
will be this day. In the Palazzo Reale the guard hath been trebled for
her defense, and every man would give his life for the Queen."

"Is there more?"

"Aye, your Excellency: rumor hath it that that devil of a Rizzo hath
forced Her Majesty to give him letters of surrender for every fortress
of Cyprus, and that to-day he is gone, with other traitors, to receive
the keys of all our citadels. _Panagia mou!_ he is capable of every
treachery! If he were not within----" He indicated the fortress with a
scowl of hatred, then made a motion which seemed to include the entire
city and plant the people, resolute, before the windows of the Queen.

"And the Governor of Famagosta?"

"That traitor Tripoli is in the train of the scoundrel Rizzo, both
faring forth for other treacheries, thinking us safe enough to leave,
with those spies of Naples on guard." His sputtering curses choked
further speech.

"It shall be _now_," said Mutio di Costanzo: "conduct us to the Signor
Bernardini"--yet wondering at the silence of the streets as he passed.

"Your Excellency," said the guard once more, in answer to his question,
"it is the order of the Bernardini who hath commanded quiet and hath
promised, on his life, to restore the Queen to her people."

The hasty conference in the Palazzo Reale, developed the fact that the
citizens of Famagosta, too furious for any considerations of expediency,
had been with difficulty restrained from storming the Citadel and
demanding the Queen's instant release: and now that any trained force,
however small, was upon their side, the critical moment had come. Men,
women and children flocked into the deserted streets and eagerly
followed the cavalcade of Knights to the Piazza San Nicolò, where the
crowd was increasing every moment; and when Bernardini and Mutio di
Costanzo appeared among them, they were greeted with cheers and vivas.

"Regina!"

"Madonna Nostra Reale!"

"Regina!"

"_Subito! Subito!_"

The cries startled the silence of the streets, and further restraint was
impossible.

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Regina! Madonna Nostra Reale! Subito!_"

The city rang with their shouts--the voice of a multitude magnificent in
righteous emotion--from the gruff tones of the men of the populace
hoarse with anger, to the strident cries and sobs of the women and the
high treble of little children; and clear and calm throughout the
chorus, the clarion-notes of command.

The mighty sound penetrated to the depths of the Citadel, waking the
Cyprian force from its stupor of despondency, rousing the dormant
manhood within them.

It reached the chamber of the captive Queen, who had known no thrill of
hope since that night of horror.

"My God! my God!" she cried, with streaming eyes. "I thank
thee!--_Madonna mia Sanctissima!_ My people are calling for me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"In the name of Her Majesty!"

"Surrender command to the Admiral of Cyprus!"

To no mighty force could those strong bars have been more swiftly
withdrawn; nor was there need of contest to displace the trembling
guards of Naples, as the men of Cyprus within the fort hastened to obey
the mandate from without, saluting as the massive gates creaked upon
their hinges and protesting that further haste had been impossible.

"Let every traitor crave mercy!" the Admiral thundered as he crossed the
drawbridge with his cavalcade: "and on your knees crave pardon of your
outraged Queen as we descend."

"Signori!"--to the Knights of the Golden Spurs--"await us here--none
less loyal may stand on guard."

       *       *       *       *       *

To-day the entire armament of the fortress was less than of wont; for
Rizzo and Tripoli, secure in their victory and confident that there
would be no uprising since none had yet been attempted, had not
hesitated to take a considerable following with them to secure the
surrender of the other citadels of Cyprus "_by order of the Queen_." For
was not Rizzo the happy holder of many pretty bits of parchment signed
by the hand of "Caterina Regina" herself and attested by the royal
signet of Cyprus--which to disobey was treason? It would be a pretty
farce to insist upon the potency of that trembling signature wrested
from the captive Queen when she had worn no semblance of power--a farce
to which the Neapolitan schemer was fully equal.

None but a man who knew the famous stronghold of Famagosta so intimately
as did the Admiral of Cyprus could thus quickly have made sure that the
surrender was complete and that no secret reserves of men and arms were
kept back for further intrigues. To swear in those who would stand for
Cyprus--to banish the mercenaries of Naples and all who were in
sympathy with them to the dungeons below--to make sure of the color of
the guards at port and passage--was not so much longer in the doing than
in the telling.

And yet, to the young Queen and Margherita the moments had seemed hours:
they stood close together; straining every faculty to interpret the
meaning of the commotion below, within the fortress, alternating between
hope and fear as, at intervals, the cries of the people reached them
from the piazza, indistinct and broken by the thickness of the walls;
now and again a fierce imprecation rising above the tumult--yet surely
there were tones of loyalty--voices calling for "Caterina Regina!"

Caterina's strength was well-nigh spent--she had suffered so much; she
caught the hand of Margherita in agitation as the tramp of footsteps
echoed through the corridor nearing the door of her chamber, and
Margherita laid her other hand on Caterina's with an almost maternal
tenderness, from the great pity within her.

"Beloved Lady!" she cried reassuringly; "they bring us glad tidings."

For she read it in their faces as the Bernardini and Mutio di Costanzo
knelt in the low doorway to offer their homage.

But the young Queen seemed to tremble between life and death as she
stretched forth her arms to them with a low wail that almost unnerved
those strong faithful men.

"My Boy! My Boy!--your Prince!"

How may joy immeasurable be told in an instant's space, and one
schooled to agony not die from the swift change to such rapture of
content!

For the Bernardini had answered her: "Safe in the Palazzo Reale: and the
people are clamoring for their Queen!"

And because the Dama Margherita had seen the great shining light in his
eyes her heart went out to him, and she knew that the safety of the
Royal infant meant a tale of loyalty and danger that Aluisi Bernardini
would never tell.

       *       *       *       *       *

But at last the Admiral and the Bernardini led Caterina forth into the
piazza, pale and calm--the glory of a great gladness in her eyes--the
suffering which had left deep traces in her face disguised by the
exaltation of the moment so that she scarcely seemed less radiant than
when she had last stood there on the day of the coronation fête with her
child in her arms--as any woman of the people might have done, the
tender, baby-cheek pressed close to hers.

Some of them remembered it as they fell on their knees around her,
kissing her hands, offering her homage--reparation--sobbing out their
devotion:

"Regina! Madonna Nostra Reale! Regina! Regina! May the Holy Mother bless
her and our little King!"

She was not a thing of State and jewels, cold and distant like the proud
Queen Elenà, but a tender human mother, fair and young, and her heart
had been all but broken when that wicked Chief of Council had stolen
away the child!--the people might gather close about her and weep and
rejoice with her.

"_Madonna Nostra Reale!_"

The air was still ringing with the loyal shouts of the multitude when
Vettore Soranzo with that eagerly expected Venetian fleet, weighed
anchor in the port of Famagosta and with his men streamed through the
unresisting gates of the Fortress into the Piazza San Nicolò, where the
young Queen still stood radiant.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the holy calm of night peace brooded over the distracted city and
the Cyprian stars looked down on the old, sweet story of mother and
child--as closely clasped beneath the gilded roof of the royal palace as
under the thatch of a peasant shed--smiling, forgetful of the days of
anguish that had parted them.


XXV


The Venetian Admiral Mocenigo, god-father to the little prince, had
followed close upon the coming of Vettore Soranzo, and they had lost no
time in examining into the causes of the difficulties and in fixing the
responsibility for the treachery where it belonged: disloyal officers
were replaced by men in sympathy with the government, men of weight and
character were sought for to fill the vacancies in the Council of the
Realm, and it seemed that days of sunshine were dawning for Caterina,
guarded by the affection of her people and the invincible arm of Venice.

These Venetian nobles would have made short work in meting out justice
to those chiefs who had been the instigators of the conspiracy, but as
yet they had eluded the search; though it was rumored that Saplana, the
Turkish commander of the Fortress of Famagosta, with his nephew Almerico
to whom the conspirators would assign control of the castle of
Cerines,--had been in hiding in the palace of the Archbishop. And a tale
was brought to Bernardini by a group of agitated peasants from the
hamlet of Varoschia, that at early dawn a man fully armed, with the
semblance of Rizzo--"not an apparition, _Signore sa_--but how could one
know the face of him with his vizor down?--was riding like the wind to
Famagosta, and with him a multitude of horsemen, coming very silently.
We saw them from the vineyards high up on the hillside. And then--quite
suddenly--we looked and they were gone--they came no more--by San
Nicolò and the Holy Madonna, it is true!"

Significant gestures gave a certain mysterious color to the peasant's
tale; but whatever its truth, it was actually known that Rizzo and other
of the conspirators had been seen in the neighborhood of Nikosia; and
the whereabouts of these intriguers was a topic of absorbing interest,
for it was felt that the sunshine would be clearer when Rizzo with his
accomplices should have been found and made to suffer the full penalty
of their crime.

Rizzo and Fabrici had been absent at the time of the uprising of the
citizens of Famagosta, and the wolf-like courage of the Chief-of-Council
was on the wane: for the letters of the Queen had not proved the
passport he had expected toward the surrender of the Cyprian strongholds
to a traitor: since more than one of the Commanders had been found so
staunch in loyalty as to question the validity of the royal signature.

When all had gone so well at first, these failures were exasperating to
a man of Rizzo's temper--the more so that the little Queen had refused
to prepare another letter of dismissal required of her; and Rizzo, the
stronger in wrath and insolence because his faith in his star was
somewhat less, had set forth himself to enforce the investiture of
Almerico as Commander of Cerines--the castle to which he had been
refused admittance on the morning of the uprising in Famagosta.

       *       *       *       *       *

Venice, meanwhile, with her faculty for establishing confidence and
settling all things in order, having brought back the smiles of the
Court, had suggested the wisdom of relieving the strain and tickling the
fancy of the people by some pageant. There was to be a grand review of
the troops in the Piazza on the esplanade, in the presence of the Queen
and the infant Prince, at which the presentation by Her Majesty to the
Admiral Mocenigo of a golden shield, magnificently wrought with the arms
of Cyprus, would diplomatically suggest the important röle that Venice
had played in the re-establishment of the Government.

Dama Ecciva was in her element again, now that something had happened to
scatter the unendurable dulness, and each day brought some new matter
for discussion.

"Hast heard, Eloisà, how that this new Council to Her Majesty hath
captured the Secretary of His Reverence the Archbishop? and they thought
to hang him for his master's treachery and his own; and then, because he
promised to confess to save his life, he is in the Castle instead. And
there were revelations!--and intrigues!--verily a Reverendissimo!"

"Name him not to me; I have no patience!"

"Thou hast never patience when I bring thee news: and it is tiresome of
thee, for one must talk, or die of ennui in this court!"

"Then let it be of something better." Eloisà answered in a tone which
showed her distaste of the subject.

"Choose thou--since one can never know thy whim. Shall it be of that
famous Saplana who runneth away to put himself in hiding;--for
fear--_verily for fear_--the Commander of Famagosta! afraid to die like
a man! A comedy!--one might laugh if it were less craven."

"One knoweth not if he be in hiding, since he is not found; he may be a
traitor, yet not a coward too."

"Yes, one knoweth, bella Contarini mia: did I not promise thee news? And
thou wilt never guess it."

"It was our Admiral Mocenigo who found him?" Eloisà asked eagerly.

"Nay; not 'our Admiral Mocenigo';" the other answered lingering on the
name with a fine mimicry of her tone; "not thine nor mine. Thou hast a
foolish way with thee of mine and thine, as if all that came from Venice
were held close to thy little heart.--How goes it with thy handsome
Signor Bernardini?"

"Oh, Ecciva! The Chamberlain of the Queen! how darest thou? Thou art
over free with thy foolish speech."

"Nay, little timid maid; it is thou who art foolish not to see--not to
see----. Ah, well, he is but a man for all he is Venetian; and
thou--thou art a child and hast no eyes."

"What meanest thou, Ecciva? Nay, thou _shalt_ tell me." She caught her
companion's hand as Ecciva made a feint of turning away.

"So----; now there is something found that doth not tax thy fickle
patience, since we speak of the splendid Bernardini! Thou hast ever
thine adoration ready for a Venetian."

Eloisà flushed indignantly, but she answered staunchly: "Not only
I--but every one who loveth what is noble. Thou knowest, Ecciva, the
Court is full of his praises."

"Aye, is it, my little one? As well it may be! Then what harm that I
should sing them too? Verily, I think he is noble beyond all others;"
her taunting tone became suddenly earnest. "And this I came to tell
thee."

"This is not news," the other answered coldly, having found it difficult
to keep the pace of Ecciva's changing admirations, for the Cyprian
maiden was easily captured by any demonstration of power; "and thou
camest to bring me news."

"Hast ever thought that the Chamberlain of the Queen would woo a bride?"
Dama Ecciva asked lightly, but unconsciously opening and closing her
slender henna-stained fingers, straining them into the soft palms with
strenuous motions, while she waited for her companion's reply.

"If I knew his secrets or dreamed them, I would not tell thee--being his
friend," Eloisà exclaimed indignantly, "such talk ill befitteth the
dignity of Her Majesty's maids of honor. What is thy news?"

Ecciva came closer and laid one hand on Eloisà's wrist, tightening her
clasp while she spoke in low, slow, insinuating tones--holding her with
her strange gaze.

"This is no news to thee--that I--that I----? Tell me Eloisà, dost thou
not see?"

The Venetian turned from her uneasily.

"Thou hast shewn me nothing with all thy talk of the Bernardini;" she
spoke the name unwillingly, Ecciva seemed to force her to continue the
theme, and it was with difficulty that she could withdraw her hand from
the Grecian maiden's sinuous clasp. "Let us talk no more; for thou hast
no news of real matter."

"Not of the Bernardini, since thou wilt not hear it. But how if I knew
of a bride for him?"

"I think he would not ask of whom thou speakest!" Eloisà tried to laugh
and shake off the spell. "I will listen no more, Ecciva."

But the other paid no heed. "How if I knew of a bride for him?" she
repeated; "of a most ancient house of Cyprus; noble enough to mate with
him--for out of it came one of the queens of the land----. And if--and
if she would not say him nay!--How then, Carina? For thou, 'being his
friend,' wouldst wish to see him win such favor----?"

"It is not the Dama Margherita de Iblin," Eloisà asked with sudden eager
interest.

"The Lady Margherita!" Ecciva echoed with a scornful toss of her head.
"Doth one seek a bride no longer young when one is a man like that?
Nor--nor beautiful?--She is not beautiful!"

"She is more rare than beautiful," Eloisà retorted, piqued. "For she is
noble, like the Signor Bernardini: and her face is like her soul."

"They should not trust their secrets to so young a maid!" the Lady
Ecciva cried tauntingly.

She had suddenly flushed and grown pale again. Then a new thought came
to her. "But she also is a Dama di Maridaggio--_she also_. Thou mightest
tell that for a bit of gossip to the Queen, who, perchance, hath
influence with the Signor Bernardini." She had laid her hand again on
Eloisà's, with an insistent touch.

"Why dost thou say, _she also_?"

"That is for thy puzzle--to amuse thee, carinissima; for verily thy
brain is dull. It is no wonder with the gravity of this court! But
happily to-morrow--thou shalt see to-morrow how the people shout to him,
for Cyprus doth owe him honor--and Her Majesty more than life. It is the
Bernardini who hath done it all--more than the Soranzo, or the
Mocenigo--more even than our great Admiral of Cyprus. Thou shalt see!"

Eloisà fell easily into praises of her hero, and her tongue was
unsealed. "To go at night, with only a poor fishing-skiff and a handful
of men, to steal back the little king from the galley of Naples--it was
not easy! But how should one think of peril when the Prince was in
danger?--They are both like that--he and she."

"All knights are like that, or they would be craven: that was no honor
to him. But what woman went with him from the palace? I watched them
going; it was a night like some great poem!"

"That was our dear Lady of the Bernardini; lest the Prince should be
strange without some loving face about him, and none can smile him into
quiet, as she with her gracious ways; and they feared a sound, for the
galley lay close under the fortress. So quietly they went, along the
shore, lingering where the nets are thrown by the shallows, to take the
galley by surprise--the Lady of the Bernardini shrouded in the mantle of
a fisher-woman."

"And after?--When they had found him? For it was not told where they hid
the child--or I heard it not."

"Yes--now it may be known; thanks be to our Mater Sanctissima!" Eloisà
answered devoutly. "They floated about in the fishing skiff until they
reached the private galley of the Signor Bernardini--so far around the
coast that it would be safe for the Prince. And of the peril, the Lady
of the Bernardini had no thought. The galley of His Excellency was dark
and with no sign of action, yet it had been manned for a cruise the
night before the treason--the poor Signor Bembo was to have gone
therein"--her voice faltered and they both crossed themselves, the
horror of that night was still so new.

"The crew were hidden within it," she continued after a moment's pause,
"and if there had been pursuit, it would have started swiftly for
Venice, to put the Prince in safety."

"How came this tale to thee?" Dama Ecciva asked with a sudden twinge of
jealousy--"we both being of the court?"

"Nay, nay, Ecciva," Eloisà pleaded; "we both are here to do our duty,
and in time of peril--thou knowest well--one may not ask counsel on the
house-tops; and this was for life or death. How might they hope to
surprise the galley of Naples, if it has been told to all the Court?"

"Thou, then?"

"Listen, Ecciva! Since it is past, thou shalt see how they are noble,
this Mother and her son! They left with me that night a message for the
dear Queen whom they might not reach with speech, to spare her greater
anguish, if they came not back. For, oh my God, how she hath suffered!"

"It is yet more a poem," Ecciva exclaimed, stirred by the hope of
further romance, and already half ashamed that she had shown her
momentary feeling of jealousy. "The message--tell it!"

"'If we come not back, thou wilt tell our beloved Lady that we have
sought to wrest the child from the galley of Naples; for rumor hath it
that he is hidden there. And if he be there, we will bring him, or give
our lives to save him. Tell her our galley waiteth far, to take the
Prince to Venice if, from pursuit, there should be need to fly.'

"But--listen Ecciva--they said, '_if we come not again, and our galley
should be found waiting on the coast, then tell her that our lives were
little to express our love; and she shall not mourn that we have given
them for her and for her child_.'--Oh, Ecciva!" she ended with a long
sigh of adoring appreciation.

Ecciva broke the tension with her exclamation: "No, Contarini mia, all
knights are _not_ like that: I said it but to tease thee. Tell it to the
Dama Margherita with a face like that, and she will make it a second
'Kypria,' for she hath, verily the gift. I have not such a tale of
knighthood to tell thee: yet, if thou carest for my tidings they would
make a canto for the new Kypria of the Dama Margherita, in contrast to
thine. And first of the traitor Saplana--_of whom there is news_."

Eloisà greeted the tidings with an exclamation of relief.

"He--and the precious group of noble villains--or of villain
nobles--one's tongue takes twist in talking trash--the more when it is
true; a precious group of traitors, all on the wild seashore--how the
Dama Margherita would bring out the booming of the waves! These doughty
villains fleeing because, forsooth, they feared the fleet of
Venice!--tossing their reins on the necks of the steeds that brought
them, and leaving them to wander at their will. A little gold and their
arms and bucklers in the fishing skiff that brought them to the galley
of the noble Ferdinand--the goodly King of Naples,--his well-beloved
son, Alfonso, wore not for long the title of the 'Prince of
Galilee!'--Is it a pretty tale for the poem of the Margherita? The tale
of the fleeing villains!"

"But who went with the Commander?--Which others?"

"There was the nephew, Almerico--much in temper because thy noble uncle
the Contarini would not yield up to his traitorous care the Castle of
Cerines for the signature forced from the Queen. There was Fabrici--the
very Reverend, the Primate of Cyprus. And then--and then--not last, but
first, and deepest and darkest traitor of them all--the very darkest
villain of them all--there was Rizzo!"

"Ecciva! Not Rizzo!--the land is free of him!"

"Aye, _Rizzo_, child. Did I tell thee I had news? And for their absences
may Heaven be praised!--though, truly, they have deserved worse."

"They have deserved _death_," said Eloisà solemnly: "death between the
columns of the Piazzetta--death and confiscation."

"So, my Venetian, thou never wilt remember that we are Cyprians! The
drama of confiscation will surely follow upon their deserts, and there
will be fiefs the more for their Cyprian betters. But as for
death--'death between the columns'--I could almost be glad that Rizzo
hath escaped. How shall one not admire the masterful scheming of the
man, and the insolence and power of him?--he is fairly great in
wile.--Have I not told thee news enough, and of a quality to make thy
hair stand on end--the comely hair of a most decorous young Venetian
maid?--and thou hast never a word of admiration. Verily, thou art
tiresome!"

"It is so terrible, Ecciva: I cannot jest, nor gloat on it for news."

"There, there, sweet child!" Ecciva had slipped easily back into her
old, mocking, taunting way--"go look out thy tire for the morrow and try
on thy jewels, for the pageant will be fine: and, do thy best, I shall
outshine thee--thee and the Dama Margherita! One pageant in six months
of woe--it is not over much."


XXVI


The pageant had been brilliant, as one may read in the chronicles of the
time.

Even the Queen of the Adriatic, in all her pride, could offer little to
surpass the splendor of this great esplanade by the sea where the review
had been held. The pavement of costly mosaic stretched along the coast,
guarded by the lofty tower which jutted out upon the sea; while the
other side of this unusual piazza was dominated by the famous Citadel
which climbed the steep acclivity with intricate windings of crenellated
walls, dotted with sentry towers where banners were floating. In that
clear atmosphere distance was not appreciable, and the castellated
slopes seemed to lead up to the highest peak of the Troödos, whose
snow-crowned summit flashed its crystal against the deep blue of the
Cyprian sky.

The massive walls of modern Famagosta skirted the esplanade, and above
their mighty bulwark rose the domes and pinnacles of her palaces and
churches--a city of delight. There were strange monuments breaking the
sky-line; there were statues and fountains gleaming in the sunlight;
there were hedges of rose and myrtle outlining the terraced gardens on
the hill-slopes, where rioted all manner of fruits and bloom: back of
them the vineyards of Varoschia--lemons, burning like topaz against the
dark thatch of their glossy leaves, and near them the thin gray of the
olive-trees, outlining with pale shadow the forests that spread to the
mountains.

Vast vases of stone looked down from the heights in grotesque
shapes--serpents coiled, thrusting out their tongues tipped with rubies,
with glaring emeralds for eyes: and below them, deep cut in the living
rock and blazoned so that one might read them from afar, the arms of the
kingdom--as if sacred pythons, terrible and fierce, kept watch above the
harbor for the honor of the realm.

And far off, against that wonderful mountain background, a colossal
marble lion stood guard over the ruins of the city that slept upon the
coast below--with demoniac, fiery eyes of flashing jewels, striking
terror to the souls of mariners who might have wandered with
sacrilegious feet among those crumbling tombs and temples in search of
buried treasure.

For this buried city on the coast was the ancient city of Salamis, and
famed for her magnificence--the _Famagosta Vecchia_ which had furnished
many a stately column and intricately wrought carving to enrich the
modern city to which Janus had transferred the capital of his kingdom.
Half-buried fragments of palaces and tombs and temples reached far along
the coast, giving the touch of pathos and historic interest: and about
them swept the broken circles of the splendid aqueduct which, in the
days long past, had gathered the waters of the mountain streams to
furnish the countless fountains and cisterns of Salamis. Great palms had
sprung up in the fissures of the massive, grass-grown arches, and vines
trailed draperies of beauty over their decay--and so they stood, a
monument to the past, challenging the dwellers of the modern city to a
labor so needful for the public weal.

The port was gay with trading ships and colors of many lands; but Mutio
di Costanzo studied it with frowning brows, noting only the absence of
his own galleys of Cyprus, which lay, unmanned in the dock-yards by
order of King Janus the Second! And before them, where he turned his
gaze, still frowning, on the silver of the sea rode the galleys of the
fleet of Venice--decked with the banners of San Marco and of Cyprus.

Caterina, under her canopy, with all her court about her in fullest
state, had received the homage of the people, as she passed her forces
in review, her cheek tingling with honest pleasure at their enthusiastic
greeting. The little Prince had been beside her, crowing his delight at
the music, the motion, the noise, the color, in most unkingly fashion,
quite unconscious that the storied jewel of his realm--the great ruby
that Peter the Valiant had received as the tribute of a conquered
Eastern city, glittering in the lace of his infant-cap, by way of royal
insignia--demanded a regal bearing.

The presentation to the Mocenigo of the golden shield, richly inlaid
with the arms of Cyprus, had made a pretty scenic episode, quite worthy
of dramatic Venice.

For Mutio di Costanzo also, and for the Bernardini, there had been
demonstrations, as Dama Ecciva had foretold: but the Lady Margherita de
Iblin had noticed with uneasiness, that whereas it was a time when the
people, high and low, should have assembled to testify their loyalty and
affection, the crowd was chiefly composed of burghers and peasants from
the hamlets in city neighborhoods, and that many of the old Cyprian
nobles with their tenantry were conspicuously absent. And since the
death of Janus, some of those who had formerly been in attendance at
court, had rarely shown themselves there.

Dama Margherita spoke of this afterwards to the Admiral, for he had
asked for some private conversation with her in her boudoir, when the
ceremonies should be over.

"What mean these absences?" she asked, when they had bemoaned the
situation.

"Venice is feared, not loved," he answered her.

But she was unwilling to confess that she understood him, having a pride
in her land and love for her Queen.

"Pardon, your Excellency," she said, "we were speaking of Cyprus."

He passed the interruption by as unworthy, being greatly in earnest.

"And the Queen--a very lovely young woman--is a mere figurehead--a pawn
to be moved at the discretion of the higher powers."

"Then, my Lord, it should be seen to that she hath a Council competent
to advise," the Lady Margherita retorted with ready indignation,
"instead of a horde of traitors."

Her voice took on a higher key in her excitement, and the Admiral laid
his hand lightly on her arm to quiet her.

"Dear Dama Margherita," he said, "we have been in conference with His
Excellency the Signor Mocenigo--a very remarkable mind--and the
Provveditore Vettore Soranzo; and the vacancies in Her Majesty's Council
have been filled with men, whom may Heaven keep more loyal!--But _why_
did not the Counts of the Chamber rise up in eager demonstration of
interest to put their best men in those vacant seats? And why--are we
quite safe to discuss it here?--_why_ did we--having her interests at
heart--not dare to ask the great nobles whom we wished to reach, to take
those places?"

"It is because of Janus, who hath been heedless and unfair?" she asked
reflecting. "For verily the people love the Queen."

"Let us not deceive ourselves out of our very loyalty. The citizens and
the nearer peasants hold her in love and reverence: but those of the
larger _casals_ and fiefs--the ancient nobles, have the power; and few
of these are in her court. I would it were otherwise."

"It is something, your Excellency, to have won the love of the simpler
folk as no Queen of this land hath ever done before," the Lady
Margherita said staunchly.

"It is something, but not all," he answered; "the nobles are as much to
be taken into consideration as the poorer classes. It is not all," he
repeated with emphasis. "One may win from sympathy--but one must rule a
kingdom by power. And the Queen--God help her!--is a charming child."

"My Lord!"

"A charming child--with a heart developed and matured like a saint; but
with a mind untrained to intrigue, unsuspicious of jealousies,
unconscious of any injustice wrought by her husband, not apt to
comprehend, perhaps, any grievance of the nobles----"

"May we not help her?" Dama Margherita interrupted eagerly. "She would
give back the fiefs if she knew that they had been misplaced--that any
right had been violated. And now--after these confiscations----"

"Aye, there are more lands to satisfy their demands, it is true. But in
their pride they might refuse--let her not wonder at it, nor cease from
her courtesies. The nobles are rather sullen than overt in their
discontent. They do not want Venetian galleys in their waters--though
they must welcome them--nor to do homage to a Venetian for the gift of
their own lands. And the restoration is less simple than was the
confiscation. For temporary lords have been created and these remain to
be reckoned with--even if the will were there."

"I am sure, your Excellency, that the will would not be lacking if this
matter were understood; for Her Majesty is fair and generous, and eager
to do all her duty by her people. It is of them, and never of herself,
that her heart is full."

The old Knight looked at her with kindling eyes as he raised her hand to
his lips with the gallantry of the time; yet retaining it in his own and
petting it in fatherly fashion, for she had been his daughter's friend
from childhood.

"Dear Margherita," he said with emotion, "it is well for our dear Queen
that thou art so loyal; and well for our distraught land that thou
shouldst be near her." He kissed her hand again as he released it. "I
spoke but to try thee, my child. If there are those near her whom we may
not trust--it is not thou: I know that a de Iblin could not be
disloyal."

"To try me--my Lord----! _Me!_"

She had drawn away from him, wounded and disdainful, her voice thrilling
with anger.

But he answered her quietly and sorrowfully. "Could I risk any hurt to
thee, cara Dama Margherita, if duty of plainest speech were not
imperative? I trust thee wholly--how else could I speak thus with thee?
I have never for a moment doubted thee; yet one might doubt one's own
loyalty in this court of Cyprus--where, it is told me, there is a most
subtle intriguer who seeketh to do thee harm."

"So it be not those whose esteem is dear to me," she answered wearily,
still smarting from the hurt, "what matters it?"

"My child," he pleaded, "if it had not been needful, I should not have
told thee; nor told thee _thus_, but that I wished to see if any
suspicion of this had dawned upon thee. But thou, like the Queen, art
too noble to soil thy soul with distrust. Yet, bethink thee, for her
sake, if there be any within this circle--however fairly spoken--who may
be intriguing against thee, yet seeking in secret to disaffect the court
in favor of some other claimant."

"Who brought your Excellency this tale?" she asked; "since all may not
be trusted?" Her tone was a challenge, and she moved towards the door to
close the interview, but the Admiral would not follow.

"Put by thine indignation, Margherita," he answered patiently, "for I
have told thee as I would tell my own Alicia, if danger threatened--if
somewhat overclumsily it seemeth to a maiden's fancy. It was told me,
in confidence, by one of judgment and most loyal honor, whose name I may
not reveal, and who besought me that I should warn thee--_thee,
Margherita_--who knew thy loyalty staunch as his own."

A slow, pale flush grew on the girl's proud cheek as she listened and
her eyes took on a strange light.

"What matters it, my Lord," she said again, "to me, if I have thy trust
and--and--that of all men of honor! Forgive the temper of my house!" She
stretched out her hand to him.

"So thou but know when to curb it," he answered smiling, "it is thy
strength and our pride. And now--as to this other?"

"My Lord, I do not know"--but she paused suddenly.

"It is well," he said watching her, "for I may name no names--but thou
art on thy guard. She was named to me as very fair--subtle--charming--of
an ancient house of Cyprus--_we have named no names_. Let no confidences
escape thee in her presence: but we have no knowledge yet of any
traitorous intent that might excuse her dismissal from Court; and if it
be but petty, personal jealousy"--again Margherita had flushed
unwontedly--"for a mere jealousy, one may not insult a noble, ancient
house. It is not known if her sympathy be with Naples, or with
Carlotta."

"Your Excellency shall know if aught be discovered that should be told,"
Margherita promised. "But the matter is difficult."

"As to Her Majesty," the Admiral continued lowering his voice still
further, "it hath been found needful to guard her interests, and the
Signor Bernardini hath been named to the Council--a most excellent
gentleman--if he were not of Venice. I would have had another of our
Cyprian nobles, because of this jealousy of Venice. But they have kept
themselves so much from court that we have not seen their color; and we
dare not trifle with them, for the time is critical."

"Why not thou--Eccellentissimo?"

"Nay; I may keep a wider outlook on the interests of the kingdom without
the Council. The city of Nikosia shall stand for her; the trading
interests are to watch; the fleets must be re-manned; these intrigues
must be thwarted. I outside the court, and thou within, very closely
within--as near to the heart of the Queen as she will let thee--we shall
work and help her, for her task is not light. She swore her oath of
office to me, and I to her gave mine, as solemnly--to help her with my
life. It is a heavy load for such tender hands to lift:--a question if
one may conquer wile with innocency--yet the strife is noble."

"What may be done to help her?" Dama Margherita questioned,
heavy-hearted. "What is my part? It is not only the scandal of watching
against intrigue."

"That is no scandal to loyal service: and such her very trust and
goodness do demand. But there is more: out of thy fuller knowledge of
the Cyprian temper--thy comprehension of their grievances--thy loyal
Cyprian pride--thy staunchness to the House of Lusignan--make thyself
charming to these great Cyprian nobles; help the Queen to see the need
of their conciliation, and stoop a little from thy loftiness to win it
for them. To two such women, the impossible is easy. I leave thee now."

"Is there no more?" she asked.

"Nay:--or it is a trifle. If they have found the court a little
over-dull, of late, blame them not over-much: the need for gayety and
splendor is in their blood--more than in ours of Sicily--more even than
in that of Venice--which hath greater gravity. I have spoken with Madama
di Thénouris and the Lady of the Bernardini; but Madama di Thénouris
hath better understanding of the Cyprian temper, its need of
excitement--half barbaric--its impatience with a tone of gloom; the
tourneys, the tennis, the hunt, all that bringeth life--let the court be
charming again with jewels and color. Too great gravity is not wise."

"Yet to-day, your Excellency, if there were no lack of brilliancy--how
many were not there to see!"

"It is the beginning only," he said; "let it not be the end. Great
issues have been changed by such trifles."

"Must there be no more than trifles?" she asked, detaining him,
dissatisfied.

He looked at her, uncertain whether it were wise to speak further.

"Tell no one that they are trifles: but listen," he said. "It will take
_strength_, and _patience_, and _wisdom_ and _cunning_ and _grace_ to
rule this people. Shall we ask all this of any woman?" He dwelt upon the
words with weighty enunciation.

"Or of any _man_?" she answered, half-mocking at the demand. "And if he
were really a man, and not a god--and if one might choose one's
King----"

He shook his head slowly in response. "Our paragon might not be found in
the House of Lusignan, perchance. But surely he would not be a Louis of
Savoy--nor a Ferdinand of Naples--no more than a Carlotta. _Nor any
Cyprian noble who hath eyes upon the Crown._"

"Not this, also!" she cried, startled; "_not this!_"

"So rumor hath it; but none is strong enough. It frets me not. I have
but told thee since thou art on guard."

"Is there a remedy?" she asked despondent.

"It is not hopeless. The Ministers must rule the land. We must choose
our men and bide our time. Our Queen, by her grace, shall win the
people's hearts: and all may be well."

"And the little Prince--under her training?--For she will teach him love
and justice. She hath vowed him to the service of his land."

"Aye, he is our hope. We must guard her kingdom for him."

Then suddenly his face flamed with wrath. "This Council of the Realm
were arch-traitors!" he said fiercely, "and to think that they escaped
death!--Wresting power for their own ends--taking no concern for Cyprian
interests--they 'forget' the tribute which assures to Cyprus the support
of our Suzerain, and wait for Venice to come with careful inquiry to set
such failures right! But what cared they whether the provisions of a
solemn treaty were kept or broken? They had no thought of honor--they
wanted power to overturn the throne--not to uphold it.--The masterful
meanness of such creatures is beyond comprehension!"

"It doth unman me!" he said apologetically to Margherita, after this
unusual outburst, for Mutio di Costanzo was a man of few words; then,

"Madama di Thénouris is of our private council," he added, to her
immense relief, as he left her.


XXVII


It was the Bernardini whose swift thought had sent the first faithful
account of the revolt of the Council of the Realm to the Signoria--his
ingenuity which had secured the delivery of this true statement before
the false story under the signature forced from Caterina had reached
Venice--his prowess that had generaled the uprising of the citizens for
the Queen's release--his devotion that had rescued the infant Prince
from captivity--his foresight that had sent warning to the Admiral
Mocenigo before he could be summoned from Venice to the rescue. Such
honors as might be decreed to a fidelity beyond reward had come upon
Aluisi Bernardini from the Republic, apt in recognition: and the undying
gratitude of the Queen was already his.

"What shall I give thee, beloved Cousin?" the Queen had asked him. "Wilt
thou be a noble of Cyprus?"

"Dear Lady," he answered, "I want but thy favor. Doth it not suffice me
that I am a noble of Venice?"

"Nay--but to prove how thou art in my grace--with rich fiefs and
holdings in this land for which thou hast spent thy service right
royally."

"He doth not spend 'right royally' who seeketh reward," he answered,
smiling down upon her, as he stood before her.

Caterina answered him by quoting the Cyprian proverb, "_Assai dimanda
che fidelmente serve_." (Who hath faithfully served hath made a large
demand.)

But he shook his head, still smiling.

"Other than I have done, what true knight would do?" he protested.
"There could be no question of reward between us--thou being royal Lady
of our Casa Cornaro, and I sworn to thy faithful service--my cousin and
Queen. But, if thou wilt grant thy favor----"

He had grown suddenly grave.

"Nay, Aluisi, how may I grant what thou already hast?"

"I thank thee, fair Cousin. See how I trust thy favor to bring thee
warning--being so much thine elder--dealing so much more with men than
thou--being now of thy Council of the Realm----"

"Doth it need so many words from thee to me to excuse a counsel?--from
_thee_, who gavest me back my child!"

She held out both hands to him impulsively, as a daughter to a father,
her beautiful face radiant with gratitude and affection.

He closed the fair hands for a moment in his own, very tenderly. "I
should have envied any," he said, "whose fortune it had been to do this
thing for thee. My star hath favored me. Heaven keep our little Prince
to bless his realm of Cyprus!"

After a moment's silence, Caterina spoke playfully, to recall him to his
theme. "Was it for this fervent vow of loyalty that thou didst crave my
grace?"

His face deepened to a seriousness that was almost compassionate.

"Thou knowest that I would fain help thee: thy people would verily spend
themselves for thee--thou hast won their hearts. But, among the ancient
nobles--it were wise to tell thee frankly--there is some discontent."

"Is it new matter?" she asked, frowning a little. She had motioned him
to a seat, for she saw that he had much to say.

"It hath been spoken of before, but since--since the treachery of the
Council and--other things--and the most unbounded confidence by the
Signoria reposed in me to uphold the Queen--I have sought more nearly to
sift the causes of this disaffection. They seem to me to be not beyond
conciliation."

"'_Not beyond conciliation_,'" she echoed, "it _seems_ to thee! It is a
sad word to bring me of my people, Aluisi, since I would give my life
for them." Her eyes had filled with tears.

"It is sad, beloved Lady: but nothing is hopeless that is not finished.
Is it not better to see wisely than to ignore?--Let us be brave."

She folded her hands very tightly for a moment, as if struggling with
herself; then she lifted her eyes to his.

"Teach me," she said. "What wouldst thou?--Thou shalt verily be made one
of the Counts of the Chamber, that I may know _one_ loyal among my
Cyprian nobles."

"Nay, nay"--he made an effort to assume a lighter tone--"there is no
need; else would it be wise to sail for Venice with the fleet of the
Mocenigo! But, pardon me, fair Cousin; there is no need to bind _my_
loyalty with Cyprian titles and Cyprian lands. Let the Sovereign of
Cyprus seek _her own nobles_ for such favors."

"Shall I stoop to _buy_ the people of my kingdom?" she asked, a little
bitterly. "Is this thy honorable counsel?"

He rose at once. "My Cousin," he said, "thou art not thyself--thine
anger doth color thy speech. I crave thy promise to listen fairly to my
honest thinking--which it is not over-easy to bring thee." He spoke
compassionately.

"Forgive me, Aluisi; I listen."

"Out of thy generous heart, thou wouldst have covered me--who am a
Venetian--with Cyprian honors. I thank thee. But I will translate thee
to thyself. Was it 'to buy my loyalty?'"

"Nay, nay--but of appreciation--to show thee grace. Thou knowest it,
Aluisi!" Her repentance came swift and warm as that of a child.

"I know it well," he answered heartily. "Show but this thy grace to thy
Cyprian nobles and win them to thy court. They should come _first_ in
favor of their Queen."

"Have I been found lacking?" she asked, slowly; "and if--and if there
seemeth little to reward?"

"Reward that little openly, and there shall be more. Bethink thee: there
hath been great honor shown the Mocenigo."

"It was so ordered by the Republic," she began in a tone of
self-justification; then stopped with a sudden perception of his point.

"Was it for this, perchance, that the Cyprian nobles came less
heartily?" he pursued. "Is there no honor that might yet be granted to
that most noble knight, the Admiral Costanzo?"

"Whatever favor he would have is already his:--he was the friend of
Janus and my own," she answered in a tone of surprise that was almost
indignant. The Florentine astronomer describes in a letter
to a friend how the planet, after emerging from superior conjunction
as a morning star, gradually loses her rotundity on the side remote
from the luminary, changing first to a half sphere and then to a
waning crescent; until, after passing through the stage of absolute
extinction when intervening between us and the sun, she re-appears
as a morning star, and undergoes the same series of transformations
in inverse order.

The revelation was indeed so novel and unexpected, that when the slight
deformation of the planet's shape was first detected by him, he did not
venture to announce it in plain terms but veiled it, according to
the prevailing fashion of the time, under a Latin anagram.

"His Excellency the Admiral is verily the champion of Cyprus," the
Bernardini resumed after a little silence; "and methinks he would hold
dear the royal order to re-man the galleys which have been disbanded--as
it is now thought, by advice of the traitor Rizzo, or of some other
Councillor _in favor of Ferdinand of Naples_. I would fain bring this
matter for consideration before the Council, if it hath your Majesty's
favor."

"It is well," she said, in a tone of perplexity, "if it seemeth so to
the Council of the Realm. But our counsellors of Venice who brought us
aid, spoke not of this."

She lifted her liquid dark eyes to his face, as she spoke--a girl of
nineteen, bewildered with the intricate jealousies and strifes of her
island kingdom--no wonder that she felt her hands weak to hold the
sceptre so disputed!

"It may be that _Venice_ hath not so closely at heart the interests of
Cyprus as the Queen herself might hold them," he answered slowly and
watching her as he spoke. "We must win the Cyprian nobles to our
councils and consult their needs and bring them before the people as in
the grace of your Majesty. _Let us not always think the thoughts of
Venice._" She started and flushed slightly at his last words, but how
could he help her else?--"We must do this to bind the hearts of the
nobles to our Prince," he added, to give her courage.

"Let us not always think the thoughts of Venice!" The meaning was new to
her, and for a few moments she struggled with it silently; then she
lifted her eyes to his face and searched it artlessly, as a child might
have done, to see if she had fully comprehended his strange speech--most
strange from her Venetian Councillor.

But he met her gaze as frankly, having nothing to add to the simple
statement wherewith he had sought to arouse this new consciousness
within her, and which he wished her to ponder.

"Thou art more Cyprian, my cousin, than any member of the Council hath
ever shown himself," she said at length, "and it heartens me--for thou
art right. But now--just now--what may be done?" She spoke eagerly, as
if from a new standpoint.

"There is Stefano Caduna, a man of the people--most worthy of your
Majesty's grace. And there is Pietro Davilla, Seigneur and Knight, who
hath proven his loyalty--how if he were to be named Grand Constable of
Cyprus? Shall these be spoken of to the Council which will meet
to-morrow, that some favor may be decreed them?"

"It is well; it should be done, thou art strength to me, Aluisi."

"Is there aught else that should be brought before the Council?" he
asked.

She hesitated a moment, and then added with visible timidity and
reluctance, flushing a vivid scarlet:

"There are other things that seem too petty--but since the death of the
Auditor, our Uncle Andrea, thou hast perchance noted much scantiness of
our treasury, though when it is a question of pageantry, the Council
hath ever found enough and to spare. This was the case of the Swiss
mathematician Gauss, who, when a child, on being shown the crescent
star through the telescope, exclaimed to his mother that it "was
turned wrong"; the inference being that he recognized the reversal
of the image in the field of the glass.

"And, meanwhile--we are of one house, my Cousin----"

"Because thou art generous, shall the Council do less than its duty?"
she asked proudly. "Or shall I be content to know that measures wise for
the ruling of the realm may be frowned upon by those who hold the keys
of my treasury--_yet render no account_? The knowledge of this added
treachery hath come to me but recently; and this also was of Rizzo's
malfeasance. Dost think that moneys shall be found for the manning of
our fleet? Or that I have any voice in the spending of them?"

"The Madonna be praised that Rizzo and that Minister of Satan are fled!"
he exclaimed devoutly.

"While Rizzo held office, I might ask _no_ question," she said, turning
towards him a face of pathetic appeal; for she had never before dared to
speak freely of her grievances even to him--in so comprehensive a manner
had the Chief of Council known how to assert himself: "and now, that I
would fain have knowledge, that I may rule my people wisely, so much
there is to set in order, that my heart doth fail me. I have written to
the Serenissimo to tell him my perplexities--to pray that he might make
it lighter for me to rule."

The Bernardini knew that she had cause for her failing courage, while
yet he keenly felt that the remedy should not lie in an appeal to
Venice, whose power was the unacknowledged core of bitterness in the
growing disaffection among the Cyprian nobles. It might not yet be too
late to save the kingdom for Cyprus; and what it lay within his power to
do, Venetian though he was, he would do, rather than see this '_isola
fortunata_' slip without a struggle, into a mere Venetian province. The
knowledge had been painfully growing within him that Venice was playing
her hand skilfully--that Caterina would find herself simply a pawn to be
moved at will of the Republic, and that "check" would be called whenever
that masterful will should elect: there had been signs, too many to
ignore, of splendor of movement and expenditure whenever the prestige of
the Republic might be concerned--of indifference when the grievances of
the Queen were confessed, or the autonomy of the island was in
question--of slowly increasing assertion of Venetian power and rights.

He had accepted his mission, at the hands of his Government, to protect
the rights of the Queen--not to enslave Cyprus; and his duty stood forth
to him in firm, unwavering lines. Yet how should he dismay Caterina
further in the attempt to force her fuller comprehension? He hesitated
for a moment, but there seemed no other way. For very pity of her he
spoke decidedly, with slow insistence holding her attention.

"The Queen of Cyprus _holdeth her kingdom by no favor of Venice_; but of
inheritance, through her husband, the King. The failures in the
Government should be righted by Cyprian wisdom; we must fill the
vacancies with Cypriotes. I will take counsel with His Excellency the
Lord Admiral of Cyprus."


XXVIII


It was the birthday of the little Prince:--only one year since he had
opened his baby-eyes on life--and the day of his anniversary dawned
radiantly.

Then, suddenly, athwart the sunshine and the promise, like the cloud in
a perfect sky in a day of June, the shadows gathered and darkened.

The child was stricken.

"There is no hope," they said; and before the day had closed the little
dimpled hands were folded over his marble breast, the long dark lashes
peacefully swept the violet eyes that would never again unclose; and the
tiny restless feet were still--oh, God, how still!--while, on the
baby-brows that would never know the weight of the crown he was born to
bear, the smile of a cherub crowned him with the promise of fairer Life.

The nobles, the soldiers, the courtiers, the people, they came and
looked, often with silent tears, as he lay in state, in the light of
countless tapers, on his mound of flowers--offerings not only from royal
terraces--for his mother had willed it so--but the gifts which his
people had brought, lay there together, rare exotics and the flowers of
the field and forest, crushed and mangled, perchance, in some toil-worn
hand when they came from far.

How little he seemed to have carried the hope of a kingdom!--how strong,
to have swept it away with the mere folding of his baby-hand!--how
mighty, to have crushed all dreams of happiness, forever, within his
mother's breast!

GOD HAVE MERCY!

       *       *       *       *       *

When the first days of the shock of the child's death had passed, and
the Queen had roused herself to notice those who were anxiously watching
her, she asked to be left alone with Dama Margherita: but of the child
she would not speak.

"Tell me," she said, "of the saintly Margherita of thine house, the
Abbess of San Lazzaro; why left she the world?"

"Dear Lady--beloved Lady"--Dama Margherita pleaded, and would have
soothed her; but the Queen would have the story. She laid a hot,
tremulous hand on that of her friend and urged her with dry, imploring
eyes, as she listened to the tale of the founding of the Abbey of San
Lazzaro, while for pity, the tears of Margherita were dropping fast.

"We must turn her from this thought," said Dama Margherita earnestly to
the Lady of the Bernardini, as she left the Queen's presence,
sorrowfully. "She will not speak of the child; she hath wept no tears;
and the fever of her grief, locked within herself, will drive her to
madness. She hath asked that Father Johannes be sent for, without delay.
Doubtless it is for this scheme. Doth it seem wise to your Excellency
now--while she is in this state?"

"Cara Margherita, should we be slow to obey the will of a suffering
soul, for fear of what might chance? The reverend Father is wise for
her: if any might bring her comfort, it is he."

       *       *       *       *       *

Father Johannes Lampadisti had been often with the Queen in the past
year, and had become her trusted counsellor, and almoner in many matters
relating to the people, so that the guards and servants of the palace
knew that when the wild prior of the convent from the mountain of the
Troödos appeared in the palace court-yard asking audience of the Queen,
he was never to be denied.

"Most reverend Father," she said, stretching out her hand to greet him,
yet with no hint of welcome in her wan face, "they have stripped me of
every joy; I had thought the Holy Christus and the Blessed Mother of
Sorrows had been more kind!"

"Daughter!" he exclaimed, startled at her mood; "cry not out against the
will of Heaven, lest thou sin because of thine unendurable anguish."

The words had escaped him, involuntarily, but already he was chiding
himself that he could bring her, at such a time, even the shadow of a
reproach.

But Caterina was beyond any perception of minor shades of feeling. She
answered him in the same passionless tone in which she had greeted him,
with no suggestion of self-pity, nor any claim for sympathy in her
manner, as she motioned him to a seat near her.

"Nay, Father," she said, "in this hath Heaven been merciful: I feel
nothing; my heart is a stone. For this I thank the Holy Mother; she knew
that I could not bear it, else."

She made the statement simply, as if it implied nothing unusual, and
waited for him to speak.

But for once Father Johannes had no words; his eyes grew dim as he
looked at the young, passive face of the Queen, "stripped of every joy,"
alone on the threshold of life. "Daughter," he said, stumblingly, "I
fain would comfort thee."

"Nay, Father," she answered, still without emotion, "there is no
comfort. Let us speak of other things."

"Nay, _of this_," he said, with an awkward wave of his rough brown hand,
as if he would have put everything else away: and then relapsed into
silence, for in the presence of the grief which had mastered her, words
seemed to have lost their meaning.

She also waited--as a gray stone might wait by the wayside, unconscious
of the lapse of time: for him the moments were quick with thought--for
her it was as if they had not been, because life had ended.

"There must be comfort for all sorrow that Heaven permitteth," he
protested at last.

She looked at him wondering.

"But not for mine," she said in the same colorless tone. "Thou knowest
naught of such sorrow, for thou livest apart from men. Thou canst not
know the pain, when thou hast not known the joy."

"Yet from sympathy one may know," he began feebly. But she took no
notice of the interruption, and as he looked at her he realized that he
had never known life in its poignancy--that he stood outside the depths
of human suffering, though he had dwelt forever in its shadow, nor had
his stern life measured the height of holy, human joy.

"I left my people and my land," she said, "and came hither for a great
love, and that--that"--there was the sound of a sob in her throat as she
paused for a moment, then caught her breath and went on in the same even
tone,--"and that was taken from me. And now--oh, God!--my child!"

She strained her arms tightly to her breast and laid her cheek, with a
great tenderness upon her thin, white hands, as if her little one were
resting there and she sought the comfort of his caress.

Father Johannes turned away his eyes: the low murmur of cooing tones of
mother-ecstasy came to him as in a dream. Was the child's angel really
there?--He did not know.

"Now, oh holy _Mater Dolorosa_, _Mater Sanctissima_," he prayed within
himself.--"I know what thou hast suffered; have mercy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no longer any sound in the room. She had dropped her arms at
her side and had come nearer to him.

"Thou canst not know the depth of human suffering, Father Johannes, for
these things enter not into thy holy life--else couldst thou not pass
thy days in prayer and passionless meditation."

"Passionless!" he cried, and was silent, pressing his hand,
unconsciously, against the thorny cross on his breast.

"I have sent for thee again, Father, to ask a question which thou alone
canst answer."

She lifted her troubled eyes to his, deep with her question that seemed
the more terrible because her quiet voice still showed no trace of
emotion.

"Thou, who knowest the ways of God----"

(He groaned aloud.)

"Hath He stricken me for any sin?"

Then suddenly the passion of her question flamed in her white face--she
searched his, as if life or death lay in his answer.

From the hand upon his breast the blood trickled in slow drops, while he
laid the other upon her head in benediction:

"No--child--no," he gasped; "God help thee--no!"

The following humorous incident is recorded in the (1903) Year Book of
another prominent book club. It may be explained that the club issued
a very elaborate and beautiful publication, printed upon deckle
edge handmade paper, illustrated with remarque proof copperplate
etchings on Japanese vellum, and in duplicate without remarque on
Whatman paper: "One of the members upon receiving the first two
volumes of the ---- publication, writes: 'The Society starts out
by making the worst kind of a blunder.

"Father, I have no tears to offer in penance."

"God asketh not tears if He hath denied them," he answered--his own
choking his speech, "but the gift of what He hath given thee--to stand
where He hath placed thee and take up thy burden of life."

"Father, I have no strength, nor will."

"They will be sent thee," he answered her.

"God is not angry with me?" she asked again with sudden passion. "Then
why--_why_ did He take my child away--my little, little child?--and
--_thus_?"

He looked at her startled. Had the terrible rumor reached her which they
were striving to keep from her, that the little, royal, innocent life
had been the victim of some intrigue--that the sudden, fatal illness had
not been sent by Heaven? The rumor had been sifted, and no clue had been
found, while yet it might not be wholly dismissed. Yet was the fear of
this horror added to the mother's anguish? Nothing but action would save
her from madness.

Then suddenly his weakness left him, because of her need; he felt that
he must hold her in her place at all costs. He rose and looked down upon
her, steadying her by the magnetic strength in his face,--his eyes wild
with the intensity of his belief.

"Whom He loveth, He chasteneth," he said. "It is granted thee to know
the depth of the meaning of those holy words. The blessed Christus, with
great drops of anguish falling from His sacred brows, cried out, 'Can
any sorrow be like my sorrow?' God is not angry with thee, my daughter;
but so He fashioneth a soul for His great work. Life is thy cross, my
child. Lift it and clasp it--Heaven's peace shall be thine."

"Why not the Convent, Father?" she asked, still irresolute. "I am so
weary."

Then his voice took on a note of authority--she shrank before it as the
tones rang out like the cry of a prophet:

"It is not for thee; for thy place is here.

"If suffering is sent thee, thou must bear it here.

"If loneliness hath come to thee, thou shalt meet it here.

"If thou art desolate, the children of thy people are thine.

"If thy dream of love is broken, the love of thy people is about thee.

"If thy heart and hands are empty, the duties of thy realm shall fill
them.

"_Thou shalt keep thy vow!_

"Thou shalt make none other; none other may be so holy for thee.

"Thou hast tasted joy and found it bitter; in duty shalt thou find
sweetness and strength.

"And the Lord thy God, and the Madonna and the Holy Christus shall bless
thee. Amen.

"I have the revelation!"

The crisp sentences crashed upon each other like a rushing torrent, hot
with inspiration, challenging acceptance. She had risen to her feet and
stood quivering before him, her eyes held to his by a strange
fascination--the wild glow within his giving her sight of her dormant
self and will.

He raised his crucifix above her and she slowly fell on her knees; and
so he left her.


XXIX


For days after the visit of Hagios Johannes, Caterina scarcely spoke, or
noticed what was passing around her; and the Lady of the Bernardini and
Dama Margherita, with hearts aching from the burden of their pity, were
helpless before such desolation.

But at last the young Queen turned to them with mournful eyes of
comprehension, holding out her hands to clasp theirs in a convulsive
pressure, rousing herself heroically from her absorption and nerving her
dormant will to meet the unwelcome stress of life again.

"The Holy Mother hath left you for me to love," she said in a tremulous
voice. "Life is not all a blank."

They could not answer her for tears; but her own eyes were dry.

"I thought," she said, "if it might but have been the will of Christ
that death should come to me--also"--she paused a moment to steady her
voice, "it would have been sweet--I was so weary. And when it did not
come to lift me out of the shadow, I longed to carry my broken heart
into some holy Sisterhood and be at rest--I felt no strength to live. I
thought it might have been the will of the Madre Sanctissima, for she
hath suffered; and I know not how to live without my _figlio
dilettissimo_."

Then suddenly she clasped her hands crying out with the passion of
prayer:

"My God! I would have trained him for thee! He should have been a noble
man and a Christian King. Why hast Thou stricken me!"

She turned to them wide-eyed with her question but the Lady Beata, for
answer, could only fold compassionate arms about her--soothing her
silently; so young and so bereft.

But Caterina struggled into quiet speech again, as in a
confessional--sorely needing some comfort of human sympathy after her
long, silent conflict.

"I thought it might have been the will of the Blessed Mother that I
should rest; but Hagios Johannes hath shown me that it might not be; I
have taken my vows again to serve my people--to live for them; the padre
hath promised me that strength shall come."

Her lip quivered, but she bore herself bravely. "Thou wilt help me,
Zia," she continued, in pathetic appeal, "and thou, my Margherita; for
life is difficult. And Aluisi--he will think what must be done for the
people until my strength returneth--for I have forgotten how to think."
She pressed her hands tightly against her forehead as if to compel the
resistant brain-power.

Then suddenly she laid her hot, trembling hand on that of her
compassionate, motherly friend, her voice rising into a wail--"Father
Johannes hath said that I must give the people all the love I gave my
baby--but not yet--I cannot do it yet!--Mother of Sorrows forgive
me!--_he doth not know_."

She fell back on her pillows exhausted by her emotion, while in a low,
crooning voice the name she loved to utter broke from her longing lips
again, like a threnody:

"_Figlio dilettissimo!_"

The Lady Beata's heart was wrung with pity.

"Nay, nay, Carinissima," she said, stooping over the couch and speaking
with tender decision, "Hagios Johannes could not know what mothers feel!
This holy love for thy little one shall bide ever with thee and grow
with thy life. It is thy breath of Heaven! It shall nerve thee to do the
work of thy child--to live for the people he would have ruled. Him thou
shalt love forever--it is the will of the Madre Beatissima:--but after
thy child shall come his people."

A change passed over the strained, worn face of the young Queen, like a
faint breath of comfort.

"Zia mia," she murmured, laying her thin white hand in the warm, restful
clasp: and so passed into the first quiet sleep that she had known for
days.

       *       *       *       *       *

While the unhappy Queen was bravely struggling to recover her poise,
many things were happening; for the death of the infant King had been
the signal for further manifestations of discontent from a party of
Cyprian nobles whose dread of the "Lion of the velvet paw" increased as
the need for some firm governing hand became more evident. They would
have liked to anger Venice to the point of withdrawing all protection
and leaving them to their own devices--yet they dared not attempt it
openly, appreciating the futility of any armed resistance that
unassisted Cypriotes might offer.

For the Turk was watching from his near point of vantage; and if he had
hitherto been content with sending his private ships to ravage and
terrorize the towns along the coast, this might but be the prelude to
more ambitious projects. ("Those incomplete observations are as
yet read by me in vain.")
forms, by transposing the letters, the more definite statement,
"Cynthiæ figuras æmulatur Mater Amorum."
("The mother of the loves imitates the aspects of Diana.")Carlotta, upon hearing of the death of the little Janus III, had at once
renewed her claim to the throne; some of the ancient nobles had declared
for her, and it was felt, rather than known, that her partisans were
secretly gathering strength. There was evidently some hostile influence
at work in the innermost circle of the Court.

And now, when Cyprus was at extremity, Venice alone--alert, powerful,
resourceful--could be relied upon for aid: her protection of the island
in the time of Rizzo's conspiracy, had given her the right to a voice in
the government--or so she claimed, and there were none to gainsay it.
Her _Provveditori_ were armed with the plenary power that was not
invariably used to the advantage of Cyprus, yet the vigilant Signoria
were ever ready with fresh instructions--if the paw were of velvet, it
was no longer sheathed!

Letters of condolence were duly sent from the Serenissimo; so, also,
came without delay the declaration that the Queen had inherited the full
rights vested in her son, and should reign alone; with the further
announcement, so simply stated that it might well seem beyond
refutation--_that Venice was heir to her beloved daughter, Caterina
Veneta_.

