Before he sat down, Phineas made one allusion to that former
scuttling of the ship,--an accusation as to which had been made
against him so injuriously by Mr. Bonteen. He himself, he said, had
been called impractical, and perhaps he might allude to a vote which
he had given in that House when last he had the honour of sitting
there, and on giving which he resigned the office which he had then
held. He had the gratification of knowing that he had been so far
practical as to have then foreseen the necessity of a measure which
had since been passed. And he did not doubt that he would hereafter
be found to have been equally practical in the view that he had
expressed on the hustings at Tankerville, for he was convinced that
before long the anomaly of which he had spoken would cease to exist
under the influence of a Government that would really believe in the
work it was doing.

There was no doubt as to the success of his speech. The vehemence
with which his insolence was abused by one after another of those who
spoke later from the other side was ample evidence of its success.
But nothing occurred then or at the conclusion of the debate to make
him think that he had won his way back to Elysium. During the whole
evening he exchanged not a syllable with Mr. Gresham,--who indeed was
not much given to converse with those around him in the House. Erle
said a few good-natured words to him, and Mr. Monk praised him
highly. But in reading the general barometer of the party as regarded
himself, he did not find that the mercury went up. He was wretchedly
anxious, and angry with himself for his own anxiety. He scorned to
say a word that should sound like an entreaty; and yet he had placed
his whole heart on a thing which seemed to be slipping from him
for the want of asking. In a day or two it would be known whether
the present Ministry would or would not go out. That they must be
out of office before a month was over seemed to him the opinion
of everybody. His fate,--and what a fate it was!--would then be
absolutely in the hands of Mr. Gresham. Yet he could not speak a
word of his hopes and fears even to Mr. Gresham. He had given up
everything in the world with the view of getting into office; and now
that the opportunity had come,--an opportunity which if allowed to
slip could hardly return again in time to be of service to him,--the
prize was to elude his grasp!

But yet he did not say a word to any one on the subject that was
so near his heart, although in the course of the night he spoke to
Lord Cantrip in the gallery of the House. He told his friend that a
correspondence had taken place between himself and Mr. Bonteen, in
which he thought that he had been ill-used, and as to which he was
quite anxious to ask His Lordship's advice. "I heard that you and he
had been tilting at each other," said Lord Cantrip, smiling.

"Have you seen the letters?"

"No;--but I was told of them by Lord Fawn, who has seen them."

"I knew he would show them to every newsmonger about the clubs," said
Phineas angrily.

"You can't quarrel with Bonteen for showing them to Fawn, if you
intend to show them to me."

"He may publish them at Charing Cross if he likes."

"Exactly. I am sure that there will have been nothing in them
prejudicial to you. What I mean is that if you think it necessary,
with a view to your own character, to show them to me or to another
friend, you cannot complain that he should do the same."

An appointment was made at Lord Cantrip's house for the next morning,
and Phineas could but acknowledge to himself that the man's manner to
himself had been kind and constant. Nevertheless, the whole affair
was going against him. Lord Cantrip had not said a word prejudicial
to that wretch Bonteen; much less had he hinted at any future
arrangements which would be comfortable to poor Phineas. They two,
Lord Cantrip and Phineas, had at one period been on most intimate
terms together;--had worked in the same office, and had thoroughly
trusted each other. The elder of the two,--for Lord Cantrip was about
ten years senior to Phineas,--had frequently expressed the most
lively interest in the prospects of the other; and Phineas had felt
that in any emergency he could tell his friend all his hopes and
fears. But now he did not say a word of his position, nor did Lord
Cantrip allude to it. They were to meet on the morrow in order that
Lord Cantrip might read the correspondence;--but Phineas was sure
that no word would be said about the Government.

At five o'clock in the morning the division took place, and the
Government was beaten by a majority of 72. This was much higher
than any man had expected. When the parties were marshalled in the
opposite lobbies it was found that in the last moment the number of
those Conservatives who dared to rebel against their Conservative
leaders was swelled by the course which the debate had taken. There
were certain men who could not endure to be twitted with having
deserted the principles of their lives, when it was clear that
nothing was to be gained by the party by such desertion.


CHAPTER XXXVII

The Conspiracy


On the morning following the great division Phineas was with his
friend, Lord Cantrip, by eleven o'clock; and Lord Cantrip, when
he had read the two letters in which were comprised the whole
correspondence, made to our unhappy hero the following little speech.
"I do not think that you can do anything. Indeed, I am sure that Mr.
Monk is quite right. I don't quite see what it is that you wish to
do. Privately,--between our two selves,--I do not hesitate to say
that Mr. Bonteen has intended to be ill-natured. I fancy that he is
an ill-natured--or at any rate a jealous--man; and that he would be
willing to run down a competitor in the race who had made his running
after a fashion different from his own. Bonteen has been a useful
man,--a very useful man; and the more so perhaps because he has not
entertained any high political theory of his own. You have chosen to
do so,--and undoubtedly when you and Monk left us, to our very great
regret, you did scuttle the ship."

"We had no intention of that kind."

"Do not suppose that I blame you. That which was odious to the eyes
of Mr. Bonteen was to my thinking high and honourable conduct. I
have known the same thing done by members of a Government perhaps
half-a-dozen times, and the men by whom it has been done have been
the best and noblest of our modern statesmen. There has generally
been a hard contest in the man's breast between loyalty to his
party and strong personal convictions, the result of which has been
an inability on the part of the struggler to give even a silent
support to a measure which he has disapproved. That inability is no
doubt troublesome at the time to the colleagues of the seceder, and
constitutes an offence hardly to be pardoned by such gentlemen as Mr.
Bonteen."

"For Mr. Bonteen personally I care nothing."

"But of course you must endure the ill-effects of his influence,--be
they what they may. When you seceded from our Government you looked
for certain adverse consequences. If you did not, where was your
self-sacrifice? That such men as Mr. Bonteen should feel that you had
scuttled the ship, and be unable to forgive you for doing so,--that
is exactly the evil which you knew you must face. You have to face it
now, and surely you can do so without showing your teeth. Hereafter,
when men more thoughtful than Mr. Bonteen shall have come to
acknowledge the high principle by which your conduct has been
governed, you will receive your reward. I suppose Mr. Daubeny must
resign now."

"Everybody says so."

"I am by no means sure that he will. Any other Minister since Lord
North's time would have done so, with such a majority against him on
a vital measure; but he is a man who delights in striking out some
wonderful course for himself."

"A prime minister so beaten surely can't go on."

"Not for long, one would think. And yet how are you to turn him out?
It depends very much on a man's power of endurance."

"His colleagues will resign, I should think."

"Probably;--and then he must go. I should say that that will be the
way in which the matter will settle itself. Good morning, Finn;--and
take my word for it, you had better not answer Mr. Bonteen's letter."

Not a word had fallen from Lord Cantrip's friendly lips as to the
probability of Phineas being invited to join the future Government.
An attempt had been made to console him with the hazy promise of
some future reward,--which however was to consist rather of the good
opinion of good men than of anything tangible and useful. But even
this would never come to him. What would good men know of him and of
his self-sacrifice when he should have been driven out of the world
by poverty, and forced probably to go to some New Zealand or back
Canadian settlement to look for his bread? How easy, thought Phineas,
must be the sacrifices of rich men, who can stay their time, and wait
in perfect security for their rewards! But for such a one as he,
truth to a principle was political annihilation. Two or three years
ago he had done what he knew to be a noble thing;--and now, because
he had done that noble thing, he was to be regarded as unfit for that
very employment for which he was peculiarly fitted. But Bonteen and
Co. had not been his only enemies. His luck had been against him
throughout. Mr. Quintus Slide, with his _People's Banner_, and the
story of that wretched affair in Judd Street, had been as strong
against him probably as Mr. Bonteen's ill-word. Then he thought of
Lady Laura, and her love for him. His gratitude to Lady Laura was
boundless. There was nothing he would not do for Lady Laura,--were it
in his power to do anything. But no circumstance in his career had
been so unfortunate for him as this affection. A wretched charge had
been made against him which, though wholly untrue, was as it were
so strangely connected with the truth, that slanderers might not
improbably be able almost to substantiate their calumnies. She would
be in London soon, and he must devote himself to her service. But
every act of friendship that he might do for her would be used as
proof of the accusation that had been made against him. As he thought
of all this he was walking towards Park Lane in order that he might
call upon Madame Goesler according to his promise. As he went up to
the drawing-room he met old Mr. Maule coming down, and the two bowed
to each other on the stairs. In the drawing-room, sitting with Madame
Goesler, he found Mrs. Bonteen. Now Mrs. Bonteen was almost as odious
to him as was her husband.

"Did you ever know anything more shameful, Mr. Finn," said Mrs.
Bonteen, "than the attack made upon Mr. Bonteen the night before
last?" Phineas could see a smile on Madame Goesler's face as the
question was asked;--for she knew, and he knew that she knew, how
great was the antipathy between him and the Bonteens.

"The attack was upon Mr. Gresham, I thought," said Phineas.

"Oh, yes; nominally. But of course everybody knows what was meant.
Upon my word there is twice more jealousy among men than among women.
Is there not, Madame Goesler?"

"I don't think any man could be more jealous than I am myself," said
Madame Goesler.

"Then you're fit to be a member of a Government, that's all. I don't
suppose that there is a man in England has worked harder for his
party than Mr. Bonteen."

"I don't think there is," said Phineas.

"Or made himself more useful in Parliament. As for work, only that
his constitution is so strong, he would have killed himself."

"He should take Thorley's mixture,--twice a day," said Madame
Goesler.

"Take!--he never has time to take anything. He breakfasts in his
dressing-room, carries his lunch in his pocket, and dines with the
division bell ringing him up between his fish and his mutton chop.
Now he has got their decimal coinage in hand, and has not a moment to
himself, even on Sundays!"

"He'll be sure to go to Heaven for it,--that's one comfort."

"And because they are absolutely obliged to make him Chancellor of
the Exchequer,--just as if he had not earned it,--everybody is so
jealous that they are ready to tear him to pieces!"

"Who is everybody?" asked Phineas.

"Oh! I know. It wasn't only Sir Orlando Drought. Who told Sir
Orlando? Never mind, Mr. Finn."

"I don't in the least, Mrs. Bonteen."

"I should have thought you would have been so triumphant," said
Madame Goesler.

"Not in the least, Madame Goesler. Why should I be triumphant? Of
course the position is very high,--very high indeed. But it's no more
than what I have always expected. If a man give up his life to a
pursuit he ought to succeed. As for ambition, I have less of it than
any woman. Only I do hate jealousy, Mr. Finn." Then Mrs. Bonteen took
her leave, kissing her dear friend, Madame Goesler, and simply bowing
to Phineas.

"What a detestable woman!" said Phineas.

"I know of old that you don't love her."

"I don't believe that you love her a bit better than I do, and yet
you kiss her."

"Hardly that, Mr. Finn. There has come up a fashion for ladies to
pretend to be very loving, and so they put their faces together. Two
hundred years ago ladies and gentlemen did the same thing with just
as little regard for each other. Fashions change, you know."

"That was a change for the worse, certainly, Madame Goesler."

"It wasn't of my doing. So you've had a great victory."

"Yes;--greater than we expected."

"According to Mrs. Bonteen, the chief result to the country will be
that the taxes will be so very safe in her husband's hands! I am sure
she believes that all Parliament has been at work in order that he
might be made a Cabinet Minister. I rather like her for it."

"I don't like her, or her husband."

"I do like a woman that can thoroughly enjoy her husband's success.
When she is talking of his carrying about his food in his pocket she
is completely happy. I don't think Lady Glencora ever cared in the
least about her husband being Chancellor of the Exchequer."

"Because it added nothing to her own standing."

"That's very ill-natured, Mr. Finn; and I find that you are becoming
generally ill-natured. You used to be the best-humoured of men."

"I hadn't so much to try my temper as I have now, and then you must
remember, Madame Goesler, that I regard these people as being
especially my enemies."

"Lady Glencora was never your enemy."

"Nor my friend,--especially."

"Then you wrong her. If I tell you something you must be discreet."

"Am I not always discreet?"

"She does not love Mr. Bonteen. She has had too much of him at
Matching. And as for his wife, she is quite as unwilling to be kissed
by her as you can be. Her Grace is determined to fight your battle
for you."

"I want her to do nothing of the kind, Madame Goesler."

"You will know nothing about it. We have put our heads to work, and
Mr. Palliser,--that is, the new Duke,--is to be made to tell Mr.
Gresham that you are to have a place. It is no good you being angry,
for the thing is done. If you have enemies behind your back, you must
have friends behind your back also. Lady Cantrip is to do the same
thing."

"For Heaven's sake, not."

"It's all arranged. You'll be called the ladies' pet, but you mustn't
mind that. Lady Laura will be here before it's arranged, and she will
get hold of Mr. Erle."

"You are laughing at me, I know."

"Let them laugh that win. We thought of besieging Lord Fawn through
Lady Chiltern, but we are not sure that anybody cares for Lord
Fawn. The man we specially want now is the other Duke. We're afraid
of attacking him through the Duchess because we think that he is
inhumanly indifferent to anything that his wife says to him."

"If that kind of thing is done I shall not accept place even if it
is offered me."

"Why not? Are you going to let a man like Mr. Bonteen bowl you over?
Did you ever know Lady Glen fail in anything that she attempted? She
is preparing a secret with the express object of making Mr. Ratler
her confidant. Lord Mount Thistle is her slave, but then I fear Lord
Mount Thistle is not of much use. She'll do anything and
everything,--except flatter Mr. Bonteen."

"Heaven forbid that anybody should do that for my sake."

"The truth is that he made himself so disagreeable at Matching that
Lady Glen is broken-hearted at finding that he is to seem to owe his
promotion to her husband's favour. Now you know all about it."

"You have been very wrong to tell me."

"Perhaps I have, Mr. Finn. But I thought it better that you should
know that you have friends at work for you. We believe,--or rather,
the Duchess believes,--that falsehoods have been used which are as
disparaging to Lady Laura Kennedy as they are injurious to you, and
she is determined to put it right. Some one has told Mr. Gresham that
you have been the means of breaking the hearts both of Lord Brentford
and Mr. Kennedy,--two members of the late Cabinet,--and he must be
made to understand that this is untrue. If only for Lady Laura's sake
you must submit."

"Lord Brentford and I are the best friends in the world."

"And Mr. Kennedy is a madman,--absolutely in custody of his friends,
as everybody knows; and yet the story has been made to work."

"And you do not feel that all this is derogatory to me?"

Madame Goesler was silent for a moment, and then she answered boldly,
"Not a whit. Why should it be derogatory? It is not done with
the object of obtaining an improper appointment on behalf of an
unimportant man. When falsehoods of that kind are told you can't meet
them in a straightforward way. I suppose I know with fair accuracy
the sort of connection there has been between you and Lady Laura."
Phineas very much doubted whether she had any such knowledge; but he
said nothing, though the lady paused a few moments for reply. "You
can't go and tell Mr. Gresham all that; nor can any friend do so on
your behalf. It would be absurd."

"Most absurd."

"And yet it is essential to your interests that he should know it.
When your enemies are undermining you, you must countermine or you'll
be blown up."

"I'd rather fight above ground."

"That's all very well, but your enemies won't stay above ground.
Is that newspaper man above ground? And for a little job of clever
mining, believe me, that there is not a better engineer going than
Lady Glen;--not but what I've known her to be very nearly 'hoist with
her own petard,'"--added Madame Goesler, as she remembered a certain
circumstance in their joint lives.

All that Madame Goesler said was true. A conspiracy had been formed,
in the first place at the instance of Madame Goesler, but altogether
by the influence of the young Duchess, for forcing upon the future
Premier the necessity of admitting Phineas Finn into his Government.
On the Wednesday following the conclusion of the debate,--the day on
the morning of which the division was to take place,--there was no
House. On the Thursday, the last day on which the House was to sit
before the Easter holidays, Mr. Daubeny announced his intention
of postponing the declaration of his intentions till after the
adjournment. The House would meet, he said, on that day week, and
then he would make his official statement. This communication he made
very curtly, and in a manner that was thought by some to be almost
insolent to the House. It was known that he had been grievously
disappointed by the result of the debate,--not probably having
expected a majority since his adversary's strategy had been declared,
but always hoping that the deserters from his own standard would be
very few. The deserters had been very many, and Mr. Daubeny was
majestic in his wrath.

Nothing, however, could be done till after Easter. The Ratlers of
the Liberal party were very angry at the delay, declaring that it
would have been much to the advantage of the country at large that
the vacation week should have been used for constructing a Liberal
Cabinet. This work of construction always takes time, and delays the
business of the country. No one can have known better than did Mr.
Daubeny how great was the injury of delay, and how advantageously the
short holiday might have been used. With a majority of seventy-two
against him, there could be no reason why he should not have at once
resigned, and advised the Queen to send for Mr. Gresham. Nothing
could be worse than his conduct. So said the Liberals, thirsting
for office. Mr. Gresham himself did not open his mouth when the
announcement was made;--nor did any man, marked for future office,
rise to denounce the beaten statesman. But one or two independent
Members expressed their great regret at the unnecessary delay which
was to take place before they were informed who was to be the
Minister of the Crown. But Mr. Daubeny, as soon as he had made his
statement, stalked out of the House, and no reply whatever was made
to the independent Members. Some few sublime and hot-headed gentlemen
muttered the word "impeachment." Others, who were more practical and
less dignified, suggested that the Prime Minister "ought to have his
head punched."

It thus happened that all the world went out of town that week,--so
that the Duchess of Omnium was down at Matching when Phineas called
at the Duke's house in Carlton Terrace on Friday. With what object he
had called he hardly knew himself; but he thought that he intended to
assure the Duchess that he was not a candidate for office, and that
he must deprecate her interference. Luckily,--or unluckily,--he did
not see her, and he felt that it would be impossible to convey his
wishes in a letter. The whole subject was one which would have defied
him to find words sufficiently discreet for his object.

The Duke and Duchess of St. Bungay were at Matching for the
Easter,--as also was Barrington Erle, and also that dreadful Mr.
Bonteen, from whose presence the poor Duchess of Omnium could in
these days never altogether deliver herself. "Duke," she said, "you
know Mr. Finn?"

"Certainly. It was not very long ago that I was talking to him."

"He used to be in office, you remember."

"Oh yes;--and a very good beginner he was. Is he a friend of Your
Grace's?"

"A great friend. I'll tell you what I want you to do. You must have
some place found for him."

"My dear Duchess, I never interfere."

"Why, Duke, you've made more Cabinets than any man living."

"I fear, indeed, that I have been at the construction of more
Governments than most men. It's forty years ago since Lord Melbourne
first did me the honour of consulting me. When asked for advice, my
dear, I have very often given it. It has occasionally been my duty to
say that I could not myself give my slender assistance to a Ministry
unless I were supported by the presence of this or that political
friend. But never in my life have I asked for an appointment as a
personal favour; and I am sure you won't be angry with me if I say
that I cannot begin to do so now."

"But Mr. Finn ought to be there. He did so well before."

"If so, let us presume that he will be there. I can only say, from
what little I know of him, that I shall be happy to see him in any
office to which the future Prime Minister may consider it to be
his duty to appoint him." "To think," said the Duchess of Omnium
afterwards to her friend Madame Goesler,--"to think that I should
have had that stupid old woman a week in the house, and all for
nothing!"

"Upon my word, Duchess," said Barrington Erle, "I don't know why it
is, but Gresham seems to have taken a dislike to him."

"It's Bonteen's doing."

"Very probably."

"Surely you can get the better of that?"

"I look upon Phineas Finn, Duchess, almost as a child of my own. He
has come back to Parliament altogether at my instigation."

"Then you ought to help him."

"And so I would if I could. Remember I am not the man I used to be
when dear old Mr. Mildmay reigned. The truth is, I never interfere
now unless I'm asked."

"I believe that every one of you is afraid of Mr. Gresham."

"Perhaps we are."

"I'll tell you what. If he's passed over I'll make such a row that
some of you shall hear it."

"How fond all you women are of Phineas Finn."

"I don't care that for him," said the Duchess, snapping her
fingers--"more than I do, that is, for any other mere acquaintance.
The man is very well, as most men are."

"Not all."

"No, not all. Some are as little and jealous as a girl in her tenth
season. He is a decently good fellow, and he is to be thrown over,
because--"

"Because of what?"

"I don't choose to name any one. You ought to know all about it, and
I do not doubt but you do. Lady Laura Kennedy is your own cousin."

"There is not a spark of truth in all that."

"Of course there is not; and yet he is to be punished. I know very
well, Mr. Erle, that if you choose to put your shoulder to the wheel
you can manage it; and I shall expect to have it managed."

"Plantagenet," she said the next day to her husband, "I want you to
do something for me."

"To do something! What am I to do? It's very seldom you want anything
in my line."

"This isn't in your line at all, and yet I want you to do it."

"Ten to one it's beyond my means."

"No, it isn't. I know you can if you like. I suppose you are all sure
to be in office within ten days or a fortnight?"

"I can't say, my dear. I have promised Mr. Gresham to be of use to
him if I can."

"Everybody knows all that. You're going to be Privy Seal, and to work
just the same as ever at those horrible two farthings."

"And what is it you want, Glencora?"

"I want you to say that you won't take any office unless you are
allowed to bring in one or two friends with you."

"Why should I do that? I shall not doubt any Cabinet chosen by Mr.
Gresham."

"I'm not speaking of the Cabinet; I allude to men in lower offices,
lords, and Under-Secretaries, and Vice-people. You know what I mean."

"I never interfere."

"But you must. Other men do continually. It's quite a common thing
for a man to insist that one or two others should come in with him."

"Yes. If a man feels that he cannot sustain his own position without
support, he declines to join the Government without it. But that
isn't my case. The friends who are necessary to me in the Cabinet are
the very men who will certainly be there. I would join no Government
without the Duke; but--"

"Oh, the Duke--the Duke! I hate dukes--and duchesses too. I'm not
talking about a duke. I want you to oblige me by making a point with
Mr. Gresham that Mr. Finn shall have an office."

"Mr. Finn!"

"Yes, Mr. Finn. I'll explain it all if you wish it."

"My dear Glencora, I never interfere."

"Who does interfere? Everybody says the same. Somebody interferes,
I suppose. Mr. Gresham can't know everybody so well as to be able
to fit all the pegs into all the holes without saying a word to
anybody."

"He would probably speak to Mr. Bonteen."

"Then he would speak to a very disagreeable man, and one I'm as sick
of as I ever was of any man I ever knew. If you can't manage this for
me, Plantagenet, I shall take it very ill. It's a little thing, and
I'm sure you could have it done. I don't very often trouble you by
asking for anything."

The Duke in his quiet way was an affectionate man, and an indulgent
husband. On the following morning he was closeted with Mr. Bonteen,
two private Secretaries, and a leading clerk from the Treasury for
four hours, during which they were endeavouring to ascertain whether
the commercial world of Great Britain would be ruined or enriched
if twelve pennies were declared to contain fifty farthings. The
discussion had been grievously burdensome to the minds of the Duke's
assistants in it, but he himself had remembered his wife through it
all. "By the way," he said, whispering into Mr. Bonteen's private ear
as he led that gentleman away to lunch, "if we do come in--"

"Oh, we must come in."

"If we do, I suppose something will be done for that Mr. Finn. He
spoke well the other night."

Mr. Bonteen's face became very long. "He helped to upset the coach
when he was with us before."

"I don't think that that is much against him."

"Is he--a personal friend of Your Grace's?"

"No--not particularly. I never care about such things for myself; but
Lady Glencora--"

"I think the Duchess can hardly know what has been his conduct to
poor Kennedy. There was a most disreputable row at a public-house in
London, and I am told that he behaved--very badly."

"I never heard a word about it," said the Duke.

"I'll tell you just the truth," said Mr. Bonteen. "I've been asked
about him, and I've been obliged to say that he would weaken any
Government that would give him office."

"Oh, indeed!"

That evening the Duke told the Duchess nearly all that he had heard,
and the Duchess swore that she wasn't going to be beaten by Mr.
Bonteen.


CHAPTER XXXVIII

Once Again in Portman Square


On the Wednesday in Easter week Lord Brentford and Lady Laura Kennedy
reached Portman Square from Dresden, and Phineas, who had remained in
town, was summoned thither by a note written at Dover. "We arrived
here to-day, and shall be in town to-morrow afternoon, between four
and five. Papa wants to see you especially. Can you manage to be with
us in the Square at about eight? I know it will be inconvenient, but
you will put up with inconvenience. I don't like to keep Papa up
late; and if he is tired he won't speak to you as he would if you
came early.--L. K." Phineas was engaged to dine with Lord Cantrip;
but he wrote to excuse himself,--telling the simple truth. He had
been asked to see Lord Brentford on business, and must obey the
summons.

He was shown into a sitting-room on the ground floor, which he
had always known as the Earl's own room, and there he found Lord
Brentford alone. The last time he had been there he had come to plead
with the Earl on behalf of Lord Chiltern, and the Earl had then been
a stern self-willed man, vigorous from a sense of power, and very
able to maintain and to express his own feelings. Now he was a
broken-down old man,--whose mind had been, as it were, unbooted and
put into moral slippers for the remainder of its term of existence
upon earth. He half shuffled up out of his chair as Phineas came
up to him, and spoke as though every calamity in the world were
oppressing him. "Such a passage! Oh, very bad, indeed! I thought it
would have been the death of me. Laura thought it better to come on."
The fact, however, had been that the Earl had so many objections to
staying at Calais, that his daughter had felt herself obliged to
yield to him.

"You must be glad at any rate to have got home," said Phineas.

"Home! I don't know what you call home. I don't suppose I shall ever
feel any place to be home again."

"You'll go to Saulsby;--will you not?"

"How can I tell? If Chiltern would have kept the house up, of course
I should have gone there. But he never would do anything like anybody
else. Violet wants me to go to that place they've got there, but I
shan't do that."

"It's a comfortable house."

"I hate horses and dogs, and I won't go."

There was nothing more to be said on that point. "I hope Lady Laura
is well."

"No, she's not. How should she be well? She's anything but well.
She'll be in directly, but she thought I ought to see you first. I
suppose this wretched man is really mad."

"I am told so."

"He never was anything else since I knew him. What are we to do now?
Forster says it won't look well to ask for a separation only because
he's insane. He tried to shoot you?"

"And very nearly succeeded."

"Forster says that if we do anything, all that must come out."

"There need not be the slightest hesitation as far as I am concerned,
Lord Brentford."

"You know he keeps all her money."

"At present I suppose he couldn't give it up."

"Why not? Why shouldn't he give it up? God bless my soul! Forty
thousand pounds and all for nothing. When he married he declared that
he didn't care about it! Money was nothing to him! So she lent it to
Chiltern."

"I remember."

"But they hadn't been together a year before he asked for it. Now
there it is;--and if she were to die to-morrow it would be lost to
the family. Something must be done, you know. I can't let her money
go in that way."

"You'll do what Mr. Forster suggests, no doubt."

"But he won't suggest anything. They never do. He doesn't care what
becomes of the money. It never ought to have been given up as it
was."

"It was settled, I suppose."

"Yes;--if there were children. And it will come back to her if he
dies first. But mad people never do die. That's a well-known fact.
They've nothing to trouble them, and they live for ever. It'll all go
to some cousin of his that nobody ever saw."

"Not as long as Lady Laura lives."

"But she does not get a penny of the income;--not a penny. There
never was anything so cruel. He has published all manner of
accusations against her."

"Nobody believes a word of that, my lord."

"And then when she is dragged forward by the necessity of vindicating
her character, he goes mad and keeps all her money! There never was
anything so cruel since the world began."

This continued for half-an-hour, and then Lady Laura came in. Nothing
had come, or could have come, from the consultation with the Earl.
Had it gone on for another hour, he would simply have continued
to grumble, and have persevered in insisting upon the hardships
he endured. Lady Laura was in black, and looked sad, and old, and
careworn; but she did not seem to be ill. Phineas could not but think
at the moment how entirely her youth had passed away from her. She
came and sat close by him, and began at once to speak of the late
debate. "Of course they'll go out," she said.

"I presume they will."

"And our party will come in."

"Oh, yes;--Mr. Gresham, and the two dukes, and Lord Cantrip,--with
Legge Wilson, Sir Harry Coldfoot, and the rest of them."

"And you?"

Phineas smiled, and tried to smile pleasantly, as he answered, "I
don't know that they'll put themselves out by doing very much for
me."

"They'll do something."

"I fancy not. Indeed, Lady Laura, to tell the truth at once, I know
that they don't mean to offer me anything."

"After making you give up your place in Ireland?"

"They didn't make me give it up. I should never dream of using such
an argument to any one. Of course I had to judge for myself. There is
nothing to be said about it;--only it is so." As he told her this he
strove to look light-hearted, and so to speak that she should not see
the depth of his disappointment;--but he failed altogether. She knew
him too well not to read his whole heart in the matter.

"Who has said it?" she asked.

"Nobody says things of that kind, and yet one knows."

"And why is it?"

"How can I say? There are various reasons,--and, perhaps, very good
reasons. What I did before makes men think that they can't depend on
me. At any rate it is so."

"Shall you not speak to Mr. Gresham?"

"Certainly not."

"What do you say, Papa?"

"How can I understand it, my dear? There used to be a kind of honour
in these things, but that's all old-fashioned now. Ministers used to
think of their political friends; but in these days they only regard
their political enemies. If you can make a Minister afraid of you,
then it becomes worth his while to buy you up. Most of the young
men rise now by making themselves thoroughly disagreeable. Abuse a
Minister every night for half a session, and you may be sure to be in
office the other half,--if you care about it."

"May I speak to Barrington Erle?" asked Lady Laura.

"I had rather you did not. Of course I must take it as it comes."

"But, my dear Mr. Finn, people do make efforts in such cases. I don't
doubt but that at this moment there are a dozen men moving heaven and
earth to secure something. No one has more friends than you have."

Had not her father been present he would have told her what his
friends were doing for him, and how unhappy such interferences made
him; but he could not explain all this before the Earl. "I would so
much rather hear about yourself," he said, again smiling.

"There is but little to say about us. I suppose Papa has told you?"

But the Earl had told him nothing, and indeed, there was nothing to
tell. The lawyer had advised that Mr. Kennedy's friends should be
informed that Lady Laura now intended to live in England, and that
they should be invited to make to her some statement as to Mr.
Kennedy's condition. If necessary he, on her behalf, would justify
her departure from her husband's roof by a reference to the
outrageous conduct of which Mr. Kennedy had since been guilty. In
regard to Lady Laura's fortune, Mr. Forster said that she could no
doubt apply for alimony, and that if the application were pressed at
law she would probably obtain it;--but he could not recommend such a
step at the present moment. As to the accusation which had been made
against her character, and which had become public through the malice
of the editor of _The People's Banner_, Mr. Forster thought that the
best refutation would be found in her return to England. At any rate
he would advise no further step at the present moment. Should any
further libel appear in the columns of the newspaper, then the
question might be again considered. Mr. Forster had already been in
Portman Square, and this had been the result of the conference.

"There is not much comfort in it all,--is there?" said Lady Laura.

"There is no comfort in anything," said the Earl.

When Phineas took his leave Lady Laura followed him out into the
hall, and they went together into the large, gloomy dining-room,
--gloomy and silent now, but which in former days he had known to be
brilliant with many lights, and cheerful with eager voices. "I must
have one word with you," she said, standing close to him against the
table, and putting her hand upon his arm. "Amidst all my sorrow, I
have been so thankful that he did not--kill you."

"I almost wish he had."

"Oh, Phineas!--how can you say words so wicked! Would you have had
him a murderer?"

"A madman is responsible for nothing."

"Where should I have been? What should I have done? But of course you
do not mean it. You have everything in life before you. Say some word
to me more comfortable than that. You cannot think how I have looked
forward to meeting you again. It has robbed the last month of half
its sadness." He put his arm round her waist and pressed her to his
side, but he said nothing. "It was so good of you to go to him as you
did. How was he looking?"

"Twenty years older than when you saw him last."

"But how in health?"

"He was thin and haggard."

"Was he pale?"

"No; flushed and red. He had not shaved himself for days; nor, as I
believe, had he been out of his room since he came up to London. I
fancy that he will not live long."

"Poor fellow;--unhappy man! I was very wrong to marry him, Phineas."

"I have never said so;--nor, indeed, thought so."

"But I have thought so; and I say it also,--to you. I owe him any
reparation that I can make him; but I could not have lived with him.
I had no idea, before, that the nature of two human beings could be
so unlike. I so often remember what you told me of him,--here; in
this house, when I first brought you together. Alas, how sad it has
been!"

"Sad, indeed."

"But can this be true that you tell me of yourself?

"It is quite true. I could not say so before your father, but it is
Mr. Bonteen's doing. There is no remedy. I am sure of that. I am only
afraid that people are interfering for me in a manner that will be as
disagreeable to me as it will be useless."

"What friends?" she asked.

He was still standing with his arm round her waist, and he did not
like to mention the name of Madame Goesler.

"The Duchess of Omnium,--whom you remember as Lady Glencora
Palliser."

"Is she a friend of yours?"

"No;--not particularly. But she is an indiscreet woman, and hates
Bonteen, and has taken it into her stupid head to interest herself in
my concerns. It is no doing of mine, and yet I cannot help it."

"She will succeed."

"I don't want assistance from such a quarter; and I feel sure that
she will not succeed."

"What will you do, Phineas?"

"What shall I do? Carry on the battle as long as I can without
getting into debt, and then--vanish."

"You vanished once before,--did you not,--with a wife?"

"And now I shall vanish alone. My poor little wife! It seems all like
a dream. She was so good, so pure, so pretty, so loving!"

"Loving! A man's love is so easily transferred;--as easily as a
woman's hand;--is it not, Phineas? Say the word, for it is what you
are thinking."

"I was thinking of no such thing."

"You must think it--You need not be afraid to reproach me. I could
bear it from you. What could I not bear from you? Oh, Phineas;--if I
had only known myself then, as I do now!"

"It is too late for regrets," he said. There was something in the
words which grated on her feelings, and induced her at length to
withdraw herself from his arm. Too late for regrets! She had never
told herself that it was not too late. She was the wife of another
man, and therefore, surely it was too late. But still the word coming
from his mouth was painful to her. It seemed to signify that for him
at least the game was all over.

"Yes, indeed," she said,--"if our regrets and remorse were at our own
disposal! You might as well say that it is too late for unhappiness,
too late for weariness, too late for all the misery that comes from a
life's disappointment."

"I should have said that indulgence in regrets is vain."

"That is a scrap of philosophy which I have heard so often before!
But we will not quarrel, will we, on the first day of my return?"

"I hope not."

"And I may speak to Barrington?"

"No; certainly not."

"But I shall. How can I help it? He will be here to-morrow, and will
be full of the coming changes. How should I not mention your name? He
knows--not all that has passed, but too much not to be aware of my
anxiety. Of course your name will come up?"

"What I request,--what I demand is, that you ask no favour for me.
Your father will miss you,--will he not? I had better go now."

"Good night, Phineas."

"Good night, dear friend."

"Dearest, dearest friend," she said. Then he left her, and without
assistance, let himself out into the square. In her intercourse with
him there was a passion the expression of which caused him sorrow and
almost dismay. He did not say so even to himself, but he felt that a
time might come in which she would resent the coldness of demeanour
which it would be imperative upon him to adopt in his intercourse
with her. He knew how imprudent he had been to stand there with his
arm round her waist.


CHAPTER XXXIX

Cagliostro


It had been settled that Parliament should meet on the Thursday in
Easter week, and it was known to the world at large that Cabinet
Councils were held on the Friday previous, on the Monday, and on the
Tuesday; but nobody knew what took place at those meetings. Cabinet
Councils are, of course, very secret. What kind of oath the members
take not to divulge any tittle of the proceedings at these awful
conferences, the general public does not know; but it is presumed
that oaths are taken very solemn, and it is known that they are very
binding. Nevertheless, it is not an uncommon thing to hear openly
at the clubs an account of what has been settled; and, as we all
know, not a council is held as to which the editor of _The People's
Banner_ does not inform its readers next day exactly what took
place. But as to these three Cabinet Councils there was an increased
mystery abroad. Statements, indeed, were made, very definite and
circumstantial, but then they were various,--and directly opposed
one to another. According to _The People's Banner_, Mr. Daubeny
had resolved, with that enduring courage which was his peculiar
characteristic, that he would not be overcome by faction, but would
continue to exercise all the functions of Prime Minister until he had
had an opportunity of learning whether his great measure had been
opposed by the sense of the country, or only by the tactics of an
angry and greedy party. Other journals declared that the Ministry as
a whole had decided on resigning. But the clubs were in a state of
agonising doubt. At the great stronghold of conservative policy in
Pall Mall men were silent, embarrassed, and unhappy. The party was
at heart divorced from its leaders,--and a party without leaders is
powerless. To these gentlemen there could be no triumph, whether Mr.
Daubeny went out or remained in office. They had been betrayed;--but
as a body were unable even to accuse the traitor. As regarded most
of them they had accepted the treachery and bowed their heads
beneath it, by means of their votes. And as to the few who had been
staunch,--they also were cowed by a feeling that they had been
instrumental in destroying their own power by endeavouring to protect
a doomed institution. Many a thriving county member in those days
expressed a wish among his friends that he had never meddled with the
affairs of public life, and hinted at the Chiltern Hundreds. On the
other side, there was undoubtedly something of a rabid desire for
immediate triumph, which almost deserved that epithet of greedy
which was then commonly used by Conservatives in speaking of their
opponents. With the Liberal leaders,--such men as Mr. Gresham and
the two dukes,--the anxiety displayed was, no doubt, on behalf of
the country. It is right, according to our constitution, that the
Government should be entrusted to the hands of those whom the
constituencies of the country have most trusted. And, on behalf of
the country, it behoves the men in whom the country has placed its
trust to do battle in season and out of season,--to carry on war
internecine,--till the demands of the country are obeyed. A sound
political instinct had induced Mr. Gresham on this occasion to attack
his opponent simply on the ground of his being the leader only of
a minority in the House of Commons. But from among Mr. Gresham's
friends there had arisen a noise which sounded very like a clamour
for place, and this noise of course became aggravated in the ears of
those who were to be displaced. Now, during Easter week, the clamour
became very loud. Could it be possible that the archfiend of a
Minister would dare to remain in office till the end of a hurried
Session, and then again dissolve Parliament? Men talked of rows in
London,--even of revolution, and there were meetings in open places
both by day and night. Petitions were to be prepared, and the country
was to be made to express itself.

When, however, Thursday afternoon came, Mr. Daubeny "threw up the
sponge." Up to the last moment the course which he intended to pursue
was not known to the country at large. He entered the House very
slowly,--almost with a languid air, as though indifferent to its
performances, and took his seat at about half-past four. Every man
there felt that there was insolence in his demeanour,--and yet
there was nothing on which it was possible to fasten in the way of
expressed complaint. There was a faint attempt at a cheer,--for good
soldiers acknowledge the importance of supporting even an unpopular
general. But Mr. Daubeny's soldiers on this occasion were not very
good. When he had been seated about five minutes he rose, still very
languidly, and began his statement. He and his colleagues, he said,
in their attempt to legislate for the good of their country had been
beaten in regard to a very great measure by a large majority, and in
compliance with what he acknowledged to be the expressed opinion of
the House, he had considered it to be his duty--as his colleagues had
considered it to be theirs--to place their joint resignations in the
hands of Her Majesty. This statement was received with considerable
surprise, as it was not generally known that Mr. Daubeny had as
yet even seen the Queen. But the feeling most predominant in the
House was one almost of dismay at the man's quiescence. He and his
colleagues had resigned, and he had recommended Her Majesty to send
for Mr. Gresham. He spoke in so low a voice as to be hardly audible
to the House at large, and then paused,--ceasing to speak, as
though his work were done. He even made some gesture, as though
stepping back to his seat;--deceived by which Mr. Gresham, at the
other side of the table, rose to his legs. "Perhaps," said Mr.
Daubeny,--"Perhaps the right honourable gentleman would pardon him,
and the House would pardon him, if still, for a moment, he interposed
between the House and the right honourable gentleman. He could well
understand the impatience of the right honourable gentleman,--who
no doubt was anxious to reassume that authority among them, the
temporary loss of which he had not perhaps borne with all the
equanimity which might have been expected from him. He would promise
the House and the right honourable gentleman that he would not detain
them long." Mr. Gresham threw himself back into his seat, evidently
not without annoyance, and his enemy stood for a moment looking at
him. Unless they were angels these two men must at that moment have
hated each other;--and it is supposed that they were no more than
human. It was afterwards said that the little ruse of pretending to
resume his seat had been deliberately planned by Mr. Daubeny with the
view of seducing Mr. Gresham into an act of seeming impatience, and
that these words about his opponent's failing equanimity had been
carefully prepared.

Mr. Daubeny stood for a minute silent, and then began to pour forth
that which was really his speech on the occasion. Those flaccid
half-pronounced syllables in which he had declared that he had
resigned,--had been studiously careless, purposely flaccid. It was
his duty to let the House know the fact, and he did his duty. But
now he had a word to say in which he himself could take some little
interest. Mr. Daubeny could be fiery or flaccid as it suited
himself;--and now it suited him to be fiery. He had a prophecy
to make, and prophets have ever been energetic men. Mr. Daubeny
conceived it to be his duty to inform the House, and through the
House the country, that now, at last, had the day of ruin come upon
the British Empire, because it had bowed itself to the dominion of an
unscrupulous and greedy faction. It cannot be said that the language
which he used was unmeasured, because no word that he uttered would
have warranted the Speaker in calling him to order; but, within the
very wide bounds of parliamentary etiquette, there was no limit to
the reproach and reprobation which he heaped on the House of Commons
for its late vote. And his audacity equalled his insolence. In
announcing his resignation, he had condescended to speak of himself
and his colleagues; but now he dropped his colleagues as though they
were unworthy of his notice, and spoke only of his own doings,--of
his own efforts to save the country, which was indeed willing to be
saved, but unable to select fitting instruments of salvation. "He
had been twitted," he said, "with inconsistency to his principles
by men who were simply unable to understand the meaning of the word
Conservatism. These gentlemen seemed to think that any man who did
not set himself up as an apostle of constant change must therefore
be bound always to stand still and see his country perish from
stagnation. It might be that there were gentlemen in that House whose
timid natures could not face the dangers of any movement; but for
himself he would say that no word had ever fallen from his lips which
justified either his friends or his adversaries in classing him among
the number. If a man be anxious to keep his fire alight, does he
refuse to touch the sacred coals as in the course of nature they are
consumed? Or does he move them with the salutary poker and add fresh
fuel from the basket? They all knew that enemy to the comfort of the
domestic hearth, who could not keep his hands for a moment from the
fire-irons. Perhaps he might be justified if he said that they had
been very much troubled of late in that House by gentlemen who could
not keep their fingers from poker and tongs. But there had now fallen
upon them a trouble of a nature much more serious in its effects than
any that had come or could come from would-be reformers. A spirit of
personal ambition, a wretched thirst for office, a hankering after
the power and privileges of ruling, had not only actuated men,--as,
alas, had been the case since first the need for men to govern others
had arisen in the world,--but had been openly avowed and put forward
as an adequate and sufficient reason for opposing a measure in
disapprobation of which no single argument had been used! The right
honourable gentleman's proposition to the House had been simply
this;--'I shall oppose this measure, be it good or bad, because I
desire, myself, to be Prime Minister, and I call upon those whom I
lead in politics to assist me in doing so, in order that they may
share the good things on which we may thus be enabled to lay our
hands!'"

Then there arose a great row in the House, and there seemed to be a
doubt whether the still existing Minister of the day would be allowed
to continue his statement. Mr. Gresham rose to his feet, but sat down
again instantly, without having spoken a word that was audible. Two
or three voices were heard calling upon the Speaker for protection.
It was, however, asserted afterwards that nothing had been said
which demanded the Speaker's interference. But all moderate voices
were soon lost in the enraged clamour of members on each side. The
insolence showered upon those who generally supported Mr. Daubeny had
equalled that with which he had exasperated those opposed to him; and
as the words had fallen from his lips, there had been no purpose of
cheering him from the conservative benches. But noise creates noise,
and shouting is a ready and easy mode of contest. For a while it
seemed as though the right side of the Speaker's chair was only
beaten by the majority of lungs on the left side;--and in the midst
of it all Mr. Daubeny still stood, firm on his feet, till gentlemen
had shouted themselves silent,--and then he resumed his speech.

The remainder of what he said was profound, prophetic, and
unintelligible. The gist of it, so far as it could be understood
when the bran was bolted from it, consisted in an assurance that the
country had now reached that period of its life in which rapid decay
was inevitable, and that, as the mortal disease had already shown
itself in its worst form, national decrepitude was imminent, and
natural death could not long be postponed. They who attempted to
read the prophecy with accuracy were of opinion that the prophet had
intimated that had the nation, even in this its crisis, consented
to take him, the prophet, as its sole physician and to obey his
prescription with childlike docility, health might not only have been
re-established, but a new juvenescence absolutely created. The nature
of the medicine that should have been taken was even supposed to
have been indicated in some very vague terms. Had he been allowed to
operate he would have cut the tap-roots of the national cancer, have
introduced fresh blood into the national veins, and resuscitated the
national digestion, and he seemed to think that the nation, as a
nation, was willing enough to undergo the operation, and be treated
as he should choose to treat it;--but that the incubus of Mr.
Gresham, backed by an unworthy House of Commons, had prevented, and
was preventing, the nation from having its own way. Therefore the
nation must be destroyed. Mr. Daubeny as soon as he had completed his
speech took up his hat and stalked out of the House.

It was supposed at the time that the retiring Prime Minister had
intended, when he rose to his legs, not only to denounce his
opponents, but also to separate himself from his own unworthy
associates. Men said that he had become disgusted with politics,
disappointed, and altogether demoralized by defeat, and great
curiosity existed as to the steps which might be taken at the time by
the party of which he had hitherto been the leader. On that evening,
at any rate, nothing was done. When Mr. Daubeny was gone, Mr. Gresham
rose and said that in the present temper of the House he thought
it best to postpone any statement from himself. He had received
Her Majesty's commands only as he had entered that House, and in
obedience to those commands, he should wait upon Her Majesty early
to-morrow. He hoped to be able to inform the House at the afternoon
sitting, what was the nature of the commands with which Her Majesty
might honour him.

"What do you think of that?" Phineas asked Mr. Monk as they left the
House together.

"I think that our Chatham of to-day is but a very poor copy of him
who misbehaved a century ago."

"Does not the whole thing distress you?"

"Not particularly. I have always felt that there has been a mistake
about Mr. Daubeny. By many he has been accounted as a statesman,
whereas to me he has always been a political Cagliostro. Now a
conjuror is I think a very pleasant fellow to have among us, if we
know that he is a conjuror;--but a conjuror who is believed to do his
tricks without sleight of hand is a dangerous man. It is essential
that such a one should be found out and known to be a conjuror,--and
I hope that such knowledge may have been communicated to some men
this afternoon."

"He was very great," said Ratler to Bonteen. "Did you not think so?"

"Yes, I did,--very powerful indeed. But the party is broken up to
atoms."

"Atoms soon come together again in politics," said Ratler. "They
can't do without him. They haven't got anybody else. I wonder what he
did when he got home."

"Had some gruel and went to bed," said Bonteen. "They say these
scenes in the House never disturb him at home." From which
conversations it may be inferred that Mr. Monk and Messrs. Ratler and
Bonteen did not agree in their ideas respecting political conjurors.


CHAPTER XL

The Prime Minister is Hard Pressed


It can never be a very easy thing to form a Ministry. The one chosen
chief is readily selected. Circumstances, indeed, have probably left
no choice in the matter. Every man in the country who has at all
turned his thoughts that way knows very well who will be the next
Prime Minister when it comes to pass that a change is imminent.
In these days the occupant of the throne can have no difficulty.
Mr. Gresham recommends Her Majesty to send for Mr. Daubeny, or Mr.
Daubeny for Mr. Gresham,--as some ten or a dozen years since Mr.
Mildmay told her to send for Lord de Terrier, or Lord de Terrier
for Mr. Mildmay. The Prime Minister is elected by the nation, but
the nation, except in rare cases, cannot go below that in arranging
details, and the man for whom the Queen sends is burdened with the
necessity of selecting his colleagues. It may be,--probably must
always be the case,--that this, that, and the other colleagues are
clearly indicated to his mind, but then each of these colleagues
may want his own inferior coadjutors, and so the difficulty begins,
increases, and at length culminates. On the present occasion it was
known at the end of a week that Mr. Gresham had not filled all his
offices, and that there were difficulties. It was announced that the
Duke of St. Bungay could not quite agree on certain points with Mr.
Gresham, and that the Duke of Omnium would do nothing without the
other Duke. The Duke of St. Bungay was very powerful, as there were
three or four of the old adherents of Mr. Mildmay who would join
no Government unless he was with them. Sir Harry Coldfoot and Lord
Plinlimmon would not accept office without the Duke. The Duke was
essential, and now, though the Duke's character was essentially that
of a practical man who never raised unnecessary trouble, men said
that the Duke was at the bottom of it all. The Duke did not approve
of Mr. Bonteen. Mr. Gresham, so it was said, insisted on Mr.
Bonteen,--appealing to the other Duke. But that other Duke, our own
special Duke, Planty Pall that was, instead of standing up for Mr.
Bonteen, was cold and unsympathetic. He could not join the Ministry
without his friend, the Duke of St. Bungay, and as to Mr. Bonteen, he
thought that perhaps a better selection might be made.

Such were the club rumours which took place as to the difficulties
of the day, and, as is generally the case, they were not far from
the truth. Neither of the dukes had absolutely put a veto on poor Mr.
Bonteen's elevation, but they had expressed themselves dissatisfied
with the appointment, and the younger duke had found himself
called upon to explain that although he had been thrown much into
communication with Mr. Bonteen he had never himself suggested that
that gentleman should follow him at the Exchequer. This was one of
the many difficulties which beset the Prime Minister elect in the
performance of his arduous duty.

Lady Glencora, as people would still persist in calling her, was at
the bottom of it all. She had sworn an oath inimical to Mr. Bonteen,
and did not leave a stone unturned in her endeavours to accomplish
it. If Phineas Finn might find acceptance, then Mr. Bonteen might be
allowed to enter Elysium. A second Juno, she would allow the Romulus
she hated to sit in the seats of the blessed, to be fed with nectar,
and to have his name printed in the lists of unruffled Cabinet
meetings,--but only on conditions. Phineas Finn must be allowed a
seat also, and a little nectar,--though it were at the second table
of the gods. For this she struggled, speaking her mind boldly to this
and that member of her husband's party, but she struggled in vain.
She could obtain no assurance on behalf of Phineas Finn. The Duke of
St. Bungay would do nothing for her. Barrington Erle had declared
himself powerless. Her husband had condescended to speak to Mr.
Bonteen himself, and Mr. Bonteen's insolent answer had been reported
to her. Then she went sedulously to work, and before a couple of days
were over she did make her husband believe that Mr. Bonteen was not
fit to be Chancellor of the Exchequer. This took place before Mr.
Daubeny's statement, while the Duke and Duchess of St. Bungay were
still at Matching,--while Mr. Bonteen, unconscious of what was being
done, was still in the House. Before the two days were over, the Duke
of St. Bungay had a very low opinion of Mr. Bonteen, but was quite
ignorant of any connection between that low opinion and the fortunes
of Phineas Finn.

"Plantagenet, of all your men that are coming up, your Mr. Bonteen
is the worst. I often think that you are going down hill, both in
character and intellect, but if you go as low as that I shall prefer
to cross the water, and live in America." This she said in the
presence of the two dukes.

"What has Mr. Bonteen done?" asked the elder, laughing.

"He was boasting this morning openly of whom he intended to bring
with him into the Cabinet." Truth demands that the chronicler should
say that this was a positive fib. Mr. Bonteen, no doubt, had talked
largely and with indiscretion, but had made no such boast as that of
which the Duchess accused him. "Mr. Gresham will get astray if he
doesn't allow some one to tell him the truth."

She did not press the matter any further then, but what she had said
was not thrown away. "Your wife is almost right about that man," the
elder Duke said to the younger.

"It's Mr. Gresham's doing,--not mine," said the younger.

"She is right about Gresham, too," said the elder. "With all his
immense intellect and capacity for business no man wants more looking
after."

That evening Mr. Bonteen was singled out by the Duchess for her
special attention, and in the presence of all who were there
assembled he made himself an ass. He could not save himself from
talking about himself when he was encouraged. On this occasion he
offended all those feelings of official discretion and personal
reticence which had been endeared to the old duke by the lessons
which he had learned from former statesmen and by the experience of
his own life. To be quiet, unassuming, almost affectedly modest in
any mention of himself, low-voiced, reflecting always more than he
resolved, and resolving always more than he said, had been his aim.
Conscious of his high rank, and thinking, no doubt, much of the
advantages in public life which his birth and position had given him,
still he would never have ventured to speak of his own services as
necessary to any Government. That he had really been indispensable to
many he must have known, but not to his closest friend would he have
said so in plain language. To such a man the arrogance of Mr. Bonteen
was intolerable.

There is probably more of the flavour of political aristocracy to
be found still remaining among our liberal leading statesmen than
among their opponents. A conservative Cabinet is, doubtless, never
deficient in dukes and lords, and the sons of such; but conservative
dukes and lords are recruited here and there, and as recruits, are
new to the business, whereas among the old Whigs a halo of statecraft
has, for ages past, so strongly pervaded and enveloped certain great
families, that the power in the world of politics thus produced
still remains, and is even yet efficacious in creating a feeling of
exclusiveness. They say that "misfortune makes men acquainted with
strange bedfellows". The old hereditary Whig Cabinet ministers must,
no doubt, by this time have learned to feel themselves at home with
strange neighbours at their elbows. But still with them something of
the feeling of high blood, of rank, and of living in a park with deer
about it, remains. They still entertain a pride in their Cabinets,
and have, at any rate, not as yet submitted themselves to a conjuror.
The Charles James Fox element of liberality still holds its own, and
the fragrance of Cavendish is essential. With no man was this feeling
stronger than with the Duke of St. Bungay, though he well knew how to
keep it in abeyance,--even to the extent of self-sacrifice. Bonteens
must creep into the holy places. The faces which he loved to
see,--born chiefly of other faces he had loved when young,--could not
cluster around the sacred table without others which were much less
welcome to him. He was wise enough to know that exclusiveness did not
suit the nation, though human enough to feel that it must have been
pleasant to himself. There must be Bonteens;--but when any Bonteen
came up, who loomed before his eyes as specially disagreeable, it
seemed to him to be a duty to close the door against such a one, if
it could be closed without violence. A constant, gentle pressure
against the door would tend to keep down the number of the Bonteens.

"I am not sure that you are not going a little too quick in regard
to Mr. Bonteen," said the elder duke to Mr. Gresham before he had
finally assented to a proposition originated by himself,--that he
should sit in the Cabinet without a portfolio.

"Palliser wishes it," said Mr. Gresham, shortly.

"He and I think that there has been some mistake about that. You
suggested the appointment to him, and he felt unwilling to raise an
objection without giving the matter very mature consideration. You
can understand that."

"Upon my word I thought that the selection would be peculiarly
agreeable to him." Then the duke made a suggestion. "Could not some
special office at the Treasury be constructed for Mr. Bonteen's
acceptance, having special reference to the question of decimal
coinage?"

"But how about the salary?" asked Mr. Gresham. "I couldn't propose a
new office with a salary above £2,000."

"Couldn't we make it permanent," suggested the duke;--"with
permission to hold a seat if he can get one?"

"I fear not," said Mr. Gresham.

"He got into a very unpleasant scrape when he was Financial
Secretary," said the Duke.


   But whither would'st thou, Muse? Unmeet
      For jocund lyre are themes like these.
   Shalt thou the talk of Gods repeat,
   Debasing by thy strains effete
      Such lofty mysteries?


The absolute words of a conversation so lofty shall no longer be
attempted, but it may be said that Mr. Gresham was too wise to
treat as of no account the objections of such a one as the Duke
of St. Bungay. He saw Mr. Bonteen, and he saw the other duke, and
difficulties arose. Mr. Bonteen made himself very disagreeable
indeed. As Mr. Bonteen had never absolutely been as yet more than a
demigod, our Muse, light as she is, may venture to report that he
told Mr. Ratler that "he'd be d---- if he'd stand it. If he were to
be thrown over now, he'd make such a row, and would take such care
that the fat should be in the fire, that his enemies, whoever they
were, should wish that they had kept their fingers off him. He knew
who was doing it." If he did not know, his guess was right. In his
heart he accused the young duchess, though he mentioned her name
to no one. And it was the young duchess. Then there was made an
insidious proposition to Mr. Gresham,--which reached him at last
through Barrington Erle,--that matters would go quieter if Phineas
Finn were placed in his old office at the Colonies instead of Lord
Fawn, whose name had been suggested, and for whom,--as Barrington
Erle declared,--no one cared a brass farthing. Mr. Gresham, when he
heard this, thought that he began to smell a rat, and was determined
to be on his guard. Why should the appointment of Mr. Phineas Finn
make things go easier in regard to Mr. Bonteen? There must be some
woman's fingers in the pie. Now Mr. Gresham was firmly resolved that
no woman's fingers should have anything to do with his pie.

How the thing went from bad to worse, it would be bootless here
to tell. Neither of the two dukes absolutely refused to join the
Ministry; but they were persistent in their objection to Mr. Bonteen,
and were joined in it by Lord Plinlimmon and Sir Harry Coldfoot. It
was in vain that Mr. Gresham urged that he had no other man ready
and fit to be Chancellor of the Exchequer. That excuse could not be
accepted. There was Legge Wilson, who twelve years since had been
at the Treasury, and would do very well. Now Mr. Gresham had always
personally hated Legge Wilson,--and had, therefore, offered him the
Board of Trade. Legge Wilson had disgusted him by accepting it, and
the name had already been published in connection with the office.
But in the lists which had appeared towards the end of the week, no
name was connected with the office of Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and no office was connected with the name of Mr. Bonteen. The editor
of _The People's Banner_, however, expressed the gratification of
that journal that even Mr. Gresham had not dared to propose Mr.
Phineas Finn for any place under the Crown.

At last Mr. Bonteen was absolutely told that he could not be
Chancellor of the Exchequer. If he would consent to give his very
valuable services to the country with the view of carrying through
Parliament the great measure of decimal coinage he should be
President of the Board of Trade,--but without a seat in the Cabinet.
He would thus become the Right Honourable Bonteen, which, no doubt,
would be a great thing for him,--and, not busy in the Cabinet,
must be able to devote his time exclusively to the great measure
above-named. What was to become of "Trade" generally, was not
specially explained; but, as we all know, there would be a
Vice-President to attend to details.

The proposition very nearly broke the man's heart. With a voice
stopped by agitation, with anger flashing from his eyes, almost in a
convulsion of mixed feelings, he reminded his chief of what had been
said about his appointment in the House. Mr. Gresham had already
absolutely defended it. After that did Mr. Gresham mean to withdraw
a promise that had so formally been made? But Mr. Gresham was not to
be caught in that way. He had made no promise;--had not even stated
to the House that such appointment was to be made. A very improper
question had been asked as to a rumour,--in answering which he
had been forced to justify himself by explaining that discussions
respecting the office had been necessary. "Mr. Bonteen," said
Mr. Gresham, "no one knows better than you the difficulties of a
Minister. If you can act with us I shall be very grateful to you. If
you cannot, I shall regret the loss of your services." Mr. Bonteen
took twenty-four hours to consider, and was then appointed President
of the Board of Trade without a seat in the Cabinet. Mr. Legge Wilson
became Chancellor of the Exchequer. When the lists were completed,
no office whatever was assigned to Phineas Finn. "I haven't done
with Mr. Bonteen yet," said the young duchess to her friend Madame
Goesler.

The secrets of the world are very marvellous, but they are not
themselves half so wonderful as the way in which they become known to
the world. There could be no doubt that Mr. Bonteen's high ambition
had foundered, and that he had been degraded through the secret
enmity of the Duchess of Omnium. It was equally certain that his
secret enmity to Phineas Finn had brought this punishment on his
head. But before the Ministry had been a week in office almost
everybody knew that it was so. The rumours were full of falsehood,
but yet they contained the truth. The duchess had done it. The
duchess was the bosom friend of Lady Laura Kennedy, who was in love
with Phineas Finn. She had gone on her knees to Mr. Gresham to get
a place for her friend's favourite, and Mr. Gresham had refused.
Consequently, at her bidding, half-a-dozen embryo Ministers--her
husband among the number--had refused to be amenable to Mr. Gresham.
Mr. Gresham had at last consented to sacrifice Mr. Bonteen, who had
originally instigated him to reject the claims of Phineas Finn. That
the degradation of the one man had been caused by the exclusion of
the other all the world knew.

"It shuts the door to me for ever and ever," said Phineas to Madame
Goesler.

"I don't see that."

"Of course it does. Such an affair places a mark against a man's name
which will never be forgotten."

"Is your heart set upon holding some trifling appointment under a
Minister?"

"To tell you the truth, it is;--or rather it was. The prospect of
office to me was more than perhaps to any other expectant. Even this
man, Bonteen, has some fortune of his own, and can live if he be
excluded. I have given up everything for the chance of something in
this line."

"Other lines are open."

"Not to me, Madame Goesler. I do not mean to defend myself. I have
been very foolish, very sanguine, and am now very unhappy."

"What shall I say to you?"

"The truth."

"In truth, then, I do not sympathise with you. The thing lost is too
small, too mean to justify unhappiness."

"But, Madame Goesler, you are a rich woman."

"Well?"

"If you were to lose it all, would you not be unhappy? It has been
my ambition to live here in London as one of a special set which
dominates all other sets in our English world. To do so a man
should have means of his own. I have none; and yet I have tried
it,--thinking that I could earn my bread at it as men do at other
professions. I acknowledge that I should not have thought so. No man
should attempt what I have attempted without means, at any rate to
live on if he fail; but I am not the less unhappy because I have been
silly."

"What will you do?"

"Ah,--what? Another friend asked me that the other day, and I told
her that I should vanish."

"Who was that friend?"

"Lady Laura."

"She is in London again now?"

"Yes; she and her father are in Portman Square."

"She has been an injurious friend to you."

"No, by heaven," exclaimed Phineas. "But for her I should never have
been here at all, never have had a seat in Parliament, never have
been in office, never have known you."

"And might have been the better without any of these things."

"No man ever had a better friend than Lady Laura has been to me.
Malice, wicked and false as the devil, has lately joined our names
together to the incredible injury of both of us; but it has not been
her fault."

"You are energetic in defending her."

"And so would she be in defending me. Circumstances threw us together
and made us friends. Her father and her brother were my friends. I
happened to be of service to her husband. We belonged to the same
party. And therefore--because she has been unfortunate in her
marriage--people tell lies of her."

"It is a pity he should--not die, and leave her," said Madame Goesler
slowly.

"Why so?"

"Because then you might justify yourself in defending her by making
her your wife." She paused, but he made no answer to this. "You are
in love with her," she said.

"It is untrue."

"Mr. Finn!"

"Well, what would you have? I am not in love with her. To me she is
no more than my sister. Were she as free as air I should not ask her
to be my wife. Can a man and woman feel no friendship without being
in love with each other?"

"I hope they may," said Madame Goesler. Had he been lynx-eyed he
might have seen that she blushed; but it required quick eyes to
discover a blush on Madame Goesler's face. "You and I are friends."

"Indeed we are," he said, grasping her hand as he took his leave.


VOLUME II

CHAPTER XLI

"I hope I'm not distrusted"


Gerard Maule, as the reader has been informed, wrote three lines to
his dearest Adelaide to inform her that his father would not assent
to the suggestion respecting Maule Abbey which had been made by
Lady Chiltern, and then took no further steps in the matter. In the
fortnight next after the receipt of his letter nothing was heard of
him at Harrington Hall, and Adelaide, though she made no complaint,
was unhappy. Then came the letter from Mr. Spooner,--with all its
rich offers, and Adelaide's mind was for a while occupied with
wrath against her second suitor. But as the egregious folly of Mr.
Spooner,--for to her thinking the aspirations of Mr. Spooner were
egregiously foolish,--died out of her mind, her thoughts reverted to
her engagement. Why did not the man come to her, or why did he not
write?

She had received from Lady Chiltern an invitation to remain with
them,--the Chilterns,--till her marriage. "But, dear Lady Chiltern,
who knows when it will be?" Adelaide had said. Lady Chiltern had
good-naturedly replied that the longer it was put off the better
for herself. "But you'll be going to London or abroad before that
day comes." Lady Chiltern declared that she looked forward to
no festivities which could under any circumstances remove her
four-and-twenty hours travelling distance from the kennels. Probably
she might go up to London for a couple of months as soon as the
hunting was over, and the hounds had been drafted, and the horses had
been coddled, and every covert had been visited. From the month of
May till the middle of July she might, perhaps, be allowed to be in
town, as communications by telegram could now be made day and night.
After that, preparations for cub-hunting would be imminent, and,
as a matter of course, it would be necessary that she should be at
Harrington Hall at so important a period of the year. During those
couple of months she would be very happy to have the companionship of
her friend, and she hinted that Gerard Maule would certainly be in
town. "I begin to think it would have been better that I should never
have seen Gerard Maule," said Adelaide Palliser.

This happened about the middle of March, while hunting was still in
force. Gerard's horses were standing in the neighbourhood, but Gerard
himself was not there. Mr. Spooner, since that short, disheartening
note had been sent to him by Lord Chiltern, had not been seen at
Harrington. There was a Harrington Lawn Meet on one occasion, but
he had not appeared till the hounds were at the neighbouring covert
side. Nevertheless he had declared that he did not intend to give
up the pursuit, and had even muttered something of the sort to Lord
Chiltern. "I am one of those fellows who stick to a thing, you know,"
he said.

"I am afraid you had better give up sticking to her, because she's
going to marry somebody else."

"I've heard all about that, my lord. He's a very nice sort of young
man, but I'm told he hasn't got his house ready yet for a family."
All which Lord Chiltern repeated to his wife. Neither of them spoke
to Adelaide again about Mr. Spooner; but this did cause a feeling in
Lady Chiltern's mind that perhaps this engagement with young Maule
was a foolish thing, and that, if so, she was in a great measure
responsible for the folly.

"Don't you think you'd better write to him?" she said, one morning.

"Why does he not write to me?"

"But he did,--when he wrote you that his father would not consent to
give up the house. You did not answer him then."

"It was two lines,--without a date. I don't even know where he
lives."

"You know his club?"

"Yes,--I know his club. I do feel, Lady Chiltern, that I have become
engaged to marry a man as to whom I am altogether in the dark. I
don't like writing to him at his club."

"You have seen more of him here and in Italy than most girls see of
their future husbands."

"So I have,--but I have seen no one belonging to him. Don't you
understand what I mean? I feel all at sea about him. I am sure he
does not mean any harm."

"Certainly he does not."

"But then he hardly means any good."

"I never saw a man more earnestly in love," said Lady Chiltern.

"Oh yes,--he's quite enough in love. But--"

"But what?"

"He'll just remain up in London thinking about it, and never tell
himself that there's anything to be done. And then, down here, what
is my best hope? Not that he'll come to see me, but that he'll come
to see his horse, and that so, perhaps, I may get a word with him."
Then Lady Chiltern suggested, with a laugh, that perhaps it might
have been better that she should have accepted Mr. Spooner. There
would have been no doubt as to Mr. Spooner's energy and purpose.
"Only that if there was not another man in the world I wouldn't marry
him, and that I never saw any other man except Gerard Maule whom I
even fancied I could marry."

About a fortnight after this, when the hunting was all over, in the
beginning of April, she did write to him as follows, and did direct
her letter to his club. In the meantime Lord Chiltern had intimated
to his wife that if Gerard Maule behaved badly he should consider
himself to be standing in the place of Adelaide's father or brother.
His wife pointed out to him that were he her father or her brother he
could do nothing,--that in these days let a man behave ever so badly,
no means of punishing was within reach of the lady's friends. But
Lord Chiltern would not assent to this. He muttered something about
a horsewhip, and seemed to suggest that one man could, if he were so
minded, always have it out with another, if not in this way, then in
that. Lady Chiltern protested, and declared that horsewhips could not
under any circumstances be efficacious. "He had better mind what he
is about," said Lord Chiltern. It was after this that Adelaide wrote
her letter:--


   Harrington Hall, 5th April.

   DEAR GERARD,--

   I have been thinking that I should hear from you, and have
   been surprised,--I may say unhappy,--because I have not
   done so. Perhaps you thought I ought to have answered the
   three words which you wrote to me about your father; if
   so, I will apologise; only they did not seem to give me
   anything to say. I was very sorry that your father should
   have 'cut up rough,' as you call it, but you must remember
   that we both expected that he would refuse, and that
   we are only therefore where we thought we should be.
   I suppose we shall have to wait till Providence does
   something for us,--only, if so, it would be pleasanter to
   me to hear your own opinion about it.

   The Chilterns are surprised that you shouldn't have come
   back, and seen the end of the season. There were some very
   good runs just at last;--particularly one on last Monday.
   But on Wednesday Trumpeton Wood was again blank, and there
   was some row about wires. I can't explain it all; but you
   must come, and Lord Chiltern will tell you. I have gone
   down to see the horses ever so often;--but I don't care to
   go now as you never write to me. They are all three quite
   well, and Fan looks as silken and as soft as any lady need
   do.

   Lady Chiltern has been kinder than I can tell you. I go
   up to town with her in May, and shall remain with her
   while she is there. So far I have decided. After that
   my future home must, sir, depend on the resolution and
   determination, or perhaps on the vagaries and caprices, of
   him who is to be my future master. Joking apart, I must
   know to what I am to look forward before I can make up my
   mind whether I will or will not go back to Italy towards
   the end of the summer. If I do, I fear I must do so just
   in the hottest time of the year; but I shall not like
   to come down here again after leaving London,--unless
   something by that time has been settled.

   I shall send this to your club, and I hope that it will
   reach you. I suppose that you are in London.

   Good-bye, dearest Gerard.

   Yours most affectionately,

   ADELAIDE.

   If there is anything that troubles you, pray tell me. I
   ask you because I think it would be better for you that I
   should know. I sometimes think that you would have written
   if there had not been some misfortune. God bless you.


Gerard was in London, and sent the following note by return of
post:--


   ---- Club, Tuesday.

   DEAREST ADELAIDE,

   All right. If Chiltern can take me for a couple of nights,
   I'll come down next week, and settle about the horses, and
   will arrange everything.

   Ever your own, with all my heart,

   G. M.


"He will settle about his horses, and arrange everything," said
Adelaide, as she showed the letter to Lady Chiltern. "The horses
first, and everything afterwards. The everything, of course, includes
all my future happiness, the day of my marriage, whether to-morrow or
in ten years' time, and the place where we shall live."

"At any rate, he's coming."

"Yes;--but when? He says next week, but he does not name any day. Did
you ever hear or see anything so unsatisfactory?"

"I thought you would be glad to see him."

"So I should be,--if there was any sense in him. I shall be glad, and
shall kiss him."

"I dare say you will."

"And let him put his arm round my waist and be happy. He will be
happy because he will think of nothing beyond. But what is to be the
end of it?"

"He says that he will settle everything."

"But he will have thought of nothing. What must I settle? That is
the question. When he was told to go to his father, he went to his
father. When he failed there the work was done, and the trouble was
off his mind. I know him so well."

"If you think so ill of him why did you consent to get into his
boat?" said Lady Chiltern, seriously.

"I don't think ill of him. Why do you say that I think ill of him? I
think better of him than of anybody else in the world;--but I know
his fault, and, as it happens, it is a fault so very prejudicial to
my happiness. You ask me why I got into his boat. Why does any girl
get into a man's boat? Why did you get into Lord Chiltern's?"

"I promised to marry him when I was seven years old;--so he says."

"But you wouldn't have done it, if you hadn't had a sort of feeling
that you were born to be his wife. I haven't got into this man's boat
yet; but I never can be happy unless I do, simply because--"

"You love him."

"Yes;--just that. I have a feeling that I should like to be in his
boat, and I shouldn't like to be anywhere else. After you have come
to feel like that about a man I don't suppose it makes any difference
whether you think him perfect or imperfect. He's just my own,--at
least I hope so;--the one thing that I've got. If I wear a stuff
frock, I'm not going to despise it because it's not silk."

"Mr. Spooner would be the stuff frock."

"No;--Mr. Spooner is shoddy, and very bad shoddy, too."

On the Saturday in the following week Gerard Maule did arrive at
Harrington Hall,--and was welcomed as only accepted lovers are
welcomed. Not a word of reproach was uttered as to his delinquencies.
No doubt he got the kiss with which Adelaide had herself suggested
that his coming would be rewarded. He was allowed to stand on the rug
before the fire with his arm round her waist. Lady Chiltern smiled on
him. His horses had been specially visited that morning, and a lively
report as to their condition was made to him. Not a word was said on
that occasion which could distress him. Even Lord Chiltern when he
came in was gracious to him. "Well, old fellow," he said, "you've
missed your hunting."

"Yes; indeed. Things kept me in town."

"We had some uncommonly good runs."

"Have the horses stood pretty well?" asked Gerard.

"I felt uncommonly tempted to borrow yours; and should have done so
once or twice if I hadn't known that I should have been betrayed."

"I wish you had, with all my heart," said Gerard. And then they went
to dress for dinner.

In the evening, when the ladies had gone to bed, Lord Chiltern took
his friend off to the smoking-room. At Harrington Hall it was not
unusual for the ladies and gentlemen to descend together into the
very comfortable Pandemonium which was so called, when,--as was the
case at present,--the terms of intimacy between them were sufficient
to warrant such a proceeding. But on this occasion Lady Chiltern
went very discreetly upstairs, and Adelaide, with equal discretion,
followed her. It had been arranged beforehand that Lord Chiltern
should say a salutary word or two to the young man. Maule began about
the hunting, asking questions about this and that, but his host
stopped him at once. Lord Chiltern, when he had a task on hand, was
always inclined to get through it at once,--perhaps with an energy
that was too sudden in its effects. "Maule," he said, "you ought to
make up your mind what you mean to do about that girl."

"Do about her! How?"

"You and she are engaged, I suppose?"

"Of course we are. There isn't any doubt about it."

"Just so. But when things come to be like that, all delays are good
fun to the man, but they're the very devil to the girl."

"I thought it was always the other way up, and that girls wanted
delay?"

"That's only a theoretical delicacy which never means much. When a
girl is engaged she likes to have the day fixed. When there's a long
interval the man can do pretty much as he pleases, while the girl can
do nothing except think about him. Then it sometimes turns out that
when he's wanted, he's not there."

"I hope I'm not distrusted," said Gerard, with an air that showed
that he was almost disposed to be offended.

"Not in the least. The women here think you the finest paladin in the
world, and Miss Palliser would fly at my throat if she thought that
I said a word against you. But she's in my house, you see; and I'm
bound to do exactly as I should if she were my sister."

"And if she were your sister?"

"I should tell you that I couldn't approve of the engagement unless
you were prepared to fix the time of your marriage. And I should ask
you where you intended to live."

"Wherever she pleases. I can't go to Maule Abbey while my father
lives, without his sanction."

"And he may live for the next twenty years."

"Or thirty."

"Then you are bound to decide upon something else. It's no use saying
that you leave it to her. You can't leave it to her. What I mean
is this, that now you are here, I think you are bound to settle
something with her. Good-night, old fellow."


CHAPTER XLII

Boulogne


Gerard Maule, as he sat upstairs half undressed in his bedroom that
night didn't like it. He hardly knew what it was that he did not
like,--but he felt that there was something wrong. He thought that
Lord Chiltern had not been warranted in speaking to him with a tone
of authority, and in talking of a brother's position,--and the rest
of it. He had lacked the presence of mind for saying anything at the
moment; but he must say something sooner or later. He wasn't going to
be driven by Lord Chiltern. When he looked back at his own conduct he
thought that it had been more than noble,--almost romantic. He had
fallen in love with Miss Palliser, and spoken his love out freely,
without any reference to money. He didn't know what more any fellow
could have done. As to his marrying out of hand, the day after his
engagement, as a man of fortune can do, everybody must have known
that that was out of the question. Adelaide of course had known it.
It had been suggested to him that he should consult his father as to
living at Maule Abbey. Now if there was one thing he hated more than
another, it was consulting his father; and yet he had done it. He had
asked for a loan of the old house in perfect faith, and it was not
his fault that it had been refused. He could not make a house to live
in, nor could he coin a fortune. He had £800 a-year of his own, but
of course he owed a little money. Men with such incomes always do owe
a little money. It was almost impossible that he should marry quite
at once. It was not his fault that Adelaide had no fortune of her
own. When he fell in love with her he had been a great deal too
generous to think of fortune, and that ought to be remembered now to
his credit. Such was the sum of his thoughts, and his anger spread
itself from Lord Chiltern even on to Adelaide herself. Chiltern would
hardly have spoken in that way unless she had complained. She, no
doubt, had been speaking to Lady Chiltern, and Lady Chiltern had
passed it on to her husband. He would have it out with Adelaide on
the next morning,--quite decidedly. And he would make Lord Chiltern
understand that he would not endure interference. He was quite ready
to leave Harrington Hall at a moment's notice if he were ill-treated.
This was the humour in which Gerard Maule put himself to bed that
night.

On the following morning he was very late at breakfast,--so late that
Lord Chiltern had gone over to the kennels. As he was dressing he had
resolved that it would be fitting that he should speak again to his
host before he said anything to Adelaide that might appear to impute
blame to her. He would ask Chiltern whether anything was meant by
what had been said over-night. But, as it happened, Adelaide had been
left alone to pour out his tea for him, and,--as the reader will
understand to have been certain on such an occasion,--they were left
together for an hour in the breakfast parlour. It was impossible that
such an hour should be passed without some reference to the grievance
which was lying heavy on his heart. "Late; I should think you are,"
said Adelaide laughing. "It is nearly eleven. Lord Chiltern has been
out an hour. I suppose you never get up early except for hunting."

"People always think it is so wonderfully virtuous to get up. What's
the use of it?"

"Your breakfast is so cold."

"I don't care about that. I suppose they can boil me an egg. I was
very seedy when I went to bed."

"You smoked too many cigars, sir."

"No, I didn't; but Chiltern was saying things that I didn't like."
Adelaide's face at once became very serious. "Yes, a good deal of
sugar, please. I don't care about toast, and anything does for me. He
has gone to the kennels, has he?"

"He said he should. What was he saying last night?"

"Nothing particular. He has a way of blowing up, you know; and he
looks at one just as if he expected that everybody was to do just
what he chooses."

"You didn't quarrel?"

"Not at all; I went off to bed without saying a word. I hate jaws. I
shall just put it right this morning; that's all."

"Was it about me, Gerard?"

"It doesn't signify the least."

"But it does signify. If you and he were to quarrel would it not
signify to me very much? How could I stay here with them, or go up to
London with them, if you and he had really quarrelled? You must tell
me. I know that it was about me." Then she came and sat close to
him. "Gerard," she continued, "I don't think you understand how much
everything is to me that concerns you."

When he began to reflect, he could not quite recollect what it was
that Lord Chiltern had said to him. He did remember that something
had been suggested about a brother and sister which had implied that
Adelaide might want protection, but there was nothing unnatural or
other than kind in the position which Lord Chiltern had declared
that he would assume. "He seemed to think that I wasn't treating you
well," said he, turning round from the breakfast-table to the fire,
"and that is a sort of thing I can't stand."

"I have never said so, Gerard."

"I don't know what it is that he expects, or why he should interfere
at all. I can't bear to be interfered with. What does he know about
it? He has had somebody to pay everything for him half-a-dozen times,
but I have to look out for myself."

"What does all this mean?"

"You would ask me, you know. I am bothered out of my life by ever so
many things, and now he comes and adds his botheration."

"What bothers you, Gerard? If anything bothers you, surely you will
tell me. If there has been anything to trouble you since you saw your
father why have you not written and told me? Is your trouble about
me?"

"Well, of course it is, in a sort of way."

"I will not be a trouble to you."

"Now you are going to misunderstand me! Of course, you are not a
trouble to me. You know that I love you better than anything in the
world."

"I hope so."

"Of course I do." Then he put his arm round her waist and pressed her
to his bosom. "But what can a man do? When Lady Chiltern recommended
that I should go to my father and tell him, I did it. I knew that no
good could come of it. He wouldn't lift his hand to do anything for
me."

"How horrid that is!"

"He thinks it a shame that I should have my uncle's money, though he
never had any more right to it than that man out there. He is always
saying that I am better off than he is."

"I suppose you are."

"I am very badly off, I know that. People seem to think that £800 is
ever so much, but I find it to be very little."

"And it will be much less if you are married," said Adelaide gravely.

"Of course, everything must be changed. I must sell my horses, and we
must cut and run, and go and live at Boulogne, I suppose. But a man
can't do that kind of thing all in a moment. Then Chiltern comes and
talks as though he were Virtue personified. What business is it of
his?"

Then Adelaide became still more grave. She had now removed herself
from his embrace, and was standing a little apart from him on the
rug. She did not answer him at first; and when she did so, she spoke
very slowly. "We have been rash, I fear; and have done what we have
done without sufficient thought."

"I don't say that at all."

"But I do. It does seem now that we have been imprudent." Then she
smiled as she completed her speech. "There had better be no
engagement between us."

"Why do you say that?"

"Because it is quite clear that it his been a trouble to you rather
than a happiness."

"I wouldn't give it up for all the world."

"But it will be better. I had not thought about it as I should have
done. I did not understand that the prospect of marrying would make
you--so very poor. I see it now. You had better tell Lord Chiltern
that it is--done with, and I will tell her the same. It will be
better; and I will go back to Italy at once."

"Certainly not. It is not done with, and it shall not be done with."

"Do you think I will marry the man I love when he tells me that
by--marrying--me, he will be--banished to--Boulogne? You had better
see Lord Chiltern; indeed you had." And then she walked out of the
room.

Then came upon him at once a feeling that he had behaved badly; and
yet he had been so generous, so full of intentions to be devoted and
true! He had never for a moment thought of breaking off the match,
and would not think of it now. He loved her better than ever, and
would live only with the intention of making her his wife. But he
certainly should not have talked to her of his poverty, nor should he
have mentioned Boulogne. And yet what should he have done? She would
cross-question him about Lord Chiltern, and it was so essentially
necessary that he should make her understand his real condition. It
had all come from that man's unjustifiable interference,--as he would
at once go and tell him. Of course he would marry Adelaide, but the
marriage must be delayed. Everybody waits twelve months before they
are married; and why should she not wait? He was miserable because he
knew that he had made her unhappy;--but the fault had been with Lord
Chiltern. He would speak his mind frankly to Chiltern, and then would
explain with loving tenderness to his Adelaide that they would still
be all in all to each other, but that a short year must elapse before
he could put his house in order for her. After that he would sell his
horses. That resolve was in itself so great that he did not think
it necessary at the present moment to invent any more plans for the
future. So he went out into the hall, took his hat, and marched off
to the kennels.

At the kennels he found Lord Chiltern surrounded by the denizens of
the hunt. His huntsman, with the kennelman and feeder, and two whips,
and old Doggett were all there, and the Master of the Hounds was in
the middle of his business. The dogs were divided by ages, as well
as by sex, and were being brought out and examined. Old Doggett was
giving advice,--differing almost always from Cox, the huntsman, as
to the propriety of keeping this hound or of cashiering that. Nose,
pace, strength, and docility were all questioned with an eagerness
hardly known in any other business; and on each question Lord
Chiltern listened to everybody, and then decided with a single word.
When he had once resolved, nothing further urged by any man then
could avail anything. Jove never was so autocratic, and certainly
never so much in earnest. From the look of Lord Chiltern's brow it
almost seemed as though this weight of empire must be too much for
any mere man. Very little notice was taken of Gerard Maule when he
joined the conclave, though it was felt in reference to him that he
was sufficiently staunch a friend to the hunt to be trusted with
the secrets of the kennel. Lord Chiltern merely muttered some words
of greeting, and Cox lifted the old hunting-cap which he wore. For
another hour the conference was held. Those who have attended such
meetings know well that a morning on the flags is apt to be a long
affair. Old Doggett, who had privileges, smoked a pipe, and Gerard
Maule lit one cigar after another. But Lord Chiltern had become too
thorough a man of business to smoke when so employed. At last the
last order was given,--Doggett snarled his last snarl,--and Cox
uttered his last "My lord." Then Gerard Maule and the Master left the
hounds and walked home together.

The affair had been so long that Gerard had almost forgotten his
grievance. But now as they got out together upon the park, he
remembered the tone of Adelaide's voice as she left him, and
remembered also that, as matters stood at present, it was essentially
necessary that something should be said. "I suppose I shall have to
go and see that woman," said Lord Chiltern.

"Do you mean Adelaide?" asked Maule, in a tone of infinite surprise.

"I mean this new Duchess, who I'm told is to manage everything
herself. That man Fothergill is going on with just the old game at
Trumpeton."

"Is he, indeed? I was thinking of something else just at that moment.
You remember what you were saying about Miss Palliser last night."

"Yes."

"Well;--I don't think, you know, you had a right to speak as you
did."

Lord Chiltern almost flew at his companion, as he replied, "I said
nothing. I do say that when a man becomes engaged to a girl, he
should let her hear from him, so that they may know what each other
is about."

"You hinted something about being her brother."

"Of course I did. If you mean well by her, as I hope you do, it can't
fret you to think that she has got somebody to look after her till
you come in and take possession. It is the commonest thing in the
world when a girl is left all alone as she is."

"You seemed to make out that I wasn't treating her well."

"I said nothing of the kind, Maule; but if you ask me--"

"I don't ask you anything."

"Yes, you do. You come and find fault with me for speaking last night
in the most good-natured way in the world. And, therefore, I tell you
now that you will be behaving very badly indeed, unless you make some
arrangement at once as to what you mean to do."

"That's your opinion," said Gerard Maule.

"Yes, it is; and you'll find it to be the opinion of any man or woman
that you may ask who knows anything about such things. And I'll tell
you what, Master Maule, if you think you're going to face me down
you'll find yourself mistaken. Stop a moment, and just listen to me.
You haven't a much better friend than I am, and I'm sure she hasn't a
better friend than my wife. All this has taken place under our roof,
and I mean to speak my mind plainly. What do you propose to do about
your marriage?"

"I don't propose to tell you what I mean to do."

"Will you tell Miss Palliser,--or my wife?"

"That is just as I may think fit."

"Then I must tell you that you cannot meet her at my house."

"I'll leave it to-day."

"You needn't do that either. You sleep on it, and then make up your
mind. You can't suppose that I have any curiosity about it. The girl
is fond of you, and I suppose that you are fond of her. Don't quarrel
for nothing. If I have offended you, speak to Lady Chiltern about
it."

"Very well;--I will speak to Lady Chiltern."

When they reached the house it was clear that something was wrong.
Miss Palliser was not seen again before dinner, and Lady Chiltern was
grave and very cold in her manner to Gerard Maule. He was left alone
all the afternoon, which he passed with his horses and groom, smoking
more cigars,--but thinking all the time of Adelaide Palliser's last
words, of Lord Chiltern's frown, and of Lady Chiltern's manner to
him. When he came into the drawing-room before dinner, Lady Chiltern
and Adelaide were both there, and Adelaide immediately began to ask
questions about the kennel and the huntsmen. But she studiously
kept at a distance from him, and he himself felt that it would be
impossible to resume at present the footing on which he stood with
them both on the previous evening. Presently Lord Chiltern came in,
and another man and his wife who had come to stay at Harrington.
Nothing could be more dull than the whole evening. At least so Gerard
found it. He did take Adelaide in to dinner, but he did not sit next
to her at table, for which, however, there was an excuse, as, had
he done so, the new-comer must have been placed by his wife. He was
cross, and would not make an attempt to speak to his neighbour, and,
though he tried once or twice to talk to Lady Chiltern--than whom,
as a rule, no woman was ever more easy in conversation--he failed
altogether. Now and again he strove to catch Adelaide's eye, but even
in that he could not succeed. When the ladies left the room Chiltern
and the new-corner--who was not a sporting man, and therefore did not
understand the question--became lost in the mazes of Trumpeton Wood.
But Gerard Maule did not put in a word; nor was a word addressed to
him by Lord Chiltern. As he sat there sipping his wine, he made up
his mind that he would leave Harrington Hall the next morning. When
he was again in the drawing-room, things were conducted in just the
same way. He spoke to Adelaide, and she answered him; but there was
no word of encouragement--not a tone of comfort in her voice. He
found himself driven to attempt conversation with the strange lady,
and at last was made to play whist with Lady Chiltern and the
two new-corners. Later on in the evening, when Adelaide had gone
to her own chamber, he was invited by Lady Chiltern into her own
sitting-room upstairs, and there the whole thing was explained to
him. Miss Palliser had declared that the match should be broken off.

"Do you mean altogether, Lady Chiltern?"

"Certainly I do. Such a resolve cannot be a half-and-half
arrangement."

"But why?"

"I think you must know why, Mr. Maule."

"I don't in the least. I won't have it broken off. I have as much
right to have a voice in the matter as she has, and I don't in the
least believe it's her doing."

"Mr. Maule!"

"I do not care; I must speak out. Why does she not tell me so
herself?"

"She did tell you so."

"No, she didn't. She said something, but not that. I don't suppose
a man was ever so used before; and it's all Lord Chiltern;--just
because I told him that he had no right to interfere with me. And he
has no right."

"You and Oswald were away together when she told me that she had made
up her mind. Oswald has hardly spoken to her since you have been in
the house. He certainly has not spoken to her about you since you
came to us."

"What is the meaning of it, then?"

"You told her that your engagement had overwhelmed you with
troubles."

"Of course; there must be troubles."

"And that--you would have to be banished to Boulogne when you were
married."

"I didn't mean her to take that literally."

"It wasn't a nice way, Mr. Maule, to speak of your future life to the
girl to whom you were engaged. Of course it was her hope to make your
life happier, not less happy. And when you made her understand--as
you did very plainly--that your married prospects filled you with
dismay, of course she had no other alternative but to retreat from
her engagement."

"I wasn't dismayed."

"It is not my doing, Mr. Maule."

"I suppose she'll see me?"

"If you insist upon it she will; but she would rather not."

Gerard, however, did insist, and Adelaide was brought to him there
into that room before he went to bed. She was very gentle with him,
and spoke to him in a tone very different from that which Lady
Chiltern had used; but he found himself utterly powerless to change
her. That unfortunate allusion to a miserable exile at Boulogne had
completed the work which the former plaints had commenced, and had
driven her to a resolution to separate herself from him altogether.

"Mr. Maule;" she said, "when I perceived that our proposed marriage
was looked upon by you as a misfortune, I could do nothing but put
an end to our engagement."

"But I didn't think it a misfortune."

"You made me think that it would be unfortunate for you, and that is
quite as strong a reason. I hope we shall part as friends."

"I won't part at all," he said, standing his ground with his back to
the fire. "I don't understand it, by heaven I don't. Because I said
some stupid thing about Boulogne, all in joke--"

"It was not in joke when you said that troubles had come heavy on you
since you were engaged."

"A man may be allowed to know, himself, whether he was in joke or
not. I suppose the truth is you don't care about me?"

"I hope, Mr. Maule, that in time it may come--not quite to that."

"I think that you are--using me very badly. I think that you
are--behaving--falsely to me. I think that I am--very--shamefully
treated--among you. Of course I shall go. Of course I shall not stay
in this house. A man can't make a girl keep her promise. No--I won't
shake hands. I won't even say good-bye to you. Of course I shall go."
So saying he slammed the door behind him.

"If he cares for you he'll come back to you," Lady Chiltern said to
Adelaide that night, who at the moment was lying on her bed in a sad
condition, frantic with headache.

"I don't want him to come back; I will never make him go to
Boulogne."

"Don't think of it, dear."

"Not think of it! how can I help thinking of it? I shall always think
of it. But I never want to see him again--never! How can I want to
marry a man who tells me that I shall be a trouble to him? He shall
never,--never have to go to Boulogne for me."


CHAPTER XLIII

The Second Thunderbolt


The quarrel between Phineas Finn and Mr. Bonteen had now become the
talk of the town, and had taken many various phases. The political
phase, though it was perhaps the best understood, was not the most
engrossing. There was the personal phase,--which had reference to the
direct altercation that had taken place between the two gentlemen,
and to the correspondence between them which had followed, as to
which phase it may be said that though there were many rumours
abroad, very little was known. It was reported in some circles that
the two aspirants for office had been within an ace of striking
each other; in some, again, that a blow had passed,--and in others,
further removed probably from the House of Commons and the Universe
Club, that the Irishman had struck the Englishman, and that the
Englishman had given the Irishman a thrashing. This was a phase
that was very disagreeable to Phineas Finn. And there was a third,
--which may perhaps be called the general social phase, and which
unfortunately dealt with the name of Lady Laura Kennedy. They all,
of course, worked into each other, and were enlivened and made
interesting with the names of a great many big persons. Mr. Gresham,
the Prime Minister, was supposed to be very much concerned in this
matter. He, it was said, had found himself compelled to exclude
Phineas Finn from the Government, because of the unfortunate alliance
between him and the wife of one of his late colleagues, and had also
thought it expedient to dismiss Mr. Bonteen from his Cabinet,--for
it had amounted almost to dismissal,--because Mr. Bonteen had made
indiscreet official allusion to that alliance. In consequence of this
working in of the first and third phase, Mr. Gresham encountered
hard usage from some friends and from many enemies. Then, of course,
the scene at Macpherson's Hotel was commented on very generally. An
idea prevailed that Mr. Kennedy, driven to madness by his wife's
infidelity, which had become known to him through the quarrel between
Phineas and Mr. Bonteen,--had endeavoured to murder his wife's lover,
who had with the utmost effrontery invaded the injured husband's
presence with a view of deterring him by threats from a publication
of his wrongs. This murder had been nearly accomplished in the centre
of the metropolis,--by daylight, as if that made it worse,--on a
Sunday, which added infinitely to the delightful horror of the
catastrophe; and yet no public notice had been taken of it! The
would-be murderer had been a Cabinet Minister, and the lover who was
so nearly murdered had been an Under-Secretary of State, and was even
now a member of Parliament. And then it was positively known that the
lady's father, who had always been held in the highest respect as
a nobleman, favoured his daughter's lover, and not his daughter's
husband. All which things together filled the public with dismay, and
caused a delightful excitement, giving quite a feature of its own to
the season.

No doubt general opinion was adverse to poor Phineas Finn, but he was
not without his party in the matter. To oblige a friend by inflicting
an injury on his enemy is often more easy than to confer a benefit on
the friend himself. We have already seen how the young Duchess failed
in her attempt to obtain an appointment for Phineas, and also how
she succeeded in destroying the high hopes of Mr. Bonteen. Having
done so much, of course she clung heartily to the side which she
had adopted;--and, equally of course, Madame Goesler did the same.
Between these two ladies there was a slight difference of opinion as
to the nature of the alliance between Lady Laura and their hero. The
Duchess was of opinion that young men are upon the whole averse to
innocent alliances, and that, as Lady Laura and her husband certainly
had long been separated, there was probably--something in it. "Lord
bless you, my dear," the Duchess said, "they were known to be
lovers when they were at Loughlinter together before she married Mr.
Kennedy. It has been the most romantic affair! She made her father
give him a seat for his borough."

"He saved Mr. Kennedy's life," said Madame Goesler.

"That was one of the most singular things that ever happened.
Laurence Fitzgibbon says that it was all planned,--that the garotters
were hired, but unfortunately two policemen turned up at the moment,
so the men were taken. I believe there is no doubt they were pardoned
by Sir Henry Coldfoot, who was at the Home Office, and was Lord
Brentford's great friend. I don't quite believe it all,--it would be
too delicious; but a great many do." Madame Goesler, however, was
strong in her opinion that the report in reference to Lady Laura was
scandalous. She did not believe a word of it, and was almost angry
with the Duchess for her credulity.

It is probable that very many ladies shared the opinion of the
Duchess; but not the less on that account did they take part with
Phineas Finn. They could not understand why he should be shut out
of office because a lady had been in love with him, and by no means
seemed to approve the stern virtue of the Prime Minister. It was
an interference with things which did not belong to him. And many
asserted that Mr. Gresham was much given to such interference. Lady
Cantrip, though her husband was Mr. Gresham's most intimate friend,
was altogether of this party, as was also the Duchess of St. Bungay,
who understood nothing at all about it, but who had once fancied
herself to be rudely treated by Mrs. Bonteen. The young Duchess was
a woman very strong in getting up a party; and the old Duchess, with
many other matrons of high rank, was made to believe that it was
incumbent on her to be a Phineas Finnite. One result of this was,
that though Phineas was excluded from the Liberal Government, all
Liberal drawing-rooms were open to him, and that he was a lion.

Additional zest was given to all this by the very indiscreet conduct
of Mr. Bonteen. He did accept the inferior office of President of
the Board of Trade, an office inferior at least to that for which
he had been designated, and agreed to fill it without a seat in the
Cabinet. But having done so he could not bring himself to bear his
disappointment quietly. He could not work and wait and make himself
agreeable to those around him, holding his vexation within his own
bosom. He was dark and sullen to his chief, and almost insolent to
the Duke of Omnium. Our old friend Plantagenet Palliser was a man who
hardly knew insolence when he met it. There was such an absence about
him of all self-consciousness, he was so little given to think of his
own personal demeanour and outward trappings,--that he never brought
himself to question the manners of others to him. Contradiction he
would take for simple argument. Strong difference of opinion even on
the part of subordinates recommended itself to him. He could put up
with apparent rudeness without seeing it, and always gave men credit
for good intentions. And with it all he had an assurance in his own
position,--a knowledge of the strength derived from his intellect,
his industry, his rank, and his wealth,--which made him altogether
fearless of others. When the little dog snarls, the big dog does
not connect the snarl with himself, simply fancying that the little
dog must be uncomfortable. Mr. Bonteen snarled a good deal, and the
new Lord Privy Seal thought that the new President of the Board of
Trade was not comfortable within himself. But at last the little
dog took the big dog by the ear, and then the big dog put out his
paw and knocked the little dog over. Mr. Bonteen was told that he
had--forgotten himself; and there arose new rumours. It was soon
reported that the Lord Privy Seal had refused to work out decimal
coinage under the management, in the House of Commons, of the
President of the Board of Trade.

Mr. Bonteen, in his troubled spirit, certainly did misbehave himself.
Among his closer friends he declared very loudly that he didn't mean
to stand it. He had not chosen to throw Mr. Gresham over at once, or
to make difficulties at the moment;--but he would not continue to
hold his present position or to support the Government without a seat
in the Cabinet. Palliser had become quite useless,--so Mr. Bonteen
said,--since his accession to the dukedom, and was quite unfit to
deal with decimal coinage. It was a burden to kill any man, and he
was not going to kill himself,--at any rate without the reward for
which he had been working all his life, and to which he was fully
entitled, namely, a seat in the Cabinet. Now there were Bonteenites
in those days as well as Phineas Finnites. The latter tribe was for
the most part feminine; but the former consisted of some half-dozen
members of Parliament, who thought they saw their way in encouraging
the forlorn hope of the unhappy financier.

A leader of a party is nothing without an organ, and an organ came
forward to support Mr. Bonteen,--not very creditable to him as a
Liberal, being a Conservative organ,--but not the less gratifying to
his spirit, inasmuch as the organ not only supported him, but exerted
its very loudest pipes in abusing the man whom of all men he hated
the most. The _People's Banner_ was the organ, and Mr. Quintus Slide
was, of course, the organist. The following was one of the tunes he
played, and was supposed by himself to be a second thunderbolt, and
probably a conclusively crushing missile. This thunderbolt fell on
Monday, the 3rd of May:--


   Early in last March we found it to be our duty to bring
   under public notice the conduct of the member for
   Tankerville in reference to a transaction which took place
   at a small hotel in Judd Street, and as to which we then
   ventured to call for the interference of the police. An
   attempt to murder the member for Tankerville had been made
   by a gentleman once well known in the political world,
   who,--as it is supposed,--had been driven to madness by
   wrongs inflicted on him in his dearest and nearest family
   relations. That the unfortunate gentleman is now insane we
   believe we may state as a fact. It had become our special
   duty to refer to this most discreditable transaction,
   from the fact that a paper, still in our hands, had been
   confided to us for publication by the wretched husband
   before his senses had become impaired,--which, however, we
   were debarred from giving to the public by an injunction
   served upon us in sudden haste by the Vice-Chancellor. We
   are far from imputing evil motives, or even indiscretion,
   to that functionary; but we are of opinion that the moral
   feeling of the country would have been served by the
   publication, and we are sure that undue steps were taken
   by the member for Tankerville to procure that injunction.

   No inquiries whatever were made by the police in reference
   to that attempt at murder, and we do expect that some
   member will ask a question on the subject in the House.
   Would such culpable quiescence have been allowed had
   not the unfortunate lady whose name we are unwilling to
   mention been the daughter of one of the colleagues of our
   present Prime Minister, the gentleman who fired the pistol
   another of them, and the presumed lover, who was fired at,
   also another? We think that we need hardly answer that
   question.

   One piece of advice which we ventured to give Mr. Gresham
   in our former article he has been wise enough to follow.
   We took upon ourselves to tell him that if, after what has
   occurred, he ventured to place the member for Tankerville
   again in office, the country would not stand it;--and he
   has abstained. The jaunty footsteps of Mr. Phineas Finn
   are not heard ascending the stairs of any office at about
   two in the afternoon, as used to be the case in one of
   those blessed Downing Street abodes about three years
   since. That scandal is, we think, over,--and for ever. The
   good-looking Irish member of Parliament who had been put
   in possession of a handsome salary by feminine influences,
   will not, we think, after what we have already said, again
   become a burden on the public purse. But we cannot say
   that we are as yet satisfied in this matter, or that we
   believe that the public has got to the bottom of it,--as
   it has a right to do in reference to all matters affecting
   the public service. We have never yet learned why it is
   that Mr. Bonteen, after having been nominated Chancellor
   of the Exchequer,--for the appointment to that office
   was declared in the House of Commons by the head of his
   party,--was afterwards excluded from the Cabinet, and
   placed in an office made peculiarly subordinate by the
   fact of that exclusion. We have never yet been told why
   this was done;--but we believe that we are justified in
   saying that it was managed through the influence of the
   member for Tankerville; and we are quite sure that the
   public service of the country has thereby been subjected
   to grievous injury.

   It is hardly our duty to praise any of that very awkward
   team of horses which Mr. Gresham drives with an audacity
   which may atone for his incapacity if no fearful accident
   should be the consequence; but if there be one among them
   whom we could trust for steady work up hill, it is Mr.
   Bonteen. We were astounded at Mr. Gresham's indiscretion
   in announcing the appointment of his new Chancellor of the
   Exchequer some weeks before he had succeeded in driving
   Mr. Daubeny from office;--but we were not the less glad to
   find that the finances of the country were to be entrusted
   to the hands of the most competent gentleman whom Mr.
   Gresham has induced to follow his fortunes. But Mr.
   Phineas Finn, with his female forces, has again
   interfered, and Mr. Bonteen has been relegated to the
   Board of Trade, without a seat in the Cabinet. We should
   not be at all surprised if, as the result of this
   disgraceful manoeuvring, Mr. Bonteen found himself at
   the head of the Liberal party before the Session be over.
   If so, evil would have worked to good. But, be that as
   it may, we cannot but feel that it is a disgrace to the
   Government, a disgrace to Parliament, and a disgrace to
   the country that such results should come from the private
   scandals of two or three people among us by no means of
   the best class.


CHAPTER XLIV

The Browborough Trial


There was another matter of public interest going on at this time
which created a great excitement. And this, too, added to the
importance of Phineas Finn, though Phineas was not the hero of the
piece. Mr. Browborough, the late member for Tankerville, was tried
for bribery. It will be remembered that when Phineas contested the
borough in the autumn, this gentleman was returned. He was afterwards
unseated, as the result of a petition before the judge, and Phineas
was declared to be the true member. The judge who had so decided had
reported to the Speaker that further inquiry before a commission into
the practices of the late and former elections at Tankerville would
be expedient, and such commission had sat in the months of January
and February. Half the voters in Tankerville had been examined, and
many who were not voters. The commissioners swept very clean, being
new brooms, and in their report recommended that Mr. Browborough,
whom they had themselves declined to examine, should be prosecuted.
That report was made about the end of March, when Mr. Daubeny's
great bill was impending. Then there arose a double feeling about
Mr. Browborough, who had been regarded by many as a model member of
Parliament, a man who never spoke, constant in his attendance, who
wanted nothing, who had plenty of money, who gave dinners, to whom a
seat in Parliament was the be-all and the end-all of life. It could
not be the wish of any gentleman, who had been accustomed to his slow
step in the lobbies, and his burly form always quiescent on one of
the upper seats just below the gangway on the Conservative side of
the House, that such a man should really be punished. When the new
laws regarding bribery came to take that shape the hearts of members
revolted from the cruelty,--the hearts even of members on the other
side of the House. As long as a seat was in question the battle
should of course be fought to the nail. Every kind of accusation
might then be lavished without restraint, and every evil practice
imputed. It had been known to all the world,--known as a thing that
was a matter of course,--that at every election Mr. Browborough had
bought his seat. How should a Browborough get a seat without buying
it,--a man who could not say ten words, of no family, with no natural
following in any constituency, distinguished by no zeal in politics,
entertaining no special convictions of his own? How should such a
one recommend himself to any borough unless he went there with money
in his hand? Of course, he had gone to Tankerville with money in
his hand, with plenty of money, and had spent it--like a gentleman.
Collectively the House of Commons had determined to put down
bribery with a very strong hand. Nobody had spoken against bribery
with more fervour than Sir Gregory Grogram, who had himself, as
Attorney-General, forged the chains for fettering future bribers. He
was now again Attorney-General, much to his disgust, as Mr. Gresham
had at the last moment found it wise to restore Lord Weazeling to the
woolsack; and to his hands was to be entrusted the prosecution of Mr.
Browborough. But it was observed by many that the job was not much to
his taste. The House had been very hot against bribery,--and certain
members of the existing Government, when the late Bill had been
passed, had expressed themselves with almost burning indignation
against the crime. But, through it all, there had been a slight
undercurrent of ridicule attaching itself to the question of which
only they who were behind the scenes were conscious. The House was
bound to let the outside world know that all corrupt practices at
elections were held to be abominable by the House; but Members of the
House, as individuals, knew very well what had taken place at their
own elections, and were aware of the cheques which they had drawn.
Public-houses had been kept open as a matter of course, and nowhere
perhaps had more beer been drunk than at Clovelly, the borough
for which Sir Gregory Grogram sat. When it came to be a matter of
individual prosecution against one whom they had all known, and
who, as a member, had been inconspicuous and therefore inoffensive,
against a heavy, rich, useful man who had been in nobody's way, many
thought that it would amount to persecution. The idea of putting
old Browborough into prison for conduct which habit had made second
nature to a large proportion of the House was distressing to Members
of Parliament generally. The recommendation for this prosecution was
made to the House when Mr. Daubeny was in the first agonies of his
great Bill, and he at once resolved to ignore the matter altogether,
at any rate for the present. If he was to be driven out of power
there could be no reason why his Attorney-General should prosecute
his own ally and follower,--a poor, faithful creature, who had never
in his life voted against his party, and who had always been willing
to accept as his natural leader any one whom his party might select.
But there were many who had felt that as Mr. Browborough must
certainly now be prosecuted sooner or later,--for there could be no
final neglecting of the Commissioners' report,--it would be better
that he should be dealt with by natural friends than by natural
enemies. The newspapers, therefore, had endeavoured to hurry the
matter on, and it had been decided that the trial should take place
at the Durham Spring Assizes, in the first week of May. Sir Gregory
Grogram became Attorney-General in the middle of April, and he
undertook the task upon compulsion. Mr. Browborough's own friends,
and Mr. Browborough himself, declared very loudly that there would be
the greatest possible cruelty in postponing the trial. His lawyers
thought that his best chance lay in bustling the thing on, and
were therefore able to show that the cruelty of delay would be
extreme,--nay, that any postponement in such a matter would be
unconstitutional, if not illegal. It would, of course, have been just
as easy to show that hurry on the part of the prosecutor was cruel,
and illegal, and unconstitutional, had it been considered that the
best chance of acquittal lay in postponement.

And so the trial was forced forward, and Sir Gregory himself was to
appear on behalf of the prosecuting House of Commons. There could be
no doubt that the sympathies of the public generally were with Mr.
Browborough, though there was as little doubt that he was guilty.
When the evidence taken by the Commissioners had just appeared in
the newspapers,--when first the facts of this and other elections at
Tankerville were made public, and the world was shown how common it
had been for Mr. Browborough to buy votes,--how clearly the knowledge
of the corruption had been brought home to himself,--there had for
a short week or so been a feeling against him. Two or three London
papers had printed leading articles, giving in detail the salient
points of the old sinner's criminality, and expressing a conviction
that now, at least, would the real criminal be punished. But this
had died away, and the anger against Mr. Browborough, even on the
part of the most virtuous of the public press, had become no more
than lukewarm. Some papers boldly defended him, ridiculed the
Commissioners, and declared that the trial was altogether an
absurdity. The _People's Banner_, setting at defiance with an
admirable audacity all the facts as given in the Commissioners'
report, declared that there was not one tittle of evidence against
Mr. Browborough, and hinted that the trial had been got up by the
malign influence of that doer of all evil, Phineas Finn. But men
who knew better what was going on in the world than did Mr. Quintus
Slide, were well aware that such assertions as these were both
unavailing and unnecessary. Mr. Browborough was believed to
be quite safe; but his safety lay in the indifference of his
prosecutors,--certainly not in his innocence. Any one prominent in
affairs can always see when a man may steal a horse and when a man
may not look over a hedge. Mr. Browborough had stolen his horse, and
had repeated the theft over and over again. The evidence of it all
was forthcoming,--had, indeed, been already sifted. But Sir Gregory
Grogram, who was prominent in affairs, knew that the theft might be
condoned.

Nevertheless, the case came on at the Durham Assizes. Within the last
two months Browborough had become quite a hero at Tankerville. The
Church party had forgotten his broken pledges, and the Radicals
remembered only his generosity. Could he have stood for the seat
again on the day on which the judges entered Durham, he might have
been returned without bribery. Throughout the whole county the
prosecution was unpopular. During no portion of his Parliamentary
career had Mr. Browborough's name been treated with so much respect
in the grandly ecclesiastical city as now. He dined with the Dean on
the day before the trial, and on the Sunday was shown by the head
verger into the stall next to the Chancellor of the Diocese, with a
reverence which seemed to imply that he was almost as graceful as
a martyr. When he took his seat in the Court next to his attorney,
everybody shook hands with him. When Sir Gregory got up to open his
case, not one of the listeners then supposed that Mr. Browborough
was about to suffer any punishment. He was arraigned before Mr.
Baron Boultby, who had himself sat for a borough in his younger
days, and who knew well how things were done. We are all aware how
impassionately grand are the minds of judges, when men accused of
crimes are brought before them for trial; but judges after all are
men, and Mr. Baron Boultby, as he looked at Mr. Browborough, could
not but have thought of the old days.

It was nevertheless necessary that the prosecution should be
conducted in a properly formal manner, and that all the evidence
should be given. There was a cloud of witnesses over from
Tankerville,--miners, colliers, and the like,--having a very good
turn of it at the expense of the poor borough. All these men must be
examined, and their evidence would no doubt be the same now as when
it was given with so damnable an effect before those clean-sweeping
Commissioners. Sir Gregory's opening speech was quite worthy of Sir
Gregory. It was essentially necessary, he said, that the atmosphere
of our boroughs should be cleansed and purified from the taint of
corruption. The voice of the country had spoken very plainly on the
subject, and a verdict had gone forth that there should be no more
bribery at elections. At the last election at Tankerville, and, as he
feared, at some former elections, there had been manifest bribery. It
would be for the jury to decide whether Mr. Browborough himself had
been so connected with the acts of his agents as to be himself within
the reach of the law. If it were found that he had brought himself
within the reach of the law, the jury would no doubt say so, and in
such case would do great service to the cause of purity; but if Mr.
Browborough had not been personally cognisant of what his agents
had done, then the jury would be bound to acquit him. A man was not
necessarily guilty of bribery in the eye of the law because bribery
had been committed, even though the bribery so committed had been
sufficiently proved to deprive him of the seat which he would
otherwise have enjoyed. Nothing could be clearer than the manner in
which Sir Gregory explained it all to the jury; nothing more eloquent
than his denunciations against bribery in general; nothing more mild
than his allegations against Mr. Browborough individually.

In regard to the evidence Sir Gregory, with his two assistants, went
through his work manfully. The evidence was given,--not to the same
length as at Tankerville before the Commissioners,--but really to
the same effect. But yet the record of the evidence as given in the
newspapers seemed to be altogether different. At Tankerville there
had been an indignant and sometimes an indiscreet zeal which had
communicated itself to the whole proceedings. The general flavour
of the trial at Durham was one of good-humoured raillery. Mr.
Browborough's counsel in cross-examining the witnesses for the
prosecution displayed none of that righteous wrath,--wrath righteous
on behalf of injured innocence,--which is so common with gentlemen
employed in the defence of criminals; but bowed and simpered, and
nodded at Sir Gregory in a manner that was quite pleasant to behold.
Nobody scolded anybody. There was no roaring of barristers, no
clenching of fists and kicking up of dust, no threats, no allusions
to witnesses' oaths. A considerable amount of gentle fun was poked
at the witnesses by the defending counsel, but not in a manner to
give any pain. Gentlemen who acknowledged to have received seventeen
shillings and sixpence for their votes at the last election were
asked how they had invested their money. Allusions were made to their
wives, and a large amount of good-humoured sparring was allowed, in
which the witnesses thought that they had the best of it. The men
of Tankerville long remembered this trial, and hoped anxiously that
there might soon be another. The only man treated with severity was
poor Phineas Finn, and luckily for himself he was not present. His
qualifications as member of Parliament for Tankerville were somewhat
roughly treated. Each witness there, when he was asked what candidate
would probably be returned for Tankerville at the next election,
readily answered that Mr. Browborough would certainly carry the seat.
Mr. Browborough sat in the Court throughout it all, and was the hero
of the day.

The judge's summing up was very short, and seemed to have been given
almost with indolence. The one point on which he insisted was the
difference between such evidence of bribery as would deprive a man
of his seat, and that which would make him subject to the criminal
law. By the criminal law a man could not be punished for the acts
of another. Punishment must follow a man's own act. If a man were
to instigate another to murder he would be punished, not for the
murder, but for the instigation. They were now administering the
criminal law, and they were bound to give their verdict for an
acquittal unless they were convinced that the man on his trial had
himself,--wilfully and wittingly,--been guilty of the crime imputed.
He went through the evidence, which was in itself clear against the
old sinner, and which had been in no instance validly contradicted,
and then left the matter to the jury. The men in the box put their
heads together, and returned a verdict of acquittal without one
moment's delay. Sir Gregory Grogram and his assistants collected
their papers together. The judge addressed three or four words almost
of compliment to Mr. Browborough, and the affair was over, to the
manifest contentment of every one there present. Sir Gregory Grogram
was by no means disappointed, and everybody, on his own side in
Parliament and on the other, thought that he had done his duty very
well. The clean-sweeping Commissioners, who had been animated with
wonderful zeal by the nature and novelty of their work, probably felt
that they had been betrayed, but it may be doubted whether any one
else was disconcerted by the result of the trial, unless it might be
some poor innocents here and there about the country who had been
induced to believe that bribery and corruption were in truth to be
banished from the purlieus of Westminster.

Mr. Roby and Mr. Ratler, who filled the same office each for his own
party, in and out, were both acquainted with each other, and apt to
discuss parliamentary questions in the library and smoking-room of
the House, where such discussions could be held on most matters.
"I was very glad that the case went as it did at Durham," said Mr.
Ratler.

"And so am I," said Mr. Roby. "Browborough was always a good fellow."

"Not a doubt about it; and no good could have come from a conviction.
I suppose there has been a little money spent at Tankerville."

"And at other places one could mention," said Mr. Roby.

"Of course there has;--and money will be spent again. Nobody dislikes
bribery more than I do. The House, of course, dislikes it. But if a
man loses his seat, surely that is punishment enough."

"It's better to have to draw a cheque sometimes than to be out in the
cold."

"Nevertheless, members would prefer that their seats should not cost
them so much," continued Mr. Ratler. "But the thing can't be done all
at once. That idea of pouncing upon one man and making a victim of
him is very disagreeable to me. I should have been sorry to have seen
a verdict against Browborough. You must acknowledge that there was no
bitterness in the way in which Grogram did it."

"We all feel that," said Mr. Roby,--who was, perhaps, by nature a
little more candid than his rival,--"and when the time comes no doubt
we shall return the compliment."

The matter was discussed in quite a different spirit between two
other politicians. "So Sir Gregory has failed at Durham," said Lord
Cantrip to his friend, Mr. Gresham.

"I was sure he would."

"And why?"

"Ah;--why? How am I to answer such a question? Did you think that Mr.
Browborough would be convicted of bribery by a jury?"

"No, indeed," answered Lord Cantrip.

"And can you tell me why?"

"Because there was no earnestness in the matter,--either with the
Attorney-General or with any one else."

"And yet," said Mr. Gresham, "Grogram is a very earnest man when he
believes in his case. No member of Parliament will ever be punished
for bribery as for a crime till members of Parliament generally look
upon bribery as a crime. We are very far from that as yet. I should
have thought a conviction to be a great misfortune."

"Why so?"

"Because it would have created ill blood, and our own hands in this
matter are not a bit cleaner than those of our adversaries. We
can't afford to pull their houses to pieces before we have put our
own in order. The thing will be done; but it must, I fear, be done
slowly,--as is the case with all reforms from within."

Phineas Finn, who was very sore and unhappy at this time, and who
consequently was much in love with purity and anxious for severity,
felt himself personally aggrieved by the acquittal. It was almost
tantamount to a verdict against himself. And then he knew so well
that bribery had been committed, and was so confident that such a one
as Mr. Browborough could have been returned to Parliament by none
other than corrupt means! In his present mood he would have been
almost glad to see Mr. Browborough at the treadmill, and would have
thought six months' solitary confinement quite inadequate to the
offence. "I never read anything in my life that disgusted me so
much," he said to his friend, Mr. Monk.

"I can't go along with you there."

"If any man ever was guilty of bribery, he was guilty!"

"I don't doubt it for a moment."

"And yet Grogram did not try to get a verdict."

"Had he tried ever so much he would have failed. In a matter such as
that,--political and not social in its nature,--a jury is sure to
be guided by what it has, perhaps unconsciously, learned to be the
feeling of the country. No disgrace is attached to their verdict, and
yet everybody knows that Mr. Browborough had bribed, and all those
who have looked into it know, too, that the evidence was conclusive."

"Then are the jury all perjured," said Phineas.

"I have nothing to say to that. No stain of perjury clings to them.
They are better received in Durham to-day than they would have been
had they found Mr. Browborough guilty. In business, as in private
life, they will be held to be as trustworthy as before;--and they
will be, for aught that we know, quite trustworthy. There are still
circumstances in which a man, though on his oath, may be untrue with
no more stain of falsehood than falls upon him when he denies himself
at his front door though he happen to be at home."

"What must we think of such a condition of things, Mr. Monk?"

"That it's capable of improvement. I do not know that we can think
anything else. As for Sir Gregory Grogram and Baron Boultby and the
jury, it would be waste of power to execrate them. In political
matters it is very hard for a man in office to be purer than his
neighbours,--and, when he is so, he becomes troublesome. I have found
that out before to-day."

With Lady Laura Kennedy, Phineas did find some sympathy;--but then
she would have sympathised with him on any subject under the sun. If
he would only come to her and sit with her she would fool him to the
top of his bent. He had resolved that he would go to Portman Square
as little as possible, and had been confirmed in that resolution
by the scandal which had now spread everywhere about the town in
reference to himself and herself. But still he went. He never left
her till some promise of returning at some stated time had been
extracted from him. He had even told her of his own scruples and of
her danger,--and they had discussed together that last thunderbolt
which had fallen from the Jove of _The People's Banner_. But she had
laughed his caution to scorn. Did she not know herself and her own
innocence? Was she not living in her father's house, and with her
father? Should she quail beneath the stings and venom of such a
reptile as Quintus Slide? "Oh, Phineas," she said, "let us be braver
than that." He would much prefer to have stayed away,--but still he
went to her. He was conscious of her dangerous love for him. He knew
well that it was not returned. He was aware that it would be best for
both that he should be apart. But yet he could not bring himself to
wound her by his absence. "I do not see why you should feel it so
much," she said, speaking of the trial at Durham.

"We were both on our trial,--he and I."

"Everybody knows that he bribed and that you did not."

"Yes;--and everybody despises me and pats him on the back. I am sick
of the whole thing. There is no honesty in the life we lead."

"You got your seat at any rate."

"I wish with all my heart that I had never seen the dirty wretched
place," said he.

"Oh, Phineas, do not say that."

"But I do say it. Of what use is the seat to me? If I could only feel
that any one knew--"

"Knew what, Phineas?"

"It doesn't matter."

"I understand. I know that you have meant to be honest, while this
man has always meant to be dishonest. I know that you have intended
to serve your country, and have wished to work for it. But you cannot
expect that it should all be roses."

"Roses! The nosegays which are worn down at Westminster are made of
garlick and dandelions!"


CHAPTER XLV

Some Passages in the Life of Mr. Emilius


The writer of this chronicle is not allowed to imagine that any of
his readers have read the wonderful and vexatious adventures of Lady
Eustace, a lady of good birth, of high rank, and of large fortune,
who, but a year or two since, became almost a martyr to a diamond
necklace which was stolen from her. With her history the present
reader has but small concern, but it may be necessary that he should
know that the lady in question, who had been a widow with many
suitors, at last gave her hand and her fortune to a clergyman whose
name was Joseph Emilius. Mr. Emilius, though not an Englishman by
birth,--and, as was supposed, a Bohemian Jew in the earlier days of
his career,--had obtained some reputation as a preacher in London,
and had moved,--if not in fashionable circles,--at any rate in
circles so near to fashion as to be brought within the reach of Lady
Eustace's charms. They were married, and for some few months Mr.
Emilius enjoyed a halcyon existence, the delights of which were,
perhaps, not materially marred by the necessity which he felt of
subjecting his young wife to marital authority. "My dear," he would
say, "you will know me better soon, and then things will be smooth."
In the meantime he drew more largely upon her money than was pleasing
to her and to her friends, and appeared to have requirements for
cash which were both secret and unlimited. At the end of twelve
months Lady Eustace had run away from him, and Mr. Emilius had made
overtures, by accepting which his wife would be enabled to purchase
his absence at the cost of half her income. The arrangement was not
regarded as being in every respect satisfactory, but Lady Eustace
declared passionately that any possible sacrifice would be preferable
to the company of Mr. Emilius. There had, however, been a rumour
before her marriage that there was still living in his old country a
Mrs. Emilius when he married Lady Eustace; and, though it had been
supposed by those who were most nearly concerned with Lady Eustace
that this report had been unfounded and malicious, nevertheless, when
the man's claims became so exorbitant, reference was again made to
the charge of bigamy. If it could be proved that Mr. Emilius had a
wife living in Bohemia, a cheaper mode of escape would be found for
the persecuted lady than that which he himself had suggested.

It had happened that, since her marriage with Mr. Emilius, Lady
Eustace had become intimate with our Mr. Bonteen and his wife. She
had been at one time engaged to marry Lord Fawn, one of Mr. Bonteen's
colleagues, and during the various circumstances which had led to the
disruption of that engagement, this friendship had been formed. It
must be understood that Lady Eustace had a most desirable residence
of her own in the country,--Portray Castle in Scotland,--and that
it was thought expedient by many to cultivate her acquaintance.
She was rich, beautiful, and clever; and, though her marriage with
Mr. Emilius had never been looked upon as a success, still, in the
estimation of some people, it added an interest to her career. The
Bonteens had taken her up, and now both Mr. and Mrs. Bonteen were hot
in pursuit of evidence which might prove Mr. Emilius to be a
bigamist.

When the disruption of conjugal relations was commenced, Lady Eustace
succeeded in obtaining refuge at Portray Castle without the presence
of her husband. She fled from London during a visit he made to
Brighton with the object of preaching to a congregation by which his
eloquence was held in great esteem. He left London in one direction
by the 5 P.M. express train on Saturday, and she in the other by the
limited mail at 8.45. A telegram, informing him of what had taken
place, reached him the next morning at Brighton while he was at
breakfast. He preached his sermon, charming the congregation by the
graces of his extempore eloquence,--moving every woman there to
tears,--and then was after his wife before the ladies had taken their
first glass of sherry at luncheon. But her ladyship had twenty-four
hours' start of him,--although he did his best; and when he reached
Portray Castle the door was shut in his face. He endeavoured to
obtain the aid of blacksmiths to open, as he said, his own hall
door,--to obtain the aid of constables to compel the blacksmiths, of
magistrates to compel the constables,--and even of a judge to compel
the magistrates; but he was met on every side by a statement that
the lady of the castle declared that she was not his wife, and that
therefore he had no right whatever to demand that the door should
be opened. Some other woman,--so he was informed that the lady
said,--out in a strange country was really his wife. It was her
intention to prove him to be a bigamist, and to have him locked up.
In the meantime she chose to lock herself up in her own mansion. Such
was the nature of the message that was delivered to him through the
bars of the lady's castle.

How poor Lady Eustace was protected, and, at the same time, made
miserable by the energy and unrestrained language of one of her
own servants, Andrew Gowran by name, it hardly concerns us now to
inquire. Mr. Emilius did not succeed in effecting an entrance; but he
remained for some time in the neighbourhood, and had notices served
on the tenants in regard to the rents, which puzzled the poor folk
round Portray Castle very much. After a while Lady Eustace, finding
that her peace and comfort imperatively demanded that she should
prove the allegations which she had made, fled again from Portray
Castle to London, and threw herself into the hands of the Bonteens.
This took place just as Mr. Bonteen's hopes in regard to the
Chancellorship of the Exchequer were beginning to soar high, and when
his hands were very full of business. But with that energy for which
he was so conspicuous, Mr. Bonteen had made a visit to Bohemia during
his short Christmas holidays, and had there set people to work. When
at Prague he had, he thought, very nearly unravelled the secret
himself. He had found the woman whom he believed to be Mrs. Emilius,
and who was now living somewhat merrily in Prague under another name.
She acknowledged that in old days, when they were both young, she
had been acquainted with a certain Yosef Mealyus, at a time in
which he had been in the employment of a Jewish moneylender in the
city; but,--as she declared,--she had never been married to him.
Mr. Bonteen learned also that the gentleman now known as Mr. Joseph
Emilius of the London Chapel had been known in his own country as
Yosef Mealyus, the name which had been borne by the very respectable
Jew who was his father. Then Mr. Bonteen had returned home, and, as
we all know, had become engaged in matters of deeper import than even
the deliverance of Lady Eustace from her thraldom.

Mr. Emilius made no attempt to obtain the person of his wife while
she was under Mr. Bonteen's custody, but he did renew his offer
to compromise. If the estate could not afford to give him the two
thousand a year which he had first demanded, he would take fifteen
hundred. He explained all this personally to Mr. Bonteen, who
condescended to see him. He was very eager to make Mr. Bonteen
understand how bad even then would be his condition. Mr. Bonteen was,
of course, aware that he would have to pay very heavily for insuring
his wife's life. He was piteous, argumentative, and at first gentle;
but when Mr. Bonteen somewhat rashly told him that the evidence
of a former marriage and of the present existence of the former
wife would certainly be forthcoming, he defied Mr. Bonteen and his
evidence,--and swore that if his claims were not satisfied, he would
make use of the power which the English law gave him for the recovery
of his wife's person. And as to her property,--it was his, not hers.
From this time forward if she wanted to separate herself from him she
must ask him for an allowance. Now, it certainly was the case that
Lady Eustace had married the man without any sufficient precaution as
to keeping her money in her own hands, and Mr. Emilius had insisted
that the rents of the property which was hers for her life should
be paid to him, and on his receipt only. The poor tenants had been
noticed this way and noticed that till they had begun to doubt
whether their safest course would not be to keep their rents in their
own hands. But lately the lawyers of the Eustace family,--who were
not, indeed, very fond of Lady Eustace personally,--came forward for
the sake of the property, and guaranteed the tenants against all
proceedings until the question of the legality of the marriage should
be settled. So Mr. Emilius,--or the Reverend Mealyus, as everybody
now called him,--went to law; and Lady Eustace went to law; and the
Eustace family went to law;--but still, as yet, no evidence was
forthcoming sufficient to enable Mr. Bonteen, as the lady's friend,
to put the gentleman into prison.

It was said for a while that Mealyus had absconded. After his
interview with Mr. Bonteen he certainly did leave England and made a
journey to Prague. It was thought that he would not return, and that
Lady Eustace would be obliged to carry on the trial, which was to
liberate her and her property, in his absence. She was told that
the very fact of his absence would go far with a jury, and she was
glad to be freed from his presence in England. But he did return,
declaring aloud that he would have his rights. His wife should be
made to put herself into his hands, and he would obtain possession
of the income which was his own. People then began to doubt. It was
known that a very clever lawyer's clerk had been sent to Prague to
complete the work there which Mr. Bonteen had commenced. But the
clerk did not come back as soon as was expected, and news arrived
that he had been taken ill. There was a rumour that he had been
poisoned at his hotel; but, as the man was not said to be dead,
people hardly believed the rumour. It became necessary, however, to
send another lawyer's clerk, and the matter was gradually progressing
to a very interesting complication.

Mr. Bonteen, to tell the truth, was becoming sick of it. When
Emilius, or Mealyus, was supposed to have absconded, Lady Eustace
left Mr. Bonteen's house, and located herself at one of the large
London hotels; but when the man came back, bolder than ever, she
again betook herself to the shelter of Mr. Bonteen's roof. She
expressed the most lavish affection for Mrs. Bonteen, and professed
to regard Mr. Bonteen as almost a political god, declaring her
conviction that he, and he alone, as Prime Minister, could save the
country, and became very loud in her wrath when he was robbed of his
seat in the Cabinet. Lizzie Eustace, as her ladyship had always been
called, was a clever, pretty, coaxing little woman, who knew how to
make the most of her advantages. She had not been very wise in her
life, having lost the friends who would have been truest to her, and
confided in persons who had greatly injured her. She was neither
true of heart or tongue, nor affectionate, nor even honest. But she
was engaging; she could flatter; and could assume a reverential
admiration which was very foreign to her real character. In these
days she almost worshipped Mr. Bonteen, and could never be happy
except in the presence of her dearest darling friend Mrs. Bonteen.
Mr. Bonteen was tired of her, and Mrs. Bonteen was becoming almost
sick of the constant kisses with which she was greeted; but Lizzie
Eustace had got hold of them, and they could not turn her off.

"You saw _The People's Banner_, Mrs. Bonteen, on Monday?" Lady
Eustace had been reading the paper in her friend's drawing-room.
"They seem to think that Mr. Bonteen must be Prime Minister before
long."

"I don't think he expects that, my dear."

"Why not? Everybody says _The People's Banner_ is the cleverest paper
we have now. I always hated the very name of that Phineas Finn."

"Did you know him?"

"Not exactly. He was gone before my time; but poor Lord Fawn used to
talk of him. He was one of those conceited Irish upstarts that are
never good for anything."

"Very handsome, you know," said Mrs. Bonteen.

"Was he? I have heard it said that a good many ladies admired him."

"It was quite absurd; with Lady Laura Kennedy it was worse than
absurd. And there was Lady Glencora, and Violet Effingham, who
married Lady Laura's brother, and that Madame Goesler, whom I
hate,--and ever so many others."

"And is it true that it was he who got Mr. Bonteen so shamefully
used?"

"It was his faction."

"I do so hate that kind of thing," said Lady Eustace, with righteous
indignation; "I used to hear a great deal about Government and all
that when the affair was on between me and poor Lord Fawn, and that
kind of dishonesty always disgusted me. I don't know that I think so
much of Mr. Gresham after all."

"He is a very weak man."

"His conduct to Mr. Bonteen has been outrageous; and if he has done
it just because that Duchess of Omnium has told him, I really do
think that he is not fit to rule the nation. As for Mr. Phineas Finn,
it is dreadful to think that a creature like that should be able to
interfere with such a man as Mr. Bonteen."

This was on Wednesday afternoon,--the day on which members of
Parliament dine out,--and at that moment Mr. Bonteen entered the
drawing-room, having left the House for his half-holiday at six
o'clock. Lady Eustace got up, and gave him her hand, and smiled upon
him as though he were indeed her god. "You look so tired and so
worried, Mr. Bonteen."

"Worried;--I should think so."

"Is there anything fresh?" asked his wife.

"That fellow Finn is spreading all manner of lies about me."

"What lies, Mr. Bonteen?" asked Lady Eustace. "Not new lies, I hope."

"It all comes from Carlton Terrace." The reader may perhaps remember
that the young Duchess of Omnium lived in Carlton Terrace. "I can
trace it all there. I won't stand it if it goes on like this. A
clique of stupid women to take up the cudgels for a coal-heaving sort
of fellow like that, and sting one like a lot of hornets! Would you
believe it?--the Duke almost refused to speak to me just now--a
man for whom I have been working like a slave for the last twelve
months!"

"I would not stand it," said Lady Eustace.

"By the bye, Lady Eustace, we have had news from Prague."

"What news?" said she, clasping her hands.

"That fellow Pratt we sent out is dead."

"No!"

"Not a doubt but what he was poisoned; but they seem to think that
nothing can be proved. Coulson is on his way out, and I shouldn't
wonder if they served him the same."

"And it might have been you!" said Lady Eustace, taking hold of her
friend's arm with almost frantic affection.

Yes, indeed. It might have been the lot of Mr. Bonteen to have died
at Prague--to have been poisoned by the machinations of the former
Mrs. Mealyus, if such really had been the fortune of the unfortunate
Mr. Pratt. For he had been quite as busy at Prague as his successor
in the work. He had found out much, though not everything. It
certainly had been believed that Yosef Mealyus was a married man,
but he had brought the woman with him to Prague, and had certainly
not married her in the city. She was believed to have come from
Cracow, and Mr. Bonteen's zeal on behalf of his friend had not been
sufficient to carry him so far East. But he had learned from various
sources that the man and woman had been supposed to be married,--that
she had borne the man's name, and that he had taken upon himself
authority as her husband. There had been written communications with
Cracow, and information was received that a man of the name of Yosef
Mealyus had been married to a Jewess in that town. But this had
been twenty years ago, and Mr. Emilius professed himself to be only
thirty-five years old, and had in his possession a document from his
synagogue professing to give a record of his birth, proving such to
be his age. It was also ascertained that Mealyus was a name common
at Cracow, and that there were very many of the family in Galicia.
Altogether the case was full of difficulty, but it was thought that
Mr. Bonteen's evidence would be sufficient to save the property from
the hands of the cormorant, at any rate till such time as better
evidence of the first marriage could be obtained. It had been hoped
that when the man went away he would not return; but he had returned,
and it was now resolved that no terms should be kept with him and no
payment offered to him. The house at Portray was kept barred, and the
servants were ordered not to admit him. No money was to be paid to
him, and he was to be left to take any proceedings at law which he
might please,--while his adversaries were proceeding against him with
all the weapons at their disposal. In the meantime his chapel was of
course deserted, and the unfortunate man was left penniless in the
world.

Various opinions prevailed as to Mr. Bonteen's conduct in the matter.
Some people remembered that during the last autumn he and his wife
had stayed three months at Portray Castle, and declared that the
friendship between them and Lady Eustace had been very useful. Of
these malicious people it seemed to be, moreover, the opinion that
the connection might become even more useful if Mr. Emilius could be
discharged. It was true that Mrs. Bonteen had borrowed a little money
from Lady Eustace, but of this her husband knew nothing till the Jew
in his wrath made the thing public. After all it had only been a
poor £25, and the money had been repaid before Mr. Bonteen took his
journey to Prague. Mr. Bonteen was, however, unable to deny that the
cost of that journey was defrayed by Lady Eustace, and it was thought
mean in a man aspiring to be Chancellor of the Exchequer to have his
travelling expenses paid for him by a lady. Many, however, were of
opinion that Mr. Bonteen had been almost romantic in his friendship,
and that the bright eyes of Lady Eustace had produced upon this
dragon of business the wonderful effect that was noticed. Be that as
it may, now, in the terrible distress of his mind at the political
aspect of the times, he had become almost sick of Lady Eustace, and
would gladly have sent her away from his house had he known how to do
so without incurring censure.


CHAPTER XLVI

The Quarrel


On that Wednesday evening Phineas Finn was at The Universe. He dined
at the house of Madame Goesler, and went from thence to the club in
better spirits than he had known for some weeks past. The Duke and
Duchess had been at Madame Goesler's, and Lord and Lady Chiltern,
who were now up in town, with Barrington Erle, and,--as it had
happened,--old Mr. Maule. The dinner had been very pleasant, and two
or three words had been spoken which had tended to raise the heart of
our hero. In the first place Barrington Erle had expressed a regret
that Phineas was not at his old post at the Colonies, and the young
Duke had re-echoed it. Phineas thought that the manner of his old
friend Erle was more cordial to him than it had been lately, and
even that comforted him. Then it was a delight to him to meet the
Chilterns, who were always gracious to him. But perhaps his greatest
pleasure came from the reception which was accorded by his hostess to
Mr. Maule, which was of a nature not easy to describe. It had become
evident to Phineas that Mr. Maule was constant in his attentions to
Madame Goesler; and, though he had no purpose of his own in reference
to the lady,--though he was aware that former circumstances,
circumstances of that previous life to which he was accustomed to
look back as to another existence, made it impossible that he should
have any such purpose,--still he viewed Mr. Maule with dislike. He
had once ventured to ask her whether she really liked "that old
padded dandy." She had answered that she did like the old dandy. Old
dandies, she thought, were preferable to old men who did not care how
they looked;--and as for the padding, that was his affair, not hers.
She did not know why a man should not have a pad in his coat, as well
as a woman one at the back of her head. But Phineas had known that
this was her gentle raillery, and now he was delighted to find that
she continued it, after a still more gentle fashion, before the man's
face. Mr. Maule's manner was certainly peculiar. He was more than
ordinarily polite,--and was afterwards declared by the Duchess to
have made love like an old gander. But Madame Goesler, who knew
exactly how to receive such attentions, turned a glance now and then
upon Phineas Finn, which he could now read with absolute precision.
"You see how I can dispose of a padded old dandy directly he goes an
inch too far." No words could have said that to him more plainly than
did these one or two glances;--and, as he had learned to dislike Mr.
Maule, he was gratified.

Of course they all talked about Lady Eustace and Mr. Emilius. "Do
you remember how intensely interested the dear old Duke used to be
when we none of us knew what had become of the diamonds?" said the
Duchess.

"And how you took her part," said Madame Goesler.

"So did you,--just as much as I; and why not? She was a most
interesting young woman, and I sincerely hope we have not got to the
end of her yet. The worst of it is that she has got into such--very
bad hands. The Bonteens have taken her up altogether. Do you know
her, Mr. Finn?"

"No, Duchess;--and am hardly likely to make her acquaintance while
she remains where she is now." The Duchess laughed and nodded her
head. All the world knew by this time that she had declared herself
to be the sworn enemy of the Bonteens.

And there had been some conversation on that terribly difficult
question respecting the foxes in Trumpeton Wood. "The fact is, Lord
Chiltern," said the Duke, "I'm as ignorant as a child. I would do
right if I knew how. What ought I to do? Shall I import some foxes?"

"I don't suppose, Duke, that in all England there is a spot in which
foxes are more prone to breed."

"Indeed. I'm very glad of that. But something goes wrong afterwards,
I fear."

"The nurseries are not well managed, perhaps," said the Duchess.

"Gipsy kidnappers are allowed about the place," said Madame Goesler.

"Gipsies!" exclaimed the Duke.

"Poachers!" said Lord Chiltern. "But it isn't that we mind. We could
deal with that ourselves if the woods were properly managed. A head
of game and foxes can be reared together very well, if--"

"I don't care a straw for a head of game, Lord Chiltern. As far as
my own tastes go, I would wish that there was neither a pheasant
nor a partridge nor a hare on any property that I own. I think that
sheep and barn-door fowls do better for everybody in the long run,
and that men who cannot live without shooting should go beyond
thickly-populated regions to find it. And, indeed, for myself, I must
say the same about foxes. They do not interest me, and I fancy that
they will gradually be exterminated."

"God forbid!" exclaimed Lord Chiltern.

"But I do not find myself called upon to exterminate them myself,"
continued the Duke. "The number of men who amuse themselves by riding
after one fox is too great for me to wish to interfere with them. And
I know that my neighbours in the country conceive it to be my duty to
have foxes for them. I will oblige them, Lord Chiltern, as far as I
can without detriment to other duties."

"You leave it to me," said the Duchess to her neighbour, Lord
Chiltern. "I'll speak to Mr. Fothergill myself, and have it put
right." It unfortunately happened, however, that Lord Chiltern got
a letter the very next morning from old Doggett telling him that a
litter of young cubs had been destroyed that week in Trumpeton Wood.

Barrington Erle and Phineas went off to The Universe together, and
as they went the old terms of intimacy seemed to be re-established
between them. "Nobody can be so sorry as I am," said Barrington, "at
the manner in which things have gone. When I wrote to you, of course,
I thought it certain that, if we came in, you would come with us."

"Do not let that fret you."

"But it does fret me,--very much. There are so many slips that of
course no one can answer for anything."

"Of course not. I know who has been my friend."

"The joke of it is, that he himself is at present so utterly
friendless. The Duke will hardly speak to him. I know that as a fact.
And Gresham has begun to find something is wrong. We all hoped that
he would refuse to come in without a seat in the Cabinet;--but that
was too good to be true. They say he talks of resigning. I shall
believe it when I see it. He'd better not play any tricks, for if he
did resign, it would be accepted at once." Phineas, when he heard
this, could not help thinking how glorious it would be if Mr. Bonteen
were to resign, and if the place so vacated, or some vacancy so
occasioned, were to be filled by him!

They reached the club together, and as they went up the stairs, they
heard the hum of many voices in the room. "All the world and his wife
are here to-night," said Phineas. They overtook a couple of men at
the door, so that there was something of the bustle of a crowd as
they entered. There was a difficulty in finding places in which to
put their coats and hats,--for the accommodation of The Universe is
not great. There was a knot of men talking not far from them, and
among the voices Phineas could clearly hear that of Mr. Bonteen.
Ratler's he had heard before, and also Fitzgibbon's, though he had
not distinguished any words from them. But those spoken by Mr.
Bonteen he did distinguish very plainly. "Mr. Phineas Finn, or some
such fellow as that, would be after her at once," said Mr. Bonteen.
Then Phineas walked immediately among the knot of men and showed
himself. As soon as he heard his name mentioned, he doubted for a
moment what he would do. Mr. Bonteen when speaking had not known of
his presence, and it might be his duty not to seem to have listened.
But the speech had been made aloud, in the open room,--so that those
who chose might listen;--and Phineas could not but have heard it. In
that moment he resolved that he was bound to take notice of what he
had heard. "What is it, Mr. Bonteen, that Phineas Finn will do?" he
asked.

Mr. Bonteen had been--dining. He was not a man by any means
habitually intemperate, and now any one saying that he was tipsy
would have maligned him. But he was flushed with much wine, and
he was a man whose arrogance in that condition was apt to become
extreme. _"In vino veritas!"_ The sober devil can hide his cloven
hoof; but when the devil drinks he loses his cunning and grows
honest. Mr. Bonteen looked Phineas full in the face a second or two
before he answered, and then said,--quite aloud--"You have crept upon
us unawares, sir."

"What do you mean by that, sir?" said Phineas. "I have come in as any
other man comes."

"Listeners at any rate never hear any good of themselves."

Then there were present among those assembled clear indications of
disapproval of Bonteen's conduct. In these days,--when no palpable
and immediate punishment is at hand for personal insolence from man
to man,--personal insolence to one man in a company seems almost
to constitute an insult to every one present. When men could fight
readily, an arrogant word or two between two known to be hostile to
each other was only an invitation to a duel, and the angry man was
doing that for which it was known that he could be made to pay. There
was, or it was often thought that there was, a real spirit in the
angry man's conduct, and they who were his friends before became
perhaps more his friends when he had thus shown that he had an enemy.
But a different feeling prevails at present;--a feeling so different,
that we may almost say that a man in general society cannot speak
even roughly to any but his intimate comrades without giving offence
to all around him. Men have learned to hate the nuisance of a row,
and to feel that their comfort is endangered if a man prone to rows
gets among them. Of all candidates at a club a known quarreller is
more sure of blackballs now than even in the times when such a one
provoked duels. Of all bores he is the worst; and there is always
an unexpressed feeling that such a one exacts more from his company
than his share of attention. This is so strong, that too often the
man quarrelled with, though he be as innocent as was Phineas on the
present occasion, is made subject to the general aversion which is
felt for men who misbehave themselves.

"I wish to hear no good of myself from you," said Phineas, following
him to his seat. "Who is it that you said,--I should be after?" The
room was full, and every one there, even they who had come in with
Phineas, knew that Lady Eustace was the woman. Everybody at present
was talking about Lady Eustace.

"Never mind," said Barrington Erle, taking him by the arm. "What's
the use of a row?"

"No use at all;--but if you heard your name mentioned in such a
manner you would find it impossible to pass it over. There is Mr.
Monk;--ask him."

Mr. Monk was sitting very quietly in a corner of the room with
another gentleman of his own age by him,--one devoted to literary
pursuits and a constant attendant at The Universe. As he said
afterwards, he had never known any unpleasantness of that sort in
the club before. There were many men of note in the room. There was
a foreign minister, a member of the Cabinet, two ex-members of the
Cabinet, a great poet, an exceedingly able editor, two earls, two
members of the Royal Academy, the president of a learned society, a
celebrated professor,--and it was expected that Royalty might come
in at any minute, speak a few benign words, and blow a few clouds of
smoke. It was abominable that the harmony of such a meeting should be
interrupted by the vinous insolence of Mr. Bonteen, and the useless
wrath of Phineas Finn. "Really, Mr. Finn, if I were you I would let
it drop," said the gentleman devoted to literary pursuits.

Phineas did not much affect the literary gentleman, but in such a
matter would prefer the advice of Mr. Monk to that of any man living.
He again appealed to his friend. "You heard what was said?"

"I heard Mr. Bonteen remark that you or somebody like you would in
certain circumstances be after a certain lady. I thought it to be
an ill-judged speech, and as your particular friend I heard it with
great regret."

"What a row about nothing!" said Mr. Bonteen, rising from his seat.
"We were speaking of a very pretty woman, and I was saying that some
young fellow generally supposed to be fond of pretty women would soon
be after her. If that offends your morals you must have become very
strict of late."

There was something in the explanation which, though very bad and
vulgar, it was almost impossible not to accept. Such at least was the
feeling of those who stood around Phineas Finn. He himself knew that
Mr. Bonteen had intended to assert that he would be after the woman's
money and not her beauty; but he had taste enough to perceive that he
could not descend to any such detail as that. "There are reasons, Mr.
Bonteen," he said, "why I think you should abstain from mentioning
my name in public. Your playful references should be made to your
friends, and not to those who, to say the least of it, are not your
friends."

When the matter was discussed afterwards it was thought that Phineas
Finn should have abstained from making the last speech. It was
certainly evidence of great anger on his part. And he was very angry.
He knew that he had been insulted,--and insulted by the man whom of
all men he would feel most disposed to punish for any offence. He
could not allow Mr. Bonteen to have the last word, especially as a
certain amount of success had seemed to attend them. Fate at the
moment was so far propitious to Phineas that outward circumstances
saved him from any immediate reply, and thus left him in some degree
triumphant. Expected Royalty arrived, and cast its salutary oil
upon the troubled waters. The Prince, with some well-known popular
attendant, entered the room, and for a moment every gentleman rose
from his chair. It was but for a moment, and then the Prince became
as any other gentleman, talking to his friends. One or two there
present, who had perhaps peculiarly royal instincts, had crept up
towards him so as to make him the centre of a little knot, but,
otherwise, conversation went on much as it had done before the
unfortunate arrival of Phineas. That quarrel, however, had been very
distinctly trodden under foot by the Prince, for Mr. Bonteen had
found himself quite incapacitated from throwing back any missile in
reply to the last that had been hurled at him.

Phineas took a vacant seat next to Mr. Monk,--who was deficient
perhaps in royal instincts,--and asked him in a whisper his opinion
of what had taken place. "Do not think any more of it," said Mr.
Monk.

"That is so much more easily said than done. How am I not to think of
it?"

"Of course I mean that you are to act as though you had forgotten
it."

"Did you ever know a more gratuitous insult? Of course he was talking
of that Lady Eustace."

"I had not been listening to him before, but no doubt he was. I need
not tell you now what I think of Mr. Bonteen. He is not more gracious
in my eyes than he is in yours. To-night I fancy he has been
drinking, which has not improved him. You may be sure of this,
Phineas,--that the less of resentful anger you show in such a
wretched affair as took place just now, the more will be the blame
attached to him and the less to you."

"Why should any blame be attached to me?"

"I don't say that any will unless you allow yourself to become loud
and resentful. The thing is not worth your anger."

"I am angry."

"Then go to bed at once, and sleep it off. Come with me, and we'll
walk home together."

"It isn't the proper thing, I fancy, to leave the room while the
Prince is here."

"Then I must do the improper thing," said Mr. Monk. "I haven't a key,
and I mustn't keep my servant up any longer. A quiet man like me can
creep out without notice. Good night, Phineas, and take my advice
about this. If you can't forget it, act and speak and look as though
you had forgotten it." Then Mr. Monk, without much creeping, left the
room.

The club was very full, and there was a clatter of voices, and the
clatter round the Prince was the noisiest and merriest. Mr. Bonteen
was there, of course, and Phineas as he sat alone could hear him as
he edged his words in upon the royal ears. Every now and again there
was a royal joke, and then Mr. Bonteen's laughter was conspicuous. As
far as Phineas could distinguish the sounds no special amount of the
royal attention was devoted to Mr. Bonteen. That very able editor,
and one of the Academicians, and the poet, seemed to be the most
honoured, and when the Prince went,--which he did when his cigar was
finished,--Phineas observed with inward satisfaction that the royal
hand, which was given to the poet, to the editor, and to the painter,
was not extended to the President of the Board of Trade. And then,
having taken delight in this, he accused himself of meanness in
having even observed a matter so trivial. Soon after this a ruck of
men left the club, and then Phineas rose to go. As he went down the
stairs Barrington Erle followed him with Laurence Fitzgibbon, and the
three stood for a moment at the door in the street talking to each
other. Finn's way lay eastward from the club, whereas both Erle and
Fitzgibbon would go westwards towards their homes. "How well the
Prince behaves at these sort of places!" said Erle.

"Princes ought to behave well," said Phineas.

"Somebody else didn't behave very well,--eh, Finn, my boy?" said
Laurence.

"Somebody else, as you call him," replied Phineas, "is very unlike a
Prince, and never does behave well. To-night, however, he surpassed
himself."

"Don't bother your mind about it, old fellow," said Barrington.

"I tell you what it is, Erle," said Phineas. "I don't think that I'm
a vindictive man by nature, but with that man I mean to make it even
some of these days. You know as well as I do what it is he has done
to me, and you know also whether I have deserved it. Wretched reptile
that he is! He has pretty nearly been able to ruin me,--and all from
some petty feeling of jealousy."

"Finn, me boy, don't talk like that," said Laurence.

"You shouldn't show your hand," said Barrington.

"I know what you mean, and it's all very well. After your different
fashions you two have been true to me, and I don't care how much you
see of my hand. That man's insolence angers me to such an extent that
I cannot refrain from speaking out. He hasn't spirit enough to go out
with me, or I would shoot him."

"Blankenberg, eh!" said Laurence, alluding to the now notorious duel
which had once been fought in that place between Phineas and Lord
Chiltern.

"I would," continued the angry man. "There are times in which one is
driven to regret that there has come an end to duelling, and there is
left to one no immediate means of resenting an injury."

As they were speaking Mr. Bonteen came out from the front door
alone, and seeing the three men standing, passed on towards the left,
eastwards. "Good night, Erle," he said. "Good night, Fitzgibbon."
The two men answered him, and Phineas stood back in the gloom. It
was about one o'clock and the night was very dark. "By George, I
do dislike that man," said Phineas. Then, with a laugh, he took a
life-preserver out of his pocket, and made an action with it as
though he were striking some enemy over the head. In those days there
had been much garotting in the streets, and writers in the Press had
advised those who walked about at night to go armed with sticks.
Phineas Finn had himself been once engaged with garotters,--as has
been told in a former chronicle,--and had since armed himself,
thinking more probably of the thing which he had happened to see
than men do who had only heard of it. As soon as he had spoken, he
followed Mr. Bonteen down the street, at the distance of perhaps a
couple of hundred yards.

"They won't have a row,--will they?" said Erle.

"Oh, dear, no; Finn won't think of speaking to him; and you may be
sure that Bonteen won't say a word to Finn. Between you and me,
Barrington, I wish Master Phineas would give him a thorough good
hiding."


CHAPTER XLVII

What Came of the Quarrel


On the next morning at seven o'clock a superintendent of police
called at the house of Mr. Gresham and informed the Prime Minister
that Mr. Bonteen, the President of the Board of Trade, had been
murdered during the night. There was no doubt of the fact. The
body had been recognised, and information had been taken to the
unfortunate widow at the house Mr. Bonteen had occupied in St.
James's Place. The superintendent had already found out that Mr.
Bonteen had been attacked as he was returning from his club late at
night,--or rather, early in the morning, and expressed no doubt that
he had been murdered close to the spot on which his body was found.
There is a dark, uncanny-looking passage running from the end of
Bolton Row, in May Fair, between the gardens of two great noblemen,
coming out among the mews in Berkeley Street, at the corner of
Berkeley Square, just opposite to the bottom of Hay Hill. It was on
the steps leading up from the passage to the level of the ground
above that the body was found. The passage was almost as near a way
as any from the club to Mr. Bonteen's house in St. James's Place;
but the superintendent declared that gentlemen but seldom used the
passage after dark, and he was disposed to think that the unfortunate
man must have been forced down the steps by the ruffian who had
attacked him from the level above. The murderer, so thought the
superintendent, must have been cognizant of the way usually taken
by Mr. Bonteen, and must have lain in wait for him in the darkness
of the mouth of the passage. The superintendent had been at work on
his inquiries since four in the morning, and had heard from Lady
Eustace,--and from Mrs. Bonteen, as far as that poor distracted
woman had been able to tell her story,--some account of the cause
of quarrel between the respective husbands of those two ladies. The
officer, who had not as yet heard a word of the late disturbance
between Mr. Bonteen and Phineas Finn, was strongly of opinion that
the Reverend Mr. Emilius had been the murderer. Mr. Gresham, of
course, coincided in that opinion. What steps had been taken as to
the arrest of Mr. Emilius? The superintendent was of opinion that Mr.
Emilius was already in custody. He was known to be lodging close to
the Marylebone Workhouse, in Northumberland Street, having removed to
that somewhat obscure neighbourhood as soon as his house in Lowndes
Square had been broken up by the running away of his wife and his
consequent want of means. Such was the story as told to the Prime
Minister at seven o'clock in the morning.

At eleven o'clock, at his private room at the Treasury Chambers, Mr.
Gresham heard much more. At that time there were present with him two
officers of the police force, his colleagues in the Cabinet, Lord
Cantrip and the Duke of Omnium, three of his junior colleagues in the
Government, Lord Fawn, Barrington Erle, and Laurence Fitzgibbon,--and
Major Mackintosh, the chief of the London police. It was not exactly
part of the duty of Mr. Gresham to investigate the circumstances of
this murder; but there was so much in it that brought it closely home
to him and his Government, that it became impossible for him not to
concern himself in the business. There had been so much talk about
Mr. Bonteen lately, his name had been so common in the newspapers,
the ill-usage which he had been supposed by some to have suffered
had been so freely discussed, and his quarrel, not only with Phineas
Finn, but subsequently with the Duke of Omnium, had been so widely
known,--that his sudden death created more momentary excitement than
might probably have followed that of a greater man. And now, too, the
facts of the past night, as they became known, seemed to make the
crime more wonderful, more exciting, more momentous than it would
have been had it been brought clearly home to such a wretch as the
Bohemian Jew, Yosef Mealyus, who had contrived to cheat that wretched
Lizzie Eustace into marrying him.

As regarded Yosef Mealyus the story now told respecting him was this.
He was already in custody. He had been found in bed at his lodgings
between seven and eight, and had, of course, given himself up without
difficulty. He had seemed to be horror-struck when he heard of the
man's death,--but had openly expressed his joy. "He has endeavoured
to ruin me, and has done me a world of harm. Why should I sorrow for
him?"--he said to the policeman when rebuked for his inhumanity. But
nothing had been found tending to implicate him in the crime. The
servant declared that he had gone to bed before eleven o'clock, to
her knowledge,--for she had seen him there,--and that he had not
left the house afterwards. Was he in possession of a latch-key? It
appeared that he did usually carry a latch-key, but that it was often
borrowed from him by members of the family when it was known that
he would not want it himself,--and that it had been so lent on this
night. It was considered certain by those in the house that he had
not gone out after he went to bed. Nobody in fact had left the house
after ten; but in accordance with his usual custom Mr. Emilius had
sent down the key as soon as he had found that he would not want
it, and it had been all night in the custody of the mistress of the
establishment. Nevertheless his clothes were examined minutely, but
without affording any evidence against him. That Mr. Bonteen had been
killed with some blunt weapon, such as a life-preserver, was assumed
by the police, but no such weapon was in the possession of Mr.
Emilius, nor had any such weapon yet been found. He was, however, in
custody, with no evidence against him except that which was afforded
by his known and acknowledged enmity to Mr. Bonteen.

So far, Major Mackintosh and the two officers had told their story.
Then came the united story of the other gentlemen assembled,--from
hearing which, however, the two police officers were debarred. The
Duke and Barrington Erle had both dined in company with Phineas
Finn at Madame Goesler's, and the Duke was undoubtedly aware that
ill blood had existed between Finn and Mr. Bonteen. Both Erle and
Fitzgibbon described the quarrel at the club, and described also the
anger which Finn had expressed against the wretched man as he stood
talking at the club door. His gesture of vengeance was remembered and
repeated, though both the men who heard it expressed their strongest
conviction that the murder had not been committed by him. As Erle
remarked, the very expression of such a threat was almost proof that
he had not at that moment any intention on his mind of doing such a
deed as had been done. But they told also of the life-preserver which
Finn had shown them, as he took it from the pocket of his outside
coat, and they marvelled at the coincidences of the night. Then Lord
Fawn gave further evidence, which seemed to tell very hardly upon
Phineas Finn. He also had been at the club, and had left it just
before Finn and the two other men had clustered at the door. He had
walked very slowly, having turned down to Curzon Street and Bolton
Row, from whence he made his way into Piccadilly by Clarges Street.
He had seen nothing of Mr. Bonteen; but as he crossed over to Clarges
Street he was passed at a very rapid pace by a man muffled in a top
coat, who made his way straight along Bolton Row towards the passage
which has been described. At the moment he had not connected the
person of the man who passed him with any acquaintance of his own;
but he now felt sure,--after what he had heard,--that the man was Mr.
Finn. As he passed out of the club Finn was putting on his overcoat,
and Lord Fawn had observed the peculiarity of the grey colour. It was
exactly a similar coat, only with its collar raised, that had passed
him in the street. The man, too, was of Mr. Finn's height and build.
He had known Mr. Finn well, and the man stepped with Mr. Finn's step.
Major Mackintosh thought that Lord Fawn's evidence was--"very
unfortunate as regarded Mr. Finn."

"I'm d---- if that idiot won't hang poor Phinny," said Fitzgibbon
afterwards to Erle. "And yet I don't believe a word of it."

"Fawn wouldn't lie for the sake of hanging Phineas Finn," said Erle.

"No;--I don't suppose he's given to lying at all. He believes it
all. But he's such a muddle-headed fellow that he can get himself
to believe anything. He's one of those men who always unconsciously
exaggerate what they have to say for the sake of the importance it
gives them." It might be possible that a jury would look at Lord
Fawn's evidence in this light; otherwise it would bear very heavily,
indeed, against Phineas Finn.

Then a question arose as to the road which Mr. Bonteen usually took
from the club. All the members who were there present had walked home
with him at various times,--and by various routes, but never by the
way through the passage. It was supposed that on this occasion he
must have gone by Berkeley Square, because he had certainly not
turned down by the first street to the right, which he would have
taken had he intended to avoid the square. He had been seen by
Barrington Erle and Fitzgibbon to pass that turning. Otherwise they
would have made no remark as to the possibility of a renewed quarrel
between him and Phineas, should Phineas chance to overtake him;--for
Phineas would certainly go by the square unless taken out of his way
by some special purpose. The most direct way of all for Mr. Bonteen
would have been that followed by Lord Fawn; but as he had not turned
down this street, and had not been seen by Lord Fawn, who was known
to walk very slowly, and had often been seen to go by Berkeley
Square,--it was presumed that he had now taken that road. In this
case he would certainly pass the end of the passage towards which
Lord Fawn declared that he had seen the man hurrying whom he now
supposed to have been Phineas Finn. Finn's direct road home would,
as has been already said, have been through the square, cutting off
the corner of the square, towards Bruton Street, and thence across
Bond Street by Conduit Street to Regent Street, and so to Great
Marlborough Street, where he lived. But it had been, no doubt,
possible for him to have been on the spot on which Lord Fawn had seen
the man; for, although in his natural course thither from the club he
would have at once gone down the street to the right,--a course which
both Erle and Fitzgibbon were able to say that he did not take, as
they had seen him go beyond the turning,--nevertheless there had been
ample time for him to have retraced his steps to it in time to have
caught Lord Fawn, and thus to have deceived Fitzgibbon and Erle as to
the route he had taken.

When they had got thus far Lord Cantrip was standing close to the
window of the room at Mr. Gresham's elbow. "Don't allow yourself to
be hurried into believing it," said Lord Cantrip.

"I do not know that we need believe it, or the reverse. It is a case
for the police."

"Of course it is;--but your belief and mine will have a weight.
Nothing that I have heard makes me for a moment think it possible. I
know the man."

"He was very angry."

"Had he struck him in the club I should not have been much surprised;
but he never attacked his enemy with a bludgeon in a dark alley. I
know him well."

"What do you think of Fawn's story?"

"He was mistaken in his man. Remember;--it was a dark night."

"I do not see that you and I can do anything," said Mr. Gresham. "I
shall have to say something in the House as to the poor fellow's
death, but I certainly shall not express a suspicion. Why should I?"

Up to this moment nothing had been done as to Phineas Finn. It was
known that he would in his natural course of business be in his place
in Parliament at four, and Major Mackintosh was of opinion that he
certainly should be taken before a magistrate in time to prevent the
necessity of arresting him in the House. It was decided that Lord
Fawn, with Fitzgibbon and Erle, should accompany the police officer
to Bow Street, and that a magistrate should be applied to for a
warrant if he thought the evidence was sufficient. Major Mackintosh
was of opinion that, although by no possibility could the two
men suspected have been jointly guilty of the murder, still the
circumstances were such as to justify the immediate arrest of both.
Were Yosef Mealyus really guilty and to be allowed to slip from their
hands, no doubt it might be very difficult to catch him. Facts
did not at present seem to prevail against him; but, as the Major
observed, facts are apt to alter considerably when they are minutely
sifted. His character was half sufficient to condemn him;--and then
with him there was an adequate motive, and what Lord Cantrip regarded
as "a possibility." It was not to be conceived that from mere rage
Phineas Finn would lay a plot for murdering a man in the street. "It
is on the cards, my lord," said the Major, "that he may have chosen
to attack Mr. Bonteen without intending to murder him. The murder may
afterwards have been an accident."

It was impossible after this for even a Prime Minister and two
Cabinet Ministers to go about their work calmly. The men concerned
had been too well known to them to allow their minds to become clear
of the subject. When Major Mackintosh went off to Bow Street with
Erle and Laurence, it was certainly the opinion of the majority of
those who had been present that the blow had been struck by the hand
of Phineas Finn. And perhaps the worst aspect of it all was that
there had been not simply a blow,--but blows. The constables had
declared that the murdered man had been struck thrice about the head,
and that the fatal stroke had been given on the side of his head
after the man's hat had been knocked off. That Finn should have
followed his enemy through the street, after such words as he had
spoken, with the view of having the quarrel out in some shape,
did not seem to be very improbable to any of them except Lord
Cantrip;--and then had there been a scuffle, out in the open path, at
the spot at which the angry man might have overtaken his adversary,
it was not incredible to them that he should have drawn even such a
weapon as a life-preserver from his pocket. But, in the case as it
had occurred, a spot peculiarly traitorous had been selected, and the
attack had too probably been made from behind. As yet there was no
evidence that the murderer had himself encountered any ill-usage. And
Finn, if he was the murderer, must, from the time he was standing at
the club door, have contemplated a traitorous, dastardly attack. He
must have counted his moments;--have returned slyly in the dark to
the corner of the street which he had once passed;--have muffled his
face in his coat;--and have then laid wait in a spot to which an
honest man at night would hardly trust himself with honest purposes.
"I look upon it as quite out of the question," said Lord Cantrip,
when the three Ministers were left alone. Now Lord Cantrip had served
for many months in the same office as Phineas Finn.

"You are simply putting your own opinion of the man against the
facts," said Mr. Gresham. "But facts always convince, and another
man's opinion rarely convinces."

"I'm not sure that we know the facts yet," said the Duke.

"Of course we are speaking of them as far as they have been told to
us. As far as they go,--unless they can be upset and shown not to be
facts,--I fear they would be conclusive to me on a jury."

"Do you mean that you have heard enough to condemn him?" asked Lord
Cantrip.

"Remember what we have heard. The murdered man had two enemies."

"He may have had a third."

"Or ten; but we have heard of but two."

"He may have been attacked for his money," said the Duke. "But
neither his money nor his watch were touched," continued Mr. Gresham.
"Anger, or the desire of putting the man out of the way, has caused
the murder. Of the two enemies one,--according to the facts as we now
have them,--could not have been there. Nor is it probable that he
could have known that his enemy would be on that spot. The other not
only could have been there, but was certainly near the place at the
moment,--so near that did he not do the deed himself, it is almost
wonderful that it should not have been interrupted in its doing by
his nearness. He certainly knew that the victim would be there.
He was burning with anger against him at the moment. He had just
threatened him. He had with him such an instrument as was afterwards
used. A man believed to be him is seen hurrying to the spot by a
witness whose credibility is beyond doubt. These are the facts such
as we have them at present. Unless they can be upset, I fear they
would convince a jury,--as they have already convinced those officers
of the police."

"Officers of the police always believe men to be guilty," said Lord
Cantrip.

"They don't believe the Jew clergyman to be guilty," said Mr.
Gresham.

"I fear that there will be enough to send Mr. Finn to a trial," said
the Duke.

"Not a doubt of it," said Mr. Gresham.

"And yet I feel as convinced of his innocence as I do of my own,"
said Lord Cantrip.


CHAPTER XLVIII

Mr. Maule's Attempt


About three o'clock in the day the first tidings of what had taken
place reached Madame Goesler in the following perturbed note from her
friend the Duchess:--"Have you heard what took place last night? Good
God! Mr. Bonteen was murdered as he came home from his club, and they
say that it was done by Phineas Finn. Plantagenet has just come in
from Downing Street, where everybody is talking about it. I can't get
from him what he believes. One never can get anything from him. But
I never will believe it;--nor will you, I'm sure. I vote we stick to
him to the last. He is to be put in prison and tried. I can hardly
believe that Mr. Bonteen has been murdered, though I don't know why
he shouldn't as well as anybody else. Plantagenet talks about the
great loss; I know which would be the greatest loss, and so do you.
I'm going out now to try and find out something. Barrington Erle was
there, and if I can find him he will tell me. I shall be home by
half-past five. Do come, there's a dear woman; there is no one else I
can talk to about it. If I'm not back, go in all the same, and tell
them to bring you tea.

"Only think of Lady Laura,--with one mad and the other in Newgate!
G.P."

This letter gave Madame Goesler such a blow that for a few minutes
it altogether knocked her down. After reading it once she hardly
knew what it contained beyond a statement that Phineas Finn was in
Newgate. She sat for a while with it in her hands, almost swooning;
and then with an effort she recovered herself, and read the letter
again. Mr. Bonteen murdered, and Phineas Finn,--who had dined with
her only yesterday evening, with whom she had been talking of all the
sins of the murdered man, who was her special friend, of whom she
thought more than of any other human being, of whom she could not
bring herself to cease to think,--accused of the murder! Believe
it! The Duchess had declared with that sort of enthusiasm which was
common to her, that she never would believe it. No, indeed! What
judge of character would any one be who could believe that Phineas
Finn could be guilty of a midnight murder? "I vote we stick to him."
"Stick to him!" Madame Goesler said, repeating the words to herself.
"What is the use of sticking to a man who does not want you?" How
can a woman cling to a man who, having said that he did not want her,
yet comes again within her influence, but does not unsay what he had
said before? Nevertheless, if it should be that the man was in real
distress,--in absolutely dire sorrow,--she would cling to him with a
constancy which, as she thought, her friend the Duchess would hardly
understand. Though they should hang him, she would bathe his body
with her tears, and live as a woman should live who had loved a
murderer to the last.

But she swore to herself that she would not believe it. Nay, she did
not believe it. Believe it, indeed! It was simply impossible. That he
might have killed the wretch in some struggle brought on by the man's
own fault was possible. Had the man attacked Phineas Finn it was only
too probable that there might have been such result. But murder,
secret midnight murder, could not have been committed by the man
she had chosen as her friend. And yet, through it all, there was a
resolve that even though he should have committed murder she would
be true to him. If it should come to the very worst, then would she
declare the intensity of the affection with which she regarded the
murderer. As to Mr. Bonteen, what the Duchess said was true enough;
why should not he be killed as well as another? In her present frame
of mind she felt very little pity for Mr. Bonteen. After a fashion a
verdict of "served him right" crossed her mind, as it had doubtless
crossed that of the Duchess when she was writing her letter. The man
had made himself so obnoxious that it was well that he should be out
of the way. But not on that account would she believe that Phineas
Finn had murdered him.

Could it be true that the man after all was dead? Marvellous reports,
and reports marvellously false, do spread themselves about the world
every day. But this report had come from the Duke, and he was not
a man given to absurd rumours. He had heard the story in Downing
Street, and if so it must be true. Of course she would go down to the
Duchess at the hour fixed. It was now a little after three, and she
ordered the carriage to be ready for her at a quarter past five. Then
she told the servant, at first to admit no one who might call, and
then to come up and let her know, if any one should come, without
sending the visitor away. It might be that some one would come to her
expressly from Phineas, or at least with tidings about this affair.

Then she read the letter again, and those few last words in it stuck
to her thoughts like a burr. "Think of Lady Laura, with one mad and
the other in Newgate." Was this man,--the only man whom she had ever
loved,--more to Lady Laura Kennedy than to her; or rather, was Lady
Laura more to him than was she herself? If so, why should she fret
herself for his sake? She was ready enough to own that she could
sacrifice everything for him, even though he should be standing as a
murderer in the dock, if such sacrifice would be valued by him. He
had himself told her that his feelings towards Lady Laura were simply
those of an affectionate friend; but how could she believe that
statement when all the world were saying the reverse? Lady Laura was
a married woman,--a woman whose husband was still living,--and of
course he was bound to make such an assertion when he and she were
named together. And then it was certain,--Madame Goesler believed it
to be certain,--that there had been a time in which Phineas had asked
for the love of Lady Laura Standish. But he had never asked for her
love. It had been tendered to him, and he had rejected it! And now
the Duchess,--who, with all her inaccuracies, had that sharpness of
vision which enables some men and women to see into facts,--spoke as
though Lady Laura were to be pitied more than all others, because of
the evil that had befallen Phineas Finn! Had not Lady Laura chosen
her own husband; and was not the man, let him be ever so mad, still
her husband? Madame Goesler was sore of heart, as well as broken down
with sorrow, till at last, hiding her face on the pillow of the sofa,
still holding the Duchess's letter in her hand, she burst into a fit
of hysteric sobs.

Few of those who knew Madame Max Goesler well, as she lived in town
and in country, would have believed that such could have been the
effect upon her of the news which she had heard. Credit was given to
her everywhere for good nature, discretion, affability, and a certain
grace of demeanour which always made her charming. She was known to
be generous, wise, and of high spirit. Something of her conduct to
the old Duke had crept into general notice, and had been told, here
and there, to her honour. She had conquered the good opinion of many,
and was a popular woman. But there was not one among her friends who
supposed her capable of becoming a victim to a strong passion, or
would have suspected her of reckless weeping for any sorrow. The
Duchess, who thought that she knew Madame Goesler well, would not
have believed it to be true, even if she had seen it. "You like
people, but I don't think you ever love any one," the Duchess had
once said to her. Madame Goesler had smiled, and had seemed to
assent. To enjoy the world,--and to know that the best enjoyment must
come from witnessing the satisfaction of others, had apparently been
her philosophy. But now she was prostrate because this man was in
trouble, and because she had been told that his trouble was more than
another woman could bear!

She was still sobbing and crushing the letter in her hand when the
servant came up to tell her that Mr. Maule had called. He was below,
waiting to know whether she would see him. She remembered at once
that Mr. Maule had met Phineas at her table on the previous evening,
and, thinking that he must have come with tidings respecting this
great event, desired that he might be shown up to her. But, as it
happened, Mr. Maule had not yet heard of the death of Mr. Bonteen. He
had remained at home till nearly four, having a great object in view,
which made him deem it expedient that he should go direct from his
own rooms to Madame Goesler's house, and had not even looked in at
his club. The reader will, perhaps, divine the great object. On this
day he proposed to ask Madame Goesler to make him the happiest of
men,--as he certainly would have thought himself for a time, had
she consented to put him in possession of her large income. He had
therefore padded himself with more than ordinary care,--reduced but
not obliterated the greyness of his locks,--looked carefully to the
fitting of his trousers, and spared himself those ordinary labours of
the morning which might have robbed him of any remaining spark of his
juvenility.

Madame Goesler met him more than half across the room as he entered
it. "What have you heard?" said she. Mr. Maule wore his sweetest
smile, but he had heard nothing. He could only press her hand, and
look blank,--understanding that there was something which he ought to
have heard. She thought nothing of the pressure of her hand. Apt as
she was to be conscious at an instant of all that was going on around
her, she thought of nothing now but that man's peril, and of the
truth or falsehood of the story that had been sent to her. "You have
heard nothing of Mr. Finn?"

"Not a word," said Mr. Maule, withdrawing his hand. "What has
happened to Mr. Finn?" Had Mr. Finn broken his neck it would have
been nothing to Mr. Maule. But the lady's solicitude was something to
him.

"Mr. Bonteen has been--murdered!"

"Mr. Bonteen!"

"So I hear. I thought you had come to tell me of it."

"Mr. Bonteen murdered! No;--I have heard nothing. I do not know the
gentleman. I thought you said--Mr. Finn."

"It is not known about London, then?"

"I cannot say, Madame Goesler. I have just come from home, and have
not been out all the morning. Who has--murdered him?"

"Ah! I do not know. That is what I wanted you to tell me."

"But what of Mr. Finn?"

"I also have not been out, Mr. Maule, and can give you no
information. I thought you had called because you knew that Mr. Finn
had dined here."

"Has Mr. Finn been murdered?"

"Mr. Bonteen! I said that the report was that Mr. Bonteen had been
murdered." Madame Goesler was now waxing angry,--most unreasonably.
"But I know nothing about it, and am just going out to make inquiry.
The carriage is ordered." Then she stood, expecting him to go; and
he knew that he was expected to go. It was at any rate clear to him
that he could not carry out his great design on the present occasion.
"This has so upset me that I can think of nothing else at present,
and you must, if you please, excuse me. I would not have let you take
the trouble of coming up, had not I thought that you were the bearer
of some news." Then she bowed, and Mr. Maule bowed; and as he left
the room she forgot to ring the bell.

"What the deuce can she have meant about that fellow Finn?" he said
to himself. "They cannot both have been murdered." He went to his
club, and there he soon learned the truth. The information was given
to him with clear and undoubting words. Phineas Finn and Mr. Bonteen
had quarrelled at The Universe. Mr. Bonteen, as far as words went,
had got the best of his adversary. This had taken place in the
presence of the Prince, who had expressed himself as greatly annoyed
by Mr. Finn's conduct. And afterwards Phineas Finn had waylaid Mr.
Bonteen in the passage between Bolton Row and Berkeley Street, and
had there--murdered him. As it happened, no one who had been at The
Universe was at that moment present; but the whole affair was now
quite well known, and was spoken of without a doubt.

"I hope he'll be hung, with all my heart," said Mr. Maule, who
thought that he could read the riddle which had been so
unintelligible in Park Lane.

When Madame Goesler reached Carlton Terrace, which she did before the
time named by the Duchess, her friend had not yet returned. But she
went upstairs, as she had been desired, and they brought her tea. But
the teapot remained untouched till past six o'clock, and then the
Duchess returned. "Oh, my dear, I am so sorry for being late. Why
haven't you had tea?"

"What is the truth of it all?" said Madame Goesler, standing up with
her fists clenched as they hung by her side.

"I don't seem to know nearly as much as I did when I wrote to you."

"Has the man been--murdered?"

"Oh dear, yes. There's no doubt about that. I was quite sure of that
when I sent the letter. I have had such a hunt. But at last I went up
to the door of the House of Commons, and got Barrington Erle to come
out to me."

"Well?"

"Two men have been arrested."

"Not Phineas Finn?"

"Yes; Mr. Finn is one of them. Is it not awful? So much more dreadful
to me than the other poor man's death! One oughtn't to say so, of
course."

"And who is the other man? Of course he did it."

"That horrid Jew preaching man that married Lizzie Eustace. Mr.
Bonteen had been persecuting him, and making out that he had another
wife at home in Hungary, or Bohemia, or somewhere."

"Of course he did it."

"That's what I say. Of course the Jew did it. But then all the
evidence goes to show that he didn't do it. He was in bed at the
time; and the door of the house was locked up so that he couldn't get
out; and the man who did the murder hadn't got on his coat, but had
got on Phineas Finn's coat."

"Was there--blood?" asked Madame Goesler, shaking from head to foot.

"Not that I know. I don't suppose they've looked yet. But Lord Fawn
saw the man, and swears to the coat."

"Lord Fawn! How I have always hated that man! I wouldn't believe a
word he would say."

"Barrington doesn't think so much of the coat. But Phineas had a club
in his pocket, and the man was killed by a club. There hasn't been
any other club found, but Phineas Finn took his home with him."

"A murderer would not have done that."

"Barrington says that the head policeman says that it is just what a
very clever murderer would do."

"Do you believe it, Duchess?"

"Certainly not;--not though Lord Fawn swore that he had seen it. I
never will believe what I don't like to believe, and nothing shall
ever make me."

"He couldn't have done it."

"Well;--for the matter of that, I suppose he could."

"No, Duchess, he could not have done it."

"He is strong enough,--and brave enough."

"But not enough of a coward. There is nothing cowardly about him.
If Phineas Finn could have struck an enemy with a club, in a dark
passage, behind his back, I will never care to speak to any man
again. Nothing shall make me believe it. If I did, I could never
again believe in any one. If they told you that your husband had
murdered a man, what would you say?"

"But he isn't your husband, Madame Max."

"No;--certainly not. I cannot fly at them, when they say so, as you
would do. But I can be just as sure. If twenty Lord Fawns swore that
they had seen it, I would not believe them. Oh, God, what will they
do with him!"

The Duchess behaved very well to her friend, saying not a single word
to twit her with the love which she betrayed. She seemed to take
it as a matter of course that Madame Goesler's interest in Phineas
Finn should be as it was. The Duke, she said, could not come home
to dinner, and Madame Goesler should stay with her. Both Houses
were in such a ferment about the murder, that nobody liked to be
away. Everybody had been struck with amazement, not simply,--not
chiefly,--by the fact of the murder, but by the double destruction of
the two men whose ill-will to each other had been of late so often
the subject of conversation. So Madame Goesler remained at Carlton
Terrace till late in the evening, and during the whole visit there
was nothing mentioned but the murder of Mr. Bonteen and the peril of
Phineas Finn. "Some one will go and see him, I suppose," said Madame
Goesler.

"Lord Cantrip has been already,--and Mr. Monk."

"Could not I go?"

"Well, it would be rather strong."

"If we both went together?" suggested Madame Goesler. And before she
left Carlton Terrace she had almost extracted a promise from the
Duchess that they would together proceed to the prison and endeavour
to see Phineas Finn.


CHAPTER XLIX

Showing What Mrs. Bunce Said to the Policeman


"We have left Adelaide Palliser down at the Hall. We are up here
only for a couple of days to see Laura, and try to find out what had
better be done about Kennedy." This was said to Phineas Finn in his
own room in Great Marlborough Street by Lord Chiltern, on the morning
after the murder, between ten and eleven o'clock. Phineas had not
as yet heard of the death of the man with whom he had quarrelled.
Lord Chiltern had now come to him with some proposition which he as
yet did not understand, and which Lord Chiltern certainly did not
know how to explain. Looked at simply, the proposition was one for
providing Phineas Finn with an income out of the wealth belonging,
or that would belong, to the Standish family. Lady Laura's fortune
would, it was thought, soon be at her own disposal. They who acted
for her husband had assured the Earl that the yearly interest of the
money should be at her ladyship's command as soon as the law would
allow them so to plan it. Of Robert Kennedy's inability to act for
himself there was no longer any doubt whatever, and there was, they
said, no desire to embarrass the estate with so small a disputed
matter as the income derived from £40,000. There was great pride
of purse in the manner in which the information was conveyed;--but
not the less on that account was it satisfactory to the Earl. Lady
Laura's first thought about it referred to the imminent wants of
Phineas Finn. How might it be possible for her to place a portion of
her income at the command of the man she loved so that he should not
feel disgraced by receiving it from her hand? She conceived some plan
as to a loan to be made nominally by her brother,--a plan as to which
it may at once be said that it could not be made to hold water for a
minute. But she did succeed in inducing her brother to undertake the
embassy, with the view of explaining to Phineas that there would be
money for him when he wanted it. "If I make it over to Papa, Papa can
leave it him in his will; and if he wants it at once there can be no
harm in your advancing to him what he must have at Papa's death."
Her brother had frowned angrily and had shaken his head. "Think how
he has been thrown over by all the party," said Lady Laura. Lord
Chiltern had disliked the whole affair,--had felt with dismay that
his sister's name would become subject to reproach if it should be
known that this young man was supported by her bounty. She, however,
had persisted, and he had consented to see the young man, feeling
sure that Phineas would refuse to bear the burden of the obligation.

But he had not touched the disagreeable subject when they were
interrupted. A knocking of the door had been heard, and now Mrs.
Bunce came upstairs, bringing Mr. Low with her. Mrs. Bunce had
not heard of the tragedy, but she had at once perceived from the
barrister's manner that there was some serious matter forward,--some
matter that was probably not only serious, but also calamitous. The
expression of her countenance announced as much to the two men, and
the countenance of Mr. Low when he followed her into the room told
the same story still more plainly. "Is anything the matter?" said
Phineas, jumping up.

"Indeed, yes," said Mr. Low, who then looked at Lord Chiltern and was
silent.

"Shall I go?" said Lord Chiltern. Mr. Low did not know him, and of
course was still silent.

"This is my friend, Mr. Low. This is my friend, Lord Chiltern," said
Phineas, aware that each was well acquainted with the other's name.
"I do not know of any reason why you should go. What is it, Low?"

Lord Chiltern had come there about money, and it occurred to him
that the impecunious young barrister might already be in some scrape
on that head. In nineteen cases out of twenty, when a man is in a
scrape, he simply wants money. "Perhaps I can be of help," he said.

"Have you heard, my Lord, what happened last night?" said Mr. Low,
with his eyes fixed on Phineas Finn.

"I have heard nothing," said Lord Chiltern.

"What has happened?" asked Phineas, looking aghast. He knew Mr. Low
well enough to be sure that the thing referred to was of great and
distressing moment.

"You, too, have heard nothing?"

"Not a word--that I know of."

"You were at The Universe last night?"

"Certainly I was."

"Did anything occur?"

"The Prince was there."

"Nothing has happened to the Prince?" said Chiltern.

"His name has not been mentioned to me," said Mr. Low. "Was there not
a quarrel?"

"Yes;"--said Phineas. "I quarrelled with Mr. Bonteen."

"What then?"

"He behaved like a brute;--as he always does. Thrashing a brute
hardly answers nowadays, but if ever a man deserved a thrashing he
does."

"He has been murdered," said Mr. Low.

The reader need hardly be told that, as regards this great offence,
Phineas Finn was as white as snow. The maintenance of any doubt on
that matter,--were it even desirable to maintain a doubt,--would be
altogether beyond the power of the present writer. The reader has
probably perceived, from the first moment of the discovery of the
body on the steps at the end of the passage, that Mr. Bonteen had
been killed by that ingenious gentleman, the Rev. Mr. Emilius, who
found it to be worth his while to take the step with the view of
suppressing his enemy's evidence as to his former marriage. But Mr.
Low, when he entered the room, had been inclined to think that his
friend had done the deed. Laurence Fitzgibbon, who had been one of
the first to hear the story, and who had summoned Erle to go with him
and Major Mackintosh to Downing Street, had, in the first place, gone
to the house in Carey Street, in which Bunce was wont to work, and
had sent him to Mr. Low. He, Fitzgibbon, had not thought it safe that
he himself should warn his countryman, but he could not bear to think
that the hare should be knocked over on its form, or that his friend
should be taken by policemen without notice. So he had sent Bunce to
Mr. Low, and Mr. Low had now come with his tidings.

"Murdered!" exclaimed Phineas.

"Who has murdered him?" said Lord Chiltern, looking first at Mr. Low
and then at Phineas.

"That is what the police are now endeavouring to find out." Then
there was a pause, and Phineas stood up with his hand on his
forehead, looking savagely from one to the other. A glimmer of an
idea of the truth was beginning to cross his brain. Mr. Low was there
with the object of asking him whether he had murdered the man! "Mr.
Fitzgibbon was with you last night," continued Mr. Low.

"Of course he was."

"It was he who has sent me to you."

"What does it all mean?" asked Lord Chiltern. "I suppose they do not
intend to say that--our friend, here--murdered the man."

"I begin to suppose that is what they intend to say," rejoined
Phineas, scornfully.

Mr. Low had entered the room, doubting indeed, but still inclined
to believe,--as Bunce had very clearly believed,--that the hands of
Phineas Finn were red with the blood of this man who had been killed.
And, had he been questioned on such a matter, when no special case
was before his mind, he would have declared of himself that a few
tones from the voice, or a few glances from the eye, of a suspected
man would certainly not suffice to eradicate suspicion. But now he
was quite sure,--almost quite sure,--that Phineas was as innocent as
himself. To Lord Chiltern, who had heard none of the details, the
suspicion was so monstrous as to fill him with wrath. "You don't mean
to tell us, Mr. Low, that any one says that Finn killed the man?"

"I have come as his friend," said Low, "to put him on his guard. The
accusation will be made against him."

To Phineas, not clearly looking at it, not knowing very accurately
what had happened, not being in truth quite sure that Mr. Bonteen was
actually dead, this seemed to be a continuation of the persecution
which he believed himself to have suffered from that man's hand. "I
can believe anything from that quarter," he said.

"From what quarter?" asked Lord Chiltern. "We had better let Mr. Low
tell us what really has happened."

Then Mr. Low told the story, as well as he knew it, describing the
spot on which the body had been found. "Often as I go to the club,"
said Phineas, "I never was through that passage in my life." Mr. Low
went on with his tale, telling how the man had been killed with some
short bludgeon. "I had that in my pocket," said Finn, producing the
life-preserver. "I have almost always had something of the kind when
I have been in London, since that affair of Kennedy's." Mr. Low cast
one glance at it,--to see whether it had been washed or scraped, or
in any way cleansed. Phineas saw the glance, and was angry. "There it
is, as it is. You can make the most of it. I shall not touch it again
till the policeman comes. Don't put your hand on it, Chiltern. Leave
it there." And the instrument was left lying on the table, untouched.
Mr. Low went on with his story. He had heard nothing of Yosef Mealyus
as connected with the murder, but some indistinct reference to Lord
Fawn and the top-coat had been made to him. "There is the coat, too,"
said Phineas, taking it from the sofa on which he had flung it when
he came home the previous night. It was a very light coat,--fitted
for May use,--lined with silk, and by no means suited for enveloping
the face or person. But it had a collar which might be made to stand
up. "That at any rate was the coat I wore," said Finn, in answer to
some observation from the barrister. "The man that Lord Fawn saw,"
said Mr. Low, "was, as I understand, enveloped in a heavy great
coat." "So Fawn has got his finger in the pie!" said Lord Chiltern.

Mr. Low had been there an hour, Lord Chiltern remaining also in
the room, when there came three men belonging to the police,--a
superintendent and with him two constables. When the men were shown
up into the room neither the bludgeon or the coat had been moved
from the small table as Phineas had himself placed them there. Both
Phineas and Chiltern had lit cigars, and they were all there sitting
in silence. Phineas had entertained the idea that Mr. Low believed
the charge, and that the barrister was therefore an enemy. Mr. Low
had perceived this, but had not felt it to be his duty to declare his
opinion of his friend's innocence. What he could do for his friend
he would do; but, as he thought, he could serve him better now by
silent observation than by protestation. Lord Chiltern, who had
been implored by Phineas not to leave him, continued to pour forth
unabating execrations on the monstrous malignity of the accusers. "I
do not know that there are any accusers," said Mr. Low, "except the
circumstances which the police must, of course, investigate." Then
the men came, and the nature of their duty was soon explained. They
must request Mr. Finn to go with them to Bow Street. They took
possession of many articles besides the two which had been prepared
for them,--the dress coat and shirt which Phineas had worn, and the
boots. He had gone out to dinner with a Gibus hat, and they took
that. They took his umbrella and his latch-key. They asked, even, as
to his purse and money;--but abstained from taking the purse when
Mr. Low suggested that they could have no concern with that. As it
happened, Phineas was at the moment wearing the shirt in which he
had dined out on the previous day, and the men asked him whether
he had any objection to change it in their presence,--as it might
be necessary, after the examination, that it should be detained
as evidence. He did so, in the presence of all the men assembled;
but the humiliation of doing it almost broke his heart. Then they
searched among his linen, clean and dirty, and asked questions of
Mrs. Bunce in audible whispers behind the door. Whatever Mrs. Bunce
could do to injure the cause of her favourite lodger by severity
of manner, snubbing the policeman, and determination to give no
information, she did do. "Had a shirt washed? How do you suppose a
gentleman's shirts are washed? You were brought up near enough to
a washtub yourself to know more than I can tell you!" But the very
respectable constable did not seem to be in the least annoyed by the
landlady's amenities.

He was taken to Bow Street, going thither in a cab with the two
policemen, and the superintendent followed them with Lord Chiltern
and Mr. Low. "You don't mean to say that you believe it?" said Lord
Chiltern to the officer. "We never believe and we never disbelieve
anything, my Lord," replied the man. Nevertheless, the superintendent
did most firmly believe that Phineas Finn had murdered Mr. Bonteen.

At the police-office Phineas was met by Lord Cantrip and Barrington
Erle, and soon became aware that both Lord Fawn and Fitzgibbon were
present. It seemed that everything else was made to give way to this
inquiry, as he was at once confronted by the magistrate. Everybody
was personally very civil to him, and he was asked whether he would
not wish to have professional advice while the charge was being made
against him. But this he declined. He would tell the magistrate,
he said, all he knew, but, at any rate for the present, he would
have no need of advice. He was, at last, allowed to tell his own
story,--after repeated cautions. There had been some words between
him and Mr. Bonteen in the club; after which, standing at the door of
the club with his friends, Mr. Erle and Mr. Fitzgibbon, who were now
in court, he had seen Mr. Bonteen walk away towards Berkeley Square.
He had soon followed, but had never overtaken Mr. Bonteen. When
reaching the Square he had crossed over to the fountain standing
there on the south side, and from thence had taken the shortest way
up Bruton Street. He had seen Mr. Bonteen for the last time dimly,
by the gaslight, at the corner of the Square. As far as he could
remember, he himself had at the moment passed the fountain. He had
not heard the sound of any struggle, or of words, round the corner
towards Piccadilly. By the time that Mr. Bonteen would have reached
the head of the steps leading into the passage, he would have been
near Bruton Street, with his back completely turned to the scene of
the murder. He had walked faster than Mr. Bonteen, having gradually
drawn near to him; but he had determined in his own mind that he
would not pass the man, or get so near him as to attract attention.
Nor had he done so. He had certainly worn the grey coat which was
now produced. The collar of it had not been turned up. The coat was
nearly new, and to the best of his belief the collar had never been
turned up. He had carried the life-preserver now produced with him
because it had once before been necessary for him to attack garotters
in the street. The life-preserver had never been used, and, as it
happened, was quite new. It had been bought about a month since,--in
consequence of some commotion about garotters which had just then
taken place. But before the purchase of the life-preserver he had
been accustomed to carry some stick or bludgeon at night. Undoubtedly
he had quarrelled with Mr. Bonteen before this occasion, and had
bought this instrument since the commencement of the quarrel. He had
not seen any one on his way from the Square to his own house with
sufficient observation to enable him to describe such person. He
could not remember that he had passed a policeman on his way home.

This took place after the hearing of such evidence as was then given.
The statements made both by Erle and Fitzgibbon as to what had taken
place in the club, and afterwards at the door, tallied exactly with
that afterwards given by Phineas. An accurate measurement of the
streets and ways concerned was already furnished. Taking the duration
of time as surmised by Erle and Fitzgibbon to have passed after they
had turned their back upon Phineas, a constable proved that the
prisoner would have had time to hurry back to the corner of the
street he had passed, and to be in the place where Lord Fawn saw the
man,--supposing that Lord Fawn had walked at the rate of three miles
an hour, and that Phineas had walked or run at twice that pace. Lord
Fawn stated that he was walking very slow,--less he thought than
three miles an hour, and that the man was hurrying very fast,--not
absolutely running, but going as he thought at quite double his own
pace. The two coats were shown to his lordship. Finn knew nothing
of the other coat,--which had, in truth, been taken from the Rev.
Mr. Emilius,--a rough, thick, brown coat, which had belonged to the
preacher for the last two years. Finn's coat was grey in colour. Lord
Fawn looked at the coats very attentively, and then said that the man
he had seen had certainly not worn the brown coat. The night had been
dark, but still he was sure that the coat had been grey. The collar
had certainly been turned up. Then a tailor was produced who gave it
as his opinion that Finn's coat had been lately worn with the collar
raised.

It was considered that the evidence given was sufficient to make a
remand imperative, and Phineas Finn was committed to Newgate. He was
assured that every attention should be paid to his comfort, and was
treated with great consideration. Lord Cantrip, who still believed in
him, discussed the subject both with the magistrate and with Major
Mackintosh. Of course the strictest search would be made for a second
life-preserver, or any such weapon as might have been used. Search
had already been made, and no such weapon had been as yet found.
Emilius had never been seen with any such weapon. No one about Curzon
Street or Mayfair could be found who had seen the man with the quick
step and raised collar, who doubtless had been the murderer, except
Lord Fawn,--so that no evidence was forthcoming tending to show that
Phineas Finn could not have been that man. The evidence adduced
to prove that Mr. Emilius,--or Mealyus, as he was henceforth
called,--could not have been on the spot was so very strong, that the
magistrate told the constables that that man must be released on the
next examination unless something could be adduced against him.

The magistrate, with the profoundest regret, was unable to agree with
Lord Cantrip in his opinion that the evidence adduced was not
sufficient to demand the temporary committal of Mr. Finn.


CHAPTER L

What the Lords and Commons Said about the Murder


When the House met on that Thursday at four o'clock everybody was
talking about the murder, and certainly four-fifths of the members
had made up their minds that Phineas Finn was the murderer. To have
known a murdered man is something, but to have been intimate with
a murderer is certainly much more. There were many there who were
really sorry for poor Bonteen,--of whom without a doubt the end had
come in a very horrible manner; and there were more there who were
personally fond of Phineas Finn,--to whom the future of the young
member was very sad, and the fact that he should have become a
murderer very awful. But, nevertheless, the occasion was not without
its consolations. The business of the House is not always exciting,
or even interesting. On this afternoon there was not a member who
did not feel that something had occurred which added an interest to
Parliamentary life.

Very soon after prayers Mr. Gresham entered the House, and men who
had hitherto been behaving themselves after a most unparliamentary
fashion, standing about in knots, talking by no means in whispers,
moving in and out of the House rapidly, all crowded into their
places. Whatever pretence of business had been going on was stopped
in a moment, and Mr. Gresham rose to make his statement. "It was with
the deepest regret,--nay, with the most profound sorrow,--that he was
called upon to inform the House that his right honourable friend and
colleague, Mr. Bonteen, had been basely and cruelly murdered during
the past night." It was odd then to see how the name of the man, who,
while he was alive and a member of that House, could not have been
pronounced in that assembly without disorder, struck the members
almost with dismay. "Yes, his friend Mr. Bonteen, who had so lately
filled the office of President of the Board of Trade, and whose
loss the country and that House could so ill bear, had been beaten
to death in one of the streets of the metropolis by the arm of a
dastardly ruffian during the silent watches of the night." Then Mr.
Gresham paused, and every one expected that some further statement
would be made. "He did not know that he had any further communication
to make on the subject. Some little time must elapse before he could
fill the office. As for adequately supplying the loss, that would
be impossible. Mr. Bonteen's services to the country, especially in
reference to decimal coinage, were too well known to the House to
allow of his holding out any such hope." Then he sat down without
having as yet made an allusion to Phineas Finn.

But the allusion was soon made. Mr. Daubeny rose, and with much
graceful and mysterious circumlocution asked the Prime Minister
whether it was true that a member of the House had been arrested, and
was now in confinement on the charge of having been concerned in the
murder of the late much-lamented President of the Board of Trade.
He--Mr. Daubeny--had been given to understand that such a charge had
been made against an honourable member of that House, who had once
been a colleague of Mr. Bonteen's, and who had always supported the
right honourable gentleman opposite. Then Mr. Gresham rose again.
"He regretted to say that the honourable member for Tankerville was
in custody on that charge. The House would of course understand that
he only made that statement as a fact, and that he was offering no
opinion as to who was the perpetrator of the murder. The case seemed
to be shrouded in great mystery. The two gentlemen had unfortunately
differed, but he did not at all think that the House would on that
account be disposed to attribute guilt so black and damning to a
gentleman they had all known so well as the honourable member for
Tankerville." So much and no more was spoken publicly, to the
reporters; but members continued to talk about the affair the whole
evening.

There was nothing, perhaps, more astonishing than the absence of
rancour or abhorrence with which the name of Phineas was mentioned,
even by those who felt most certain of his guilt. All those who had
been present at the club acknowledged that Bonteen had been the
sinner in reference to the transaction there; and it was acknowledged
to have been almost a public misfortune that such a man as Bonteen
should have been able to prevail against such a one as Phineas Finn
in regard to the presence of the latter in the Government. Stories
which were exaggerated, accounts worse even than the truth, were
bandied about as to the perseverance with which the murdered man
had destroyed the prospects of the supposed murderer, and robbed
the country of the services of a good workman. Mr. Gresham, in the
official statement which he had made, had, as a matter of course,
said many fine things about Mr. Bonteen. A man can always have fine
things said about him for a few hours after his death. But in the
small private conferences which were held the fine things said all
referred to Phineas Finn. Mr. Gresham had spoken of a "dastardly
ruffian in the silent watches," but one would have almost thought
from overhearing what was said by various gentlemen in different
parts of the House that upon the whole Phineas Finn was thought to
have done rather a good thing in putting poor Mr. Bonteen out of the
way.

And another pleasant feature of excitement was added by the prevalent
idea that the Prince had seen and heard the row. Those who had been
at the club at the time of course knew that this was not the case;
but the presence of the Prince at The Universe between the row and
the murder had really been a fact, and therefore it was only natural
that men should allow themselves the delight of mixing the Prince
with the whole concern. In remote circles the Prince was undoubtedly
supposed to have had a great deal to do with the matter, though
whether as abettor of the murdered or of the murderer was never
plainly declared. A great deal was said about the Prince that evening
in the House, so that many members were able to enjoy themselves
thoroughly.

"What a godsend for Gresham," said one gentleman to Mr. Ratler very
shortly after the strong eulogium which had been uttered on poor Mr.
Bonteen by the Prime Minister.

"Well,--yes; I was afraid that the poor fellow would never have got
on with us."

"Got on! He'd have been a thorn in Gresham's side as long as he
held office. If Finn should be acquitted, you ought to do something
handsome for him." Whereupon Mr. Ratler laughed heartily.

"It will pretty nearly break them up," said Sir Orlando Drought, one
of Mr. Daubeny's late Secretaries of State to Mr. Roby, Mr. Daubeny's
late patronage secretary.

"I don't quite see that. They'll be able to drop their decimal
coinage with a good excuse, and that will be a great comfort. They
are talking of getting Monk to go back to the Board of Trade."

"Will that strengthen them?"

"Bonteen would have weakened them. The man had got beyond himself,
and lost his head. They are better without him."

"I suppose Finn did it?" asked Sir Orlando.

"Not a doubt about it, I'm told. The queer thing is that he should
have declared his purpose beforehand to Erle. Gresham says that
all that must have been part of his plan,--so as to make men think
afterwards that he couldn't have done it. Grogram's idea is that he
had planned the murder before he went to the club."

"Will the Prince have to give evidence?"

"No, no," said Mr. Roby. "That's all wrong. The Prince had left the
club before the row commenced. Confucius Putt says that the Prince
didn't hear a word of it. He was talking to the Prince all the time."
Confucius Putt was the distinguished artist with whom the Prince had
shaken hands on leaving the club.

Lord Drummond was in the Peers' Gallery, and Mr. Boffin was talking
to him over the railings. It may be remembered that those two
gentlemen had conscientiously left Mr. Daubeny's Cabinet because they
had been unable to support him in his views about the Church. After
such sacrifice on their parts their minds were of course intent on
Church matters. "There doesn't seem to be a doubt about it," said Mr.
Boffin.

"Cantrip won't believe it," said the peer.

"He was at the Colonies with Cantrip, and Cantrip found him very
agreeable. Everybody says that he was one of the pleasantest fellows
going. This makes it out of the question that they should bring in
any Church bill this Session."

"Do you think so?"

"Oh yes;--certainly. There will be nothing else thought of now till
the trial."

"So much the better," said his Lordship. "It's an ill wind that blows
no one any good. Will they have evidence for a conviction?"

"Oh dear yes; not a doubt about it. Fawn can swear to him," said Mr.
Boffin.

Barrington Erle was telling his story for the tenth time when he was
summoned out of the Library to the Duchess of Omnium, who had made
her way up into the lobby. "Oh, Mr. Erle, do tell me what you really
think," said the Duchess.

"That is just what I can't do."

"Why not?"

"Because I don't know what to think."

"He can't have done it, Mr. Erle."

"That's just what I say to myself, Duchess."

"But they do say that the evidence is so very strong against him."

"Very strong."

"I wish we could get that Lord Fawn out of the way."

"Ah;--but we can't."

"And will they--hang him?"

"If they convict him, they will."

"A man we all knew so well! And just when we had made up our minds to
do everything for him. Do you know I'm not a bit surprised. I've felt
before now as though I should like to have done it myself."

"He could be very nasty, Duchess!"

"I did so hate that man. But I'd give,--oh, I don't know what I'd
give to bring him to life again this minute. What will Lady Laura
do?" In answer to this, Barrington Erle only shrugged his shoulders.
Lady Laura was his cousin. "We mustn't give him up, you know, Mr.
Erle."

"What can we do?"

"Surely we can do something. Can't we get it in the papers that he
must be innocent,--so that everybody should be made to think so? And
if we could get hold of the lawyers, and make them not want to--to
destroy him! There's nothing I wouldn't do. There's no getting hold
of a judge, I know."

"No, Duchess. The judges are stone."

"Not that they are a bit better than anybody else,--only they like to
be safe."

"They do like to be safe."

"I'm sure we could do it if we put our shoulders to the wheel. I
don't believe, you know, for a moment that he murdered him. It was
done by Lizzie Eustace's Jew."

"It will be sifted, of course."

"But what's the use of sifting if Mr. Finn is to be hung while it's
being done? I don't think anything of the police. Do you remember how
they bungled about that woman's necklace? I don't mean to give him
up, Mr. Erle; and I expect you to help me." Then the Duchess returned
home, and, as we know, found Madame Goesler at her house.

Nothing whatever was done that night, either in the Lords or Commons.
A "statement" about Mr. Bonteen was made in the Upper as well as
in the Lower House, and after that statement any real work was out
of the question. Had Mr. Bonteen absolutely been Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and in the Cabinet when he was murdered, and had Phineas
Finn been once more an Under-Secretary of State, the commotion
and excitement could hardly have been greater. Even the Duke of
St. Bungay had visited the spot,--well known to him, as there the
urban domains meet of two great Whig peers, with whom and whose
predecessors he had long been familiar. He also had known Phineas
Finn, and not long since had said civil words to him and of him. He,
too, had, of late days, especially disliked Mr. Bonteen, and had
almost insisted that the man now murdered should not be admitted into
the Cabinet. He had heard what was the nature of the evidence;--had
heard of the quarrel, the life-preserver, and the grey coat. "I
suppose he must have done it," said the Duke of St. Bungay to himself
as he walked away up Hay Hill.


CHAPTER LI

"You think it shameful"


The tidings of what had taken place first reached Lady Laura Kennedy
from her brother on his return to Portman Square after the scene in
the police court. The object of his visit to Finn's lodgings has been
explained, but the nature of Lady Laura's vehemence in urging upon
her brother the performance of a very disagreeable task has not been
sufficiently described. No brother would willingly go on such a
mission from a married sister to a man who had been publicly named
as that sister's lover;--and no brother could be less likely to do
so than Lord Chiltern. But Lady Laura had been very stout in her
arguments, and very strong-willed in her purpose. The income arising
from this money,--which had been absolutely her own,--would again be
exclusively her own should the claim to it on behalf of her husband's
estate be abandoned. Surely she might do what she liked with her own.
If her brother would not assist her in making this arrangement, it
must be done by other means. She was quite willing that it should
appear to come to Mr. Finn from her father and not from herself. Did
her brother think any ill of her? Did he believe in the calumnies of
the newspapers? Did he or his wife for a moment conceive that she
had a lover? When he looked at her, worn out, withered, an old woman
before her time, was it possible that he should so believe? She
herself asked him these questions. Lord Chiltern of course declared
that he had no suspicion of the kind, "No;--indeed," said Lady Laura.
"I defy any one to suspect me who knows me. And if so, why am not I
as much entitled to help a friend as you might be? You need not even
mention my name." He endeavoured to make her understand that her
name would be mentioned, and others would believe and would say evil
things. "They cannot say worse than they have said," she continued.
"And yet what harm have they done to me,--or you?" Then he demanded
why she desired to go so far out of her way with the view of spending
her money upon one who was in no way connected with her. "Because
I like him better than any one else," she answered, boldly. "There
is very little left for which I care at all;--but I do care for his
prosperity. He was once in love with me and told me so,--but I had
chosen to give my hand to Mr. Kennedy. He is not in love with me
now,--nor I with him; but I choose to regard him as my friend." He
assured her over and over again that Phineas Finn would certainly
refuse to touch her money;--but this she declined to believe. At any
rate the trial might be made. He would not refuse money left to him
by will, and why should he not now enjoy that which was intended for
him? Then she explained how certain it was that he must speedily
vanish out of the world altogether, unless some assurance of an
income were made to him. So Lord Chiltern went on his mission, hardly
meaning to make the offer, and confident that it would be refused
if made. We know the nature of the new trouble in which he found
Phineas Finn enveloped. It was such that Lord Chiltern did not open
his mouth about money, and now, having witnessed the scene at the
police-office, he had come back to tell his tale to his sister. She
was sitting with his wife when he entered the room.

"Have you heard anything?" he asked at once.

"Heard what?" said his wife.

"Then you have not heard it. A man has been murdered."

"What man?" said Lady Laura, jumping suddenly from her seat. "Not
Robert!" Lord Chiltern shook his head. "You do not mean that Mr. Finn
has been--killed!". Again he shook his head; and then she sat down as
though the asking of the two questions had exhausted her.

"Speak, Oswald," said his wife. "Why do you not tell us? Is it one
whom we knew?"

"I think that Laura used to know him. Mr. Bonteen was murdered last
night in the streets."

"Mr. Bonteen! The man who was Mr. Finn's enemy," said Lady Chiltern.

"Mr. Bonteen!" said Lady Laura, as though the murder of twenty Mr.
Bonteens were nothing to her.

"Yes;--the man whom you talk of as Finn's enemy. It would be better
if there were no such talk."

"And who killed him?" said Lady Laura, again getting up and coming
close to her brother.

"Who was it, Oswald?" asked his wife; and she also was now too deeply
interested to keep her seat.

"They have arrested two men," said Lord Chiltern;--"that Jew who
married Lady Eustace, and--" But there he paused. He had determined
beforehand that he would tell his sister the double arrest that the
doubt this implied might lessen the weight of the blow; but now he
found it almost impossible to mention the name.

"Who is the other, Oswald?" said his wife.

"Not Phineas," screamed Lady Laura.

"Yes, indeed; they have arrested him, and I have just come from
the court." He had no time to go on, for his sister was crouching
prostrate on the floor before him. She had not fainted. Women do
not faint under such shocks. But in her agony she had crouched down
rather than fallen, as though it were vain to attempt to stand
upright with so crushing a weight of sorrow on her back. She uttered
one loud shriek, and then covering her face with her hands burst out
into a wail of sobs. Lady Chiltern and her brother both tried to
raise her, but she would not be lifted. "Why will you not hear me
through, Laura?" said he.

"You do not think he did it?" said his wife.

"I'm sure he did not," replied Lord Chiltern.

The poor woman, half-lying, half-seated, on the floor, still hiding
her face with her hands, still bursting with half suppressed sobs,
heard and understood both the question and the answer. But the fact
was not altered to her,--nor the condition of the man she loved.
She had not yet begun to think whether it were possible that he
should have been guilty of such a crime. She had heard none of the
circumstances, and knew nothing of the manner of the man's death. It
might be that Phineas had killed the man, bringing himself within the
reach of the law, and that yet he should have done nothing to merit
her reproaches;--hardly even her reprobation! Hitherto she felt only
the sorrow, the annihilation of the blow;--but not the shame with
which it would overwhelm the man for whom she so much coveted the
good opinion of the world.

"You hear what he says, Laura."

"They are determined to destroy him," she sobbed out, through her
tears.

"They are not determined to destroy him at all," said Lord Chiltern.
"It will have to go by evidence. You had better sit up and let me
tell you all. I will tell you nothing till you are seated again. You
disgrace yourself by sprawling there."

"Do not be hard to her, Oswald."

"I am disgraced," said Lady Laura, slowly rising and placing herself
again on the sofa. "If there is anything more to tell, you can tell
it. I do not care what happens to me now, or who knows it. They
cannot make my life worse than it is."

Then he told all the story,--of the quarrel, and the position of the
streets, of the coat, and the bludgeon, and the three blows, each on
the head, by which the man had been killed. And he told them also how
the Jew was said never to have been out of his bed, and how the Jew's
coat was not the coat Lord Fawn had seen, and how no stain of blood
had been found about the raiment of either of the men. "It was the
Jew who did it, Oswald, surely," said Lady Chiltern.

"It was not Phineas Finn who did it," he replied.

"And they will let him go again?"

"They will let him go when they find out the truth, I suppose. But
those fellows blunder so, I would never trust them. He will get some
sharp lawyer to look into it; and then perhaps everything will come
out. I shall go and see him to-morrow. But there is nothing further
to be done."

"And I must see him," said Lady Laura slowly.

Lady Chiltern looked at her husband, and his face became redder than
usual with an angry flush. When his sister had pressed him to take
her message about the money, he had assured her that he suspected her
of no evil. Nor had he ever thought evil of her. Since her marriage
with Mr. Kennedy, he had seen but little of her or of her ways of
life. When she had separated herself from her husband he had approved
of the separation, and had even offered to assist her should she
be in difficulty. While she had been living a sad lonely life at
Dresden, he had simply pitied her, declaring to himself and his wife
that her lot in life had been very hard. When these calumnies about
her and Phineas Finn had reached his ears,--or his eyes,--as such
calumnies always will reach the ears and eyes of those whom they are
most capable of hurting, he had simply felt a desire to crush some
Quintus Slide, or the like, into powder for the offence. He had
received Phineas in his own house with all his old friendship. He had
even this morning been with the accused man as almost his closest
friend. But, nevertheless, there was creeping into his heart a sense
of the shame with which he would be afflicted, should the world
really be taught to believe that the man had been his sister's lover.
Lady Laura's distress on the present occasion was such as a wife
might show, or a girl weeping for her lover, or a mother for her son,
or a sister for a brother; but was extravagant and exaggerated in
regard to such friendship as might be presumed to exist between the
wife of Mr. Robert Kennedy and the member for Tankerville. He could
see that his wife felt this as he did, and he thought it necessary to
say something at once, that might force his sister to moderate at any
rate her language, if not her feelings. Two expressions of face were
natural to him; one eloquent of good humour, in which the reader
of countenances would find some promise of coming frolic;--and
the other, replete with anger, sometimes to the extent almost of
savagery. All those who were dependent on him were wont to watch his
face with care and sometimes with fear. When he was angry it would
almost seem that he was about to use personal violence on the object
of his wrath. At the present moment he was rather grieved than
enraged; but there came over his face that look of wrath with which
all who knew him were so well acquainted. "You cannot see him," he
said.

"Why not I, as well as you?"

"If you do not understand, I cannot tell you. But you must not see
him;--and you shall not."

"Who will hinder me?"

"If you put me to it, I will see that you are hindered. What is the
man to you that you should run the risk of evil tongues, for the sake
of visiting him in gaol? You cannot save his life,--though it may be
that you might endanger it."

"Oswald," she said very slowly, "I do not know that I am in any way
under your charge, or bound to submit to your orders."

"You are my sister."

"And I have loved you as a sister. How should it be possible that my
seeing him should endanger his life?"

"It will make people think that the things are true which have been
said."

"And will they hang him because I love him? I do love him. Violet
knows how well I have always loved him." Lord Chiltern turned his
angry face upon his wife. Lady Chiltern put her arm round her
sister-in-law's waist, and whispered some words into her ear. "What
is that to me?" continued the half-frantic woman. "I do love him. I
have always loved him. I shall love him to the end. He is all my life
to me."

"Shame should prevent your telling it," said Lord Chiltern.

"I feel no shame. There is no disgrace in love. I did disgrace
myself when I gave the hand for which he asked to another man,
because,--because--" But she was too noble to tell her brother even
then that at the moment of her life to which she was alluding she had
married the rich man, rejecting the poor man's hand, because she had
given up all her fortune to the payment of her brother's debts. And
he, though he had well known what he had owed to her, and had never
been easy till he had paid the debt, remembered nothing of all this
now. No lending and paying back of money could alter the nature
either of his feelings or his duty in such an emergency as this.
"And, mind you," she continued, turning to her sister-in-law, "there
is no place for the shame of which he is thinking," and she pointed
her finger out at her brother. "I love him,--as a mother might love
her child, I fancy; but he has no love for me; none;--none. When I am
with him, I am only a trouble to him. He comes to me, because he is
good; but he would sooner be with you. He did love me once;--but then
I could not afford to be so loved."

"You can do no good by seeing him," said her brother.

"But I will see him. You need not scowl at me as though you wished
to strike me. I have gone through that which makes me different from
other women, and I care not what they say of me. Violet understands
it all;--but you understand nothing."

"Be calm, Laura," said her sister-in-law, "and Oswald will do all
that can be done."

"But they will hang him."

"Nonsense!" said her brother. "He has not been as yet committed for
his trial. Heaven knows how much has to be done. It is as likely as
not that in three days' time he will be out at large, and all the
world will be running after him just because he has been in Newgate."

"But who will look after him?"

"He has plenty of friends. I will see that he is not left without
everything that he wants."

"But he will want money."

"He has plenty of money for that. Do you take it quietly, and not
make a fool of yourself. If the worst comes to the worst--"

"Oh, heavens!"

"Listen to me, if you can listen. Should the worst come to the worst,
which I believe to be altogether impossible,--mind, I think it next
to impossible, for I have never for a moment believed him to be
guilty,--we will,--visit him,--together. Good-bye now. I am going
to see that friend of his, Mr. Low." So saying Lord Chiltern went,
leaving the two women together.

"Why should he be so savage with me?" said Lady Laura.

"He does not mean to be savage."

"Does he speak to you like that? What right has he to tell me of
shame? Has my life been so bad, and his so good? Do you think it
shameful that I should love this man?" She sat looking into her
friend's face, but her friend for a while hesitated to answer. "You
shall tell me, Violet. We have known each other so well that I can
bear to be told by you. Do not you love him?"

"I love him!--certainly not."

"But you did."

"Not as you mean. Who can define love, and say what it is? There are
so many kinds of love. We say that we love the Queen."

"Psha!"

"And we are to love all our neighbours. But as men and women talk of
love, I never at any moment of my life loved any man but my husband.
Mr. Finn was a great favourite with me,--always."

"Indeed he was."

"As any other man might be,--or any woman. He is so still, and with
all my heart I hope that this may be untrue."

"It is false as the Devil. It must be false. Can you think of the
man,--his sweetness, the gentle nature of him, his open, free speech,
and courage, and believe that he would go behind his enemy and knock
his brains out in the dark? I can conceive it of myself, that I
should do it, much easier than of him."

"Oswald says it is false."

"But he says it as partly believing that it is true. If it be true I
will hang myself. There will be nothing left among men or women fit
to live for. You think it shameful that I should love him."

"I have not said so."

"But you do."

"I think there is cause for shame in your confessing it."

"I do confess it."

"You ask me, and press me, and because we have loved one another so
well I must answer you. If a woman, a married woman,--be oppressed by
such a feeling, she should lay it down at the bottom of her heart,
out of sight, never mentioning it, even to herself."

"You talk of the heart as though we could control it."

"The heart will follow the thoughts, and they may be controlled. I
am not passionate, perhaps, as you are, and I think I can control
my heart. But my fortune has been kind to me, and I have never been
tempted. Laura, do not think I am preaching to you."

"Oh no;--but your husband; think of him, and think of mine! You have
babies."

"May God make me thankful. I have every good thing on earth that God
can give."

"And what have I? To see that man prosper in life, who they tell me
is a murderer; that man who is now in a felon's gaol,--whom they
will hang for ought we know,--to see him go forward and justify
my thoughts of him! that yesterday was all I had. To-day I have
nothing,--except the shame with which you and Oswald say that I have
covered myself."

"Laura, I have never said so."

"I saw it in your eye when he accused me. And I know that it is
shameful. I do know that I am covered with shame. But I can bear my
own disgrace better than his danger." After a long pause,--a silence
of probably some fifteen minutes,--she spoke again. "If Robert should
die,--what would happen then?"

"It would be--a release, I suppose," said Lady Chiltern in a voice so
low, that it was almost a whisper.

"A release indeed;--and I would become that man's wife the next day,
at the foot of the gallows;--if he would have me. But he would not
have me."


CHAPTER LII

Mr. Kennedy's Will


Mr. Kennedy had fired a pistol at Phineas Finn in Macpherson's Hotel
with the manifest intention of blowing out the brains of his presumed
enemy, and no public notice had been taken of the occurrence. Phineas
himself had been only too willing to pass the thing by as a trifling
accident, if he might be allowed to do so, and the Macphersons had
been by far too true to their great friend to think of giving him in
charge to the police. The affair had been talked about, and had come
to the knowledge of reporters and editors. Most of the newspapers had
contained paragraphs giving various accounts of the matter; and one
or two had followed the example of _The People's Banner_ in demanding
that the police should investigate the matter. But the matter had not
been investigated. The police were supposed to know nothing about
it,--as how should they, no one having seen or heard the shot but
they who were determined to be silent? Mr. Quintus Slide had been
indignant all in vain, so far as Mr. Kennedy and his offence had
been concerned. As soon as the pistol had been fired and Phineas
had escaped from the room, the unfortunate man had sunk back in
his chair, conscious of what he had done, knowing that he had
made himself subject to the law, and expecting every minute that
constables would enter the room to seize him. He had seen his enemy's
hat lying on the floor, and, when nobody would come to fetch it, had
thrown it down the stairs. After that he had sat waiting for the
police, with the pistol, still loaded in every barrel but one, lying
by his side,--hardly repenting the attempt, but trembling for the
result,--till Macpherson, the landlord, who had been brought home
from chapel, knocked at his door. There was very little said between
them; and no positive allusion was made to the shot that had been
fired; but Macpherson succeeded in getting the pistol into his
possession,--as to which the unfortunate man put no impediment in his
way, and he managed to have it understood that Mr. Kennedy's cousin
should be summoned on the following morning. "Is anybody else
coming?" Robert Kennedy asked, when the landlord was about to leave
the room. "Naebody as I ken o', yet, laird," said Macpherson, "but
likes they will." Nobody, however, did come, and the "laird" had
spent the evening by himself in very wretched solitude.

On the following day the cousin had come, and to him the whole story
was told. After that, no difficulty was found in taking the miserable
man back to Loughlinter, and there he had been for the last two
months in the custody of his more wretched mother and of his cousin.
No legal steps had been taken to deprive him of the management either
of himself or of his property,--so that he was in truth his own
master. And he exercised his mastery in acts of petty tyranny about
his domain, becoming more and more close-fisted in regard to money,
and desirous, as it appeared, of starving all living things about the
place,--cattle, sheep, and horses, so that the value of their food
might be saved. But every member of the establishment knew that the
laird was "nae just himself", and consequently his orders were not
obeyed. And the laird knew the same of himself, and, though he would
give the orders not only resolutely, but with imperious threats of
penalties to follow disobedience, still he did not seem to expect
compliance. While he was in this state, letters addressed to him came
for a while into his own hands, and thus more than one reached him
from Lord Brentford's lawyer, demanding that restitution should be
made of the interest arising from Lady Laura's fortune. Then he would
fly out into bitter wrath, calling his wife foul names, and swearing
that she should never have a farthing of his money to spend upon her
paramour. Of course it was his money, and his only. All the world
knew that. Had she not left his roof, breaking her marriage vows,
throwing aside every duty, and bringing him down to his present state
of abject misery? Her own fortune! If she wanted the interest of her
wretched money, let her come to Loughlinter and receive it there. In
spite of all her wickedness, her cruelty, her misconduct, which had
brought him,--as he now said,--to the verge of the grave, he would
still give her shelter and room for repentance. He recognised his
vows, though she did not. She should still be his wife, though she
had utterly disgraced both herself and him. She should still be his
wife, though she had so lived as to make it impossible that there
should be any happiness in their household.

It was thus he spoke when first one and then another letter came
from the Earl's lawyer, pointing out to him the injustice to which
Lady Laura was subjected by the loss of her fortune. No doubt these
letters would not have been written in the line assumed had not Mr.
Kennedy proved himself to be unfit to have the custody of his wife
by attempting to shoot the man whom he accused of being his wife's
lover. An act had been done, said the lawyer, which made it quite out
of the question that Lady Laura should return to her husband. To
this, when speaking of the matter to those around him,--which he did
with an energy which seemed to be foreign to his character,--Mr.
Kennedy made no direct allusion; but he swore most positively that
not a shilling should be given up. The fear of policemen coming down
to Loughlinter to take account of that angry shot had passed away;
and, though he knew, with an uncertain knowledge, that he was not in
all respects obeyed as he used to be,--that his orders were disobeyed
by stewards and servants, in spite of his threats of dismissal,--he
still felt that he was sufficiently his own master to defy the Earl's
attorney and to maintain his claim upon his wife's person. Let her
return to him first of all!

But after a while the cousin interfered still further; and Robert
Kennedy, who so short a time since had been a member of the
Government, graced by permission to sit in the Cabinet, was not
allowed to open his own post-bag. He had written a letter to one
person, and then again to another, which had induced those who
received them to return answers to the cousin. To Lord Brentford's
lawyer he had used a few very strong words. Mr. Forster had replied
to the cousin, stating how grieved Lord Brentford would be, how much
grieved would be Lady Laura, to find themselves driven to take steps
in reference to what they conceived to be the unfortunate condition
of Mr. Robert Kennedy; but that such steps must be taken unless some
arrangement could be made which should be at any rate reasonable.
Then Mr. Kennedy's post-bag was taken from him; the letters which
he wrote were not sent;--and he took to his bed. It was during this
condition of affairs that the cousin took upon himself to intimate
to Mr. Forster that the managers of Mr. Kennedy's estate were by
no means anxious of embarrassing their charge by so trumpery an
additional matter as the income derived from Lady Laura's forty
thousand pounds.

But things were in a terrible confusion at Loughlinter. Rents were
paid as heretofore on receipts given by Robert Kennedy's agent; but
the agent could only pay the money to Robert Kennedy's credit at his
bank. Robert Kennedy's cheques would, no doubt, have drawn the money
out again;--but it was almost impossible to induce Robert Kennedy
to sign a cheque. Even in bed he inquired daily about his money,
and knew accurately the sum lying at his banker's; but he could be
persuaded to disgorge nothing. He postponed from day to day the
signing of certain cheques that were brought to him, and alleged very
freely that an attempt was being made to rob him. During all his life
he had been very generous in subscribing to public charities; but now
he stopped all his subscriptions. The cousin had to provide even for
the payment of wages, and things went very badly at Loughlinter. Then
there arose the question whether legal steps should be taken for
placing the management of the estate in other hands, on the ground
of the owner's insanity. But the wretched old mother begged that
this might not be done;--and Dr. Macnuthrie, from Callender, was of
opinion that no steps should be taken at present. Mr. Kennedy was
very ill,--very ill indeed; would take no nourishment, and seemed to
be sinking under the pressure of his misfortunes. Any steps such as
those suggested would probably send their friend out of the world at
once.

In fact Robert Kennedy was dying;--and in the first week of May, when
the beauty of the spring was beginning to show itself on the braes of
Loughlinter, he did die. The old woman, his mother, was seated by his
bedside, and into her ears he murmured his last wailing complaint.
"If she had the fear of God before her eyes, she would come back to
me." "Let us pray that He may soften her heart," said the old lady.
"Eh, mother;--nothing can soften the heart Satan has hardened, till
it be hard as the nether millstone." And in that faith he died
believing, as he had ever believed, that the spirit of evil was
stronger than the spirit of good.

For some time past there had been perturbation in the mind of that
cousin, and of all other Kennedys of that ilk, as to the nature of
the will of the head of the family. It was feared lest he should have
been generous to the wife who was believed by them all to have been
so wicked and treacherous to her husband;--and so it was found to be
when the will was read. During the last few months no one near him
had dared to speak to him of his will, for it had been known that
his condition of mind rendered him unfit to alter it; nor had he
ever alluded to it himself. As a matter of course there had been a
settlement, and it was supposed that Lady Laura's own money would
revert to her; but when it was found that in addition to this the
Loughlinter estate became hers for life, in the event of Mr. Kennedy
dying without a child, there was great consternation among the
Kennedys generally. There were but two or three of them concerned,
and for those there was money enough; but it seemed to them now that
the bad wife, who had utterly refused to acclimatise herself to the
soil to which she had been transplanted, was to be rewarded for her
wicked stubbornness. Lady Laura would become mistress of her own
fortune and of all Loughlinter, and would be once more a free woman,
with all the power that wealth and fashion can give. Alas, alas! it
was too late now for the taking of any steps to sever her from her
rich inheritance! "And the false harlot will come and play havoc
here, in my son's mansion," said the old woman with extremest
bitterness.

The tidings were conveyed to Lady Laura through her lawyer, but did
not reach her in full till some eight or ten days after the news of
her husband's death. The telegram announcing that event had come to
her at her father's house in Portman Square, on the day after that
on which Phineas had been arrested, and the Earl had of course known
that his great longing for the recovery of his wife's fortune had
been now realised. To him there was no sorrow in the news. He had
only known Robert Kennedy as one who had been thoroughly disagreeable
to himself, and who had persecuted his daughter throughout
their married life. There had come no happiness,--not even
prosperity,--through the marriage. His daughter had been forced to
leave the man's house,--and had been forced also to leave her money
behind her. Then she had been driven abroad, fearing persecution, and
had only dared to return when the man's madness became so notorious
as to annul his power of annoying her. Now by his death, a portion
of the injury which he had inflicted on the great family of Standish
would be remedied. The money would come back,--together with the
stipulated jointure,--and there could no longer be any question of
return. The news delighted the old Lord,--and he was almost angry
with his daughter because she also would not confess her delight.

"Oh, Papa, he was my husband."

"Yes, yes, no doubt. I was always against it, you will remember."

"Pray do not talk in that way now, Papa. I know that I was not to him
what I should have been."

"You used to say it was all his fault."

"We will not talk of it now, Papa. He is gone, and I remember his
past goodness to me."

She clothed herself in the deepest of mourning, and made herself a
thing of sorrow by the sacrificial uncouthness of her garments. And
she tried to think of him;--to think of him, and not to think of
Phineas Finn. She remembered with real sorrow the words she had
spoken to her sister-in-law, in which she had declared, while still
the wife of another man, that she would willingly marry Phineas at
the foot even of the gallows if she were free. She was free now; but
she did not repeat her assertion. It was impossible not to think of
Phineas in his present strait, but she abstained from speaking of him
as far as she could, and for the present never alluded to her former
purpose of visiting him in his prison.

From day to day, for the first few days of her widowhood, she heard
what was going on. The evidence against him became stronger and
stronger, whereas the other man, Yosef Mealyus, had been already
liberated. There were still many who felt sure that Mealyus had been
the murderer, among whom were all those who had been ranked among
the staunch friends of our hero. The Chilterns so believed, and Lady
Laura; the Duchess so believed, and Madame Goesler. Mr. Low felt sure
of it, and Mr. Monk and Lord Cantrip; and nobody was more sure than
Mrs. Bunce. There were many who professed that they doubted; men such
as Barrington Erle, Laurence Fitzgibbon, the two Dukes,--though the
younger Duke never expressed such doubt at home,--and Mr. Gresham
himself. Indeed, the feeling of Parliament in general was one of
great doubt. Mr. Daubeny never expressed an opinion one way or the
other, feeling that the fate of two second-class Liberals could
not be matter of concern to him;--but Sir Orlando Drought, and Mr.
Roby, and Mr. Boffin, were as eager as though they had not been
Conservatives, and were full of doubt. Surely, if Phineas Finn were
not the murderer, he had been more ill-used by Fate than had been any
man since Fate first began to be unjust. But there was also a very
strong party by whom no doubt whatever was entertained as to his
guilt,--at the head of which, as in duty bound, was the poor widow,
Mrs. Bonteen. She had no doubt as to the hand by which her husband
had fallen, and clamoured loudly for the vengeance of the law. All
the world, she said, knew how bitter against her husband had been
this wretch, whose villainy had been exposed by her dear, gracious
lord; and now the evidence against him was, to her thinking,
complete. She was supported strongly by Lady Eustace, who, much as
she wished not to be the wife of the Bohemian Jew, thought even that
preferable to being known as the widow of a murderer who had been
hung. Mr. Ratler, with one or two others in the House, was certain
of Finn's guilt. The _People's Banner_, though it prefaced each
one of its daily paragraphs on the subject with a statement as to
the manifest duty of an influential newspaper to abstain from the
expression of any opinion on such a subject till the question had
been decided by a jury, nevertheless from day to day recapitulated
the evidence against the Member for Tankerville, and showed how
strong were the motives which had existed for such a deed. But, among
those who were sure of Finn's guilt, there was no one more sure than
Lord Fawn, who had seen the coat and the height of the man,--and the
step. He declared among his intimate friends that of course he could
not swear to the person. He could not venture, when upon his oath, to
give an opinion. But the man who had passed him at so quick a pace
had been half a foot higher than Mealyus;--of that there could be no
doubt. Nor could there be any doubt as to the grey coat. Of course
there might be other men with grey coats besides Mr. Phineas
Finn,--and other men half a foot taller than Yosef Mealyus. And there
might be other men with that peculiarly energetic step. And the man
who hurried by him might not have been the man who murdered Mr.
Bonteen. Of all that Lord Fawn could say nothing. But what he did
say,--of that he was sure. And all those who knew him were well aware
that in his own mind he was convinced of the guilt of Phineas Finn.
And there was another man equally convinced. Mr. Maule, Senior,
remembered well the manner in which Madame Goesler spoke of Phineas
Finn in reference to the murder, and was quite sure that Phineas was
the murderer.

For a couple of days Lord Chiltern was constantly with the poor
prisoner, but after that he was obliged to return to Harrington
Hall. This he did a day after the news arrived of the death of his
brother-in-law. Both he and Lady Chiltern had promised to return
home, having left Adelaide Palliser alone in the house, and already
they had overstayed their time. "Of course I will remain with you,"
Lady Chiltern had said to her sister-in-law; but the widow had
preferred to be left alone. For these first few days,--when she must
make pretence of sorrow because her husband had died; and had such
real cause for sorrow in the miserable condition of the man she
loved,--she preferred to be alone. Who could sympathise with her now,
or with whom could she speak of her grief? Her father was talking to
her always of her money;--but from him she could endure it. She was
used to him, and could remember when he spoke to her of her forty
thousand pounds, and of her twelve hundred a year of jointure, that
it had not always been with him like that. As yet nothing had been
heard of the will, and the Earl did not in the least anticipate any
further accession of wealth from the estate of the man whom they had
all hated. But his daughter would now be a rich woman; and was yet
young, and there might still be splendour. "I suppose you won't care
to buy land," he said.

"Oh, Papa, do not talk of buying anything yet."

"But, my dear Laura, you must put your money into something. You can
get very nearly 5 per cent. from Indian Stock."

"Not yet, Papa," she said. But he proceeded to explain to her how
very important an affair money is, and that persons who have got
money cannot be excused for not considering what they had better do
with it. No doubt she could get 4 per cent. on her money by buying up
certain existing mortgages on the Saulsby property,--which would no
doubt be very convenient if, hereafter, the money should go to her
brother's child. "Not yet, Papa," she said again, having, however,
already made up her mind that her money should have a different
destination.

She could not interest her father at all in the fate of Phineas Finn.
When the story of the murder had first been told to him, he had been
amazed,--and, no doubt, somewhat gratified, as we all are, at tragic
occurrences which do not concern ourselves. But he could not be made
to tremble for the fate of Phineas Finn. And yet he had known the man
during the last few years most intimately, and had had much in common
with him. He had trusted Phineas in respect to his son, and had
trusted him also in respect to his daughter. Phineas had been his
guest at Dresden; and, on his return to London, had been the first
friend he had seen, with the exception of his lawyer. And yet he
could hardly be induced to express the slightest interest as to
the fate of this friend who was to be tried for murder. "Oh;--he's
committed, is he? I think I remember that Protheroe once told me
that, in thirty-nine cases out of forty, men committed for serious
offences have been guilty of them." The Protheroe here spoken of as
an authority in criminal matters was at present Lord Weazeling, the
Lord Chancellor.

"But Mr. Finn has not been guilty, Papa."

"There is always the one chance out of forty. But, as I was saying,
if you like to take up the Saulsby mortgages, Mr. Forster can't be
told too soon."

"Papa, I shall do nothing of the kind," said Lady Laura. And then she
rose and walked out of the room.

At the end of ten days from the death of Mr. Kennedy, there came the
tidings of the will. Lady Laura had written to Mrs. Kennedy a letter
which had taken her much time in composition, expressing her deep
sorrow, and condoling with the old woman. And the old woman had
answered. "Madam, I am too old now to express either grief or anger.
My dear son's death, caused by domestic wrong, has robbed me of any
remaining comfort which the undeserved sorrows of his latter years
had not already dispelled. Your obedient servant, Sarah Kennedy."
From which it may be inferred that she had also taken considerable
trouble in the composition of her letter. Other communications
between Loughlinter and Portman Square there were none, but there
came through the lawyers a statement of Mr. Kennedy's will, as far as
the interests of Lady Laura were concerned. This reached Mr. Forster
first, and he brought it personally to Portman Square. He asked for
Lady Laura, and saw her alone. "He has bequeathed to you the use of
Loughlinter for your life, Lady Laura."

"To me!"

"Yes, Lady Laura. The will is dated in the first year of his
marriage, and has not been altered since."

"What can I do with Loughlinter? I will give it back to them." Then
Mr. Forster explained that the legacy referred not only to the house
and immediate grounds,--but to the whole estate known as the domain
of Loughlinter. There could be no reason why she should give it up,
but very many why she should not do so. Circumstanced as Mr. Kennedy
had been, with no one nearer to him than a first cousin, with a
property purchased with money saved by his father,--a property to
which no cousin could by inheritance have any claim,--he could not
have done better with it than to leave it to his widow in fault of
any issue of his own. Then the lawyer explained that were she to give
it up, the world would of course say that she had done so from a
feeling of her own unworthiness. "Why should I feel myself to be
unworthy?" she asked. The lawyer smiled, and told her that of course
she would retain Loughlinter.

Then, at her request, he was taken to the Earl's room and there
repeated the good news. Lady Laura preferred not to hear her father's
first exultations. But while this was being done she also exulted.
Might it not still be possible that there should be before her a
happy evening to her days; and that she might stand once more beside
the falls of Linter, contented, hopeful, nay, almost glorious, with
her hand in his to whom she had once refused her own on that very
spot?


CHAPTER LIII

None But the Brave Deserve the Fair


Though Mr. Robert Kennedy was lying dead at Loughlinter, and though
Phineas Finn, a member of Parliament, was in prison, accused of
murdering another member of Parliament, still the world went on with
its old ways, down in the neighbourhood of Harrington Hall and Spoon
Hall as at other places. The hunting with the Brake hounds was now
over for the season,--had indeed been brought to an auspicious end
three weeks since,--and such gentlemen as Thomas Spooner had time on
their hands to look about their other concerns. When a man hunts five
days a week, regardless of distances, and devotes a due proportion
of his energies to the necessary circumstances of hunting, the
preservation of foxes, the maintenance of good humour with the
farmers, the proper compensation for poultry really killed by
four-legged favourites, the growth and arrangement of coverts, the
lying-in of vixens, and the subsequent guardianship of nurseries, the
persecution of enemies, and the warm protection of friends,--when
he follows the sport, accomplishing all the concomitant duties of a
true sportsman, he has not much time left for anything. Such a one
as Mr. Spooner of Spoon Hall finds that his off day is occupied from
breakfast to dinner with grooms, keepers, old women with turkeys'
heads, and gentlemen in velveteens with information about wires and
unknown earths, His letters fall naturally to the Sunday afternoon,
and are hardly written before sleep overpowers him. Many a large
fortune has been made with less of true devotion to the work than is
given to hunting by so genuine a sportsman as Mr. Spooner.

Our friend had some inkling of this himself, and felt that many of
the less important affairs of his life were neglected because he
was so true to the one great object of his existence. He had wisely
endeavoured to prevent wrack and ruin among the affairs of Spoon
Hall,--and had thoroughly succeeded by joining his cousin Ned with
himself in the administration of his estate,--but there were things
which Ned with all his zeal and all his cleverness could not do for
him. He was conscious that had he been as remiss in the matter of
hunting, as that hard-riding but otherwise idle young scamp, Gerard
Maule, he might have succeeded much better than he had hitherto done
with Adelaide Palliser. "Hanging about and philandering, that's what
they want," he said to his cousin Ned.

"I suppose it is," said Ned. "I was fond of a girl once myself, and I
hung about a good deal. But we hadn't sixpence between us."

"That was Polly Maxwell. I remember. You behaved very badly then."

"Very badly, Tom; about as bad as a man could behave,--and she was as
bad. I loved her with all my heart, and I told her so. And she told
me the same. There never was anything worse. We had just nothing
between us, and nobody to give us anything."

"It doesn't pay; does it, Ned, that kind of thing?"

"It doesn't pay at all. I wouldn't give her up,--nor she me. She was
about as pretty a girl as I remember to have seen."

"I suppose you were a decent-looking fellow in those days yourself.
They say so, but I never quite believed it."

"There wasn't much in that," said Ned. "Girls don't want a man to be
good-looking, but that he should speak up and not be afraid of them.
There were lots of fellows came after her. You remember Blinks, of
the Carabineers. He was full of money, and he asked her three times.
She is an old maid to this day, and is living as companion to some
crusty crochetty countess."

"I think you did behave badly, Ned. Why didn't you set her free?"

"Of course, I behaved badly. And why didn't she set me free, if you
come to that? I might have found a female Blinks of my own,--only
for her. I wonder whether it will come against us when we die, and
whether we shall be brought up together to receive punishment."

"Not if you repent, I suppose," said Tom Spooner, very seriously.

"I sometimes ask myself whether she has repented. I made her swear
that she'd never give me up. She might have broken her word a score
of times, and I wish she had."

"I think she was a fool, Ned."

"Of course she was a fool. She knows that now, I dare say. And
perhaps she has repented. Do you mean to try it again with that girl
at Harrington Hall?"

Mr. Thomas Spooner did mean to try it again with the girl at
Harrington Hall. He had never quite trusted the note which he had
got from his friend Chiltern, and had made up his mind that, to say
the least of it, there had been very little friendship shown in the
letter. Had Chiltern meant to have stood to him "like a brick," as he
ought to have stood by his right hand man in the Brake country, at
any rate a fair chance might have been given him. "Where the devil
would he be in such a country as this without me,"--Tom had said
to his cousin,--"not knowing a soul, and with all the shooting men
against him? I might have had the hounds myself,--and might have 'em
now if I cared to take them. It's not standing by a fellow as he
ought to do. He writes to me, by George, just as he might do to some
fellow who never had a fox about his place."

"I suppose he didn't put the two things together," said Ned Spooner.

"I hate a fellow that can't put two things together. If I stand to
you you've a right to stand to me. That's what you mean by putting
two things together. I mean to have another shy at her. She has
quarrelled with that fellow Maule altogether. I've learned that from
the gardener's girl at Harrington."

Yes,--he would make another attempt. All history, all romance, all
poetry and all prose, taught him that perseverance in love was
generally crowned with success,--that true love rarely was crowned
with success except by perseverance. Such a simple little tale of
boy's passion as that told him by his cousin had no attraction for
him. A wife would hardly be worth having, and worth keeping, so won.
And all proverbs were on his side. "None but the brave deserve the
fair," said his cousin. "I shall stick to it," said Tom Spooner.
"_Labor omnia vincit_," said his cousin. But what should be his next
step? Gerard Maule had been sent away with a flea in his ear,--so, at
least, Mr. Spooner asserted, and expressed an undoubting opinion that
this imperative dismissal had come from the fact that Gerard Maule,
when "put through his facings" about income was not able to "show the
money." "She's not one of your Polly Maxwells, Ned." Ned said that he
supposed she was not one of that sort. "Heaven knows I couldn't show
the money," said Ned, "but that didn't make her any wiser." Then Tom
gave it as his opinion that Miss Palliser was one of those young
women who won't go anywhere without having everything about them.
"She could have her own carriage with me, and her own horses, and her
own maid, and everything."

"Her own way into the bargain," said Ned. Whereupon Tom Spooner
winked, and suggested that that might be as things turned out after
the marriage. He was quite willing to run his chance for that.

But how was he to get at her to prosecute his suit? As to writing to
her direct,--he didn't much believe in that. "It looks as though one
were afraid of her, you know;--which I ain't the least. I stood up to
her before, and I wasn't a bit more nervous than I am at this moment.
Were you nervous in that affair with Miss Maxwell?"

