Produced by Juliet Sutherland, S.R.Ellison
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


 THE GHOST KINGS

      By

H. Rider Haggard


First published _July_ 1908. _Reprinted March_ 1909.

Cheap Edition _December_ 1911.


 CONTENTS


CHAPTER

1. THE GIRL

2. THE BOY

3. GOOD-BYE

4. ISHMAEL

5. NOIE

6. THE CASTING OF THE LOTS

7. THE MESSAGE OF THE KING

8. MR. DOVE VISITS ISHMAEL

9. THE TAKING OF NOIE

10. THE OMEN OF THE STAR

11. ISHMAEL VISITS THE Inkosazana

12. RACHEL SEES A VISION

13. Yes, Madame, it is the general fate.

Queen.

If it is so, why are you seems so extraordinarily?

Hamlet. Seems, Madam?

No, it is; Bey seems to me nothing.

It is not just this black Rok, my dear mother, not the Gepränge a
habitual moderate grief, nor the hissing erkünstelter sigh windichte,
not the ever-thränende eye, nor the low-beaten face, nor any other
external sign of sadness, which the true state of my heart visible.

This girl, they say, was very beautiful and
brave, and had great power in the land before the battle of the Blood
River, which they fought with the emigrant Boers. Her title was Lady of
the Zulus, or more shortly, Zoola, which means Heaven.

"She seems to have been the daughter of a wandering, pioneer missionary,
but the king, I mean Dingaan, murdered her parents, of whom he was
jealous, after which she went mad and cursed the nation, and it is to this
curse that they still attribute the death of Dingaan, and their defeats
and other misfortunes of that time.

"Ultimately, it appears, in order to be rid of this girl and her evil eye,
they sold her to the doctors of a dwarf people, who lived far away in a
forest and worshipped trees, since when nothing more has been heard of
her. But according to them the curse stopped behind.

"If I can find out anything more of this curious story I will let you
know, but I doubt if I shall be able to do so. Although fifteen years or
so have passed since Dingaan's death in 1840 the Kaffirs are very shy of
talking about this poor lady, and, I think, only did so to me because I am
neither an official nor a missionary, but one whom they look upon as a
friend because I have doctored so many of them. When I asked the Indunas
about her at first they pretended total ignorance, but on my pressing the
question, one of them said that 'all that tale was unlucky and "went
beyond" with Mopo.' Now Mopo, as I think I wrote to you, was the man who
stabbed King Chaka, Dingaan's brother. He is supposed to have been mixed
up in the death of Dingaan also, and to be dead himself. At any rate he
vanished away after Panda came to the throne."_


CHAPTER I

THE GIRL


The afternoon was intensely, terribly hot. Looked at from the high ground
where they were encamped above the river, the sea, a mile or two to her
right--for this was the coast of Pondo-land--to little Rachel Dove staring
at it with sad eyes, seemed an illimitable sheet of stagnant oil. Yet
there was no sun, for a grey haze hung like a veil beneath the arch of the
sky, so dense and thick that its rays were cut off from the earth which
lay below silent and stifled. Tom, the Kaffir driver, had told her that a
storm was coming, a father of storms, which would end the great drought.
Therefore he had gone to a kloof in the mountains where the oxen were in
charge of the other two native boys--since on this upland there was no
pasturage to drive them back to the waggon. For, as he explained to her,
in such tempests cattle are apt to take fright and rush away for miles,
and without cattle their plight would be even worse than it was at
present.

At least this was what Tom said, but Rachel, who had been brought up among
natives and understood their mind, knew that his real reason was that he
wished to be out of the way when the baby was buried. Kaffirs do not like
death, unless it comes by the assegai in war, and Tom, a good creature,
had been fond of that baby during its short little life. Well, it was
buried now; he had finished digging its resting-place in the hard soil
before he went. Rachel, poor child, for she was but fifteen, had borne it
to its last bed, and her father had unpacked his surplice from a box, put
it on and read the Burial Service over the grave. Afterwards together they
had filled in that dry, red earth, and rolled stones on to it, and as
there were few flowers at this season of the year, placed a shrivelled
branch or two of mimosa upon the stones--the best offering they had to
make.

Rachel and her father were the sole mourners at this funeral, if we may
omit two rock rabbits that sat upon a shelf of stone in a neighbouring
cliff, and an old baboon which peered at these strange proceedings from
its crest, and finally pushed down a boulder before it departed, barking
indignantly. Her mother could not come because she was ill with grief and
fever in a little tent by the waggon. When it was all over they returned
to her, and there had been a painful scene.

Mrs. Dove was lying on a bed made of the cartel, or frame strung with
strips of green hide, which had been removed from the waggon, a pretty,
pale-faced woman with a profusion of fair hair. Rachel always remembered
that scene. The hot tent with its flaps turned up to let in whatever air
there might be. Her mother in a blue dressing-gown, dingy with wear and
travel, from which one of the ribbon bows hung by a thread, her face
turned to the canvas and weeping silently. The gaunt form of her father
with his fanatical, saint-like face, pale beneath its tan, his high
forehead over which fell one grizzled lock, his thin, set lips and
far-away grey eyes, taking off his surplice and folding it up with quick
movements of his nervous hands, and herself, a scared, wondering child,
watching them both and longing to slip away to indulge her grief in
solitude. It seemed an age before that surplice was folded, pushed into a
linen bag which in their old home used to hold dirty clothes, and finally
stowed away in a deal box with a broken hinge. At length it was done, and
her father straightened himself with a sigh, and said in a voice that
tried to be cheerful:

"Do not weep, Janey. Remember this is all for the best. The Lord hath
taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord."

Her mother sat up looking at him reproachfully with her blue eyes, and
answered in her soft Scotch accent:

"You said that to me before, John, when the other one went, down at
Grahamstown, and I am tired of hearing it. Don't ask me to bless the Lord
when He takes my babes, no, nor any mother, He Who could spare them if He
chose. Why should the Lord give me fever so that I could not nurse it, and
make a snake bite the cow so that it died? If the Lord's ways are such,
then those of the savages are more merciful."

"Janey, Janey, do not blaspheme," her father had exclaimed. "You should
rejoice that the child is in Heaven."

"Then do you rejoice and leave me to grieve. From to-day I only make one
prayer, that I may never have another. John," she added with a sudden
outburst, "it is your fault. You know well I told you how it would be. I
told you that if you would come this mad journey the babe would die, aye,
and I tell you"--here her voice sank to a kind of wailing whisper--"before
the tale is ended others will die too, all of us, except Rachel there, who
was born to live her life. Well, for my part, the sooner the better, for I
wish to go to sleep with my children."

"This is evil," broke in her husband, "evil and rebellious--"

"Then evil and rebellious let it be, John. But why am I evil if I have the
second sight like my mother before me? Oh! she warned me what must come if
I married you, and I would not listen; now I warn you, and you will not
listen. Well, so be it, we must dree our own weird, everyone of us, a
short one; all save Rachel, who was born to live her life. Man, I tell
you, that the Spirit drives you on to convert the heathen just for one
thing, that the heathen may make a martyr of you."

"So let them," her father answered proudly. "I seek no better end."

"Aye," she moaned, sinking back upon the cartel, "so let them, but my
babe, my poor babe! Why should my babe die because too much religion has
made you mad to win a martyr's crown? Martyrs should not marry and have
children, John."

Then, unable to bear any more of it, Rachel had fled from the tent, and
sat herself down at a distance to watch the oily sea.

It has been said that Rachel was only fifteen, but in Southern Africa
girls grow quickly to womanhood; also her experiences had been of a nature
to ripen her intelligence. Thus she was quite able to form a judgment of
her parents, their virtues and their weaknesses. Rachel was English born,
but had no recollection of England since she came to South Africa when she
was four years old. It was shortly after her birth that this
missionary-fury seized upon her father as a result of some meetings which
he had attended in London. He was then a clergyman with a good living in a
quiet Hertfordshire parish, and possessed of some private means, but
nothing would suit him short of abandoning all his prospects and sailing
for South Africa, in obedience to his "call." Rachel knew all this because
her mother had often told her, adding that she and her people, who were of
a good Scotch family, had struggled against this South African scheme even
to the verge of open quarrel.

At length, indeed, it came to a choice between submission and separation.
Mr. Dove had declared that not even for her sake would he be guilty of
"sin against the Spirit" which had chosen him to bring light to those who
sat in darkness--that is, the Kaffirs, and especially to that section of
them who were in bondage to the Boers. For at this time an agitation was
in progress in England which led ultimately to the freeing of the slaves
of the Cape Dutch, and afterwards to the exodus of the latter into the
wilderness and most of those wars with which our generation is familiar.
So, as she was devoted to her husband, who, apart from his religious
enthusiasm, or rather possession, was in truth a very lovable man, she
gave way and came. Before they sailed, however, the general gloom was
darkened by Mrs. Dove announcing that something in her heart told her that
neither of them would ever see home again, as they were doomed to die at
the hands of savages.

Now whatever the reason or explanation, scientifically impossible as the
fact might be, it remained a fact that Janey Dove, like her mother and
several of her Scottish ancestors, was foresighted, or at least so her
kith and kin believed. Therefore, when she communicated to them her
conviction as though it were a piece of everyday intelligence, they never
doubted its accuracy for a minute, but only redoubled their efforts to
prevent her from going to Africa. Even her husband did not doubt it, but
remarked irritably that it seemed a pity she could not sometimes be
foresighted as to agreeable future events, since for his part he was quite
willing to wait for disagreeable ones until they happened. Not that he
quailed personally from the prospect of martyrdom; this he could
contemplate with complacency and even enthusiasm, but, zealot though he
was, he did shrink from the thought that his beautiful and delicate wife
might be called upon to share the glory of that crown. Indeed, as his own
purpose was unalterable, he now himself suggested that he should go forth
to seek it alone.

Then it was that his wife showed an unsuspected strength of character. She
said that she had married him for better or for worse against the wishes
of her family; that she loved and respected him, and that she would rather
be murdered by Kaffirs in due season than endure a separation which might
be lifelong. So in the end the pair of them with their little daughter
Rachel departed in a sailing ship, and their friends and relations knew
them no more.

Their subsequent history up to the date of the opening of this story may
be told in very few words. As a missionary the Reverend John Dove was not
a success. The Boers in the eastern part of the Cape Colony where he
laboured, did not appreciate his efforts to Christianise their slaves. The
slaves did not appreciate them either, inasmuch as, saint though he might
be, he quite lacked the sympathetic insight which would enable him to
understand that a native with thousands of generations of savagery behind
him is a different being from a highly educated Christian, and one who
should be judged by another law. Their sins, amongst which he included all
their most cherished inherited customs, appalled him, as he continually
proclaimed from the housetops. Moreover, when occasionally he did snatch a
brand from the burning, and the said brand subsequently proved that it was
still alight, or worse still, replaced its original failings by those of
the white man, such as drink, theft and lying, whereof before it had been
innocent, he would openly condemn it to eternal punishment. Further, he
was too insubordinate, or, as he called it, too honest, to submit to the
authority of his local superiors in the Church, and therefore would only
work for his own hand. Finally he caused his "cup to overflow," as he
described it, or, in plain English, made the country too hot to hold him,
by becoming involved in a bitter quarrel with the Boers. Of these, on the
whole, worthy folk, he formed the worst; and in the main a very unjust
opinion, which he sent to England to be reprinted in Church papers, or to
the Home Government to be published in Blue-books. In due course these
documents reached South Africa again, where they were translated into
Dutch and became incidentally one of the causes of the Great Trek.

The Boers were furious and threatened to shoot him as a slanderer. The
English authorities were also furious, and requested him to cease from
controversy or to leave the country. At last, stubborn as he might be,
circumstances proved too much for him, and as his conscience would not
allow him to be silent, Mr. Dove chose the latter alternative. The only
question was whither he should go. As he was well off, having inherited a
moderate fortune in addition to what he had before he left England, his
poor wife pleaded with him to return home, pointing out that there he
would be able to lay his case before the British public. This course had
attractions for him, but after a night's reflection and prayer, he
rejected it as a specious temptation sent by Satan.

What, he argued, should he return to live in luxury in England not only
unmartyred but a palpable failure, his mission quite unfulfilled? His wife
might go if she liked, and take their surviving children, Rachel and the
new-born baby boy, with her (they had buried two other little girls), but
he would stick to his post and his duty. He had seen some Englishmen who
had visited the country called Natal where white people were beginning to
settle. In that land it seemed there were no slave-driving Boers, and the
natives, according to all accounts, much needed the guidance of the
Gospel, especially a certain king of the people called Zulus, who was
named Chaka or Dingaan, he was not sure which. This ferocious person he
particularly desired to encounter, having little doubt that in the absence
of the contaminating Boer, he would be able to induce him to see the error
of his ways and change the national customs, especially those of fighting
and, worse still, of polygamy.

His unhappy wife listened and wept, for now the martyr's crown which she
had always foreseen, seemed uncomfortably near, indeed as it were, it
glowed blood red within reach of her hand. Moreover, in her heart she did
not believe that Kaffirs could be converted, at any rate at present. They
were fighting men, as her Highland forefathers had been, and her Scottish
blood could understand the weakness, while, as for this polygamy, she had
long ago secretly concluded that the practice was one which suited them
very well, as it had suited David and Solomon, and even Abraham. But for
all this, although she was sure in her uncanny fashion that her baby's
death would come of her staying, she refused to leave her husband as she
had refused eleven years before.

Doubtless affection was at the bottom of it, for Janey Dove was a very
faithful woman; also there were other things--her fatalism, and stronger
still, her weariness. She believed that they were doomed. Well, let the
doom fall; she had no fear of the Beyond. At the best it might be happy,
and at the worst deep, everlasting rest and peace, and she felt as though
she needed thousands of years of rest and peace. Moreover, she was sure no
harm would come to Rachel, the very apple of her eye; that she was marked
to live and to find happiness even in this wild land. So it came about
that she refused her husband's offer to allow her to return home where she
had no longer any ties, and for perhaps the twentieth time prepared
herself to journey she knew not whither.

Rachel, seated there in the sunless, sweltering heat, reflected on these
things. Of course she did not know all the story, but most of it had come
under her observation in one way or other, and being shrewd by nature, she
could guess the rest, for she who was companionless had much time for
reflection and for guessing. She sympathised with her father in his ideas,
understanding vaguely that there was something large and noble about them,
but in the main, body and mind, she was her mother's child. Already she
showed her mother's dreamy beauty, to which were added her father's
straight features and clear grey eyes, together with a promise of his
height. But of his character she had little, that is outside of a courage
and fixity of purpose which marked them both.

 For the rest she was far, or fore-seeing, like her mother, apprehending
the end of things by some strange instinct; also very faithful in
character.

Rachel was unhappy. She did not mind the hardship and the heat, for she
was accustomed to both, and her health was so perfect that it would have
needed much worse things to affect her. But she loved the baby that was
gone, and wondered whether she would ever see it again. On the whole she
thought so, for here that intuition of hers came in, but at the best she
was sure that there would be long to wait. She loved her mother also, and
grieved more for her than for herself, especially now when she was so ill.
Moreover, she knew and shared her mind. This journey, she felt, was
foolishness; her father was a man "led by a star" as the natives say, and
would follow it over the edge of the world and be no nearer. He was not
fit to have charge of her mother.

Of herself she did not think so much. Still, at Grahamstown, for a year or
so there had been other children for companions, Dutch most of them, it is
true, and all rough in mind and manner. Yet they were white and human.
While she played with them she could forget she knew so much more than
they did; that, for instance, she could read the Gospels in Greek--which
her father had taught her ever since she was a little child--while they
could scarcely spell them out in the Taal, or Boer dialect, and that they
had never heard even of William the Conqueror. She did not care
particularly about Greek and William the Conqueror, but she did care for
friends, and now they were all gone from her, gone like the baby, as far
off as William the Conqueror. And she, she was alone in the wilderness
with a father who talked and thought of Heaven all day long, and a mother
who lived in memories and walked in the shadow of doom, and oh! she was
unhappy.

Her grey eyes filled with tears so that she could no longer see that
everlasting ocean, which she did not regret as it wearied her. She wiped
them with the back of her hand that was burnt quite brown by the sun, and
turning impatiently, fell to watching two of those strange insects known
as the Praying Mantis, or often in South Africa as Hottentot gods, which
after a series of genuflections, were now fighting desperately among the
dead stalks of grass at her feet. Men could not be more savage, she
reflected, for really their ferocity was hideous. Then a great tear fell
upon the head of one of them, and astonished by this phenomenon, or
thinking perhaps that it had begun to rain, it ran away and hid itself,
while its adversary sat up and looked about it triumphantly, taking to
itself all the credit of conquest.

 She heard a step behind her, and having again furtively wiped her eyes
with her hand, the only handkerchief available, looked round to see her
father stalking towards her.

"Why are you crying, Rachel?" he asked in an irritable voice. "It is wrong
to cry because your little brother has been taken to glory."

"Jesus cried over Lazarus, and He wasn't even His brother," she answered
in a reflective voice, then by way of defending herself added
inconsequently: "I was watching two Hottentot gods fight."

As Mr. Dove could think of no reply to her very final Scriptural example,
he attacked her on the latter point.

"A cruel amusement," he said, "especially as I have heard that boys, yes,
and men, too, pit these poor insects against each other, and make bets
upon them."

"Nature, is cruel, not I father. Nature is always cruel," and she glanced
towards the little grave under the rock. Then, while for the second time
her father hesitated, not knowing what to answer, she added quickly, "Is
mother better now?"

"No," he said, "worse, I think, very hysterical and quite unable to see
things in the true light."

She rose and faced him, for she was a courageous child, then asked:

"Father, why don't you take her back? She isn't fit to go on. It is wrong
to drag her into this wilderness."

At this question he grew very angry, and began to scold and to talk of the
wickedness of abandoning his "call."

"But mother has not got a 'call,'" she broke in.

Then, as for the third time he could find no answer, he declared
vehemently that they were both in league against him, instruments used by
the Evil One to tempt him from his duty by working on his natural fears
and affections, and so forth.

The child watched him with her clear grey eyes, saying nothing further,
till at last he grew calm and paused.

"We are all much upset," he went on, rubbing his high forehead with his
thin hand. "I suppose it is the heat and this--this--trial of our faith.
What did I come to speak to you about? Oh! I remember; your mother will
eat nothing, and keeps asking for fruit. Do you know where there is any
fruit?"

"It doesn't grow here, father." Then her face brightened, and she added:
"Yes, it does, though. The day that we outspanned in this camp mother and
I went down to the river and walked to that kind of island beyond the dry
donga to get some flowers that grow on the wet ground. I saw lots of Cape
gooseberries there, all quite ripe."

"Then go and get some, dear. You will have plenty of time before dark."

She started up as though to obey, then checked herself and said:

"Mother told me that I was not to go to the river alone, because we saw
the spoor of lions and crocodiles in the mud."

"God will guard you from the lions and the crocodiles, if there are any,"
he answered doggedly, for was not this an opportunity to show his faith?
"You are not afraid, are you?"

"No, father. I am afraid of nothing, perhaps because I don't care what
happens. I will get the basket and go at once."

In another minute she was walking quickly towards the river, a lonely
little figure in that great place. Mr. Dove watched her uneasily till she
was hidden in the haze, for his reason told him that this was a foolish
journey.

"The Lord will send His angels to protect her," he muttered to himself.
"Oh! - Should I even aufruffen hell? - O Fy, hold you, my heart! And you,
my nerves will not plözlich old, but maintained traget me - you remember?
Yes, you poor unglüklicher spirit, so long as the memory in this round
stunned (he proposes to his head) will keep its Siz! - You remember? Yes,
yes, I want them all to the table of my memory wipe, all this everyday
footling memories, everything I have read in books, all the other
ideas and Eindrüke which youth and observation have included in
them, I will wipe out and your command alone, with less pure material,
is the whole space to fill my brain.

Yes, Beyme heaven!

- O!

Heinous woman! O villain, villain, smiling Verdammter wretch! - My writing
table - I will write it down - that a smile and always smile, and but a
baddie Seyn can - at least I know now that in so Dännemark Seyn kan -
(He writes.) So, uncle, as it stands; IZT to my word, it is: Adieu,
adieu, I remember: I've got it conjured - Ninth Scene. (Horatio and
Marcellus enter.) Horatio. Gracious Lord, Gracious Lord - Marcellus.
Prince Hamlet - Horatio. Heaven protect him! Marcellus. Amen! Horatio.
Holla, ho! ho! Gracious Lord - Hamlet. Hillo, ho, ho, boy, come, bird,
come - Marcellus. Horatio. How is it, Gracious Lord? What have you heard
new? Hamlet. Oh, the wonders of things! Horatio. Entdekt us, Gracious Lord.
Hamlet.

No, you would be spreading. Horatio. I do not, Gracious Lord, Beyme heaven!
Marcellus. I do not, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. Well, tell me because once a
person could come to be defined - But will you be silent? Beyde. Yes, Beyme
sky, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. It resides nowhere in the whole Dännemark not
a bad guy who is not a vested Rogue is. Horatio. It needs no spirit,
Gracious Lord, from his grave up in us to say. Hamlet. True, it's, you
did right, and so without further ado, I held for rathsam that we
are each other's hands and distinguished, its where you your business
and intentions are, (because everyone has his business and intentions,
how to do it) and what betrift myself, I will go pray.

Horatio. Gracious Lord, these are nothing but wonderful and purring speeches.
Hamlet. I am sorry that they offend you, heartily sorry; in That,
cordially. Horatio. The speech is of no offense, Gracious Lord. Hamlet.
Yes, Bey Sancte patrician! There is talk here of an insult, Gracious
Lord, and a heavy, believe me. What this phenomenon here betrift - It
is an honest mind, I can tell you: But your desire to know what action is
between us, the übermeistert so good it könnet. And now, my good friends,
if we are friends, school and spit-Gesellen, it granted me one poor
request. Horatio. What is it, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. Saget no nothing of
what you've seen tonight . Beyde. We promise it your grace. Hamlet. That
is not enough, you must zuschwören's me.

Horatio. On my fairly, Gracious Lord, I will say nothing. Marcellus. I do
not, Gracious Lord, my loyalty Bey. Hamlet. Swear on my Schwerdt.
Marcellus. We have already sworn, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. On my Schwerdt
ye swear in That. The Spirit (calling behind the stage:) Swear. Hamlet.
Ha, ha, boy, are you saying that? Are you still there? - Come, come, you
hear something behind the boy says - Swear! Horatio. What shall we then
evoked, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. That ye never seen what it habet, want
to talk. Swear Bey my Schwerdt .* -* A (ed allusion to the old habit
of Dähne, Schwerdt on her to swear, if they wanted feyrlichsten Eid thun.
Behold the Bartholinus, (de Causis contemp. mort. apud Dan.) Warburton.
Spirit) Swear! Hamlet. Here and everywhere? So we want to search for
another square. Hieher If their lords, leget your hands again to my Schwerdt,
and swears that you want to tell anyone what you heard.

Swear my Bey Schwerdt. Spirit. Swear Bey his Schwerdt. Hamlet. Wolgesprochen,
old mole, kanst you so fast in the ground work? The hot 'I geschikte
Schanz graves - yet a little further away, good friends. Horatio. O day
and night, but this is extremely strange. Hamlet. That is because you're
so alien to occur, it is said as welcome a stranger. My good Horatio,
it giebt things in heaven and on earth, of which our philosophy is not
dreaming.

But come, I swear, as before, that you never (so you perceive God graciously
sey!) So strange and widersinnisch I ever increasing amounts, and may
(as I, perhaps, a good future there could be thun) that ye, if ye will see
me then, and never by such a position of the arms, or a shake of the
head, or by some mysterious abgebrochne saying as well - we know what we
know - or we could if we wanted - or, if we want to talk - or, it might
perhaps want to - or other such ambiguous intimations give wollet to
recognize that you know more of me than others, which I swear,
when you heaven in your highest North wanted to help! Swear! Spirit.
Swear! (They swear.) Hamlet.

Gieb you to Ruh, Ruh gieb to thee, unglüklicher spirit. So, you gentlemen,
and I recommend you leave me like a friend of his friends, and what
such a poor man as Hamlet is thun kan, you his love and friendship
auszudrüken, that's it, if God wants, not missing. We want to go, but
still your fingers on the mouth, I give you: The time has come out of
their joints; o!'s Unhappy coincidence! that I had to be born, they get
back to Sezen! Well, come, we want to go with each other. (They go from.)
Zweyter lift. Erste Scene. (A room in Polonius home.) (Polonius and
Reinoldo occur.) Polonius. Übergieb him this money and these papers.
Reinoldo. I will not lack, Gracious Lord. Polonius.

It would be very wise of you acted Seyn honest Reinold, if you previously,
eh it goes to him, after his performance would inquire. Reinoldo. That
was also my Vorsaz, Gracious Lord. Polonius. I trust, that was a good idea
and a very good idea. You see, Sir, first erkundiget you what Dähne seyen
in Paris, and how and who and how well-off, and where they reside, and
what for society, and what they do for an expense, and you can
find out their answers to these questions Präliminar that they know
my son, so come a little closer, shall you, as if her from him so
far forth kenntet - -for example, so - I know his father and his
friends, and Theil, himself - Merkt her so what I want, Reinoldo?

Reinoldo. Yes, well, Gracious Lord. Polonius. And to him self-Theil
-But you can add Sezen - not very accurate, but if it is the one that I
Meyn, he is a fairly wild young man - such and such Ausschweiffungen
shows - And since you can say about him what you want , but not what his
honor holy night Seyn could, on the need to want to look out for her,
but want such Excess of ordinary Muthwillen and wildness, which commonly
companions of youth and Freyheit to maintain Seyn - Reinoldo. As such as
games, Gracious Lord -- Polonius.

Yes, or drink, swear, Handel make the woman running - so far has allowed
her go. Reinoldo. But that would indeed honor its sacred night Seyn. Polonius.
That is not where you Ausdrüken in a little vorsehet: You must not go so
far as to accuse him and that he is a public bitch-sey hunters,
this is not my Meynung, so you must talk of its mistakes, that they
mistake for the freedom, outbreaks of a fiery blood, an even unbounded
Youth Hize to all young people are common, can be viewed.

 Reinoldo. But why, Mr. Gracious - Polonius. Why should her thun? Reinoldo.
Yes, Gracious Lord, like 'I ask. Polonius. Well, Lord, I will tell you it
is a trick, sir, and, Beyme element, I think one of the fine. You see,
if you like my son beyleget small mistake that you can think it
sey a young lad, a little in doing mißgerathen sey - sees me, it is the
one who with her in conversation Seyde, and its like want to delve
into when it's young people, from which the speech is gelegenheitlich
etwann one or another of example of Ausschweiffungen is guilty, has
seen one so that he is following masses against you will be let
out: "Werther" My Lord!

or simply Mr., or my friend, or as he likes to say - Reinoldo. Very well,
Mr. Gracious - Polonius. And then, Lord, does he - does he - what I want
to say - because I wanted what to say - where was I? Reinoldo. the Bey,
as he is against me would be let out - Polonius. As it turned out he would
- yes, my Six - he would be let out - I know the young Lord, I saw him
yesterday or the day before yesterday, or a different day and with the,
and, like you say, because he played because he gerieth in Hize because
he fieng Beyme ball game to Handel, or maybe I saw him in disagreement
or that suspicious house, videlicet in a brothel, or the like - You see
now that this way of fishing your lie Karpe truth of this catch can - these
are the ways in which we and other scholars Staatisten by winds and
Sondiren (by indirectum), behind the true nature of things to come
Maintain: I make no secrets from you the fruit of my former Lecture
and experience so that you now my son Bey applicieren can - you
have understood me, did you not?

Reinoldo. Yes, Gracious Lord. Polonius. So God forbid you, lives well.
Reinoldo. My Gracious Lord -- Polonius. You must seek that ye yourselves
behind by his inclinations come. Reinoldo. I will, Gracious Lord. Polonius.
And makes his music that he diligently exerciert. Reinoldo. well,
Gracious Lord. (Reinold's up.) Zweyte Scene. (Ophelia occurs.) Polonius.
Farewell - Ha, what giebts, Ophelia? What do you want? Ophelia. Oh, Gracious
Lord Father, I am so erschrekt been! Polonius. What, what, about heaven's
sake? Ophelia. Mr. Gracious Father, because I am in my room, sat and sewed,
as was the Prince Hamlet, his dewlap from top to bottom to ungeknöpft, no
hat on his head, his stockings are not raised without knee ligaments, to
the toes rolled down, so pale as his shirt, shivering, his knees anschlugen
to each other, and with a so Blik pathetic significance, as if he were out
of hell would have been left out, so he should talk about their Schreknissen;
in this form, he is out before me. Polonius. He is not out of love for
you has been great Seyn? Ophelia. I know it not, Mr. Gracious Father,
but, on my honor, I'll get it. Polonius. What he said then? Ophelia. Bey
He gave me his hand, and held me, then he makes the entire length
of his arm back, and the other hand he held it over his forehead,
and then he looked me sharply in the face, as if he wanted to sign
off.

So he stuhnd a good while, as last, he shook my arm a bit, wavered dreymal
so with his head up and down, and then to seek such a deep and
pathetic sigh, not that I thought differently than he would give
up the spirit.

 Top he let me go, turned his head on the shoulder, and seemed Rükweg without
his eyes to find, because he came without their Hülfe to Thür out, and
tacked it as last even with a sad Blik on me. Polonius. Come with me I
want the king advice. This is nothing different than the effect of excessive
and non-self-placed love, because the violence of love is so fierce that
the people so desperate acts can drive, than any other passion, what
our nature is tainted. I am sorry for this, did you recently about
his hard-tempered?

Ophelia. No, Mr. Gracious Father, everything that I was just that I
command euerm no letters from him believing him and not let me come.
Polonius . And he had been foolish.

I am sorry that I am the nature of his affection to you better not have
watched. I worried that he now only briefly, and entice you to search,
but the executioner get my hasty concerns, it seems sey a feature of
age, the wariness too far to drive, as Bey young people is nothing in
common as to no have. Come, we want to go to the king. He must get message
of which the My discoveries in this mystery we can not as much draw
annoyances than we could have them if we would remain silent. (They go
from.) Third Scene. (Transforms into the palace.)

(The King, queen, rosary, Güldenstern, Noble and others from the
Royal entourage.) King.

Welcome, rosary and Güldenstern. Besides that we have a special request,
you have borne to see us still necessary, use of you to make this
eilfertigen Beschikung managed.

Your habet probably something Hamlets transformation of one, so I must
call it, because it neither the internal nor external, nor even
more similar.

Seyn What the mag, which is, except his father's death, it is this
alienation from itself brought has, I can not be imagined. So I ask you
beyde, since it by your first youth to auferzogen with him, and the
equality of the age you to his confidential legal giebt than others,
so do you only a little time on our court to order him to society
him in merry allerley to consider and try if it does not have an
opportunity to find out about him Loken, unknown to us what the
cause of his unusual Schwermuth is, and whether they are such that
the same situation we are in a position. queen.

My dear gentlemen, he has a lot of you talking, and I'm sure that
nobody in the world, on which he holds more than you beyde.

If you have so many favors and good will prove, and as long as you stop
us here Bey wollet than to achieve our intention and expectation
Nöthiger Seyn mag, so Seyde assured that your visit should receive
thanks, as the gratitude of a king decency is. rosary.

Your Majesties have both so full power over us that they can command,
where they want to ask.

Güldenstern. beyde So we obey, and give everything we are pledged to the
zeal, which we endeavor are our services euern feet to lay. King. I thank
you, Werther and Güldenstern rosary. queen.

Thank you, Werther Güldenstern and rosary, and urge you to go immediately,
and my son totally unrecognizable gewordnen a visit to give. Go one of
you, and bring these gentlemen to Hamlet.

 Güldenstern. Gebe of heaven, that our present and he uses our pleasant
and salutary sey! (Rosary and go from Güldenstern.)

Queen. Amen!

(Polonius to the former.) Polonius.

Gracious Lord, the Envoy to Norway are glüklich again arrived. King. You're
always the good father had newspapers. Polonius. Am I, Gracious Lord?
Seyde assured, my lord, I think in my duty as my soul, my beydes against
God and against my Huldreich King, and I think (or my head would have all
the trouble that I have in my life on the political soothsayers Art
colleagues, have been in vain,) I think I have the true cause of Hamlet's
Wahnwiz ausfündig made. king.

O, as talking about the things I am most requested to be heard. Polonius.
emissary prayer before the audience, my news, the Dessert of this
great feast Seyn. king. erweiset To honor them, and they führet
itself.

(Polonius goes anyway.) He says to me, my dearest queen, he was the true
source of our son's disease identified. Queen. I procure, it is in
fact no other than his father's death and our hasty marriage.

Fourth Scene. (Polonius comes with Cornelius Voltimand and back.) King.
Well, we want him to have worms move from the nose - Welcome, my
good friends!

Talking Voltimand what brings it to us by our brother Norway? Voltimand.
The coercive Erwiederung Grusse with all your friendship Erbietungen. On
our first ad schikte he said the ads off of his nephew, which he for a
Zurüstung against Pohle had, how he looked better on the merits,'s was
that in the That against Eu.

Majesty apart was: Bey My discoveries led to this big, he claims that his
old-age infirmities and inability to be abused, and had the
Fortinbras in arresting immediately take this (our story so we
briefly summarize) submit to, adopted by his uncle a Verweiß sharp,
and Blessed same as last in the hand, the weapons that he never
against Eu.

Majesty to be in jeopardy. In that Norway had the old one so great joy
that he had him on the spot for an annual salary of dreytausend crowns
respectively, with the mission, which already angeworbnen forces against
the king in Pohler to use, to what end he Eu. Majesty in the current
letter requests that it wants to have fallen, the same peaceful passage
through their countries to allow this company, and among those Bedingnissen
Security Clausuln, which included letters bemeldtem.

King. We want it very satisfied, and be Bey gelegnerer time to read this
letter, think about and answer. Meanwhile, we thank you for your glüklich
applied effort. Come and rest from IZT, on the night we want to laugh
with each other. Seyde friendly welcome again! (The messengers go from.)
Polonius. This business is now glüklich geendigt. My area of Merciful Lord,
and my madam; widely to expose what majesty and what duty is, why the day
is day, night night, and time is time, if nothing else as day,
night time and spoil.

Accordingly alldieweilen and then the shortness of the soul Wizes,
and spaciousness in the presentation only the body and the external
Auszierung same mind, so do I want the short befleissen: Your noble
son is great, great, I call it, because to the true madness to give
a definition of what is different, as nothing else than to Seyn toll?

But we want IZO beyseite Sezen - Queen. More substance with less art, if
you would arbitrarily. Polonius.

Madam, I can swear on it that I do not dißmal prior art purposes.

That it toll, is true, that it is true, is to regret - a funny
character - but she likes to travel, because here I will use no art.

So we want to reason that he is great, now it is left that we are the cause
of this effect, or more properly speaking, the cause of this defect
after them.

The remains, and this residue is DISS - Überleget the matter. I have a
daughter, had, tell me, as long as it is my, and this has made
guiltier duty and obedience, want to note, sent me this now rathet
once, or make you a Seyn what it likes.

(He opens a letter and reads:) "To the heavenly idol of my soul that
reizerfüllteste Ophelia" - This is a terrible phrase, a abgeschmakte
saying Reizerfüllteste is a abgeschmakte way to talk: But it's yet to
be heard - "These lines of its incomparable white bosom, these - the
queen. If the Hamlet of them? Polonius. madam, just a little patience, I
want my guilt thun. (He reads:) doubt the fire Hize, doubters in the sun
light, doubt whether the truth lies, fairest, thy victory only to
my love And not.

O, my dear Ophelia, I am angry about these verses, I understand the art is
not my sighs to fingers abzuzählen, but that I love you so completely
when you're worthy of love, believe.

Adieu. The deinige so long as this machine is to Hamlet. "
Richard Darrien, it seemed, had been in Africa about five years, his
father having emigrated there on the death of his mother, as he had
nothing but the half-pay of a retired naval captain, and he hoped to
better his fortunes in a new land. He had been granted a farm in the
Graaf-Reinet district, but like many other of the early settlers, met with
misfortunes. Now, to make money, he had taken to elephant-hunting, and
with his partners was just returning from a very successful expedition in
the coast lands of Natal, at that time an almost unexplored territory. His
father had allowed Richard to accompany the party, but when they got back,
added the boy with sorrow, he was to be sent for two or three years to the
college at Capetown, since until then his father had not been able to
afford him the luxury of an education. Afterwards he wished him to adopt a
profession, but on this point he--Richard--had made up his mind, although
at present he said little about that. He would be a hunter, and nothing
else, until he grew too old to hunt, when he intended to take to farming.

His story done, Rachel told him hers, to which he listened eagerly.

"Is your father mad?" he asked when she had finished.

"No," she answered. "How dare you suggest it? He is only very good; much
better than anybody else."

"Well, it seems to come to much the same thing, doesn't it?" said Richard,
"for otherwise he would not have sent you to gather gooseberries here with
such a storm coming on."

"Then why did your father send you to hunt lions with such a storm coming
on?" she asked.

"He didn't send me. I came of myself; I said that I wanted to shoot a
buck, and finding the spoor of a lion I followed it. The waggons must be a
long way ahead now, for when I left them I returned to that kloof where I
had seen the buck. I don't know how I shall overtake them again, and
certainly nobody will ever think of looking for me here, as after this
rain they can't spoor the horse."

"Supposing you don't find it--I mean your horse--tomorrow, what shall you
do?" asked Rachel. "We haven't got any to lend you."

"Walk and try to catch them up," he replied.

"And if you can't catch them up?"

"Come back to you, as the wild Kaffirs ahead would kill me if I went on
alone."

"Oh! But what would your father think?"

"He would think there was one boy the less, that's all, and be sorry for a
while. People often vanish in Africa where there are so many lions and
savages."

Rachel reflected a while, then finding the subject difficult, suggested
that he should find out what their own particular lions were doing. So
Richard went to look, and reported that the storm had ceased, and that by
the moonlight he could see no lions or any other animals, so he thought
that they must have gone away somewhere. The flood waters also appeared to
be running down. Comforted by this intelligence Rachel piled on the fire
nearly all the wood that remained to them. Then they sat down again side
by side, and tried to continue their conversation. By degrees it drooped,
however, and the end of it was that presently this pair were fast asleep
in each other's arms.


CHAPTER III

GOOD-BYE


Rachel was the first to wake, which she did, feeling cold, for the fire
had burnt almost out. She rose and walked from the cave. The dawn was
breaking quietly, for now no wind stirred, and no rain fell. So dense was
the mist which rose from the river and sodden land, however, that she
could not see two yards in front of her, and fearing lest she should
stumble on the lions or some other animals, she did not dare to wander far
from the mouth of the cave. Near to it was a large, hollow-surfaced rock,
filled now with water like a bath. From this she drank, then washed and
tidied herself as well as she could without the aid of soap, comb or
towels, which done, she returned to the cave.

As Richard was still sleeping, very quietly she laid a little more wood on
the embers to keep him warm, then sat down by his side and watched him,
for now the grey light of the dawning crept into their place of refuge. To
her this slumbering lad looked beautiful, and as she studied him her
childish heart was filled with a strange, new tenderness, such as she had
never felt before. Somehow he had grown dear to her, and Rachel knew that
she would never forget him while she lived. Then following this wave of
affection came a sharp and sudden pain, for she remembered that presently
they must part, and never see each other any more. At least this seemed
certain, for how could they when he was travelling to the Cape and she to
Natal?

And yet, and yet a strange conviction told her otherwise. The power of
prescience which came to her from her mother and her Highland forefathers
awoke in her breast, and she knew that her life and this lad's life were
interwoven. Perhaps she dozed off again, sitting there by the fire. At any
rate it appeared to her that she dreamed and saw things in her dream. Wild
tumultuous scenes opened themselves before her in a vision; scenes of
blood and terror, sounds, too, of voices crying war. It appeared to her as
if she were mad, and yet ruled a queen, death came near to her a score of
times, but always fled away at her command. Now Richard Darrien was with
her, and how she had lost him and sought--ah! how she sought through dark
places of doom and unnatural night. It was as though he were dead, and she
yet living, searched for him among the habitations of the dead. She found
him also, and drew him towards her. How, she did not know.

Then there was a scene, a last scene, which remained fixed in her mind
after everything else had faded away. She saw the huge trunks of forest
trees, enormous, towering trees, gloomy trees beneath which the darkness
could be felt. Down their avenues shot the level arrows of the dawn. They
fell on her, Rachel, dressed in robes of white skin, turning her long,
outspread hair to gold. They fell upon little people with faces of a dusky
pallor, one of them crouched against the bole of a tree, a wizened monkey
of a man who in all that vastness looked small. They fell upon another
man, white-skinned, half-naked, with a yellow beard, who was lashed by
hide ropes to a second tree. It was Richard Darrien grown older, and at
his feet lay a broad-bladed spear!

The vision left her, or she was awakened from her sleep, whichever it
might be, by the pleasant voice of this same Richard, who stood yawning
before her, and said:

"It is time to get up. I say, why do you look so queer? Are you ill?"

"I have been up, long ago," she answered, struggling to her feet. "What do
you mean?"

"Nothing, except that you seemed a ghost a minute ago. Now you are a girl
again, it must have been the light."

"Did I? Well, I dreamed of ghosts, or something of the sort," and she told
him of the vision of the trees, though of the rest she could remember
little.

"That's a queer story," he said when she had finished. "I wish you had got
to the end of it, I should like to know what happened."

"We shall find out one day," she answered solemnly.

"Do you mean to say that you believe it is true, Rachel?"

"Yes, Richard, one day I shall see you tied to that tree."

"Then I hope you will cut me loose, that is all. What a funny girl you
are," he added doubtfully. "I know what it is, you want something to eat.
Have the rest of that biltong."

"No," she answered. "I could not touch it. There is a pool of water out
there, go and bathe your arm, and I will bind it up again."

He went, still wondering, and a few minutes later returned, his face and
head dripping, and whispered:

"Give me the gun. There is a reed buck standing close by. I saw it through
the mist; we'll have a jolly breakfast off him."

She handed him the _roer_, and crept after him out of the cave. About
thirty yards away to the right, looming very large through the dense fog,
stood the fat reed buck. Richard wriggled towards it, for he wanted to
make sure of his shot, while Rachel crouched behind a stone. The buck
becoming alarmed, turned its head, and began to sniff at the air, whereon
he lifted the gun and just as it was about to spring away, aimed and
fired. Down it went dead, whereon, rejoicing in his triumph like any other
young hunter who thinks not of the wonderful and happy life that he has
destroyed, Richard sprang upon it exultantly, drawing his knife as he
came, while Rachel, who always shrank from such sights, retreated to the
cave. Half an hour later, however, being healthy and hungry, she had no
objection to eating venison toasted upon sticks in the red embers of their
fire.

Their meal finished at length, they reloaded the gun, and although the
mist was still very dense, set out upon a journey of exploration, as by
now the sun was shining brightly above the curtain of low-lying vapour.
Stumbling on through the rocks, they discovered that the water had fallen
almost as quickly as it rose on the previous night. The island was strewn,
however, with the trunks of trees and other debris that it had brought
down, amongst which lay the carcases of bucks and smaller creatures, and
with them a number of drowned snakes. The two lions, however, appeared to
have escaped by swimming, at least they saw nothing of them. Walking
cautiously, they came to the edge of the donga, and sat down upon a stone,
since as yet they could not see how wide and deep the water ran.

Whilst they remained thus, suddenly through the mist they heard a voice
shouting from the other side of the donga.

"Missie," cried the voice in Dutch, "are you there missie?"

 "That is Tom, our driver," she said, "come to look for me. Answer for me,
Richard."

So the lad, who had very good lungs, roared in reply:

"Yes, I'm here, safe, waiting for the mist to lift, and the water to run
down."

"God be thanked," yelled the distant Tom. "We thought that you were surely
drowned. But, then, why is your voice changed?"

"Because an English heer is with me," cried Rachel. "Go and look for his
horse and bring a rope, then wait till the mist rises. Also send to tell
the pastor and my mother that I am safe."

"I am here, Rachel," shouted another voice, her father's. "I have been
looking for you all night, and we have got the Englishman's horse. Don't
come into the water yet. Wait till we can see."

"That's good news, any way," said Richard, "though I shall have to ride
hard to catch up the waggons."

Rachel's face fell.

"Yes," she said; "very good news."

"Are you glad that I am going, then?" he asked in an offended tone.

"It was you who said the news was good," she replied gently.

"I meant I was glad that they had caught my horse, not that I had to ride
away on it. Are you sorry, then?" and he glanced at her anxiously.

"Yes, I am sorry, for we have made friends, haven't we? It won't matter to
you who will find plenty of people down there at the Cape, but you see
when you are gone I shall have no friend left in this wilderness, shall
I?"

Again Richard looked at her, and saw that her sweet grey eyes were full of
tears. Then there rose within the breast of this lad who, be it
remembered, was verging upon manhood, a sensation strangely similar, had
he but known it, to that which had been experienced an hour or two before
by the child at his side when she watched him sleeping in the cave. He
felt as though these tear-laden grey eyes were drawing his heart as a
magnet draws iron. Of love he knew nothing, it was but a name to him, but
this feeling was certainly very new and queer.

"What have you done to me?" he asked brusquely. "I don't want to go away
from you at all, which is odd, as I never liked girls much. I tell you,"
he went on with gathering vehemence, "that if it wasn't that it would be
mean to play such a trick upon my father, I wouldn't go. I'd come with
you, or follow after--all my life. Answer me--what have you done?"

"Nothing, nothing at all," said Rachel with a little sob, "except tie up
your arm."

"That can't be it," he replied. "Anyone could tie up my arm. Oh! I know it
is wrong, but I hope I shan't be able to overtake the waggons, for if I
can't I will come back."

"You mustn't come back; you must go away, quite away, as soon as you can.
Yes, as soon as you can. Your father will be very anxious," and she began
to cry outright.

"Stop it," said Richard. "Do you hear me, stop it. I am not going to be
made to snivel too, just because I shan't see a little girl any more whom
I never met--till yesterday."

These last words came out with a gulp, and what is more, two tears came
with them and trickled down his nose.

For a moment they sat thus looking at each other pitifully, and--the truth
must be told--weeping, both of them. Then something got the better of
Richard, let us call it primeval instinct, so that he put his arms about
Rachel and kissed her, after which they continued to weep, their heads
resting upon each other's shoulders. At length he let her go and stood up,
saying argumentatively:

"You see now we are really friends."

"Yes," she answered, again rubbing her eyes with the back of her hand for
lack of a pocket handkerchief in the fashion that on the previous day had
so irritated her father, "but I don't know why you should kiss me like
that, just because you are my friend, or" she added with an outburst of
truthfulness, "why I should kiss you."

Richard stood over her frowning and reflecting. Then he gave up the
problem as beyond his powers of interpretation, and said:

"You remember that rubbish you dreamt just now, about my being tied to a
tree and the rest of it? Well, it wasn't nice, and it gives me the creeps
to think of it, like the lions outside the cave. But I want to tell you
that I hope it is true, for then we shall meet again, if it is only to say
good-night."

"Yes, Richard," she answered, placing her slim fingers into his big brown
hand, "we shall meet again, I am sure--I am quite sure. And I think that
it will be to say, not good-night," and she looked up at him and smiled,
"but good-morning."

As Rachel spoke a puff of wind blew down the donga, rolling up the mist
before it, and of a sudden shining above them they saw the glorious sun.
As though by magic butterflies appeared basking upon the rain-shattered
lily blooms; bright birds flitted from tree to tree, ringdoves began to
coo. The terror of the tempest and the darkness of night were overpast;
the world awoke again to life and love and joy. Instantly this change
reflected itself in their young hearts. They whose natures had as it were
ripened prematurely in the stress of danger and the shadow of death,
became children once again. The very real emotions that they had
experienced were forgotten, or at any rate sank into abeyance. Now they
thought, not of separation or of the dim, mysterious future that stretched
before them, but only of how they should ford the stream and gain its
further side, where Rachel saw her father, Tom, the driver, and the other
Kaffirs, and Richard saw his horse which he had feared was lost.

They ran down to the brink of the water and examined it, but here it was
still too deep for them to attempt its crossing. Then, directed by the
shouts and motions of the Kaffir Tom and Mr. Dove, they proceeded up
stream for several hundred yards, till they came to a rapid where the
lessening flood ran thinly over a ridge of rock, and after investigation,
proceeded to try its passage hand in hand. It proved difficult but not
dangerous, for when they came near to the further side where the current
was swift and the water rather deep, Tom threw them a waggon rope,
clinging on to which they were dragged--wet, but laughing--in safety to
the further bank.

"Ow!" exclaimed the Kaffirs, clapping their hands. "She is alive, the
lightnings have turned away from her, she rules the waters, and the
lightnings!" and then and there, after the native fashion, they gave
Rachel a name which was destined to play a great part in her future. That
name was "Lady of the Lightnings," or, to translate it more accurately,
"of the Heavens."

"I never thought to see you again," said her father, looking at Rachel
with a face that was still white and scared. "It was very wrong of me to
send you so far with that storm coming on, and I have had a terrible
night--yes, a terrible night; and so has your poor mother. However, she
knows that you are safe by now, thank God, thank God!" and he took her in
his arms and kissed her.

"Well, father, you said that He would look after me, didn't you? And so He
did, for He sent Richard here If it hadn't been for Richard I should have
been drowned," she added inconsequently.

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Dove. "Providence manifests itself in many ways. But
who is your young friend whom you call Richard? I suppose he has some
other name."

"Of course," answered that youth himself, "everybody has except Kaffirs.
Mine is Darrien."

"Darrien?" said Mr. Dove. "I had a friend called Darrien at school. I
never saw him after I left, but I believe that he went into the Navy."

"Then he must be my father, sir, for I have heard him say that there had
been no other Darrien in the service for a hundred years."

"I think so," answered Mr. Dove, "for now that I look at you, I can see a
likeness. We slept side by side in the same dormitory once five-and-thirty
years ago, so I remember. And now you have saved my daughter; it is very
strange. But tell me the story."

So between them they told it, although to one scene of it--the
last--neither of them thought it necessary to allude; or perhaps it was
forgotten.

"Truly the Almighty has had you both in His keeping," exclaimed Mr. Dove,
when their tale was done. "And now, Richard, my boy, what are you going to
do? You see, we caught your horse--it was grazing about a mile away with
the saddle twisted under its stomach--and wondered what white man could
possibly have been riding it in this desolate place. Afterwards, however,
one of my voor-loopers reported that he had seen two waggons yesterday
afternoon trekking through the poort about five miles to the north there.
The white men with them said that they were travelling towards the Cape,
and pushing on to get out of the hills before the storm broke. They bade
him, if he met you, to bid you follow after them as quickly as you could,
and to say that they would wait for you, if you did not arrive before, at
the Three Sluit outspan on this side of the Pondo country, at which you
stopped some months ago."

"Yes," answered Richard, "I remember, but that outspan is thirty miles
away, so I must be getting on, or they will come back to hunt for me."

"First you will stop and eat with us, will you not?" said Mr. Dove.

"No, no, I have eaten. Also I have saved some meat in my pouch. I must go,
I must indeed, for otherwise my father will be angry with me. You see," he
added, "I went out shooting without his leave."

"Ah! my boy," remarked Mr. Dove, who seldom neglected an opportunity for a
word in season, "now you know what comes of disobedience."

"Yes, I know, sir," he answered looking at Rachel. "I was just in time to
save your daughter's life here; as you said just now, Providence sent me.
Well, good-bye, and don't think me wicked if I am very glad that I was
disobedient, as I believe you are, too."

"Yes, I am. Good comes out of evil sometimes, though that is no reason why
we should do evil," the missionary added, not knowing what else to say.
Richard did not attempt to argue the point, for at the moment he was
engaged in bidding farewell to Rachel. It was a very silent farewell;
neither of them spoke a word, they only shook each other's hand and looked
into each other's eyes. Then muttering something which it was as well that
Mr. Dove did not hear, Richard swung himself into the saddle, for his
horse stood at hand, and, without even looking back, cantered away towards
the mountains.

"Oh!" exclaimed Rachel presently, "call him, father."

"What for?" asked Mr. Dove.

"I want to give him our address, and to get his."

"We have no address, Rachel. Also he is too far off, and why should you
want the address of a chance acquaintance?"

"Because he saved my life and I do," replied the child, setting her face.
Then, without another word, she turned and began to walk towards their
camp--a very heavy journey it was to Rachel.

When Rachel reached the waggon she found that her mother was more or less
recovered. At any rate the attack of fever had left her so that she felt
able to rise from her bed. Now, although still weak, she was engaged in
packing away the garments of her dead baby in a travelling chest, weeping
in a silent, piteous manner as she worked. It was a very sad sight. When
she saw Rachel she opened her arms without a word, and embraced her.

"You were not frightened about me, mother?" asked the child.

"No, my love," she answered, "because I knew that no harm would come to
you. I have always known that. It was a mad thing of your father to send
you to such a place at such a time, but no folly of his or of anyone else
can hurt you who are destined to live. Never be afraid of anything,
Rachel, for remember always you will only die in old age."

"I am not sure that I am glad of that," answered the girl, as she pulled
off her wet clothes. "Life isn't a very happy thing, is it, mother, at
least for those who live as we do?"

"There is good and bad in it, dear; we can't have one without the
other--most of us. At any rate, we must take it as it comes, who have to
walk a path that we did not make, and stop walking when our path comes to
an end, not a step before or after. But, Rachel, you are changed since
yesterday. I see it in your face. What has happened to you?"

"Lots of things, mother. I will tell you the story, all of it, every word.
Would you like to hear it?"

Her mother nodded, and, the baby-clothes being at last packed away, shut
the lid of-the box with a sigh, sat down upon it and listened.

Rachel told her of her meeting with Richard Darrien, and of how he saved
her from the flood. She told of the strange night that they had spent
together in the little cave while the lions marched up and down without.
She told of her vigil over the sleeping Richard at the daybreak, and of
the dream that she had dreamed when she seemed to see him grown to
manhood, and herself grown to womanhood, and clad in white skins, watching
him lashed to the trunk of a gigantic tree as the first arrows of sunrise
struck down the lanes of some mysterious forest. She told of how her heart
had been stirred, and of how afterwards in the mist by the water's brink
his heart had been stirred also, and of how they had kissed each other and
wept because they must part.

Then she stopped, expecting that her mother would be angry with her and
scold her for her thoughts and conduct, as she knew well her father would
have done. But she was not angry, and she did not scold. She only
stretched out her thin hands and stroked the child's fair hair, saying:

"Don't be frightened, Rachel, and don't be sad. You think that you have
lost him, but soon or late he will come back to you, perhaps as you
dreamed--perhaps otherwise."

"If I were sure of that, mother, I would not mind anything," said the
girl, "though really I don't know why I should care," she added defiantly.

"No, you don't know now, but you will one day, and when you do, remember
that, however long it seems to wait, you may be quite sure, because I who
have the gift of knowing, told you so. Now tell me again what Richard
Darrien was like while you remember, for perhaps I may never live to see
his face, and I wish to get it into my mind."

So Rachel told her, and when she had described every detail, asked
suddenly:

"Must we really go on, mother, into this awful wilderness? Would not
father turn back if you asked him?"

"Perhaps," she answered. "But I shall not ask. He would never forgive me
for preventing him from doing what he thinks his duty. It is a madness
when we might be happy in the Cape or in England, but that cannot be
helped, for it is also his destiny and ours. Don't judge hardly of your
father, Rachel, because he is a saint, and this world is a bad place for
saints and their families, especially their families. You think that he
does not feel; that he is heartless about me and the poor babe, and
sacrifices us all, but I tell you he feels more than either you or I can
do. At night when I pretend to go to sleep I watch him groaning over his
loss and for me, and praying for strength to bear it, and for help to
enable him to do his duty. Last night he was nearly crazed about you, and
in all that awful storm, when the Kaffirs would not stir from the waggon,
went alone down to the river guided by the lightnings, but of course
returned half dead, having found nothing. By dawn he was back there again,
for love and fear would not let him rest a minute. Yet he will never tell
you anything of that, lest you should think that his faith in Providence
was shaken. I know that he is strange--it is no use hiding it, but if I
were to thwart him he would go quite mad, and then I should never forgive
myself, who took him for better and for worse, just as he is, and not as I
should like him to be. So, Rachel, be as happy as you can, and make the
best of things, as I try to do, for your life is all before you, whereas
mine lies behind me, and yonder," and she pointed towards the place where
the infant was buried. "Hush! here he comes. Now, help me with the
packing, for we are to trek to the ford this afternoon."


CHAPTER IV

ISHMAEL


It may he doubted whether any well-born young English lady ever had a
stranger bringing-up than that which fell to the lot of Rachel Dove. To
begin with, she had absolutely no associates, male or female, of her own
age and station, for at that period in its history such people did not
exist in the country where she dwelt. Practically her only companions were
her father, a religious enthusiast, and her mother, a half broken-hearted
woman, who never for a single hour could forget the children she had lost,
and whose constitutional mysticism increased upon her continually until at
times it seemed as though she had added some new quality to her normal
human nature.

Then there were the natives, amongst whom from the beginning Rachel was a
sort of queen. In those first days of settlement they had never seen
anybody in the least like her, no one so beautiful--for she grew up
beautiful--so fearless, or so kind. The tale of that adventure of hers as
a child upon the island in the midst of the flooded torrent spread all
through the country with many fabulous additions. Thus the Kaffirs said
that she was a "Heaven-herd," that is, a magical person who can ward off
or direct the lightnings, which she was supposed to have done upon this
night; also that she could walk upon the waters, for otherwise how did she
escape the flood? And, lastly, that the wild beasts were her servants, for
had not the driver Tom and the natives seen the spoor of great lions right
at the mouth of the cave where she and her companion sheltered, and had
they not heard that she called these lions into the cave to protect her
and him from the other creatures? Therefore, as has been said, they gave
her a name, a very long name that meant Chieftainess, or Lady of Heaven,
_Inkosazana-y-Zoola;_ for Zulu or Zoola, which we know as the title of
that people, means Heaven, and _Udade-y-Silwana,_ or Sister of wild
beasts. As these appellations proved too lengthy for general use, even
among the Bantu races, who have plenty of time for talking, ultimately it
was shortened to Zoola alone, so that throughout that part of
South-Eastern Africa Rachel came to enjoy the lofty title of "Heaven," the
first girl, probably, who was ever so called.

With all natives from her childhood up, Rachel was on the best of terms.
She was never familiar with them indeed, for that is not the way for a
white person to win the affection, or even the respect of a Kaffir. But
she was intimate in the sense that she could enter into their thoughts and
nature, a very rare gift. We whites are apt to consider ourselves the
superior of such folk, whereas we are only different. In fact, taken
altogether, it is quite a question whether the higher sections of the
Bantu peoples are not our equals. Of course, we have learned more things,
and our best men are their betters. But, on the other hand, among them
there is nothing so low as the inhabitants of our slums, nor have they any
vices which can surpass our vices. Is an assegai so much more savage than
a shell? Is there any great gulf fixed between a Chaka and a Napoleon? At
least they are not hypocrites, and they are not vulgar; that is the
privilege of civilised nations.

Well, with these folk Rachel was intimate. She could talk to the warrior
of his wars, to the woman of her garden and her children to the children
of that wonder world which surrounds childhood throughout the universe.
And yet there was never a one of these but lifted the hand to her in
salute when her shadow fell upon them. To them all she was the Inkosazana,
the Great Lady. They would laugh at her father and mimic him behind his
back, but Rachel they never laughed at or mimicked. Of her mother also,
although she kept herself apart from them, much the same may be said. For
her they had a curious name which they would not, or were unable to
explain. They called her "Flower-that-grows-on-a-grave." For Mr. Dove
their appellation was less poetical. It was
"Shouter-about-Things-he-does-not-understand," or, more briefly, "The
Shouter," a name that he had acquired from his habit of raising his voice
when he grew moved in speaking to them. The things that he did not
understand, it may be explained, were not to their minds his religious
views, which, although they considered them remarkable, were evidently his
own affair, but their private customs. Especially their family customs
that he was never weary of denouncing to the bewilderment of these poor
heathens, who for their part were not greatly impressed by those of the
few white people with whom they came in contact. Therefore, with native
politeness, they concluded that he spoke thus rudely because he did not
understand. Hence his name.

But Rachel had other friends. In truth she was Nature's child, if in a
better and a purer sense than Byron uses that description. The sea, the
veld, the sky, the forest and the river, these were her companions, for
among them she dwelt solitary. Their denizens, too, knew her well, for
unless she were driven to it, never would she lift her hand against
anything that drew the breath of life. The buck would let her pass quite
close to them, nor at her coming did the birds stir from off their trees.
Often she stood and watched the great elephants feeding or at rest, and
even dared to wander among the herds of savage buffalo. Of only two living
things was she afraid--the snake and the crocodile, that are cursed above
all cattle, and above every beast of the field, because being cursed they
have no sympathy or gentleness. She feared nothing else, she who was
always fearless, nor brute or bird, did they fear her.

After Rachel's adventure in the flooded river she and her parents pursued
their journey by slow and tedious marches, and at length, though in those
days this was strange enough, reached Natal unharmed. At first they went
to live where the city of Durban now stands, which at that time had but
just received its name. It was inhabited by a few rough men, who made a
living by trading and hunting, and surrounded themselves with natives,
refugees for the most part from the Zulu country. Amongst these people and
their servants Mr. Dove commenced his labours, but ere long a bitter
quarrel grew up between him and them.

These dwellers in the midst of barbarism led strange lives, and Mr. Dove,
who rightly held it to be his duty to denounce wrong-doing of every sort,
attacked them and their vices in no measured terms, and upon all
occasions. For long years he kept up the fight, until at length he found
himself ostracised. If they could avoid it, no white men would speak to
him, nor would they allow him to instruct their Kaffirs. Thus his work
came to an end in Durban as it had done in other places. Now, again, his
wife and daughter hoped that he would leave South Africa for good, and
return home. But it was not to be, for once more he announced that it was
laid upon him to follow the example of his divine Master, and that the
Spirit drove him into the wilderness. So, with a few attendants, they
trekked away from Durban.

On this occasion it was his wild design to settle in Zululand--where
Chaka, the great king, being dead, Dingaan, his brother and murderer,
ruled in his place--and there devote himself to the conversion of the
Zulus. Indeed, it is probable that he would have carried out this plan had
he not been prevented by an accident. One night when they were about forty
miles from Durban they camped on a stream, a tributary of the Tugela
River, which ran close by, and formed the boundary of the Zulu country. It
was a singularly beautiful spot, for to the east of them, about a mile
away, stretched the placid Indian Ocean, while to the west, overshadowing
them almost, rose a towering cliff, over which the stream poured itself,
looking like a line of smoke against its rocky face. They had outspanned
upon a rising hillock at the foot of which this little river wound away
like a silver snake till it joined the great Tugela. In its general aspect
the country was like an English park, dotted here and there with timber,
around which grazed or rested great elands and other buck, and amongst
them a huge rhinoceros.

When the waggon had creaked to the top of the rise, for, of course, there
was no road, and the Kaffirs were beginning to unyoke the hungry oxen,
Rachel, who was riding with her father, sprang from her horse and ran to
it to help her mother to descend. She was now a tall young woman, full of
health and vigour, strong and straightly shaped. Mrs. Dove, frail,
delicate, grey-haired, placed her foot upon the disselboom and hesitated,
for to her the ground seemed far off, and the heels of the cattle very
near.

"Jump," said Rachel in her clear, laughing voice, as she smacked the near
after-ox to make it turn round, which it did obediently, for all the team
knew her. "I'll catch you."

But her mother still hesitated, so thrusting her way between the ox and
the front wheel Rachel stretched out her arms and lifted her bodily to the
ground.

"How strong you are, my love!" said her mother, with a sort of wondering
admiration and a sad little smile; "it seems strange to think that I ever
carried you."

"One had need to be in this country, dear," replied Rachel cheerfully.
"Come and walk a little way, you must be stiff with sitting in that horrid
waggon," and she led her quite to the top of the knoll. "There," she
added, "isn't the view lovely? I never saw such a pretty place in all
Africa. And oh! look at those buck, and yes--that is a rhinoceros. I hope
it won't charge us."

Mrs. Dove obeyed, gazing first at the glorious sea, then at the plain and
the trees, and lastly behind her at the towering cliff steeped in
shadow--for the sun was westering--down the face of which the waterfall
seemed to hang like a silver rope.

As her eyes fell upon this cliff Mrs. Dove's face changed.

"I know this spot," she said in a hurried voice. "I have seen it before."

"Nonsense, mother," answered Rachel. "We have never trekked here, so how
could you?"

"I can't say, love, but I have. I remember that cliff and the waterfall;
yes, and those three trees, and the buck standing under them."

"One often feels like that, about having seen places, I mean, mother, but
of course it is all nonsense, because it is impossible, unless one dreams
of them first."

"Yes, love, unless one dreams. Well, I think that I must have dreamt. What
was the dream now? Rachel weeping--Rachel weeping--my love, I think that
we are going to live here, and I think--I think----"

"All right," broke in her daughter quickly, with a shade of anxiety in her
voice as though she did not wish to learn what her mother thought. "I
don't mind, I am sure. I don't want to go to Zululand, and see this horrid
Dingaan, who is always killing people, and I am quite sure that father
would never convert him, the wicked monster. It is like the Garden of
Eden, isn't it, with the sea thrown in. There are all the animals, and
that green tree with the fruit on it might be the Tree of Life, and--oh,
my goodness, there is Adam!"

Mrs. Dove followed the line of her daughter's outstretched hand, and
perceived three or four hundred yards away, as in that sparkling
atmosphere it was easy to do, a white man apparently clad in skins. He was
engaged in crawling up a little rise of ground with the obvious intention
of shooting at some blesbuck which stood in a hollow beyond with quaggas
and other animals, while behind him was a mounted Kaffir who held his
master's horse.

"I see," said Mrs. Dove, mildly interested. "But he looks more like
Robinson Crusoe without his umbrella. Adam did not kill the animals in the
Garden, my dear."

"He must have lived on something besides forbidden apples," remarked
Rachel, "unless perhaps he was a vegetarian as father wants to be.
There--he has fired!"

As she spoke a cloud of smoke arose above the man, and presently the loud
report of a _roer_ reached their ears. One of the buck rolled over and lay
struggling on the ground, while the rest, together with many others at a
distance, turned and galloped off this way and that, frightened by this
new and terrible noise. The old rhinoceros under the tree rose snorting,
sniffed the air, then thundered away up wind towards the man, its pig-like
tail held straight above its back.

"Adam has spoilt our Eden; I hope the rhinoceros will catch him," said
Rachel viciously. "Look, he has seen it and is running to his horse."

Rachel was right. Adam--or whatever his name might be--was running with
remarkable swiftness. Reaching the horse just as the rhinoceros appeared
within forty yards of him, he bounded to the saddle, and with his servant
galloped off to the right. The rhinoceros came to a standstill for a few
moments as though it were wondering whether it dared attack these strange
creatures, then making up its mind in the negative, rushed on and
vanished. When it was gone, the white man and the Kaffir, who had pulled
up their horses at a distance, returned to the fallen buck, cut its
throat, and lifted it on to the Kaffir's horse, then rode slowly towards
the waggon.

"They are coming to call," said Rachel. "How should one receive a
gentleman in skins?"

Apparently some misgivings as to the effect that might be produced by his
appearance occurred to the hunter. At any rate, he looked first at the two
white women standing on the brow, and next at his own peculiar attire,
which appeared to consist chiefly of the pelt of a lion, plus a very
striking pair of trousers manufactured from the hide of a zebra, and
halted about sixty yards away, staring at them. Rachel, whose sight was
exceedingly keen, could see his face well, for the light of the setting
sun fell on it, and he wore no head covering. It was a dark, handsome face
of a man about thirty-five years of age, with strongly-marked features,
black eyes and beard, and long black hair that fell down on to his
shoulders. They gazed at each other for a while, then the man turned to
his after-rider, gave him an order in a clear, strong voice, and rode away
inland. The after-rider, on the contrary, directed his horse up the rise
until he was within a few yards of them, then sprang to the ground and
saluted.

 "What is it?" asked Rachel in Zulu, a language which she now spoke
perfectly.

"Inkosikaas" (that is--Lady), answered the man, "my master thinks that you
may be hungry and sends you a present of this buck," and, as he spoke, he
loosed the riem or hide rope by which it was fastened behind his saddle,
and let the animal fall to the ground.

Rachel turned her eyes from it, for it was covered with blood, and
unpleasant to look at, then replied:

"My father and my mother thank your master. How is he named, and where
does he dwell?"

"Lady, among us black people he is named Ibubesi (lion), but his white
name is Hishmel."

"Hishmel, Hishmel?" said Rachel. "Oh! I know, he means Ishmael. There,
mother, I told you he was something biblical, and of course Ishmael dwelt
in the wilderness, didn't he, after his father had behaved so badly to
poor Hagar, and was a wild man whose hand was against every man's."

"Rachel, Rachel," said her mother suppressing a little smile. "Your father
would be very angry if he heard you. You should not speak lightly of holy
persons."

"Well, mother, Abraham may have been a holy person, but we should think
him a mean old thing nowadays, almost as mean as Sarah. You know they were
most of them mean, so what is the use of pretending they were not?"

Then without waiting for an answer she asked the Kaffir again: "Where does
the Inkoos Ishmael dwell?"

"In the wilderness," answered the man appropriately. "Now his kraal is
yonder, two hours' ride away. It is called Mafooti," and he pointed over
the top of the precipice, adding: "he is a hunter and trades with the
Zulus."

"Is he Dutch?" asked Rachel, whose curiosity was excited.

The Kaffir shook his head. "No, he hates the Dutch; he is of the people of
George."

"The people of George? Why, he must mean a subject of King George--an
Englishman."

"Yes, yes, Lady, an Englishman, like you," and he grinned at her. "Have
you any message for the Inkoos Hishmel?"

"Yes. Say to the Inkoos Ishmael or Lion-who-dwells-in-the-wilderness,
hates the Dutch and wears zebra-skin trousers, that my father and my
mother thank him very much for his present, and hope that his health is
good. Go. That is all."

The man grinned again, suspecting a joke, for the Zulus have a sense of
humour, then repeated the message word for word, trying to pronounce
Ishmael as Rachel did, saluted, mounted his horse, and galloped off after
his master.

"Perhaps you should have kept that Kaffir until your father came,"
suggested Mrs. Dove doubtfully.

"What was the good?" said Rachel. "He would only have asked Mr. Ishmael to
call in order that he might find out his religious opinions, and I don't
want to see any more of the man."

"Why not, Rachel?"

"Because I don't like him, mother. I think he is worse than any of the
rest down there, too bad to stop among them probably, and--" she added
with conviction, "I think we shall have more of his company than we want
before all is done. Oh! it is no good to say that I am prejudiced--I do,
and what is more, he came into our Garden of Eden and shot the buck. I
hope he will meet that rhinoceros on the way home. There!"

Although she disapproved, or tried to think that she did, of such strong
opinions so strongly expressed, Mrs. Dove offered no further opposition to
them. The fact was that her daughter's bodily and mental vigour
overshadowed her, as they did her husband also. Indeed, it seemed curious
that this girl, so powerful in body and in mind, should have sprung from
such a pair, a wrong-headed, narrow-viewed saint whose right place in the
world would have been in a cell in the monastery or one of the stricter
orders, and a gentle, uncomplaining, high-bred woman with a mind
distinguished by its affectionate and mystical nature, a mind so unusual
and refined that it seemed to be, and in truth was, open to influences
whereof, mercifully enough, the majority of us never feel the subtle,
secret power.

There is nothing strange in them, if our love with our circumstances
change, and it is still a unausgemachte whether the Glük love, or love Glük
forward. You see, when a big fall, so flee his crony, and arms, which
comes up, makes his enemies to friends, however, such as that laid down
in the North a hollow friend at the sample Sezen wants to make even an
enemy. So at the end of what I started to come, so däucht me, our desires
and our circumstances to thwart each other so often that our Vorsäze
violence rarely in our left our thoughts are ours, but not their execution.
Remember always, my love, that you do not want to take zweyten husband,
but let these thoughts to die as soon as your first husband died. Duchess.
O! then give me the earth neither food, nor heaven light! Then come Bey Bey
day and night no joy in my heart still resting on my Auglieder! Sey my
miserable life as the life of the hermit penitents, a fortdaurender
death, every one of my wishes come across what he is most opposed, and
eternal torment follow me here and there when I made a Wittwer,
ever be married again.

Hamlet. If they break these oaths - Herzog. The oaths are great! My
beloved, IZT leave me for a while, my spirits are dull, and I will try and
see if I can sleep - (He entschläft.) Herzogin. Resting gently, and never,
never come Unglük between us beyde! (You will anyway.) Hamlet (to the
queen.) Madam, how like you this Stük? queen. däucht Me, the lady promises
too much. Hamlet. O, we will see how they will keep their word. king. Do
you know the contents of the Stüks? Is nothing objectionable in them?
Hamlet. No, nothing at all, it's all just fun, they do not poison
seriously, in the world nothing offensive. King.

What is called the Stük? Hamlet. The (mouse-trap;) - In of That, in a
figurative sense, probably - Stük That is the idea of a murder in Vienna
met; is Gonzago the Duke name, his wife Baptista says, you will
immediately see that it is a mischievous Stük work is, but what does the
us? Your Majesty and others who have a good conscience, this is nothing,
and the like are Kraz, it jukt we have a smooth skin. (Lucianus occurs.)
This is one name Lucianus, a nephew of the Duke. Ophelia.

Man kan the choir with you, save, Gracious Lord. .** Hamlet - Well,
early look at murderers. Listening to your deuced faces to cut, and start.
Come, the krächzende Rabe schreyt to revenge. -** Ed (Here you zwey joke
Speeches Hamlets have to omit, of which the first Übersezer the
incomprehensible, and the other one is zweydeutige Zote.) Lucianus black
thoughts; willing hands; schnellwürkendes poison, and gelegne time - all
agreed together, and no man is there that I could see. Pour, thou fatal
mix from midnight herbs withdrawn, and Hecate dreyfach with magic
curse geschwängert, pour out your perishable nature and magical
properties, and make 'belonging to a life I hated plözliches end!

(He pours the flabbily Duke of the poison in the ears .) Hamlet
(for kings.)

He poisoned him in his garden, to lord of his assets to be his Nam
'is Gonzago; the history of this is in the printer, it is in the best
Tuscan written. Immediately you will see how the murderer and the love
of Gonzago's wife wins - Ophelia. The King is on. Hamlet. How, from a
blind Lermer erschrekt? Queen. What is missing my husband? Polonius. Stop
playing! King. Give me light. Way! gone! All. lights, lights, lights!
(you go from confusion.) Siebende Scene.

(Hamlet and Horatio remain.) Hamlet. Let the cry verwundten Hirsch, The
unverlezte joked: Because cheap Missethat By monitor the sleep of innocence.
Would this, Sir, (if all other fehlschlüge) and a forest of feathers on the
hat, and a couple of huge striped roses on my shoes, I do not have a
square under a dome of Comödianten yourself? Horatio. I do with when
it comes to . Hamlet. "O my good Horatio, I wanted the word spirit for
tens of thousands Thaler accept. Hast du's seen?

Horatio. Not only for charitable, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. As the talk
of the poisoning was? Horatio. I have very much want to observe.
(Rosenkranz and Güldenstern occur.)

Hamlet. Hey! holla! comes, plays one on us. Come, where are the flutes? If
the Comödie the king does not like, well, so do not do it, and he must
know why. Come, play on, I say. Güldenstern. My Gracious prince, erlaubet
me a word with you to talk - Hamlet.

An entire history, Sir. Güldenstern. The king, sir - Hamlet. So, my Lord,
what's giebt from him? Güldenstern. Has to be locked cabinet, and is
extremely bad - Hamlet. Perhaps too much wine? Güldenstern. No, Gracious
Lord, from Galle - Hamlet. Your usual wisdom, you probably do not Gerath,
sir, because they do has shown to me; the Doctor would have her go, I
can not here, because if I give him a Purgier funds wanted to enter, let
'it may still make more bile. Güldenstern. Gracious Lord, listen to
me, instead of Such strange bounces my presentation elsewhere. Hamlet. I
want to stop, Mr. - Speak! Güldenstern. The queen, your mother, schikt
larger Betrübniß me in their heart to you. Hamlet. Seyde your welcome.
Güldenstern. No, Gracious Lord, this is here Compliment except his
Plaz. If it is you can give me a sound answer to give, I will rid myself
of the contract to me your mother has abandoned, where not, so you'll
forgive me if I go and my business for geendigt think. Hamlet. Lord, I can
not - Güldenstern. What, Gracious Lord?

Hamlet. you a healthy answer; my Wiz is not likely to be But, sir, as good
as I get a reply can give, it will be available to serve you, or rather,
as you say, my mother - only without further ado to the cause! - My mother
says it - rosary. Well then, which she says, your demeanor, it has in the
ultimate surprise and amazement gesezt. Hamlet. O amazing son, so his mother
in astonishment Sezen kan! stumbles But not a consequence etwann behind
this surprise her? rosary. you wish, eh it goes to bed, in her cabinet
with you to speak. Hamlet. We will obey, and if they are ten times our
mother would be. Do you have what continues to act with us? Rosary. Gracious
Lord, you liebtet me once - Hamlet. That I still thu - rosary. Well, then,
dearest prince, to our old friendship's sake, what is the cause of this
your Humor's strange? Seyde assured her sezt your own Freyheit in
danger if you refuse longer, your complaints to trust a friend. Hamlet.
My Lord, I would like Befördrung. Rosary.

How can the Seyn because their word for the royal throne in your Dännemark
you? Hamlet. Okay, but (because the grass wächßt) - The Sprüchwort is a
little schmuzig. (One with a flute occurs.) O, the flutes, let me see - We
go with each other, sir - how, why is it so around me, the wind abzugewinnen
me as if you say that I am in a yarn wanted to drive? Güldenstern. O my
Gracious Prince, when my duty to make bold, it forces me my love so rude
to even Seyn. Hamlet. versteh The 'I do not allzuwol. Will you play on
this flute? Güldenstern. I can not, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. I beg you.
Güldenstern. Believe me, on my word, I can not. Hamlet. I ask quite a lot.
Güldenstern. I do not know a grip, Gracious Mr. Hamlet. It is so easy as
lies, the government lulls euern with the fingers and the thumb, blaßt with
euerm mouth burned, and it is the most eloquent music of the world by
themselves. You see, here are the grip holes. Güldenstern. But that is
precisely the error that I do not know Greiff, a harmony so come out and
I do not understand the art. Hamlet. So? you see now, what a miserable
thing it made me want to do, like her want to play me, you want to Seyn
viewed as if you are my handles Kennet; her want me like my secrets
of the heart, pull, you want that I you from the lowest note to
highest should specify, which do you want, and it is so much music,
such a lovely singing in this little Stüke wood, and yet you can
not bring?

Like, is you, that I'm easier to play than a whistle? Call me what
instrument you want, but if you have to tamper I can, so you can not play
upon me - you Grüß God, my Lord - Polonius (the former). Gracious Lord,
the Queen wants to be with you speak, and that immediately. Hamlet. You
see then that cloud which beynahe looks like a camel? Polonius. Bey Sct.
Veit, in That, like a perfect camel. Hamlet. Däucht Mich., she more like a
blackbird. Polonius.

She is black like a blackbird. Hamlet. Or a wall fish? Polonius. It has
many similarities with a wall of fish, it is true . Hamlet. Now, I
will immediately come to my mother - (in front of him.) - The guys are
still great to me - I will come augenbliklich. Polonius. I want it so say.
Hamlet. Augenbliklich is soon said. Let me alone, good friends. (They go
from.)

It is now midnight, the time where magicians and fiend behind the
curtain of darkness push their vile arts, and the time when their
cemeteries Todt omit and even hell verpestete epidemics in the upper
world aufdünstet.

Now I can drink hot blood, things thun, whose Anblik better days
would zurükschauern.

Silence! Now to my mother - O my heart, verliehre not thy nature! Let's
not, oh! nevermore! The soul of Nero in the bosom strong drive, and I
will Seyn cruel, not unnatural, and I will speak daggers to her, but no
use. Hierinn to my tongue and my heart do not agree. So ruthless always my
words with their procedures, so far sey it forever from my soul, they
entered the factory Sezen. (He goes anyway.) Eighth Scene. (The King,
rosary and Güldenstern occur.) King. He I do not like it, and it would
also not safe for us Seyn this madness so unattached continued to swarm.
Get ready to travel so I will give you delay your Instruction aufsezen,
and he will be with you to England. The circumstances do not allow us the
dangers just to make the moon an hour from his addict tempers can
arise. Güldenstern. We want to anschiken it is a most just and holy
fear, for so many thousands of people worried about security Seyn,
in Eu . Majesty live. Rosary. It is the private duty of every human being,
all the forces of his mind about this procedure, itself from harm: But much
more is it a requirement deßjenigen spirit, the soul of the whole body of
state, and by whose welfare the lives of so many others depend.

The death of a king is not the death of a single, but moves like a swirl
everything close to him in itself. He is like a wheel, from the summit of
the highest mountain gewälzt down under its enormous spokes thousand small
things that depend smashed. A king sighs never alone, if he suffers, all
suffer. King. Equipped you, I ask you, on eilfertigste on this journey,
we must create this danger fetters, which so far has gone around frey.
Beyde. We want our utmost thun . (They go from.) (Polonius occurs.)
Polonius. Gracious Lord, he is entering his mother go to Cabinet, I am
behind the wallpaper versteken to hear how it will read the text . Because,
as your Majesty has said, (and it was wisely said) it is not superfluous,
that there is still someone else as a mother (the maternal heart always
partheyisch to maintain) to hear what he say is his responsibility. Lebet
well, my lord, I want you to wait, eh it goes to bed, and tell you
what I would have heard.

(He goes anyway.) King. I thank you, my honest Polonius. (Allein.) O! My
crime is stinking it smells to heaven, up there with the ancient curse
laden, and a brother-murder - I can not pray - how could I, since
I, in dispute between the inside of my affection and my Vorsaz that equal
bin, the zwey shops in front of him, and under no doubt what he should
first thun, beyde failed .-- As if these criminal diker hand as she is,
with blood-brother would be covered? Has the sky allgütige not enough
rain, they snow white wash? What is mercy, mercy than the debt to prove?
Has not the prayer of this dual force us to give support, eh, we fall, or
forgiveness, if we have fallen? Sun I will then aufschauen - My crime
is out. But, oh! For what forms of prayer can I use? - "Vergieb my shameful
murder" - The Seyn can not because I am still in the Besiz advantages
am I derentwillen to this murder begieng - I crown, and my queen? How can
a criminal pardon hope as long he is winning his Übelthat reserves? Yes,
after the wrong course of this world it Seyn kan, kan of the crime
übergüldete hand the eye of justice lock here, where often the
reward of iniquity even the Gesez auskauft, but it is not up there:
There are no excuses, there That is in their natural nakedness, and
we are forced to return their certificate us in the face of our
sins, to reaffirm.

What then? What is left? - Try what repentance can: what can they not? -
But what can mere barren remorse? - O's unhappy state!

O, soul sunk in the mud! the deeper you sink, the more you want losarbeiten.
Help me, ye angels! Helfet! For Earth, ungeschmeidigen her knees!

And thou, with heart of steel fibers, soften you, and be as soft as the
sinews neugebohrnen a child - it can still be anything good. (He begiebt
in the rearmost portion of the Scene and kneels down.) Ninth Scene.
(Hamlet occurs.) Hamlet. IZT can 'ich's thun am quite properly, IZT as
he prays, and I want to IZT's thun - so he goes to heaven - And
should my revenge Seyn?

That would be fine read!

- A bad guy murdered my father, and before that I send his only son,
this baddie nemlichen to heaven - O, the reward would not revenge! He
attacked my father suddenly, Bey full stomach, with all its flowers
are in full sins - and how it now stands around him, aware only of
the sky - our terms after bad enough.

So I would smell when I put to him in the Augenblik wegnähme, since
his soul has discharged its debts as they transition to this geschikte
is?

- Hindsight, my Schwerdt, you are a service provided schreklichern! If he
is drunk and asleep, or in the eruption of anger, or in the middle of the
incestuous pleasure of his bed, where he plays, escape, or otherwise does
something that no hope of salvation leaves, then gieb him a blow that his
Legs to heaven streke by his black soul goes to hell - My mother
is waiting for me - a Arzney, nothing to serve as an incurable
disease should be extended.

(He's up.) (The King is on, and enters forward.) King. My words fly on,
my thoughts are back, and long words without thoughts never to
heaven.

(He goes anyway.) Tenth Scene. (Turns to the Cabinet of the Queen.)

(The Queen and Polonius enter on.) Polonius. He is at once because Seyn;
see that its about to work with him is, he says, the pranks he
played seyen too rough to stand, the king sey very indignant about
that, and if its not his Advocate wäret been so would have consequences
that may have - I want to hide here, I ask you, says he is aware
of the fine Meynung sharp.

Hamlet (behind the scene.) Mother! Mother - Queen. Seyde deßwegen without
worrying, you leave me - Removes you, I hear him coming. (Polonius
hidden behind the wallpaper.) (Hamlet occurs.) Hamlet. Well, Mother,
what is the thing? queen.

Hamlet, thou hast thy father much beleidiget. Hamlet. Mother, you've got
(my) father very beleidiget. Queen.

Come, come, you give me a wrong answer. Hamlet. schikt you to a malicious
Salutation. Queen . What, what should the Seyn, Hamlet? Hamlet. What
do you want then? queen. Do you know me no more? Hamlet. No, Beyme sky
that is not; Seyde her the queen, your husband brother's wife, but I
wanted her wäret not! - Your Seyde my mother. Queen. Well, if you start
from that sound, I will let you answer someone who can talk - Hamlet.
Come, come, and you settle sezt; ye not me by the office: I do not let
go until I have a mirror accused had worinn you to the bottom of your
soul shall see. Queen. What you have in mind? You will not kill me, but
want to?

Hülfe! ho! Polonius (behind the wallpaper.) How? He, Hülfe! Hamlet.
Giebt What's there? A mouse?

Todt a Ducat, Todt. (He stabs the Polonius.) Polonius. O, I am a man of
death. Queen. Woe to me! What hast thou done? Hamlet. In That, I do not
know: Is it the king? Queen. O, what a quick and bloody That is it! Hamlet.
One That bloody; beynahe so bad, my good mother, as assassinate a
king and his brother heyrathen.

Queen. assassinate a king? Hamlet.

Yes, madam, that was my word. (To Polonius.)

Du unglüklicher, reckless, untimely-bustling Thor, you are probably
running!

I held thee for a greater than thou art, have now, apply what you
have, you learn now that it is dangerous to do too much to make
thun - (The Queen).

Power is not so much hands-struggle , still, sezt you down, and let
me in your hearts to the press, because I want tuna, if it be
otherwise vicious habit of not so iron-hard is that it has lost all
feeling.

Queen. What have I done that you presumptuous enough makes me so
rough to be started?

Hamlet.

One That which the chaste innocence Röth the suspect himself makes
a virtue and the Heuchlerin called the Rose of the beautiful forehead
a lawful wegreißt love and a bump-Eyter in its place sezt, a That
the Ehgelübden faith no more leaves, than the oaths of false dice
players have - O!

a That the venerable ausreißt contracts the soul, and the hold of
religion in empty words sound transforms.

Heaven sees the face, since this That happened, with dull eyes down
to this planet, so gloomy and sad, as Beyme Dawn of the World Court.

Queen. Woe to me, what a That? Hamlet. The roars so loudly that they are
up to the India thunders - hieher Look, look at this Gemählde, and
on this, the images zwoer brothers: see what kind of dignity sat
on the forehead - Hyperion Loken - the forehead of Jupiter itself
- an eye, like the war-god, to Schreker or commands to prevail, and
a position as the herald of the gods, which is just a himmelküssenden
Hill herabgeschwungen has a figure to which all God's seal to gesezt
seemed to have the world's instruments, that the man sey.

That was your husband - now hieher Behold, here is your husband,
he, like the Mihlthau a healthy ear, poisoned his brother.

Have you eyes?

Could you good Weyden on this beautiful mountain leave to you in
this mire to wallow?

Ha! Do you have eyes?

You can not love it hot, because, in euerm age, the blood is tame, and can
be guided by reason, and what reason would be by (this) to (this one) go
on?

Sensuality have you, that's certainly, otherwise you could you have no
idea, but these senses are taken from the Digest: Wahnwiz could not
have lost so much, nobody will be so great that he is still not
so much distinctive character left such a variety of exercise -
What kind of a vicious because you have blindfolded, as their machtet
this election?

Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, Ears without hands or
eyes, or just rest a sick sense of a single unverblendeten's would not be
able to miss - O Schaam! where's your Röth?

Rebel Hell, if you are in the bones of a matron make such an uproar,
let always the chastity of youth Seyn wax, and in their own fire
wegschmelzen.

Retrieves no shame, if the driving impetuous youth Hize in Ausschweiffung
auflodert because Frost himself just as untamed burns, and the
reason is Kupplerin contemptible lust.

Queen. O Hamlet, have a! You turn my eyes in my innermost soul, and
because I see so black, so ugly Fleken that they never will be their
color verliehren. Hamlet. Certainly not, as long it Seyde capable in the
welding of a stinking bed blutschändrischen to live, love in a pig
scurrility Stalle to maintain - the queen.

O to hear these words penetrate like daggers in my ears - nothing more,
my dear Hamlet.

Hamlet. A murderer and a bad guy on top! - A Sclave, the not a twentieth
Theil Theil toes of euerm first Lord of Pikelhäring among kings, a
cowardly rogue Gaudieb and the crown of a kissing wegstahl, and in his
Schnapsak stekte - Queen. Enough, enough - (The Spirit can be seen.)
Hamlet. zusammengeflikter A rags-King - heaven! (He stares with Entsezen
on.) umschwebet me with euern wings, you heavenly guards! - What will
your venerable appearance? queen. Alas! he is insane - Hamlet. If you
do not, euern lazy son to procure advanced the time unthätigem Gram
verliehrend, the great work that you anbefohlen him, you can lie? mind.
Forget it not: This visit has no other intention when your almost
blunt Vorsaz to wezen.

But, see! Amazement take your mother!

O occurs between her and her fighting soul: In the weakest bodies
works the imagination the most.

Speaking with her, Hamlet. Hamlet. What about you, madam? Queen. Alas! what
about you?

you want your eyes as a place without being the subject of book, and
with the incorporeal air talks lead?

Your ghosts look wildly out of your eyes out, and immediately schläfernden
soldiers Bey plözlichen an alarm, rigid your hair, like a soul, arise, and
stand motionless on their ends - O my dear son, patience sprize cold
to the fire of your passion -- What you look at it?

For a long time the girls remained beneath their seaweed, fearing lest the
men or others should return, until at length they could bear the cold of
the water no longer, and crept out of it to the brink of the little pool,
where, still wreathed in seaweed, they sat and warmed themselves in the
hot sunlight. Now Noie seemed to be half dead; indeed Rachel thought that
she would die.

"Awake," she said, "life is still before you."

"Would that it were behind me, Lady," moaned the poor girl. "You
understand our tongue--did you not hear? My father, my own mother, my
other mothers, my brothers and sisters, all killed, all killed for my
sake, and I left living. Oh! you meant kindly, but why did you not let
Bomba pass his spear through me? It would have been quickly over, and now
I should sleep with the rest."

Rachel made no answer, for she saw that talking was useless in such a
case. Only she took Noie's hand and pressed it in silent sympathy, until
at length the poor girl, utterly outworn with agony and the fatigue of her
long flight, fell asleep, there in the sunshine. Rachel let her sleep,
knowing that she would take no harm in that warmth. Quietly she sat at her
side for hour after hour while the fierce sun, from which she protected
her head with seaweed, dried her garments. At length the shadows told her
that midday was past, and the sea water which began to trickle over the
surrounding rocks that the tide was approaching its full. They could stop
there no longer unless they wished to be drowned.

"Come," she said to Noie, "the Zulus have gone, and the sea is here. We
must swim to the shore and go back to my father's camp."

"What place have I in your kraal, Lady?" asked the girl when her senses
had returned to her.

"I will find you a place," Rachel answered; "you are mine now."

"Yes, Lady, that is true," said Noie heavily, "I am yours and no one
else's," and taking Rachel's hand she pressed it to her forehead.

Then together once more they swam the pool, and not too soon, for the tide
was pouring into it. Reaching the shore in safety, no easy task for
Rachel, who must hold the heavy gun above her head, Noie tied Rachel's
towel about her middle to take the place of her moocha, and very
cautiously they crept up the kloof, fearing lest some of the Zulus might
still be lurking in the neighbourhood.

At length they came to the pool into which they had thrown the soldier
Bomba, and saw two crocodiles doubtless those that had eaten him, lying
asleep in the sun upon flat rocks at its edge. Here they were obliged to
leave the kloof both because they feared to pass the crocodiles, and for
the reason that their road to the camp ran another way. So they climbed up
the cliff and looked about, but could see only a pair of oribe bucks, one
lying down under a tree, and one eating grass quite close to its mate.

"The Zulus have gone or there would be no buck here," said Rachel. "Come,
now, hold the shield before you and the spear in your hand, to hide that
you are a woman, and let us go on boldly."

So they went till they reached the crest of the next rise, and then sprang
back behind it, for lying here and there they saw people who seemed to be
asleep.

"The Zulus resting!" exclaimed Rachel.

"Nay," answered the girl with a sigh. "My people, dead! See the vultures
gathered round them."

Rachel looked again, and saw that it was so. Without a word they walked
forward, and as they passed each body Noie gave it its name. Here lay a
brother, there a sister, yonder four folk of her father's kraal. They came
to a tall and handsome woman of middle age, and she shivered as she had
done in the pool and said in an icy voice:

"The mother who bore me!"

A few more steps and in a patch of high grass that grew round an ant-heap,
they found two Zulu soldiers, each pierced through with a spear. Seated
against the ant-heap also, as though he were but resting, was a
light-coloured man, a dwarf in stature, spare of frame, and with sharp
features. His dress, if he wore any, seemed to have been removed from him,
for he was almost naked, and Rachel noticed that no wound could be seen on
him.

"Behold my father!" said Noie in the same icy voice.

"But," whispered Rachel, "he only sleeps. No spear has touched him."

"Not so, he is dead, dead by the White Death after the fashion of his
people."

Now Rachel wondered what this White Death might be, and of which people
the man was one. That he was not a Zulu who had been stunted in his growth
she could see for herself, nor had she ever met a native who at all
resembled him. Still she could ask no questions at that time; the thing
was too awful. Moreover Noie had knelt down before the body, and with her
arms thrown around its neck, was whispering into its ear. For a full
minute she whispered thus, then set her own ear to the cold stirless lips,
and for another minute or more, seemed to listen intently, nodding her
head from time to time. Never before had Rachel witnessed anything so
uncanny, and oddly enough, the fact that this scene was enacted in the
bright sunlight added to its terrors. She stood paralysed, forgetting the
Zulus, forgetting everything except that to all appearance the living was
holding converse with the dead.

At length Noie rose, and turning to her companion said:

"My Spirit has been good to me; I thank my Spirit, which brought me here
before it was too late for us to talk together. Now I have the message."

"The message! Oh! what message?" gasped Rachel.

An inscrutable look gathered on the face of the beautiful native girl.

"It is to me alone," she answered, "but this I may say, much of it was of
you, Inkosazana-y-Zoola."

"Who told you that was my native name?" asked Rachel, springing back.

"It was in the message, O thou before whom kings shall bow."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Rachel, "you have heard it from our people."

"So be it, Lady; I have heard it from your people whom I have never seen.
Now let us go, your father is troubled for you."

Again Rachel looked at her sideways, and Noie went on:

"Lady, from henceforth I am your servant, am I not? and that service will
not be light."

"She thinks I shall make her dig," thought Rachel to herself, as the girl
continued in her low, soft voice:

"Now I ask you one thing--when I tell you my story, let it be for your
breast alone. Say only that I am a common girl whom you saved from the
soldier."

"Why not?" answered Rachel. "That is all I have to tell."

Then once more they went on, Rachel wondering if she dreamed, the girl
Noie walking at her side, stern and cold-faced as a statue.


CHAPTER VI

THE CASTING OF THE LOTS


They reached the crest of the last rise, and there, facing them on the
slope of the opposite wave of land, stood the waggon, surrounded by the
thorn fence, within which the cattle and horses were still enclosed,
doubtless for fear of the Zulus. Nothing could be more peaceful than the
aspect of that camp. To look at it no one would have believed that within
a few hundred yards a hideous massacre had just taken place. Presently,
however, voices began to shout, and heads to bob up over the fence. Then
it occurred to Rachel that they must think she was a prisoner in the
charge of a Zulu, and she told Noie to lower the shield which she still
held in front of her. The next instant some thorns were torn out, and her
father, a gun in his hand, appeared striding towards them.

"Thank God that you are safe," he said as they met. "I have suffered great
anxiety, although I hoped that the white man Israel--no, Ishmael--had
rescued you. He came here to warn us," he added in explanation, "very
early this morning, then galloped off to find you. Indeed his after-rider,
whose horse he took, is still here. Where on earth have you been, Rachel,
and"--suddenly becoming aware of Noie, who, arrayed only in a towel, a
shield, and a stabbing spear, presented a curious if an impressive
spectacle--"who is this young person?"

"She is a native girl I saved from the massacre," replied Rachel,
answering the last question first. "It is a long story, but I shot the man
who was going to kill her, and we hid in a pool. Are you all safe, and
where is mother?"

"Shot the man! Shed human blood! Hid in a pool!" ejaculated Mr. Dove,
overcome. "Really, Rachel, you are a most trying daughter. Why should you
go out before daybreak and do such things?"

"I don't know, I am sure, father; predestination, I suppose--to save her
life, you know."

Again he contemplated the beautiful Noie, then, murmuring something about
a blanket, ran back to the camp. By this time Mrs. Dove had climbed out of
the waggon, and arrived with the Kaffirs.

"I knew you would be safe, Rachel," she said in her gentle voice, "because
nothing can hurt you. Still you do upset your poor father dreadfully,
and--what are you going to do with that naked young woman?"

"Give her something to eat, dear," answered Rachel. "Don't ask me any more
questions now. We have been sitting up to our necks in water for hours,
and are starved and frozen, to say nothing of worse things."

At this moment Mr. Dove arrived with a blanket, which he offered to Noie,
who took it from him and threw it round her body. Then they went into the
camp, where Rachel changed her damp clothes, whilst Noie sat by her in a
corner of the tent. Presently, too, food was brought, and Rachel ate
hungrily, forcing Noie to do the same. Then she went out, leaving the girl
to rest in the tent, and with certain omissions, such as the conduct of
Noie when she found her dead father, told all the story which, wild as
were the times and strange as were the things that happened in them, they
found wonderful enough.

When she had done Mr. Dove knelt down and offered up thanks for his
daughter's preservation through great danger, and with them prayers that
she might be forgiven for having shot the Zulu, a deed that, except for
the physical horror of it, did not weigh upon Rachel's mind.

"You know, father, you would have done the same yourself," she explained,
"and so would mother there, if she could hold a gun, so what is the good
of pretending that it is a sin? Also no one saw it except that white man
and the crocodiles which buried the body, so the less we say about the
matter the better it will be for all of us."

"I admit," answered Mr. Dove, "that the circumstances justified the deed,
though I fear that the truth will out, since blood calls for blood. But
what are we to do with the girl? They will come to seek her and kill us
all."

"They will not seek, father, because they think that she is dead, and will
never know otherwise unless that white man tells them, which he will
scarcely do, as the Zulus would think that he shot the soldier, not I. She
has been sent to us, and it is our duty to keep her."

"I suppose so," said her father doubtfully. "Poor thing! Truly she has
cause for gratitude to Providence: all her relations killed by those
bloodthirsty savages, and she saved!"

"If all of you were killed and I were saved, I do not know that I should
feel particularly grateful," answered Rachel. "But it is no use arguing
about such things, so let us be thankful that we are not killed too. Now I
am tired out, and going to lie down, for of course we can't leave this
place at present, unless we trek back to Durban."

Such was the finding of Noie.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Rachel awoke from the sleep into which she had fallen, sunset was
near at hand. She left the tent where Noie still lay slumbering or lost in
stupor, to find that only her mother and Ishmael's after-rider remained in
the camp, her father having gone out with the Kaffirs, in order to bury as
many of the dead as possible before night came, and with it the jackals
and hyenas. Rachel made up the fire and set to work with her mother's help
to cook their evening meal. Whilst they were thus engaged her quick ears
caught the sound of horses' hoofs, and she looked up to perceive the white
man, Ishmael, still leading the spare horse on which she had ridden that
morning. He had halted on the crest of ground where she had first seen him
upon the previous day, and was peering at the camp, with the object
apparently of ascertaining whether its occupants were still alive.

"I will go and ask him in," said Rachel, who, for reasons of her own,
wished to have a word or two with the man.

Presently she came up to him, and saw at once that he seemed to be very
much ashamed of himself.

"Well," she said cheerfully, "you see here I am, safe enough, and I am
glad that you are the same."

"You are a wonderful woman," he replied, letting his eyes sink before her
clear gaze, "as wonderful as you are beautiful."

"No compliments, please," said Rachel, "they are out of place in this
savage land."

"I beg your pardon, I could not help speaking the truth. Did they kill the
girl and let you go?"

"No, I managed to hide up with her; she is here now."

"That is very dangerous, Miss Dove. I know all about it; it is she whom
Dingaan was after. When he hears that you have sheltered her he will send
and kill you all. Take my advice and turn her out at once. I say it is
most dangerous."

"Perhaps," answered Rachel calmly, "but all the same I shall do nothing of
the sort unless she wishes to go, nor do I think that my father will
either. Now please listen a minute. If this story comes to the ears of the
Zulus--and I do not see why it should, as the crocodiles have eaten that
soldier--who will they think shot him, I or the white man who was with me?
Do you understand?"

"I understand and shall hold my tongue, for your sake."

"No, for your own. Well, by way of making the bargain fair, for my part I
shall say as little as possible of how we separated this morning. Not that
I blame you for riding off and leaving an obstinate young woman whom you
did not know to take her chance. Still, other people might think
differently."

 "Yes," he answered, "they might, and I admit that I am ashamed of myself.
But you don't know the Zulus as I do, and I thought that they would be all
on us in a moment; also I was mad with you and lost my nerve. Really I am
very sorry."

"Please don't apologise. It was quite natural, and what is more, all for
the best. If we had gone on we should have ridden right into them, and
perhaps never ridden out again. Now here comes my father; we have agreed
that you will not say too much about this girl, have we not?"

He nodded and advanced with her, leading the horses, for he had
dismounted, to meet Mr. Dove at the opening in the fence.

"Good evening," said the clergyman, who seemed depressed after his sad
task, as he motioned to one of the Kaffirs to put down his mattock and
take the horses. "I don't quite know what happened this morning, but I
have to thank you for trying to save my daughter from those cruel men. I
have been burying their victims in a little cleft that we found, or rather
some of them. The vultures you know----" and he paused.

"I didn't save her, sir," answered the stranger humbly. "It seemed
hopeless, as she would not leave the Kaffir girl."

Mr. Dove looked at him searchingly, and there was a suspicion of contempt
in his voice as he replied:

"You would not have had her abandon the poor thing, would you? For the
rest, God saved them both, so it does not much matter exactly how, as
everything has turned out for the best. Won't you come in and have some
supper, Mr.--Ishmael--I am afraid I do not know the rest of your name."

"There is no more to know, Mr. Dove," he replied doggedly, then added:
"Look here, sir, as I daresay you have found out, this is a rough country,
and people come to it, some of them, whose luck has been rough elsewhere.
Now, perhaps I am as well born as you are, and perhaps _my_ luck was rough
in other lands, so that I chose to come and live in a place where there
are no laws or civilisation. Perhaps, too, I took the name of another man
who was driven into the wilderness--you will remember all about him--also
that it does not seem to have been his fault. Any way, if we should be
thrown up together I'll ask you to take me as I am, that is, a hunter and
a trader 'in the Zulu,' and not to bother about what I have been. Whatever
I was christened, my name is Ishmael now, or among the Kaffirs Ibubesi,
and if you want another, let us call it Smith."

"Quite so, Mr. Ishmael. It is no affair of mine," replied Mr. Dove with a
smile, for he had met people of this sort before in Africa.

But within himself already he determined that this white and perchance
fallen wanderer was one whom, perhaps, it would be his duty to lead back
into the paths of Christian propriety and peace.

These matters settled, they went into the little camp, and a sentry having
been set, for now the night was falling fast, Ishmael was introduced to
Mrs. Dove, who looked him up and down and said little, after which they
began their supper. When their simple meal was finished, Ishmael lit his
pipe and sat himself upon the disselboom of the waggon, looking extremely
handsome and picturesque in the flare of the firelight which fell upon his
dark face, long black hair and curious garments, for although he had
replaced his lion-skin by an old coat, his zebra-hide trousers and
waistcoat made of an otter's pelt still remained. Contemplating him,
Rachel felt sure that whatever his present and past might be, he had
spoken the truth when he hinted that he was well-born. Indeed, this might
be gathered from his voice and method of expressing himself when he grew
more at ease, although it was true that sometimes he substituted a Zulu
for an English word, and employed its idioms in his sentences, doubtless
because for years he had been accustomed to speak and even to think in
that language.

Now he was explaining to Mr. Dove the political and social position among
that people, whose cruel laws and customs led to constant fights on the
part of tribes or families, who knew that they were doomed, and their
consequent massacre if caught, as had happened that day. Of course, the
clergyman, who had lived for some years at Durban, knew that this was
true, although, never having actually witnessed one of these dreadful
events till now, he did not realise all their horror.

"I fear that my task will be even harder than I thought," he said with a
sigh.

"What task?" asked Ishmael.

"That of converting the Zulus. I am trekking to the king's kraal now, and
propose to settle there."

Ishmael knocked out his pipe and filled it again before he answered.
Apparently he could find no words in which to express his thoughts, but
when at length these came they were vigorous enough.

"Why not trek to hell and settle _there_ at once?" he asked, "I beg
pardon, I meant heaven, for you and your likes. Man," he went on
excitedly, "have you any heart? Do you care about your wife and daughter?"

"I have always imagined that I did, Mr. Ishmael," replied the missionary
in a cold voice.

 "Then do you wish to see their throats cut before your eyes, or," and he
looked at Rachel, "worse?"

"How can you ask such questions?" said Mr. Dove, indignantly. "Of course I
know that there are risks among all wild peoples, but I trust to
Providence to protect us."

Mr. Ishmael puffed at his pipe and swore to himself in Zulu.

"Yes," he said, when he had recovered a little, "so I suppose did Seyapi
and his people, but you have been burying them this afternoon--haven't
you?--all except the girl, Noie, whom you have sheltered, for which deed
Dingaan will bury you all if you go into Zululand, or rather throw you to
the vultures. Don't think that your being an _umfundusi_, I mean a
teacher, will save you. The Almighty Himself can't save you there. You
will be dead and forgotten in a month. What's more, you will have to drive
your own waggon in, for your Kaffirs won't, they know better. A Bible
won't turn the blade of an assegai."

"Please, Mr. Ishmael, please do not speak so--so irreligiously," said Mr.
Dove in an irritated but nervous voice. "You do not seem to understand
that I have a mission to perform, and if that should involve
martyrdom----"

"Oh! bother martyrdom, which is what you are after, no doubt, 'casting
down your golden crown upon a crystal sea,' and the rest of it--I remember
the stuff. The question is, do you wish to murder your wife and daughter,
for that's the plain English of it?"

"Of course not. How can you suggest such a thing?"

"Then you had better not cross the Tugela. Go back to Durban, or stop
where you are at least, for, unless he finds out anything, Dingaan is not
likely to interfere with a white man on this side of the river."

"That would involve abandoning my most cherished ambition, and impulses
that--but I will not speak to you of things which perhaps you might not
understand."

"I dare say I shouldn't, but I do understand what it feels like to have
your neck twisted out of joint. Look here, sir, if you want to go into
Zululand, you should go alone; it is no place for white ladies."

"That is for them to judge, sir," answered Mr. Dove. "I believe that their
faith will be equal to this trial," and he looked at his wife almost
imploringly.

For once, however, she failed him.

"My dear John," she said, "if you want my opinion, I think that this
gentleman is quite right. For myself I don't care much, but it can never
have been intended that we should absolutely throw away our lives. I have
always given way to you, and followed you to many strange places without
grumbling, although, as you know, we might be quite comfortable at home,
or at any rate in some civilised town. Now I say that I think you ought
not to go to Zululand, especially as there is Rachel to think of."

"Oh! don't trouble about me," interrupted that young lady, with a shrug of
her shoulders. "I can take my chance as I have often done before--to-day,
for instance."

"But I do trouble about you, my dear, although it is true I don't believe
that you will be killed; you know I have always said so. Still I do
trouble, and John--John," she added in a kind of pitiful cry, "can't you
see that you have worn me out? Can't you understand that I am getting old
and weak? Is there nobody to whom you have a duty as well as to the
heathen? Are there not enough heathen here?" she went on with gathering
passion. "If you must mix with them, do what this gentleman says, and stop
here, that is, if you won't go back. Hamlet. Yes, the heck, here it
is, but after my Meynung whether I be a Dähne and to use this'm born, a
greater scope to use the honor is broken than kept.

These staggering drinking binge to make us into East and West despicable,
and we will by the other nations as a national vice vorgeworffen: They
call us Säuffer, Sezen Swiss and American Beywörter about us little credit,
and in That, of deßwegen reputation worinn we are, take our Thater, so big
and famous they have to their best shine. In this Stüke is often
whole populations as individual citizens, to which any natural defect
sake, than because of etwann Upper angebohrnen power of a certain
temperament (which they have no debt, because nobody's original plant itself
can select,) which sometimes through the fence of the break makes sense,
or because of some accustomed manner, a grimace or something, which
is related to the imported wealth into an excessively large Absaz
does - I say that such people to a single such error sake, it may
now Seyn that nature or a chance blame had to fall's must have their
good qualities, so large and numerous they may always Seyn where
Urtheil the world to see abgewürdiget.

(The spirit appears.) Horatio. Here, Gracious Lord, look, it comes from.
Hamlet. Your heavenly angels and all powers, schüzet us! You might now
be a good spirit or a damn Kobolt Seyn, thou mayest heavenly or hellish
air vapors bring with thee, and in wohlthätiger or malicious intent came
Seyn the shape you have adopted, is so venerable that I want to talk with
you. I want thee Hamlet, I want you my king, my father name: O, answer
me, let me not in ignorance, which makes my life would cost: Sage, why
did thy sacred bones through their containers? Why has the grave, we
worein thee to thy unruffled saw its heavy marble throat aufgethan
to eject you again?

What might this mean that you have a corpse Todt, in full armor again the
moonlight visit to the night with Schreknissen to meet, and our being on
a so entsezliche kind thoughts to shake which exceed the limits of
our nature walk. ( The Spirit beckons to Hamlet.) Horatio. It beckons you
to go with him, as if it was something you just have to say. Marcellus.
Behold, how friendly are you to a distant place beckons: But is not with
him. Horatio (The Hamlet zurükhaltend.) No, everything in the world.
Hamlet. Because it does not want to talk, I will follow him. Horatio. That
does not, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. And why not? Why should 'I fear? My
life is to me a Stek-needle for sale, and what can be my soul thun, which
is an immortal being is how it yourself? - It beckons me away again -
I will follow him - Horatio. And then, Gracious Lord, if you're on the
Spize of the rock resulted in there on the lake bükt, and then an even
more terrible shape Further, what euern mind and confuse mindless stun you
into the depths below could plunge? Denket to DISS! The location alone,
without that other causes may come about, one might take, so many
threads deep into the lake looked down and bottom up so awful howl
heard an impulse type of dizziness.

Hamlet. It beckons me still : just go ahead, I will follow thee. Marcellus.
We can not leave you, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. Back with euern hands!
Marcellus. Rathen let you, ye shall not go. Hamlet. My Verhängniß calls,
his voice makes every little vein in this body as strong as the
nerves of the Nemeischen Lion: He still calls me: Let your hands
from me, their men - (He breaks off from them.)

Beyme heaven, I want a ghost from the making who wants to keep me
- way, I say - if - I will go with you - (Hamlet and the ghost go
from.)

Horatio.

His imagination is so erhizt that he does not know what he does. Marcellus.
We want to follow him; Bey such an opportunity would be 'contrary
to our obligation to obey Seyn.

"Lady, I do not know; I think it was because he would have been their
priest, or one of their priests, and he feared I think that he had seen a
woman, a slave to them, whom therefore he might not marry. I think that
woman was my mother. So he fled from them--with her, and came to live
among the Zulus. He was a great doctor there in Chaka's time, not one of
the _Abangomas_, not one of the 'Smellers-out-of-witches,' not a
'Bringer-down-to-death,' for like all his race he hated bloodshed. No,
none of these things, but a doctor of medicines, a master of magic, an
interpreter of dreams, a lord of wisdom; yes, it was his wisdom that made
Chaka great, and when he withdrew it from him because of his cruelties,
then Chaka died.

"Lady, Dingaan rules in Chaka's place, Dingaan who slew him, but although
he had been Chaka's doctor, my father was spared because they feared him.
I was the only child of my mother, but he took other wives after the Zulu
fashion, not because he loved them, I think, but that he might not seem
different to other men. So he grew great and rich, and lived in peace
because they feared him. Lady, my father loved me, and to me alone he
taught his language and his wisdom. I helped him with his medicines; I
interpreted the dreams which he could not interpret, his blanket fell upon
me. Often I was sought in marriage, but I did not wish to marry, Wisdom is
my husband.

"There came an evil day; we knew that it must come, my father and I, and I
wished to fly the land, but he could not do so because of his other wives
and children. The maidens of my district were marshalled for the king to
see. His eye fell upon me, and he thought me fair because I am different
from Zulu women, and--you can guess. Yet I was saved, for the other
doctors and the head wives of the king said that it was not wise that I
should be taken into his house, I who knew too many secrets and could
bewitch him if I willed, or prison him with drugs that leave no trace. So
I escaped a while and was thankful. Now it came about that because he
might not take me Dingaan began to think much of me, and to dream of me at
nights. At last he asked me of my father, as a gift, not as a right, for
so he thought that no ill would come with me. But I prayed my father to
keep me from Dingaan, for I hated Dingaan, and told him that if I were
sent to the king, I would poison him. Do you hear nothing? Queen. No, nothing
but us beyde. Hamlet. Like, just look there! See how it glides across!
My father in his favorite term shape! Look, just IZT, it goes through the
door beyond. (The mind disappear.) Queen. It is a mere ghost your brain,
an insignificant creature of the imagination enthusing. Hamlet. Invented
What?

My pulse is as regular as the Eurig - I have not talked in great
Muth; sezt me to the test, I will give you everything from word to
word again hersagen, which can not be the Wahnwiz - mother to the
heaven's sake, shall submit flatteringly not this ointment on your
soul, as if not your crime, but talking about my madness: It would
only harm the eyternden with a skin over, however, the poison inside
fäulende to frässe and the incurably ill made. confesses your sins
to heaven; bereuet what has happened, and avoids what can be done
- no Leget fertilization on weed to make it even more lush making.

Forgiving me this my virtue, but because in this time verdorbnen the
virtue vice ask forgiveness, and are still Büker and bend in order to
receive permission to submit good thun. Queen. O Hamlet! You have my heart
broken entzwey. Hamlet. Werft the O defective Theil away, and the
healthier lives with the other half.

Good night, but does not go into my uncle Bette: This forces you to virtue,
if you do not find in the heart euerm. The habit of this monster, which
is the feeling of all evil wegfrißt skills, but inside is an angel, that
they also exercise nice and good acts facilitated: Thut you this night
of violence, which will contain the following abstention already make less
tedious, and the next will be even easier Seyn because exercise can be good
even in the stamp of nature extinguish, even the devil himself
overwhelmed and drive out, so he is reluctant opposite.

Once again, good night!

and if you even after the heavenly blessing Seyde anxious, because I want
you to ask blessings euern - What betrift this honest man, (he points
to the corpse of Polonius) so I's sorry, but it now has the sky fallen
through the other to streamline and myself a hostage in order to punish
them. I will provide for him and for the death that I gave him, his spirit
will Genugthüung from me; hiemit again good night! I must be cruel Seyn
to a good intention to maintain - The beginning is now, but the
worst is yet to come.

Queen (in embarrassment.) What should I thun? Hamlet (indignant and
scornful.) Ja Bey nothing of all physical why I've asked you - you euerm
strozenden of King back in his bed Loken, the beacons zwiken, his
call to mice, for a few stinking kisses, or that he up with his
damned fingers, crawls around on the neck, you the entire contents
of our conversation abtändeln, and that I do not really, but only
adjusted'm way toll.

It would be pretty good if you know him liesset.

After all, why should such a beautiful, smart, tugendsame Queen matters of
such importance in front of a toad, a bat before, in front of a
sea-Kaze keep secret? Who wanted the thun? No, troz of reason and
discretion!

Does the nail from the basket on the roof, let the birds fly out, and
crawls, like the monkey in the fable, but in the basket inside, and if you
are suitable necks euern should it break.
If that which is black floats first to the ground,
then I stay, if that which is golden, then I go to seek my hair. Is it
agreed?"

"It is agreed."

So the two girls went to the entrance of the tent, and Noie with a swift
motion tossed up the hairs. As it happened one of those little eddies of
wind which are common in South Africa, caught them, causing them to rise
almost perpendicularly into the air. At a certain height, about forty
feet, the supporting wind seemed to fail, that is so far as the hair from
Noie's head was concerned, for there it floated high above them like a
black thread in the sunlight, and gently by slow degrees came to the earth
just at their feet. But the hair from Rachel's head, being caught by the
fringe of the whirlwind, was borne upwards and onwards very swiftly, until
at length it vanished from their sight.

"It seems that I stay," said Noie.

"Yes," answered Rachel. "I am very glad; also if any evil comes of it we
are not to blame, the wind is to blame."

"Yes, Lady, but what makes the wind to blow?"

Again Rachel shrugged her shoulders, and asked a question in her turn.

"Whither has that hair of mine been borne, Noie?"

"I do not know, Lady. Perhaps my father's spirit took it for his own ends.
I think so. I think it went northwards. At any rate when mine fell, it was
snatched away, was it not? And yet they both floated up together. I think
that one day you will follow that hair of yours, Lady, follow it to the
land where great trees whisper secrets to the night."


CHAPTER VII

THE MESSAGE OF THE KING


So it chanced that Noie became a member of the Dove household. For obvious
reasons she changed her name, and thenceforward was called Nonha. Also it
happened that Mr. Dove abandoned his idea of settling as a missionary in
Zululand, and instead, took up his residence at this beautiful spot. He
called it Ramah because it was a place of weeping, for here all the family
and dependents of Seyapi had been destroyed by the spear. Mrs. Dove
thought it an ill-omened name enough, but after her manner gave way to her
husband in the matter.

"I think there will be more weeping here before everything is done," she
said.

Rachel answered, however, that it was as good as any other, since names
could alter nothing. Here, then, at Ramah, Mr. Dove built him a house on
that knoll where first he had pitched his camp. It was a very good house
after its fashion, for, as has been said, he did not lack for means, and
was, moreover, clever in such matters. He hired a mason who had drifted to
Natal to cut stone, of which a plenty lay at hand, and two half-breed
carpenters to execute the wood-work, whilst the Kaffirs thatched the whole
as only they can do. Then he set to work upon a church, which was placed
on the crest of the opposite knoll where the white man, Ishmael, had
appeared on the evening of their arrival. Like the house, it was excellent
of its sort, and when at length it was finished after more than a year of
labour, Mr. Dove felt a proud man.

Indeed at Ramah he was happier than he had ever been since he landed upon
the shores of Africa, for now at length his dream seemed to be in the way
of realisation. Very soon a considerable native village sprang up around
him, peopled almost entirely by remnants of the Natal tribes whom Chaka
had destroyed and who were but too glad to settle under the aegis of the
white man, especially when they discovered how good he was. Of the
doctrines which he preached to them day and night, most of them, it is
true, did not understand much. Still they accepted them as the price of
being allowed "to live in his shadow," but in the vast majority of cases
they sturdily refused to put away all wives but one, as he earnestly
exhorted them to do.

At first he wished to eject them from the settlement in punishment of this
sin, but when it came to the point they absolutely refused to go,
demonstrating to him that they had as much right to live there as he had,
an argument that he was unable to controvert. So he was obliged to submit
to the presence of this abomination, which he did in the hope that in time
their hard hearts would be softened.

"Continue to preach to us, O Shouter," they said, "and we will listen.
Mayhap in years to come we shall learn to think as you do. Meanwhile give
us space to consider the point."

So he continued to preach, and contented himself with baptising the
children and very old people who took no more wives. Except on this one
point, however, they got on excellently together. Indeed, never since
Chaka broke upon them like a destroying demon had these poor folk been so
happy. The missionary imported ploughs and taught them to improve their
agriculture, so that ere long this rich, virgin soil brought forth
abundantly. Their few cattle multiplied also in an amazing fashion, as did
their families, and soon they were as prosperous as they had been in the
good old days before they knew the Zulu assegai, especially as, to their
amazement, the Shouter never took from them even a calf or a bundle of
corn by way of tax. Only the shadow of that Zulu assegai still lay upon
them, for if Chaka was dead Dingaan ruled a few miles away across the
Tugela. Moreover, hearing of the rise of this new town, and of certain
strange matters connected with it, he sent spies to inspect and enquire.
The spies returned and reported that there dwelt in it only a white
medicine-man with his wife, and a number of Natal Kaffirs. Also they
reported in great detail many wonderful stories concerning the beautiful
maiden with a high name who passed as the white teacher's daughter, and
who had already become the subject of so much native talk and rumour. On
learning all these things Dingaan despatched an embassy, who delivered
this message:

"I, Dingaan, king of the Zulus, have heard that you, O White Shouter, have
built a town upon my borders, and peopled it with the puppies of the
jackals whom Chaka hunted. I send to you now to say that you and your
jackals shall have peace from me so long as you harbour none of my
runaways, but if I find but one of them there, then an Impi shall wipe you
out. I hear also that there dwells with you a beautiful white maiden said
to be your daughter, who is known, throughout the land as
Inkosazana-y-Zoola. Now that is the name of our Spirit who, the doctors
say, is also white, and it is strange to us that this maiden should bear
that great name. Some of the _Isanusis_, the prophetesses, declare that
she is our Spirit in the flesh, but that meat sticks in my throat, I
cannot swallow it. Still, I invite this maiden to visit me that I may see
her and judge of her, and I swear to you, and to her, by the ghosts of my
ancestors, that no harm shall come to her then or at any time. He who so
much as lays a finger upon her shall die, he and all his house. Because of
her name, which I am told she has borne from a child, all the territories
of the Zulus are her kraal and all the thousands of the Zulus are her
servants. Yea, because of her high name I give to her power of life and
death wherever men obey my word, and for an offering I send to her twelve
of my royal white cattle and a bull, also an ox trained to riding. When
she visits me let her ride upon the white ox that she may be known, but
let no man come with her, for among the people of the Zulus she must be
attended by Zulus only. I have spoken. I pray that she who is named
Princess of the Zulus will appear before my messengers and acknowledge the
gift of the King of the Zulus, that they may see her in the flesh and make
report of her to me."

Now when Mr. Dove had received this message, one evening at sundown, he
went into the house and repeated it to Rachel, for it puzzled him much,
and he knew not what to answer.

Rachel in her turn took counsel with Noie who was hidden, away lest some
of the embassy should see and recognise her.

"Speak with the messengers," said Noie, "it is well to have power among
the Zulus. I, who have some knowledge of this business, say, speak with
them alone, and speak softly, saying that one day you will come."

So having explained the matter to her father, and obtained his consent,
Rachel, who desired to impress these savages, threw a white shawl about
her, as Noie instructed her to do. Then, letting her long, golden hair
hang down, she went out alone carrying a light assegai in her hand, to the
place where the messengers, six of them, and those who had driven the
cattle from Zululand, were encamped in the guest kraal, at the gate of
which, as it chanced, lay a great boulder of rock. On this boulder she
took her stand, unobserved, waiting there till the full moon shone out
from behind a dark cloud, turning her white robe to silver. Now of a
sudden the messengers who were seated together, talking and taking snuff,
looked up and saw her.

"_Inkosazana-y-Zoola_!" exclaimed one of them, rising, whereon they all
sprang to their feet and perceiving this beautiful and mysterious figure,
by a common impulse lifted their right arms and gave to her what no woman
had ever received before--the royal salute.

"Bayète!" they cried, "Bayète!" then stood silent.

"I hear you," said Rachel, who spoke their tongue as well as she did her
own. "It has been reported to me that you wished to see me, O Mouths of
the King. Behold I am pleased to appear before you. What would you of
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, O Mouths of the King?"

Then their spokesman, an old man of high rank, with a withered hand,
stepped forward from the line of his companions, stared at her for a
while, and saluted again.

"Lady," he said humbly, "Lady or Spirit, we would know how thou earnest by
that great name of thine."

"It was given me as a child far away from here," she answered, "because in
a mighty tempest the lightnings turned aside and smote me not; because the
waters raged yet drowned me not; because the lions slept with me yet
harmed me not. It came to me from the high Heaven that was my friend. I do
not know how it came."

"We have heard the story," answered the old man (which indeed they had
with many additions), "and we believe. We believe that the Heavens above
gave thee their own name which is the name of the Spirit of our people.
That Spirit I have seen in a dream, and she was like to thee, O
Inkosazana-y-Zoola."

"It may be so, Mouth of the King, still I am woman, not spirit."

"Yet in every woman there dwells a spirit, or so we believe, and in thee a
great one, or so we have heard and believe, O Lady of the Heavens. To
receive it, as my gift and as your property well-deserved, my daughter
received. But you wofern dissolve their virginal girdle, eh Alliance all
your sacred Feyer, after full use bekräftiget can be: So may the heavens
all the beneficent influences zurükhalten full, otherwise Your bekrönen
association would be the same and instead of barren hate, disgust and
sauersehender Dissension your bed with weeds so wild breadcrumbs
that you hate it beyde sollet.

Pull yourself so careful, so you love it is that you Hymens Fakel tale.
Ferdinand. As I quiet days, a beautiful offspring, and a long life, with
the unchanged duration of such love, as I feel IZT, I wish so
certainly is the darkest caves, the most convenient opportunity and
the greatest inspiration of our evil genius never Seyn wealthy,
virtuous love my messy in pleasure melt, that I should steal that
which is reserved feyerlichen days, whose dawn Bey's seem me, either
the sun horse seyen stiff, or night crawler angeschmiedet been.

Prospero. Well spoken! Size it down and talk with her, it is your own. How?
Ariel, my ausrichtsamer servant, Ariel - Zweyte Scene. (Ariel to the
former.) Ariel. What orders, mighty lord? here I am. Prospero. You and your
little earlier Mitgesellen have their service provide the best,
and I want you IZT game to another use.

Go, bring the spirits Schaar, about which I have given thee of violence,
to this place; Muntre to move on, because I have the eyes of this
young couple with any vanity to amuse my art, I've promised, and
it's expected of them me.

Ariel. Immediately? Prospero. Yes, in a Augenblik. Ariel. Eh you say can
come and go, zweymal Athmer and Ruff, so, so, should everyone on the
toes tripplend Seyn here, and make his art. Love me now, my lord? * (-*
Ed.

Ariel says that the original verses in small, all in rhyme O, and, because
they all have their type, therefore, are not in rhymes übersezen
leave.)

 Prospero. Höchlich, my sense of Ariel; not come back until I thee Ruff.
Ariel. Well, I understand you. (Geht ab.) Prospero (to Ferdinand).
you do not forget to keep your word, the joke does not drift too
far, the only strongest oaths are straw for the fire in our blood,
think better of you, or good night, vow!

Ferdinand. versichre I you, my Lord, this white cold virgin snow in my
heart gedrükt, cools the Hize from my liver. Prospero .
For some time, however, Rachel thought of it a good deal, wondering
how it came about that her native name and the strange significance which
they appeared to give to it had taken such a hold of the imagination of
the Zulus. Ultimately she discovered that the white man, Ishmael, was the
chief cause of these things. He had lived so long among savages that he
had caught something of their mind and dark superstitions. To him, as to
them, it seemed a marvellous thing that she should have acquired the title
of the legendary Spirit of the Zulu people. The calm courage, too, so
unusual in a woman, which she showed when she shot the warrior, and at the
risk of her own life saved that of the girl, Noie, impressed him as
something almost ultra-human, especially when he remembered his own
conduct on that occasion. All of this story, of course, he did not tell to
the Zulus for he feared lest they should take vengeance for his share in
it. But of Rachel he discoursed to the King and his _indunas_, or great
men, as a white witch-doctoress of super-natural power, whose name showed
that she was mixed up with the fortunes of the race. Therefore, in the
end, Dingaan sent Mopo, "he who knew the Spirit," to make report of her.

When he was not absent upon his hunting or trading expeditions, Ishmael
visited Ramah a great deal and, as Rachel soon discovered, not without an
object. Indeed, almost from the first, her feminine instincts led her to
suspect that this man who, notwithstanding his good looks, repelled her so
intensely, was falling in love with her, which in truth he had done once
and for all at their first meeting. In the beginning he did not, it is
true, say much that could be so interpreted, but his whole attitude
towards her suggested it, as did other things. For instance, when he came
to visit the Doves, he discarded his garments of hide, including the
picturesque zebra-skin trousers, and appeared dressed in smart European
clothes which he had contrived to obtain from Durban, and a large hat with
a white ostrich feather, that struck Rachel as even more ludicrous than
the famous trousers. Also he was continuously sending presents of game and
of skins, or of rare karosses, that is, fur rugs, which he ordered to be
delivered to her personally--tokens, all of them, that she could not
misunderstand. Her father, however, misunderstood them persistently,
although her mother saw something of the truth, and did her best to shield
her from attentions which she knew to be unwelcome. Mr. Dove believed that
it was his company which Ishmael sought. Indeed in this matter the man was
very clever, contriving to give the clergyman the impression that he
required spiritual instruction and comfort, which, of course, he found
forthcoming in an abundant supply. When Mrs. Dove remonstrated, saying
that she misdoubted her of him and his character, her husband answered
obstinately, that it was his duty to turn a sinner from his way, and
declined to pursue the conversation. Todtengräber.

Sapperment, probably yes, it says: This must be indeed the Geschwornen
understand that it looked at - 2 Todtengräber. Willt you know where the
crux of the matter is? If they do not Merciful lady would have been, they
would certainly be in their life has no Christian grave Seyn 1. Todtengräber.
How you like me want to be right. But the worse that make people in the
world should have more right to hang or ersäuffen as their
by-Christians!

Come, my spade, her! But there are no older nobles as a gardener, and Todt
tombs, they have their profession by Adam ago 2. Todtengräber. War is a
gentleman? 1st Todtengräber. The first person ever armirt was 2. Todtengräber.
Like that? 1st Todtengräber. How, because you're an infidel? Do you
understand the Scriptures not? The Scripture says, Adam had dug: Had 'dig
it, if he had no arms? I want you to submit another question if you are
to me the right answer giebst to confess - 2 Todtengräber. What's next?
1st Todtengräber. Who is the one who builds more than bricklaying and
carpentry 2nd Todtengräber.

 This is the gallows-maker, because its buildings survived his one thousand
Innhaber 1. Todtengräber. I like your idea is not bad, in That, and the
gallows schikt to want: But how schikt he want? He schikt is for those
who want evil thun now Thust you sick to say the gallows built sey
stronger than the church, (ergel), like the gallows for you want
to send.

Substance, come 2. Todtengräber. Who build stronger as a bricklayer and
carpenter? 1st Todtengräber. Yes, if you tell me the kanst, I will let
you apply 2.

Todtengräber. Beyme element, I can now tell you's 1. Todtengräber.
Well, so say - 2 Todtengräber. No, Sakerlot, I can not. (Hamlet and Horatio
enter at some distance from the Todtengräbern on.) 1. Todtengräber.
Presently, when she
had gone too far to return to the house if she caught sight of him, he
followed after her, and, leaving his horse, at last came up with her
seated on a rock by the pool in which she had bathed on the morning of the
massacre.

Walking softly in his veld-schoens, or shoes made of raw hide, on the
sand, Rachel knew nothing of his coming until his shadow fell upon her.
Then she sprang up and saw him, smiling and bowing, the ostrich-plume hat
in his hand. Her first impulse was to run away, but recovering herself she
nodded in a friendly fashion, and bade him "Good day," adding:

"What are you doing here, Mr. Ishmael, hunting?"

"Yes," he answered, "that's it. Hunting you. It has been a long chase, but
I have caught you at last."

"Really, I am not a wild creature, Mr. Ishmael," she said indignantly.

"No," he answered, "you are more beautiful and more dangerous than any
wild creature."

Rachel looked at him. Then she made, as though she would pass him, saying
that she was going home. Now Ishmael stood between two rocks filling the
only egress from this place.

He stretched out his arms so that his fingers touched the rocks on either
side, and said:

"You can't. You must listen to me first. I came here to say what I have
wanted to tell you for a long time. I love you, and I ask you to marry
me."

"Indeed," she replied, setting her face. "How can that be? I understood
that you were already married--several times over."

"Who told you that?" he asked, angrily. "I know--that accursed little
witch, Noie."

 "Don't speak any ill of Noie, please; she is my friend."

"Then you have a liar for your friend. Those women are only my servants."

"It doesn't matter to me what they are, Mr. Ishmael. I have no wish to
know your private affairs. Shall we stop this talk, which is not
pleasant?"

"No," he answered. "I tell you that I love you and I mean to marry you,
with your will or without it. Let it be with your will, Rachel," he added,
pleadingly, "for I will make you a good husband. Also I am well-born, much
better than you think, and I am rich, rich enough to take you out of this
country, if you like. I have thousands of cattle, and a great deal of
money put by, good English gold that I have got from the sale of ivory.
You shall come with me from among all these savage people back to England,
and live as you like."

"Thank you, but I prefer the savages, as you seem to have done until now.
No, do not try to touch me; you know that I can defend myself if I
choose," and she glanced at the pistol which she always carried in that
wild land, "I am not afraid of you, Mr. Ishmael; it is you who are afraid
of me."

"Perhaps I am," he exclaimed, "because those Zulus are right, you are
_tagati_, an enchantress, not like other women, white or black. If it were
not so, would you have driven me mad as you have done? I tell you I can't
sleep for thinking of you. Oh! Rachel, Rachel, don't be angry with me.
Have pity on me. Give me some hope. I know that my life has been rough in
the past, but I will become good again for your sake and live like a
Christian. But if you refuse me, if you send me back to hell--then you
shall learn what I can be."

"I know what you are, Mr. Ishmael, and that is quite enough. I do not wish
to be unkind, or to say anything that will pain you, but please go away,
and never try to speak to me again like this, as it is quite useless. You
must understand that I will never marry you, never."

"Are you in love with somebody else?" he asked hoarsely, and at the
question, do what she would to prevent it, Rachel coloured a little.

"How can I be in love here, unless it were with a dream?"

"A dream, a dream of a man you mean. Well, don't let him cross my path, or
it will soon be the dream of a ghost. I tell you I'd kill him. If I can't
have you, no one else shall. Do you understand?"

"I understand that I am tired of this. Let me go home, please."

"Home! Soon you will have no home to go to except mine--that is, if you
don't change your mind about me. I have power here--don't you understand?
I have power."

As he spoke these words the man looked so evil that Rachel shivered a
little. But she answered boldly enough:

"I understand that you have no power at all against me; no one has. It is
I who have the power."

"Yes, because as I said, you are _tagati_, but there are others----"

As these words passed his lips someone slipped by him. Starting back, he
saw that it was Noie, draped in her usual white robe, for nothing would
induce her to wear European clothes. Passing him as though she saw him
not, she went to Rachel and said:

"Inkosazana, I was at my work in the house yonder and I thought that I
heard you calling me down here by the seashore, so I came. Is it your
pleasure that I should accompany you home?"

"For instance," he went on furiously, "there is that black slut whom you
are fond of. Well, if I can't hurt you, I can hurt her. Daughter of
Seyapi, you know how runaways die in Zululand, or if you don't you shall
soon learn. I will pay you back for all your tricks," and he stopped,
choking with rage.

Noie looked him up and down with her soft, dreamy brown eyes.

"Do you think so, Night-prowler?" she asked. "Do you think that what you
did to the father and his house, you will do to the daughter also? Well,
it is strange, but last night, just before the cock crew, I sat by
Seyapi's grave, and he spoke to me of you, White Man. Listen, now, and I
will tell you what he said," and stepping forward she whispered in his
ear.

Rachel, watching, saw the man's swarthy face turn pale as he hearkened,
then he lifted his hand as though to strike her, let it fall again, and
muttering curses in English and in Zulu, turned and walked, or rather
staggered away.

"What did you tell him, Noie?" asked Rachel.

"Never mind, Zoola," she answered. "Perhaps the truth; perhaps what came
into my mind. At any rate I frightened him away. He was making love to
you, was he not, the low _silwana _(wild beast)? Ah! I thought so, for
that he has wished to do for long. And he threatened, did he not? Well,
you are right; he cannot hurt you at all, and me only a little, I think.
But he is very dangerous and very strong, and can hurt others. If your
father is wise he will leave this place, Zoola."

"I think so too," answered Rachel. "Let us go home and tell him so."


CHAPTER VIII

MR. DOVE VISITS ISHMAEL


When Rachel and Noie reached the house, which they did not do for some
time, as they waited to make sure that Ishmael had really gone, it was to
see the man himself riding away from its gate.

"Be prepared," said Noie; "I think that he has been here before us to pour
poison into your father's ears."

So it proved to be, indeed, for on the stoep or verandah they found Mr.
Dove walking up and down evidently much disturbed in mind.

"What is all this trouble, Rachel?" he asked. "What have you done to Mr.
Smith"--for Mr. Dove in pursuance of the suggestion made by the man, had
adopted that name for him which he considered less peculiar than Ishmael.
"He has been here much upset, declaring that you have used him cruelly,
and that Nonha threatened him with terrible things in the future, of
which, of course, she can know nothing."

"Well, father, if you wish to hear," answered Rachel, "Mr. Ishmael, or Mr.
Smith as you call him, has been asking me to marry him, and when I
refused, as of course I did, behaved very unpleasantly."

"Indeed, Rachel. I gathered from him that something of the sort had
happened, only his story is that it was you who behaved unpleasantly,
speaking to him as though he were dirt. Now, Rachel, of course I do not
want you to marry this person, in fact, I should dislike it, although I
have seen a great change for the better in him lately--I mean spiritually,
of course--and an earnest repentance for the errors of his past life. All
I mean is that the proffered affection of an honest man should not be met
with scorn and sharp words."

Up to this point Rachel endured the lecture in silence, but now she could
bear no more.

"Honest man!" she exclaimed. "Father, are you deaf and blind, or only so
good yourself that you cannot see evil in others? Do you know that it was
this 'honest man' who brought about the murder of all Noie's people in
order that he might curry favour with the Zulus?"

Mr. Dove started, and turning, asked:

"Is that so, Nonha?"

"It is so, Teacher," answered Noie, "although I have never spoken of it to
you. Afterwards I will tell you the story, if you wish."

"And do you know," went on Rachel, "why he will never let you visit his
kraal among the hills yonder? Well, I will tell you. It is because this
'honest man,' who wishes me to marry him, keeps his Kaffir wives and
children there!"

"Rachel!" replied her father, in much distress, "I will never believe it;
you are only repeating native scandal. Why, he has often spoken to me with
horror of such things."

"I daresay he has, father. Well, now, I ask you to judge for yourself.
Take a guide and start two hours before daybreak to-morrow morning to
visit that kraal, and see if what I say is not true."

"I will, indeed," exclaimed Mr. Dove, who was now thoroughly aroused, for
it was conduct of this sort that had caused his bitter quarrel with the
first settlers in Natal. "I cannot believe the story, Rachel, I really
cannot; but I promise you that if I should find cause to do so, the man
shall never put foot in my house again."

"Then I think that I am rid of him," said Rachel, with a sigh of relief,
"only be careful, dear, that he does not do you a mischief, for such men
do not like to be found out." Then she left the stoep, and went to tell
her mother all that had happened.

When she had heard the story, Mrs. Dove, who detested Ishmael as much as
her daughter did, tried to persuade her husband not to visit his kraal,
saying that it would only breed a feud, and that under the circumstances,
it would be easy to forbid him the house upon other grounds. But Mr. Dove,
obstinate as usual, refused to listen to her, saying that he would not
judge the man without evidence, and that of the natives could not be
relied on. Also, if the tale were true, it was his duty as his spiritual
adviser to remonstrate with him.

So his poor wife gave up arguing, as she always did, and long before dawn
on the following morning, Mr. Dove, accompanied by two guides, departed
upon his errand.

After he had ridden some twelve miles across the plain which lay behind
Ramah, just at daybreak, he reached a pass or nek between two swelling
hills, beyond which the guides said lay the kraal that was called Mafooti.
Presently he saw it, a place situated in a cup-like valley, chosen
evidently because the approaches to it were easy to defend. On a knoll in
the centre of this rich valley stood the kraal, a small native town
surrounded by walls, and stone enclosures full of cattle. As they
approached the kraal, from its main entrance issued four or five
good-looking native women, one of them accompanied by a boy, and all
carrying hoes in their hands, for they were going out at sunrise to work
in the mealie fields. When they saw Mr. Dove they stood still, staring at
him, till he called to them not to be afraid, and riding up, asked them
who they were.

"We are of the number of the wives of Ibubesi, the Lion," answered their
spokeswoman, who held the little boy by the hand.

"Do you mean the _Umlungu_ (that is, the white man), Ishmael?" he asked
again.

"Whom else should we mean?" she answered. "I am his head wife, now that he
has put away old Mami, and this is his son. If the light were stronger you
would see that he is almost white," she added, with pride.

Mr. Dove knew not what to answer; this intelligence overwhelmed him, and
he sat silent on his horse. The wives of Ishmael prepared to pass on to
the mealie fields, then stopped, and began to whisper together. At length
the mother of the boy turned and addressed him, while the others crowded
behind her to listen.

"We desire to ask you a question, Teacher," she said, somewhat shyly, for
evidently they knew well enough who he was. "Is it true that we are to
have a new sister?"

"A new sister! What do you mean?" asked Mr. Dove.

"We mean, Teacher," she replied smiling, "that we have heard that Ibubesi
is courting the beautiful Zoola, the daughter of your head wife, and we
thought that perhaps you had come to arrange about the cattle that he must
pay for her. Doubtless if she is so fair, it will be a whole herd."

This was too much, even for Mr. Dove.

"How dare you talk so, you heathen hussies?" he gasped. "Where is the
white man?"

"Teacher," she replied with indignation, and drawing herself up, "why do
you call us bad names? We are respectable women, the wives of one husband,
as respectable as your own, although not so numerous, or so we hear from
Ibubesi. If you desire to see him, he is in the big hut, yonder, with our
youngest sister, she whom he married last month. We wish you good day, as
we go to hoe our lord's fields, and we hope that when she comes, the
Inkosazana, your daughter, will not be as rude as you are, for if so, how
shall we love her as we wish to do?" Then wrapping her blanket round her
with a dignified air, the offended lady stalked off, followed by her
various "sisters."

As for Mr. Dove, who for once in his life was in a towering rage, he cut
his horse viciously with the sjambok, or hippopotamus-hide whip, which he
carried, and followed by his guides, galloped forward to a big hut in the
centre of the kraal.

Apparently Ishmael heard the sound of his horse's hoofs, for as the
missionary was dismounting he crawled out of the bee-hole of the hut upon
his hands and knees, as a Kaffir does, followed by a young woman in the
lightest of attire, who was yawning as though she had just been aroused
from sleep. What is more, except for the colour of his skin, he _was_ a
Kaffir and nothing else, for his costume consisted of a skin moocha such
as the natives wear, and a fur kaross thrown over his shoulders.
Straightening himself, Ishmael saw for the first time who was his visitor.
His jaw dropped, and he uttered an ejaculation that need not be recorded,
then stood silent. Mr. Dove was silent also; for his wrath would not allow
him to speak.

"How do you do, sir?" Ishmael jerked out at last. "You are an early
visitor, and find me somewhat unprepared. If I had known that you were
coming I would"--then suddenly he remembered his attire, or the lack of
it, also his companion who was leaning on his shoulder, and peeping at the
white man over it. Drawing the kaross tightly about him, he gave the poor
girl a backward kick, and with a Kaffir oath bade her begone, then went on
hurriedly: "I am afraid my dress is not quite what you are accustomed to,
but among these poor heathens I find it necessary to conform more or less
to their ways in order to gain their confidence and--um--affection. Will
you come into the hut? My servant there will get you some _tywala_ (Kaffir
beer)--I mean some _amasi_ (curdled milk) at once, and I will have a calf
killed for breakfast."

Mr. Dove could bear it no longer.

"Ishmael, or Smith, or Ibubesi--whichever name you may prefer," he broke
out, "do not lie to me about your servant, for now I know all the truth,
which I refused to believe when my daughter and Nonha told it me. You are
a black-hearted villain. But yesterday you dared to come and ask Rachel to
marry you, and now I find that you are living--oh! I cannot say it, it
makes me ashamed of my race. Listen to me, sir. If ever you dare to set
foot in Ramah again, or to speak to my wife and daughter, the Kaffirs
shall whip you off the place. Indeed," he added, shaking his sjambok in
Ishmael's face, "although I am an older man than you are, were it not for
my office I would give you the thrashing you deserve."

At first Ishmael had shrunk beneath this torrent of invective, but the
threat of violence roused his fierce nature. His face grew evil, and his
long black hair and beard bristled with wrath.

"You had best get out of this, you prayer-snuffling old humbug," he said
savagely, "for if you stop much longer I will make you sing another tune.
We have sea-cow whips here, too, and you shall learn what a hiding means,
such a hiding that your own family won't know you, if you live to get back
to them. Look here, I offered to marry your daughter on the square, and I
meant what I said. I'd have got rid of all this black baggage, and she
should have been the only one. It has let us Ruffer, Gracious Lord. Hamlet.
I will tell you what, so have you but no Verrätherey to be ashamed of, and
your loyalty to the king and the queen is not a lighter spring. I have
since some time, why do not I know, all my cheerfulness lost all my
usual exercises abandoned, and the That is my Schwermuth so far
that these anmuthige earth to me only a bare Vorgebürge; this
magnificent canopy the air, you see, this proud about hanging
firmament, this majestic golden spheres with Deke brought me nothing
else happens, as a stinking pestilence Sammelplaz evaporation.

What a Meisterstük is the man! How noble the reason! How infinite in its
capabilities! On shape and motion strength as completed and admirable!
In Würker how similar to an angel! In thinking how like a god! The most
beautiful adornment of Creation! The most perfect of all visible beings!
And yet, what is in my eyes this quintessence of dust? Man I do not like,
and the woman just as little; ohngeachtet you do with your smile seems
to understand. Rosary. Gracious Lord, I had no idea of das Hamlet. Why
lachtet her then, as I said, man I do not like it? rosary. I laughed,
because I dabey einfiel what a magern maintenance, Bey such circumstances,
the Comödianten, Bey will find your grace, and we met while on them, and
they are in the hieher to come to see you their services. Hamlet. The
one who makes the king, shall I welcome Seyn, his Majesty will
receive a tribute from me, the knight should be mistaken Rappi
Tarsch and its need, the fans should not sigh gratis; the funny
person to be their role calmly to play; Hans Wurst will all laugh
at it, their lungs were already characterized by sharp gekizelt
moistures, and the ladies should say what they think, or should it
unrhymed verses charges.

Comödianten What are they? Rosary. The nemlichen what else euern Beyfall
had the actors from the city. Hamlet. How is it that they stay? Their
residence was for their glory and their bags advantageous. Rosary. I think
that their abdication is the result of some changes, which recently has
been made. Hamlet.

Are they still in the Credit nemlichen as formerly, when I was in
the city? Do they still so much feed? Rosary. That no "in that they have
not. Hamlet. How come, they start to be rusty? Rosary. No, they still
give as much trouble as before, but it is a nest full children
came to light, small Kichelchen, Beyme the main word of a Sazes
from all ausgrillen forces, and even despicable enough to be beaten
until they have learned so well; IZT are the fashion, and the general
überplappern actor (so - it's called) so that some, with a sword
in hand, before geese coils frightened, and the heart does not have
to visit it .* -* (ed This whole body refers to a former theatrical
dispute by some spectacles causes, which of the choir boys of the
King Jacob I.

Capelle listed.) Hamlet. children, says her seyen it? And who has
them?

       How are they salariert?

Are they just the craft so long to drive as they can sing? And when they
finally mature Comödianten common to have (such as last but it must be
if they have no funds,) then they will not complain that their authors
so beautiful they formerly Exclamation against their own future
profession in the mouth have? rosary. Bey my honor, it was great to beyden
pages Lermer, and the nation holds it no sin, they are still more to
the dispute aufzureizen. It was a good time with the most beautiful of the
world Stük no money to earn, if the poet and the actor this important issue
not brought into it, and their opponents left and right, slaps in the face
austheilten. Hamlet. Is it possible? Güldenstern.

O, I can assure your grace, it is hizig hergegangen. Hamlet. And there are
guys like this?

** (ed -** You have this phrase, which also is usually in French, (est-ce
que les Enfans l'emportent? ) to the response must sake beybehalten.)
Güldenstern. The thun them, Gracious Lord, with the Hercules and
his load.

Hamlet. it does not surprise me, because my uncle is king in Dännemark and
Nemlichen what my father's life Bey Frazer against him, faces were cut,
IZT give twenty, forty, fifty, one hundred Ducat yes, for his miniature
portraits to have .*** It is something more than natural hierinn, would
be worth the want that the philosophers have trouble gave, there
to explore. (ed -*** a stitch on the Beyfall the choir boys Bey the king
and the court found.) (You hear a roar.) Güldenstern.

Here come the Comödianten. Hamlet (to Güldenstern and rosary.) Gentlemen
their welcome in Seyde Elsinoor, give me your hands, come, come, we
want the ceremony Bey side. That must be identified Seyn among us, else
would my behavior against these Comödianten (against which I, due to
certain causes, polite Seyn be) more binding seems to have as my
witnessing against you.

Your Seyde welcome, but my uncle-father and my aunt-mother are deceived.
Güldenstern. Like so, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. I'm just great Bey North or
North-West, and when the wind from the south bläßt, can I get a Falcons
want much of a hand saw differentiate .**** (ed -**** An ordinary Sprüchwort
then.

Actually it is hot, a hawk from a nest Reyger alone the common people made
(Hern-Shaw, (I know a hawk from a Herne Shaw) hand-saw) a hand-saw, probably,
so the saying funny sounds, as many Sprüchwörtern cares to go.) Siebende
Scene. (Polonius to the former.) Polonius. I wish you much good, gentlemen.
Hamlet. Do you hear, Güldenstern, and her also; DISS large weighing-child,
here before you can see, has never come out of his diapers. rosary.

Perhaps he is on the other times Dreiner come because they say, old people
zweymal children. Hamlet.

I see it, that he comes to me from the Comödianten to speak - Gebt
eight points - you are right, sir, last Monday morning it was so,
in That.

Polonius. Gracious Lord, I have given you something new to say. Hamlet.
Gracious Lord, I have (you) something new to say, as a Roscius at Rome was
Comödiant - Polonius. The Comödianten have arrived here, Gracious
Lord. Hamlet. What? Polonius. On my honor - Hamlet. Comödiant Everyone
was so on his ass - Polonius.

The best actor in the world, for now it sey tragedy Comödie, history,
pastoral, tragic Comödie, Comical-Pastoral, or what ever you want, for
it is not too hard Seneca, Plautus and not too easy. If Wiz and Freyheit
the only Gesez, so there are not their equal in the world. Hamlet. (O
Jephta, judges in Israel) *, what a Schaz you! (-* Ed this and what the
Hamlet Polonius responds seem Bruchstüke from old ballads to Seyn.)
Polonius. What he had for a Schaz, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. (An 'daughter
hatt' er, and no more, A pretty girl who he loves very much.)

Polonius (in front of .) Always stekt him my daughter in the head Hamlet.
Have I not right, old Jephta? Polonius. Jephta If I am to it meynt, Gracious
Lord, so I have a daughter, which I very much love. Hamlet. No, which does
not follow. Polonius.

What follows because, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. What? For example, (as
happened to, as I say thu -) yes you know the song? But there are honest
people who help me out - (Four or five actors perform.) Welcome,
you gentlemen, welcome everybody - I am pleased to see a good -
Welcome my good friends - Ha!

Old friend!

You have a nice get Bart, since we have seen - like, my pretty maiden,
Seyde yes it is a slipper-grown height?

I would hope that your beautiful voice will have done nothing - your
men, their Seyde all welcome, we only want the same thing for - a nice
scene, if I may ask, comes, comes, a small sample of your art , in a
speech, worinn Affect is quite a lot - 1 Actor. What a speech, Gracious
Lord? Hamlet. I heard you even have a declamieren, but on the stage she
came not, at least not more than once, because the Stük, as much
as I remember, like the big Hauffen not there sturgeon roe was
(Caviar) for the mob, but, as I and others whose Urtheil I trust
in such matters, that was it, it was an excellent Stük; much
simplicity and yet a lot of art in the appendix of the plan, and
the Scenes want planned, nothing in the shrine affectiertes beard,
no salt, (someone said), in the words, to take its weariness of
thought, no words yet swings, worinn instead of speaking to the
person himself pleasing author hears, in short, a natural, unvarnished
style, as the experts said.

I erinnre me sonderheitlich a speech, which I liked excellently, there was
a dialogue of Aeneas with Dido, the place where he spoke of Priam's daughter.
If it's still in memory, you start as Bey of the line - Lets see,
let's see - "The rough pyrrhic, equal to the Hyrcanischen Tyger" -
No, it is said not - it starts with the pyrrhic at -- "The rough
pyrrhic whose arms, Black as his inhuman heart, that night was like,
since it is based on laurend ruin, in the belly of the fatal horse
was hidden, now had the terrible blackness of his arms with an even
more dreadful color beflekt; now he is of head to foot with red
blood all over; entsezlich besprizt with blood of fathers, mothers,
sons, daughters, into the flame wrapped düstre whose Verdammter
note the way contemptible murderer illuminated - from Sun and Wuthe
Hize lechzend so covered with blood gestoktem, searches with
glittering eyes of the old infernal pyrrhic Anherrn to Priam.

"Polonius. Bey God, Gracious Lord, that was good declamirt; with a
good accent, and with a geschikte ActionScript 1. Actor. He found him
surrounded by Greeks, but he is too short guided brushing, zurükzutreiben
studied. His old complaint disobeying the virtue-less arm, leads
louder harmless and remains subject blows wherever it falls - what an
opponent who Wuthe of pyrrhic daherstürzenden reside, the Wütrich hohlt
to a string tödtlichen far from, but by the mere hiss of his bloody
appeal of nervenlose father falls to the ground.

 The Ilion unfeelingly himself seemed to feel the string, his flaming
Thürmer collapsed, and the entsezliche ruin even the pyrrhic stuzen,
because, you see, his appeal in the notion that the head of the
white milk venerable Priam falling down, it remained so it seemed
in the air Stekene; pyrrhic stuhnd, gemahlter like a tyrant, unthätig,
Unentschloßnen the same, between his will and the object floats in
equilibrium, but, as we often when a storm is imminent, a deep
silence through the sky perceive the wheel of nature seems to stand
trozigen the winds are silent, and among them is the earth in
silence-banger death; suddenly crashes to the crack of thunder,
doom down on the region: So feurt the barbaric pyrrhic, after this
short break a storm of vindictiveness plözlicher back to bloody
work: feeling free breakers were never the Cyclop of the glowing
mass down, giving them the war-god forge impenetrable arms, as now
the pyrrhic Schwerdt on hülflosen old falls - and beyond, beyond
You meze, Fortuna!

O ye gods all vereiniget you all stand together, they deprive their
violence: Zerbrechet all its spokes and wheel rims, and Rollet
zirkelnde the hub of the hill of heaven into the abyss of hell down!

Polonius. That's too long . Hamlet. It seeks to euerm beard barber - I beg
you, go away with it, he must be puns or schmuzige Mährchen, or he asleep
- Go away, for Hecuba - 1 Actor.

But who, oh who IZT masked the Queen had seen - Hamlet. The masked
queen? Polonius. This is good, masked queen, is good. Actor. As she, in
despair, with nakts on foot and ran down, and wept, that the flames
from their Thränen would die like one Tainted Lumpe on this primary,
where recently the diadem sparkled, and instead of the royal purple
bed sheets, the first thing they seized narcotic Schreker to her
slippers, from frequent Gebähren very emaciated hergeworffen loins;
who would have seen, would be submerged in poison tongue imprecations
against the expelled Glük have - But if the gods themselves would
have seen it in the Augenblik they had seen as pyrrhic, with inhuman
Muthwillen the limbs of her husband before their eyes into small
Stüke zerhakte the ausberstende Geschrey, which they did, they would
(it would be that of mortal things they do not stirred,), the burning
eyes of heaven in Thränen dissolved, and passion in the gods have
gesezt.

Polonius.

Seht only if he has not changed its color, and if he does not Thränen in
the eyes? I pray thee, let Seyn enough. Hamlet. Well, we want the rest of
this speech to save another - My good Lord, (to Polonius) do you
want to ensure that these actors are probably worried?

Hear it's, let them not come off, there are people who you must beware,
they are lively chronicles of their time, it would be better you, a bad
script grave after death euerm to have as their libel, because their
lives. Polonius . Gracious Lord, I will meet them as they deserve. Hamlet.
God preserve us, man, far better! If you every wanted to meet, as he's
deserved, who would whisk the distemper-miss? Meets them as your own
honor and dignity is under. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your Validity. Take it with you inside. Polonius. Come, gentlemen. (Polonius
goes anyway.) Hamlet. Follow him, my good friends: Tomorrow, we want a
Stük hear - Can you hear me, old friend, you kanst the assassination
of Gonzago perform?

Actor. Yes, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. How's tomorrow, we want to have the
night. You can however, Nothfall in a speech by a dozen or sixteen lines
of study, which I still aufsezen, and would like to bring into it? Can
you not? Actor. Yes, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. This is something I love.
Is this Lord, but do you watch that you do not have the best.

(On the Rosary and Güldenstern.) My good friends, I leave you until that
night, her Seyde welcome to Elsinoor.

Rosary. We recommend ourselves to grace - (you go from.) Eighth Scene.
Hamlet (alone). Yes, God forbid you: I'm finally alone - O what a rogue,
not a decent Sclave I am!
Then they had spoken with Noie, who in the
end called her and gave her a message. This was the message: "Say to the
Inkosazana that the Zulus have caught me, and are taking me to Dingaan the
King. Say that they declare that if she is pleased to come and speak the
word, I shall be set free unharmed, that is, if she comes at once. But if
she does not come, then I shall be killed. Say to her that I do not ask
that she should come who am ready to die, and that though I believe that
no harm will happen to her in Zululand, I think that she had better not
come. Say that, living or dead, I love her."

Then the maid described how the embassy went on with Noie, leaving her in
the charge of the man Tamboosa, who at the first break of dawn brought her
back to Ramah, and made her hide in the bush.

Now Rachel had no more doubts. Clearly the tale was true, and the question
was--what must be done? She thought a while, then bade Tamboosa and the
child to follow her to the mission-house. On the stoep she found her
father and mother sitting in the sun and drinking coffee, after the South
African fashion.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Dove, looking at the man anxiously.

Rachel ordered him to repeat his story, and this he did, addressing Rachel
alone, for of her father and mother he would take no notice. When he had
done the child told her tale also.

"Go now, and wait without," said Rachel, when it was finished.

"Inkosazana, I go," answered the man, "but if it pleases you to save your
servant, know that you must come swiftly. If you are not across the Tugela
by sunset this night, word will be passed to the King, and she dies at
once. Know also that you must come alone with me, for if any, white or
black, accompany you, they will be killed."

"Now," said Rachel when the three of them were left alone, "now what is to
be done?"

Mrs. Dove shook her head helplessly, and looked at her husband, who broke
into a tirade against the Zulus, their superstitions, cruelties, customs,
and everything that was theirs, and ended by declaring that it was of
course utterly impossible that Rachel should go upon such a mad errand,
and thus place herself in the power of savages.

"But, father," she said when he had done, "do you understand that you are
pronouncing Noie's death sentence? If you were in my place, would you not
go?"

"Of course I would. In fact I propose to do so as it is. No doubt Dingaan
will listen to me."

"You mean that Dingaan will kill you. Did you not hear what that man
Tamboosa said? Father, you must not go."

"No, John," broke in Mrs. Dove, "Rachel is right, you must not go, for you
would never come back again. Also, how can you be so cruel as to think of
leaving me here alone?"

"Then I suppose that we must abandon that poor girl to her fate,"
exclaimed Mr. Dove.

"How can you suppose anything so merciless, father, when it is in my power
to save her?" asked Rachel. "If I let those horrible Zulus kill her I
shall never be happy again all my life."

"And what if the horrible Zulus kill you?"

"They will not kill me, father; mother knows they will not, and so do I.
But as they have got this madness into their heads, I am sure that if I do
not go they will send an impi here to kill everybody else, and take me
prisoner. The kidnapping of Noie is only a first move. It is one of two
things: either I must visit Zululand, save Noie, and play my part there as
best I can, or we must desert Noie, and all leave this place at once,
tomorrow if possible. But then, as I told you, I shall never forgive
myself, especially as I am not in the least afraid of the Zulus."

 "It is true that God can protect you as much in Zululand as He can here,"
replied Mr. Dove, beginning to weaken in face of this desperate
alternative.

"Of course, father, but if I go to Zululand I want you and mother to trek
to Durban, and remain there till I return."

"Why, Rachel? It is absurd."

"Because I do not think that you are safe here, and it is not at all
absurd," she answered stubbornly. "These people choose to believe that I
am in some way in bondage to you; you remember all their talk about the
heavens and the cloud. Of course it may mean nothing, but you will be much
better in Durban for a while, where you can take to the water if
necessary."

Now Mr. Dove's obstinacy asserted itself. He refused to entertain any such
idea, giving reason after reason why he should not do so. Thus for another
half hour the argument raged till at length a compromise was arrived at,
as usual in such cases, not of too satisfactory an order. Rachel was to be
allowed to undertake her mission on behalf of Noie, and her parents were
to remain at Ramah. On her return, which they hoped would be within a week
or eight days, the question of the abandonment of the mission was to be
settled by the help of the experience she had gained. To this arrangement,
then, they agreed, reluctantly enough all of them, in order, to save
Noie's life, and for no other reason.

The momentous decision once taken, in half an hour Rachel was ready for
her journey, which she determined she would make upon her own horse, a
grey mare that she had ridden for a long while, and could rely on in every
way. The white riding-ox that Dingaan had sent as a present was also to
accompany her, to carry her spare garments and other articles packed in
skin bags, such as coffee, sugar and a few medicines, and to serve as a
remount in case anything should happen to the horse. When it was laden
Rachel sent for the Zulu, Tamboosa, and, pointing to the ox, said:

"I come to visit Dingaan the king, and to claim my servant. Lead the beast
on, I will overtake you presently."

The man saluted and began to _bonga_, that is, to give her titles of
praise, but she cut him short with a wave of her hand, and he departed
leading the ox.

Now while Mr. Dove saw to the saddling of the horses, for he was to ride
with her as far as the Tugela, Rachel went to bid farewell to her mother.
She found her by herself in the sitting-room, seated at an open window,
and looking out sadly towards the sea.

 "I am quite ready, dear," she said in a cheerful voice. "Don't look so
sad, I shall be back again in a week with Noie."

"Yes," answered Mrs. Dove, "I think that you and Noie will come back
safely, but--" and she paused.

"But what, mother?"

"Oh! I don't know. I am very much oppressed, my heart is heavy in me. I
hate parting with you, Rachel. Remember we have never been separated since
you were born."

Her daughter looked at her, and was filled with grief and compunction.

"Mother," she said, "if you feel like that--well, I love Noie, but after
all you are more to me than Noie, and if you wish I will give up this
business and stop with you. It is very terrible, but it can't be helped;
Noie will understand, poor thing," and her eyes filled with tears at the
thought of the girl's dreadful fate.

"No, Rachel, somehow I think it best that you should go, not only for
Noie's sake, but for your own. If your father would leave here to-day or
to-morrow, as you suggested, it might be otherwise, but he won't do that,
so it is no use talking of it. Let us hope for the best."

"As you wish, mother."

"Now, dear kiss me and go. I hear your father calling you; and, Rachel, if
we should not meet again in this world, I know you won't forget me, or
that there is another where we shall. I did not want to frighten you with
my fancies, which come from my not being well. Goodbye, my love, good-bye.
God be with you, and make you happy, always--always."

Then Rachel kissed her in silence, for she could not trust herself to
speak, and turning, left the room whence her mother watched her go, also
in silence. In another minute she was mounted, and, accompanied by her
father, riding on the road along which Tamboosa had led the white ox.

Presently they overtook him, whereon he stopped, and looking at Mr. Dove,
said:

"Inkosazana, the King's orders are that none should accompany you into
Zululand."

"Be silent," answered Rachel, proudly. "He rides with me as far as the
river bank."

Then they went on, and Rachel was relieved to find that whatever might
have been her mother's mood, that of her father was fairly cheerful.
Indeed, his mind was so occupied with the details and object of her
journey that he quite forgot its dangers.

Two hours' steady riding brought them to the ford of the Tugela river,
across which lay Zululand. On the hills beyond it they could see a number
of Kaffirs watching, who on catching sight of Rachel, ran down to the
river and entered it, shouting and beating the water with their sticks, as
she guessed, to scare away any crocodiles that might be lurking there.

Now that the moment of separation had come, Mr. Dove grew loth to part
with his daughter, and again suggested to Tamboosa that he should
accompany her to Dingaan's Great Place.

"If you set a foot across that river, Praying Man," answered the induna
grimly, "you shall die; look, there are the spears that will kill you."

As he spoke he pointed to the crest of the opposing hill over which,
running swiftly in ordered companies, now appeared a Zulu regiment who
carried large white shields and wore white plumes rising from their head
rings.

"It is the escort of the Inkosazana," he added. "Do you think that she can
take hurt among so many? And do you think, if you dare to disobey the
words of Dingaan, that you can escape so many? Go back new, lest they
should come over and kill you where you are."

Then, seeing that both argument and resistance were useless, and that
Tamboosa would brook no delay, Mr. Dove hurriedly embraced his daughter in
farewell. Indeed, Rachel was glad that there was no time for words, for
this parting was more terrible to her than she cared to own, and she
feared lest she should break down before the Zulu who was watching her,
and thereby be lowered in his eyes and in those of his people.

It was over and done. She had entered the water, riding her grey mare
while Tamboosa led the white ox at her side. Presently she looked, back,
and saw her father kneeling in prayer upon the bank.

"What does the man?" asked Tamboosa, uneasily. "Is he bewitching us?"

"Nay," she answered, "he prays to the Heavens for us."

On they went between the two lines of natives, who ceased their beating of
the water, and were silent as she passed. The river was shallow, and they
crossed it with ease. By now the regiment was gathered on its further
bank, two thousand men or more, brought hither to do honour to this white
girl in whom they chose to consider that the guardian spirit of their
people was incarnate. Contemplating them, Rachel wondered how it came
about that they should be thus prepared for her advent. The answer rose in
her mind. If she had refused to visit Zululand, it was their mission to
fetch her. It was wise, therefore, that she had come of her own will.

Forward she rode, a striking figure in her long white cloak, down which
her bright hair hung, sitting very proud and upright on her horse, without
a sign of doubt or fear. As she approached, the captains of the regiment
ran forward to meet her with lifted shield and crouching bodies.

"Hail!" cried their leader. "In the name of the Great Elephant, of Dingaan
the King, hail to thee, Princess of the Heavens, Holder of the Spirit of
Nomkubulwana."

Rachel rode on, taking no notice, marvelling who Nomkubulwana, whose
spirit she was supposed to enshrine, might be. Afterwards she discovered
that it was only another name for the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, that mysterious
white ghost believed by this people to control their destinies, with whom
it had pleased them to identify her. As her horse left the wide river and
set foot upon dry land, every man of the two thousand soldiers, who were
watching, as it seemed to her, with wonder and awe, began to beat his
ox-hide shield with the handle of his spear. They beat very softly at
first, producing a sound like the distant murmur of the sea, then harder
and harder till its volume grew to a mighty roar, impossible to describe,
a sound like the sound of thunder that echoed along the water and from
hill to hill. The mighty noise sank and died away as it had begun, and for
a moment there was silence. Then at some signal every spear flashed aloft
in the sunlight, and from every throat came the royal salute--_Bayète_. It
was a tremendous and most imposing welcome, so tremendous that Rachel
could no longer doubt that this people regarded her as a being apart, and
above the other white folk whom they knew.

At the time, however, she had little space for such thoughts, since the
mare she rode, terrified by the tumult, bucked and shied so violently that
she could scarcely keep her seat. She was a good rider, which was
fortunate for her, since, had she been ignominiously thrown upon such an
occasion, her prestige must have suffered, if indeed it were not
destroyed. As it proved, it was greatly enhanced by this accident. Many of
the Zulus of that day had never even seen a horse, which was considered by
all of them to be a dangerous if not a magical beast. That a woman could
remain seated on such a wild animal when it sprang into the air, and
swerved from side to side, struck them, therefore, as something marvellous
and out of experience, a proof indeed that she was not as others are.

She quieted the mare, and rode on between the white-shielded ranks, who,
their greeting finished, remained absolutely still like bronze statues
watching her with wondering eyes. When at length they were passed, the
captains and a guard of about fifty men ran ahead of her.

 Then she came, and after her Tamboosa, leading the white ox, followed by
another guard, which in turn was followed by the entire regiment. Thus
royally escorted, asking no questions, and speaking no word, did Rachel
make her entry into Zululand. Only in her heart she wondered whither she
was going, and how that strange journey would end, wondered, too, how it
would fare with her father and her mother till she returned to them.

Well might she wonder.

When she had ridden thus for about two hours an incident occurred which
showed her how great, and indeed how dreadful was the eminence on which
she had been set among these people. Suddenly some cattle, frightened by
the approach of the impi, rushed through it towards their kraal, and a
bull that was with them, seeing this unaccustomed apparition of a white
woman mounted on a strange animal, put down its head and charged her
furiously. She saw it coming, and by pulling the mare on to its haunches,
avoided its rush. Now at the time she was riding on a path which ran along
the edge of a little rock-strewn donga not more than eight or ten feet
deep, but steep-sided. Into this donga the bull, which had shut its eyes
to charge after the fashion of its kind, plunged headlong, and as it
chanced struck its horns against a stone, twisting and dislocating the
neck, so that it lay there still and dead.

When the Zulus saw what had happened they uttered a long-drawn _Ow-w_ of
amazement, for had not the beast dared to attack the White Spirit, and had
not the Spirit rewarded it with instant death? Then a captain made a
motion with his hand and instantly men sprang upon the remaining cattle,
four or five of them that were following the bull, and despatched them
with assegais. Before Rachel could interfere they were pierced with a
hundred wounds. Now there was a little pause, while the carcases of the
beasts were dragged out of her path, and the bloodstains covered from her
eyes with fresh earth. Just as this task was finished there appeared,
scrambling up the denga, and followed, by some men, a fat and
hideous-looking woman, with fish bladders in her hair, and snake-skins
tied about her, who, from her costume, Rachel knew at once must be an
_Isanuzi_ or witch-doctoress. Evidently she was in a fury, as might be seen
by the workings of her face, and the extraordinary swiftness with which
she moved notwithstanding her years and bulk.

"Who has dared to kill my cattle?" she screamed. "Is it thou whom men name
Nomkubulwana?"

"Woman," answered Rachel quietly, "the Heavens killed the bull which would
have hurt me. For the rest, ask of the captains of the King."

 The witch-doctoress glanced at the dead bull which lay in the donga, its
head twisted up in an unnatural fashion at right angles to the body, and
for a moment seemed afraid. Then her rage at the loss of her herd broke
out afresh, for she was a person in authority, one accustomed to be feared
because of her black arts and her office.

"When the Inkosazana is seen in Zululand," she gasped, "death walks with
her. There is the token of it," and she pointed to the dead cattle. "So it
has ever been and so shall it ever be. Red is thy road through life, White
One. Go back, go back now to thine own kraal, and see whether or no my
words are true," and springing at the horse she seized it by the bridle as
though she would drag it round.

Now in her hand Rachel held a little rod of white rhinoceros horn which
she used as a riding whip, and with this rod she pointed at the woman,
meaning that some of those with her should cause her to loose the bridle.
Too late she remembered that in this savage land such a motion when made
by the King or one in supreme command, had another dreadful
interpretation--death without pity or reprieve.

In an instant, before she could interfere, before she could speak, the
witch-doctoress lay dead upon the carcase of the dead bull.

"What of the others, Queen, what of the others?" asked the chief of the
slayers, bending low before her, and pointing with his spear to the
attendants of the witch-doctoress, who fled aghast. "Do they join this
evil-doer who dared to lift her hand against thee?"

"Nay," she answered in a low voice, for horror had made her almost dumb.
"I give them life. Forward."

"She gives them life!" shouted the praisers about her. "The Bearer of life
and death gives life to the children of the evil-doer," and as the great
cavalcade marched forward, company after company took up these words and
sang them as a song.


CHAPTER X

THE OMEN OF THE STAR


As it chanced and can easily be understood, Rachel could not have made a
more effective entry into Zululand, or one more calculated to confirm her
supernatural reputation. When the "wild beast" she rode plunged about she
had remained seated on it as though she grew there, whereas every warrior
knew that he would have fallen off. When the bull charged her that bull
had died, slain by the Heavens. When the Isanuzi, a witch of repute, had
lifted voice and hand against her she had commanded her death, showing
that she feared no rival magic. True the woman would have been killed in
any case, for such was the order of the King as to all who should dare to
affront the Inkosazana, yet the captains had waited to see what Rachel
would do that they might judge her accordingly. If she had shown fear, if
she had even neglected to avenge, they might have marvelled whether after
all she were more than a beautiful white maiden filled with the wisdom of
the whites.

Now they knew better; she was a Spirit having the power of a Spirit over
beast and man, who smote as a Spirit should. The fame of it went
throughout the land, and little chance thence forward had Rachel of
escaping from the shadow of her own fearful renown.

Towards sundown they came to a kraal set upon a hill, and it was asked of
her if she were pleased to spend the night there. She bowed her head in
assent, and they entered the kraal. It was quite empty save for certain
maidens dressed in bead petticoats, who waited there to serve her. All the
other inhabitants had gone. They took her to a large and beautifully clean
hut. Kneeling on their knees, the maidens presented her with food--meat
and curdled milk, and roasted cobs of corn. She ate of the corn and the
milk, but the meat she sent away as a gift to the captains. Then alone in
that kraal, in which after they had served her even the girls seemed to
fear to stay, Rachel slept as best she might in such solitude, while
without the fence two thousand armed savages watched over her safety.

It was a troubled sleep, for she dreamed always of that dreadful-looking
Isanuzi with the fish-bladders in her hair, yelling to her that her path
through life was watered with blood, and bidding her go back to her own
kraal and see whether the words were true, an ominous saying of which she
could not read the riddle. She dreamed also of the woman's coarse, furious
face turned suddenly to one of abject terror, and then of the dreadful end
the red death without mercy and without appeal which she had let loose by
a motion of her hand. Another dream she had was of her father and her
mother, who seemed to be lying side by side staring towards her with
wide-open eyes, and that when she spoke to them they would not answer.

So the long night wore away, till at length Rachel woke with a start
thinking that a hand had been laid upon her face, to see by the faint
light of dawn which struggled into the hut through the cracks of the
door-boards that the hand was only a great rat that had crawled over her
and now nibbled at her hair. She sat up, frightening it and its companions
away, then rose and washed herself with water that stood by in great
gourds while without she heard the women singing some kind of song or hymn
of which she could not catch the words.

Scarcely was she ready than they entered the hut, saluting her and
bringing more food. Rachel ate, then bade one of them say to the captain
of the impi that she was ready to start. Presently the girl returned with
the message that all was prepared. She walked from the kraal to find her
mare, which had been well fed and groomed by Tamboosa, who had seen horses
in Natal, and knew how they should be treated, saddled and waiting, whilst
before and behind it, arranged as on the previous day, stood the warriors,
who received her in dead, respectful silence.

She mounted, and the procession went forward. With a two hours' halt at
midday they marched on over hill and dale, passing many villages of
beehive-shaped huts. As they came the inhabitants of these places deserted
them and fled, crying _"Nomkubulwana! Nomkubulwana!"_ It was evident to
Rachel that the tale of the death of the Isanuzi had preceded her, and
they feared lest, should they cross her path, her fate would be their
fate. Indeed, one of the strangest circumstances of this strange adventure
was the complete loneliness in which she lived. Except those who were
actually ordered to wait upon her, none dared come near to Rachel; she was
holy, a Spirit, to approach whom unbidden might mean death.

At nightfall they reached another empty kraal, where again she slept
alone. When they left it in the morning she called Tamboosa to her and
asked him at what hour they would come to Dingaan's great town,
Umgugundhlovo, which means the Place of the trumpeting of the Elephant. He
answered, at sunset.

So she rode on all that day also till as the sun began to sink, from a
hill whereon grew large euphorbia trees, on a plain backed by mountains,
she saw the town surrounded by a fence, inside of which were thousands of
huts, that in their turn surrounded a great open space. Now they pushed
forward quickly, and as darkness fell approached the main gate of the
place, where, as usual, there was no one to be seen. But here they did not
enter, marching on till they came to another gate, that of the Intunkulu,
the King's house, where, their escort done, the regiment turned and went
away, leaving Rachel alone with the envoy, Tamboosa, who still led the
white ox. They entered this gate, and presently came to a second. It was
that of the Emposeni, the Dwelling of the King's wives, out of which
appeared women crawling on the ground before Rachel, and holding in their
left hands torches of grass. These undid the baggage from the ox, and at
their signals, for they did not seem to dare to speak to her, Rachel
dismounted. Thereon Tamboosa saluted her, and taking the horse by the
bridle, led it away with the ox.

Then Rachel felt that she was indeed alone, for Tamboosa at any rate had
seen her home, which now was so far away. Still proudly enough she
followed the women, who, bent double as before, led her to a great hut lit
by a rude lamp filled with melted hippopotamus fat, where they set down
her bags, and departed, to return presently with food and water.

Having washed off the dust of her long journey, and combed out her hair,
Rachel ate all she could, for she was hungry, and guessed that she might
need her strength that night. Then she lay down upon a pile of beautiful
karosses that had been placed ready for her, and rested. An hour or more
went by, and just as she was beginning to fall asleep the door-board of
the hut was thrust aside, and a tall woman entered, who knelt to her and
said:

"Hail, Inkosazana! The King asks whether it be thy pleasure to appear
before him this night."

"It is my pleasure," answered Rachel; "for that purpose have I travelled
here. Lead me to the King."

So the woman went out of the hut, Rachel following her to find that the
moon shone brightly in a clear sky. The woman conducted her through
tortuous reed fences, until presently they came to an open court where, in
the shadow of a hut, sat a number of men wrapped about with fur karosses.
Guessing that she was in the presence of Dingaan, Rachel drew her white
cloak round her tall form and walked forward slowly, till she reached the
centre of the space, where she stopped and stood quite still, looking like
a ghost in the moonlight. Then all the men to right and left rose and
saluted her silently by the uplifting of one arm; only he who was in the
midst of them remained seated and did not salute. Still she stayed
motionless, uttering no word for a long while, six or seven minutes,
perhaps. Her silence fought against theirs, and she knew that the one who
spoke first would own to inferiority.

At length, in answering salutation, she lifted the little wand of white
horn that she carried and turned slowly as though to leave the place, so
that now the moonlight glistened on her lovely hair. Then, fearing perhaps
lest she should depart or vanish away, the man seated in the centre said
in a low half-awed voice:

"I am Dingaan, King of the Amazulu. Say, White One, who art thou?"

"By what name am I known here, O Dingaan the King?" she replied, answering
the question with a question.

"By a high name, White One, a name that is seldom spoken, the name of
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, the title of Nomkubulwana, the Spirit of our people.
How camest thou by that name?"

"My name is my name," she said.

"We know, White One; the wind has borne all that story through the land,
it whispers it from the leaves of the forest and the reeds of the water
and the grass of the plains. We know that the Heavens gave thee their own
name, O Child of Heaven, O Holder of the Spirit of Nomkubulwana."

"Thou sayest it, King. I do not say it, thou sayest it."

"I say it, and having seen thee I know that it is true, for thy beauty,
White One, is not the beauty of woman alone, although still thou beest
woman. Now I confirm to thee the words my messengers bore thee in past
days. Here, with me, thou rulest. The land is thine, my impis wait thy
word. Death and life are in thy hands; command, and they go forth to slay;
command, and they return again. Only thou rulest alone with me, and the
black folk, not the white, shall be thy servants."

"I hear thee, King. Now, as a first fruit, give to me Noie, daughter of
Seyapi, my slave whom the soldiers stole away from Ramah beyond the river
where I dwell."

"She is dead, White One, she is dead for her crimes," answered Dingaan,
looking at her.

Now Rachel's heart sank in her, for it might well be that a trick had been
played on her, and that this was true. Or perhaps this tale of Noie's
death was but a trap to test her powers; moreover, it was not likely that
the King, who had promised that she should live, would dare to break his
word to one whom he believed or half-believed to be a spirit.

For a moment she thought; then, after her nature, determined to be bold
and hazard all upon a throw. Therefore she did not argue or reproach, but
said:

"She is not dead. I have questioned every spear in Zululand, and none of
them is red with her blood."

"Thou art right," he answered; "the spears are clean. She died in the
river."

Now Rachel was sure, and answered in her clear voice:

"I have questioned the waters, and I have questioned the crocodiles, and
they answer that Noie has passed them safely."

"Thou art right, White One. She died by a rope in yonder huts."

Now Rachel looked at the huts and cried:

"Noie, I hear thee, I see thee, I smell thee out. Come forth, Noie."

The King and his councillors stared at her, whispering to one another, and
before ever they had done their whisperings out from among the gloom of
the huts crept Noie.

To Rachel she crept, taking no heed even of the King, and crouching down
in the faint shadow of her that the moonlight threw, she flung her arms
about her knees and pressed her forehead on her feet. Now Rachel's heart
bounded with joy at the sight of her, and she longed to bend down and kiss
her, but did not, lest her great dignity should be lessened in the eyes of
the King; only she said:

"I greet you, Noie; be seated in my shadow, where you are safe, and tell
me, have these men dealt well by you?"

"Not so ill, Inkosazana, that is since I reached the Great Kraal. But one
of them, he who sits yonder," and she pointed to a certain induna, "struck
me on the journey, and took away my food."

Now Rachel looked at the man angrily, playing with the little wand in her
hand, whereon this induna shivered with terror, fearing lest she should
point it at him. Rising, he came to Rachel and flung himself down before
her.

"What have you to say," asked Rachel, "you who have dared to strike my
servant?"

"Inkosazana," he mumbled, "the maid was obstinate, and tried to run away,
and our orders were to bring her to the King. Spare my life, I pray thee."

"King," said Rachel, "I have power over this man, have I not?"

"It is so," answered Dingaan. "Kill him if thou wilt."

Rachel seemed to consider while the poor wretch, with chattering teeth,
implored her to forgive. Then she turned to Noie, saying:

"He struck you, not me. I give him to you to do by as you will. Shall he
sleep to-night with the living or the dead?"

Noie looked at him, and next at a mark on her arm, and the induna, ceasing
from his prayers to Rachel, clutched Noie by the ankle, and begged her
mercy.

"Your life has been given to you," he said, "give mine to me, lest
ill-fortune follow you."

 "Do you remember," asked Noie contemptuously, "how, when you had beaten
me, yonder by the Tugela, you said you hoped that it would be your luck to
put a spear through this heart of mine? And do you remember that I
answered you that the spear would be over your own heart first, and that
thereon you called me 'Daughter of Wizards' and struck me again--me, the
child of Seyapi, upon whom the mantle of the Inkosazana lies, me who have
drunk of her wisdom and of his--you struck _me_, you dog," and lifting her
foot she spurned him in the face.

Now the King and his company, concluding that the thing was finished,
glanced at Rachel to see her point with the rod and thus give the man to
death. But Rachel waited, sure that Noie had not done. Moreover, whatever
Noie might say, she had determined to save him.

Meanwhile, the girl, after a pause, said:

"Were you a man you would be too proud to ask your life of me, but you are
a dog; and, Dog, I remember that you have children, among them a daughter
of my own age, whom, I saw come out to greet you. For her sake, then, take
your life, and with it this new name that I give
you--'Soldier-who-strikes-girls.'"

So the man rose, and weak with shame and the agony of suspense, crept
swiftly from the place, fearing lest the Inkosazana or her servant might
change her mind and kill him after all. But Noie's name clung to him so
closely that at length, unable to bear the ridicule of it, he and his
family fled from Zululand.

So this matter ended.

Now the King spoke, saying:

"White One, thy magic is great, and thine eyes could pierce the darkness
and see thy servant hidden, and call her forth to thee. Yet know, she is
mine, not thine, for when she fled I had already chosen her to be my wife,
and afterwards I sent and killed the wizard Seyapi, and all his House."

"But this girl thou didst not kill, O King, for I saved her."

"It is so, White One. I have heard lately how thou didst call down the
lightning and burn up my soldier who followed after her, so that nothing
of him remained."

"Yes," said Rachel quietly, "as, were it to please me, I could burn thee
up also, O King," a saying at which. Dingaan looked afraid.

"Yet," he went on, waving his hand as though to put aside this unpleasant
suggestion, "the maid is mine, not thine, and therefore I took her."

"How didst thou learn that she dwelt at my kraal?" asked Rachel.

 The King hesitated.

"The white man, Ishmael, he whom thou callest Ibubesi, told thee, did he
not?"

Dingaan bowed his head.

"And he told thee that thou couldst make what promises thou wouldst to me
as to the girl's life, but that afterwards when thou hadst called me here
to claim it, thou mightest kill her or keep her as a wife, as it pleased
thee."

"I can hide nought from thee; it is so," said Dingaan.

"Is that still in thy mind, O King?" asked Rachel again, beginning to play
with the little wand.

"Not so, not so," he answered hurriedly. "Hadst thou not come the girl
would have died, as she deserved to do according to our law. But thou hast
come and claimed her, O Holder of the Spirit of Nomkubulwana, and she sits
in thy shadow and is clothed with thy garment. Take her then, for
henceforth she is holy, as thou art holy."

Rachel heard, and without any change of countenance waved her hand to show
that this question was finished. Then she asked suddenly:

"What is this great matter whereof thou wouldst speak with me, O King?"

"Surely thy wisdom has told thee, White One," he answered uneasily.

"Perchance, yet I would have it from thy lips, and now."

Now Dingaan consulted a little with his council.

"White One," he said presently, "the thing is grave, and we need guidance.
Therefore, as the circle of the witch-doctors have declared must be done,
we ask it of thee who art named with the name of the Spirit of our people
and hast of her wisdom. Thou knowest, White One, of the fights in past
years between the white people of Natal and the Zulus, in which many were
slain on either side. But now, when we are at peace with the English, we
hear of another white people, the Amaboona" (_i.e._ the Dutch Boers), "who
are marching towards us from the Cape, and have already fought with
Moselikatze--the traitor who was once my captain--and killed thousands of
his men. These Amaboona threaten us also, and say aloud that they will eat
us up, for they are brave and armed with the white man's weapons that spit
out lightning. Now, White One, what shall we do? Shall I send out my impis
and fall on them while they are unprepared, and make an end of them, as
seems wisest, and is the wish of my indunas? Or, shall I sit at home and
watch, trying to be at peace with them, and only strike back if they
strike at me? Answer not lightly, O Zoola, for much may hang upon thy
words. Remember also that he whose name may not be spoken, the Lion who
ruled before me and is gone, with his last breath uttered a certain
prophecy concerning the white people and this land."

"Let me hear that prophecy, O King."

"Come forth," said Dingaan pointing to a councillor who sat in the circle,
"come forth, thou who knowest, and tell the tale in the ears of this White
One."

A figure rose, a draped figure whose face was hidden in a hood of blanket.
It came forward, and as it came it drew the blanket tighter about it.
Rachel, watching all things, saw, or thought she saw, that one of its
hands was white as though it had been burned with fire. Surely she had
seen such a hand before.

"Speak," she said.

"Name me by my name and tell me who I am and I will obey thee," answered
the man.

Then she was sure, for she remembered the voice. She looked at him
indifferently and asked:

"By what name shall I name you, O Slayer of a King? Will you be called
Mopo or Umbopa, who have borne them both?"

Now Dingaan stared, and the shrouded form before her started as though in
surprise.

"Why do you seek to mock me?" she went on. "Can a blanket of bark hide
that face of yours from these eyes of mine which saw it a while ago at
Ramah, when you came thither to judge of me, O Mouth of the King?"

Now the man let the blanket slip from his head and looked at her.

"It seems that it cannot," he answered. "Then I told thee that I had
dreamed of the Spirit of our people, and that thou, White One, wast like
to her of whom I had dreamed. Canst thou tell me what was the fashion of
that dream of mine?"

Now Rachel understood that notwithstanding his words at Ramah, this man
still doubted her, and was set up to prove her, and all that Noie had told
her about him and the secret history of the Zulus came back into her mind.

"Surely Mopo or Umbopa," she replied, "you dreamed three dreams, not one.
Is it of the last you speak?--that dream at the kraal Duguza, when the
Inkosazana rode past you on a storm clothed in lightning, and shaking in
her hand a spear of fire?"

"Yes, I speak of it," he replied in an awed voice, "but if thou art but a
woman as thou hast said, how knowest thou these things?"

"Perchance I am both woman and spirit, and perchance the past tells them
to me," Rachel answered; "but the past has many voices, and now that I
dwell in the flesh I cannot hear them all. Let me search you out. Let me
read your heart," and she bent forward and fixed her eyes upon him,
holding him with her eyes.

"Ah! now I see and I hear," she said presently. "Had you not a sister,
Mopo, a certain Baleka, who afterwards entered the house of the Black One
and bore a son and died in the Tatiyana Cleft? Shall I tell you how she
died?"

"Tell it not! Tell it not!" exclaimed the old man quaveringly.

"So be it. There is no need. Yet ere she died you made a promise to this
Baleka, and that promise you kept at the kraal Duguza, you and the prince
Umhlangana, and another prince whose name I forget," and she looked at
Dingaan, who put his hand before his face. "You kept that promise with an
assegai--let me look, let me look into your heart--yes, with a little
assegai handled with the royal red wood, an assegai that had drunk much
blood."

Now a low moan broke from the lips of Dingaan, and those who sat with
them, while Umbopa shivered as though with cold.

"Have mercy, I pray thee," he gasped. "Forgive me if at times since we met
at Ramah I thought thee but a white maiden, beautiful and bold, as thou
didst declare thyself to be. Now I see thou hast the spirit, or else how
didst thou know these things?"

Noie heard and smiled in the shadow, but Rachel stood silent.

"I was bidden to tell thee of the last words of the Black One," went on
Umbopa hurriedly; "but what need is there to tell thee anything who
knowest all? They were that he heard the sound of the running of the feet
of a great white people which shall stamp out the children of the Zulus."

"Nay," answered Rachel, "I think they were; _'Where-fore wouldst thou kill
me, Mopo?'"_

Again Dingaan moaned, for he had heard these very words spoken. Umbopa
turned and stared at him, and he stared at Umbopa.

"Come hither," said Rachel, beckoning to the old man.

He obeyed, and she threw the corner of her cloak over his head, and
whispered into his ear. He listened to her whisperings, then with a cry
broke from her and fled away out of the council of the King.

When he had gone there was silence, though Dingaan looked a question with
his eyes.

"Ask it not," she said, "ask it not of me, or of him. I think this Mopo
here had his secrets in the past. I think that once he sat in a hut at
night and bargained with certain Great Ones, a prince who lives, and a
prince who died. Come hither, come hither, thou son of Senzangacona, come
from the fields of Death and tell me what was that bargain which thou
madest with Mopo, thou and another?" and once again Rachel beckoned, this
time upwards in the air.

Come, Sir, we want you to bring the spot - Good night, mother. (Goes
from Hamlet, and Polonius after the drags.) Fourth lift. Erste Scene. (The
Royal Room.) (The King, the Queen, Rosary and Güldenstern occur.) King
(Queen). These are sighs of content difficult; Nöthiger it is that
we understand their importance. Where is your son?

Queen. Let's look at a Augenblik alone. (On Güldenstern the rosary and go
away.) King.'s What, Gertrude? What makes Hamlet? Queen. He is furious as
the ocean and the wind when beyde fight, which is the most powerful
sey; in such a tremendous impetus from Wuthe he hears something
behind the wallpaper to stir, pulls the sword, shouts, a mouse!

and stabs in this fantasy the unseen good old man King. heaven! what an
accident - it would be (us) Seyn gone, if we are to the old square would
have been: His Freyheit drohet general danger yourself and everyone.
Woe to us! How are these bloody That we can justify? You will be charged,
because we would have to be careful, these young people racing to keep
locked up. But so far went to him our love, we deluded ourselves against
what the intelligence required, and compared hierinn a person with a
bad injury is tainted, and made him fear that he wants to be known,
so long nourished until he the Mark of his life has weggefressen.

Where is he gone? Queen. The corpse of the murdered away, the Bey he gebehrdet
so that you clearly siehet, as his will not to the work of Theil's
Raserey have. He beweint what he has done. King. O Gertrude, come with me
and the sun will not touch the mountains soon, as we see it from here to
want to send ships: And what these evil That betrift, we will all
of our reputation and our cleverness Nöthiger have to follow their
preparedness - Hey!

Güldenstern! (Rosenkranz and Güldenstern come back.)

My friends, goes, and take some people with you, Hamlet, in a fit of Raserey
the slain Polonius, and his mother from his Cabinet weggeschleppt;
goes looking for him to talk friendly with him and bring the corpse
into the castle-Capelle.

I ask you, you no Augenblik line. (Rosenkranz and Güldenstern go anyway.)
Come, Gertrude, we want the best of our friends zusammenberuffen,
and show them, what we sowol thun plan than what Hamlet has done
unglüklicher way.

It is only too besorgs that the rumor That this recently in the world by
whispering, and maybe our name by secret accusations poison is -
Come, come, my Gemüth balance and is full of inside fight - (You
go from.)

Zweyte Scene. (Hamlet occurs.) Hamlet. Now he is where he heard - (Behind
the Scene: Hamlet!

Prince Hamlet) Hamlet. What a Lermer? Who calls on Hamlet? Ha, because they
come angestochen - (Rosenkranz and Güldenstern occur.) Rosary.

What do you have with the body starting Todt, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. Him,
where the dust to which he has relatives. Rosary.

 Tell us where he lies, so we pick up him and the bear Capelle.

Hamlet.

That makes you not - rosary. What imagine? Hamlet. That I could hide your
secret and not my own. Moreover, if the Fräger a Erdschwamm is what kind
of response can the son of a king give? rosary.

You see me for a sponge to Mr. Gracious? Hamlet. Yes Lord, for a sponge,
the king Blik, Winke absorbing and mines, but such a royal servant thun
the best service at the end, when it's needed, eingeschlukt what you
did, so he drukt you, and ye shall return to the trokne löchrichte sponge
that has previously WARET. rosary. I do not know what you mean to say you,
Gracious Lord?

Hamlet. This is something I love, a spizige speech sleeps in a clownish ear.
rosary. Gracious Lord, you must tell us where the body is with us and
go to the king. Hamlet. The body is already Beyme Kings, but the king Bey
is not the corpse.

The king is a thing - Güldenstern. One thing, Gracious Lord? Hamlet.
From - Nothing: leaves me with him; Verstek you, fox, and all rear
Dreiner.

(They go from.) Third Scene. (The King is on.) King. I command him to me,
and the corpse attention to how dangerous it is to these people so frey
around to it! And yet we must not under the rigor of Gesezes treat, the
rabble of his affections is not following its reason, but after his eyes
abmißt, the rabble, who loves him, would in his Bestraffung, not their
ratio against his crimes, but only the hardness of the Tight seen.
Glüklicher way it adds that this incident to his plözlichen Verschikung
a pretext giebt.

Counter become desperate damage must be desperate to use resources
or none at all.

(Rosary occurs.) Giebts What?

What happened? Rosary. Gracious Lord, we can not bring him out, where
the corpse is hingekommen. King. Where is he? Rosary. Outside, Gracious
Lord, with a guard, expecting euern command. King.

Does it come . rosary. Hey!

Güldenstern says the prince inside. (Hamlet and Güldenstern occur.) King.
Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius? Hamlet. Beyme food. King. Beyme food? where
then?

Hamlet. no where (he) eats, but where he is eaten, a gathering of political
worms is really him.

 Where there is feasting on arriving in the world is nothing more than a
worm. We fatten all Creatures in order to fatten us, and for whom we fatten
ourselves for maggots as? Your fat king and your Magre beggars are only
different courts; zwey dishes on a table, this is the end of songs. King.
Alas! alas! Hamlet. A person can change with the worm of a king has
eaten a fish fishing, and fish meal, which this worm has eaten. king.
What do you want to say? Hamlet. Nothing, as I show you wants, as a king
can come so far that he had a journey through the intestines must make a
beggar. king. Where is Polonius? Hamlet. In heaven, schikt just
out, and let him ask.

If it is not your emissary findt, so looking at him the other places
itself But, seriously speaking, if you do within this month can not find,
so you'll smell it when you down the stairs into the gallery goes up.
King. Go, looking for him there. Hamlet. He is certainly not out of it
Lauffen. King. Hamlet, thy That makes these for your own safety (for which
we are so very worried, as we höchlich what thou hast done,
disapprove) necessarily, that you in hot haste to England off.

Schiker so as to thee, the ship is ready, the wind is favorable,
your companions are waiting, and everything returns to England
itself out.

Hamlet. After England? King.

Yes, Hamlet. Hamlet. Good. King. It is, if you our intentions kennnest.
Hamlet. I see a cherub that sees them, but comes to England!

Lebet well, dear mother. king. Your loving father, Hamlet. Hamlet.

My mother, father and mother is man and woman; husband and wife is
one flesh, and so Seyde her my mother - Come to England! (He's up.) King.
follow him on foot; lokt him with good words on board, no delay!

I want him on this night have continued.

Route, it's all ready and sailed, what else belongs on the matter, I ask
you, does hurtig - (Rosenkranz and Güldenstern go anyway.) And, of England,
if you accept my friendship worth keeping, how to get involved in
consideration of my power thun should, as the scars still so rough and look
roth the Danish Schwerdt has dug yourself: How do you like you care, our
mission is nothing less than the infallible death Hamlets object,
execute kaltsinnig. Thu England is, because he raßt in my blood like a
fever zehrendes, and you must me Curie. Until I know that it happened, I
will, so great my Glüks booth is not happy Augenbliks enjoy. (He goes
anyway.) Fourth Scene. (A camp on the borders of Dännemark.) (Fortinbras
with its war - army.) Fortinbras. Geh captain, reported the Danish kings
my greeting, tell him that his authorization required, Fortinbras
to Freyer passage through his realm apply, and tell him that his
Majesty wofern us to ask, so we would him personally make our
respects.

Captain. I will align, Gracious Lord.

Fortinbras. marches on - (Fortinbras goes with the army again.) (Hamlet,
rosary and Güldenstern occur.) Hamlet. My good Lord, whose peoples are
that? captain. They are from Norway, sir. Hamlet. What is your project,
sir, if I may ask? captain. For a Theil of Pohl. Hamlet. commandiert
Who they, sir? captain. Fortinbras, the old Norway nephew. Hamlet. Is it
the whole Pohle, or is the issue only from a district on the
borders?

captain.

If I tell you the truth is round, so we go to a small Flek country einzunehmen
what the name is the lucrative - if a five-Ducat register - Five? I want
'is not about taking in rent, there would be neither the Norway
is still the Pohler more yield, if it should be auctioned.

Hamlet. If it is, so will the Polak little trouble, you're fighting to
make. Captain. However, he has already with a strong team besezt.

Hamlet.

Zweytausend souls and twenty thousand Ducat Seyn will not be sufficient
to resolve this dispute is a straw-Halm evident. This is the apost of
excessive size and quietness, inside the break, from the outside
without a cause to show why the man must die.

Thank you, sir, for your messages.

Captain. God forbid you, sir. Rosary. Gefällt's you to go further,
Gracious Lord? Hamlet. I will immediately turn you Seyn Bey; is only a
little ahead. (They go ab.) Hamlet (allein.) Do not all occasions arise
against me, and my noble dilatoriness ashamed?

What is a man, if anything, he wins with his time, food and Schlaffer is?
One animal, no better.

O surely, He who deals with a Denkungs force created, in such a wide circle
back and looks ahead, gave us this property, these God-like common sense
does not it rust unused to leave. What then? Is it thierische carelessness,
or concerns, it is an exact Erwegung the outcome, (an idea which,
if he geviertheilet is only one Theil wisdom and three-quarters of
a cowardly memme in itself:) what is the cause that I'm still alive
to these things than to talk of such, which has yet to be done?

Since I am the cause, will, wealth and resources have run it - What
a Beyspiel!

Such a numerous army, from a tender young prince above, its spirit of divine
glory-craving geschwellt, an invisible source Troz offers, and everything
is mortal and uncertain, everything random, and death risk assets, aussezt,
and the order a Eyer-Schaal - This is not a big heart, the only
large objects in motion can be gesezt; on a noble nature of the
opportunity to handle in a straw-straw, if there is the honor HEREBY
INVITES - The nominal 'I tall.

What steh 'I, I, a murdered father, a mother had dishonored,
(Betrachtungen, my reason and my blood aufzureizen at the same time!)

, Stand by what I do and let everything flaccid? However, I, to my shame,
anything like the death of over twenty thousand men herabhängt which is a
cricket, one-point vermeynten honor's sake, so quiet in her grave, as
in their beds go for a floor fight Stükchen which is not far enough
for a grave for the Erschlagnen would.

 O my soul!

So seyen then, from this Augenblik to bloody your thoughts, listen
to or think!

(Geht ab.) Fifth Scene. (Transforms into the palace.)

(The Queen, Horatio, and a farm servant.) Queen. I will not speak. Hofbedienter
She is beside himself in That does not quite Bey himself; their
condition deserves pity.

Queen. What is it then?

Hofbedienter It always speaks of her father, says she heard that it was
everything Ek bunt over the world, and calls oh oh, is echoed in the chest;
encounters a straw-Halm reluctant before him, saying things that are
only half a mind - which in themselves are nothing but cause the listener
to conclusions, and with the wave, the head-shaking and other
Gebehrden, which makes them, although their true Meynung not clear,
but just enough to understand, that they misunderstand kan.

Horatio. It would be good if we talked with her, because she could
übelgesinnten Gemüthern strange Muthmassungen erweken.

Let them come in. - Queen (front). My sick soul seems every child Tand
the prelude of some tragic incident - So is the nature of sin, so verräth
they themselves through their perpetual fear verrathen to be. (Ophelia
occurs.) Ophelia. Where is the beautiful majesty of Dännemark? Queen.
What makes you, Ophelia?

Ophelia (singend.) How can I tell your friend, if I find him thu? On his
shell-hat and staff and his wooden shoe.

Queen. Oh! the poor girl! willt what you do with this song? Ophelia.
Tell her that? No, I ask you, is listening. (Singend.) (He is Todt, Miss,
he is Todt and then, A green Wasen dekt his head and his body a stone.)
(The King occurs.)

Queen. But my dear Ophelia - Ophelia.

I ask you, is listening to - (White is your shirt, like fresh snow.) Queen.
Alas! Look hieher, sir. Ophelia. With flowers umstekt rings, you go with
him to the grave, With steadfast love benezt Thau.

King. How's about you, young lady? Ophelia. Well, God sey you Bey! People
say that the owl sey prior Bekers-daughter had. Lord God! we know
what we are, but we do not know what we can. God bless you eat lunch! King.
Sadness about her father - Ophelia. I ask you, nothing of this matter, and
if they ask you what it should mean, it says to them that: (On Tomorrow is
Valentine Sant days and early before I sunshine, girls, come to
the window to you, and wants your Valentine Seyn.

Since he stuhnd, and withdrew, and left them in his house, and you went
as a girl to him, but not as a girl.) King. Blesseds Hold Ophelia!
Ophelia. In That, and without an oath, that should the last Seyn: Bey sancte
Kilian and Charity, The nasty sex, you thun's when the opportunity comes;
Beyme Hahn, it is not right.

She said: Before you get caught me, you give me the Verspracht Eh Bey of
those Sundays, I hätt's done, what gave you free? King. How long is it
already in this state? Ophelia. I hope everything will go well. We must
have patience, and yet I can not be otherwise than weep when I think that
it in the cold ground will insert and my brother should know, and
thanks hiemit 'I have good euern for Rath.

Come, where is my coach? - Good night, ladies, good night, nice ladies,
good night, good night. (She goes anyway.) King (at Horatio.) Followed
her, and just let them take care, I ask you - (Horatio's up.) This is
the poison of a deep Grams, a consequence of her father's death. O
Gertrude, Gertrude, when Unglük, then it is not individually, as spies,
but Schaars-weis. Only the violent death of her father - then the removal
of your son, he is just apply those Mordthat - The nation of unhealthy
Muthmassungen on the good death of Polonius, from one ear to the other
whispers are upset and outraged ready - It was imprudent of us traded, that
we let him secretly burial - Poor Ophelia robbed her beautiful
mind - and what still is the worst, so is her brother in secret
from France zurükgekommen, remains hidden, attracts inquiries and
will find enough ears winds that filled him with poisonous rhetoric
about the cause of his father's death will ansteken - O my dear
Gertrude, this is more than Nöthiger is to me the worst care to make.

(You hear a roar behind the Scene .) Queen. heavens, what a racket is this?
Sixth Scene. (A court-operated with the former.) King. Where are my
Swiss? Let them guard the door - What do you want? Hofbedienter Save you,
Gracious Lord. The rising over its banks Ocean eats not with the vehemence
reissenderm fords and sandbars away, when the young Laertes, in a Spize
Hauffen agitate your guards to the ground throws, and the rags people call
him Lord, and no different than if the world only IZT anfienge and Geseze,
usage and everything that ties the company befestiget, would be
forgotten at once, they Ruffer: Let the Laertes to our king! Caps, hands
and tongues enter their Beyfall up into the clouds, everything schreyt:
"Laertes our Seyn king, Laertes king." Queen. (You hear the crowd closer)
How they schreyer! What Wuthe of joy! O, these are only computing Pfenning,
their false Danish dogs - (Laertes occurs with a Partey front of the
door.) King. The doors are affixed. Laertes. Where is this king? - Your
Men! Will you all stand out. All. No, we want it. Laertes. I beg you, let
me grant. All. We want we want. (They go from.)

Laertes. I thank you; bewachet the door. O thou shameless king, my
father created her. Queen. Quiet, good Laertes. Laertes. The drop of
blood, the calm in me, calling me from the Bastart; called my father a
Hahnreyh; and burn the whore here, here amidst between the chaste and
honest unbeflekte Augbraunen my mother. king. What is the cause, Laertes,
your outrage that this Riesenmässige reputation giebt? Let him go, Gertrude;
besorget nothing for your person, it's something as a Sacred King
hergezäunt that Verrätherey to what they wanted to be happy, by the grills
just hineinguken kan, without the power to have their desire to work
Sezen. Tell me, Laertes, why Seyde her so upset? Let him go, Gertrude -
Talk, man!

Laertes. Where is my father? King. Todt is he. Queen. But not by his
fault. King. Let's ask him until he has enough. Laertes. Todt, why is he?
How it went to, that he is Todt? I will not make excuses reject! Go to
hell, tenure-duty!

On the blackest devil, you Eyd, I swore! Conscience and religion, even in
the deepest wells! I troze the Verdammniß; to the point where I stand, beyde
worlds are nothing in my eyes, let come what comes, I will have vengeance,
vengeance for my father, full flowing on revenge! King. Who should
you stay for? Laertes. Not the whole world, and what my assets betrift,
I will ensure that house so that I get far with few wants. king.
Laertes My dear, if ye from your father's fate revoke some message
like, it's Bey you decided that beydes her friend and enemy, without
distinction, would sacrifice your revenge?

Laertes. Nobody as his enemies. King. Do you want to know who they are?
Laertes. His friends, I want to prevent poor ofnen rush, and it is equal
to the Pelican with my own blood. King. Well, that is how a good child
and spoken like a gentleman. I believed in your father's death'm
innocent, and that I am over sensitive saddened by this, that should euerm
minds are as clear as the day euerm eye. (You can hear behind the
scene a Geschrey: let them in. .) Laertes. Now, what's giebt what a Lermer
is this? Siebende Scene. (Ophelia, in a fantastic way with straw and
flowers geschmükt occurs.) Laertes. Hize O, trokne my brain! Thränen,
seven salted, brennet the sensation and sight-force my eyes out! Beyme
sky, this eclipse will be your common sense to me so vollwichtig be paid
until the Wagschal at the bar encounters - O Rose of Mayen!

Holdes girls, dear sister, Ophelia pleasant! - Heaven!

ists possible that the mind of a young girl so Seyn mortal, is known as the
life of an old man?

The nature of love is in ruins, and sends the subject of the most
precious loved what she has in memory after.

"You can do what you like," he answered sullenly. "You know why I got you
here--because I love you: I told you that many months ago. While you were
down at Ramah I had no chance with you, because of that old hypocrite of a
father of yours, and this black girl," and he looked at Noie viciously.
"Here I thought that it would be different--that you would be glad of my
company, but you have turned yourself into a kind of goddess and hold me
off," and he paused.

"Go on," said Rachel.

"All right, I will. You may think yourself a goddess, as I do myself
sometimes. But I know that you are a woman too, and that soon you will get
tired of this business. You want to go home to your father and mother,
don't you? Well, you can't. You are a prisoner here, for these fools have
got it into their heads that you are their Spirit, and that it would be
unlucky to let you out of the country. So here you must stop, for years
perhaps, or till they are sick of you and kill you. Just understand,
Rachel, that nobody can help you to escape except me, and that I shan't do
so for nothing."

Rachel straightened herself upon her seat, gripping the edge of it with
her hands, for her temper was rising, while Noie bent forward and said
something in her ear.

"What is that black devil whispering to you?" he asked. "Telling you to
have me killed, I expect. Well, you daren't, for what would your holy
parents say? It would be murder, wouldn't it, and you would go to hell,
where I daresay you come from, for otherwise how could you be such a
witch? Look here," he went on, changing his tone, "don't let's squabble.
Make it up with me. I'll get you clear of this and marry you afterwards on
the square. If you won't, it will be the worse for you--and everybody
else, yes, everybody else."

"Mr. Ishmael," answered Rachel calmly, "you are making a very great
mistake, about my scruples as to taking life I mean, amongst other things.
Once when it was necessary you saw me kill a man. Well, if I am forced to
it, what I did then I will do again, only not with my own hand. Mr.
Ishmael, you said just now that you could get me out of Zululand. I take
you at your word, not for my own sake, for I am comfortable enough here,
but for that of my father and mother, who will be anxious," and her voice
weakened a little as she spoke of them.

"Do you? Well, I won't. I am comfortable here also, and shall be more so
as the husband of the Inkosazana. This is a very pretty kraal, and it is
quite big enough for two," he added with an amorous sneer.

Now for a minute at least Rachel sat still and rigid. When she spoke again
it was in a kind of gasp:

"Never," she said, "have you gone nearer to your death, you wanderer
without name or shame. Listen now. I give you one week to arrange my
escape home. If it is not done within that time, I will pay you back for
those words. Be silent, I will hear no more."

Then she called out:

"Rise, men, and bear the message of the Inkosazana to Dingaan, King of the
Zulus. Say to Dingaan that this wandering white dog whom he has sent into
my house has done me insult. Say that he has asked me, the
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, to be one of his wives."

At these words the counsellors and captains uttered a shout of rage, and
two of the latter seized Ishmael by the arm, lifting their spears to
plunge them into him. Rachel waved her wand and they let them fall again.

"Not yet," she said. "Take him to the King, and if my word comes to the
King, then he dies, and not till then. I would not have his vile blood on
my hands. Unless I speak, I, Queen of the Heavens, leave him to the
vengeance of the Heavens. My mantle is over him, lead him back to the King
and let me see his face no more."

"We hear and it shall be so," they answered with one voice, then
forgetting their ceremony hustled Ishmael from the kraal.

"Have I done well?" asked Rachel of Noie, when they were alone.

"No, Zoola," she answered, "you should have killed the snake while you
were hot against him, since when your blood grows cold you can never do
it, and he will live to bite you."

"I have no right to kill a man, Noie, just because he makes love to me,
and I hate him. Also, if I did so he could not help me to escape from
Zululand, which he will do now because he is afraid of me."

"Will he be afraid of you when you are both across the Tugela?" asked
Noie. "Inkosazana, give me power and ask no questions. Ibubesi killed my
father and mother and brethren, and has tried to kill me. Therefore my
heart would not be sore if, after the fashion of this land, I paid him
spears for battle-axes, for he deserves to die."

"Perhaps, Noie, but not by my word."

"Perhaps by your hand, then," said Noie, looking at her curiously. "Well,
soon or late he will die a red death--the reddest of deaths, I learned
that from the spirit of my father."

"The spirit of your father?" said Rachel, looking at her.

"Certainly, it speaks to me often and tells me many things, though I may
not repeat them to you till they are accomplished. Thus I was not afraid
in the hands of Dingaan, for it told me that you would save me."

"I wish it would speak to me and tell me when I can go home," said Rachel
with a sigh.

"It would if it could, Zoola, but it cannot because the curtain is too
thick. Had all you loved been slain before your eyes, then the veil would
be worn thin as mine is, and through it, you who are akin to them, would
hear the talk of the ghosts, and dimly see them wandering beneath their
trees."

"Beneath their trees----!"

"Yes, the trees of their life, of which all the boughs are deeds and all
the leaves are words, under the shadow of which they must abide for ever.
My people could tell you of those trees, and perhaps they will one day
when we visit them together. Nay, pay no heed, I was wandering in my talk.
It is the sight of that wild beast, Ibubesi. You will not let me kill him!
Well, doubtless it is fated so. I think one day you will be sorry--but too
late."


CHAPTER XII

RACHEL SEES A VISION


That evening Ishmael was brought before the King. He was in evil case, for
the captains, some of whom had grudges against him, when he tried to break
away from them outside the gate, had beaten him with their spear shafts
nearly all the way from the kraal to the Great Place, remarking that he
fought and remonstrated, that the Inkosazana had forbidden them to kill
him, but had said nothing as to giving him the flogging which he deserved.
His clothes were torn, his hat and pipe were lost--indeed hours before
Noie had thrown both of them into the fire--his eyes were black from the
blow of a heavy stick and he was bruised all over.

Such was his appearance when he was thrust before Dingaan, seething with
rage which he could scarcely suppress, even in that presence.

"Did you visit the Inkosazana to-day, White Man?" asked the King blandly,
while the indunas stared at him with grim amusement.

Then Ishmael broke out into a recital of his wrongs, demanding that the
captains who had beaten him, a white man, and a great person, should be
killed.

"Silence," said Dingaan at length. "The question, Night-prowler, is
whether you should not be killed, you dog who dared to insult the
Inkosazana by offering yourself to her as a husband. Had she commanded you
to be speared, she would have done well, and if you trouble me with your
shoutings, I will send you to sleep with the jackals to-night without
waiting for her word."

Now, seeing his danger, Ishmael was silent, and the King went on:

"Did you discover, as I bade you, why it is that the Inkosazana desires to
leave us?"

"Yes, King. It is because she would return to her own people, the old
prayer-doctor and his wife."

"They are not her people!" exclaimed Dingaan. "We know that she came to
them out of the storm, and that they are but the foster-parents chosen for
her by the Heavens. You were the first to tell us that story, and how she
caused the lightning to burn up my soldier yonder at Ramah. We are her
people and no others. Can the Inkosazana have a father and a mother?"

"I don't know," answered Ishmael, "but she is a woman and I never knew a
woman who was without them. At least I am sure that she looks upon them as
her father and mother, obeying them in all things, and that she will never
leave them while they live, unless they command her to do so."

Dingaan stared at him with his pig-like eyes, repeating after him--"while
they live, unless they command her to do so." Then he asked:

"If the Inkosazana desires to go, who is there that dares to stay her, and
if she puts out her magic, who is there that has the power? If a hand is
lifted against her, will she not lay a curse on us and bring destruction
upon us?"

"I don't know," answered Ishmael again, "but if she goes back among the
white folk and is angry, I think that she will bring the Boers upon you."

Now Dingaan's face grew very troubled, and bidding Ishmael stand back
awhile, he consulted with his council. Then he said:

"Listen to me, White Man. It would be a very evil thing if the Inkosazana
were to leave us, for with her would go the Spirit of our people, and
their good luck, so say the witch-doctors with one voice, and I believe
them. Further, it is our desire that she should remain with us a while.
This day the Council of the Diviners has spoken, saying that the words of
the Inkosazana which she uttered here are too hard for them, and that
other doctors of a people who live far away, must be sent for and brought
face to face with her. Therefore here at Umgugundhlovo she should abide
until they come."

"Indeed," answered Ishmael indifferently.

In the doctors who dwell far away, and the council of the Diviners he had
no belief. But understanding the natives as he did he guessed correctly
enough that the latter found themselves in a cleft stick. Worked on by
their superstitions, which he had first awakened for his own ends, they
had accepted Rachel as something more than human, as the incarnation of
the Spirit of their people. This Mopo, who was said to have killed Chaka
by command of that Spirit, had acknowledged her to be, and therefore they
did not dare to declare that her words spoken as an oracle were empty
words. But neither did they dare to interpret the saying that she meant
that no attack must be made upon the Boers and should be obeyed.

 To do this would be to fly in the face of the martial aspirations of the
nation and the secret wishes of the King, and perhaps if war ultimately
broke out, would cost them their lives. So it came about that they
announced that they could not understand her sayings, and had decided to
thrust off the responsibility on to the shoulders of some other diviners,
though who these men might be Ishmael neither knew nor took the trouble to
ask.

"But," went on the King, "who can force the dove to build in a tree that
does not please it, seeing that it has wings and can fly away? Yet if its
own tree, that in which it was reared from the nest, could be brought to
it, it might be pleased to abide there. Do you understand, White Man?"

"No," answered Ishmael, though in fact he understood well enough that the
King was playing upon Rachel's English name of Dove, and that he meant
that her home might be moved into Zululand. "No, the Inkosazana is not a
bird, and who can carry trees about?"

"Have the spear-shafts knocked the wit out of you, Ibubesi," asked
Dingaan, impatiently, "or are you drunk with beer? Learn then my meaning.
The Inkosazana will not stay because her home is yonder, therefore it must
be brought here and she will stay. At first I gave orders that if this old
white teacher and his wife tried to accompany her, they should be killed.
Now I eat up those words. They must come to Zululand."

"How will you persuade them to be such fools?" asked Ishmael.

"How did I persuade the Inkosazana herself to come? Was it not to seek one
whom she loved?"

"They will think that you have killed her, and wish to kill them also."

"No, because you will go in command of an impi and show them otherwise."

"I cannot go; your brutes of captains have hurt my head, and lamed me; I
cannot walk or ride."

"Then you can be carried in a litter, or," he added threateningly, "you
can abide here with the vultures. The Inkosazana is merciful, but why
should I not avenge her wrongs upon you, white dog, who have dared to
scratch at the kraal gate of the Inkosazana-y-Zoola?"

Now Ishmael saw that he had no choice; also a dark thought rose dimly in
his mind. He desired to win Rachel above everything on earth, he was mad
with love--or what he understood as love--of her, and this business might
be worked to his advantage. Moreover, to stay was death. So he fell to
bargaining for a reward for his services, a large reward in cattle and
ivory; half of it to be paid down at once, and it was promised to him.
Then he took his instructions. These were that he was to travel to the
mission station of Ramah in command of a small impi of three hundred men,
whose only orders would be that they were to obey him in all things! That
he was to tell the Umfundusi who was called Shouter, that if they wished
to see her any more, he and his wife must come to dwell with the
Inkosazana, in Zululand: that if they refused he was to bring them by
force. Where are his Quidditäten and qualities? His (Casus?) His Titul? His
scheming? Why he is suffering, that this rough him with journeyman kothigen
his shovel from his knock out Retirade may, without an action against him
to be? --* I must talk with this boy. Whose grave is it, lad? (Ed -*
Hamlet sezt in the original cool these considerations continue even
longer, he imagines that the skull of a rich Landsässen been sey;
one has found it impossible for the body, whose largest Nachdruk
in many word games, too übersezen, and it would be this whole scene
just sogern omitted, if you do not give the reader an idea of the
infamous Todtengräber-Scene would want to give.)

Todtengräber. I, Mr. - (he starts again to sing.) Hamlet. I think 'it's
yours, because you lie in them. Todtengräber.

And lying to her, O Lord, and so it's not yours - (Here follow a number
of miserable speeches, of which the sense of the word game lie,
which means lying and lies, lies.)

Hamlet. I wonder how the man is, for the grave machst du das? Todtengräber.
I do it for no man, Lord. Hamlet. For what a woman then? Todtengräber.
Also for no woman. Hamlet. Who should then be buried in them? Todtengräber.
A in their life is a woman, but God comfort your soul! Now she is Todt.
Hamlet. What a Rogue that is deterministic! In what language we need to
talk with him, that he is not with us make Zweydeutigkeiten dumb? Bey
God, Horatio, I did this three years ago observed that the world has been
spizfündig so that the farmer's clumsy Wiz just jump so high and
so strange Gambaden make it as the wizigste of our Hofschranzen -
How long have you already a Todtengräber?

Todtengräber. Of all the days of the year I came on the day about this,
because our verstorbner King Fortinbras, Hamlet on the champion. Hamlet.
How long is it? Todtengräber. Can you not say? That every fool can say:
It was on the nemlichen day when the young Hamlet to the world
came, the foolish, and to England geschikte been.

Hamlet. What the heck! and why was he moved to England geschikte? Todtengräber.
Why?

because he has been foolish, he is doing his five senses get back, or if
he did not get back, so there is not much to be mean.

Hamlet. Why? Todtengräber. You will not be aware of him, because there
people are just as foolish as he.

Hamlet. How was he foolish? Todtengräber. In a strange kind of even, they
say. Hamlet. Like so strange? Todtengräber. Sapperment, he was just a fool,
because he lost his mind . Hamlet. What kind of reason? Todtengräber.
Like, here, in Dännemark. I am here Todtengräber been, from my younger
years until IZT these thirty years.

Hamlet. How long can a man want in the soil is, until he rot?

 Todtengräber. If he is not lazy, eh he died (as we heut to day because some
corpses have barely hold for so long until they are underneath the
ground) so he can you eight to nine years dauren, a Loh-tanner takes
out his nine years.

Hamlet. Why Loh-Gerber for more than andre people? Todtengräber. Why, sir?
because of his skin tanned as his profession is that they endure
the water longer.

Because there is nothing to a Todt Garaus the body rather than water
does.

Here is a Schedel, which is now already three and twenty years in the
ground. Hamlet. Whose was it? Todtengräber. Vertrakter There was a lad,
to which he belonged, who do you think it was? Hamlet. I do not know.
Todtengräber. the pestilence that rogue! He poured me once with a bottle
of Rhine wine on his head. This nemliche Schedel, Lord, was Yoriks
Schedel, the royal court jester.

Hamlet. This? Todtengräber. This nemliche. Hamlet. Alas poor Yorik. I knew
him, Horatio, it was the fun guy in the world, from an incomparable
imagination and power: He has a lot of me a hundred times on his
worn Rüken: And now, what a good horror Anblik! My stomach turns them
around. Here hiengen these lips, I who knows how often kissed.

Where are your jokes? Your jumps? Your song? Where are the schnakischen
incursions by the panel with roaring laughter tended to shake?

If you no one left to think about your own smile to scoff? Now I go into a
Mylady's sleeping room, and tell her, and if they get a thumbs-dik on
mahle, you need 'it as last (this) with her Comment - I pray thee, Horatio,
answer me just one question - Horatio. What is it, Gracious Lord? Hamlet.
Do you think Alexander was also in that which floor? Horatio. Precisely
so. Hamlet. And smelt so? Fy! (He smells of the Schedel.) Horatio. Yes,
Gracious Lord. Hamlet. To what a unedeln determination of reducing, we can
finally, Horatio! Can not we in our imagination noble dust of Alexander
follow him until we find a place where he is a bung-hole stops? Horatio.
Such a view would be even spizfündig. Hamlet. No, not at all, not least in
the view is quite natural: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
has become dust, the dust is earth, the earth we Laim, and this could
Laim, worein he was transformed, not a ton of beer stopped?

And so can the world-conqueror Caesar a column in a wall against the wind
have stopped. But gently! Softly a while - here comes the King -
Scene Zweyte.

(The King, Queen, Laertes, and a coffin with a funeral-wake of court, priests,
etc.) Hamlet. The Queen - a retinue of court -- What is that which they
accompany? and why with so little ceremony? This shows that the corpse, so
she is accompanied by someone who gewaltthätige hand himself has
- there must be a person of ethics Seyn been - we want to keep a
little distance and watch.

Laertes. The rest of Ceremonies ? Hamlet.

That is Laertes, a very fine young man: gieb eight - Laertes. The rest of
Ceremonies? priest. Obsequien your are so far been extended, as we are
empowered, and their death was doubtful, and had command of the
Royal Order übermocht not, it should be in a ungeweihten floor to
sound the last trumpet had their camp, instead mildherziger
Intercessions should shards and pebbles have been thrown on them
Seyn now with virgin they will honor, among singing and bells
Gloken-buried.

Laertes. And this is what should be done? priest.

It's all what can be done, it would be desecration Seyn their one
(requiem) to sing and honor the last the only souls in peace are separated,
due to reimburse.

Laertes. Set in the earth, and from her beautiful and unbeflekten meats
like Violas hervorkeimen!

I tell you, hard-hearted priest, my sister is an angel of the heavenly
throne Seyn if you howling in the abyss lying. Hamlet. How? the beautiful
Ophelia? queen. The last farewell pleasant Beautiful! I hoped that you
should be my Hamlet's wife: I thought once thy bride-bed to Deken, holdes
girl, not your grave with flowers on top. Laertes. Dreyfaches O woe
falls zehnfältig dreymal the cursed head, whose wicked That you your
beautiful Reason robbed. Haltet another, until I have it once in my
arms was closed. (He jumps into the grave.) Now werft euern dust on the
living and Todt, until their out of this paving a Gebürge have
made to the old Pelion and the Himmelberührenden Olimpus übergipfle.

Hamlet, (which is to recognize giebt.) Who is the one whose pain is so
emphatically ausdrukt?

Meanwhile, grief-tones evoke the wandering stars, and they oblige by
surprise shackled, to stand quiet and listen? The I, Hamlet, the Dähne. (He
jumps into the grave.) Laertes. The devil take thy soul! (He wrestles
with him.) Hamlet. You pray not nice. I pray thee, thy fingers from
my throat away! - If I do not like splenetisch and irascible am, so I
have something in me dangerous, beware what you like, if you're
wise.

Your hand back. King's. Tear them from each other - the queen. Hamlet,
Hamlet - Horatio. My gracious prince, halltet you back - (The bystanders,
they Loss of one another.) Hamlet. What I want on this matter with
fight him until my Auglider techniques can not be longer. Queen. "O my
son! what kind of matter? Hamlet. I loved Ophélie; forty thousand brothers
could love with all their combined total of the mine not afford. willt
What you have for them thun? King. O, he is livid, Laertes - Queen.

For God's sake, have patience with him. Hamlet. Come on, show me what
you willt thun. Willt you cry? Willt you fight? Willt you fasting? Zerfezen
yourself?

Willt you drink wine vinegar, a crocodile swallow? I want it thun - did
you just hieher to cry? Before my eyes in her grave to jump? Get buried
alive with her, I want it also, and if you Schwazer of mountains, so
leave them on millions Jaucharten us throw up on us is the earth, the
Ossa to a mole-Hauffen makes! Truly! If you are talking big willt, so
can I use the foot so as to fully du queen.

 He speaks in great courage, and so is a while the paroxysm of Würker
on him, but all at once, so be patient as the female Daube, eh its
goldbehaarten Boys are ausgekrochen, his brooding silence sizen.

Hamlet. Stop it, Mr. - what is the cause, that ye shall meet me?

I loved you all the time: But it has nothing to say. Let Hercules himself
to what he thun kan, the Kaze has mauen and the dog have its course -
(He goes anyway.) King.

I ask you, good Horatio, habet eight to him. (Geht ab Horatio.) (To Laertes
.) Stärket your patience with our last agreement. We will no longer grace
the hand of the execution to be - Dear Gertrude, Give your son some
guardians to - This grave is a worthy monument get - And now we want
our gift one hours rest. (They go from .) Third Scene. (Turns into a hall
in the palace.) (Hamlet and Horatio come on.) (Hamlet erzehlt his
confidant, what he way the contents of the Royal Commission, womitRosenkranz
and Güldenstern were loaded, entdekt and vereitelthabe. Since this whole
scene just to serve notice to the audience, it would have been sufficiently
zwey words to say to them anyway wassie could easily guess.
einMißtrauen Hamlet had cause in the intentions of the King Bey his
dispatch to England Sezen.

He slipped so that the beydenGesandten while asleep in their Cajute,
Packages fingerte her away, so zogsich into his own room back, vomited
königlicheSigel the gemeßnen and found a command to the English king, by
means of which the Hamlet as soon as he arrived Seyn would be the
Kopfabgeschlagen - It stekte this paper itself, undsezte down a andre
Commission to write worinn derKönig up a serious beschwohren was so fond
of him dieFreundschaft Dännemarks (of which England was then subject)
sey, the bearer of this letter without delay on the way to space. Too
good Glüke He had his father Signet hildren bag, and still grösserm Glük
it was the big dähnischenSigel completely equal, so he folded the
letter and just the first signed and sigelte it and put it sogeschikt
to replace the other, that rosary and Güldensterndie confusion were
not aware, and thus their arrival inEngland Bey as Bellerophon their
own Todesurtheil überlieferten.Horatio finds hiebey concern that
this unsuccessful outcome desKöniglichen Bubenstüks not long be
hidden.

Hamletberuhigst be informed that although the intermediate-time sey,
undnicht more as a Augenblik will require the life of a people to make
an end. bedaurt However, he stated that he had sichdurch the Affect ravish
leave the Laertes to insult, and sets out that he wanted to seek his
friendship back.)

(ed -* You can close this, that Hamlet's intentions against the king had,
but it was not given, no draft, he wobey his own safety would have an
assured source glüklichen able to hold - Hamlet, and wants revenge for
his father - -This will beherrschtihn from the Actus Stüks to the end
without jemalsselbst that he knows or thinks it just as he works to dabey
want to go - alone we have long seen that the establishment of the
fable, dieVerwiklung Developers and the same straight the Stüke are worinn
our poet hardly anyone in it. Indessengefällt but the top floor of their
Stük no more Shakespeare than this. One should say that it simpathisiere
with ihnen.Der humor of Hamlet (Because that was him in the whole course
of Stüksbeherrscht, is much less passion than humor,) this cold, raisonnirende
or right to speak phantasirende melancholy, which only now and
then plözliche in and just as quickly wiedersinkende wind shocks
of passion erupts, dieseGleichgültigkeit against his own life, which
the great projects of vengeance, of which his soul is geschwellt,
demungefehren random überlaßt, and it is not worth the trouble keeps
einenPlan or Präcautionen them to take not even in any case his
enemy verwikelt to be - all these are traits, her own English worinn
picture too see, not much more interested in them, than by
idealischenCharakters and the strong passions of the hero soutenierten
end Corneille.

Shake Spears heroes, especially as his favorite heroes, are all (comedians),
and this is probably a main reason why whatever language, manners and
taste are seitseiner times have changed so much, but this author for
his country people always remains new, and something anzügelichers for
siehat far as all the newer, which according to French Modellengearbeitet
have.) Fourth Scene. (Oßrik the king's court jester, Hamlet comes to the
report, the king had a wager with Laertes given that his Hamlet in fencing
superior sey. This Scene is the kind of unübersezlichen Wiz, word games and
Fopperey filled, worinn our author is his former rival as far as to the
true genius and beauty behind her left.

After a long ball game with Wiz, in what some satirical lines against the
forced and) precieuse (Hof-language of that time with einlauffen, Hamlet
produces the fools with the response to the king that he is on the spot
ready sey, the competitive struggle with Laertes to undertake. Soon after
this occurs a gentleman from the court, and announced that the king, the
queen, and the whole Court in the term seyen to come and fight the
competition beyzuwohnen. sezt He added: The Queen asked the Prince, before
the beginning of the battle is for a while with Laertes on a friendly
walk to entertain. Hamlet promises to tuna, and the courtier's up.)
Horatio. verliehret I'll get you the bet Gracious Lord.

Hamlet. I think it not, I am, since he went to France, been in constant
exercise, I consider myself the victory certain. But you kanst you not
imagine how bad my heart everywhere around here is - the single that has
nothing to mean. Horatio. I do not think so, my dearest prince. Hamlet.
There is nothing, mere Kinderey, and yet it might be enough for a woman
to make restless. Horatio. If your heart out a secret warning giebt, then
follows him. I want them go and tell her Seyde IZO not planned. Hamlet.
No, no, I think nothing on hunches; Providence extends until about the
fall of a sparrow. Is it IZT, it is not another, it is not another, it
is IZT, and it is not IZT, it will be another Seyn - Everything depends
on that you are willing to sey. Fifth Scene. ( The King, Queen, Laertes,
and a number of gentlemen from the court, and some servants Oßrik Rappi
and fencing with gloves.

A table and bottle of wine with it.) King. Come, Hamlet, come, and nemmt
this hand from me. ( He giebt him of Laertes hand.) Hamlet. I ask for your
forgiveness, my Lord, I have given you bleidiget but forgiving me and
assured me of a gentleman. All present know, and you must have heard it,
with what a unglüklichen Gemüths disease, I am punished. What I've done
that in your nature, honor and revenge against me infuriatingly,
has, I stated 'it here publicly, my Raserey done; It was not insulted you
in Hamlet - Hamlet was not himself, because he is that he abhors the
Raserey That's it is the insulting, he on the side of the insulted his
Raserey poor Hamlets is the enemy. Let feyerliche my statement that I had
no Vorsaz, evil to thun me so far in euern edelmüthigen thoughts
frey speak as if I use my arrow over a house shot, and my brother
would have been wounded.

Laertes. I am satisfied, in so far I am the son and brother, the name, which
in this case I most to urge vengeance, but as a gentleman, I can and
will be no reconciliation until I was older and by some good judges
of what the honor HEREBY INVITES, insurance received that I do without
my name on thun could dishonor. Meanwhile, I suppose, to the extent of
your offered friendship as friendship, and do not want it abused.
Hamlet. I'm satisfied, and on this walk I am prepared to this friendly
competition confident struggle to exist. Give us the Rappi. Laertes. Come,
one for me. Hamlet. I will be your Seyn foil, Laertes, but your art
is, in my ignorance, the more fiery hervorstralen like a star from the
darkness of night, in the That. Laertes. Your scherzet , sir. Hamlet. No,
this hand-Bey. king. Give them Rappi, Oßrik. Hamlet, you know what, I bet
it? Hamlet.

I know it, Gracious Lord, Your Majesty is in danger gesezt to verliehren.
King. I'll get nothing and I've seen you beyde fence because he does
more, however, has been , we have employed the Gewette. Laertes. Rappi
This is too hard, let me see differently. Hamlet. That is what I
am all right; Rappi they all have the right length. king.

Fills me this Dekel glasses of wine! When Hamlet first zweyten or stroke
beybringt, or until the third erwiedert immediately, so let's all Canon
loßfeuren, the king is to improve Hamlets Athem drink, and in the cup
should have been thrown into a pearl, richer than the most precious ever a
Danish king Crone's taken. Give me the cup: And let the kettle-drums to
the announcement trumpets, the trumpets Canonieren the outdoors, the Canon
of the sky, the heavens of the earth, that the king Hamlets on health
drink - komt, begins to judge men and their , have a good eight.

Hamlet. Come then, sir. Laertes. Well, Mr. Gracious - (They fight.) Hamlet.
One - Laertes. No - Hamlet. Thut the phrase - Oßrik. A Strike, and the
quite sensible. Laertes. Good - Again - King. Hold On - to drink! Hamlet,
this pearl is your - on your health! - Give him the cup - (trumpets and
timpani and Salve of Geschüz.) Hamlet. I will only fight out this course
- however it Sezt out - (they fight ) - Very well - again a bump -
what say you? Laertes. Gestreift, striated, I confess' it. king. Our son
will win. Queen.

He is too fat and too short Athem. Here Hamlet, take my handkerchief and
wipe your forehead - The Queen drinks dirs to Hamlet, to your good Glük!
- (You drink from the cup, which was intended for Hamlet.) Hamlet. Valid
mother - King. Gertrude drinks not - Queen. I will, sir, I ask you for
forgiveness. King (front). It is the poisoned cup, now it's too late -
Hamlet. I can not drink yet, madam, a little patience - the queen. Come,
let me wipe your face. Laertes. Diesesmal I will certainly be a fit him.
king. I it is not credible. Laertes (Bey page.) And yet it is almost against
my conscience. Hamlet.

Come, the third gear, Laertes; tändelt her only, I ask you, you needed
your utmost strength, and I worry you want me just to make sure. Laertes.
Tell her that? Well then. (They fight.) Oßrik. It has none nothing -
Laertes.

As it did then - (Laertes wounds Hamlet; afterward confused them in the
battle of the Hize Rappi, Hamlet and Laertes the wounded.) King. Trennet
she Gerath in Hize. Hamlet. No, again - Oßrik. Look at the Queen here, ho!
Horatio. beyde you bleed - How are you, Gracious Lord? Oßrik.
Gasping with relief, Rachel went out of the oven-like hut into the
cool, sweet air, and sat down upon a tanned bull's hide which she had
ordered her servants to spread for her by the pool of water upon the bank
beneath the trees. It was very pleasant here, and the raindrops shaken
from the wet leaves fell upon her fevered face and hands and refreshed
her.

She tried to forget her troubles for a little while, and began to think of
Richard Darrien, her boy-lover of a long-past hour, wondering what he
looked like now that he was grown to be a man.

"If only you would come to help me! Oh! Richard, if only you would come to
help me," the poor, worn-out girl murmured to herself, and so murmuring
fell asleep.

Suddenly it seemed to her that she was wide awake, and staring into a part
of the pool beneath her where the bottom was of granite and the water
clear. In this water she saw a picture. She saw a great laager of waggons,
and outside of one of them a group of bearded, jovial-looking men smoking
and talking. Presently another man of sturdy build and resolute carriage,
who was followed by a weary Kaffir, walked up to them. His back was
towards her so that she could not see his face, but now she was able to
hear all that was said, although the voices seemed thin and far away.

"What is it, Nephew?" asked the oldest of the bearded men, speaking in
Dutch. "Why are you in such a hurry?"

"This, Uncle," he answered, in the same language, and in a pleasant voice
that sounded familiar to Rachel's ears. "That spy, Quabi, whom we sent out
a long time ago and who was reported dead, reached Dingaan's kraal, and
has come back with a strange story."

"Almighty!" grunted the old man, "all these spies have strange stories,
but let him tell it. Speak on, swartzel." [Footnote: Black-fellow.]

 Then the tired spy began to talk, telling a long tale. He described how
he had got into Zululand, and reached Umgugundhlovo and lodged there with
a relative of his, and done his best to collect information as to the
attitude of the King and indunas towards the Boers. While he was there the
news came that the white Spirit, who was called Inkosazana-y-Zoola, was
approaching the kraal from Natal, where she dwelt with her parents, who
were teachers.

"Almighty!" interrupted the old man again, "What rubbish is this? How can
a Spirit, white or black, have parents who are teachers?"

The weary-looking spy answered that he did not know, it was not for him to
answer riddles, all he knew was that there was great excitement about the
coming of this Queen of the Heavens, and he, being desirous of obtaining
first-hand information, slipped out of the town with his relative, and
walked more than a day's journey on the path that ran to the Tugela, till
they came to a place where they hid themselves to see her pass. This place
he described with minuteness, so minutely, indeed, that in her dream,
Rachel recognised it well. It was the spot where the witch-doctoress had
died. He went on with his story; he told of her appearance riding on the
white horse and surrounded by an impi. He described her beauty, her white
cloak, her hair hanging down her back, the rod of horn she carried in her
hand, the colour of her eyes, the shape of her features, everything about
her, as only a native can. Then he told of the incident of the cattle
rushing across her path, of the death of the bull that charged her, of the
appearance of the furious witch-doctoress who seized the rein of the
horse, of the pointing of the wand, and the instant execution of the
woman.

He told of how he had followed the impi to the Great Place, of the story
of Noie as he had heard it, and the reports that had reached him
concerning the interview between the King and this white Inkosazana, who,
it was said, advised him not to fight the Boers.

"And where is she now?" asked the old Dutchman.

"There, at Umgugundhlovo," he answered, "ruling the land as its head
Isanuzi, though it is said that she desires to escape, only the Zulus will
not let her go."

"I think that we should find out more about this woman, especially as she
seems to be a friend to our people," said the old Boer. "Now, who dares to
go and learn the truth?"

"I will go," said the young man who had brought in the spy, and as he
spoke he turned, and lo! _his face was the face of Richard Darrien_,
bearded and grown to manhood, but without doubt Richard Darrien and none
other.

 "Why do you offer to undertake so dangerous a mission?" asked the Boer,
looking at the young man kindly. "Is it because you wish to see this
beautiful white witch of whom yonder Quabi tells us such lies, Nephew?"

The shadow of Richard nodded, and his face reddened, for the Boers around
him were laughing at him.

"That is right, Uncle," he answered boldly. "You think me a fool, but I am
not. Many years ago I knew a little maid who was the daughter of a
teacher, and who, if she lives, must have grown into such a woman as Quabi
describes. Well, I joined you Boers last year in order to look for that
maid, and I am going to begin to look for her across the river yonder."

As the words reached whatever sense of Rachel's it was that heard them, of
a sudden, in an instant, laager, Boers, and Richard vanished. In her sleep
she tried to recreate them, at first without avail, then the curtain of
darkness appeared to lift, and in the still water of the pool she saw
another picture, that of Richard Darrien mounted on a black horse with one
white foot, riding along a native path through a bush-clad country, while
by his side trotted the spy whose name was Quabi.

They were talking together, and she heard, or, at any rate, knew their
words.

"How far is it now to Umgugundhlovo?" asked Richard.

"Three days' journey, Inkosi, if we are not stopped by flooded rivers,"
answered Quabi.

For one second only Rachel saw and heard these things, then they, too,
passed away, and she awoke to see in front of her the pool empty save for
its lilies, and above to hear the whispering of the evening wind among the
trees.


CHAPTER XIII

RICHARD COMES


As the sun set Rachel rose and walked to her hut. She was utterly dazed,
she could not understand. Was this but a fiction of an overwrought and
disordered mind, or had she seen a vision of things passing, or that had
passed, far away? If it were a dream, then this was but another drop in
her cup of bitterness. If a true vision--oh! then what did it mean to her?
It meant that Richard Darrien lived, Richard, of whom her heart had been
full for years. It meant that his heart was full of her also, for had she
not seemed to hear him say that he had travelled from the Cape with the
Boers to look for her, and was he not journeying alone through a hostile
land to pursue his search? Who would do such a thing for the sake of a
girl unless--unless? It meant that he would protect her, would rescue her
from her terrible plight, would take her from among these savages to her
home again--oh! and perhaps much more that she did not dare to picture to
herself.

Yet how could such things be? They were contrary to experience, at any
rate, to the experience of white folk, though natives would believe in
them easily enough. Yet in Nature things might be possible which were
generally held to be impossible. Her mother had certain gifts--had she,
perhaps, inherited them? Had her helplessness appealed to the pity of some
higher power? Had her ceaseless prayers been heard? Yet, why should the
universal laws be stretched for her? Why should she be allowed to lift a
corner of the black veil of ignorance that hems us in, and see a glimpse
of what lies beyond? If Richard were really coming, in a day or two she
would have learned of his arrival naturally; there was no need that these
mysterious influences should be set to work to inform her of his approach.

How selfish she was. The warning might concern him, not her. It was
probable enough that the Zulus would kill a solitary white man, especially
if they discovered that he proposed to visit their Inkosazana. Well, she
had the power to protect him. If she "threw her mantle" over him, no man
in all the land would dare to do him violence. Surely it was for this
reason that she had been allowed to learn these things, if she had learned
them, not for her own sake, but his. _If_ she had learned them! Well, she
would take the risk, would run the chance of failure and of mockery, yes,
and of the loss of her power among these people. It should be done at
once.

Rachel clapped her hands, and a maiden appeared whom she bade summon the
captain of the guard without the gate. Presently he came, surrounded by a
band of her women, since no man might visit the Inkosazana alone. Bidding
him to cease from his salutations, she commanded him to go swiftly to the
Great Place and pray of Dingaan that he would send her an escort and a
litter, as she must see him that night on a matter which would not brook
delay.

In an hour, just after she had finished her food, which she ate with more
appetite than she had known for days, it was reported that they were
there. Throwing on her white cloak, and taking her horn wand, she entered
the litter and, guarded by a hundred men, was borne swiftly to the House
of Dingaan. At its gate she descended, and once more entered that court by
the moonlight.

As before, there sat the King and his indunas without the Great Hut, and
while she walked towards them every man rose crying "Hail! Inkosazana."
Yes, even Dingaan, mountain of flesh though he was, struggled from his
stool and saluted her. Rachel acknowledged the salutation by raising her
wand, motioned to them to be seated, and waited.

"Art thou come, White One," asked Dingaan, "to make clear those dark words
thou spokest to us a moon ago?"

"Nay, King," she answered, "what I said then, I said once and for all.
Read thou the saying as thou wilt, or let the Ghost-people interpret it to
thee. Hear me, King and Councillors. Ye have kept me here when I would be
gone, my business being ended, that I might be a judge among this people.
Ye have told me that the rivers were in flood, that the beast I rode was
sick, that evil would befall the land if I deserted you. Now I know, and
ye know, that if it pleased me I could have departed when and whither I
would, but it was not fitting that the Inkosazana should creep out of
Zululand like a thief in the night, so I abode on in my house yonder. Yet
my heart grew wrath with you, and I, to whom the white people listen also,
was half minded to bring hither the thousands of the Amaboona who are
encamped beyond the Buffalo River, that they might escort me to my home."

Now at these bold words the King looked uneasy, and one of the councillors
whispered to another,

"How knows she that the white men are camped beyond the Buffalo?"

"Yet," went on Rachel, "I did not do so, for then there must have been
much fighting and bloodshed, and blood I hate. But I have done this. With
these Amaboona travels an English chief, a young man, one Darrien, whom I
knew from long years ago, and who does me reverence. Him, then, I have
commanded to journey hither, and to lead me to my own place across the
Tugela. To-night I am told he sleeps a short three days' journey from this
town, and I am come here to bid you send out swift messengers to guide him
hither."

She ceased, and they stared at her awhile. Then the King asked,

"What messenger is it, Inkosazana, that thou hast sent to this white
chief, Dario? We have seen none pass from thy house."

"Dost thou think, then, King, that thou canst see my messengers? My
thoughts flew from me to him, and called in his ear in the night, and I
saw his coming in the still pool that lies near my huts."

"_Ow!_" exclaimed one of the Council, "she sent her thoughts to him like
birds, and she saw his coming in the water of the pool. Great is the magic
of the Inkosazana."

"The chief, Darrien," went on Rachel, without heeding the interruption,
although she noted that it was Mopo of the withered hand who had spoken
from beneath the blanket wrapped about his head, "may be known thus. He is
fair of face, with eyes like my eyes, and beard and hair of the colour of
gold. If I saw right, he rides upon a black horse with one white foot and
his only companion is a Kaffir named Quabi who, I think," and she passed
her hand across her forehead, "yes, who was surely visiting a relation of
his, at this, the Great Place, when I crossed the Tugela."

Now the King asked if any knew of this Quabi, and an induna answered in an
awed voice, that it was true that a man so called had been in the town at
the time given by the Inkosazana, staying with a soldier whose name he
mentioned, but who was now away on service. He had, however, departed
before the Inkosazana arrived, or so he believed, whither he knew not.

"I thought it was so," went on Rachel. "As I saw him in the pool he is a
thin man whose shoulders stoop, and whose beard is white, although his
hair is black. He wears no ring upon his head."

"That is the man," said the induna, "being a stranger I noted him well, as
it was my business to do."

"Summon the messengers swiftly, King," went on Rachel, "and let them
depart at once, for know that this white chief and his servant are under
the protection of the Heavens, and if harm comes to them, then I lay my
curse upon the land, and it shall break up in blood and ruin. Bid them say
to Darrien, that the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, she who stood with him once on
the rock in the river while the lightnings fell and the lions roared about
them, sends him greetings and awaits him."

Now Dingaan turned to an induna and said,

"Go, do the bidding of the Inkosazana. Bid swift runners search out this
white chief, and lead him to her house, and remember that if aught of ill
befalls him, those men die, and thou diest also."

The induna leapt up and departed, and Rachel also made ready to go. A
moment later the captain of the gate entered, fell upon his knees before
Dingaan, and said,

"O King, tidings."

"What are they, man?" he asked.

"King, the watchmen report that it has been called from hilltop to hilltop
that a white man who rides a black horse, has crossed the Buffalo, and
travels towards the Great Place. What is thy pleasure? Shall he be killed
or driven back?"

"When did that news come?" asked the King in the silence which followed
this announcement.

"Not a minute gone," he answered. "The inner watchman ran with it, and is
without the gates. There has been no other tidings from the West for
days."

"Thy watchmen call but slowly, King, the water in the pool speaks
swifter," said Rachel, then still in the midst of a heavy silence, for
this thing was fearful to them, she turned and departed.

"So it is true, so it is true!" Rachel kept repeating to herself, the
words suiting themselves to the time of the footfall of her bearers. She
was spent with all the labour and emotions of that long day, culminating
in the last scene, when she must play her dangerous, superhuman part
before these keen-witted savages. She could think no more; scarcely could
she undress and throw herself upon her bed in the hut. Yet that night she
slept soundly, better than she had done since Noie went away. No dreams
came to trouble her and in the morning she woke refreshed.

But now doubts did come. Might she not be mistaken after all? She knew the
marvellous powers of the natives in the matter of the transmission of
news, powers so strange that many, even among white people, attributed
them to witchcraft. She had no doubt, therefore, as to the fact of some
Englishman or Boer having entered Zululand. Doubtless the news of his
arrival had been conveyed over scores of miles of country by the calling
of it as the captain said, from hill to hill, or in some other fashion.
But might not this arrival and the circumstance of her dream or vision be
a mere coincidence? What was there to show that the stranger who was
riding a black horse was really Richard Darrien? Perhaps it was all a
mistake, and he was only one of those white wanderers of the stamp of the
outcast Ishmael who, even at that date, made their way into savage
countries for the purposes of gain or to enjoy a life of licence. And yet,
and yet Quabi, of whom she also dreamed, had visited the Great Place--as
she dreamed.

The next two days were terrible to Rachel. She endured them as she had
endured all those that went before, trying the cases that were brought to
her, keeping up her appearance of distant dignity and utter indifference.
She asked no questions, since to do so would be to show doubt and
weakness, although she was aware that the tale of her vision had spread
through the land, and that the issue of the matter was of intense interest
to thousands. From some talk which she overheard while she pretended to be
listening to evidence, she learned even that two men going to execution
had discussed it, saying that they regretted they would not live to know
the truth. On the second day she did hear one piece of news, for although
she sat by her pool and again tried to sleep by its waters, these remained
blind and dumb.

The induna, Tamboosa, on one of his ceremonial visits, after speaking of
the health of her mare, which, it seemed was improving, mentioned
incidentally that the messengers running night and day had met the white
man and "called back" that he was safe and well. He added that had it not
been for her vision this said white man would certainly have been killed
as a spy.

"Yes, I knew that," answered Rachel, indifferently, although her heart
thumped within her bosom. "I forget if I said that the Inkosi was to be
brought straight here when he arrives. If not, let it be known that such
is my command. The King can receive him afterwards if it pleases him to do
so, as probably we shall not depart until the next day."

Then she yawned, and as though by an afterthought asked if any news had
been "called back" from Noie.

Tamboosa answered, No; no system of intelligence had been organised in the
direction in which she had gone, for that country was empty of enemies,
and indeed of population. However, this would not distress the Inkosazana,
who had only to consult her Spirit to see all that happened to her
servant.

Rachel replied that of course this was so, but as a matter of fact she had
not troubled about the matter, then waved her hand to show that the
interview was at an end.

It was the morning of the third day, and while Rachel was delivering
judgment in a case, a messenger entered and whispered something to the
induna on duty, who rose and saluted her.

"What is it?" she asked.

"Only this, Inkosazana; the white Inkoos from the Buffalo River has
arrived, and is without."

"Good," said Rachel, "let him wait there." Then she went on with her
judgment. Yes, she went on, although her eyes were blind, and the blood
beating in her ears sounded like the roll of drums. She finished it, and
after a decent interval, bowed her head in acknowledgement of the
customary salutes, and made the sign which intimated that the Court was to
be cleared.

Slowly, slowly, all the crowd melted away, leaving her alone with her
women.

"Go," she said to one of them, "and bid the captain admit this white
chief. Say that he is to come unarmed and alone. Then depart, all of you.
If I should need you I will call."

The girl went on her errand while her companions filed away through the
back gate of the inner fence. Rachel glanced round to make sure of her
solitude. It was complete, no one was left. There she sat in state upon
her carved stool, her wand in her hand, her white cloak upon her
shoulders, and the sunlight that passed over the round of the hut behind
her glinting on her hair till it shone like a crown of gold, but leaving
her face in shadow; sat quite still like some lovely tinted statue.

The gate of the inner fence opened and closed again after a man who
entered. He walked forward a few paces, then stood still, for the flood of
light that revealed him so clearly at first prevented him from seeing her
seated in the shadow. Oh! there could be no further doubt--before her was
Richard Darrien, the lad grown to manhood, from, whom she had parted so
many years ago. Now, as then, he was not tall, though very strongly built,
and for the rest, save for his short beard, the change in him seemed
little. The same clear, thoughtful, grey eyes, the same pleasant, open
face, the same determined mouth. She was not disappointed in him, she knew
this at once. She liked him as well as she had done at the first.

Now he caught sight of her and stayed there, staring. She tried to speak,
to welcome him, but could not, no words would come. He also seemed to be
smitten with dumbness, and thus the two of them remained a while. At last
he took off his hat almost mechanically, as though from instinct, and said
vaguely,

"You are the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, are you not?"

"I am so called," she answered softly, and with effort.

The moment that he heard her voice, with a movement so swift that it was
almost a spring, he advanced to her, saying,

"Now I am sure; you are Rachel Dove, the little girl who--Oh, Rachel, how
lovely you have grown!"

"I am glad you think so, Richard," she answered again in the same low,
deep voice, a voice laden with the love within her, and reddening to her
eyes. Then she let fall her wand, and rising, stretched out both her hands
to him.

They were face to face, now, but he did not take those hands; he passed
his arms about her, drew her to him unresisting, and kissed her on the
lips. She slipped from his embrace down on to her stool, white now as she
had been red. Then while he stood over her, trembling and confused, Rachel
looked up, her beautiful eyes filled with tears, and whispered,

"Why should I be ashamed? It is Fate."

"Yes," he answered, "Fate."

 For so both, of them knew it to be. Though they had seen each other but
once before, their love was so great, the bond between their natures so
perfect and complete, that this outward expression of it would not be
denied. Here was a mighty truth which burst through all wrappings of
convention and proclaimed itself in its pure strength and beauty. That
kiss of theirs was the declaration of an existent unity which
circumstances did not create, nor their will control, and thus they
confessed it to each other.

"How long?" she asked, looking up at him.

"Eight years to-day," he answered, "since I rode away after those
waggons."

"Eight years," she repeated, "and no word from you all that time. You have
behaved badly to me, Richard."

"No, no, I could not find out. I wrote three times, but always the letters
were returned, except one that went to the wrong people, who were angry
about it. Then two years ago, I heard that your father and mother had been
in Natal, but had gone to England, and that you were dead. Yes, a man told
me that you were dead," he added with a gulp. "I suppose he was speaking
of somebody else, as he could not remember whether the name was Dove or
Cove, or perhaps he was just lying. At any rate, I did not believe, him. I
always felt that you were alive."

"Why did you not come to see, Richard?"

"Why? Because it was impossible. For years my father was an invalid,
paralysed; and I was his only child, and could not leave him."

She looked a question at him.

"Yes," he answered with a nod, "dead, ten months ago, and for a few weeks
I had to remain to arrange about the property, of which he left a good
deal, for we did well of late years. Just then I heard a rumour of an
English missionary and his wife and daughter who were said to be living
somewhere beyond the boundaries of Natal, in a savage place on the
Transvaal side of the Drakensberg, and as some Boers I knew were trekking
into that country I came with them on the chance--a pretty poor one, as
the story was vague enough."

"You came--you came to seek the girl, Rachel Dove?"

"Of course. Otherwise why should I have left my farms down in the Cape to
risk my neck among these savages?"

"And then," went on Rachel, "you or somebody else sent in the spy, Quabi,
who returned to the Boer camp with his story about the Inkosazana-y-Zoola.
You remember you brought him in limping to that old fellow with a grey
beard and a large pipe, and the others who laughed at the tale. I mean
when you said that this Inkosazana seemed very like an English maid, 'the
daughter of a teacher,' whom you were looking for, and that you would go
to find out the truth of the business."

"Yes, that's all right; but Rachel," he added with a start, "how do you
know anything about it--Oom Piet and the rest, and the words I used? Your
spies must be very good and quick, for you can't have seen Quabi."

"My spies are good and quick. Did you get my message sent by the King's
men? It was that she who stood with you on the rock in the river, greeted
you and awaited you?"

"Yes, I could not understand. I do not understand now. Just before that
they were going to kill me as a Boer spy. Who told you everything?"

"My heart," she answered smiling. "I dreamed it all. I suppose that I was
allowed to save your life that I might bring you here to save me. Listen
now, Richard, while I tell you the strangest story that you ever heard;
and if you don't believe it, go and ask the King and his indunas."

Then she told him of her vision by the pool and all that happened after
it. When she had finished Richard could only shake his head and say:

"Still I don't understand; but no wonder these Zulus have made a goddess
of you. Well, Rachel, what is to happen now? If you are to stop here they
mayn't care for me as a high priest."

"I am not; I am going home, and you must take me. I told them that you
were coming to do so. You have your horse, have you not, the black horse
with the white forefoot? Well, we will start at once--no, you must eat
first, and there are things to arrange. Now stand at a distance from me
and look as respectful as you can, for I fill a strange position here."

Then Rachel clapped her hands and the women came running in.

"Bring food for the Inkosi Darrien," she said, "and send hither the
captain of the gate."

Presently the man arrived crouched up in token of respect, and shouting
her titles.

"Go to the King," said Rachel, "and tell him the Inkosazana commands that
the horse on which she came be brought to her at once, as she leaves
Zululand for a while; also that an impi be assembled within an hour to
escort her and this white chief, her servant, to the Tugela. Say that the
Inkosi Darrien has brought her tidings which make it needful that she
should travel hence speedily if the Zulus, her people, are to be saved
from great misfortune, and say, too, that he goes with her. If the King or
his indunas would see the Inkosazana, or the chief Darrien, let him or the
indunas meet them on their road, since they have no time to visit the
Great Place. Let Tamboosa be in command of the impi, and say also that if
it is not here at once, the Inkosazana will be angry and summon an impi of
her own. Go now, for the lives of many hang upon your speed; yes, the
lives of the greatest in the land."

The man saluted and shot away like an arrow.

"Will they obey you?" asked Richard.

"I think so, because they are afraid of me, especially since I saw you
coming. At any rate we must act at once, it is our best chance--before
they have time to think. Here is some food--eat. Woman, go, tell the guard
that the Inkosi's horse must be fed at the gate, for he will need it
presently, and his servant also."

"I have no servant, Inkosazana," broke in Richard. "I left Quabi at a
kraal fifty miles away, laid up with a cut foot. As soon as he is better
he will slip back across the Buffalo River."

Then while Richard ate, which he did heartily enough, for joy had made him
very hungry, they talked, who had much to tell. He asked her why she
thought it necessary to leave Zululand at once. She answered, for two
reasons, first because of her desperate anxiety about her father and
mother, as to whom her heart foreboded ill, and secondly for his own sake.
She explained that the Zulus who had set her up as an image or a token of
the guiding Spirit of their nation, were madly jealous concerning her, so
jealous that if he remained here long she was by no means certain that
even her power could protect him when they came to understand that he was
much to her. It was impossible that she could see him often, and much more
so that he could remain in her kraal. Therefore if they were detained he
would be obliged to live at some distance from her where an assegai might
find him at night or poison be put in his food. At present they were
impressed by her foreknowledge of his arrival, and that was why he had
been admitted to her at once. But this would wear off--and then who could
say, especially if Ishmael returned?

He asked who Ishmael was and what he had to do with her. Rachel told him
briefly, and though she suppressed much, he looked very grave at that
story.

While she was finishing it a woman called without for leave to enter, and,
as before, Rachel bade him stand in a respectful attitude, and at a
distance from her. Richard obeyed, and the woman came in to say that
certain of the King's indunas craved audience with her. They were admitted
and saluted her in their usual humble fashion, but of Richard, beyond
eyeing him curiously and, as she thought, hostilely, they took not the
slightest heed.

 "Are all things ready for my journey, as I commanded?" asked Rachel at
once.

"Inkosazana," answered their spokesman, "they are ready, for how canst
thou be disobeyed? Tamboosa and the impi wait without. Yet, Inkosazana,
the heart of the Black One and the hearts of his councillors, and of all
the Zulu people are cut in two because thou wouldst go and leave them
mourning. Their hearts are sore also with this white man Dario, who has
come to lead thee hence, so sore, that were he not thy servant," the
induna added grimly, "he at least should stay in Zululand."

"He is my servant," answered Rachel haughtily, "whom I sent for. Let that
suffice. Remember my words, all of you, and let them be told again in the
ears of the King, that if any harm comes to this white chief who is my
guest and yours, then there will be blood between me and the people of the
Zulus that shall be terribly avenged in blood."

The indunas seemed to cower at this declaration, but made no answer. Only
the chief of them said:

"The King would know if the Inkosi, thy servant, brings thee any tidings
of the Amaboona, the white folk with whom he has been journeying."

"He brings tidings that they seek peace with the Zulus, to whom they will
do no hurt if no hurt is done to them. Shall I tell them that the Zulus
also seek peace?"

"The King gave us no message on that matter, Inkosazana," replied the
induna. "He awaits the coming of the prophets of the Ghost-folk to
interpret the meaning of thy words, and of the omen of the falling star."

"So be it," said Rachel. "When my servant, Noie, returns, let her be sent
on to me at once, that I may hear and consider the words of her people,"
and she began to rise from her seat to intimate that the interview was
finished.

"Inkosazana," said the induna hurriedly, "one question from the King--when
dost thou return to Zululand?"

"I return when it is needful. Fear not, I think that I shall return, but I
say to the King and to all of you: Be careful when I come that there is no
blood between me and you, lest great evil fall upon your heads from
Heaven. I have spoken. Good fortune go with you till we meet again."

The indunas looked at each other, then rose and departed humbly as they
had entered.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, surrounded by the impi, and followed by Richard, Rachel was
on the Tugela road. At the crest of a hill she pulled rein and looked back
at the great kraal, Umgugundhlovu. Then she beckoned Richard to her side
and said:

"I think that before long I shall see that hateful place again."

"Why?" he asked.

"Because of the way in which those indunas looked at each other just now.
There was some evil secret in their eyes. Richard, I am afraid."


CHAPTER XIV

WHAT CHANCED AT RAMAH


The news which reached Rachel that Ishmael had been ill after the rough
handling of the captains in her presence, was true enough. For many days
he was far too ill to travel, and when he recovered sufficiently to start
he could only journey slowly to the Tugela.

It will be remembered that she was told that he had escaped, as indeed he
seemed to do, slipping off at night, but this escape of his was carefully
arranged beforehand, nor did any attempt to re-capture him upon his way.
When at length he came to the river he found the small impi awaiting him,
not knowing whither they were to go or what they were to do, their only
orders being that they must obey him in all things. He found also that the
Tugela was in furious flood, so that to ford it proved quite impossible.
Here, then, he was obliged to remain for ten full days while the water ran
down.

Ishmael was not idle during those ten days, which be spent in recovering
his health, and incidentally in reflection. Thus he thought a great deal
of his past life, and did not find the record satisfactory. With his exact
history we need not trouble ourselves. He was well-born, as he had told
Rachel, but had been badly brought up. His strong passions had led him
into trouble while young, and instead of trying to reform him his
belongings had cast him off. Then he had enlisted in the army, and so
reached South Africa. There he committed a crime--as a matter of fact it
was murder or something like it--and fled from justice far into the
wilderness, where a touch of imagination prompted him to take the name of
Ishmael.

For a while this new existence suited him well enough. Thus he had wives
in plenty of a sort, and he grew rich, becoming just such a person as
might be expected from his environment and unchecked natural tendencies.
At length it happened that he met Rachel, who awoke in him certain
forgotten associations. She was an English lady, and he remembered that
once he had been an English gentleman, years and years ago. Also she was
beautiful, which appealed to his strong animal nature, and spiritual,
which appealed to a materialist soaked in Kaffir superstition. So he fell
in love with her, really in love; that is to say, he came to desire to
make her his wife more than he desired anything else on earth. For her
sake he grew to dislike his black consorts, however handsome; even the
heaping up of herds of cattle after the native fashion ceased to appeal to
him. He wanted to live as his forbears had lived, quietly, respectably,
with a woman of his own class.

So he made advances to her, with the results we know. For fifteen years or
more he had been a savage, and he could not hide his savagery from her
eyes any more than he could break off the ties and entanglements that had
grown up about him. Had she happened to care for him, it is very possible,
however, that in this he would have succeeded in time. He might even have
reformed himself completely, and died in old age a much-respected colonial
gentleman; perhaps a member of the local Legislature. But she did not; she
detested him; she knew him for what he was, a cowardly outcast whose good
looks did not appeal to her. So the spark of his new aspirations was
trampled out beneath her merciless heel, and there remained only the
acquired savagery and superstition mixed with the inborn instincts of a
blackguard.

It was this superstition of his that had, brought all her troubles upon
Rachel, for however it came about, he had conceived the idea that she was
something more than an ordinary woman and, with many tales of her
mysterious origin and powers, imparted it to the Zulus, in whose minds it
was fostered by the accident of the coincidence of her native name and
personal loveliness with those of the traditional white Spirit of their
race, and by Mopo's identification of her with that Spirit. Thus she
became their goddess and his; at any rate for a time. But while they
desired to worship her only, and use her rumoured wisdom as an oracle, he
sought to make her his wife; the more impossible it became, the more he
sought it. She refused him with contumely, and he laid plots to decoy her
to Zululand, thinking that there she would be in his power. In the end he
succeeded, basely enough, only to find that he was in her power, and that
the contumely, and more, were still his share.

But all this did not in the least deter him from his aim, and as it
chanced, fortune had put other cards into his hand. He knew that Rachel
would not stay among the Zulus, as they knew it. Therefore they had
commissioned him to bring her people to her. If her people were not
brought he was sure that she would come to seek them, and _if she found no
one_, then where could she go, or at least who would be at hand to help
her? Surely his opportunity had come at last, and marriage by capture did
not occur to him, who had spent so many years among savages, as a crime
from which to shrink. Only he feared that the prospective captive, the
Inkosazana-y-Zoola, was not one with whom it was safe to trifle. But his
love was stronger than his fear. He thought that he would take the risk.

Such were the reflections of Ishmael upon the banks of the flooded Tugela,
and when at length the waters went down sufficiently to enable him and the
soldiers under his command to cross into Natal, he was fully determined to
put them into practice, if the chance came his way. How this might best be
done he left to luck, for if it could be avoided he did not wish to have
more blood upon his hands. Only Rachel must be rendered homeless and
friendless, for then who could protect her from him? An answer came into
his mind--she might protect herself, or that Power which seemed to go with
her might protect her. Something warned him that this evil enterprise was
very dangerous. Yet the fire that burnt within him drove him on to face
the danger.

Ishmael was still on the Zululand bank of the river when one day about
noon an urgent message reached him from Dingaan. It said that the King was
angry as a wounded buffalo to learn, as he had just done, that he,
Ibubesi, still lingered on his road, and had not carried out his mission.
The Inkosazana, accompanied by a white man, was travelling to Ramah, and
unless he went forward at once, would overtake him. Therefore he must
march instantly and bring back the old Teacher and his wife as he had been
bidden. Should he meet the Inkosazana and her companion as he returned
with the white prisoners she must not be touched or insulted in any way,
only his ears and those of the soldiers with him were to be deaf to her
orders or entreaties to release them, for then she would surely turn and
follow of her own accord back to the Great Place. If the white man with
her made trouble or resisted, he was to be bound, but on no account must
his blood be made to flow, for if this happened it would bring a curse
upon the land, and he, Dingaan, swore by the head of the Black One who was
gone (that is Chaka) that he would kill him, Ibubesi, in payment. Yes, he
would smear him with honey and bind him over an ant-heap in the sun till
he died, if he hunted Africa from end to end to catch him. Moreover,
should he fail in the business, he would send a regiment and destroy his
town at Mafooti, and, put his wives and people to the spear, and seize his
cattle. All this also he swore by the head of the Black One.

Now when Ishmael received this message he was much frightened, for he knew
that these were not idle threats. Indeed, the exhausted messenger told him
that never had any living man seen Dingaan so mad with rage as he was when
he learned that he, Ibubesi, was still lingering on the banks of the
Tugela, adding that he had foamed at the mouth with fury and uttered
terrible threats. Ishmael sent him back with a humble answer, pointing out
that it had been impossible to cross the river, which was "in wrath," but
that now he would do all things as he was commanded, and especially that
not a hair of the white man's head should be harmed.

"Then you must do them quickly," said the messenger with a grim smile as
he rose and prepared to go, "for know that the Inkosazana is not more than
half a day's march behind you, accompanied by the white Inkoos Dario."

"What is this Dario like?" asked Ishmael.

"Oh! he is young and very handsome, with hair and beard of gold, and eyes
that are such as those of the Inkosazana herself. Some say that he is her
brother, another child of the Heavens, and some that he is her husband.
Who am I that I should speak of such high things? But it is evident that
she loves him very much, for by her magic she told the King of his coming,
and even when he is behind her she is always trying to turn her head to
look at him."

"Oh! she loves him very much, does she?" said Ishmael, setting his white
teeth. Then he turned, and calling the captain of the impi, gave orders
that the river must be crossed at once, for so the King commanded, and it
was better to die with honour by water than with shame by the spear.

So they waded and swam the river with great difficulty, but, as it
chanced, without loss of life, Ishmael being borne over it upon the
shoulders of the strongest men. Upon its further bank he summoned the
captains and delivered to them the orders of the King. Then they set out
for Ramah, Ishmael carried in a litter made of boughs.

Whilst the soldiers were constructing this litter, he called two men of
the Swamp-dwellers, who had their homes upon the banks of the Tugela, and
promising them a reward, bade them run to his town, Mafooti, and tell his
head man there to come at once with thirty of the best soldiers, and to
hide them in the bush of the kloof above Ramah, where he would join them
that night. The men, who knew Ibubesi, and what happened to those who
failed upon his business, went swiftly, and a little while afterwards, the
litter being finished, Ishmael entered it, and the impi started for Ramah.

Before sundown they appeared upon a ridge overlooking the settlement, just
as the herds were driving the cattle into their kraals. Seeing the Zulus
while as yet they were some way off, these herds shouted an alarm, whereon
the people of the place, thinking that Dingaan had sent a regiment to wipe
them out, fled to the bush, the herds driving the cattle after them. Man,
woman, and child, deserting their pastor, who knew nothing of all this,
being occupied with a sad business, they fled, incontinently, so that when
Ishmael and the impi entered Ramah, no one was left in it save a few aged
and sick people, who could not walk.

At the outskirts of the town Ishmael descended from his litter and
commanded the soldiers to surround it, with orders that they were to hurt
no one, but if the white Umfundusi, who was called Shouter, or his wife
attempted to escape, they were to be seized and brought to him. Then
taking with him some of the captains and a guard of ten men, he advanced
to the mission-house.

The door was open, and, followed by the Zulus, he entered to search the
place, for he feared that its inhabitants might have seen them, and have
gone with the others. Looking into the first room that they reached, of
which, as it chanced, the door was also open, Ishmael saw that this was
not so, for there upon the bed lay Mrs. Dove, apparently very ill, while
by the side of the bed knelt her husband, praying. For a few moments
Ishmael and the savages behind him stood still, staring at the pair, till
suddenly Mrs. Dove turned her head and saw them. Lifting herself in the
bed she pointed with her finger, and Ishmael noticed that her lips were
quite blue, and that she did not seem to be able to speak. Then Mr. Dove,
observing her outstretched hand, looked round. He had not seen Ishmael
since that day when he struck him after their stormy interview at Mafooti,
but recognising the man at once, he asked sternly:

"What are you doing, sir, with these savages in my house? Cannot you see
that my wife is sick, and must not be disturbed?"

"I am sorry," Ishmael answered shamefacedly, for in his heart he was
afraid of Mr. Dove, "but I am sent to you with a message from Dingaan the
King, and," he added as an afterthought, "from your daughter."

"From my daughter!" exclaimed Mr. Dove eagerly. "What of her? Is she well?
We cannot get any certain news of her, only rumours."

"I saw her but once." replied Ishmael, "and she was well enough, then. You
know the Zulus have made her their Inkosazana, and keep her guarded."

"Does she live quite alone then with these savages?"

"She did, but I am sorry I must tell you that she seems to have a
companion now, some scoundrel of a white man with whom she has taken up,"
he sneered.

"My daughter take up with a scoundrel of a white man! It is false. What is
this man's name?"

"I don't know, but the natives call him Dario, and say that he is young,
and has fair hair, and that she is in love with him. That's all I can tell
you about the man."

Mr. Dove shook his head, but his wife sat up suddenly in bed, and plucked
him by the sleeve, for she had been listening intently to everything that
passed.

"Dario! Young, fair hair, in love with him--" she repeated in a thick
whisper, then added, "John, it is Richard Darrien grown up--the boy who
saved her in the Umtooma River, years ago, and whom she has never
forgotten. Oh! thank God! Thank God! With him she will be safe. I always
knew that he would find her, for they belong to each other," and she sank
back exhausted.

"That's what the Zulus say, that they belong to each other," replied
Ishmael, with another sneer. "Perhaps they are married native fashion."

"Stop insulting my daughter, sir," said Mr. Dove angrily. "She would not
take a husband as you take your wives, nor if this man is Richard Darrien,
as I pray, would he be a party to such a thing. Tell me, are they coming
here?"

"Not they, they are far too comfortable where they are. Also the Zulus
would prevent them. But don't be sad about it, for I am sent to take you
both to join her at the Great Place where you are to live."

"To join her! It is impossible," ejaculated Mr. Dove, glancing at his sick
wife.

"Impossible or not, you've got to come at once, both of you. That is the
King's order and the Inkosazana's wish, and what is more there is an impi
outside to see that you obey. Now I give you five minutes to get ready,
and then we start."

"Man, are you mad? How can my wife travel to Zululand in her state? She
cannot walk a step."

"Then she can be carried," answered Ishmael callously. "Come, don't waste
time in talking. Those are my orders, and I am not going to have my throat
cut for either of you. If Mrs. Dove won't dress wrap her up in blankets."

"You go, John, you go," whispered his wife, "or they will kill you. Never
mind about me; my time has come, and I die happy, for Richard Darrien is
with Rachel."

The mention of Richard's name seemed to infuriate Ishmael. At any rate he
said brutally:

"Are you coming, or must I use force?"

"Coming, you wicked villain! How can I come?" shouted Mr. Dove, for he was
mad with grief and rage. "Be off with your savages. I will shoot the first
man who lays a finger on my wife," and as he spoke he snatched a
double-barrelled pistol which hung upon the wall and cocked it.

Ishmael turned to the Zulus who stood behind him watching this scene with
curiosity.

"Seize the Shouter," he said, "and bind him. Lift the old woman on her
mattress, and carry her. If she dies on the road we cannot help it."

The captains hesitated, not from fear, but because Mrs. Dove's condition
moved even their savage hearts to pity.

"Why do you not obey?" roared Ishmael. "Dogs and cowards, it is the King's
word. Take her up or you shall die, every man of you, you know how. Knock
down the old Evildoer with your sticks if he gives trouble."

Now the men hesitated no longer. Springing forward, several of them seized
the mattress and began to lift it bodily. Mrs. Dove rose and tried to
struggle from the bed, then uttered a low moaning cry, fell back, and lay
still.

"You devils, you have killed her!" gasped Mr. Dove, as lifting the pistol
he fired at the Zulu nearest to him, shooting him through the body so that
he sank upon the floor dying. Then, fearing lest he should shoot again,
the captains fell upon the poor old man, striking him with kerries and the
handles of their spears, for they sought to disable him and make him drop
the pistol.

As it chanced, though this was not their intention, in the confusion a
heavy blow from a knobstick struck him on the temple. The second barrel of
the pistol went off, and the bullet from it but just missed Ishmael who
was standing to one side. When the smoke cleared away it was seen that Mr.
Dove had fallen backwards on to the bed. The martyrdom he always sought
and expected had overtaken him. He was quite dead. They were both dead!

The head induna in command of the impi stepped forward and looked at them,
then felt their hearts.

"_Wow!_" he said, "these white people have 'gone beyond.' They have gone
to join the spirits, both of them. What now, Ibubesi?"

Ishmael, who stood in the corner, very white-faced, and staring with round
eyes, for the tragedy had taken a turn that he did not intend or expect,
shook himself and rubbed his forehead with his hand, answering:

"Carry them into the Great Place, I suppose. The King ordered that they
should be brought there. Why did you kill that old Shouter, you fools?" he
added with irritation. "You have brought his blood and the curse of the
Inkosazana on our heads."

"_Wow!_" answered the induna again, "you bade us strike him with sticks,
and our orders were to obey you. Who would have guessed that the old man's
skull was so thin from thinking? You or I would never have felt a tap like
that. But they are 'gone beyond,' and we will not defile ourselves by
touching them. Dead bones are of no use to anyone, and their ghosts might
haunt us. Come, brethren, let us go back to the King and make report. The
order was Ibubesi's, and we are not to blame."

"Yes," they answered, "let us go back and make report. Are you coming,
Ibubesi?"

"Not I," he answered. "Do I want to have my neck twisted because of your
clumsiness? Go you and win your own peace if you can, but if you see the
Inkosazana, my advice is that you avoid her lest she learn the truth, and
bring your deaths upon you, for, know, she travels hither, and she called
these folk father and mother."

"Without doubt we will avoid her," said the captain, "who fear her
terrible curse. But, Ibubesi, it is on you that it will fall, not on us
who did but obey you as we were bidden; yes, on you she will bring down
death before this moon dies. Make your peace with the Heavens, if you can,
Ibubesi, as we go to try to make ours with the King."

"Would you bewitch me, you ill-omened dog?" shouted Ishmael, wiping the
sweat of fear off his brow, "May you soon be stiff!"

"Nay, nay, Ibubesi, it is you who shall be stiff. The Inkosazana will see
to that, and were I not sure of it I would make you so myself, who am a
noble who will not be called names by a white _umfagozan_, a low-born
fellow who plots for blood, but leaves its shedding to brave men.
Farewell, Ibubesi; if the jackals leave anything of you after the
Inkosazana has spoken, we will return to bury your bones," and he turned
to go.

"Stay," cried the dying man on the floor, "would you leave me here in
pain, my brothers?"

The induna stepped to him and examined him.

"It is mortal," he said, shaking his head, "right through the liver. Why
did not the white man's thunder smite Ibubesi instead of you, and save the
Inkosazana some trouble? Well, your arms are still strong and here is a
spear; you know where to strike. Be quick with your messages. Yes, yes, I
will see that they are delivered. Good-night, my brother. Do you remember
how we stood side by side in that big fight twenty years ago, when the
Pondo giant got me down and you fell on the top of me and thrust upwards
and killed him? It was a very good fight, was it not? We will talk it over
again in the World of Spirits. Good-night, my brother. Yes, yes, I will
deliver the message to your little girl, and tell her where the necklace
is to be found, and that you wish her to name her firstborn son after you.
Good-night. Use that assegai at once, for your wound must be painful, or
perhaps as you are down upon the ground Ibubesi will do it for you.
Good-night, my brother, and Ibubesi, goodnight to you also. We cross the
Tugela by another drift, wait you here for the Inkosazana, and tell her
how the Shouter died."

Then they turned and went. The wounded man watched them pass the door, and
when the last of them had gone he used the assegai upon himself, and with
his failing hand flung it feebly at Ishmael.

The dying Zulu's spear struck Ishmael, who had turned his head away, upon
the cheek, just pricking it and causing the blood to flow, no more.
Ishmael was still also, paralysed almost, or so he seemed, for even the
pain of the cut did not make him move. He stared at the bodies of Mr. and
Mrs. Dove; he stared at the dead Zulu, and in his heart a voice cried:
"You have murdered them. By now they are pleading to God for vengeance on
you, Ishmael, the outcast. You will never dare to be alone again, for they
will haunt you."

As he thought it the relaxed hand of the old clergyman who had fallen in a
sitting posture on the bed, slipped from his wounded head which he had
clasped just before he died, and for a moment seemed to point at him. He
shivered, but still he could not stir. How dreadful and solemn was that
face! And those eyes, how they searched out the black record of his heart!
The quiet rays of the afternoon sun suddenly flowed in through the window
place and illumined the awful, accusing face till it shone like that of a
saint in glory. A drop of blood from the cut upon his cheek splashed on to
the floor, and the noise of it struck on his strained nerves loud as a
pistol-shot. Blood, his own blood wherewith he must pay for that which he
had shed. The sight and the thought seemed to break the spell. With an
oath he bounded out of the room like a frightened wolf, those dead staring
at him as he went, and rushed from the house that held them.

Beyond its walls Ishmael paused. The Zulus had fled in one direction, and
the inhabitants of Ramah in another; there was no one to be seen. His eye
fell upon the dense mass of bush above the station, and he remembered the
message that he had sent to his own people to meet him there. Perhaps they
had already arrived. He would go to see, he who was in such sore need of
human company. As he went his numbed faculties returned to him, and in the
open light of day some of his terror passed. He began to think again. What
was done was done; he could not bring the dead back to life. He was not
really to blame, and after all, things had worked out well for him. Save
for this white man, Dario, Rachel was now alone in the world, and dead
people did not speak, there was no one to tell her of his share in the
tragedy. Why should she not turn to him who had no one else to whom she
could go? The white man, if he were still with her, could be got rid of
somehow; very likely he would run away, and they two would be left quite
alone. At any rate it was for her sake that be had entered on this black
road of sin, and what did one step more matter, the step that led him to
his reward? Of course it might lead him somewhere else. Rachel was a woman
to be feared, and the Zulus were to be feared, and other things to which
he could give no shape or name, but that he felt pressing round him, were
still more to be feared. Perhaps he would do best to fly, far into the
interior, or by ship to some other land where none would know him and his
black story. What! Fly companioned by those ghosts, and leave Rachel, the
woman for whom he burned, with this Dario, whom the Zulus said she loved,
and with whom her mother, just before her end, had declared that she would
be safe? Never. She was his; he had bought her with blood, and he would
have the due the devil owed him.

He was in the bush now, and a voice called him, that of his head man.

"Come out, you dog," he said, searching the dense foliage with his eyes,
and the man appeared, saluting him humbly.

"We received your message and we have come, Inkoos. We are but just
arrived. What has chanced here that the town is so still?"

"The Zulus have been and gone. They have killed the white Teacher and his
wife, though I thought to save them--look at my wound. Also the people are
fled."

"Ah!" replied the head man, "that was an ill deed, for he was holy, and a
great prophet, and doubtless his spirit is strong to revenge. Well for you
is it, Master, that you had no hand in the deed, as at first I feared
might be the case, for know that last night a strange dog climbed on to
your hut and howled there and would not be driven away, nor could we kill
it with spears, so we think it was a ghost. All your wives thought that
evil had drawn near to you."

 Ishmael struck him across the mouth, exclaiming.

"Be silent, you accursed wizard, or you shall howl louder than your
ghost-dog."

"I meant no harm," answered the man humbly, but with a curious gleam in
his eye. "What are your commands, Chief?"

"That we watch here. I think that the daughter of the Shouter, she who is
called Inkosazana-y-Zoola, is coming, and she may need help. Have you
brought thirty men with you as I bade you through my messengers?"

"Aye, Ibubesi, they are all hidden in the bush. I go to summon them,
though I think that the mighty Inkosazana, who can command all the Zulu
impis and all the spirits of the dead, will need little help from us."


CHAPTER XV

RACHEL COMES HOME


As Rachel had travelled up from the Tugela to the Great Place, so she
travelled back from the Great Place to the Tugela in state and dignity
such as became a thing divine, perhaps the first white woman, moreover,
who had ever entered Zululand. All day she rode alone, Tamboosa leading
the white ox before her and Richard following behind, while in front and
to the rear marched the serried ranks of the impi, her escort. At night,
as before, she slept alone in the empty kraals provided for her, attended
by the best-born maidens, Richard being lodged in some hut without the
fence.

So at length, about noon one day, they reached the banks of the Tugela,
not many hours after Ishmael had crossed it, and camped there. Now, after
she had eaten, Rachel sent for Richard, with whom she had found but few
opportunities to talk during that journey. He came and stood before her,
as all must do, and she addressed him in English while the spies and
captains watched him sullenly, for they were angry at this use of a
foreign tongue which they could not understand. Preserving a cold and
distant air, she asked him of his health, and how he had fared.

"Well enough," he answered. "And now, what are your plans? The river is in
flood, you will find it difficult to cross. Still it can be done, for I
hear that the white man, Ishmael, of whom you told me, forded it this
morning with a company of armed men."

 Aware of the eyes that watched her, with an effort Rachel showed no
surprise.

"How is that?" she asked. "I thought the man fled from Zululand many days
ago. Why then does he leave the country with soldiers?"

"I can't tell you, Rachel. There is something queer about the business.
When I inquire, everyone shrugs his shoulders. They say that the King
knows his own business. If I were you I would ask no questions, for you
will learn nothing, and if you do not ask they will think that you know
all."

"I understand," she said. "But, Richard, I must cross the river to-day.
You and I must cross it alone and reach Ramah to-night. Richard, something
weighs upon my heart; I am terribly afraid."

"How will you manage it?" he asked, ignoring the rest.

"I can't tell you yet, Richard, but keep my horse and yours saddled there
where you are encamped," and she nodded towards a hut about fifty yards
away. "I think that I shall come to you presently. Now go."

So he saluted her and went.

Presently Rachel sent for Tamboosa and the captains, and asked the state
of the river which was out of sight about half a mile from them. They
replied that it was "very angry"; none could think of attempting its
passage, as much water was coming down.

"Is it so?" she said indifferently. "Well, I must look," and with slow
steps she walked towards the hut where she knew the horses were, followed
by Tamboosa and the captains.

Reaching it, she saw them standing saddled on its further side, and by
them Richard, seated on the ground smoking. As she came he rose and
saluted her, but, taking no heed of him, she went to her grey mare, and,
placing her foot in the stirrup, sprang to the saddle, motioning to him to
do likewise.

"Whither goest thou, Inkosazana?" asked Tamboosa anxiously.

"To throw a charm on the waters," she answered, "so that they may run down
and I can cross them to morrow. Come, Dario, and come Tamboosa, but let
the rest stay behind, since common eyes must not look upon my magic, and
he who dares to look shall be struck with blindness."

The captains hesitated, and turning on them fiercely she commanded them to
obey her word lest some evil should befall them.

Then they fell back and she rode towards the Tugela, followed by Richard
on horseback and Tamboosa on foot. Arrived at that spot on the bank where
she had received the salutation of the regiment when she entered Zululand,
Rachel saw at once that although the great river was full it could easily
be forded on horseback. Calling Richard to her, she said:

"We must go, and now, while there is no one to stop us but Tamboosa. Do
not hurt him unless he tries to spear you, for he has been kind to me."

Then she addressed Tamboosa, saying:

"I have spoken to the waters and they will not harm me. The hour has come
when I must leave my people for a while, and go forward alone with my
white servant, Dario. These are my commands, that none should dare to
follow me save only yourself, Tamboosa, who can bring on the white ox with
its load so soon as the water has run down and deliver them to me at
Ramah. Do you hear me?"

"I hear, Inkosazana," answered the old induna, "and thy words split my
heart."

"Yet you will obey them, Tamboosa."

"Yes, I will obey them who know what would befall me otherwise, and that
it is the King's will that none should dare to thwart thee, even if they
could. Yet I think that very soon thou wilt return to thy children.
Therefore, why not abide with us until to-morrow, when the waters will be
low?"

"Tamboosa," said Rachel, leaning forward and looking him in the eyes, "why
did Ibubesi cross this river with soldiers but a few hours ago--Ibubesi,
who fled from the Great Place when the moon was young that now is full?
Look, there goes their spoor in the mud."

"I know not," he answered, looking down. "Inkosazana, to-morrow I will
bring on the white ox to Ramah, and I will bring it alone."

"So be it, Tamboosa, but if by chance you should not find me, ask where
Ibubesi is, and if need be, seek for me with an impi, Tamboosa--for me and
for this white man, Dario," and again she bent forward and looked at him.

"I know not what thou meanest, Inkosazana," he replied. "But of this be
sure, that if I cannot find thee, then I will seek for thee, if need be
with every spear in Zululand at my back."

"Farewell, then, Tamboosa, and to the regiment farewell also. Say to the
captains that it is my will that they should return to the Great Place,
bearing my greetings to the King and those of the white lord, Dario. Look
for me to-morrow at Ramah."

Then, followed by Richard, she rode her horse past him into the lip of the
water. As she went Tamboosa drew himself up and gave her the Bayète, the
royal salute.

Although it was red with earth and flecked with foam and the roar of it
was loud as it sped towards the sea, the river did not prove very
difficult to ford. But once, indeed, were the horses swept off their feet
and forced to swim, and then but for a few paces, after which they
regained them, and plunged to the farther bank without accident.

"Free at last, Rachel, with our lives before us and nothing more to fear,"
called Richard in his cheery voice, as he forced his horse alongside of
hers. Then suddenly he caught sight of her face and saw that it was white
and drawn as though with pain; also that she leaned forward on her saddle,
clasping its pommel as though she were about to faint.

"What is it?" he exclaimed in alarm. "Did the flood frighten you,
Rachel--are you ill?"

For a few moments she made no answer, then straightened herself with a
sigh and said in a low voice:

"Richard, I have been so long among those Zulus playing the part of a
spirit that I begin to think I am one, or that their magic has got hold of
me. I tell you that in the roar of the water I heard voices--the voices of
my father and mother calling me and speaking of you--and, Richard, they
seemed to be in great fear and pain, for a minute or more I heard them,
then a dreadful cold wind blew on me not this wind, it seemed to come from
above--and everything passed away, leaving my mind numb and empty so that
I do not remember how we came out of the river. Don't laugh at me,
Richard; it is so. The Kaffirs are right; I have some power of the sort.
Remember how I saw you travelling towards me in the pool."

"Why should I laugh at you, dearest?" he asked anxiously, for something of
this uncanny fear passed from her mind into his, with which it was in
tune. "Indeed, I don't laugh who know that you are not quite like other
women. But, Rachel, the strain of those two months has worn you out, and
now the reaction is too much. Perhaps it is nothing.".

"Perhaps," she answered sadly, "I hope so. Richard, what is the time?"

"About a quarter to six, to judge by the sun," he answered,

"Then we shall not be able to reach Ramah before dark."

"No, Rachel, but there is a good moon."

"Yes, there is a good moon; I wonder what it will show us," and she
shivered.

Then they pressed their horses to a canter and rode on, speaking little,
for the fount of words seemed to be frozen in them, although Richard
recollected, with a curious sense of wonder how he had looked forward to
this opportunity of long, unfettered talk with Rachel and how much he had
to tell her. Over hill and valley, through bush and stream they rode, till
at last with the short twilight they reached the plain that ran to Ramah.
Then came the dark in which they must ride slowly, till presently the
round edge of the moon pushed itself up above the shoulder of a hill and
there was light again--pure, peaceful light that turned the veld to silver
and shone whitely on the pale face of Rachel.

Ramah was before them. They had met no living thing save some wild game
trekking to the water, and heard no sound save the distant roar of some
beast of prey. Ramah was before them. The moon shone on the roofs of the
Mission-house and the little church and the clusters of Kaffir huts
beyond. But, oh! it was silent: no cattle lowed, no child cried, nor did
the bell of the church ring for evening prayer as at this hour it should
have done. Also no lamp showed in the windows of the Mission-house and no
smoke rose from the cooking fires of the kraals.

"Where are all the people, Richard?" whispered Rachel. "There is the place
unharmed, but where are the people?"

But Richard could only shake his head: the terror of something dreadful
had got hold of him also, and he knew not what to say.

Now they had come to the wall of the Mission-house and sprang from their
horses which they left loose. As they advanced side by side towards the
open gate, something leapt the stoep and rushed through it. It was a
striped hyena; they could see the hair bristle on its back as it passed
them with a whining growl. Hand in hand they ran to the house across the
little garden patch--Rachel, led by some instinct, guiding her companion
straight to her parents' room whereof the windows, that opened like doors,
stood wide as the gate had done.

One more moment and they were there; another, and the moonlight showed
them all.

For a long while--to Richard it seemed hours--Rachel said nothing; only
stood still like the statue of a woman, staring at those cold faces that
looked back at her through the unearthly moonlight. Indeed, it was Richard
who spoke first, feeling that if he did not this dreadful silence would
choke him or cause him to faint.

"The Zulus have murdered them," he said hoarsely, glancing at the dead
Kaffir on the floor.

"No," she answered in a cold, small voice; "Ishmael, Ishmael!" and she
pointed to something that lay at his feet.

Richard stooped and picked it up. It was a fly wisp of rhinoceros horn
which the man had let fall when the Zulu's spear struck him.

"I know it," she went on; "he always carried it. He is the real murderer.
The Zulus would not have dared," and she choked and was silent.

"Let me think," said Richard confusedly. "There is something in my mind.
What is it? Oh! I know. If you are right that devil has not done this for
nothing. He is somewhere near; he wants to take you"; and he ground his
teeth at the thought, then added: "Rachel, we must get out of this and
ride for Durban, at once--at once; the white people will protect you
there."

"Who will bury my father and mother?" she asked in the same cold voice.

"I do not know, it does not matter, the living are more than the dead. I
can return and see to it afterwards."

"You are right," she answered. Then she knelt down by the bed and lifting
her beautiful, agonised face, put up some silent prayer. Next she rose and
kissed first her father, then her mother, kissed their dead brows in a
last farewell and turned to go. As she went her eyes fell upon the assegai
that lay near to the dead Zulu. Stooping down, she took it and with it in
her hand passed on to the stoep. Here her strength seemed to fail her, for
she reeled against the wall, then with an effort flung herself into
Richard's arms, moaning:

"Only you left, Richard, only you. Oh! if you were taken from me also,
what would become of me?"

A moment later she became aware that the stoep was swarming with men who
seemed to arise out of the shadows. A voice said in the Kaffir tongue:

"Seize that fellow and bind him."

Instantly, before he could do anything, before he could even turn, Richard
was torn from her, struggling furiously, and thrown to the ground. Rachel
sprang to the wall and stood with her back to it, raising the spear she
held. It flashed into her mind that these were Zulus, and of Zulus she was
not afraid.

"What dogs are these," she cried, "that dare to lift a hand against the
Inkosazana and her servant?"

The black men about her swayed and murmured, then made way for a man who
walked up the steps of the stoep. The moonlight fell upon him and she saw
that it was Ishmael.

"Rachel," he said, taking off his hat politely, "these are my people. We
saw that white scoundrel assault you, and of course seized him at once. As
you know a dreadful thing has happened here. This afternoon the Zulus
killed your father and mother, or rather they killed your father, and your
mother, who was ill, died with the shock, because they refused to go to
Zululand whither Dingaan had ordered that they should be taken. So seeing
that you were travelling here I came to rescue you, lest you should fall
into their hands, and," he added lamely, "you know the rest."

Ishmael had spoken in English, but Rachel answered him in Zulu.

"I know all, Night-prowler," she cried aloud. "I know that my father and
mother were killed by your order, and in your presence; their spirits told
me so but now, and for that crime I sentence you to death!" and she
pointed at him with the spear. "Heaven above and earth beneath," she went
on, "bear witness that I sentence this man to death. People of the Zulus,
hear me in your kraals far away. Hear me, Dingaan, sitting in your Great
Place. Hear me, every captain and induna, hear the voice of your
Inkosazana: I sentence this man to death, since because of him there is
blood between me and my people, the blood of my father and my mother. Now,
Night-prowler, do your worst before you die, but know this, you his
servants, that if I am harmed, or if this white man, the chief Dario, is
harmed, then you shall die also, every one of you. What is your will,
Night-prowler?"

"I will tell you that at Mafooti," answered Ishmael, trying to look bold.
"I am not afraid of you like those Zulu savages, and Dingaan is a long way
off. Will you come quietly? I hope so, for I don't want to hurt you or put
you to shame, but you've got to come, and this Dario, too. If you make any
trouble, I will have him killed at once. Understand, Rachel, that if you
don't come, he shall be killed at once. My people may be afraid of you,
but they won't mind cutting his throat," he added significantly.

"Never mind about me," said Richard in a choked voice from the ground
where he was pinned down by the Kaffirs. "Do what you think best for
yourself, Rachel."

Now Rachel, whose wits were made keen by doubt and anguish, looked at the
faces of the natives about her, and even in that dim moonlight read them
like a book, as she could always do. She saw that they were afraid of her,
and that if she commanded them, they would let her go free, whatever their
master might say or do. But she saw also that Ishmael spoke truth when he
declared that they had no such dread of Richard, and might even believe
that he was doing her some violence. If she escaped therefore it would be
at the cost of Richard's life. Instantly in her bold fashion she made up
her mind. It was borne in upon her that she had declared the truth; that
Ishmael was doomed, that he had no power to work her any hurt, however
sore her case might seem. Since Richard's life hung on it she would go
with him.

"Servants of Ibubesi," she said, "lift the white chief Dario to his feet,
and listen to my words."

They obeyed her at once, without even waiting for their master to speak,
only holding Richard by the arms.

Now the most of the men went into the garden followed by Ishmael, and
taking Richard with them, but a few remained to watch her. From this
garden presently arose a sound of great quarrelling. Rachel was too far
off to understand what was said, but from the sounds she judged that
Ishmael was giving orders to his people which they refused to obey, for
she could hear him cursing them furiously. Presently she heard something
else--the loud report of a gun followed by groans. Then a Kaffir ran up to
them and whispered something to those who surrounded her; it was that head
man whom Ishmael had struck on the mouth in the bush when he told him that
a dog had howled upon his hut, and his face was very frightened.

Rachel leaned against the wall and looked at him, for she could not speak,
she who thought that Richard had been murdered.

"Have no fear, Inkosazana," said the man, answering the question in her
eyes. "Ibubesi has killed one of us because we do not like this business
and would clean it off our hands, that is all. The chief Dario is safe,
and I swear to thee that no harm shall come to him from us. We will care
for him and protect him to the death, and if we lead him away a prisoner
it is because we must, since otherwise Ibubesi will kill us all. Therefore
be merciful to us when the spear of thy power is lifted."

Before Rachel could answer Ishmael's voice was heard asking why they did
not bring the Inkosazana as the horses were ready.

"I pray thee come, Zoola," said the man hurriedly "or he will shoot more
of us."

So Rachel walked down the steps of the stoep in front of them, holding her
head high, leaving behind her the house of Ramah and its dead. At the gate
of the garden stood the horses, on one of which, his own, Richard was
already mounted, his arms bound, his feet made fast beneath it with a hide
rope. Her path lay past him, and as she went by he said in a voice that
was choking with rage:

"I am helpless, I cannot save you, but our hour will come."

"Yes, Richard," she answered quietly, "our hour will come when his has
gone," and with the spear in her hand once more she pointed at Ishmael,
who stood by watching them sullenly. Then she mounted her horse--how she
could never remember--and they were separated.

After this she seemed to hear Ishmael talking to her, arguing, explaining,
but she made no answer to his words. Her mind was a blank, and all she
knew was that they were riding on for hours. Her tired horse stumbled up a
pass and down its further side. Then she heard dogs bark and saw lights.
The horse stopped and she slid from it, and as she was too exhausted to
walk, was supported or carried into a hut, as she thought by women who
seemed very much afraid of touching her, after which she seemed to sink
into blackness.

Who can call me a rogue, a hole in my head beat me with the beard
ausrauffen, and throw in the face? Who me zwikt Bey of the nose, or throws
me a lie in the throat, so deep into the lungs down? Who does me this? But
should I suffer from it - because it can not otherwise Seyn, Daubenherziger
I am a man who has no bile, which his bitter Unterdrükung do if it
were not the case, I would not have all the Geyer in the area with the
vorgeworfnen Aas Sclaven fattened this? The bloody kupplerische Jack!
The unscrupulous, verräthrische, licentious, cruel wretch! - How, what a
vile patience holds me back? I, the son of a murdered father Theurer,
of heaven and hell to revenge aufgefodert, I should like a coward meze,
my heart through words, like a true street-whore in swear words and
curses erupt - and it is in the brain Schedel this! Fy, the baseness!
It must be different - I have heard that criminals under a drama by the
simple art of the poet and the actor into the soul has been taken
that they are on the site have their Übelthaten confesses.

When a murder does not equal the tongue, so it must be before the lifeless
thing language get unentdekt than that he should remain. I want that something
Comödianten the assassination of my father, like before my uncle can
perform. I want his face dabey watch, and I want him to Wike and sharpen
meat drilling into the wound, if he only erblaßt, so I know what I've
thun. The spirit that I saw, the devil can Seyn, because the devil has the
power a pleasing shape, perhaps he abused my Schwermuth and blue (ghost,
which he has a special force) me to a damn That to tempt. I want a
convincing reason, as this phenomenon, and in the drama, the case Seyn, I
worinn the conscience of the king wants to catch. Third lift. Erste Scene.
(The Pallast.) (The King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosary , Güldenstern,
and gentlemen of the court acceded to.) King. You did not bring out of
him, which is the reason why he is in the best days of his life in these
turbulent and dangerous threat Raserey like?

rosary. He confesses that he was in a state of extraordinary Gemüths feel,
but what is the cause of it sey, he wants it bad but not let out. Güldenstern.
Also he never giebt no opportunity where you could delve into it, and
if you würklich very close to dabey Seyn believes him to his true confessions
to state, so has he, despite his purported madness, but enough list,
again and again out of the noose to be drawn. Queen. Empfieng it you
friendly? rosary. With many of politeness. Güldenstern. But as that the
violence which he had his sense of humor anthun, could remember very
clearly. rosary. With questions, he was very frey, but extremely
zurükhaltend when he referred to the answer should be ours. Queen.
Schluget her before him no pastime?

rosary. Merciful woman, it came from approximately that we are underway on
a society actors met; this we said to him, and it seemed as if he
were a kind of joy that would have been: You are würklich Bey
court, and (as I believe ), they already command the night before
him to play.

Polonius. There is nothing certain, and he invites your Majesties,
viewers must dabey. king. From the heart happy, it pleased me immensely
to hear that he is so well planned . Bey will get him this happy, my good
friends, and Seyde anxious that it always tastes more like the time to
think. Rosary. We do not want to let lack, Gracious Lord. (They go
from.) King.

Dearest Gertrude, leave us your also, we have secret prisons to the fact
that Hamlet hieher come so he Ophélie, as if it were of approximately
happen here for you.

Her father and I want to take such a square that we ungesehn,
witnesses of everything between them will proceed, Seyn, and therefore
ourselves urtheilen able to determine whether the love of the cause
of his gloom or not.

Queen. I obey you And in my Theil, Ophelia, wünsch 'I know that your cause
irritation of the glükliche Hamlets Consummation Seyn like: Because that
would make me hope that your virtue it to your beyder honor back
on the right path would bring.

Ophelia . Madam, I wish 'it. (The Queen is from.) Polonius. Ophelia, here
it goes up and down - Gracious Lord, if it is arbitrary, we want to hide
here - (to Ophelia).

Thut as if you read in this book, so that a considerable spiritual
exercise your loneliness euphemistically.

It meets only do too often that we have with the devout and the
mine frömmsten Gebehrde to suck the devil himself.

King (front). This is just even true. What a sharp Geissel String giebt this
speech to my conscience!

The cheeks of a whore by fraudulent art with painted roses, are not
ugly under their make-up, as my beautiful That the larva of my words
- O heavy burden!

Polonius. I hear him coming, we want to remove, Gracious Lord. (
All Ophelia to go from.)

Zweyte Scene. (Hamlet is a problem with it obviously.) Hamlet. Seyn Seyn
or not - That is the question - Whether it is edeln spirit is
decent, the insults of Glüks patiently to subjugate, or to prevent
its seizure, and a hearty spread it at once to termination?

What is dying?

- Sleep - that's all - and by a good sleep is always on the headaches and
all other plagues, of which our flesh is heir to it, is a Glükseligkeit
that you agree with an andächtiglich should zubeten - -Death -
Sleep - But maybe it was more - as if it would be dreaming?

 - Since stekt the hook - What earthly turmoil after this long sleep of
death for dreams to follow, that is what stuzen us to do it.

If that does not would be who would abuse and distemper shots, the
time that Gewaltthätigkeiten of Unterdrükers the contemptuous insults
of arrogant, the Quaal spurned love, Schicanen justice, Übermuth
the Great, endured, or what man of merit would from a meek, whose
birth or Glük Werth his whole mind, with your feet come out if he
stühnde frey with a poor little pen knife to calm yourself?

Which would Taglöhner Schwizer groan and a laborious life want to drag? -
If the fear of something after death - if this unknown country from
which no traveler has come back, our intention is not stunned, and
riehte us, prefer to to suffer evil, we know when we frey willing
to plunge into other, we seem the more terrible because they are
unknown.

And so does the conscience of us all memme; entnervet as a mere idea of the
strength of the natural revulsion from pain and misery, and the size
Thater, the most important drafts, they only look in her run
inhibited, and the execution zurükgeschrekt -- But gently!

- how? The beautiful Ophelia - Nymph, erinnre you of all my sins
in your prayers.

Ophelia. My Gracious prince, how did you these many days found? Hamlet.
Demüthigst I thank you, probably - Ophelia. Gracious Lord, I have different
things to the memory of you, I would like to zurükgegeben; I beg your graces,
they Bey this opportunity to take back. Hamlet. I?

I do not know that what I have ever had been. Ophelia. You know it does
well, Gracious Lord, and that their gifts with your words, so sweet Athem
zusammengesezt accompanied you that it is an even bigger Werth
received.

Since this perfume lost, so take it back again.

Verliehren gifts for a noble Gemüth their Werth, when the heart is changed
by the donor. Hamlet. Ha, ha! Seyde her virtuous? Ophelia. Gracious
Lord - Hamlet. Seyde it beautiful? Ophelia. What do these questions mean?
Hamlet. I will tell you. If you are virtuous and beautiful Seyde, then
your virtue will not admit that one of your beauty Schmeicheleyen
vorschwaze.

Ophelia. Make beauty and virtue, not a good company with each other, Gracious
Lord? Hamlet. Not the best, because it is all the beauty Seyn easier,
the virtue in a Kupplerin organization, as of virtue, the beauty is
similar to. The former was a paradoxical Saz, but in our days is his
undisputed truth - It was a time when I loved you.

Ophelia. In That, Gracious Lord, it's me machtet believe.

Hamlet. You would have me believe. For virtue can be our old tribe einpfropfen
never so good that we do not still have a taste of it should keep. I
loved you not.

Ophelia. Desto worse, so that I was cheated. Hamlet. Go into a nunnery. Why
did you want a mother of sinners be? I am personally not one of the worst,
but can I accuse me of such things that it would be better, my
mother would have me not brought to the world.

I am very proud to rachgierig, ehrsüchtig to set up more sins than I
thought it had to Namsen, imagination and power train them, and time
to perform. Why should such a lad as I am, between heaven and earth
herumkriechen? We are all identified worthless; trust none of us - go into
a convent of nuns - Where is your father?

Ophelia. At home, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. Let the door lock behind him, so
he fools anywhere than in his own home could play - Adieu. Ophelia. O, help
him, loving God!

Hamlet. If you take a man, I will curse you this-to give dowry Sey-so-chaste
as ice, as pure as snow, but you will not miss the Verläumdung - go
into a convent of nuns - Adieu - Or if you do not avoid kanst, so take one
fools, because people know gescheidte even to think what kind of monster
it makes them .-- nuns in a convent, and I say the only soon: Adieu.

Ophelia. Your heavenly powers, restore him Stellet! Hamlet. I also have
from your Mahler Art one, a fine art!

God has given you one face, and it makes you a different. verhunzt our Lord
your God with your creature tändelhafte manners by your Ziererey, your
stuttering affected, euern dancing career, your childish whims, and Seyde
ignorant enough for you on this paltriness yet who knows how much
einzubilden. Go, go, I want nothing more of it, it has made me great. I
Meyn, Heyrathen no more! Those who now verheyrathet are all up to one,
live like the rest should remain as they are. In a nuns' convent, geh.
(Hamlet's up.) Ophelia. O what a noble Gemüth is basically addressed to!
The one Aug Hofmann, the tongue is one lesson, the sword of a hero! The
expectation, the hope of the blooming of State!

Der Spiegel, worinn each besah who wanted to like, the model of all that
big, beautiful and lovable is totally, totally zernichtet!

I unglükselige!

Once the honey of his Schmeicheleyen, the music of his vows to me so eager
sog; IZT and must see how the best minds, like a disgruntled Glokenspiel,
all false, mißklingende tones giebt own, and this incomparable Virtue
Flowers in finstrer Schwermuth hinwelkt!

O! Woe to me!

that I had to live, to see what I have seen.

Third Scene. (The King and Polonius occur.) King. love, say you? No,
his Gemüth is used quite different things, and what he said, whether
it be a little strange sound, also did not Wahnwiz. There is
something in him Gemüth what sizt his brooding melancholy, and I would
like to arrange it Seyn dangerous, it will be time to leave. It gives
me the speed in a way beygefallen how this evil will be pre kan. I want him
to England without delay send to the tribute to fodern, we will
zurükgehalten: Maybe that the sea-air, a different country and others
objects, this may dispel evil matter which in his heart gesezt, and his
brain filled with black has ideas which he nachhängt, and more in this
strange sense of humor is in ruins. What do you think of this?

Polonius. It is a good effect thun . And yet I think still that despised
love, the first source and cause of this Schwermuth been - How's, Ophelia?
You did not Nöthiger to tell us what Prince Hamlet said, we have all heard
- (Ophelia geht ab.) Gracious Lord, act like euerm, but if you do not,
then let the queen his mother after the Comödie a secret meeting in an
attempt to make the cause of his Gramshammer to learn from him, let them
with language straight out go against him, and I will if it's for
good anseht to provide a place where I am with everything they each other
to talk, listen kan.

Will he not say so schikt him to England, or keeps it somewhere else,
what your wisdom rathsamste the place. king. We want to make it so -
Wahnwiz is what all the big suspect the you should not leave unattended.
(They go from.) (with Hamlet, or three actors zween occurs.) Hamlet. Say
your speech, I ask you, as I do you've foregoing, with the natural
tone and accent, how to Life in general is talking about. Because
if it's mouth so full of wanted to take, as some of our actors to maintain
thun, so I would just love it when the Ausruffer my verses hersagte.

And sawed the air is not so with your hand, but it makes manière,
because even in the fiercest stream, storm and whirlwind of your passion
you must move so well in your violence have indicated that they have
something noble and decent reserve. Oh, it's me against the soul, if I train
a broad set lout in a large Perüke see before me, a passion to Fezen
ripping, and in order to Seyn pathetic, is not gebehrdet otherwise
than as a great man, but are commonly Such Gesellen also capable
of nothing else than Lermer strange and unnatural to make
Gesticulationen.

I could beat such a boy, if he gets the role of a hero, and a Dragoon in
the inn makes; Herod himself is only one child against. I ask you, you take
it in eight. Actor. But I stand by your grace. Hamlet. However, you must
also not too tame Seyn, in which Stüke-determination must be your strength
your teacher Seyn.

Let the action to the words and the words to fit action, with the only
caution that it never went beyond the boundaries of the natural
excess - because everything is Übertriebne against the actor-Endzwek art,
at all times, from the beginning and IZT, nothing else was and is, as of
nature like a mirror for providing, of virtue their own true shape and
proportions to show and the morals of time before their smallest units
and shades according to the present life gemahlt. Hierinn is somewhat
exaggerated, or even to faint and below the real life, so it can while the
foolish laugh irritate, but it is more reasonable offensive Seyn, and the
Urtheil of these will be all eyes euern an entire theater full of
those predominate.

I know actors, and they were praised by some people (so you can praise,)
their roles howled so disgusting, so ungebehrdig to spreißten that I
thought some of their natural Tagwerker boys did people want to make and
they did not seyen Gerath so odious-grotesque fact annoyed it to human
nature. actor. I hope we have this pretty much Unform Bey us
abolished.

Hamlet. O, nity from him perfectly. And those who make your funny Baur be
schärfet, that they no longer say, as in their role is, because it giebt
some among them who are themselves want to make fun with it, that it is
a silly number of spectators to laugh can bring, although in the
nemlichen Augenblik attention to an important body of Stüks should be stapled
Seyn: That's what shameful, appalling and shows a kind of ambition
in the fool that makes it so.

Go, get ready. (The actors are from.) Fourth Scene. (Polonius, rosary and
Güldenstern occur.) Hamlet. Ists How, sir? Will the king hear this Stük?
Polonius. And to the queen, and that immediately. Hamlet. To see that
the actors make hurtig. (Polonius geht ab.) Will you beyde not even go
and help that they are ready ? Beyde. We want Gracious Lord. (They go
from.) Hamlet. He, holla, Horatio - (Horatio to Hamlet.) Horatio. Here,
dearest prince, what have you to command? Hamlet. Horatio, you're perfectly
as an honest man, than I ever in my life have found. Horatio. Oh, my
Gracious Lord - Hamlet. No, you do not train, I flatterer, because what
interest can I hope from you, whose whole Reichthum Therein is that you
have enough common sense to bring you food and clothes yourself? The tongue
of Schmeicheley lekt only to the feet of the Great, and prevents
their kupplerische knees just where she hopes reward. Do you hear? Since
then, my soul is able to select people and of people to distinguish
yourself from it all for himself auserkohren. Because I have you as a man
to know, the good and bad Glük with equal acceptance, and if all are
vile united against him, so good Muths was as if he had nothing to
suffer. And glüklich are those whose blood type and Gemüths want so mixed
that they do not whistle for finger fortunes, and drown, as it takes. Show
me the man who does not Sclave passion is, I want him in the core take
my heart, yes, in the heart of my heart, I thee wear - Enough, and a little
more than its fair share of which - it is a show the night before the king
to be, worinn a scene that comes very close to what I tell you of
the special circumstances of my father's death was told.

I ask you, if this scene comes to watch my uncle with the utmost
degree of care, of your soul is possible. If a certain Bey speech his
secret guilt is not even verräth, it is the spirit we have seen,
from hell, and my fantasies of the devil on ambos forged. Use an eye from
him, I want it so, and afterwards we want our observations together,
and a Urtheil about his witnessing festsezen. Horatio. Good, Gracious Lord.
If what he steals, while Comödie that is played, and the My discoveries
escapes, I will pay the theft. Fifth Scene.

(The King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosary, Güldenstern, and other lords
of the court, with the servant, what Fakeln present. A Danish march, with
trumpets.) Hamlet. As they come to Comödie - I must here make the Geken -
(to Horatio.) Look at a square. King. What's to our nephew Hamlet? Hamlet.
Immeasurably in That, after Cameleon Art; I eat air, filled with promises,
but your Capuns will not be bold dabey. king. I know nothing with this
answer to make Hamlet - Hamlet. I do not - (To Polonius.) Well, my Lord,
yes it played former also Comödien at the university, did you say?
Polonius. The that I, Gracious Lord, and you gave me a good actor. Hamlet.
And what machtet for their roles? Polonius. I made the Julius Caesar, I
was killed at the Capitol, Brutus brought me to.

Hamlet. That was brutally acted by him, such as capital calf kill - Are
Comödianten ready? rosary. Yes, Gracious Lord, they are waiting for euern
command. Queen. hieher Come, my dear Hamlet; Seze thee to me. Hamlet. To
pardon, mother, here is a magnet to attract more. Polonius (to the queen.)
Oh, ho, have you noticed that? Hamlet. Miss, do you want me to leave the
respective euerm Schooß? (He sezt themselves to their feet on the
floor.) Ophelia. No, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. I Meyn, my head on euerm Schooß?
Ophelia. Yes, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. Think of it, I did what otherwise
gemeynt? Ophelia. I believe nothing, Gracious Lord. Hamlet (somewhat
quietly.) This is a nice idea, between the legs of a girl unicellular -
Ophelia.

What's Gracious Lord? Hamlet. Nothing. Ophelia. Seyde your tidy, Gracious
Lord? Hamlet. Who I? Ophelia. Yes. Hamlet. O God! a fun-maker, as you
will no longer see.

What should a thun as tidy Seyn? Because, you see what my mother for a
fun face time, and it is hardly zwo hours, that my father is Todt. Ophelia.
To forgive, it is zweymal zween months, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. Even so
long? O, if that is so black like the devil go, I want my ermine-fur
knock again.
Also she hated him bitterly, and with good cause.
There was only one way to work on her--through her love for this man,
Richard Darrien; for that she did love him, he had little doubt. If it
were choice between yielding and the death of Darrien, then perhaps she
might give way. But there came the rub.

Dingaan had sworn to him that if he made Darrien's blood to flow, then he
should be killed, and, like Rachel, Dingaan kept his oaths. Moreover, that
Zulu who met the cattle herd had sworn it again in almost the same words.
Therefore it would seem that if he wished to continue to breathe,
Darrien's blood must not be made to flow. All the rest might be explained
when the impi came, as it would do sooner or later, especially if he could
show to them that the Inkosazana was his willing wife, but the murder of
Darrien could never be explained. Well, the man might die, or seem to die,
and then who could hold him responsible? Or if they did, if any of his
people remained faithful to him, an attack might be beaten off. Brave as
they were, the Zulus could not storm those walls on which he had spent so
much labour, though now he almost wished that he had left the walls alone
and settled the affair of Rachel and of Darrien first.

Ishmael poured out more rum and drank it, neat this time, as though to
nerve himself for some undertaking. Then he went to the door of the hut
and called, whereon presently a hideous old woman crept in and squatted
down in the circle of light thrown by the lamp. She was wrinkled and
deformed, and her snake-skin moocha, with the inflated fish-bladder in her
hair, showed that she was a witch-doctoress.

"Well, Mother," he said, "have you made the poison?"

"Yes, Ibubesi, yes. I have made it as I alone can do. Oh! it is a
wonderful drug, worth many cows. How many did you say you would give me?
Six?"

"No, three; but if it does what is wanted you shall have the other three
as well. Tell me again, how does it work?"

"Thus, Ibubesi. Whoever drinks this medicine becomes like one dead--none
can tell the difference, no, not a doctor even--and remains so for a long
while--perhaps one day, perhaps two, perhaps even three. Then life
returns, and by degrees strength, but not memory; for whole moons the
memory is gone, and he who has drunk remains like a child that has
everything to learn."

"You lie, Mother. I never heard of such a medicine."

"You never heard of it because none can make it save me, and I had its
secret from my grandmother; also few can afford to pay me for it. Still,
it has been used, and were I not afraid I could give you cases. Stay, I
will show you. Call that beast," and she pointed to a dog that was asleep
at the side of the hut. "Here is milk; I will show you."

Ishmael hesitated, for he was fond of this dog; then as he wished to test
the stuff he called it. It came and sat down beside him, looking up in his
face with faithful eyes. Then the old witch poured milk into a bowl, and
in the milk mixed some white powder which she took out of a folded leaf,
and offered it to the animal. The dog sniffed the milk, growled slightly,
and refused it.

"The evil beast does not like me; he bit me the other day," said the old
doctoress. "Do you give it to him, Ibubesi; he will trust you."

 So Ishmael patted the dog on the head, then, offered it the milk, which
it lapped up to the last drop.

"There, evil beast," said the woman, with a chuckle, "you won't bite me
any more; you'll forget all about me for a long time. Look at him,
Ibubesi, look at him."

As she spoke, the poor dog's coat began to stare; then it uttered a low
howl, ran to Ishmael, tried to lick his hand, and rolled over, to all
appearance quite dead.

"You have killed my dog, which I love, you hag!" he said angrily.

"Then why did you give medicine to what you love, Ibubesi? But have no
fear, the evil beast has only taken a small dose; to-morrow morning it
will awake, but it will not know you or anyone. Who is the medicine for,
Ibubesi? The Lady Zoola? If so, it may not work on her, for she is mighty,
and cannot be harmed."

"Fool! Do you think that I would play tricks with the Inkosazana?"

"No, you want to marry her, don't you? but it seems to me that she has no
mind that way. Then it is for the man for whom she has a mind for? Well,
Ibubesi, you have promised the six cows, and you saved me once from being
killed for witchcraft, so I will say something. Don't give it to the chief
Dario."

"Why not, you old fool; will it kill him after all?"

"No, no; it will do what I said, no less and no more, in this quantity,"
and she handed him another powder wrapped in dry leaves; "but I have had
bad dreams about you, Ibubesi, and they were mixed up with the Inkosazana
and this white man Dario. I dreamed they brought your death upon you--a
dreadful death. Ibubesi, be wise, set Dario free, and change your mind as
to marrying the Inkosazana, who is not for you."

"How can I change my mind, Descendant of Wizards?" broke out Ishmael. "Can
a river penned between rocks change its course? Can it run backwards from
the sea to the hill? This woman draws me as the sea draws the river;
because of her my blood is afire. I had rather win her and die, than live
rich and safe without her to old age. The more she hates and scorns me,
the more I love her."

"I understand," said the doctoress, nodding her head till the bladder in
her hair bobbed about like a float at which a fish is pulling. "I
understand. I have seen people like this before--men and women too--when a
bad spirit enters into them because of some crime they have committed. The
Inkosazana, or those who guard her, have sent you this bad spirit, and,
Ibubesi, you must run the road upon which it is appointed that you should
travel; for joy or sorrow you must run that road. But when we meet in the
world of ghosts, which I think will be soon, do not blame me, do not say
that I did not warn you. Now it is all right about those cows, is it not?
although I dare say the Zulus will milk them and not I, for to-night I
seem to smell Zulus in the air," and she lifted her broad nose and sniffed
like a hound. "I wish you could have left the Inkosazana alone, and that
Dario too, for he is a part of her; in my dreams they seemed to be one.
But you won't, you will walk your own path; so good night, Ibubesi. The
dog will wake again in the morning, but he will not know you. Good night,
Ibubesi--of course I understand that the cows will be young ones that have
not had more than two calves. Mix the powder in milk, or water, or
anything; it is without taste or colour. Good night, Ibubesi," and without
waiting for an answer the old wretch crept out of the hut.

When she was gone Ishmael cursed her aloud, then drank some more rum,
which he seemed to need. The place was very lonely, and the sight of his
dog, lying to all appearance dead at his side, oppressed him. He patted
its head and it did not move; he lifted its paw and it fell down flabbily.
The brute was as dead as anything could be. It occurred to him that before
night came again he might look like that dog. His story might be told; he
might have left the earth in company of all the deeds that he had done
thereon. He had imagination enough to know his sins, and they were an evil
host to face. Old Dove and his wife, for instance--holy people who
believed in God and Vengeance, and had never done any wrong, only striven
for years and years to benefit others; it would not be pleasant to meet
them. Rachel had said that she saw them standing behind him, and he felt
as though they were there at that moment. Look, one of them crossed
between him and the lamp--there was the mark of the kerry on his head--and
the woman followed; he could see her blue lips as she bent down to look at
the dog. It was unbearable. He would go and talk to Rachel, and ask her if
she had made up her mind. No, for if he broke in on her thus at night, he
was sure that she would kill either herself or him with that spear she had
taken from the dead Zulu, reddened with his own blood. He would keep faith
with her and wait till the morrow. He would send for one of his wives. No,
the thought of those women made him sick. He would go round the
fortifications and beat any sentries whom he found asleep, or receive the
reports of the spies. To stop in that hut in the company of a dog which
seemed to be dead, and of imaginations that no rum could drown, was
impossible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once more the morning came, and Rachel sat in the walled yard awaiting the
dreadful hour of her trial, for it was the day and time that Ishmael had
appointed for her answer. Until now Rachel had cherished hopes that
something might happen: that the people of Mafooti might intervene to save
her and Richard; that the Zulus might appear, even that Ishmael might
relent and let them go. But Mami had been out that morning and brought
back tidings which dispelled these hopes. She had ventured to sound some
of the leading men, and said that, like all the people, they were very
sullen and alarmed, but declared, as she had expected, that they dare do
nothing, for Ibubesi would kill them, and if they escape him the Zulus
would kill them because the Inkosazana was found in their possession. Of
the Zulus themselves, scouts who had been out for miles, reported that
they had seen no sign. It was clear also that Ishmael was as determined as
ever, for he had sent her a message by Mami that he would wait upon her as
he had promised, and bring the white man with him.

Then what should she say and what should she do? Rachel could think of no
plan; she could only sit still and pray while the shadow of that awful
hour crept ever nearer.

It had come; she heard voices without the wall, among them Ishmael's. Her
heart stopped, then bounded like a live thing in her breast. He was
commanding someone to "catch that dog and tie it up, for it was bewitched,
and did not know him or anyone," then the sound of a dog being dragged
away, whining feebly, and then the door opened. First Ishmael came in with
an affectation of swaggering boldness, but looking like a man suffering
from the effects of a long debauch. About his eyes were great black rings,
and in them was a stare of sleeplessness. He carried a double-barrelled
gun under his arm, but the hand with which he supported it shook visibly,
and at every unusual sound he started. After him came Richard, his wrists
bound together behind him, and on his legs hide shackles which only just
allowed him to shuffle forward slowly. Moreover he was guarded by four men
who carried spears. Rachel glanced quickly at his face, and saw that it
was pale and resolute; quite untouched by fear.

"Are you well?" she asked quietly, taking no note of Ishmael.

"Yes," he answered, "and you, Rachel?"

"Quite well bodily, Richard, but oh! my soul is sick."

Before he could reply Ishmael turned on him savagely, and bade him be
silent, or it would be the worse for him. Then he took off his hat with
his shaking hand, and bowed to Rachel.

"Rachel," he said, "I have kept my promise, and left you alone for three
days, but time is up and now this gentleman and I have come to hear your
decision, which is so important to both of us."

"What am I to decide?" she asked in a low voice, looking straight before
her.

"Have you forgotten? Your memory must be very bad. Well, it is best to
have no mistake, and no doubt our friend here would like to know exactly
how things stand. You have to decide whether you will take me as your
husband to-day of your own free will, or whether Mr. Richard Darrien shall
suffer the punishment of death, for having tried to kill his sentry and
escape, a crime of which he has been guilty, and afterwards I should take
you as my wife with, or without, your consent."

When Richard heard these words the veins in his forehead swelled with rage
and horror till it seemed as though they would burst.

"You unutterable villain," he gasped, "you cowardly hound! Oh! if only my
hands were free."

"Well, they ain't, Mr. Darrien, and it's no use your tugging at that
buffalo hide, so hold your tongue, and let us hear the lady's answer,"
sneered Ishmael.

"Richard, Richard," said Rachel in a kind of wail, "you have heard. It is
a matter of your life. What am I to do?"

"Do?" he answered, in loud, firm tones, "do? How can you ask me such a
question? The matter is not one of my life, but of your--of your--oh! I
cannot say it. Let this foul beast kill me, of course, and then, if you
care enough, follow the same road. A few years sooner or later make little
difference, and so we shall soon be together again."

She thought a moment, then said quietly:

"Yes, I care enough, and a hundred times more than that. Yes, that is the
only way out. Listen, you Ishmael:--Richard Darrien, the man to whom I am
sworn, and I, give you this answer. Murder him if you will, and bring
God's everlasting vengeance on your head. He will not buy his life on such
terms, and if I consented to them I should be false to him. Murder him as
you murdered my father and mother, and when I know that he is dead I will
go to join him and them."

"All right, Rachel," said Ishmael, whose face was white with fury, "I
think I will take you at your word, and you can go to look for him down
below, if you like, for if I am not to get you here, he shan't. Now then,
say your prayers, Mr. Darrien," and stepping forward slowly he cocked the
double-barrelled gun.

"Men of Mafooti," exclaimed Rachel in Zulu, "Ibubesi is about to do murder
on one who like myself is under the mantle of Dingaan. If his blood should
flow to-day or to-morrow, yours shall flow in payment, yours, and that of
your wives and children, for the crime of the chief is the crime of the
people."

At her words the four natives who had been watching this scene uneasily,
although they could not understand the English talk, called out to Ishmael
in remonstrance. His only answer was to lift the gun, and for an instant
that seemed infinite Rachel waited to hear its explosion, and to see the
grey-eyed, open-faced man she loved, who stood there like a rock, fall a
shattered corpse. After all, why should we take what we know that it must
Seyn, and that it is so common as some of the everyday matters that are
always floating before our senses, from wrong childish waywardness,
take to heart?

Fy! It is an offense against the sky, an offense against the Gestorbnen,
a crime against nature; unrhymed highly in the eyes of reason,
which knows no common theme, as the deaths of fathers, and from the
first corpse to the flat IZT has died, has always zugeruffen, so
it must Seyn.

We ask you therefore, to throw nothing serving sadness in his grave, and
will see us as a father to euern, because the world should know that its
our next Seyde the throne, and that love, of tenderness to his father
sons can bear, no bigger than that which we have gewiedmet you. What your
projects, after school at Wittenberg betrift to go back, it is not at all
with our desires, and we ask you which abzustehen, and our loving eyes to
stay here, our first courtier, our nephew and our son . Queen.

Let not your mother Fehlbitte thun, Hamlet: I pray thee, stay Bey us, go
not to Wittenberg. Hamlet. I obey you with the best will, Madame. king.
Well, this is a beautiful Liebreich response; Seyde as ourselves in
Dännemark! Come, Madame, this pleasant and ungezwungne attunement Hamlets
is as enjoyable to me that this day is a festive day of joy is
Seyn - Come, follow me - (you go from.)

Third Scene. Hamlet (remains alone.) That O this too - too - solid
flesh melt and dissolved in Thränen wish to melt away!

Or that He who Immerdaurende, his thunder is not the self-murder would
have been addressed! O God! O God! How disgusting, schaal, stale and
ungeschmakt come to me all the pleasures of this world! Fy, fy, graut
before me!

It is a ungesäuberter Garden, where everything in Saame shoots, and
with weeds and thistles is overgrown.

That it should then come Seyn!

Only months zween Todt! No, not even so much, not so much - so excellent a
king - against this, as against a satyr Apollo: The my mother loved her
so tenderly that there was no rough breeze anwehen they could - heaven and
earth! Why must my memory as faithful Seyn? How, they do not hieng to him,
as if even the tenderness of their diet increases their hunger? - And yet,
within a month - I want, I can not think off - frailty, thy Nam
'is woman!

A little month!

Eh, the shoes were worn in which my poor father's corpse was followed,
regardless of Niobe louder Thränen - How?

They - they just - (o heaven! A rational loose animal would have more
getraurt) verheyrathet with my uncle - my father's brother, but my
father just as I like the Hercules. Within one month! - Eh yet the salt
of their feigning Thränen her red eyes jüken stopped verheyrathet!

- Sun eilfertig, and in an incestuous bed! - No, there is nothing good and
nothing can be good bud. But - o brich you, my heart, because my tongue,
I must mention hot. Fourth Scene. (Horatio, Bernardo and Marcellus occur.)
Horatio. Heil, Gracious prince! Hamlet.

I am enjoying myself, you probably see - your Seyde Horatio, or I forget
myself Horatio.

I'm Horatio, Gracious Lord, and your servant demüthiger forever. Hamlet.
Sir, my good friend, which were subsequently incorporated into the
conditions under Seyn us. And what leads you hieher from Wittenberg,
Horatio? - Is not Marcellus? - Marcellus. Yes, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. I'm
glad to see you, good morning, sir (to Bernardo) - But seriously,
Horatio, what brings you from Wittenberg hieher? Horatio. Landstreicherey
An impetus of my Gracious Lord. Hamlet. euern The enemy, I would
not say, even my ears, you should not anthun the violence, to witness
such a statement against you to make yourself. I know its not a
loafer Seyde.

What is your business in Elsinoor? We must teach you to drink, eh abreiset
her again. Horatio. Gracious Lord, I came to your father to see Leichenbegängniß.
Hamlet. I beg you, I do not scoff, school Camerade: I think you did a
lot more on my mother's wedding.

Horatio. The truth is, Gracious Lord, she followed quickly behind Dreiner.
Hamlet. It was out of pure domesticity, my good Horatio - For roasts,
assisted by the Leichenmahl left, Bey of the wedding to be able to apply
cold - O Horatio, rather like 'my worst enemy in the sky as this
day have seen - my father - däucht me, I see my father - Horatio
(lebhaft.)

Where, Gracious Lord? Hamlet. In the eyes of my Gemüths , Horatio. Horatio.
I saw him once, he was a handsome prince.

Hamlet. Sag ', he was a man in all points a man, so everything you have
said, its the same werd' I never see. Horatio. Gracious Lord, I think I
saw him verwichne night. Hamlet.

Sahest you him? Who? Horatio. The king, father euern. Hamlet. The king,
my father? Horatio.

Mässiget your astonishment only so long and leihet me an attentive
ear, till I, on the traces of this wakern men here, you have told
the miracle be.

Hamlet. For heaven's sake, let's listen to me. Horatio. zwo nights at
each other, these beyden officiers, Marcellus and Bernardo, on the
vigil, in the Todt silence of midnight, this coincidence had a shape
that resembled euerm father from head to foot, Stük before Stük
armed, appears before them, and goes with feyerlichem motion, slowly
and majestically Bey them vorbey; dreymal he went from fear before
their eyes fixed, with its long Stok in hand, back and forth;
however, that, by Schreker beynahe into jelly dissolved completely
immobile stuhnden, and Muth did not have him anzureden.

You entdekten me this chance in secret, and led me in previous ones
by night with them at the guard to pull, and here I saw the nemliche
time that these nemliche appearance, from word to word, as they had
described it in me.

I realized euern Father: These hands are not like each other. Hamlet. And
where was that? Horatio. Gracious Lord, on the terrace, where we
had the guard.

Hamlet. Have ye not angeredet? Horatio. I that is, Gracious Lord but it
gave me no answer, only one's times I had before, it will lift its
head up and make a movement as if it wanted to talk: But in the
nemlichen Augenblik the cock crowed, and then trembles' plözlich
it away, and disappeared from our face.

Hamlet. That is what is very wonderful! Horatio. As I live, Gracious
Lord, it is, and we felt it our duty to see you like this message to give.
Hamlet. In That their masters, I must confess, I am restless thereon.
(to Marcellus and Bernardo.) Did you receive the watch that night? Beyde.
Yes, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. It was armed, told her? Beyde. Armed, Gracious
Lord. Hamlet. From foot to head? Beyde. Yes, Gracious Lord. Hamlet. So yes
Could you not see his face? Horatio. Oh, yes, Gracious Lord, he wore his
visor raised. Hamlet. Tell me, he saw from indignant? Horatio. His
Gebehrdung seemed more sadness than anger auszudrüken. Hamlet. Bleich or
roth? Horatio. Very pale. Hamlet. And he saw you in the face? Horatio.
Very rigid.

Hamlet. I wished that I would have been dabey. Horatio. It would
take you in no Schreker gesezt have little. Hamlet. Very probably, it
remained long?

Horatio.

How long it took to deal with hundreds of moderate speed to count. Beyde.
Longer, longer. Horatio. When I saw it not. Hamlet. Was his gray beard
?

No - Horatio. That was it, as I do in his life saw silvergrey. Hamlet. I
am with you on guard that night, maybe it goes again. Horatio. I'm good
for you, this is it . Hamlet. If my venerable father's shape, I will
talk with him, though hell itself tearing their throats and I would
mention hot.

I ask you, you wofern this phenomenon habet hitherto kept secret, so
let it always be a secret among us to stay there tonight may encounter
what it wants to observe it, but silent.

I want evidence for your friendship Seyn: Now, had you want.

Between eilf and twelve clock, on the terrace, I will visit you. All.
Demüthige your servants, Gracious Lord - (You go from.) Hamlet. My
friends, like me Eurig: Lebet well.

(Allein.) my father spirit in arms! It is not all as it should Seyn!
I'll get some verdekte Übelthat: If only the night would have been there!
Until then, size still, my soul: shameful Thater have come to light, and
if the whole earth would be about them hergewälzt. Fifth Scene. (Turns
into a room in Polonius home.) (Laertes and Ophelia occur.) Laertes.
My Geräthe is eingepakt, probably sister lives, and when the winds
of my trip are favorable, so my memory verschlaft not, but let me
have news of you.

Ophelia. How can you doubt? Laertes. As for the Hamlet and his love
Tändeley betrift, keep them for a fleeting taste, and a game of youthful
blood, and a violet in the first spring days of nature, early but not
durable, comfortable, but fell, and a sweet smell for a minute, not more -
Ophelia. Not more than that? Laertes. Believe me, no more, dear sister.
We take in our youth not only in size and strength; wächßt with the
soul and its inner operations and duties are expanding their temple.
Perhaps he loves you IZT honestly, with the pure affection of a still heart
unverdorbnen: But you must remember that as soon as his size to consider
is his inclination is no longer in its violence, because he depends
on himself from his birth; he can not choose for themselves how ordinary
people: The safety and welfare of the State depends on his choice, and
therefore must be his choice for the voice and the desires of the body, of
which he is the head, determined.

If he then says he love you, so there ways; the point of your wisdom
to him in so far as to believe that after his birth and future of
dignity, his words can give strength, and this is no more than what the
consent of the King received kan. Überleget so wish, what a great loss
your honor can suffer when their lokenden his singing too gullible
ear verleihet either their verliehrt your heart, or his impetuosity,
which as last zurükhalten is nothing more, even on your sieget
chastity.

Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my sister Theurer; steuret a more innocent tendency,
which is so dangerous, and you do not überlaßt electricity charming wishes.
The gap is wasteful enough girls, if they are chaste beauty of the moon
entschleyert: The Virtue itself is against the bites of Verläumdung not
sure, only too often eats a worm verborgner the children of the spring
before their buds that have developed, and mengender Meel Thau-is
never more to obtain than in the morning Thauvollen youth.

Seyde so be careful here giebt fear is the best security, the youth has an
enemy in itself, even if it has not from the outside. Ophelia. I will
call these good memories to ever watchful guardians of my heart make. But,
my dear brother, yes it does not, as some ungeheiligte souls shepherds to
look for close and dornichten path to heaven, that, however, that they
themselves, their own teachings uneingedenk in nefarious Freyheit
on the wide spring through opulence dahertraben. Laertes. O, it Seyde
unconcerned. Sixth Scene. (Polonius to the former.) Laertes. I consider
myself to oneself - But here comes my father, the better, I will present
his farewell blessing duplicated receive. Polonius.

You 're still here, Laertes! For vessels, boats, my son, the wind
schwellt your sail already, and it is waiting for you. Here, receive
my blessing (He put his hand on Laertes principal) and those living a few
rules, which I accompanied him, write in your memory A. Gieb thy
thoughts no tongue, and if ever you'll be surprised by irregular,
at least so beware, it acts to make against anyone Sey affable,
without you with someone to make common: Do you have good friends,
so they are inseparable in folders your soul, but your friendship
gieb not everyone neuausgebruteten, Preiss unbefiederten acquaintance.

Beware of the opportunities to handle, but once you're inside, so
do you so that your opponent can not hope, to insult you with
impunity.

Leih 'your ear to every one, but few thy mouth; take everyone's
censure, but your Urtheil think back.

Clothed thee so precious as it can pay for your bag, but not fantastic,
rich, not comödiantisch: Because the suit verräth often the man, and in
France people maintain the status and reputation just by announcing that
they deal with taste and decency dress . Sey is neither a loan nor a
borrower, because lending is often directed himself and his friend
basically, borrow and undermines the foundation of a good house keeping.
Especially sey honestly against yourself, because it necessarily follow
that as the light from the day that you are also against anyone
Seyn wilt.

Farewell, my son and my blessing fertilize these memories in your
Gemüthe!

Laertes. I leave my demüthigst of you, Gracious Lord Father. Polonius.
You have high time; go, your wait Serves - Laertes.

Lebet probably, Ophelia, and Reminds you of what I said.

Ophelia. It is in my memory locked, and ye shall be the key to take
with you.

Laertes. Lebet well. (He goes anyway.) Polonius. What did he do to you,
Ophelia? Ophelia . With Eu. Graces permits, something that the prince
Hamlet angieng. Polonius. Truly, a good idea! I did say that he some time
since you often quite alone spoke, and that ye him a very Freyer
access verstattet, and inclined to have heard.

If it is, (as I then play safer hands) so I must tell you, that ye
yourselves not as well understood as it is my daughter and your honor
befitting. What happened between you? Tell me the truth. Ophelia. Mr.
Gracious Father, he gave me zeither several statements made by his affection.
Polonius. Of his affection? Hey! You speak like a young thing, still no
experience of such dangerous things. Believe it because his statements, as
it is called? Ophelia. I do not know what I think, Mr Father. Polonius.
Potz hundred! I will teach thee; seyst you think a child is the head
that you have explanations for his baar've made money because they are
false coin. You must see to better yourself, or I will be little joy in
your experience - Ophelia.

Gracious Lord's father, testified he is a fierce love for me, but in honor
- Polonius. Yes, in Thorheit you should say, go go - Ophelia. And has
by his words and feyrlichsten sacred oaths bekräftiget. Polonius. Yes,
slings, in order to catch woodcocks. I know how verschwendrisch in the
heart aussprudelt oaths, if the blood is in flames. My good child, you
must not for this upsurge fire hold true, they are like lightning in
a cool summer evening, they light up without Hize, and die as soon as
they ascend. From this hour on Seyde somewhat economical with the access
to your person; sezt your conversation to a higher Preiß than one
command that you wished to speak.

What the prince Hamlet betrift, it feels so much from him that he is
young, and that he is more Freyheit may remove, when you Wolstand
permits.

In a word, Ophelia, his oaths trauet not the less, depending feyrlicher
they are, they wrap to, regardless of the vows, the sky is often
performed, in religion, in order to defraud the more safer. Once and for
all: I would not like to talk too much, that you only one in your Augenblike
suspect seztest, as you know it not better to use than with the prince
Hamlet words to change. Please remember that, I'll tell you's, and go into
your room. Ophelia. Seyn I will obey, Gracious Lord Father. (They go
from.) Siebende Scene. (Transforms into the terrace in front of the
palace.) (Hamlet, Horatio and Marcellus occur.)
Again the lightning flared, and in it they saw her standing on the crest
of the hut. She had let drop the spear as though she needed it no more,
and her arms were outstretched to the Heavens, and her beautiful face was
upturned, and her long hair floated in the wind. Seen thus by that quick,
white light, which shone in the madness of her eyes, she seemed no woman
but what they had fabled her to be, a queen of Spirits, and at the vision
of her they groaned again, while some of them fell to the earth and hid
their faces with their hands.

The darkness fell once more, and a man went into the hut to bring out the
lamp that burned there. When he returned Rachel stood among them; they had
not seen or heard her descend. Ishmael saw her also, and feeling his doom
in the fierce eyes that glowered at him, stretched out his hand and caught
her by the robe, praying for pity.

At his touch she uttered a wild scream, which pierced like a knife through
the hearts of all that heard it.

"Suffer it not," she cried, "oh! my people, suffer not that I be thus
defiled."

They rent him from her with blows and execrations, looking up to their
chief for his word to tear him to pieces.

"No," said Tamboosa, grimly, "he shall to the King to tell this story ere
he die."

"Save me, Rachel, save me," he moaned. "You don't know what they mean. I
was mad with love for you, do not judge me harshly and send me to be
tortured."

This appeal of his seemed to pierce the darkness of her brain, and for a
little while her face grew human.

"I judge not," she answered in Zulu; "pray to the Great One above who
judges. Oh! man, man," she went on in a kind of eerie whisper, "what have
I done to you that you should treat me thus? Why did you command the
soldiers to kill my father and my mother? Why did you poison my lover? Why
did you drive away my soul, and fill me with this madness? Take me away
from this accursed town, Tamboosa, before Heaven's vengeance falls on it,
and let me see that face no more."

Then some of them made a guard about her and led her thence, along the
central street, and through the barricaded gates, that they broke down for
her passage. They led her to a little cave in the slope of the opposing
hill, for although no rain fell, the gathered storm was breaking; the
lightning flashed thick and fast, the thunder groaned and bellowed, and a
wild wind beat the screeching trees.

Here in the mouth of this cave Rachel sat herself down and looked at the
kraal, Mafooti, awaiting she knew not what, while the impi pillaged the
town, and Ishmael, already half dead with fear, remained bound to the
roof-tree of the hut that had been her prison.

 Whilst she waited thus, and watched, of a sudden one of the outer huts
began to burn, though whether the lightning or some soldier had fired it
none could tell. Then, in an instant, as it seemed, driven by the raging
wind, the flame leapt from roof to roof till Mafooti was but a sheet of
fire. The soldiers at their work of pillage saw, and rushed hither and
thither, confusedly, for they did not know the paths, and were tangled in
the fences.

A figure appeared running down the central street, a figure of flame, for
his clothes burned on him, and those by Rachel said,

"See, see, _Ibubesi!_"

He could not reach the gate, for a blazing hut fell across his path.
Turning he sped to the edge of a cliff that rose near by, where, because
of its steepness, there was no wall. Here for a while he ran up and down
till the wind-driven fire from new-lit huts at its brink leapt out upon
him like thin, scarlet tongues. He threw himself to the ground, he rose
again, beating his head with his hand, for his long hair was ablaze. Then
in his torment and despair, of a sudden he threw himself backwards into
the dark gulf beneath. Fifty feet and more he fell to the rocks below, and
where he fell there he lay till he died, and on the morrow the Zulus found
and buried him.

Thus did Ishmael depart out of the life of Rachel to the end which he had
earned.

Nor did he go alone, for of the Zulus in the town many were caught by the
fire, and perished, so many that when the regiment mustered at dawn, that
same regiment which had escorted the Inkosazana to the banks of the
Tugela, fifty and one men were missing, whilst numbers of others appeared
burned and blistered.

"Ah!" said Tamboosa as he surveyed the injured and counted the dead, "the
curse is quickly at work among us, and I think that this is but the
beginning of evil. Well, I expected it, no less."

As for the town of Mafooti it was utterly destroyed. To this day the place
is a wilderness where the grass grows rank between the crumbling,
fire-blackened walls. For the people of Ibubesi who had fled, returned
thither no more, nor would others build where it had been, since still
they swear that the spot is haunted by the figure of a white man who, in
times of thunder, rushes across it wrapped in fire, and plunges blazing
into the gulf upon its northern side.

After the storm came the rain which poured all night long, a steady sheet
of water reaching from earth to heaven. Rachel watched it vacantly for a
while, then went to the head of the little cave and lay down wrapped in
karosses that they had made ready for her. Moreover, she slept as a child
sleeps until the sun shone bright on the morrow, then she woke and asked
for food.

But the impi did not sleep. All night long the soldiers stood in huddled
groups beneath such shelter as the trees and rocks would give to them,
while the water poured on them pitilessly till their teeth chattered and
their limbs were frozen. Some died of the cold that night, and afterwards
many others fell sick of agues and fevers of the lungs which killed a
number of them.

In the morning when the storm was past and the sun shone hotly Tamboosa
called the Council of the captains together, and consulted with them as to
whether they should follow after the people of Mafooti who had fled, and
destroy them, or return straight to Zululand. Most of the captains
answered that of Mafooti and its people they had seen enough. Ibubesi was
dead, slain by the vengeance of Heaven; the Inkosazana they had rescued,
alive, though filled with madness; the white lord, Dario, had been
murdered by Ibubesi, it was said with poison, and doubtless his body was
burned in the fire. As for the people of Mafooti themselves, it would seem
that most of them were innocent as they had fled the place, deserting
their chief. To these arguments other captains answered that the people of
Mafooti were not innocent inasmuch as they had helped Ibubesi to carry off
the Inkosazana and the white lord, Dario, from Ramah, and consented to
their imprisonment and to the death of one of them, only flying when they
had tidings that the impi was on the way. Moreover the command was that
every one of these dogs should be killed, whereas they had killed none of
them, but only taken those cattle which were left behind in their flight.
At length the dispute growing fierce, the captains being unable to come to
an agreement, decided that they would lay the matter before the
Inkosazana, and be guided by the words that fell from her, if they could
understand them.

So Tamboosa went into the cave with one other man, and talked to Rachel,
who sat staring at him with stony eyes as though she understood nothing.
When at length he ceased, however, she cried:

"Lead me to Noie at the Great Place. Lead me to Noie," nor would she say
any more.

So, as the people of Mafooti had fled they knew not where, and they had
secured some of the cattle, and as many of the soldiers were sick from the
cold and burns received in the fire, Tamboosa told the regiment that it
was the will of the Inkosazana that they should return to Zululand.

A while later they started, those of them who were so badly burned that
they could not travel, being carried on shields. But Rachel would not be
carried, choosing to walk alone surrounded at a distance by a ring of
soldiers who guarded her. For hours she walked thus, showing no sign of
weariness, but now and again bursting out into shrill laughter, as though
she saw things that moved her to merriment. Only the regiment that
listened was not merry, for it had heard the words that the Inkosazana
spoke in the town of Mafooti, foretelling evil to the Zulus because of the
blood that was between them and her. They thought that she laughed over
the misfortunes that were to come, and over those that had already
befallen them in the fire and in the rain.

About midday they halted to eat, and as before Rachel took food in plenty,
for now that her mind was wandering her body seemed to call for
sustenance. When their meal was finished they moved down to the banks of
the Buffalo River, which ran near by, to find that it was in great flood
after the heavy rain and that it was not safe to try the ford. So they
determined to camp there on the banks, murmuring among themselves that all
went ill with them upon this journey, as was to be expected, and that they
would have done better if they had spent the time in hunting down the
people of Mafooti, instead of sitting idle like tired storks upon the
banks of a river. Yet bad as things might seem, they were destined to be
worse, for while some of them were cutting boughs and grass to make a hut
for the Inkosazana, Rachel, who stood watching them with empty eyes, of a
sudden laughed in her mad fashion, and sped like a swallow to the lip of
the foaming ford. Here, before they could come up with her, she threw off
the outer cloak she wore and rushed into the water till the current bore
her from her feet. Then while the whole regiment shouted in dismay, she
began to swim, striking out for the further bank, and being swept
downwards by the stream. Now Tamboosa, who was almost crazed with fear
lest she should drown, called out that where the Inkosazana went, they
must follow, even to their deaths.

"It is so!" answered the soldiers, as each man locking his arms round the
middle of him who stood in front, company by company, they plunged into
the water in a fourfold chain, hoping thus to bridge it from bank to bank.

Meanwhile Rachel swam on in the strength of her madness as a woman has
seldom swum before. Again and again the muddy waters broke over her head
and the soldiers groaned, thinking that she was drowned. But always that
golden hair reappeared above them. A great tree swept down upon her but
she dived beneath it. She was dashed against a tall rock, but she warded
herself away from it with her hands and still swam on, till at length with
a shout of joy the Zulus saw her find her feet and struggle slowly to the
further bank. Yes, and up it till she reached its crest where she stood
and watched them idly as though unconscious of the danger she had passed,
and of the water that ran from her hair and breast.

"Where a woman can go, we can follow," said some, but others answered:

"She is not a woman, but a spirit. Death himself cannot kill her."

Now the fourfold chain was near the centre of the ford, when suddenly
those at the tip of it were lifted from their feet as Rachel had been, nor
could those behind hold on to them. They were torn from their grasp and
swept away, the most of them never to be seen again, for of these men but
few could swim. Thrice this happened until strong swimmers were sent to
the front, and at length these men won across as Rachel had done, and
caught hold of the stones on the further side, thus forming a living chain
from bank to bank, whereof the centre floated and was bent outwards by the
weight of the water as the back of a bow bends when the string is drawn.

By the help of this human rope thus formed the companies began to come
over, supporting themselves against it, till presently the strain and the
push of them and of the angry river overcame its strength, and the chain
burst in the middle so that many were borne down the stream and drowned.
Yet with risk and toil and loss it joined itself together again and held
fast until every man was over, save the sick and some lads who were left
to tend them and the cattle on the further bank. Then that cable of brave
warriors began to struggle forward like a great snake dragging its tail
after it, and, so by degrees drew itself to safety and gasping out foam
and water saluted the Inkosazana where she stood.

Many were drowned, and others were bruised by rocks, but of this they
thought little since she was safe and they had found her again, to have
lost whom would have been a shame from generation to generation. She
watched the captains reckoning up the number of the dead, and when
Tamboosa and some of them came to make report of it to her, a shadow as of
pity floated across her stony eyes.

"Not on my head," she cried, "not on my head! There is blood between the
Inkosazana and her people of the Zulus, and that blood avenges itself in
blood," and she laughed her eerie laugh.

"It is true, it is just, O Queen," answered Tamboosa solemnly; "the nation
must pay for the sin of its children as the wild beast, Ibubesi, has paid
for his sins."

Then as they could travel no further that day, they built a hut, and lit a
great fire by which Rachel sat and dried herself, nor did she take any
harm from the water, for as the Zulus had said, it seemed as though
nothing could harm her now.

The soldiers also lit fires and despatched messengers to neighbouring
kraals commanding them to bring food, and to send maidens to attend on the
Inkosazana, while others went to a mountain to call all this ill-tidings
from hill to hill till it came to the Great Place of the King.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE CURSE OF THE INKOSAZANA


That night the regiment and Rachel slept upon the bank of the river, and
nothing happened save that lions carried off two soldiers, while two more
who had been injured against the rocks, died. Also others fell sick. On
the following morning food arrived in plenty from the neighbouring kraals,
and with it some girls of high birth to attend upon the Inkosazana.

But with these Rachel would have nothing to do, and when they came near to
her only said:

"Where is Noie, daughter of Seyapi? Lead me to Noie."

So they began their march again, Rachel walking as before in the centre of
a ring of soldiers, and that night slept at a kraal upon a hill. Here
messengers from the King met them charged with many fine words, to which
Rachel listened without understanding them, and then scared them away with
her laughter. Also they brought a beautiful cloak made of the skins of a
rare white monkey, and this she took and wrapped herself in it, for she
seemed to understand that her clothes were ragged.

That day they passed through fertile country, where much corn was grown.
Here they saw a strange sight, for as they went clouds seemed to arise in
the sky from behind them, which presently were seen to be not clouds, but
tens of millions of great winged grasshoppers that lit upon the corn,
devouring it and every other green thing. Within a few hours nothing was
left except the roots and bare branches, while the women of that land ran
to and fro wailing, knowing that next winter they and their children must
starve, and the cattle lowed about them hungrily, for the locusts had
devoured all the grass. Moreover, having eaten everything, these insects
themselves began to die in myriads so that soon the air was poisoned. The
waters were also poisoned with their dead bodies, and at once sickness
came which presently grew into a pestilence.

Now the men of the country sent a deputation to the Inkosazana, praying
her to remove the curse, but when they had spoken she only repeated the
words she had used upon the banks of the Buffalo River.

"Not on my head, not on my head! There is blood between the Inkosazana and
her people of the Zulus. Famine and war and death upon the people of the
Zulus because they have shed the holy blood!"

Then the men grew afraid and went away, and the regiment marched on
accompanied by the myriads of the locusts that wasted all the land through
which they passed.

At length, followed by a wail of misery, they came to the Great Place and
entered it, preceded by the locusts which already were heaped up in the
streets like winter leaves, and for lack of other provender gnawed at the
straw of the huts, and the shields and moochas of the soldiers. It was a
strange sight to see the men trying to stamp them to death, and the women
and children rushing to and fro shrieking and brushing them from their
hair.

Amid such scenes as these they passed through the town of Umgugundhlovu
into which Rachel had been brought in order that the people might see that
their Inkosazana had returned, and on to that kraal upon the hill, where
she had spent all those weary weeks until Richard came. She reached it as
the sun was setting, and although she did not seem to know any of them was
received with joy and adoration by the women who had been her attendants.
Here she slept that night, for they thought that she must be too weary to
see the King at once; moreover, he desired first to receive the reports of
Tamboosa and the captains, and to learn all that had happened in this
strange business.

Next morning, whilst Rachel sat by the pool in which, once she had seen
the vision of Richard, Tamboosa and an escort came to bring her to
Dingaan. When they told her this, she said neither yea nor nay, but,
refusing to enter a litter they had brought, walked at the head of them,
back to the Great Place, and, watched by thousands, through the
locust-strewn streets to the Intunkulu, the House of the King. Here, in
front of his hut, and surrounded by his Council, sat Dingaan and the
indunas who rose to greet her with the royal salute. She advanced towards
them slowly, looking more beautiful than ever she had done, but with wild,
wandering eyes. They set a stool for her, and she sat down on the stool,
staring at the ground. Then as she said nothing, Dingaan, who seemed very
sad and full of fear, commanded Tamboosa to report all that had happened
in the ears of the Council, and he took up his tale.

He told of the journey to the Tugela, and of how the Inkosazana and the
white lord, Dario, had crossed the river alone but a few hours after
Ibubesi, ordering him to follow next day, also alone, with the white ox
that bore her baggage. He told how he had done so, and on reaching Ramah
had found the white Umfundusi and his wife lying dead in their room, and
on the floor of it a Zulu of the men who had been sent with Ibubesi, also
dead, and in the garden of the house a man of the people of Ibubesi,
dying, who, with his last breath narrated to him the story of the taking
of the Inkosazana and the white lord, by Ibubesi. He told of how he had
run to the town of Mafooti, to find out the truth, and of the message that
he had sent by the herd boy to Ibubesi and his people. Lastly he told all
the rest of that story, of how he had come back to Zululand "as though he
had wings," and finding the regiment that had escorted the Inkosazana
still in camp near the river, had returned with them to attack Mafooti,
which they discovered to be deserted by its people.

While he described how by the flare of the lightning they saw the
Inkosazana standing on the roof of a hut, how they captured the wild
beast, Ibubesi, how they learned that the Spirit of the Inkosazana was
"wandering," and the dreadful words she said, the burning of Mafooti, and
the fearful death of Ibubesi by fire, all the Council listened in utter
silence. Thus they listened also whilst he showed how evil after evil had
fallen upon the regiment, evil by fire and water and sickness, as evil had
fallen upon the land also by the plague of locusts.

At length Tamboosa's story was finished, and certain men were brought
forward bound, who had been the captains of the band that went with
Ishmael, among them those who had killed, or caused to die, the white
teacher and his wife.

Upon the stern command of the King these men also told their story, saying
that they had not meant to kill the white man and that what they did was
done at the word of Ibubesi, whom they were ordered to obey in all things,
but who, as they now understood, had dared to lay a plot to capture the
Inkosazana for himself. When they had finished the King rose and poured
out his wrath on them, because through their deeds the Spirit of the
Inkosazana had been driven away, and her curse laid upon the land, where
already it was at work. Then he commanded that they should be led thence,
all of them, and put to a terrible death, and with them those captains of
the regiment who had spoken against the following of the people of
Mafooti, who should, he said, have been destroyed, every one.

At his words executioners rushed in to seize these wretched men, and then
it was that Rachel, who all this while had sat as though she heard
nothing, lifted her head and spoke, for the first time.

"Set them free, set them, free!" she commanded. "Vengeance is from Heaven,
and Heaven will pour it out in plenty. Not on my hands, not on my hands
shall be the blood of those who sent the Spirit of the Inkosazana to
wander in the skies. Who was it that bade an impi run to Ramah, and what
did they there in the house of those who gave me birth? When the Master
calls, the dogs must search and kill. Set them free, lest there be more
blood between the Inkosazana and her people of the Zulus."

When he heard these words, spoken in a strange, wailing voice, Dingaan
trembled, for he knew that it was he who had bidden his dogs to run.

"Let them go," he said, "and let the land see them no more for ever."

So those men went thankfully enough, and the land saw them no more. As
they passed the gate other men entered, starved and hungry-looking men,
whose bones almost pierced their skins, and who carried in their hands
remnants of shields that looked as though they had been gnawed by rats.
They saluted the King with feeble voices, and squatted down upon the
ground.

"Who are those skeletons," he asked angrily, "who dare to break in upon my
Council?"

"King," answered their spokesman, "we are captains of the Nobambe, the
Nodwenge, and the Isangu regiments whom thou didst send to destroy the
chief, Madaku and his people, who dwell far away in the swamp land to the
north near where the Great River runs into the sea. King, we could not
come at this chief because he fled away on rafts and in boats, he and his
people, and we lost our path among the reeds where again and again we were
ambushed, and many of us sank in the swamps and were drowned. Also, we
found no food, and were forced to live upon our shields," and he held up a
gnawed fragment in his hand. "So we perished by hundreds, and of all who
went forth but twenty-one times ten remain alive."

When Dingaan heard this he groaned, for his arms had been defeated and
three of his best regiments destroyed. But Rachel laughed aloud, the
terrible laugh at which all who heard it shivered.

"Did I not say," she asked, "that Heaven would pour out its vengeance in
plenty because of the blood that runs between the Spirit of the Inkosazana
and her people of the Zulus?"

"Truly this curse works fast and well," exclaimed Dingaan. Then, turning
to the men, he shouted: "Be gone, you starved rats, you cowards who do not
know how to fight, and be thankful that the Great Elephant (Chaka) is
dead, for surely he would have fed you upon shields until you perished."

Who are you, you are this late hour, at the same time with this
wonderful hero-figure, worinn the majesty of the king begrabnen
Dähne einhergieng once, you presumptuous?

Beyme sky conjure 'ich dich, talk! Marcellus. It is unwilling. Bernardo.
Look! it moves across. Horatio. Steh; talking about, I implore thee, speak!
(The spirit's up.) Marcellus. It is gone, and will not respond.

Bernardo. What say you now, Horatio? You look pale and trembles from.
Is not that more than fantasy?

What do you think? Horatio. So God lives, I would not believe it when I
tactile certificate my own eyes would not believe. Marcellus. Is it not
the King?

Horatio. As you yourself So was the defense nemliche he anhatte when he
beat the Norwegians ehrsüchtigen, so he folded the Augbraunen,
when he was in grim Zweykampf the prince of the ice hinschleuderte
Pohle.

It is strange - Marcellus. So it's already zweymal, and in this nemlichen
hour with kriegerischem step that our Guard vorbey Bey gone. Horatio.
What I look for a specific term of it should, I do not know, but as far as
I me ever imagine, it means any extraordinary change in our state.
Marcellus. Well, friends, sezt you down and tell me who it beyden of
you know, why such a sharp watch the nightly Unterthanen this whole
island is required?

Why this amount of Geschüz and needs of war, what a day from foreign land?
Why this crowd of ship-builders, whose tireless hard work on Sunday
does not work from Day differs?

What might be imminent, that the schwizende Eilfertigkeit the night the
day will be soon enough to be ready? Who can give me this information?

Horatio. That I can, at least I can tell you what one expects in the ears
whispers. Our verstorbner king whose shape we just published, was, as you
know, by Fortinbras, the King of Norway, his rival for power and glory, for
Zweykampf herausgefodert: Our tapfrer Hamlet (as they held him to
this portion of the known world ) killed his opponent in this fight,
and lost by this property of a previously sealed and after the war
formally affirmed treaty rights, all countries, than what is now
the winner ruins were just as steady as a portion of the lands which
our King Fortinbras and his heirs are Seyn would fall if the victory
for him would have been declared.

Nunmehro man hears that his son, young Fortinbras, in gährenden Hize an
even unbounded Muth, here and there, on the coasts of Norway provide an
Hauffen heimathloser Wage-necks together, and food and pay, to
perform any bold work 've hired: What then, as we did want to farm
at, nothing is different than the question of his father verwürkten
countries through force of arms off again: And this, I think, is
the cause of our Zurüstungen, that our guard, and this crowd rushed
across the country.

Bernardo. It is probably no other, and it may want Seyn that precisely
this specter schrekliche in arms, and in the shape of the King, the cause
of these wars was and is, by our guard goes. Horatio. It is a coincidence,
which it is difficult to see why. In the highest and most successful
time-point of the Roman Republic, shortly before the big eh Julius
fell, that the graves on the eingeschleyerten Todt screamed in dreadful
sounds huge through the streets of Rome; Schweiffe Stars drew fire
after that, it was bloody Thau; general Unst shrouded the sun, and
the moist star, under whose influence the realm of the Sea God, as
the darkened days of the World Court.

Similar harbingers schrekenvoller events, characters wonder what
the ordinary speaker upcoming appearances are sad, to have heaven
and earth to vereiniget this country in fearful anticipation of
some general Unglüks to Sezen.

(The spirit is back on.) But quiet, you see! Here it comes back again! I
want him in the way, if I like all my hair should cost. Steh, and
mirrors! (He spreads his arms against the spirit.) If you're capable of,
an audible tone to give of yourself, so talk to me .
"From whom?" asked Dingaan anxiously. "The white Amaboona?"

"Nay, O King, from the queen of the Ghost-people to whom thou didst
dispatch Noie, daughter of Seyapi, a while ago."

Hearing the name Noie, Rachel lifted her head, and for the first time her
face grew human.

"I remember," said Dingaan. "Admit the embassy."

Then followed a long pause. At length the gate opened and through it
appeared Noie herself, clad in a garb of spotless white, and somewhat
travel-worn, but beautiful as ever. She was escorted by four gigantic men
who were naked except for their moochas, but wore copper ornaments on
their wrists and ankles, and great rings of copper in their ears. After
her came three litters whereof the grass curtains were tightly drawn,
carried by bearers of the same size and race, and after these a bodyguard
of fifty soldiers of a like stature. This strange and barbarous-looking
company advanced slowly, whilst the Council stared at them wondering, for
never before had they seen people so huge, and arriving in front of the
King set down the litters, staring back in answer with their great round
eyes.

As they came Rachel rose from her stool and turned slowly so that she and
Noie, who walked in front of the embassy, stood face to face. For a moment
they gazed at each other, then Noie, running forward, knelt before Rachel
and kissed the hem of her robe, but Rachel bent down and lifted her up in
her strong arms, embracing her as a mother embraces a child.

"Where hast thou been, Sister?" she asked. "I have sought thee long."

"Surely on thy business, Zoola," answered Noie, scanning her curiously.
"Dost thou not remember?"

"Nay, I remember naught, Noie, save that I have sought thee long. My
Spirit wanders, Noie."

"Lady," she said, "my people told me that it was so. They told me many
terrible things, they who can see afar, they for whom distance has no
gates, but I did not believe them. Now I see with my own eyes. Be at
peace, Lady, my people will give thee back thy Spirit, though perchance
thou must travel to find it, for in their land all spirits dwell. Be at
peace and listen."

"With thee, Noie, I am at peace," replied Rachel, and still holding her
hand, she reseated herself upon the stool.

"Where are the messengers?" asked Dingaan. "I see none."

"King," answered Noie, "they shall appear."

Then she made signs to the escort of giants, some of whom came forward and
drew the curtains of the litters, whilst others opened huge umbrellas of
split cane which they carried in their hands.

"Now what weapons are these?" asked Dingaan. "Daughter of Seyapi, you know
that none may appear before the King armed."

"Weapons against the sun, O King, which my people hate."

"And who are the wizards that hate the sun?" queried Dingaan again in an
astonished voice. Then he was silent, for out of the first litter came a
little man, pale as the shoot from a bulb that has grown in darkness, with
large, soft eyes like the eyes of an owl, that blinked in the light, and
long hair out of which all the colour seemed to have faded.

As the man, who, like Noie, was dressed in a white robe, and in size
measured no more than a twelve-year-old child, set his sandalled feet upon
the ground, one of the huge guards sprang forward to shield him with the
umbrella, but being awkward, struck his leg against the pole of the litter
and stumbled against him, nearly knocking him to the ground, and in his
efforts to save himself, letting fall the umbrella. The little man turned
on him furiously, and holding one hand above his head as though to shield
himself from the sun, with the other pointed at him, speaking in a low
sibilant voice that sounded like the hiss of a snake. Thereon the guard
fell to his knees, and bending down with outstretched arms, beat his
forehead on the earth as though in prayer for mercy. The sight of this
giant making supplication to one whom he could have killed with a blow,
was so strange that Dingaan, unable to restrain his curiosity, asked Noie
if the dwarf was ordering the other to be killed.

"Nay, King," answered Noie, "for blood is hateful to these people. He is
saying that the soldier has offended many times. Therefore he curses him
and tells him that he shall wither like a plucked leaf and die without
seeing his home again."

"And will he die?" asked Dingaan.

"Certainly, King; those upon whom the Ghost-people lay their curse must
obey the curse. Moreover, this man deserves his doom, for on the journey
he killed another to take his food."

"Of a truth a terrible people!" said Dingaan uneasily. "Bid them lay no
curse on me lest they should see more blood than they wish for."

"It is foolish to threaten the Great Ones of the Ghost-folk, King, for
they hear even what they seem not to understand," answered Noie quietly.

"Wow!" exclaimed the King; "let my words be forgotten. I am sorry that I
troubled them to come so far to visit me."

Meanwhile the offender had crept back upon his hands and knees, looking
like a great beaten dog, whilst another soldier, taking his umbrella, held
it over the angry dwarf. Also from the other litters two more dwarfs had
descended, so like to the first that it was difficult to tell them apart,
and were in the same fashion sheltered by guards with umbrellas. Mats were
brought for them also, and on these they sat themselves down at right
angles to Dingaan, and to Rachel, whose stool was set in front of the
King, whilst behind them stood three of their escort, each holding an
umbrella over the head of one of them with the left hand, while with the
right they fanned them with small branches upon which the leaves, although
they were dead, remained green and shining.

With Dingaan and his Council the three dwarfs did not seem to trouble
themselves, but at Rachel they peered earnestly. Then one of them made a
sign and muttered something, whereon a soldier of the escort stepped
forward with a fourth umbrella, which he opened over the heads of Rachel,
and of Noie who stood at her side.

"Why does he do that?" asked Dingaan. "The Inkosazana is not a bat that
she fears the sun."

"He does it," answered Noie, "that the Inkosazana may sit in the shade of
the wisdom of the Ghost-people, and that her heart which is hot with many
wrongs, may grow cool in the shade."

"What does he know about the Inkosazana and her wrongs?" asked Dingaan
again, but Noie only shrugged her shoulders and made no answer.

Now one of the dwarfs made another sign, whereon more guards advanced,
carrying small bowls of polished wood. These bowls they set upon the
ground before the three dwarfs, one before each of them, filling them to
the brim with water from a gourd.

"If your people are thirsty, Noie," exclaimed the King, "I have beer for
them to drink, for at least the locusts have left me that. Bid them throw
away the water, and I will give them beer."

"It is not water, King," she answered, "but dew gathered from certain
trees before sunrise, and it is their spirits that are thirsty for
knowledge, not their bodies, for in this dew they read the truth."

"Then the Inkosazana must be of their family, Noie, for she read of the
coming of the white chief Dario in water, or so they say."

"Perhaps, O King, if it is so these prophets will know it and acknowledge
her."

Now for a long while there was silence, so long a while indeed that
Dingaan and his Councillors began to move uneasily, for they felt as
though the dwarf men were fingering their heart-strings. At length the
three dwarfs lifted their wrinkled faces that were bleached to the colour
of half-ripe corn, and gazed at each other with their round, owl-like
eyes; then as though with one accord they said to each other:

"What seest thou, Priest?" and at same sign from them Noie translated the
words into Zulu.

Now the first of them, he who had cursed the soldier, spoke in his low
hissing voice, a voice like to the whisper of leaves in the wind, Noie
rendering his words.

"I see two maidens standing by a house that moves when cattle draw it. One
of them is dark-skinned, it is she," and he pointed to Noie, "the other is
fair-skinned, it is she," and he pointed to Rachel. "They cast, each of
them, a hair from her head into the air. The black hair falls to the
ground, but a spirit catches the hair of gold and bears it northward. It
is the spirit of Seyapi whom the Zulus slew. Northwards he bears it, and
lays it in the hand of the Mother of the Trees, and with it a message."

"Yes, with it a message," repeated the other two nodding their heads.

Then one of them drew a little package wrapped in leaves from his robe,
and motioned to Noie that she should give it to Rachel. Noie obeyed, and
the man said:

"Let us see if she has vision. Tell us, thou White One, what lies within
the leaves."

Rachel, who had been sitting like a person in a dream, took the packet,
and, without looking at it, answered:

"Many other leaves, and within the last of them a hair from this head of
mine. I see it, but three knots have been tied therein. They are three
great troubles."

"Open," said the dwarf to Noie, who cut the fibre binding the packet, and
unfolded many layers of leaves. Within the last leaf was a golden hair,
and in it were tied three knots.

Noie laid the hair upon the head of Rachel--it was hers. Then she showed
it to the King and his Council, who stared at the knots not knowing what
to say, and after they had looked at it, refolded it in the leaves and
returned the packet to the dwarf.

Now the dwarf who had read the picture in his bowl turned to him who sat
nearest and asked:

"What seest thou, Priest?"

The man stared at the limpid water and answered:

"I see this place at night. I see yonder King and his Councillors talking
to a white man with evil eyes and the face of a hawk, who has been wounded
on the head and foot. I read their lips. They bargain together; it is of
the bringing of an old prophet and his wife hither by force. I see the
prophet and his wife in a house, and with them Zulus. By the command of
the white man with the evil eyes the Zulus kill the prophet whose head is
bald, and his wife dies upon the bed. Before they kill the prophet he
slays one of the Zulus with smoke that comes from an iron tube."

When he heard all this Dingaan groaned, but the dwarf who had spoken,
taking no heed of him, said to the third dwarf:

"What seest thou, Priest?" to which that dwarf answered:

"I see the White One yonder standing on a hut, but her Spirit has fled
from her, it has fled from her to haunt the Trees. In her hand is a spear,
and below is the white man with, the evil eyes, held by Zulus. I read her
words: she says that there is blood," and he shivered as he said the word,
"yes, blood between her Spirit and the people of the Zulus. She prophesies
evil to them. I see the ill; I see many burnt in a great fire. I see many
drowned in an angry river. I see the demons of sickness lay hold of many.
I see her Spirit call up the locusts from the coast land. I see it bring
disaster on their arms; I see it scatter plague among their cattle; I see
a dim shape that it summons striding towards this land. It travels fast
over a winter veld, and the head of it is the head of a skull, and the
name of it is Famine."

As he ended his words the three dwarfs bent forward, and with one movement
seized their bowls and emptied them on to the ground, saying:

"Earth, Earth, drink, drink and bear record of these visions!"

Now the Council was much disturbed, for, although there were great witch
doctors among them, none had known magic like to this. Only Dingaan stared
down brooding. Then he looked up, and his fat body shook with hoarse
laughter.

"You play pretty tricks, little men," he said, "with your giants and your
boughs and your huts that open, and your bowls of water. But for all that
they are only tricks, since Noie, or others have told you of these things
that happened in the past. Now if you are wizards indeed, read me the
riddle of the words of the Inkosazana that she spoke before her Spirit
left her because of the evil acts of the wolf, Ibubesi. Show me the answer
to them in your bowls of water, little men, or be driven hence as cheats
and liars. Also tell us your names by which we may know you."

When Noie had translated this speech the three dwarfs gathered themselves
under one umbrella, and spoke to each other; then they slid back to their
places, and the first of them, he who had cursed the soldier, said:

"King of the Zulus, I am Eddo, this on my right is Pani, and that on my
left is Hana. We are children of the Mother of the Trees; we are
high-priests of the Grey-people, the Dream-people, who rule by dreams and
wisdom, not by spears as thou dost, O King. We are the Ghost-kings whom
the ghosts obey, we are the masters of the dead, and the readers of
hearts. Those are our names and titles, O King. We have travelled hither
because thou sentest a messenger of our own blood who whispered a strange
tale in the ear of the Mother of the Trees, a tale of one of whom we knew
already but desired to see," and all three of them nodded towards Rachel
seated on her stool. "We will read thy riddle, O King, but first thou must
fix the fee."

"What do you demand, Ghost-people?" asked Dingaan. "Cattle are somewhat
scarce here just now, and wives, I think, would be of little use to you.
What is there, then, that you desire, and I can give?"

They looked at each other, then Eddo said, pointing with his thin hand
upon which the nails grew long:

"We ask for the White One who sits there. We think that her Spirit dwells
with us already, and we ask her body that we may join it to the Spirit
again."

Now the Council murmured, but Dingaan replied:

"Once we sought to keep her in whom dwelt the Inkosazana of the Zulus. But
things have gone amiss, and she brings curses on us. If shape and spirit
were joined together again, mayhap the curses would be taken off our
heads. Yet we dare not give her to you, unless she gives herself of her
own will. Moreover, first the divination, then the pay. Is that enough?"

"It is enough," they answered, speaking all together. "Set out the matter,
King of the Zulus, and we will see what we can do."

Then Dingaan beckoned to a man with a withered hand who sat close to him,
listening and noting all things, but saying nothing, and said:

"Stand forth, thou Mopo, and tell the tale."

So Mopo rose and began his story. He told how he alone among the people of
the Zulus had thrice seen the spirit of the Inkosazana in the days of the
"Black-One-who-was-gone." He told how many moons ago the white man,
Ibubesi, had come to the Great Place speaking of a beautiful white maiden
who was known by the name of the Inkosazana-y-Zoola, a maiden who ruled
the lightning, and was not as other maidens are, and how he had been sent
to see her, and found that as was the Spirit of the Inkosazana which he
knew, so was this maiden.

"_Wow_!" he added, "save that the one walked on air and the other on
earth, they are the same."

Moreover, as a spirit she seemed wise. He told of the trapping of Noie,
and of the decoying of Rachel into Zululand, and of the interview between
her and the King by moonlight when she smelt out Noie. Now he was going on
to speak of the question put by Dingaan to the Inkosazana, and the answer
that she gave to him, when one of the little men who all this while sat as
though they were asleep, blinking their eyes in the light--it was
Eddo--said:

"Surely thou forgettest something. Tongue of the King, thou who are named
Mopo, or Umbopa, Son of Makedama; thou forgettest certain words which the
Inkosazana whispered to thee when she threw her cloak about thy head ere
thou fleddest away from the Council of the King. Of course, we do not know
the words, but why dost thou not repeat them, Tongue of the King?"

King Henry the fourth. Henry, Prince of Wales, and George, Duke of
Lancaster, the king's sons.

Worcester, Northumberland, hot track, Mortimer, Archbishop of York, Dowglas,
Owen Glendower, Sir Richard Vernon and Sir Michell, enemies of the
King.

Westmorland, Sir Walter Blunt, and Sir John Falstaff, the king of Parthey.
pointed, Gadshill, Peto and Bardolph, Falstaff Cameraden.

Lady Percy. Lady Mortimer, daughter of Glendower. Wirthin The Quikly. Scheriff
A, in various Serves Wirth House, carters , travelers, and other dumb
people. The scene is in England. Act. Erste Scene. (The Court in
London.)

(King Henry, the Duke of Lancaster, the Earl of Westmorland, and other
Lords occur.) King Henry . From Worry shaken and pale haggard sorrow, we
finally find the Augenblik, where the geschrekte again Athem peace can
come to aborted Accente of new work to talk to distant shores to our Muth
employ. No longer is this Earth are the blood of their children's drinking,
domestic discord no longer devastate their fields, and with the iron
step of the war their blooming meadows mash. rükende battle against these
orders, which equals the meteors scenting a sky, all of einerley nature
of einerley origin, even recently with the whole of civil war on
Wuthe met each other, are now gleichlauffenden lines, in a beautiful
line of policy, a way out, no longer be brothers against brothers,
friends against friends are, no longer the mördrische steel, like
a übeleingescheideten knife, wounding his own Lord.

No, my friends, to that sacred grave of Christ, under whose heilbringendem
Creuze we have vowed to fight, we want to war with our English
army, in order that those infidels from the holy lands to drive,
what the blessed feet are gone, the front of one hundred fourteen
years for our salvation to the bittre Creuze have been nailed.

However, this is our project already a year old, it is unnöthig you to
say that we want to go, and we are not IZO For this came together. Let
me hear from you, my beloved cousin of Westmorland, which is our
Rathscheck Assembly yesterday for undertaking this important
agreement.

Westmorland.

Gracious Lord, we operate this business with great zeal, and there
were various flashovers of expenses designed: As a quite unverhofter
Courier, laden with irksome newspapers, came in between, of which
the worst was that the noble Mortimer, of the people of Hereford-Schire
agitate against Glendower led by Welschen caught, and over a thousand
of his people niedergemezelt been seyen , in whose bodies the women
Todt Welschen of such abuse, such a beastly schaamlose Verstümmlung
exercised without Erröthen can not tell.

King Henry.

It seems, then, the news of this uprising have developed our business in
accordance with the promised land aborted? Westmorland. This even more
support, thats it, Gracious Lord, because there were still more unequal
and mißbeliebige newspapers from north.

On the cross-raising day geriethen this muthreiche hot track, the young
Henry Percy, and Archibald, this glorious tapfre and bulkheads,
to Holmedon into a bloody Handgemeng, so much learned from the
institutions and the fury of the attack was close, because the
person who of this newspaper took, ran in the middle of the strongest
Hize of battle like this, without waiting for the outcome.

King Henry. Here is a Werther-zealous and faithful friend, Sir Walter
Blunt, who just dismounted from his horse, to us from Holmedon willkommne
the message to that of the Earl of Douglas beaten sey.

Ten thousand bold Scots, and three and twenty knights Sir Walter looked
at the leveling of Holmedon in their blood roll. Mordak, Earl of Fife,
the eldest son of geschlagnen Douglas and the Earl of Athol, Murry,
Angus, and Menteith has hot track get caught. Is not that a nice booty? A
noble That? Ha, cousin, is it not? Westmorland. In That a victory, what
a prince proud to have Seyn cause. King Henry. O why you mention the word,
sad thoughts in order to excite me, and me to the sin of envy to
irritate that Milord Northumberland the father of a son so worthy
Seyn aims, one son, whose name the glory always goes in the mouth,
the same as the highest tree in a Hayn, towers over all others, the
favorite of the Glüks, and her pride; however, that I use just the
Blik, the looks on his fame, shame and rampant Schwelgerey the
forehead of my young Harry besmirch see.

O you can 'it be proved that any night fairy mincing our children in the
cradle confused, and my son, Percy, Plantagenet genennt those with
him would have - But let me, this idea is not to hang on - what do
you think cousin of this young Percy pride?

It keeps the prisoners, which he did in this battle for the back,
and let me say that I am not as Mordake, the Earl of Fife, to have.

Westmorland.

The inspiration is his uncle, this is Worcester, Apparently after all the
evil-minded is against you, the ists that him inflate his feathers,
and his young comb against your Highness emporsträuben makes.

King Henry. I voted for him geschikte to him deßwegen to account, and
that is the cause why we are genöthigt our holy defer projects to
Jerusalem.

Vetter, we want to next Wednesday for our big Rath gather in Windsor.
Benachrichtiget of which the Lords, but eilet quickly back to us,
then there must be more to be said and done, as our reluctance to
say IZT allowed.

Westmorland. I obey, area of my Lord. (They go from.) Zweyte Scene. (A room
in the Cron Prince.)

(Henry, the Prince of Wales, and Sir John Falstaff occur.) Falstaff. Hey,
Hal, what time * ists on days, boy? (ed * Harry and Hal, are abbreviated
name, rather than Henry, as in confidential treatment have been used.) Prinz
Heinrich.

Your praiseworthy habit you in Sect to besauffen old, to eat up all
the buttons you must aufthun, and the whole afternoon on benches
to snore, your wikelt Wiz so much fat in Schmeer and that, so you
do lose, right to ask quite what you want to know.

What the hell, you have the time on the day to thun?

Yes, if the hours were cups full Sect, the minutes Capaunen, the tongues
of Gloken Kuppler who watches shields H ** houses, and the sun
itself is a nice man roßiges in feuerfarbem Taft, it could still
begreiffen why you after the time asked.

Falstaff. My faith, it is close to me 'to his body, Hal, for we rest,
the cutting craft bag, and Beyme silver moon and the stars around, and
not Beyme Phoebus, "he edeln the bondage so beautiful ', ** but I
pray thee, my sweet Närrchen, even when you're king - thy graces
which God (Majesty wollt' I say grace because you will not have) -
(ed ** (Hey, that wall ring as fair Knight) - a line from an old
ballad.

Warburton.) Prinz Heinrich.

How? No? Falstaff.

No, my soul, not so much as a Prologus for a few Eyer in butter is Nöthiger.
Prince Henry.

Well, and what next? Hey there, flatly, no hassles! Falstaff. Sapperment
now then, Närrchen when you're king, so sorge pretty sure that we have other
guys honest, their craft night driving Bey, Bey days of the judiciary
remain unscathed.

Let's look at the Diana Forster their stay, Knights of the Shadows,
darlings of the moon, and let the people say we seyen people of good
performance, since we are equal to the lake from our edeln and chaste
mistress, the moon, to be ** * Schuz and under whose leadership
we - steal.

(ed *** The jokes of Mr. John Falstaff is not always translate, because
they do too often based on puns, as here, where (government) and (govern)
in an entirely different meaning to be, which is not quite in the German
ausdrüken him, and so the answer of the prince not quite fit.) Prinz Heinrich.
You are right, and you do not go amiss parables, and the other of us
Glük lunar knights, and grow to like the lake, because it looks like
the lake is dominated by the Moon. For example, a bag of gold savory
weggeschnappt in last Monday night, will again lüders durchgebracht on
Tuesday morning, with cursing and (leg ab) won with and rejoice (bring
in.) durchgewonnen; IZT in such a low ebb as the foot of a ladder,
and in a Augenblik in such a high Fluth as a crossbeam of the
gallows.

Falstaff. I Six, you're right, boy, and my Wirthin in the tavern is
not a very pleasant man? Prinz Heinrich. As the honey of Hybla, old boy,
and is not a buffalo dewlap of a rather pleasant Stük clothes in the long
run? Falstaff. What, what, what willt you mean to say, foolish boy? What
are your bites me Leyen and your Quidditäten to?

What, pestilence! Hab 'ich with a dewlap of buffalo thun?

Prinz Heinrich. And what serious North! Yeah, I with my Wirthin in the
inn to thun? Falstaff. Well, you do not often and a lot of reckoning
to geruffen? Prinz Heinrich. Did I ever geruffen thee, that thou thy
portion of the colliery pay sollst? Falstaff. No, the fairness, I must
let you go again, you have paid for everything there. Prince
Henry. Yes, and everywhere, so long my pititemaman ranged, and if it was
empty, so I used my credit. Falstaff. That is true, and so used that,
when it probably would not, that probably you are the heir - but I pray
thee, Närrchen, willt you also have a gallows in England are, if
you're king?

Willt you admit that a resolute man of the rusty old bugbear grotesque,
Gesez themselves can be schicanieren?

Hanging me yes no thief when you're king, the sag 'ich dir. Prince
Henry. That I will not, you should they depend.

Falstaff. I? Incomparable! Beyme Sapperment! I want an excellent judge
Seyn. Prince Henry. You understand me not; I Meyn, thou shalt, in the
person hanging the thieves, and therefore are an excellent executioner.
Falstaff. Well, Hal, well; the wär 'a craft which is to my Humor schikte
as good as Bey aufzuwarten yard, which I can tell you.

Schlapperment! I'm so schwermüthig like a cat, or like a bear, the man
pulls the ears Bey. Prinz Heinrich. Or like an old lion, or sounds
like a lover? Falstaff. Yes, or how the Scharrpfeiffe in a
Lincolnschirer Dudelsak.

Prinz Heinrich . What do you say to a hare, or a Kothe Melancholey Pool?
Falstaff. You parables from bad taste, and you'll be That of
allerunvergleichlichste by an extraordinary Spizbube like young princes -
But, Hall, I pray thee, plage me no more with such eiteln things I
wished to God thou and I knew an opportunity when a good name could get
Kauff, an old Lord of the State Rath lezthin euertwegen got me on
the road to paken, Sir; but I was not sure what he said, whether
he very wisely said, and even on the road.

Prinz Heinrich. thats you want, because the wisdom makes her voice heard on
the streets, and nobody respects her.

Falstaff.

O you have a damn pull-force, my soul, you could seduce a saint. You have
done me much evil, Hal, God forgive you.

Before I knew thee, Hal knew 'I had nothing, and I'm IZT, if one wanted
to tell the truth, little better than one of the worst.

DISS I must abandon life and I want to give up; Bey G ***, if I do not Thue,
so I sey a dog **!

I want no king's son in Christendom for the sake of T ** drive. Prinz
Heinrich. Where do we want to steal a bag tomorrow, John? Falstaff. Willt
Where you, boy, I'm doing with; Thue ichs not so hot I am a dog **
and my mouth clamps gieb. Prince Henry. The Beßrung your life goes well
equip, I see only only Stoßseufzer, IZT street robbery.

Falstaff. How, Hal, that's my profession, Hal, it is one no sin in his
profession to work. Hey! Who is coming? Pointed! Now we will hear whether
Gadshill has done something ausfündig - O if people would be saved
from earning what hole in hell were hot enough for this service!

Third Scene.

(Pointed to the former), Falstaff.

This is the omnipotent Spizbube that ever an honest man stop! zugeruffen
has. Prince Henry. Good morning, Ned. pointed. Good morning, my dear
Hal. What says Monsieur conscience? What says Sir John, and Sect Zukerhans?
How did you's with each other, you and the devil, because of your soul
that you have him verwichnen Char Freytag for a glass of Madeira wine
and a cold Capaunen legs've sold? Prinz Heinrich. Sir John keeps his
word, the devil is his Waar have you know that he never broke no Sprüchwort
has, he is the devil, what belongs to him. pointed. So you will be damned
if the devil you do your word? Prinz Heinrich. Otherwise, he would damn,
because he is the devil had cheated. pointed. But, my boy, my boy, tomorrow
morning, at four clock, after Gadshill there are Pilgrims on the
way, with rich victims to Canterbury, and Kauffleute with wohlgespikten
bags go to London. I have visors for you all, and you have horses for you
self Gadshill ligt this night to Rochester, I have until tomorrow night,
a night dining in East Cheap ordered. It's one thing we can be as safe
tuna, as flaccid, if you want to go, I will get your bag with cron stuff,
will you not, it stays there, and you get the executioner.

Falstaff. Do you hear, Yedward if I stay home and not go, I will hang
you for that ye went Seyde. pointed. Willt you, wolverine? Falstaff. Hal,
willt you one of us Seyn? Prinz Heinrich. Who, I rob? I, a thief? No,
my faith Bey! Falstaff. You have neither honor nor courage in him,
if you Thust; du willt so your good friends in the lurch? I am Six, you
have no royal blood drops in the womb, if you were not at ten shillings
the heart have to Ruff: Stop! Prinz Heinrich.

Sey So then, once in my life I want to by a great header Seyn. Falstaff.
Well, that is, once a good talk. Prinz Heinrich. No, go there as it
wants, I will stay at home. Falstaff. Bey like G ** I Verräther Seyn when
you're king. Prinz Heinrich. bekümmre I am nothing about it. pointed.
Sir John, I pray thee, let the prince and me alone, I want him to
present such reasons that he should certainly go. Falstaff. Well, may you
the spirit of persuasion, and his ears to hear, so what you're talking
about might move, and hears what he believed. Lebet well, however, ye
shall me in East Cheap find. (Falstaff's up.) Pointed.

Well, my dear sweet Zuker-Prince, riding with me tomorrow. I have a fun
in mind, I will not run kan. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshill to
deprive these people of which we have made an attack, she and I do not
want to attend dabey Seyn if they have the prey, and her and I do not
abjagen them, so this skin-head from my shoulders. Prinz Heinrich. But how
shall we come by them, if we are riding with them? pointed. How? We
want to before or after them, and to give them a certain Plaz determine
where we want to meet, and then we can miss when it's our favorite, and
then they will Abentheuer alone company, and once they are done, like we
have them. Prinz Heinrich. Well, but it is probably that they remind us
of our horses on our clothes, and to hundreds of others milling
Saved recognize. pointed.

For this is already Rath shop. Our horses will not see them, because we
want to connect in the forest, our visors, we want to confuse others when
we are away from them, and, Sapperment! I have Ueberröke of the Vorrath
Schetter, under which no one should know our clothes. Prinz Heinrich. But
I care, they will get too strong Seyn. pointed. O what anbetrift, zween
of them I know as a pair of outlaw so-gebohrne memme than ever Rüken
have shown, and what the third betrift if the longer rather than resisting,
so I want everything Rifle conspirators.

The biggest fun of the thing is in the miraculosen lies, which this nemliche
Dike Spizbube prompt us when we eat at night to come together, as
he did with the fewest recorded dreyßig what blows he got what he risks for
existed, and in the way we see it all these Aufschneidereyen be transferred,
of ligt fun. Prinz Heinrich. Well, I will go with thee; care for
everything we have Nöthiger, and expect me to tomorrow night in East
Cheap . Leb 'probably. Pointed. Lebet well Milord. (Pointed geht ab.)
Prince Henry. I know all, and would like this for a while unbridled humor
your idle Lüderlichkeit hold in the highest, but hierinn I will
imitate the sun, the Simmer the unedeln anstekenden allowed, their
beauty in the world to hide, so when you do it again themselves
Seyn, the more they are admired if they missed some time, at once
by the bad and ugly clouds hervorbricht which they had to erstiken
geschienen.

If the whole year out of pure solid days there, it would be so weary of
the Feyerns are working, they are only desirable because they are rare,
and like nothing more than seltne things. So will I, if I used this ausgelaßne
care of my throw, and pay a debt I never promised you the concerns
of the people all the more so zuschanden make, the better I will Seyn
as my word. And like a shining jewel on a dark ground, my
improvement, my mistake überschimmernd, seem nicer, and more eyes on the
draw than a life that does not slide, which means that it is levied. (He
goes anyway.) Fourth Scene . (Turns into a hall of the royal palace.)
(King Henry, Northumberland, Worcester, Hot-Track, Sir Walter Blunt, and
others may occur.) King Henry. My blood is too cold and too mild, that
it Bey such an improper demeanor aufwallte not, you have found my weak side,
and stand deßwegen patience with my feet, but assured you that I
want more künftighin Seyn what my dignity than what my Gemüthsart
calls to soft and gentle has been deßwegen and the reverence has
lost the soul of a proud paid only to the arrogant.

Worcester. Our house, Gracious Lord verdienet truly not that the scourge of
the same size to be used, and are the same size, which our own
hands so handsome too have helped make.

 Northumberland. My Gracious Lord - King Henry. Worcester, remove thee,
I see disobedience and threats to your eyes. O Sir, yours is mine too
bold and determined, and the majesty can not trozbietenden pride on the
forehead a Unterthanen tolerate. You have our permission to leave. If we
euern Rath Nöthiger or your services, we will let you Ruffer. (Worcester
geht ab.) You wanted to talk so - (To Northumberland.) Northumberland.
Yes, my Gracious Lord, that the prisoners in Europe. Complete name of
majesty, and the Henry Percy to Holmedon has made, as he says, not so bad
but been denied, how to Your Majesty has reported. Either envy or
misunderstanding is guilty of this offense, not my son. Hot-Track. My
Gracious Lord, I failed no prisoners, but whose erinnre I like the
action was finished, and I, quite aufgetroknet of Hize and Labor,
athemlos and exhausted to my Schwerdt rejected me, there came a
certain young man, nice, dainty aufgepuzt, fresh as a bridegroom,
and his recently abgeschohrnes chin looked like a stubble-field in
autumn.

He was like a parfumirt-Specerey Krämer, and held between his fingers and
his thumb a snuff-rifle, which he all Augenblike held before the nose,
which he always had to smile and Schwazer, and, like the soldiers wore
vorbey Todt body, he bade them ungezogne Flegel, so naughty and unsaubre
burden between the wind and his Adeliche person to bring. He asked me with
a stream of Sunday's and women's room for a hundred types of speech
matters, and called me finally, to your Majesty my hand from prisoners. I,
the wounds all over my hurt and sullen about that I am such a Papagay to
inopportunely übertäuben should answer him in Unmuth and the
impatience, I do not know what he should have, or he should not
have, because it made me great, something that looked like a man
before me to see that so many colors gleamed and smelled so sweet,
and shotguns and Trummeln chamber and wounds so redte Miss-moderate,
and I said, for a bruising internal sey no means infallible than
Spermacet, and it really sorry sey, sey it that this cursed saltpeter
from the bowels of the earth hervorgegraben been innocent sey, which
so many brave people wolgewachsene've killed so elendiglich: And
if only they are not worthy shotguns would not, he would himself
become a soldier Seyn - all this on its cool, I gave disconnectedly
gossip, therefore, Gracious Lord, only the top answer, as I said,
and I ask you, let not his report the validity of an indictment
against a man have of your Majesty shall result than I do.

Blunt. The circumstances taken into consideration, Gracious Lord, so could
everything Harry Percy then to such a person to such a place, and in
such a time would like to have said, cheaper Maassen for Todt abgethan
and kept, and never on his night healing again mentioned. Because
what he said then, the entsagt he IZO yes again, as you see.
So
they entered it, and were borne forward at a great pace, the bearers
travelling at a run, and being often changed. Also many other bearers came
with them, and on the shoulders of each of them was strapped a hide bag of
water. Of this they soon discovered the reason, for the sand of that
wilderness was white with salt; the air also seemed to be full of salt, so
that the thirst of those who travelled there was sharp and constant, and
if it could not be satisfied they died.

It was a very strange journey, and although she did not seem to take much
note of them at the time, its details and surroundings burned themselves
deeply into Rachel's mind. The hush of the infinite desert, the white
moonlight gleaming upon the salt, white sand; the tall rocks which stood
up here and there like unfinished obelisks and colossal statues, the snowy
clouds of dust that rose beneath the feet of the company; the hoarse
shouts of the guides, the close heat, the halts for water which was
greedily swallowed in great gulps; the occasional cry and confusion when a
man fell out exhausted, or because he had been bitten by one of the
serpents--all these things, amongst others, were very strange.

Once Rachel asked vaguely what became of these outworn and snake-poisoned
men, and Noie only shook her head in answer, for she did not think fit to
tell her that they were left to find their way back, or to perish, as
might chance.

All that night and for the first hours of the day that followed, they went
forward swiftly, camping at last to eat and sleep in the shadow of a mass
of rock that looked like a gigantic castle with walls and towers. Here
they remained in the burning heat until the sun began to sink once more,
and then went on again, leaving some of the bearers behind them, because
there was no longer water for so many. There the great men sat in patient
resignation and watched them go, they who knew that having little or no
water, few of them could hope to see their homes again. Still, so great
was their dread of the Ghost-priests, that they never dared to murmur, or
to ask that any of the store of water should be given to them, they who
were but cattle to be used until they died.

The second night's journey was like the first, for this desert never
changed, its aspect, and on the following morning they halted beneath
another pile of fantastic, sand-burnished rocks, from some of which hung
salt like icicles. Here one of the bearers who had been denied water as a
punishment for laziness, although in truth he was sick, began to suck the
salt-icicles. Suddenly he went raving mad, and rushing with a knife at
Eddo, Pani, and Hana where they sat under their cane umbrellas that, for
the sake of coolness, were damped with this precious water, he tried to
kill them.

Then as they saw the knife gleaming, all their imperturbable calm departed
from these dwarfs. They squeaked in terror with thin voices as rats speak;
they rolled upon the ground yelling to the slaves to save them from a "red
death." The man was seized and, though he fought with all his giant
strength, held down and choked in the sand. Once, however, he twisted his
head free, howling a curse at them. Also he managed to hurl his knife at
Eddo, and the point of it scratched him on the hand, causing the pale
blood to flow, a sight at which Eddo and the other priests broke into
tears and lamentations, that continued long after the Umkulu was dead.

"Why are they such cowards?" asked Rachel, dreamily, for she had not seen
the murder of the slave, and thought that Eddo had only scratched himself.

"Because they fear the sight of blood, Zoola," answered Noie, "which is a
very evil omen to them. Death they do not fear who are already among
ghosts, but if it is a red death, their souls are spilt with their life,
or so they believe."

Towards noon that day the sky banked up with lurid-coloured clouds; the
sun which should have shone so hotly, went out, and a hush that was almost
fearful in its heat and intensity, fell upon the desert. The Umkulu
bearers became disturbed, and gathered together into knots, talking in low
tones. Eddo and his brother priests who, either because of the adventure
of the morning or the oppressive air, could not sleep, as was usual with
them, were also disturbed. They crept from beneath their umbrellas which,
as the sun had vanished, were of no use to them, and stood together
staring at the salty plain, which under that leaden and lowering sky
looked white as snow, and at the brooding clouds above. They even sent for
their bowls to read in them pictures of what was about to happen, but
there was no dew left, so these could not be used.

Then they consulted with the captains of the bearers, who told then what
no magic was needed to guess that a mighty storm was gathering, and that
if it overtook them in the desert, they would be buried beneath the
drifting sand. Now this was a "white death" which the dwarfs did not seem
to desire, so they ordered an instant departure, instead of delaying the
start until sunset, as they had intended, for then, if all went well, they
would have arrived at their homes by dawn, and not in the middle of the
night. So that litters were made ready, and they went forward through the
overpowering heat, that caused the bearers to hang out their tongues and
reel as they walked.

Towards evening the storm began to stir. Little wandering puffs of wind
blew upon them and died away, and lightnings flickered intermittently.
Then a hot breeze sprang up that gradually increased in strength until the
sand rolled and rippled before it, now one way and now another, for this
breeze seemed to blow in turn from every quarter of the heavens. Suddenly,
however, after trying them all, it settled in the west, and drove straight
into their faces with ever increasing force. Now Eddo thrust out his head
between the curtains of his litter and called to the bearers to hurry, as
they had but a little distance of desert left to pass, after which came
the grass country where there would be no danger from the sand. They heard
and obeyed, changing the pole gangs frequently, as those who carried the
litters became exhausted.

But the storm was quicker than they; it burst upon them while they were
still in the waste, though not in its full strength. Then the darkness
came, utter darkness, for no moon or stars could be seen, and salt and
sand drove down on them like hail. Through it all, the bearers fought on,
though how they found their way Noie, who was watching them, could not
guess, since no landmarks were left to guide them. They fought on,
blinded, choked with the salt sand that drove into their eyes and lungs,
till man after man, they fell down and perished. Others took their places,
and yet they fought on.

It must have been near to midnight when the company, or those who were
left of them, staggered to the edge of that dreadful wilderness which was
but a vast plain of stone and sand, bordered on the west as on the east by
slopes of fertile soil. For a while the fierce tempest lifted a little,
and the light of the stars which struggled through breaks in the clouds
showed that they were marching down a steep descent of grassland. Thus
they went on for several more hours, till at length the bearers of the
litter in which were Rachel and Noie, who for a long time had been
staggering to and fro like drunken men, came to a halt, and litter and
all, sank to the ground, utterly exhausted.

 Rachel and Noie disentangled themselves from the litter, for they were
unhurt, and stood by it, not knowing where to go, till presently two other
litters containing the priests came up, for the third had been abandoned,
and its occupant crowded in with Eddo. Now a great clamour arose in the
darkness, the priests hissing commands to the surviving bearers to take up
the litter and proceed. But great as was their strength, this the poor men
could not do. There they lay upon the ground answering that Eddo might
curse them if he wished, or even kill them as their brothers had been
killed, but they were unable to stir another step until they had rested
and drunk. Where they were, there they must lie until rain fell. Then the
priests wished Rachel to enter one of their litters, leaving Noie to walk,
which they were afraid to do themselves. But when she understood, Rachel
cut the matter short by answering,

"Not so, I will walk," and picking up the spear of one of the fallen
Umkulu to serve as a staff, she took Noie by the hand and started forward
down the hill.

One of the priests clasped her robe to draw her back, but she turned on
him with the spear, whereon he shrank back into his litter like a snail
into his shell and left her alone. So following the steep path they
marched on, and after them came the two litters with the priests, carried
by all the bearers who could still stand, for these old men weighed no
more than children. From far below them rose a mighty sound as of an angry
sea.

"What is that noise?" called Rachel into the ear of Noie, for the gale was
rising again.

"The sound of wind in the forest where the Tree-folk dwell," she answered.

Then the dawn broke, an awful, blood-red dawn, and by degrees they saw.
Beneath them ran a shallow river, and beyond it, stretching for league
upon league farther than the eye could see, lay the mighty forest whereof
the trees soared two hundred feet or more into the air; the dark
illimitable forest that rolled as the sea rolls beneath the pressure of
the gale, and indeed, seen from above, looked like a green and tossing
ocean. At the sight of the water Rachel and Noie began to run towards it
hand in hand, for they were parched with thirst whose mouths were full of
the salt dust of the desert. The bearers of the litters in which were the
three priests ran also, paying no heed to the cries of the dwarfs within.
At length it was reached, and throwing themselves down they drank until
that raging thirst of theirs was satisfied; even Eddo and his companions
crawled out of their litters and drank. Then having washed their hands and
faces in the cool water, they forded the fleet stream, and, filled with a
new life, followed the road that ran beyond towards the forest. Scarcely
had they set foot upon the farther bank when the heart of the tempest,
which had been eddying round them all night long, burst over them in its
fury. The lightnings blazed, the thunder rolled, and the wild wind grew to
a hurricane, so fierce that the litters in which were Eddo, Pani, and Hana
were torn from the grasp of the bearers and rolled upon the ground. From
the wreck of them, for they were but frail things, the little grey priests
emerged trembling, or rather were dragged by the hands of their giant
bearers, to whom they clung as a frightened infant clings to its mother.
Rachel saw them and, laughed.

"Look at the Masters of Magic!" she cried to Noie, "those who kill with a
curse, those who rule the Ghosts," and she pointed to the tiny,
contemptible figures with fluttering robes being dragged along by those
giants whom but a little while before they had threatened with death.

"I see them," answered Noie into her ear. "Their spirits are strong when
they are at peace, but in trouble they fear doom more than others. Now, if
I were those Umkulu, I would make an end of them while they can."

But these great, patient men did otherwise; indeed, when the dwarfs, worn
out and bewildered by the hurricane, could walk no more, they took them up
and carried them as a woman carries a babe.

Now they were passing a belt of open land between the river and the forest
in which terrified mobs of cattle rushed to and fro, while their herds,
slave-men of large size like the Umkulu, tried to drive them to some place
where they would be safe from the tempest In this belt also grew broad
fields of grain, which furnished food for the Tree-folk. At last they came
to the confines of the forest, and Rachel, looking round her with
wondering eyes, saw at the foot of each great tree a tiny hut shaped like
a tent, and in front of the hut a dwarf seated on the ground staring into
a bowl of water, and beating his breast with his hands.

"What do they?" she asked of Noie.

"They strive to read their fates, Lady, and weep because the wind ripples
the dew in their bowls, so that they can see nothing, and cannot be sure
whether their tree will stand or fall. Follow me, follow me; I know the
way, here we are not safe."

The hurricane was at its height; the huge trees about them rocked and bent
like reeds, great boughs came crashing down; one of them fell upon a
praying dwarf and crushed him to a pulp. Those around him saw it and
uttered a wild shrill scream; Eddo, Pani, and Hana saw it and screamed
also, in the arms of their bearers, for this sight of blood was terrible
to them. The forest was alive with the voices of the storm, it seemed to
howl and groan, and the lightnings illumined its gloomy aisles. The
grandeur and the fearfulness of the scene excited Rachel; she waved the
spear she carried, and began to laugh in the wild fashion of her madness,
so that even the grey dwarfs, seated each at the foot of his tree, ceased
from his prayers to glance at her askance.

On they went, expecting death at every step, but always escaping it, until
they reached a wide clearing in the forest. In the centre of this clearing
grew a tree more huge than any that Rachel had ever dreamed of, the bole
of it, that sprang a hundred feet without a branch, was thicker than
Dingaan's Great Hut, and its topmost boughs were lost in the scudding
clouds. In front of this tree was gathered a multitude of people, men,
women, and children, all dwarfs, and all of them on their knees engaged in
prayer. At its bole, by a tent-shaped house, stood a little figure, a
woman whose long grey hair streamed upon the wind.

"The Mother of the Trees," cried Noie through the screaming gale. "Come to
her, she will shelter us," and she gripped Rachel's arm to lead her
forward.

Scarcely had they gone a step when the lightning blazed above them
fearfully, and with it came an awful rush of wind. Perhaps that flash fell
upon the tree, or perhaps the wind snapped its roots. At least its mighty
trunk burst in twain, and with a crash that for a moment seemed to master
even the roar of the volleying thunder, down it came to earth. Two huge
limbs fell on either side of Rachel and Noie, but they were not touched. A
bough struck the Umkulu slave who was carrying Eddo, and swept off his
head, leaving the dwarf unharmed. Another bough fell upon Pani and his
bearer, and buried them in the earth beneath its bulk, so that they were
never seen again. As it chanced the most of the worshippers were beyond
the reach of the falling branches, but some of these that were torn loose
in the fall, or shattered by the lightning, the wind caught and hurled
among them, slaying several and wounding others.

In ten seconds the catastrophe had come and gone, the Queen-Tree that had
ruled the forest for a thousand years was down, a stack of green leaves,
through which the shattered branches showed like bones, and a prostrate,
splintered trunk. The shock threw Noie and Rachel to the ground, but
Rachel, rising swiftly, pulled Noie to her feet after her; then, acting
upon some impulse, leapt forward, and climbing on to the trunk where it
forked, ran down it till she almost reached its base, and stood there
against the great shield of earth that had been torn up with the roots.
After that last fearful outburst a stillness fell, the storm seemed to
have exhausted itself, at any rate for a while. Rachel was able to get her
breath and look about her.

All around were lines of enormous trees, solemn aisles that seemed to lead
up to the Queen of the Trees, and down these aisles, piercing the shadows
cast by the interlacing branches overhead, shone the lights of that lurid
morning. Rachel saw, and something struggled in the darkness of her brain,
as the light struggled in the darkness of the forest aisles. She
remembered--oh! what was it she remembered? Now she knew. It was the dream
she had dreamed upon the island in the river, years and years ago, a dream
of such trees as these, and of little grey people like to these, and of
the boy, Richard, grown to manhood, lashed to the trunk of one of the
trees. What had happened to her? She could recall nothing since she saw
the body of Richard upon its bier in the kraal Mafooti.

But this was not the kraal Mafooti, nor had Noie, who stood at her side,
been with her there, Noie, who had gone on an embassy to her father's
folk, the dwarf people. Ah! these people were dwarfs. Look at them running
to and fro screaming like little monkeys. She must have been dreaming a
long, bad dream, whereof the pictures had escaped her. Doubtless she was
still dreaming and presently would awake. Well, the torment had gone out
of it, and the fear, only the wonder remained. She would stand still and
see what happened. Something was happening now. A little thin hand
appeared, gripping the rough bark at the side of the fallen tree.

She peeped over the swell of it and saw an old dwarf woman with long white
hair, whose feet were set in a cleft of the shattered bole, and who hung
to it as an ape hangs. Beneath her to the ground was a fall of full thirty
feet, for the base of the bole was held high up by the roots, so that the
little woman's hair hung down straight towards the ground, whither she
must presently fall and be killed. Rachel wondered how she had come there,
if she had clung to the trunk when it fell, or been thrown up by the
shock, or lifted by a bough. Next she wondered how long it would be before
she was obliged to leave go, and whether her white head or her back would
first strike the earth all that depth beneath. Then it occurred to her
that she might be saved.

"Hold my feet," she said to Noie, who had followed her along the trunk,
speaking in her own natural voice, at the sound of which Noie looked at
her in joyful wonder. "Hold my feet; I think I can reach that old woman,"
and without waiting for an answer she laid herself down upon the bole, her
body hanging over the curve of it.

Now Noie saw her purpose, and seating herself with her heels set against
the roughness of the bark, grasped her by the ankles. Supporting some of
her weight on one hand, with the other Rachel reached downwards all the
length of her long arm, and just as the grasp of the old woman below was
slackening, contrived to grip her by the wrist. The dwarf swung loose,
hanging in the air, but she was very light, of the weight of a
five-year-old child, perhaps, no more, and Rachel was very strong. With an
effort she lifted her up till the monkey-like fingers gripped the rough
bark again. Another effort and the little body was resting on the round of
the tree, one more and she was beside her.

Now Rachel rose to her feet again and laughed, but it was not the mad
laughter that had scared Ishmael and the Zulus; it was her own laughter,
that of a healthy, cultured woman.

The little creature, crouching on hands and knees at Rachel's feet, lifted
her head and stared with her round eyes. At that moment, too, the sun
broke out, and its rays, shining where they had never shone for ages, fell
upon Rachel, upon her bright hair, and the white robes in which the dwarfs
had clothed her, and the gleaming spear in her hand, causing her to look
like some ancient statue of a goddess upon a temple roof.

"Who art thou," said the dwarf woman in the hissing voice of her race,
"thou Beautiful One? I know! I know! Thou art that Inkosazana of the Zulus
of whom we have had many visions, she for whom I sent. But the Inkosazana
was mad, she had lost her Spirit; it has been seen here. Beautiful One,
_thou_ art not mad."

"What does she say, Noie?" asked Rachel. "I can only understand some
words."

Noie told her, and Rachel hid her eyes in her hand. Presently she let it
fall, saying:

"She is right. I lost my Spirit for a while; it went away with another
Spirit. But I think that I have found it again. Tell her, Noie, that I
have travelled far to seek my Spirit, and that I have found it again."

Noie, who could scarcely take her eyes from Rachel's face, obeyed, but the
old woman hardly seemed to heed her words; a grief had got hold of her.
She rocked herself to and fro like a monkey that has lost its young, and
cried out:

"My tree has fallen, the tree of my House, which stood from the beginning
of the world, has fallen, but that of Eddo still stands," and she pointed
to another giant of the forest that soared up, unharmed, at a little
distance. "Nya's tree has fallen--Eddo's tree still stands. His magic has
prevailed against me, his magic has prevailed against me!"

 As she spoke a man appeared scrambling along the bole towards them; it
was Eddo himself. His round eyes shone, on his pale face there was a look
of triumph, for whoever might be lost, the danger had passed him by.

"Nya," he piped, tapping her on the shoulder, "thy Ghost has deserted
thee, old woman, thy tree is down. See, I spit upon it," and he did so.
"Thou art no longer Mother of the Trees; thou art only the old woman Nya.
The Ghost people, the Dream people, the little Grey people, have a new
queen, and I am her minister, for I rule her Spirit. Yonder she stands,"
and he pointed at the tall and glittering Rachel. "Now, thou new-born
Mother of the Trees, who wast the Inkosazana of the Zulus, obey me. Give
death to this old woman, the Red Death, that her spirit may be spilt with
her blood, and lost for ever. Give it to her with that spear in thy hand,
while I hide my eyes, and reign thou in her place through me," and he
bowed his head and waited.

"Not the Red Death, not the Red Death," wailed Nya. "Give me the White
Death and save my soul, Beautiful One, and in return I will give thee
something that thou desirest, who am still the wisest of them all,
although my Tree is down."

Noie whispered for a while in Rachel's ear. Then while all the dwarf
people gathered beneath them, watching, Rachel bent forward, and putting
her arms about the trembling creature, lifted her up as though she were a
child, and held her to her bosom.

"Mother," she said, "I give thee no death, red or white; I give thee love.
Thy tree is down; sit thou in my shadow and be safer On him who harms
thee"--and she looked at Eddo--"on him shall the Red Death fall."


CHAPTER XX

THE MOTHER OF THE TREES


When Eddo understood these words he lifted his head and stared at Rachel
amazed.

"This is thy doing, Bastard," he said savagely, addressing Noie, who had
translated them. "I have felt thee fighting against me for long, and now
thou causest this Inkosazana to defy me. It was thou who didst work upon
that old woman, thine aunt, to command that the white witch should be
brought hither, and because as yet I dared not disobey, I made a terrible
journey to bring her. Yes, and I did this gladly, for when my eyes fell
upon her, there in the town of Dingaan, I saw that she was great and
beautiful, but that her Spirit had gone, and I knew that I could make her
mouth to speak my words, and her pure eyes to see things that are denied
to mine, even the future as, when I bade her, she saw it yonder in the
court of Dingaan. But now it seems that her Spirit has returned to her, so
that there is no room for mine in her heart, and she speaks her own words,
not my words. And thou hast done this thing, O Bastard."

"Perhaps," answered Noie unconcernedly.

"Thou thinkest," went on Eddo, in his fury beating the bole on which he
sat, "thou thinkest to protect that old hag, Nya, because her blood runs
in thee. But, fool, it is in vain, for her tree is down, her tree is down,
and as its leaves wither, and its sap dries up, so must she wither and her
blood dry up until she dies, she who thought to live on for many years."

"What does that matter?" asked Noie, "seeing that then she will only join
the great company of the ghosts with whom she longs to be, and return with
them to torment thee, Eddo, until thou, too, art one of them, and lookest
on the face of Judgment."

"Thou thinkest," screamed the dwarf, ignoring this ominous suggestion,
"thou thinkest, when she is gone, to be queen in her place, or to rule as
high priestess through this White One."

"If I do, that will be a bad hour for thee, Eddo," replied Noie.

"It shall not be, woman. No bastard shall reign here as Mother of the
Trees while the nations round cringe before her feet. I have spells; I
have poisons; I have slaves who can shoot with arrows."

"Then use them if thou canst, thou evil-doer," said "Noie contemptuously.

"Aye, I will use them all, and not on thee only, but on that white witch
whom thou lovest. She shall never pass living from this land that is
ringed in by the desert and the forest. She shall choose me to reign
through her as her high priest, or she shall die--die miserably. For a
little while that old hag, Nya, may protect her with her wisdom, but when
she passes, as she must, and quickly, for I will light fires beneath this
fallen tree of hers, then I tell thee the Beautiful One shall choose
between my rule and doom."

Now Noie would hear no more.

"Dog," she cried, "filthy night-bird, darest thou speak thus of the
Inkosazana? Another word and I will offer that heart of thine to the sun
thou hatest," and snatching the spear from Rachel's hand, she charged at
him, holding it aloft.

Eddo saw her come. With a scream of fear he leapt to his feet, and ran
swiftly along the bole till he reached the mass of the fallen branches.
Into these he sprang, swinging himself from bough to bough like an ape
until he vanished amongst the dark green foliage. Then, having quite lost
sight of him, Noie returned laughing to Rachel, by whom stood the old
Mother of the Trees who had slid from her arms, and gave her back the
spear, saying in the dwarf language:

"This Eddo speaks great words, but he is also a great coward."

"Yes, yes," answered the old woman, "he is a great coward, because like
all our folk he fears the Red Death; but, child, I tell thee he is
terrible. He hates me because I rule through the white art, not the black,
but while my tree stood he must obey me, and I was safe. Now it is down,
and he may kill me if he can, according to the custom of my land, and set
up another to be queen, she at whose feet my tree bowed itself and fell by
the will of the Heavens, and whom, therefore, the people will accept.
Through her he will wield all the power of the Ghost-kings, over whom no
man may rule, but a woman only. Come, Child, and thou, White One, come
also. I know where we may hide. Lady, the power that was mine is thine;
protect me till I die, and in payment I will give thee whatever thy heart
desires."

"I ask no payment," Rachel answered wearily, when she understood the
words; "and I think that it is I who need protection from that wicked
dwarf."

Then, guided by Nya, who clung to Rachel's hand, they walked down the bole
of the tree and along a great branch, till at length they reached a place
whence they could climb to the ground. Before they were clear of the
boughs the dethroned Mother, from whose round eyes the tears fell, turned
and kissed the bark of one of them, wailing aloud.

"Farewell, thou mighty one, under whose shade I, and the queens of my race
before me, have dreamed for centuries. Thou art fallen beneath the stroke
of Heaven, and great was thy fall, and I am fallen with thee. Save me from
the Red Death, O Spirit of my tree, that in the land of ghosts I still may
sleep beneath thy shade for ever."

Then she ran to the very point of the tree and broke off its topmost twig,
which was covered with narrow and shining green leaves, and holding it in
her hand, returned to Rachel.

"I will plant it," she said, "and perchance it will grow to be the house
of queens unborn. Come, now, come," and she turned her face towards the
forest.

The thunder had rolled away, and from time to time the sun shone fiercely,
so fiercely that, unable to bear its rays, all the dwarfs who were
gathered about the fallen tree had retreated into the shadow of the other
trees around the open space. There they stood and sat watching the three
of them go by. Men, women and children, they all watched, and Rachel they
saluted with their raised hands; but to her who had been their mother for
unknown years they did no reverence. Only one hideous little man ran up to
her and called out:

"Thou didst punish me once, old woman, now why should I not kill thee in
payment? Thy tree is down at last."

Nya looked at him sadly, and answered:

"I remember. Thou shouldst have died, for thy sin was great, but I laid a
lesser burden on thee. Man, thou canst not kill me yet; my tree is down,
but it is not dead."

She held up the green bough in her hand and looked at him from beneath it,
then went on slowly: "Man, my wisdom remains within me, and I tell thee
that before I die thou shalt die, and not as thou desirest. Remember my
words, people of the Ghosts."

Then she walked on with the others, leaving the dwarf staring after her
with a face wherein hate struggled with fear.

"Thou liest," he screamed after her; "thy power is gone with thy tree."

Scarcely were the words out of his mouth when they heard a crash which
caused them to look round. A bough, broken by the storm, had fallen from
on high. It had fallen on to the head of the dwarf, and there he lay
crushed and dead.

"Ah!" piped the other dwarfs, pointing towards the corpse with their
fingers, and closing their eyes to shut out the sight of blood, "ah! Nya
is right; she still has power. Those who would kill her must wait till her
tree dies."

Taking no heed of what had happened, Nya walked on into the forest. For a
while Rachel noted the little huts built, each of them, at the foot of a
tree. There were hundreds of these huts that they could see, showing that
the people were many, but by degrees they grew fewer, only one was visible
here and there, set beneath some particularly vigorous and handsome
timber. At last they ceased altogether; they had passed through that city,
the strangest city in the world.

Trees--everywhere trees, hundreds of trees, tens of thousands of trees
soaring up to heaven, making a canopy of their interlacing boughs,
shutting out the light so that beneath them was a deep oppressive gloom.
There was silence also, for if any beasts or birds dwelt there the
hurricane had scared them away, silence only broken from time to time by
the crash of some giant of the forest that, its length of days fulfilled
at last, sank suddenly to ruin, to be buried in a tomb of brushwood whence
in due course its successor would arise.

"Another life gone," said the old woman, Nya, flitting before them like a
little grey ghost, every time that this weird sound struck upon their
ears; "whose was it, I wonder? I will look in my bowl, I will look in my
bowl."

For, as Rachel discovered afterwards, these people believed that the
spirit of each tree of the forest is attached to the spirit of a human
being, although that being may dwell in other lands, far away, which dies
when the tree dies, sometimes slowly by disease, and sometimes in swift
collapse, so that they pass together into the world of ghosts.

On they flitted through the gloom, on for mile after mile. Although the
leaf-strewn ground showed no traces of it, evidently they were following
some kind of path, for no fallen trunks barred their progress, nor were
there any creepers or brushwood, although to right and left of them all
these could be seen in plenty. At last, quite of a sudden, for the bole of
a tree at the end of the path had hidden it from them, they came upon a
clearing in the forest. It seemed to be a natural, or, at any rate, a very
ancient clearing, since in it no stumps were visible, nor any scrub, or
creepers, only tall grass and flowering plants. In the centre of this
place, covering a quarter of it, perhaps, was a vast circular wall, fifty
feet or more in height, and clothed with ferns. This wall, they noted, was
built of huge blocks of stone, so huge indeed that it seemed wonderful
that they could have been moved by human beings. At the sight of that
marvellous wall Rachel and Noie halted involuntarily, and Noie asked:

"Who made it, Mother?"

"The giants who lived when the world was young. Can our hands lift such
stones?" Nya answered, as, bending down, she thrust the top shoot from her
fallen tree deep into the humid soil, then added: "On, child; there is
danger here."

As she spoke something hissed through the air just above her head, and
stuck fast in the bark of a sapling. Noie sprang forward and plucked it
out. It was a little reed, feathered with grasses, and having a sharp
ivory point, smeared with some green substance.

"Touch it not," cried Nya, "it is deadly poison. Eddo's work, Eddo's work!
but my hour is not yet. Into the open before another comes."

 So they ran forward, all three of them, seeing and bearing nothing of the
shooter of the arrow. As they approached the titanic wall they saw that it
enclosed a mound, on the top of which mound grew a cedar-like tree with
branches so wide that they seemed to overshadow half of the enclosure.
There were no gates to this wall, but while they wondered how it could be
entered, Nya led them to a kind of cleft in its stones, not more than two
feet in width, across which cleft were stretched strings of plaited grass.
She pressed herself against them, breaking them, and walked forward,
followed by Rachel and Noie. Suddenly they heard a noise above them, and,
looking up, saw white-robed dwarfs perched upon the stones of the cleft,
holding bent bows in their hands, whereof the arrows were pointed at their
breasts. Nya halted, beckoning to them, whereon, recognising her, they
dropped the arrows into the little quivers which they wore, and scrambled
off, whither Rachel could not see.

"These are the guardians of the Temple that cannot either speak or hear,
who were summoned by the breaking of the thread," said Nya, and went
forward again.

Now to the right, and now to the left, ran the narrow path that wound its
way in the thickness of the mighty wall, which towered so high above them
that they walked almost in darkness, and at each turn of it were recesses;
and above these projecting stones, where archers could stand for its
defence. At length this path ended in a _cul-de-sac_, for in front of them
was nothing but blank masonry. Whilst Rachel and Noie stared at it
wondering whither they should go now, a large stone in this wall turned,
leaving a narrow doorway through which they passed, whereon it shut again
behind them, though by what machinery they could not see.

Thus they passed through the wall, emerging, however, at a different point
in its circumference to that at which they had entered. In the centre of
the enclosure rose the hill of earth that they had seen from without,
which evidently was kept free from weeds and swept, and on its crest grew
the huge cedar-like tree, the Tree of the Tribe. Between the base of this
hill and the foot of the wall was a wide ring of level ground, also swept
and weeded, and on this space, neatly arranged in lines, were hundreds of
little hillocks that resembled ant-heaps.

"The burying-place of the Ghost-priests, Lady," said Nya, nodding at the
hillocks. "Soon my bones will be added to them."

Walking across this strange cemetery, they came to the foot of the mound
that was entirely overshadowed by the cedar above, from the outspread
limbs of which hung long grey moss, that swayed ceaselessly in the wind.
Here dwarfs appeared from right and left, the same whom they had seen
within the thickness of the wall, or others like to them, some male and
some female; melancholy-eyed little creatures who bowed to Nya, and looked
with fear and wonder at the tall while Rachel. Evidently they were all of
them deaf mutes, for they made signs to Nya, who answered them with other
signs, the purport of which seemed to sadden and disturb them greatly.

"They have seen the fall of my tree in their bowls," explained Nya to
Noie, "and ask me if it is a true vision. I tell them that I am come here
to die and that is why they are sad. This is the place of dying of all the
Ghost-priests, whence they pass into the world of spirits, and here no
blood may be shed, no, not that of the most wicked evil-doer. If any one
of the family of the priests reaches this place living, the glory of the
White Death is won. Follow and see."

So they followed her up the mound, past what looked like the entrance to a
cave, until they reached a low fence of reeds whereof the gate stood open.

"The gate is open, but enter not there," whispered the old Mother of the
Trees, "for those who enter there live not long. Look, Lady, look."

Rachel peered through the gate, but so dense was the gloom in that holy
spot that at first she could only see the enormous red bole of the cedar,
and the ghostly, moss-clad branches which sprang from it at no great
height above the ground. Presently, however, her eyes, grown accustomed to
the light, distinguished several little white-robed figures seated upon
the earth at some distance from the trunk staring into vessels of wood
which were placed before them. These figures appeared to be those of both
men and women, while one was that of a child. Even as they watched, the
figure nearest to them fell forward over its bowl and lay quite still,
whereon those around it set up a feeble, piping cry, that yet had in it a
note of gladness. The dwarf-mutes who had accompanied them, and who alone
seemed to have a right of entry into this sad place, ran forward and
looked. Then very gently they lifted up the fallen figure and bore it out.
As it was carried past them Rachel noted that it was the body of quite a
young woman, whose little face, wasted to nothing, still looked sweet and
gentle.

"Was she ill?" asked Rachel in an awed voice.

"Perhaps," answered the Mother, shaking her grey head, "or perhaps she was
very unhappy, and came here to die. What does it matter? She is happy
now."

"Ask her, Noie, if all must die who sit beneath that tree," said Rachel.

"Aye," answered Nya, "all save these dumb people who have been priests of
the Tree from generation to generation. To touch its stem is to perish
soon or late, for it is the Tree of Life and Death, and in it dwells the
Spirit of the whole race."

"What then would happen if it fell down, or was destroyed like your tree,
Mother?"

"Then the race would perish also," answered Nya, "since their Spirit would
lack a home and depart to the world of Ghosts, whither they must follow.
When it dies of old age, if it should ever die, then the race will die
with it."

"And if someone should cut it down, Mother, what then?"

Now when Noie translated these words to her, the face of the old queen was
filled with horror, and as her face was, so was Noie's face.

"White Maiden," she gasped, "speak not such wickedness lest the very
thought of it should bring the curse upon us all. He who destroyed that
tree would bring ruin upon this people. They would fly away, every one of
them, far into the heart of the forest, and be seen no more by man.
Moreover, he who did this evil thing would perish and pass down to
vengeance among the ghosts, such vengeance as may not be spoken. Put that
thought from thy mind, I pray thee, and let it never pass thy lips again."

"Do you believe all this, Noie?" asked Rachel in English with a smile.

"Yes, Zoola," answered Noie, shuddering, "for it is true. My father told
me of it, and of what happened once to some wild men who broke into the
sanctuary, and shot arrows at the Tree. No, no, I will not tell the story;
it is dreadful."

"Yet it must be foolishness, Noie, for how can a tree have power over the
lives of men?"

"I do not know, but it has, it has! If I were but to cast a stone at it, I
should be dead in a day, and so would you--yes, even you--nothing could
save you. Oh!" she went on earnestly, "swear to me, Sister, that you will
never so much as touch that tree; I pray you, swear."

So Rachel swore, to please her, for she was tired of this tree and its
powers.

Then they went down the hill again, till they came to the mouth of the
cave.

"Enter, Lady," Nya said, "for this must be thy home a while until thou
goest to rule as Mother of the Trees after me, or, if it pleases thee
better, up yonder to die."

They went into the cave, having no choice. It was a great place lit dimly
by the outer light, and farther down its length with lamps. Looking round
her, Rachel saw that its roof was supported by white columns which she
knew to be stalactites, for as a child she had seen their like. At the end
of it, where the lamps burned and a fountain bubbled from the ground, rose
a very large column shaped like the trunk of a tree, with branches at the
top that looked like the boughs of a tree. Gazing at it Rachel understood
why these dwarfs, or some ancient people before them, had chosen this cave
as their temple.

"The ghost Tree of my race," said old Nya, pointing to it, "the only tree
that never falls, the Tree that lives and grows for ever. Yes, it grows,
for it is larger now than when my mother was a child."

As they drew near to this wondrous and ghostly looking object Rachel saw
piled around and beyond it many precious things. There was gold in dust
and heaps, and rings and nuggets; there were shining stones, red and green
and white, that she knew were jewels; there were tusks of ivory and
carvings in ivory; there were karosses and furs mouldering to decay; there
were grotesque gods, fetishes of wood and stone.

"Offerings," said Nya, "which all the nations that live in darkness bring
to the Mother of the Trees, and the priests of the Cave. Costly things
which they value, but we value them not, who prize power and wisdom only.
Yes, yes, costly things which they give to the Mother of the Trees, the
fools without a spirit, when they come here to ask her oracle. Look, there
are some of the gifts which were sent by Dingaan of the Zulus in payment
for the oracle of his death. Thou broughtest them, Noie, my child."

"Yes," answered Noie, "I brought them, and the Inkosazana here, she
delivered the oracle. Eddo gave her the bowl, and she saw pictures in the
bowl and showed them to Dingaan."

"Nay, nay," said the old woman testily, "it was I who saw the pictures,
and I showed them to Eddo and to this white virgin. You cannot understand,
but it was so, it was so. Eddo's gift of vision is small, mine is great.
None have ever had it as I have it, and that is why Eddo and the others
have suffered my tree to live so long, because the light of my wisdom has
shone about their heads and spoken through their tongues, and when I am
gone they will seek and find it not. In thee they might have found it,
Maiden, had thy heart remained empty, but now, it is full again and what
room is there for wisdom such as ours?--the wisdom of the ghosts, not the
wisdom of life and love and beating hearts."

Noie translated the words, but Rachel seemed to take no heed of them.

 "Dingaan?" she asked. "Is Dingaan dead? He was well enough when--when
Richard came to Zululand, and since then I have seen nothing of him. How
did he die?"

"He did not die, Zoola," answered Noie, "though I think that ere long he
will die, for you told him so. It was you who died for a while, not
Dingaan. By-and-bye you shall learn all that story. Now you are very weary
and must rest."

"Yes," said Rachel with a sob, "I think I died when Richard died, but now
I seem to have come to life again--that is the worst of it. Oh!! Noie,
Noie, why did you not let me remain dead, instead of bringing me to life
again in this dreadful place?"

"Because it was otherwise fated, Sister," replied Noie. "No, do not begin
to laugh and cry; it was otherwise fated," and bending down she whispered
something into Nya's ear.

The old dwarf nodded, then, taking Rachel by the hand, led her to where
some skins were spread upon the floor.

"Lie down," she said, "and rest. Rest, beautiful White One, and wake up to
eat and be strong again," and she gazed into Rachel's eyes as Eddo had
done when the fits of wild laughter were on her, singing something as she
gazed.

While she sang the madness that was gathering there again went out of
Rachel's eyes, the lids closed over them, and presently they were fast
shut in sleep, nor did she open them again for many hours.

Rachel awoke and sat up looking round her wonderingly. Then by the dim
light of the lamps she saw Noie seated at her side, and the old
dwarf-woman, who was called Mother of the Trees, squatted at a little
distance watching them both--and remembered.

"Thou hast had happy dreams, Lady, and thou art well again, is it not so?"
queried Nya.

"Aye, Mother," she answered, "too happy, for they make my waking the more
sad. And I am well, I who desire to die."

"Then go up through the open gate which thou sawest not so long ago, and
satisfy thy desire, as it is easy to do," replied Nya grimly. "Nay," she
added in a changed voice, "go not up, thou art too young and fair, the
blood runs too red in those blue veins of thine. What hast thou to do with
ghosts and death, and the darkness of the trees, thou child of the air and
sunshine? Death for the dwarf-folk, death for the dealers in dreams, death
for the death-lovers, but for thee life--life."

 "Tell her, Noie," said Rachel, "that my mother, who was fore-sighted,
always said that I should live out my days, and I fear that it is true,
who must live them out alone."

"Yes, yes, she was right, that mother of thine," answered Nya, "and for
the rest, who knows? But thou art hungry, eat; afterwards we will talk,"
and she pointed to a stool upon which was food.

Rachel tasted and found it very good, a kind of porridge, made of she knew
not what, and with it forest fruits, but no flesh. So she ate heartily,
and Noie ate with her. Nya ate also, but only a very little.

"Why should I trouble to eat?" she said, "I to whom death draws near?"

When they had finished eating, at some signal which Rachel did not
perceive, mutes came in who bore away the fragments of the meal. After
they had gone the three women washed themselves in the water of the
fountain. Then Noie combed out Rachel's golden hair, and clothed her again
in her robe of silken fur that she had cleansed, throwing over it a mantle
of snowy white fibre, such as the dwarfs wove into cloth, which she and
Nya had made ready while Rachel slept.

As Noie put it about her mistress and stepped back to see how it became
her beauty, two of the dwarf-mutes appeared creeping up the cave, and
squatting down before Nya began to make signs to her.

"What is it?" asked Rachel nervously.

"Eddo is without," answered the Mother, "and would speak with us."

"I fear Eddo and will not go," exclaimed Rachel.

"Nay, have no fear, Maiden, for here he can not harm thee or any of us; it
is the place of sanctuary. Come, let us see this priest; perhaps we may
learn something from him."


CHAPTER XXI

THE CITY OF THE DEAD


Nya led the way down the cave, followed by Rachel and Noie. Squatted in
its entrance, so as to be out of reach of the rays of the sun, sat Eddo,
looking like a malevolent toad, and with him were Hana and some other
priests. As Rachel approached they all rose and saluted, but to Nya and
Noie they gave no salute. Only to Nya Eddo said:

 "Why art thou not within the Fence, old woman?" and he pointed with his
chin towards the place of death above. "Thy tree is down, and all last
night we were hacking off its branches that it may dry up the sooner. It
is time for thee to die."

"I die when my tree dies, not before, Priest," answered Nya. "I have still
some work to do before I die, also I have planted my tree again in good
soil, and it may grow."

"I saw," said Eddo; "it is without the wall there, but many a generation
must go by before a new Mother sits beneath its shade. Produced by Chuck
Grief Doña Luz By Juan Valera Library Perojo Paris 1897 A Countess from
Mrs Gomar V. While in house, on a night last summer, was the simple story
of Doña Luz. Hallola V. Well, no doubt thanks to the indulgence with
which you look at me and encouraged me to write it.

I promised to write and engage V.; accepted V. promise, and today,
with the greatest pleasure the meet.

What I regret is worth the short of the gift itself or any claim, if it
attends to the person to whom he dedicated, for her talent and beauty
and so justly praised.

Is, however, shows my dedication, although poor, the respectful affection
that V. inspires me.

Otherwise, although the novel is not fun, I think that is worth something
for the very severe and harsh lessons it contains. Set aside five hundred
thousand and that any sharp critic if you can get praise and strives to
be showcased, and I am merely giving the lesson, not only to the friars,
that in Spain there are so few now, but by extension the entire courtly
gentleman, old man or something machucho, who falls in love vicious. The
disastrous case of P. Henry will serve as a warning and recording in the
mind of the old courtier as moral principal, those warnings with the
illustrious divine Micer Pietro Bembo and crown hermosea book _The
cortesano_.

The warnings say in summary that the court "his desire to straighten beauty
alone, and the more we can contemplate in itself pure and simple, and
within the imagination in the form of separate matters, and shape and make
friends and family of his soul, and hence the enjoyment, and it has the
days and nights in any place and time without fear of ever perdella,
remembering always that the body is very different kinds of beauty, and
not only not growing, but you ruin your Apoc. This way it will be our
old courtier out of all those miseries and troubles that often the
young men often feel, and feel no jealousy or suspicion, or
desabrimientos or anger or despair, or a thousand other follies
filled with rage, with which often come to love so crazy that even
unreasonable to kill themselves "as happened to Fr Enrique, back
to my story.

To which Father would have been better to draw on this scale love to
climb to the highest degree.

Because, considering the narrowness of being always occupied in contemplating
the beauty of a single body, he had felt something and desire to widen the
exit end so narrow, and we also had to gather much beauty in his mind,
and by a single , to form that which on the whole nature stretches and
strokes. We know, finally, that for top of this universal concept of beauty,
there is another excelsa, uncreated and that all came from. If love
comes to columbrarla, what does not forget? And then (and this is the whole
doctrine of micer Pietro Bembo), was at that burns the soul flame,
symbolized and foreshadowed in the huge pyre which burned Hercules, after
all his work there on the summit of Mount Oeta or and converted back
into the burning car, where Elijah left the earth and was flying to heaven.
"Yo, lady, with the weight of years, and that bothers me a lot, and not
a few disappointments healthy, I'm going to provide, although a sinner,
to climb this way. And although in my novels are still noticeable
remnants of men and worldly passions, there are already signs of them as
I call it very different from other voices of the world. With this, it
lost in what I write amenity, but win Utilities. Now that fashion is
what teachers tell me V.

Frankly if my book does not teach something when it teaches. V. Give therefore
approval; defiéndala and accept it as it belongs, and believe me your
server and devoted friend, JUAN VALERA.-I-The Marquis and his manager Not
all I refer to stories that have happened in Villabermeja.

Today I have a very interesting happened a few years has, in another place
nearby, which we call Villafría aside for more things their real
names. Moreover, among Villabermeja Villafría and is not very noticeable
difference, because, although Villabermeja has a more miraculous
patron saint, Villafría term is richer, more people, better houses, and
wealthy landowners. These descollaba D. Acisclo, so called since it turned
forty-five years, which in turn had been before, until the age of twenty-eight
to thirty, and uncle Acisclillo Acisclo later. The gift came and antepuso
Finally, the Acisclo, by the tone and the importance that Mr rightly
given to the many funds that were managed carefully and honestly
acquired.

His reputation transcended throughout the province. Not only felt like a
person who has kidney well covered, and not be left hanging for
two or three milloncejos reals, but was recommended as a subject
very fully, in their dealings formalísimo and secure to the wall
opposite, and such as straight, devotee of Mary Most Holy and
God-fearing, that you almost at the odor of sanctity, in spite of
the bad language, that there ever.

The truth is that D. Acisclo thrives had managed to reconcile with his probity
and justice. He had been manager of the Marquis de Villafría, at least
for twenty years and had compound so that all property of the Marquis
had been gradually shifting from the hands of his lordship to you faster
and save. This pass or dislocation been done naturally and legitimately.
Don Acisclo did not blame any of the Marquis had been squandered and
perdulario; and over because it could be counted on merit and that he
was resourceful, thrifty and aprovechadísimo. Always led to greater fairness
in the administration. The Marquis of Villafría lived in Madrid, where
he spent a great deal. Needed money. Sending a request. Had not. And
then called for more resources, some of which I speak here in a
few words.

He sent the Marquis, who, to meet two thousand hard, wine is sold,
even underselling: giving, for example, fine drinking and burning.
Acisclo Don was very close and scrupulous conscience, and put on a quest
to find someone to carry the wine for the fair value, but not found.

Nobody gave each arroba but six or seven fewer than the actual worth.
So D. Acisclo being slaughtered; close money was sent to the Marquis,
and took the wine to each other by a penny less for each arroba. In
this way he won by beating three real arroba Marquis for the short.

After missing Acisclo D.

Wood said the wine, and after a year, so exquisitely made, each selling
arroba pesetas seven or eight more than it had cost. Sometimes called
the Marquis, running, Durito thousand out of a predicament. "Take it
from a trader in Malaga - wrote to Mr Acisclo - promising to pay for
oil within two months, which will be the harvest. Acisclo Don wanted
to point at Malaga trader raids that give money and it was but nobody
wanted to claim him in oil, or just over two months later, and
taking the arroba of the liquid at least two of the actual current
price. This was a monstrous usury, usury was one of more than 30 per 100
per year.

Don Acisclo is afflicted, he screamed at the sky, fell sick for grief
that gave the plight of the Marquis, and repeated the order to
sacrifice, taking him for a real fluid than its current price and
the money apronte from which to draw but did not come at a rate of
20 per 100 per year.

Marquis did well winning at 10 per 100. In case you own wheat. The Marquis
sent wheat to sell him two or three months before harvest. Who was not
paid in advance but three real discount per bushel.

So D. Acisclo provided the money, and stayed with the actual wheat by two
less, but doing a real beating in Marquis bushel. The Marquis of liked
having a reat eight beautiful mules, which had eaten a lot of barley, without
working for the Marquis, but at most four months each year, but D.

Acisclo of mules were used for hauling and traffic, and thus saved him from
paying Mulero and mules, and made the Marquis six months to save on feed.
The lands of the Marquis of fertilizer were very needy. Don Acisclo
bought it for quite a few sheep and goats, which, in exchange for
some herbs and perhaps unnecessary and harmful for some shoots low
and vicious, well-paid of the best olive Marquis.

Marquis most needed the money needed to take given , who did not
give it to less than 15 per 100.

Don Acisclo to find a relative or a friend of his who gave him 12. Marquis
did well winning at three per cent per annum on the amount received. In
resolution, and the like mentioned exactísimas accountable, and demonstrating
mathematically that the Marquis did win three or four thousand
a year with hard so faithfully and carefully manage their property D.
Acisclo came to stay with almost all of them. Your Honor, besieged by
hunger, then had to leave the court, and retired to do penance in Villafría,
where he died, the year, with some evil calenturas who gave their blood
the absence of metals and the excess of bile. flowrate All of the Marquis,
his death could produce at most 16,000 rs. per year. I'm so deep Scaled
with critics who do not rightly resolve and declare where the
marquis was dumb or discrete.

In Madrid, the Marquis was the charm of society, and had gone through
in person discretion.

However, the Marquis had been poor. Maybe it consists in having two kinds
of foolishness, the foolishness and stupidity of action of speech, which
are in inverse ratio to each human being. The nonsense that makes it says:
that does not say. When someone always does and says nonsense, it is
fool capirote and enjoys absolute nonsense, total, one and all, as
expressed philosophers. For this is not this is what common: it is common
to be silly socks. When someone spends their discretion in words, love the
people, and the delight of the talk shows, but consumed its entire
discretion in objects of luxury, it is only nonsense for businesses
should care.

And, conversely, all or almost all those who consume their discretion
in making their business, are insufferable fools of zafios or until you
do, though, after he has returned to shine its discretion in
speeches and conversations, or because they no longer have to use
it as helpful and friendly towards the stem, or the prestige that
surround seductor its success and good fortune.

So I explained that I Marquis, who has a good husband , passed always
discreet in court, and instead unable to Sacramento.

Razón took place, tell me who read it. If the Marquis was no fool, would
have known that D. Acisclo he had looted and moved administrator. This
matter what answer the Marquis answered, because it never failed to make
him such thoughts. Here, I do not argue that the marquis was right: I
am merely repeating what he said. He said, therefore, that in twenty miles
to the round by taking Villafría center of the circle or circle, there
was more honest and virtuous man that his manager that the savings
of four thousand a year that Hard D.

Acisclo boasted of having done was the most rigorous accuracy, and therefore
still leaving the debtor in the twenty years he had managed his property,
just over 80,000 hard.

Any other manager would have finished with the Marquis in ten years . The
Marquis, therefore, believed to be D. Acisclo ten years of good and happy
life.

Another manager had not made any progress in half less, and was soon
enriched, and had not ruined his master so many miramientos, so soft and
pause, and with such severe conscience. D.

 The actual Acisclo thought, back in the bottom of his soul, but rarely
boasted of it on his extreme modesty, which was to the Marquis a
paragon of faithful servants.

So, in the year he lived in the Marquis Villafría already ruined, D.
Acisclo lecturing him well on his improvidence and wastefulness,
and the Marquis was always heard with respect and even sometimes
compungido.

With these posthumous sermons and advice, with a friendship full of reverence,
D. Acisclo always showed the Marquis, especially when poor than when rich,
and the care with which he attended in the last days of his life,
without even remotely enter into this, the idea of relief, believing
him and not favored offended Acisclo don rose to considerable height
in the moral and intellectual spirit of the Marquis, who at death
left him confident that the most beautiful jewel in this world still
held.

It was this gem a girl who has just turned fifteen years old when he died,
the Marquis .

He was educated by an English aya was required to dismiss for lack of money
before coming to Villafría, but because the girl spoke English and
French perfectly and was well educated.

The place had to be right to want all people, especially the poor,
but she was too little and could improve.

Orphaned mother since she was two years, had been left alone in the world
to die the Marquis.

He, who had never been married, had one daughter in a dark woman,
but she had given his name and had legitimized. Acisclo Don killed the
Marquis took great effort to advance the money for the transfer
of title to Miss but it knew it, and opposed the more determined.

Although such a young age, and said he thought that discretion was
to be marquesa ridiculous with so little money as I had.

Don Acisclo insisted to get the title, but the girl objected ever
harder. Quedose therefore no title. Everyone on the left instead of calling
it the Marquesita, as she was called during the lifetime of his
father, and called Doña Luz, who was his first name.

Doña Luz, as a good daughter, and wept much regret the death of the
Marquis, but his Christian humility and resignation was great. Eventually
doña Luz stayed calm and comforted. He lived in the house of D. Acisclo.
Knew their plight, and will not be tormented by it.

It seems that Madrid had forgotten. Was to move in accordance Villafría
entire life.-II-Background and annoying but essential details from
the death of the marquis had passed twelve years.

Doña Luz was twenty-seven and it was beautiful: a lot better than
fifteen.

His good nature, aimed directly at childhood and in adolescence by the lessons
of the aya, had not ever left. Doña Luz, without sybaritic, with the
severity of someone who has a duty, had cared for, and continued care in
the place of his soul and his body.

With the same care be taken not to stain their intelligence or their willingness
to ideas or with unworthy affection, serving the cleaning material and
decoration honest person. Doña Luz was neatness personified throughout.
Perhaps instinctively, without realizing it, or at least not letting
fear or feel, is looking more and was pleased that we call corporeal and
moral cleanliness, so it is was surrounded by people just rude and not
very clean either body or soul, as though he had the fear of contamination.
He was so circumspect, that this fear never left forward, and not so
clever art, anyone accused of disdainful. Although not descended to the
level of anybody, for a fresh, frank and generous sympathy, sought to
raise people to their level.

They were falling past her, those vast, glowing suns, those rounded
planets that were now vivid with light, and now steeped in gloom, those
infinite showers of distant stars. They were gone, they and their music
together; she was far beyond them in a region where all life was
forgotten, beyond the rush of the uttermost comet, beyond the last glimmer
of the spies and outposts of the universe. One shape of light she sped
into the black bosom of fathomless space, and its solitude shrivelled up
her soul. She could not endure, she longed for some shore on which to set
her mortal feet.

Behold! far away a shore appeared, a towering, cliff-bound shore, upon
whose iron coasts all the black waves of space beat vainly and were
eternally rolled back. Here there was light, but no such light as she had
ever known; it did not fall from sun or star, but, changeful and radiant,
welled upward from that land in a thousand hues, as light might well from
a world of opal. In its dazzling, beautiful rays she saw fantastic palaces
and pyramids, she saw seas and pure white mountains, she saw plains and
new-hued flowers, she saw gulfs and precipices, and pale lakes pregnant
with wavering flame. All that she had ever conceived of as lovely or as
fearful, she beheld, far lovelier or a thousandfold more fearful.

Like a great rose of glory that world bloomed and changed beneath her.
Petal by petal its splendours fell away and were swallowed in the sea of
space, whilst from the deep heart of the immortal rose new splendours took
their birth, and fresh-fashioned, mysterious, wonderful, reappeared the
measureless city with its columns, its towers, and its glittering gates.
It endured a moment, or a million years, she knew not which, and lo! where
it had been, stood another city, different, utterly different, only a
hundred times more glorious. Out of the prodigal heart of the world-rose
were they created, into the black bosom of nothingness were they gathered;
whilst others, ever more perfect, pressed into their place. So, too,
changed the mountains, and so the trees, while the gulfs became a garden
and the fiery lakes a pleasant stream, and from the seed of the strange
flowers grew immemorial forests wreathed about with rosy mists and
bedecked in glimmering dew. With music they were born, on the wings of
music they fled away, and after them that sweet music wailed like
memories.

A hand took hers and drew her downwards, and up to meet her leapt myriads
of points of light, in every point a tiny face. They gazed at her with
their golden eyes; they whispered together concerning her, and the sound
of their whispering was the sound of a sea at peace. They accompanied her
to the very heart of the opal rose of life whence all these wonders
welled, they set her in a great grey hall roofed in with leaning cliffs,
and there they left her desolate.

Fear came upon her, the loneliness choked her, it held her by the throat
like a thing alive. She seemed about to die of it, when she became aware
that once more she was companioned. Shapes stood about her. She could not
see the shapes, save dimly now and again as they moved, but their eyes she
could see, their great calm, pitiful eyes, which looked down on her, as
the eye of a giant might look down upon a babe. They were terrible, but
she did not fear them so much as the loneliness, for at least they lived.

One of the shapes bent over her, for its holy eyes drew near to her, and
she heard a voice in her heart asking her for what great cause she had
dared to journey hither before the time. She answered, in her heart, not
with her lips, that she was bereaved of all she loved and came to seek
them. Then; still in her heart, she heard that voice command:

 "Let all this Rachel's dead be brought before her."

Instantly doors swung open at the end of that grey hall, and through them
with noiseless steps, with shadowy wings, floated a being that bore in its
arms a child. Before her it stayed, and the light of its starry head
illumined the face of the child. She knew it at once--it was that baby
brother whose bones lay by the shore of the African sea. It awoke from its
sleep, it opened its eyes, it stretched out its arms and smiled at her.
Then it was gone.

Other Shapes appeared, each of them bearing its burden--a companion who
had died at school, friends of her youth and childhood whom she had
thought yet living, a young man who once had wished to marry her and who
was drowned, the soldier whom she had killed to save the life of Noie. At
the sight of him she shrank, for his blood was on her hands, but he only
smiled like the rest, and was borne away, to be followed by that
witch-doctoress whom the Zulus had slain because of her, who neither
smiled nor frowned but passed like one who wonders.

Then another shadow swept down the hall, and in its arms her mother--her
mother with joyful eyes, who held thin hands above her as though in
blessing, and to whom she strove to speak but strove in vain. She was
borne on still blessing her, and where she had been was her father, who
blessed her also, and whose presence seemed to shed peace upon her soul.
He pointed upwards and was gone, gazing at her earnestly, and lo! a form
of darkness cast something at her feet. It was Ishmael who knelt before
her, Ishmael whose tormented face gazed up at her as though imploring
pardon.

A struggle rent her heart. Could she forgive? Oh! could she forgive him
who had slain them all? Now she was aware that the place was filled with
the points of light that were Spirits, and that every one of them looked
at her awaiting the free verdict of her heart. Rank upon rank, also, the
mighty Shapes gathered about her, and in their arms her dead, and all of
them looked and looked, awaiting the free verdict of her heart. Then it
arose within her, drawn how she knew not from every fibre of her infinite
being, it arose within her, that spirit of pity and of pardon. As the dead
had stretched out their arms above her, so she stretched out her arms over
the head of that tortured soul, and for the first time her lips were given
power to speak.

"As I hope for pardon, so I pardon," she said. "Go in peace!"

Voices and trumpets caught up the words, and through the grey hall they
rang and echoed, proclaimed for ever and as they died away he too was
gone, and with him went the myriad points of flame, in each of which
gleamed a tiny face. She looked about her seeking another Spirit, that
Spirit she had, travelled so far and dared so much to find. But there came
only a little dwarf that shambled alone down the great hall. She knew him
at once for Pani, the priest, he who had been crushed in the tempest,
Pani, the brother of Eddo. No Shape bore him, for he who on earth had been
half a ghost, could walk this ghost-world on his mortal feet, or so her
mind conceived. Past her he shuffled shamefaced, and was gone.

Now the great doors at the end of the hall closed; from far away she could
see them roll together like lightning-severed clouds, and once more that
awful loneliness overcame her. Her knees gave way beneath her, she sank
down upon the floor, one little spot of white in its expanse, wishing that
the roof of rock would fall and hide her. She covered her face with her
golden hair, and wept behind its veil. She looked up and saw two great
eyes gazing at her--no face, only two great, steady eyes. Then a voice
speaking in her heart asked her why she wept, whose desire had been
fulfilled, and she answered that it was because she could not find him
whom she sought, Richard Darrien. Instantly the tongues and trumpets took
up the name.

"Richard Darrien!" they cried, "Richard Darrien!"

But no Shape swept in bearing the spirit of Richard in its arms.

"He is not here," said the voice in her heart. "Go, seek him in some other
world."

She grew angry.

"Thou mockest me," she answered, "He is dead, and this is the home of the
dead; therefore he must be here. Shadow, thou mockest me."

"I mock not," came the swift answer. "Mortal, look now and learn."

Again the doors burst open, and through them poured the infinite rout of
the dead. That hall would not hold them all, therefore it grew and grew
till her sight could scarcely reach from wall to wall. Shapes headed and
marshalled them by races and by generations, perhaps because thus only
could her human heart imagine them, but now none were borne in their arms.
They came in myriads and in millions, in billions and tens of billions,
men and women and children, kings and priests and beggars, all wearing the
garments of their age and country. They came like an ocean-tide, and their
floating hair was the foam on the tide, and their eyes gleamed like the
first shimmer of dawn above the snows. They came for hours and days and
years and centuries, they came eternally, and as they came every finger of
that host, compared to which all the sands of all the seas were but as a
handful, was pointed at her, and every mouth shaped the words:

"Is it I whom thou seekest?"

Million by million she scanned them all, but the face of Richard Darrien
was not there.

Now the dead Zulus were marching by. Down the stream of Time they marched
in their marshalled regiments. Chaka stood over her--she knew him by his
likeness to Dingaan--and threatened her with a little, red-handled spear,
asking her how she dared to sit upon the throne of the Spirit of his
nation. She began to tell him her story, but as she spoke the wide
receding walls of that grey hall fell apart and crumbled, and amidst a
mighty laughter the great-eyed Shapes rebuilt them to the fashion of the
cave in the mound beneath the tree of the dwarf-folk. The sound of the
trumpets died away, the shrill, sweet music of the spheres grew far and
faint.

Rachel opened her eyes. There in front of her sat Nya, crooning her low
song, and there, on either side crouched the mutes tapping upon their
little drums and gazing into their bowls of water, while against her
leaned Noie, who stirred like one awaking from sleep. Ages and ages ago
when she started on that dread journey, the dwarf to her left was
stretching out her hand to steady the bowl at her feet, and now it had but
just reached the bowl. A great moth had singed its wings in the lamp, and
was fluttering to the ground--it was still in mid-air. Noie was placing
her arm about her neck, and it had but begun to fall upon her shoulder!


CHAPTER XXII

IN THE SANCTUARY


Nya ceased her singing, and the dwarf women their beating on the drums.

"Hast thou been a journey, Maiden?" she asked, looking at Rachel
curiously.

"Aye, Mother," she answered in a faint voice, "and a journey far and
strange."

"And thou, Noie, my niece?"

"Aye, Mother," she answered, shivering as though with cold or fear, "but I
went not with my Sister here, I went alone--for years and years."

"A far journey thou sayest, Inkosazana, and one that was for years and
years, thou sayest, Noie, yet the eyes of both of you have been shut for
so long only as it takes a burnt moth to fall from the lamp flame to the
ground. I think that you slept and dreamed a moment, that is all."

"Mayhap, Mother," replied Rachel, "but if so mine was a most wondrous
dream, such as has never visited me before, and as I pray, never may
again. For I was borne beyond the stars into the glorious cities of the
dead, and I saw all the dead, and those that I had known in life were
brought to me by Shapes and Powers whereof I could only see the eyes."

"And didst thou find him whom thou soughtest most of all?"

"Nay," she answered, "him alone I did not find. I sought him, I prayed the
Guardians of the dead to show him to me, and they called up all the dead,
and I scanned them every one, and they summoned him by his name, but he
was not of their number, and he came not. Only they spoke in my heart,
bidding me to look for him in some other world."

"Ah!" exclaimed Nya starting a little, "they said that to thee, did they?
Well, worlds are many, and such a search would be long." Then as though to
turn the subject, she added, "And what sawest thou, Noie?"

"I, Mother? I went not beyond the stars, I climbed down endless ladders
into the centre of the earth, my feet are still sore with them. I reached
vast caves full of a blackness that shone, and there many dead folk were
walking, going nowhere, and coming back from nowhere. They seemed
strengthless but not unhappy, and they looked at me and asked me tidings
of the upper world, but I could not answer them, for whenever I opened my
lips to speak a cold hand was laid upon my mouth. I wandered among them
for many moons, only there was no moon, nothing but the blackness that
shone like polished coal, wandered from cave to cave. At length I came to
a cave in which sat my father, Seyapi, and near to him my mother, and my
other mothers, his wives, and my brothers and sisters, all of whom the
Zulus killed, as the wild beast, Ibubesi, told them to do."

"I saw Ibubesi, and he prayed me for my pardon, and I granted it to him,"
broke in Rachel.

"I did not see him," went on Noie fiercely, "nor would I have pardoned him
if I had. Nor do I think that my father and his family pardon him; I think
that they wait to bear testimony against him before the Lord of the dead."

"Did Seyapi tell you so?" asked Rachel.

"Nay, he sat there beneath a black tree whereof I could not see the top,
and gazed into a bowl of black water, and in that bowl he showed me many
pictures of things that have been and things that are to come, but they
are secret, I may say nothing of them."

"And what was the end of it, my niece?" asked Nya, bending forward
eagerly.

"Mother, the end of it was that the black tree which was shaped like the
tree of our tribe above us, took fire and went up in a fierce flame. Then
the roofs of the caves fell in and all the people of the dwarfs flew
through the roofs, singing and rejoicing, into a place of light; only,"
she added slowly, "it seemed to me that I was left alone amidst the ruins
of the caves, I and the white ghost of the tree. Then a voice cried to me
to make my heart bold, to bear all things with patience, since to those
who dare much for love's sake, much will be forgiven. So I woke, but what
those words mean I cannot guess, seeing that I love no man, and never
shall," and she rested her chin upon her hand and sat there musing.

"No," replied Nya, "thou lovest no man, and therefore the riddle is hard,"
but as she spoke her eyes fell upon Rachel.

"Mother," said Rachel presently, "my heart is the hungrier for all that it
has fed upon. Can thy magic send me back to that country of the dead that
I may search for him again? If so, for his sake I will dare the journey."

"Not so," answered Nya shaking her head; "it is a road that very few have
travelled, and none may travel twice and live."

Now Rachel began to weep.

"Weep not, Maiden, there are other roads and perchance to-morrow thou
shall walk them. Now lie down and sleep, both of you, and fear no dreams."

So they laid themselves down and slept, but the old witch-wife, Nya, sat
waiting and watched them.

"I think I understand," she murmured to herself, as She gazed at the
slumbering Rachel, "for to her who is so pure and good, and who has
suffered such cruel wrong, the Guardians would not lie. I think that I
understand and that I can find a path. Sleep on, sweet maiden, sleep on in
hope."

Then she looked at Noie and shook her grey head.

"I do not understand," she muttered. "The black tree shaped like the Tree
of our Tribe, and Seyapi of the old blood seated beneath it. The tree that
went up in fire, and the maid of the old blood left alone with the ghost
of it, while the dwarf people fled into light and freedom. What does it
mean? Ah! that picture in the bowl! Now I can guess. 'Those who dare much
for love.' It did not say for love of man, and woman can love woman. But
would she dare a deed that none of our race could even dream? Well, the
Zulu blood is bold. Perhaps, perhaps. Oh! Eddo, thou black sorcerer,
whither art thou leading the Children of the Tree? On thy head be it,
Eddo, not on mine; on thy head for ever and for ever."

When Rachel awoke, refreshed, on the following day, she lay a while
thinking. Every detail of her vision was perfectly clear in her mind, only
now she was sure that it had been but a dream. Yet what a wonderful dream!
How, even in her sleep, had she found the imagination to conceive
circumstances so inconceivable? That magic rush beyond the stars; that
mighty world set round with black cliffs against which rolled the waves of
space; that changeful, wondrous world which unfolded itself petal by petal
like a rose, every petal lovelier and different from the last; that grey
hall roofed with tilted precipices; and then those dead, those multitudes
of the dead!

What power had been born in her that she could imagine such things as
these? Vision she had, like her mother, but not after this sort. Perhaps
it was but an aftermath of her madness, for into the minds of the mad
creep strange sights and sounds, and this place, and the people amongst
whom she sojourned, the Ghost-people, the grey Dwarf-people, the Dealers
in dreams, the Dwellers in the sombre forest, might well open new doors in
such a soul as hers. Or perhaps she was still mad. She did not know, she
did not greatly care. All she knew was that her poor heart ached with love
for a man who was dead, and yet whom she could not find even among the
dead. She had wished to die, but now she longed for death no more, fearing
lest after all there should be something in that vision which the magic of
Nya had summoned up, and that when she reached the further shore she might
not find him who dwelt in a different world. Oh! if only she could find
him, then she would be glad enough to go wherever it was that he had gone.

Now Noie was awake at her side, and they talked together.

"We must have dreamt dreams, Noie," she said. "Perhaps the Mother mingled
some drug with our food."

"I do not know, Zoola," answered Noie; "but, if so, I want no more of
those dreams which bode no good to me. Besides, who can tell what is dream
and what is truth? Mayhap this world is the dream, and the truth is such
things as we saw last night," and she would say no more on the matter.

Nothing happened within the Wall that day--that is, nothing out of the
common. A certain number of the privileged, priestly caste of the dwarfs
were carried or conducted into the holy place, and up to the Fence of
Death that they might die there, and a certain number were brought out for
burial. Some of those who came in were folk weary of life, or, in other
words, suicides, and these walked; and some were sick of various diseases,
and these were carried. But the end was the same, they always died, though
whether this result was really brought about by some poison distilled from
the tree, as Nya alleged, or whether it was the effect of a physical
collapse induced by that inherited belief, Rachel never discovered.

At least they died, some almost at once, and some within a day or two of
entering that deadly shade, and were borne away to burial by the mutes who
spent their spare time in the digging of little graves which they must
fill. Indeed, these mutes either knew, or pretended that they knew who
would be the occupant of each grave. At least they intimated by signs that
this was revealed to them in their bowls, and when the victims appeared
within the Wall, took pleasure in leading them to the holes they had
prepared, and showing to them with what care these had been dug to suit
their stature. For this service they received a fee that such moribund
persons brought with them, either of finely woven robes, or of mats, or of
different sorts of food, or sometimes of gold and copper rings
manufactured by the Umkulu or other subject savages, which they wore upon
their wrists and ankles.

Certain of these doomed folk, however, went to their fate with no light
hearts, which was not wonderful, as it seemed that these were neither ill
nor sought a voluntary euthanasia. They were political victims sent
thither by Eddo as an alternative to the terror of the Red Death, whereby
according to their strange and ancient creed, they would have risked the
spilling of their souls. For the most part the crime of these poor people
was that they had been adherents and supporters of the old Mother of the
Tree, Nya, over whom Eddo was at last triumphant. On their way up to the
Fence such individuals would stop to exchange a last few, sad words with
their dethroned priestess.

Then without any resistance they went on with the rest, but from them the
mutes received scant offerings, or none at all, with the result that they
were cast into the worst situated and most inconvenient graves, or even
tumbled two or three together into some shapeless corner hole. But, after
all, that mattered nothing to them so long as they received sepulchre
within the Wall, which was their birth-or, rather, their death-right.

The priest-mutes themselves were a strange folk, and, oddly enough, Rachel
observed, by comparison, quite cheerful in their demeanour, for when off
duty they would smile and gibber at each other like monkeys, and carry on
a kind of market between themselves. They lived in that part of the
circumference of the Wall which was behind the hill whereon grew the
sacred tree. Here no burials took place, and instead of graves appeared
their tiny huts arranged in neat streets and squares. In these they and
their forefathers had dwelt from time immemorial; indeed, each little hut
with a few yards of fenced-in ground about it ornamented with dwarf trees,
was a freehold that descended from father to son. For the mutes married,
and were given in marriage, like other folk, though their children were
few, a family of three being considered very large, while many of the
couples had none at all. But those who were born to them were all
deaf-mutes, although their other senses seemed to be singularly acute.

These mutes had their virtues; thus some of them were very kind to each
other, and especially to those from the outer forest world who came hither
to bid farewell to that world, and others, renouncing marriage and all
earthly joys, devoted their lives, which appeared to be long, to the
worship of the Spirit of the Tree. Also they had their vices, such as
theft, and the seducing away of the betrothed of others, but the chief of
them was jealousy, which sometimes led to murder by poisoning, an art
whereof they were great masters.

When such a crime was discovered, and a case of it happened during the
first days of Rachel's sojourn among them, the accused was put upon his
trial before the chief of the mutes, evidence for and against him being
given by signs which they all understood. Then if a case were established
against him, he was forced to drink a bowl of medicine. If he did this
with impunity he was acquitted, but if it disagreed with him his guilt was
held to be established. Now came the strange part of the matter. All his
life the evil-doer had been accustomed to go within the Fence about his
business and take no harm, but after such condemnation he was conducted
there with the usual ceremonies and very shortly perished like any other
uninitiated person. Whether this issue was due to magic or to mental
collapse, or to the previous administration of poison, no one seemed to
know, not even Nya herself. So, at least, she declared to Rachel.

At each new moon these mutes celebrated what Rachel was informed they
looked upon as a festival. That is, they climbed the Tree of the Tribe and
scattered themselves among its enormous branches, where for several hours
they mumbled and gibbered in the dark like a troop of baboons. Then they
came down, and mounting the huge, surrounding wall, crept around its
circumference. Occasionally this journey resulted in an accident, as one
of them would fall from the wall and be dashed to pieces, although it was
noticed that the unfortunate was generally a person who, although guilty
of no actual crime, chanced to be out of favour with the other priests and
priestesses. After the circuit of the wall had been accomplished, with or
without accidents, the dwarfs feasted round a fire, drinking some spirit
that threw them into a sleep in which wonderful visions appeared to them.
Such was their only entertainment, if so it could be called, since
doubtless the ceremony was of a religious character. For the rest they
seldom if ever left the holy place, which was known as "Within the Wall,"
most of them never doing so in the course of a long life.

Beyond the burial of the dead they did no work, as their food was brought
to them daily by outside people, who were called "the slaves of the Wall."
Their only method of conversation was by signs, and they seemed to desire
no other. Indeed, if, as occasionally happened, a child was born to any of
them who could hear or speak like other human beings, it was either given
over to the other dwarfs, or if the discovery was not made until it was
old enough to observe, it was sacrificed by being bound to the trunk of
the tribal tree "lest it should tell the secret of the Tree."

Such were the weird, half-human folk among whom Rachel was destined to
dwell. The Zulus had been bad and bloodthirsty, but compared to these
little wizards they seemed to her as angels. The Zulus at any rate had
left her her thoughts, but these stunted wretches, she was sure, pried
into them and read them with the help of their bowls, for often she caught
sight of them signing to each other about her as she passed, and pointing
with grins to pictures which they saw in the water.


It was night again, still, silent night made odorous with the heavy cedar
scents of the huge tree upon the mound. Rachel and Noie sat before Nya in
the cave beneath the burning lamp about which fluttered the big-winged,
gilded moths.

"Thou didst not find him yonder among the Shades," said Nya suddenly, as
though she were continuing a conversation. "Say now, Maiden, art thou
satisfied, or wouldst thou seek for him again?"

"I would seek him through all the heavens and all the earths. Mother, my
soul burns for a sight of him, and if I cannot find him, then I must die,
and go perchance where he is not."

"Good," said Nya; "the effort wearies me, for I grow weak, yet for thy
sake I will try to help thee, who saved me from the Red Death."

Then the dwarf-women came in and beat upon their drums, and, as before,
the old Mother of the Trees began to sing, but Noie sat aside, for in this
night's play she would take no part. Again Rachel sank into sleep, and
again it seemed to her that she was swept from the earth into the region
of the stars and there searched world after world.

She saw many strange and marvellous things, things so wonderful that her
memory was buried beneath the mass of them, so that when she woke again
she could not recall their details. Only of Richard she saw nothing. Yet
as her life returned to her, it seemed to Rachel that for one brief moment
she was near to Richard. She could not see him, and she could not hear
him, yet certainly he was near her. Then her eyes opened, and Nya ceasing
from her song, asked:

"What tidings, Wanderer?"

"Little," she answered feebly, for she was very tired, and in a faint
voice she told her all.

"Good," said Nya, nodding her grey head. "This time he was not so far
away. To-morrow I will make thy spirit strong, and then perhaps he will
come to thee. Now rest."

So next night Nya laid her charm upon Rachel as before, and again her
spirit sought for Richard. This time it seemed to her that she did not
leave the earth, but with infinite pain, with terrible struggling,
wandered to and fro about it, bewildered by a multitude of faces, led
astray by myriads of footsteps. Yet in the end she found him. She heard
him not, she saw him not, she knew not where he was, but undoubtedly for a
while she was with him, and awoke again, exhausted, but very happy.

Nya heard her story, weighing every word of it but saying nothing. Then
she signed to the dwarfs to bring her a bowl of dew, and stared in it for
a long while. The dwarf-women also stared into their bowls, and afterwards
came to her, talking to her on their fingers, after which all three of
them upset the dew upon a rock, "breaking the pictures."

"Hast thou seen aught?" asked Rachel eagerly.

"Yes, Maiden," answered the mother. "I and these wise women have seen
something, the same thing, and therefore a true thing. But ask not what it
was, for we may not tell thee, nor would it help thee if we did. Only be
of a good courage, for this I say, there is hope for thee."

So Rachel went to sleep, pondering on these words, of which neither she
nor Noie could guess the meaning. The next night when she prayed Nya to
lay the spell upon her, the old Mother would not.

"Not so," she said. "Thrice have I rent thy soul from thy body and sent it
afar, and this I may do no more and keep thee living, nor could I if I
would, for I grow feeble. Neither is it necessary, seeing that although
thou knowest it not, that spirit of thine, having found him, is with him
wherever he may be, yes, at his side comforting him."

"Aye, but Where is he, Mother? Let me look in the bowl and see his face,
as I believe that thou hast done."

"Look if thou wilt," and she motioned to one of the dwarf-women to place a
bowl before her.

So Rachel looked long and earnestly, but saw nothing of Richard, only many
fantastic pictures, most of which she knew again for scenes from her own
past. At length, worn out, she thrust away the bowl, and asked in a bitter
voice why they mocked her, and how it came about that she who had seen the
coming of Richard in the pool in Zululand, and the fate of Dingaan the
King in the bowl of Eddo, could now see nothing of any worth.

"As regards the vision of the pool I cannot say, Maiden," replied Nya,
"for that was born of thine own heart, and had nothing to do with our
magic. As regards the visions in the bowl of Eddo, they were his visions,
not thine, or rather my visions that I saw before he started hence. I
passed them on to him, and he passed them on to thee, and thou didst pass
them on to King Dingaan. Far-sighted and pure-souled as thou art, yet not
having been instructed in their wizardry, thou wilt see nothing in the
bowls of the dwarfs unless their blood is mingled with thy blood."

"'Their blood mingled with my blood?' What dost thou mean, Mother?"

"What I say, neither more nor less. If Eddo has his will, thou wilt rule
after me here as Mother of the Trees. But first thy veins must be opened,
and the veins of Eddo must be opened, and Eddo's blood must be poured into
thee, and thy blood into him. Then thou wilt be able to read in the bowls
as we can, and Eddo will be thy master, and thou must do his bidding while
you both shall live."

"If so," answered Rachel, "I think that neither of us will live long."

That night Rachel felt too exhausted to sleep, though why this should be
she could not guess, as she had done nothing all day save watch the mutes
at their dreary tasks, and it was strange, therefore, that she should feel
as though she had made a long journey upon her feet. About an hour before
the dawn she saw Nya rise and glide past her towards the mouth of the
cave, carrying in her hand a little drum, like those used by the mute
women. Something impelled her to follow, and waking Noie at her side, she
bade her come also.

 Outside of the cave by the faint starlight they saw the little shape of
Nya creeping down the mound, and thence across the open space towards the
wall, and went after her, thinking that she intended to pass the wall. But
this she did not do, for when she came to its foot Nya, notwithstanding
her feebleness, began to climb the rough stones as actively as any cat,
and though their ascent seemed perilous enough, reached the crest of the
wall sixty feet above in safety, and there sat herself down. Next they
heard her beating upon the drum she bore, single strokes always, but some
of them slow, and some rapid, with a pause between every five or ten
strokes, "as though she were spelling out words," thought Rachel.

After a while Nya ceased her beating, and in the utter silence of the
night, which was broken only, as always, by the occasional crash of
falling trees, for no breath of air stirred, and all the beasts of prey
had sought their lairs before light came, both she and Noie seemed to
hear, far, infinitely far away, the faint beat of an answering drum. It
would appear that Nya heard it also, for she struck a single note upon
hers as though in acknowledgement, after which the distant beating went
on, paused as though for a reply from some other unheard drum, and again
from time to time went on, perhaps repeating that reply.

For a long while this continued until the sky began to grow grey indeed,
when Nya beat for several minutes and was answered by a single, far-off
note. Then glancing at the heavens she prepared to descend the wall, while
Rachel and Noie slipped back to the cave and feigned to be asleep. Soon
she entered, and stood over them shaking her grey head and asking how it
came about that they thought that she, the Mother of the Trees, should be
so easily deceived.

"So thou sawest us," said Rachel, trying not to look ashamed.

"No; I saw you not with my eyes, either of you, but I felt both of you
following me, and heard in my heart what you were whispering to each
other. Well, Inkosazana, art thou the wiser for this journey?"

"No, Mother, but tell us if thou wilt what thou wast beating on that
drum."

"Gladly," she answered. "I was sending certain orders to the slave peoples
who still know me as Mother of the Trees, and obey my words. Perhaps thou
dost not believe that while I sat upon yonder wall I talked across the
desert to the chiefs of the marches upon the far border of the land of the
Umkulu, and that by now at my bidding they have sent out men upon an
errand of mine."

 "What was the errand, Mother?" asked Rachel curiously.

"I said the errand was mine, not thine, Maiden. It is not pressing, but as
I do not know how long my strength will last, I thought it well that it
should be settled." Then without more words she coiled herself up on her
mat and seemed to go to sleep.

It was after this incident of the drums that Rachel experienced the
strangest days, or rather weeks of her life. Nya sent her into no more
trances, and to all outward seeming nothing happened. Yet within her much
did happen. Her madness had utterly left her and still she was not as
other women are, or as she herself had been in health. Her mind seemed to
wander and she knew not whither it wandered. Yet for long hours, although
she was awake and, so Noie said, talking or eating or walking as usual, it
was away from her, and afterwards she could remember nothing. Also this
happened at night as well as during the day, and ever more and more often.

She could remember nothing, yet out of this nothingness there grew upon
her a continual sense of the presence of Richard Darrien, a presence that
seemed to come nearer and nearer, closer and closer to her heart. It was
the assurance of this presence that made those long days so happy to her,
though when she was herself, she felt that it could be naught but a dream.
Yet why should a dream move her so strangely, and why should a dream weary
her so much? Why, after sleeping all night, should she awake feeling as
though she had journeyed all night? Why should her limbs ache and she grow
thin like one who travels without cease? Why should she seem time after
time to have passed great dangers, to have known cold, and heat and want
and struggle against waters and the battling against storms? Why should
her knowledge of this Richard, of the very heart and soul of Richard, grow
ever deeper till it was as though they were not twain, but one?

She could not answer these questions, and Noie could not answer them, and
when she asked Nya the old Mother shook her head and could not, or would
not answer. Only the dwarf-mutes seemed to know the answer, for when she
passed them they nudged each other, and grinned and thrust their little
woolly heads together staring, several of them, into one bowl. But if Noie
and Nya knew nothing of the cause of these things the effect of them
stirred them both, for they saw that Rachel, the tall and strong, grew
faint and weak and began to fade away as one fades upon whom deadly
sickness has laid its hand.

Thus three weeks or so went by, until one day in some fashion of her own
Nya caused to arise an the mind of Eddo a knowledge of her desire to speak
with him. Early the next morning Eddo arrived at the Holy Place
accompanied only by his familiar, Hana, and Nya met them alone in the
mouth of the cave.

"I see that thou art very white and thin, but still alive, old woman,"
sneered Eddo, adding: "All the thousands of the people yonder thought that
long ere this thou wouldst have passed within the Fence. May I take back
that good tidings to them?"

The ancient Mother of the Trees looked at him sternly.

"It is true, thou evil mocker," she said, "that I am white and thin. It is
true that I grow like to the skeleton of a rotted leaf, all ribs and
netted veins without substance. It is true that my round eyes start from
my head like to those of a bush plover, or the tree lizard, and that soon
I must pass within the Fence, as thou hast so long desired that I should
do that thou mayest reign alone over the thousands of the People of the
Dwarfs and wield their wisdom to increase thy power, thou poison-bloated
toad. All these things are true, Eddo, yet ere I go I have a word to say
to thee to which thou wilt do well to listen."

"Speak on," said Eddo. "Without doubt thou hast wisdom of a sort; honey
thou hast garnered during many years, and it is well that I should suck
the store before it is too late."

"Eddo," said Nya, "I am not the only one in this Holy Place who grows
white and thin. Look, there is another," and she nodded towards Rachel,
who walked past them aimlessly with dreaming eyes, attended by Noie, upon
whose arm she leant.

"I see," answered Eddo; "this haunted death-prison presses the life out of
her, also I think that thou hast sent her Spirit travelling, as thou
knowest how to do, and such journeys sap the strength of flesh and blood."

"Perhaps; but now before it is too late I would send her body travelling
also; only thou, who hast the power for a while, dost bar the road."

"I know," said Eddo, nodding his bead and looking at his companion. "We
all know, do we not, Hana? we who have heard certain beatings of drums in
the night, and studied dew drops beneath the trees at dawn. Thou wouldst
send her to meet another traveller."

"Yes, and if thou art wise thou wilt let her go."

"Why should I let her go," asked the priest passionately, "and with her
all my greatness? She must reign here after thee, for at her feet thy Tree
fell, and it is the will of the people, who weary of dwarf queens and
desire one that is tall and beautiful and white. Moreover, when my blood
has been poured into her, her wisdom will be great, greater than thine or
that of any Mother that went before thee, for she is '_Wensi_' the Virgin,
and her soul is purer than them all. I will not let her go. If she leaves
this Holy Place where none may do her harm, she shall die, and then her
Spirit may go to seek that other traveller."

"Thou art mad, Eddo, mad and blind with pride and folly. Let her be, and
choose another Mother. Now, there is Noie."

"Thy great-niece, Nya, who thinks as thou thinkest, and hates those whom
thou hatest. Nay, I will have none of that half-breed. Yonder white
Inkosazana shall be our queen and no other."

"Then, Eddo," whispered Nya, leaning forward and looking into his eyes,
"she shall be the last Mother of this people. Fool, there are those who
fight for her against whom thou canst not prevail. Thou knowest them not,
but I know them, and I tell thee that they make ready thy doom. Have thy
way, Eddo; it was not for her that I pleaded with thee, but for the sake
of the ancient People of the Ghosts, whose fate draws nigh to them. Fool,
have thy way, spin thy web, and be caught in it thyself. I tell thee,
Eddo, that thy death shall be redder than any thou hast ever dreamed, nor
shall it fall on thee alone. Begone now, and trouble me no more till in
another place all that is left of thee shall creep to my feet, praying me
for a pardon thou shalt not find. Begone, for the last leaf withers on my
Tree and to-morrow I pass within the Fence. Say to the people that their
Mother against whom they rebelled is dead, and that she bids them prepare
to meet the evil which, alive, she warded from their heads."

Now Eddo strove to answer, but could not, for there was something in the
flaming eyes of Nya which frightened him. He looked at Hana, and Hana
looked back at him, then taking each other's hand they slunk away towards
the wall, staggering blindly through the sunshine towards the shade.


CHAPTER XXIII

THE DREAM IN THE NORTH


Richard Darrien remembered drinking a bowl of milk in the hut in which he
was imprisoned at Mafooti, and instantly feeling a cold chill run to his
heart and brain, after which he remembered no more for many a day. At
length, however, by slow degrees, and with sundry slips back into
unconsciousness, life and some share of his reason and memory returned to
him. He awoke to find himself lying in a hut roughly fashioned of
branches, and attended by a Kaffir woman of middle age.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I am named Mami," she answered.

"Mami, Mami! I know the name, and I know the voice. Say, were you one of
the wives of Ibubesi, she who spoke with me through the fence?" and he
strove to raise himself on his arm to look at her, but fell back from
weakness.

"Yes, Inkoos, I was one of his wives."

"Was? Then where is Ibubesi now?"

"Dead, Inkoos. The fire has burned him up with his kraal Mafooti."

"With the kraal Mafooti! Where, then, is the Inkosazana? Answer, woman,
and be swift," he cried in a hollow voice.

"Alas! Inkoos, alas! she is dead also, for she was in the kraal when the
fire swept it, and was seen standing on the top of a hut where she had
taken refuge, and after that she was seen no more."

"Then let me die and go to her," exclaimed Richard with a groan, as he
fell back upon his bed, where he lay almost insensible for three more
days.

Yet he did not die, for he was young and very strong, and Mami poured milk
down his throat to keep the life in him. Indeed little by little something
of his strength came back, so that at last he was able to think and talk
with her again, and learned all the dreadful story.

He learned how the people of Mafooti, fearing the vengeance of Dingaan,
had fled away from their kraal, carrying what they thought to be his body
with them, lest it should remain in evidence against them, and taking all
the cattle that they could gather. Every one of them had fled that could
travel, only Ibubesi and a few sick, and certain folk who chanced to be
outside the walls, remaining behind. It was from two of these, who escaped
during the burning of the kraal by the Zulus, or by fire from the Heavens,
they knew not which, that they had heard of the awful end of Ibubesi, and
of his prisoner, the Inkosazana. As for themselves, they had travelled
night and day, till they reached a certain secret and almost inaccessible
place in the great Quathlamba Mountains, in which people had lived whom
Chaka wiped out, and there hidden themselves. In this place they remained,
hoping that Dingaan would not care to follow them so far, and purposing to
make it their home, since here they found good mealie lands, and
fortunately the most of their cattle remained alive. That was all the
story, there was nothing more to tell.

A day or two later Richard was able to creep out of the hut and see the
place. It was as Mami had said, very strong, a kind of tableland ringed
round with precipices that could only be climbed through a single narrow
nek, and overshadowed by the great Quathlamba range. The people, who were
engaged in planting their corn, gathered round him, staring at him as
though he were one risen from the dead, and greeted him with respectful
words. He spoke to several of them, including the two men who had seen the
burning of Mafooti, though from a little distance. But they could tell him
no more than Mami had done, except that they were sure that the Inkosazana
had perished in the flames, as had many of the Zulus, who broke into the
town. Richard was sure of it also--who would not have been?--and crept
back broken-hearted to his hut, he who had lost all, and longed that he
might die.

But he did not die, he grew strong again, and when he was well and fit to
travel, went to the headmen of the people, saying that now he desired to
leave them and return to his own place in the Cape Colony. The headmen
said No, he must not leave, for in their hearts they were sure that he
would go, not to the Cape Colony, but to Zululand, there to discover all
he could as to the death of the Inkosazana. So they told him that with
them he must bide, for then if the Zulus tracked them out they would be
able to produce him, who otherwise would be put to the spear, every man of
them, as his murderers. The sin of Ibubesi who had been their chief, clung
to them, and they knew well what Dingaan and Tamboosa had sworn should
happen to those who harmed the white chief, Dario, who was under the
mantle of their Inkosazana.

Richard reasoned with them, but it was of no use, they, would not let him
go. Therefore in the end he appeared to fall in with their humour, and
meanwhile began to plan escape. One dark night he tried it indeed, only to
be seized in the mouth of the nek, and brought back to his hut. Next
morning the headman spoke with him, telling him that he should only depart
thence over their dead bodies, and that they watched him night and day;
that the nek, moreover, was always guarded. Then they made an offer to
him. He was a white man, they said, and cleverer than they were; let them
come under his wing, let him be their chief, for he would know how to
protect them from the Zulus and any other enemies. He could take over the
wives of Ibubesi (at this proposition Richard shuddered), and they would
obey him in all things, only he must not attempt to leave them--which he
should never do alive.

 Richard put the proposal by, but in the end, not because he wished it,
but by the mere weight of his white man's blood, and for the lack of
anything else to do, drifted into some such position. Only at the wives of
Ibubesi, or any other wives, he would not so much as look, a slight that
gave offence to those women, but made the others laugh.

So, for certain long weeks he sat in that secret nook in the mountains as
the chief of a little Kaffir tribe, occupying himself with the planting of
crops, the building of walls and huts, the drilling of men and the
settling of quarrels. All day he worked thus, but after the day came the
night when he did not work, and those nights he dreaded. For then the
languor, not of body, but of mind, which the poison the old
witch-doctoress had given to Ishmael had left behind it, would overcome
him, bringing with it black despair, and his grief would get a hold of
him, torturing his heart. For of the memory of Rachel he could never be
rid for a single hour, and his love for her grew deeper day by day. And
she was dead! Oh, she was dead, leaving him living.

One night he dreamed of Rachel, dreamed that she was searching for him and
calling him. It was a very vivid dream, but he woke up and it passed away
as such dreams do. Only all the day that followed he felt a strange
throbbing in his head, and found himself turning ever towards the north.
The next night he dreamed again of her, and heard her say, "The search has
been far and long, but I have found you, Richard. Open your eyes now, and
you will see my face." So he opened his eyes, and there, sure enough, in
the darkness he perceived the outline of her sweet, remembered face, about
which fell her golden hair. For one moment only he perceived it, then it
was gone, and after that her presence never seemed to leave him. He could
not see her, he could not touch her, and yet she was ever at his side. His
brain ached with the thought of her, her breath seemed to fan his hands
and hair. At night her face floated before him, and in his dreams her
voice called him, saying: _"Come to me, come to me, Richard. I am in need
of you. Come to me. I myself will be your guide."_

Then he would wake, and remembering that she was dead, grew sure and ever
surer that the Spirit of Rachel was calling him down to death. It called
him from the north, always from the north. Soon he could scarcely walk
southwards, or east or west, for ere he had gone many yards his feet
turned and set his face towards the north, that was to the narrow nek
between the precipices which the Kaffirs guarded night and day.

One evening he went to his hut to sleep, if sleep would come to him. It
came, and with it that face and voice, but the face seemed paler, and the
voice more insistent.

"Will you not listen to me," it said, "you who were my love? For how long
must I plead with you? Soon my power will leave me, the opportunity will
be passed, and then how will you find me, Richard, my lover? Rise up, rise
up and follow ere it be too late, for I myself will be your guide."

He awoke. He could bear it no more. Perhaps he was mad, and these were
visions of his madness, mocking visions that led him to his death. Well,
if so, he still would follow them. Perhaps her body was buried in the
north. If so, he would be buried there also; perhaps her Soul dwelt in the
north. If so, his soul would fly thither to join it. The Kaffirs would
kill him in the pass. Well, if so, he would die with his face set
northwards whither Rachel drew him.

He rose up and wrapped himself in a cloak of goatskins. He filled a hide
bag with sun-dried flesh and parched corn, and hung it about his shoulders
with a gourd of water, for after all he might live a little while and need
food and drink. As he had no gun he took a staff and a knife and a
broad-bladed spear, and leaving the hut, set his face northward and walked
towards the mouth of the nek. At the first step which he took the torment
in his head seemed to leave him, who fought no longer, who had seemed
obedient to that mysterious summons. Quietness and confidence possessed
him. He was going to his end, but what did it matter? The dream beckoned
and he must follow. The moon shone bright, but he took no trouble to hide
himself, it did not seem to be worth while.

Now he was in the nek and drawing near to the place where the guard was
stationed, still he marched on, boldly, openly. As he thought, they were
on the alert. They drew out from behind the rocks and barred his path.

"Whither goest thou, lord Dario?" asked their captain. "Thou knowest that
here thou mayest not pass."

"I follow a Ghost to the north," he answered, "and living or dead, I
pass."

"_Ow_!" said the captain. "He says that he follows a Ghost. Well, we have
nothing to do with ghosts. Take him, unharmed if possible, but take him."

So, urged thereto by their own fears, since for their safety's sake they
dared not let him go, the men sprang towards him. They sprang towards him
where he stood waiting the end, for give back he would not, and of a
sudden fell down upon their faces, hiding their heads among the stones.
Richard did not know what had happened to them that they behaved thus
strangely, nor did he care. Only seeing them fallen he walked on over
them, and pursued his way along the nek and down it to the plains beyond.

All that night he walked, looking behind him from time to time to see if
any followed, but none came. He was alone, quite alone, save for the dream
that led him towards the north. At sunrise he rested and slept a while,
then, awaking after midday, went on his road. He did not know the road,
yet never was he in doubt for a moment. It was always clear to him whither
he should go. That night he finished his food and again slept a while,
going forward at the dawn. In the morning he met some Kaffirs, who
questioned him, but he answered only that he was following a Dream to the
north. They stared at him, seemed to grow frightened and ran away. But
presently some of them came back and placed food in his path, which he
took and left them.

He came to the kraal Mafooti. It was utterly deserted, and he wandered
amidst its ashes. Here and there he found the bones of those who had
perished in the fire, and turned them over with his staff wondering
whether any of them had belonged to Rachel. In that place he slept a night
thinking that perhaps his journey was ended, and that here he would die
where he believed Rachel had died. But when he waked at the dawn, it was
to find that something within him still drew him towards the north, more
strongly indeed than ever before.

So he left what had been the town Mafooti. Walking along the edge of the
cleft into which Ishmael had leapt on fire, he climbed the walls built
with so much toil to keep out the Zulus, and at last came to the river
which Rachel had swum. It was low now, and wading it he entered Zululand.
Here the natives seemed to know of his approach, for they gathered in
numbers watching him, and put food in his path. But they would not speak
to him, and when he addressed them saying that he followed a Dream and
asking if they had seen the Dream, they cried out that he was _tagali_,
bewitched, and fled away.

He continued his journey, finding each night a hut prepared for him to
sleep in, and food for him to eat, till at length one evening he reached
the Great Place, Umgugundhlovu. Through its streets he marched with a set
face, while thousands stared at him in silence. Then a captain pointed out
a hut to him, and into it he entered, ate and slept. At dawn he rose, for
he knew that here he must not tarry; the spirit face of Rachel still hung
before him, the spirit voice still whispered--"_Forward, forward to the
north. I myself will be your guide_." In his path sat the King and his
Councillors, and around them a regiment of men. He walked through them
unheeding, till at length, when he was in front of the King, they barred
his road, and he halted.

"Who art thou and what is thy business?" asked an old Councillor with a
withered hand.

"I am Richard Darrien," he answered, "and here I have no business. I
journey to the north. Stay me not."

"We know thee," said the Councillor, "thou art the lord Dario that didst
dwell in the shadow of the Inkosazana. Thou art the white chief whom the
wild beast, Ibubesi, slew at the kraal Mafooti. Why does thy ghost come
hither to trouble us?"

"Living or dead, ghost or man, I travel to the north. Stay me not," he
answered.

"What seekest thou in the north, thou lord Dario?"

"I seek a Dream; a Spirit leads me to find a Dream. Seest thou it not, Man
with the withered hand?"

"Ah!" they repeated, "he seeks a Dream. A Spirit leads him to find a Dream
in the north."

"What is this Dream like?" asked Mopo of the withered hand.

"Come, stand at my side and look. . * * * * * The excitement among the
swimmers in Ems, which the first news of the differences on the
Candidature Hohenzollersche had aroused, was almost completely
disappeared.

We had the heavy articles of the French read journals, national
outrage, the whole of Germany in these Provocationen seized, was
also there in the quiet circles of bath stocky, but it had also had
the opportunity again, here in the immediate vicinity of the
so-friendly transport of kings with the French ambassador to see.

They had seen how his Majesty Count Benedetti day on the promenade
to the graciously anredete and some time in a lively conversation
with him and niederging.

The smile vanished from the moment no smooth face of the ambassador and
the King was calm and cheerful as ever.

Baron Werther was again zurückgereist to Paris, the Minister of Interior,
which the Count Bismarck, the coming of Barzin, in Berlin, was slightly
ill, according to the king sends Ems was again returned to Berlin,
the finance minister had arrived, how you told His Majesty departments
on matters concerning his lecture, and everything seemed back to
the familiar track to return.

When did the telegraph brought the news that the Prince Leopold of
Hohenzollern Candidature to its renunciation done, and that Count
Bismarck, is the full discharge of the whole matter seeing his
trip to abandoned Ems have disappeared completely since the last
concern, and we saw at the fountain promenade just cheerful and
smiling faces, we arranged lots in the mountains, and the entertainment,
which for so long by the serious subject matter of policy in was
taken, turned again to the little events of the day.

They spoke of the Toilet of the Duchess of Ossuna, which has just arrived
with her husband was, and everything by their flavors and elegance in
the shade provided. You repeated the fairy-tale stories about Reichthum
that the Spanish grandees, which the Queen Isabella at the court of St.
Petersburg and represented in this magnificent courtyard of Europe had
developed a bright, himself still had not seen.

Suddenly came on the afternoon of July 14 in this re - serene, cheerful
sociability merging circles like an unprepared weather the shock news
that the King, the man, as he more often that, Coblenz after his wife
had to go see on the evening of zurückerwartet was already in the early
the next morning to Berlin will leave that all negotiations were broken
off, that even His Majesty any further meeting with the ambassador
refused, and that war seemed inevitable. The deepest consternation spread
everywhere. Those who with one or the other from the Lord of the environment
king were known, searched approaching the same thing to detailed
information - the surroundings of the King avoided although, in
long conversations about the situation severely limited, but the
serious, almost solemn feeling, which is on the faces of all these
men was hingeworfene individual observations and the confirmation
of the next morning for the fixed departure of the King showed
clearly enough that the fears which were aroused everywhere, were
totally justified.

The French ambassador was not yet departed, but he stayed in his apartment
and did not appear On the evening promenade. Until late into the night all
the streets were filled with people, and lasted throughout the night on
the unrest in all houses, as almost all non-swimmers met stations
for quick departure, and the inhabitants of Ems saw with the sudden
Bekümmerniß end of a season so brilliantly begun opposite.

Long before eight clock the next morning, at what hour the king's
departure was ordered, had the station is densely filled with a
numerous audience, under which the men and women from among the
bathers, the king personally known, the first series on Perron
taking in the night with Blumenguirlanden was decorated. gradual
appeared the environment of the king, which the monarch accompanied
to Berlin.

The wagon drove up and the numerous luggage was already in the vorgefahrenen
train, in the middle of one the great royal salon car saw invited. To
the surprise of all present was also French ambassador Count
Benedetti at the station and went with a cheerful countenance at
ease, one or the others from the Welcoming Badegesellschaft on the
platform, where he is about rock and test in a black suit, the belt
of the black eagle on the Order chest, stood quietly with the others
awaiting the king, without which astonished and a little friendly
looks to note with what you call it from all sides installations.

The cars were loaded and the Locomotive was snorting and herangefahren
was at the head of the train by and the lackeys in Reiselivreen stood at
the Thürschlägen. bathhouse As heard from individual to quickly propagate
the cheers.

A few moments went to the king to the platform up, he wore Militaire-skirt
and hat. The wing-Adjutant Prince Radziwill escorted him to the Hofmarschall
Graf Perponcher went against the king and reported that everything
was ready.

The king looked fresh and vigorous from his attitude was proud and determined,
and in spite of deep seriousness, based on its trains stood, but his eyes
looked mild hilarity to be gathered out his welcome.

He quickly herabschreitend the series, with a friendly nod all those
responding were respectful greetings to some friends a few words.

The Police Presidents of Wurmb, which is currently in the travel suit
was stayed for a moment the king is.

"I have asked you to leave with me," he said. "They are too thun find - our
preparations for the unveiling of the monument of the highly blessed king,"
he added with a smile wehmüthigem added, "will now probably postponed for
a long time to stay." "May the creation of the bronze memorial still delayed
are, Your Majesty, "said Mr. von Wurmb with moving voice," the living
monument to the great era of the highly blessed Lord, in which each of
Prussia heart is firmly established, it is these days living with wreaths
of remembrance and hope decorated. pervades the recovery entire nation
as it was the holy reputation from the time of the Iron Cross "With God
for King and Fatherland."

The king bowed the head, his gaze fell on the black and white ribbon of the
Iron Cross, which he wore, and by the same easy touched with the hand,
he said half-loud: "In this sign we conquer."

He went further. amazing and firm step, he started to have a profound
bow Count Benedetti. "You have desired, Mr. Graf," said the king with
friendly courtesy, "to be adopted by me - do you live well."

 Despite the violence with which the French diplomat to express
its trains dominated, was a moment, but a powerful movement on his face.
"I thank your Majesty," he said with a slightly trembling voice,
"that you give me the opportunity for you to say goodbye, and I
also thank you in this moment once again for the grace and kindness,
which you sent me during the time of my trust in your yard have
proved .

All the wishes for good future contact. "" The future lies in God's
hands, "said the king with a solid voice, and he kindly head bowed, he
turned to the door of the saloon car in which the Hofmarschall and the other
gentlemen of the retinue awaited him. "Come to me, dear Abeken," the
King said, "we have a lot to work on and take St. Blanquart, so
that all incoming dispatches immediately dechiffrirt can be." The Secret
Legationsrath took out of the hands a service the large pack, which contained
his papers, waved the Hofrath St. Blanquart, which at some distance from
the royal entourage stood up, and both followed the Kings, who had already
entered into the saloon car, while the rest of their lords places in
the coupe in front of and behind the same revenue. The Locomotive
whistled, the king came again to the window and waved greeting with his
hand. A buzzing of cheer sounded in response to the royal farewell and
repeated with growing enthusiasm, while the faster then rolling
train the monarch from the quiet, peaceful seaside residence after
his back, from where he should pull out soon at the head of the
waffengerüsteten Germany, in order to renew the fight to oppose the
old enemy of his house and his country.

The king had in the window of the parlor car taken place and looked
through the panes of glass in the bright area out laughing, while the
Geheimrath Abeken him had taken place, to inform him of the various
dispatches received forward. Hofrath The St. Blanquart sat at the end
of the salons, the symbol in front of him, one after the other, the dispatches
dechiffrirend, which immediately prior to departure had been received and
ready to receive those to which we at the individual stations had
expected. "I have your Majesty , "said the Geheimrath Abeken," once at the
beginning of an important and welcome news mitzutheilen. From Munich is
reported that the king at the proposal of the Ministry has declared the
Casus foederis for where to consider, also has submitted his Majesty
the Mobilisirungsordre approved. "The gaze of the king joyfully lit up."
The blood of the German Wittelsbacher verläugnet not, "he said," they
have stood against us in the war of 1866, and they love there Prussia
perhaps not too much - but now where in Germany the fight occurs, the young
king doubt not, where his place is. Now Germany will not forget him
and I can not, because from now on, if God gives us in this struggle beisteht
is indeed the history of Prussia and Germany, for always same. Henceforth,
the German army into the box - "" How Brandenburg Prussia was, Your Majesty,
"said the Secret Legationsrath," said Germany is Prussia, and so
its great mission complete.

"The king looked silently far after horizon, in which the train is on
the trees quickly vorüberflogen. "The festivities and patriotic
resolve of King Louis," he said after a few moments, "is the greater
recognition than it Baiern in all the circles are not eager to efforts
lacked the opportunity to use a special policy. Now, Germany is
united, and any hope of Napoleon, the Southern States to be to pull over,
failed. From Würtemberg are still no news there? "" Not yet, "said the
Secret Legationsrath Abeken, "but Mr. von Rosenberg reported that in the
patriotic attitude Würtemberg was no doubt." "That is because Germany,
for the first time since a long time really united," said the king,
"the time has come, in which those old name mockery of the imperial
army will disappear, and in which the German armies, led by Prussia,
the old war glory of the nation to rise to new glory. "" Everything
is uniting, "said the Secret Legationsrath," so confident of victory,
which I am firmly in the heart contributes to confidence.

Also, the concerns, which instill the attitude of Austria could be
eliminated by the certainty of the friendly attitude of Russia, which
Count Bismarck reports. The Prime Minister is personally about your Majesty
detailed report, but as to be assured that any hostile movement of
Austria will be vigorously opposed that trade in the Baltic Sea to pose
no risk to be all the previous discussions on this eventuality are
again confirmed, and there is full security in place, the whole ungeschwächte
and ungetheilte Militairkraft according to the French border to use them.
"" The Emperor Alexander is a loyal friend, "said the king. "He recognizes
me as the political necessity that Germany and Russia together
firmly to each other to fulfill their mission and their goals to reach. Do
these two powers are always in agreement, then France will übermüthige
Prätension must abandon the dominant role in Europe to play. "The train
stopped in Coblenz. The king came to the window, took the message
of the generals opposed friendly and welcomed the numerous quantity,
which he opposed her cheering Hurray cried.

After a few minutes we drove on. Newsflashes Newsflashes came on. The
Hofrath St. Blanquart deciphered tirelessly with many experienced security
whose contents range from long rows and the Secret Legationsrath Abeken
kings always wore the new messages before the client made of the
increasingly powerful flare up enthusiasm of the German people in all areas
of the vast motherland. After a few hours was the saloon car, the simple
breakfast of King servirt, hunters brought the body with cold food baskets
and easy travel services. And for a moment to talk to refraction, His Majesty
ate something cold lobster and drank a glass of wine, whilst the Privy
Legationsrath Abeken calling the exhausted forces after such a long work
to be completed. Then the king waved again to the body of a hunter and
had the basket enough.

He took a Butterbrod and some cold meat and put it on a small plate. "A glass
of wine," he commanded. The body hunters servirte a glass of Bordeaux. The
king took it in hand, the small plate in the other and went he by the
saloon for Hofrath St. Blanquart, which is still eager and tireless a set
of numbers after another dechiffrirte. "Stop for a moment," said the
king with a friendly smile, "my dear St. Blanquart, cipher numbers of
human beings can not live. Take this, what I will bring, we must have
a bit to get used Campagneleben. "St. Blanquart was very frightened to.
"Majesty," he said, "what grace - Your Majesty consider themselves to me
-" "If I do not think my servant," said the king, "the day and night for
me to work - get in quick, we do not have much time to rest. "He put the
plate before the Hofrath out, gave him a glass of wine in hand and then
returned to his seat by the window, where he thoughtfully out into the
level watched, waiting until the two men had finished their breakfast,
then he left the basket and take out service, and work again. More
and more rustled the train. At all stations was the king of dense crowds
welcomed the jubilant shouts always been lively and enthusiastic. "War! War
against France!" we heard almost everywhere. Dazwischen individual
voices heard: "After Paris! Down with Napoleon!"

In every way documentirte the patriotic enthusiasm of the people.

In all such calls the King gazed deeply serious about the crowd out.

"You call after the war, "he said quietly," it moves the patriotic
enthusiasm and highlights all the worries about the future remain. But
nobody knows exactly how I am the victim, the next time the entire
Fatherland hang up, and yes I have but the key word to speak . Well, God
knows that this crucial word abgerungen me, and that ambition and not
Übermuth pushes me to the battle, so God will give me his blessing,
in which everything is located. Such devotion, such an enthusiasm of the
people is so the best blessings of God! "After a quick dinner Cassel was
taken after in Magdeburg at the decorated station to the king with
great enthusiasm welcomes been stopped the train in Burg.

Here, too, was a head to head brief crowd gathered, and a thundering
Hurrahrufen welcomed the departure of the royal saloon car. The king came
again to the window and waved his hand out over the square. Because all
of a sudden, the cheering voices fell silent, a deep There was a
silence, and one on the side of the platforms positioned Music Corps
began giving you a fully poignant melody to play.

The king listened to the sounds, which here in place of the "healing you in
the winner-wreath", which welcomed him everywhere else had heard . He
seemed in his memory to search for these tones, and looked
questioningly at how Legationsrath Abeken out how backward from the
window stood beside his chair.

"It is the Wacht am Rhein, Your Majesty," said the Secret Legationsrath.
Still the King gazed silently before him. "Die Wacht am Rhein - the Wacht
am Rhein," he said sinnend deep, while the melody sounded out
further, and only individual voices, then an ever fuller choral
music to accompany began .-- "The Wacht am Rhein, - yes, yes, this
is it, this is beautiful - this is very nice, this is the true word,
which is simple, delicious and large expresses the deep thoughts
of moving these days, and the whole people together to frustrate
the audacious attack.

"Slowly the train began moving. No Hurrahrufen yell, but all the large crowd
was singing in the haggard, the full and powerful sound after the Kings,
who stood at the window and all these bare heads, to all of this
enthusiasm flaming faces light with soft movements of the head to the rhythm
accompanied the melody, until the same under the wheels of the wheels and
the snort of the machine in the afar verklang. So it was getting closer and
closer to Brandenburg, where, as the kings of the telegraph was
reported, the Crown Prince, Count Bismarck, the minister of war
Roon and General von Moltke the King expected.

Finally, the evening darkened already inside, drove the train station
in the Mark of the old city.

Almost the entire population was assembled there, the tops of the
authorities, and the Officiercorps stood on the platform behind the
ministers, all preceded the Prince, who, as the little train was brought
to stand, even the door opened into the saloon car and hineinsprang
moving deeper into the hand of the king led to his lips.

The King stretched out his arms and pressed his son for a moment in silence
to the chest. "I had hoped," he said quietly and then mildly, "that
the evening of my life would end in peace, and that the battles
of the future of your younger and stronger arm should be left, -
God has willed it otherwise, you will myself to stand by our people
once again to lead to victory.

"Then he stepped on the platform beyond and the ever recurring again
shouts, which are widely used in the vicinity of the station moves,
he greeted with a warm handshake and Count Bismarck the General von
Moltke and Roon, which it seriously and deeply moved entgegentraten.

"The moment is here," said Graf Bismarck, "which we so long tried
to delay any effort.

The final decision is approaching, and I am free aufathmen now that the fog
tear, because the fresh air and craned forward in pure clarity of our great
goal in front of us, the most sacred items of the Fatherland to vertheidigen,
Germany heraufzuheben at first place among European nations. The morning
of a big time dawns , such a great time, as she hardly ever knew the
story, and thank God, the sword is in the hands of Germany, they do
not resign, before the victory is not won. "The king nodded slowly, the
principal, without something to say, then he turned on the platform to
the officer and Civil officers spoke with the senior representatives
of the same few words and soon commanded the onward journey by the
Privy Legationsrath Abeken and Hofrath St.

Blanquart and sacked the ministers called with him and the crown prince in
the saloon car to rise. "Well, gentlemen," said the king, when the train
is in motion was, "we are again drawn to the battle field, because I do
not think that now even a peaceful expression is possible and each of us
with all her forces on the item must be, because this time it is even heavier
fighting than in 1866, perhaps harder to effort and work, "he added
added. "But," he said then, the bright, clear view of the crown prince
being guided, "I prefer using a lighter, happier heart into the field
against the old enemy Germany, than it was then because I opposed
the old allies, as I against a prince from German tribe had to
fight. "" And everything is ready, Your Majesty, "said Graf Bismarck
almost cheerful tone," to us in all directions to secure the success.

 France has been through this with such incredible foolishness selected
isolirt war completely, so that including those powers, which he
perhaps inwardly minded are favorable, as we are unable to find him
any sympathy to prove and, above all, we are perhaps a worrying
side completely secured.

I have extensively with the prince on Gortschakoff the negotiation
situation, the Russian policy is completely pervaded by the need
for the inevitable war between us and France localisiren and the
strict neutrality of Austria monitored.

"The king nodded his head." We will continue to talk about, "he said.
- "Süddeutschland is without support and without wavering to us?" "To
command, Your Majesty," said Graf Bismarck, "in spite of all the agitations
of the hostile parties are the kings of Würtemberg Baiern and
firmly keep their contracts, and the mood of the population stands
out after all, what I reported, increasingly einmüthiger national
enthusiasm.

I think my turn a little to help the entire public opinion in Germany
and other countries from the justice of our cause and to convince
the real crux of the French attack clearly set.

"The king looked inquiringly at the minister." Your Majesty will remember,
"said Graf Bismarck," the shameful propositions which of France repeated
occasions we have been made, and which provide us with a shameful
trade to the national Developed in Germany offered by third parties
through robbery at the purchase should be what the law independent
of Germany.

Your Majesty will remember of the draft contract, which I once gave
Benedetti, and in which the conquest of the South German states
of Belgium, whose independence and independence is as much in Paris,
has spoken to us by France should be handed down. "" I remember,
"said the king."

Well, now, Your Majesty, "continued Count Bismarck continued," the inner,
the real reason this is now so measured cope with war is that those we trade
all the time and decided to have rejected. It will now try to take by force
what we do not want to sell. I have all of those proposals has been
the deepest silence observed from our side so that nothing be done
to bring so verhängnißvollen fracture.

But now, Your Majesty, is how I think the moment has come to the real
intentions and plans of France before the whole world to reveal,
and if your majesty will allow, I will be the contractual design,
Benedetti and the Emperor Napoleon can not deny to the representatives
of of power and public opinion in Europe mittheilen.

The Süddeutsche will see where they are with the here and there
cherished hope of France would come.

England will see what the contracts for Belgium in French eyes, and
mean apart from the outer form of this incredible Provocation is
also the internal justice of our cause before the eyes of the world
are clear.

This is a great moral force us to be. "The king nodded his head approvingly.

Here
sat the two women priests gazing into their bowls as they had left them.
The death of Nya had not moved them, the advent of this white man did not
seem to move them. Perhaps they expected him; at any rate food was made
ready, and a bed of rugs prepared on which he could lie.

Richard ate some of the food, staring at Rachel all the while with vacant
eyes as though she were still but a vision, the figment of a dream. Then
he muttered something about being very tired, and sinking back upon the
rugs fell into a deep sleep.

In that sleep he remained scarcely stirring for full four-and-twenty
hours, while Rachel watched by his side, till at length her weariness
overcame her, and she slept also. When she opened her eyes again they saw
no other light than that which crept in from the mouth of the cave. The
lamps which always burned there were out. Noie, who was seated near by,
heard her stir, and spoke.

"If thou art rested, Zoola," she said, "I think that we had better carry
the white lord from this place, for the two witch-women have gone, and I
can find no more oil to fill the lamps."

So they felt their way to Richard, purposing to lift him between them, but
at Rachel's touch he awoke, and with their help walked out of the cave. In
the open space beyond they saw a strange sight, for across it were
streaming all the dwarf-mutes carrying their aged and sick and infants,
and bearing on their backs or piled up in litters their mats and cooking
utensils. Evidently they were deserting the Sanctuary.

"Why are they going?" asked Rachel.

"I do not know," answered Noie, "but I think it is because no food has
been brought to them as usual, and they are hungry. You remember that Eddo
said we should starve. Only fear of death by hunger would make them leave
a place where they and their forefathers have lived for generations."

Presently they were all gone. Not a living creature was left within the
Wall except these three, nor were any more dwarfs brought in to die
beneath the Holy Tree. Now, at length Richard seemed to awake, and taking
Rachel by the hand began to ask questions of her in a low stammering
voice, since words did not seem to come readily to him who had not spoken
his own language for so long.

"Before you begin to talk, Sister," broke in Noie, "let us go and see if
we can close the cleft in the Wall, for otherwise how shall we sleep in
peace? Eddo and the dwarfs might creep in by night and murder us."

"I do not think they dare shed blood in their Holy Place," answered
Rachel. "Still, let us see what we can do; it may be best."

So they went to the cleft, and as the stone door was open and they could
not shut it, at one very narrow spot they rolled down rocks from the loose
sides of the ancient wall above in such a fashion that it would be
difficult to pass through or over them from without. This hard task took
them many hours, moreover, it was labour wasted, since, as Rachel had
thought probable, the dwarfs never tried to pass the Wall, but waited till
hunger forced them to surrender.

Towards evening they returned to the cave and collected what food they
could find. It was but little, enough for two spare meals, no more; nor
could they discover any in the town of the dwarfs behind the Tree. Only of
water they had plenty from the stream that ran out of the cave.

They ate a few mouthfuls, then took their mats and cloaks and went to camp
by the opening in the wall, so that they might guard against surprise. Now
for the first time they found leisure to talk, and Rachel and Richard told
each other a little of their wonderful stories. But they did not tell them
all, for their minds seemed to be bewildered, and there was much that they
were not able to explain. It was enough for them to know that they had
been brought together again thus marvellously, by what power they knew
not, and that still living, they who for long weeks had deemed the other
dead, were able to hold each other's hands and gaze into each other's
eyes. Moreover, now that this had been brought about they were tired, so
tired that they could scarcely speak above a whisper. The end of it was
that they fell asleep, all of them, and so slept till morning, when they
awoke somewhat refreshed, and ate what remained of the food.

The second day was like the first, only hotter and more sultry. Noie
climbed to the top of the wall to watch, while Richard and Rachel wandered
about among the little, antheap-like graves, and through the dwarf
village, talking and wondering, happy even in their wretchedness. But
before the day was gone hunger began to get a hold of them; also the
terrible, stifling heat oppressed them so that their words seemed to die
between their lips, and they could only sit against the wall, looking at
one another.

Towards evening Noie descended from the Wall and reported that large
numbers of the dwarfs were keeping watch without, flitting to and fro
between the trunks of the trees like shadows. The stifling night went by,
and another day dawned. Having no food they went to the stream and drank
water. Then they sat down in the shadow and waited through the long hot
hours. Towards evening, when it grew a little cooler, they gathered up
their strength and tried to find some way of escape before it was too
late. Richard suggested that as flight was impossible they should give
themselves up to the dwarfs, but Rachel answered No, for then Eddo would
certainly kill him and Noie, and take her to fill the place of Mother of
the Trees until she became useless to him, when she would be murdered
also.

"Then there is nothing left for us but to die," said Richard.

"Nothing but to die," she answered, "to die together; and, dear, that
should not be so hard, seeing that for so long we have thought each other
dead apart."

"Yet it is hard," answered Richard, "after living through so much and
being led so far to die at last and go whither we know not, before our
time."

Rachel looked at Noie, who sat opposite to them, her head rested on her
hand.

"Have you anything to say, Sister?" she asked.

"Yes, Zoola. Here is a little moss that I have found upon the stones," and
she produced a small bundle. "Let us boil it and eat, it will keep us
alive for another day."

"What is the use?" asked Rachel, "unless there is more."

"There is no more," said Noie, "for the leaves of yonder tree are deadly
poison, and here grows no other living thing. Still, eat and live on, for
I wait a message."

"A message from whom?" asked Rachel.

"A message from the dead, Sister. It was promised to me by Nya before she
passed, and if it does not come, then it will be time to die."

So they made fire and boiled the moss till it was a horrible, sticky
substance, which they swallowed as best they could, washing it down with
gulps of water. Still it was food of a kind, and for a while stayed the
gnawing, empty pains within them; only Noie ate but little, so that there
might be more for the others.

That night was even hotter than those that had gone before, and during the
day which followed the place became like a hell. They crept into the cave
and lay there gasping, while from without came loud cracking sounds,
caused, as they thought, by the trees of the forest splitting in the heat.
About midday the sky suddenly became densely overcast, although no breath
stirred; the air was thicker than ever, to breathe it was like breathing
hot cream. In their restless despair they wandered out of the cave, and to
their surprise saw a dwarf standing upon the top of the wall. It was Eddo,
who called to them to come out and give themselves up.

"What are the terms?" asked Noie.

"That thou and the Wanderer shall die by the White Death, and that the
Inkosazana shall be installed Mother of the Trees," was the answer.

"We refuse them," said Noie. "Let us go now and give us food and escort,
and thou shall be spared. Refuse, and it is thou and thy people who will
die by that Red Death which Nya promised thee."

"That we shall learn before to-morrow," said Eddo with a mocking laugh,
and vanished down the wall.

As he went a hot gust of wind burst upon them, causing the forest without
to rock and groan. Noie turned her face towards it and seemed to listen.

"What is it?" asked Rachel.

"I heard a voice in the wind, Sister," she answered. "The message I
awaited has come to me."

"What message?" asked Richard listlessly.

"That I will tell you by and by, Chief," she answered. "Come to the cave,
it is no longer safe here, the hurricane breaks."

So supporting each other they crept back to the cave, and there Noie made
fire, feeding it with the idols and precious woods that had been brought
thither as offerings. Richard and Rachel watched her wondering, for it
seemed strange that she should make a fire in that heat where there was
nothing to cook. Meanwhile gust succeeded gust, until a tempest of
screaming wind swept over them, though no rain fell. Soon it was so fierce
that the deep-rooted Tree of the Tribe rocked above them, and loose stones
were blown from the crest of the great wall.

Then of a sudden Noie sprang up, and seized a flaming brand from the fire;
it was the limb of a fetish, made of some resinous wood. She ran from the
cave swiftly, before they could stop her, and vanished in the gathering
gloom, to return again in a few moments weak and breathless. "Come out,
now," she said, "and see a sight such as you shall never behold again,"
and there was something so strange in her voice that, notwithstanding
their weakness, they rose and followed her.

Outside the cave they could not stand because of the might of the
hurricane, but cast themselves upon the ground, and following Noie's
outstretched arm, looked up towards the top of the mound. Then they saw
that the Tree of the Tribe was _on fire_. Already its vast trunk and
boughs were wrapped in flame, which burnt furiously because of the resin
within them, while long flakes of blazing moss were being swept away to
leeward, to fall among the forest that lay beyond the wall.

"Did you do this?" cried Rachel to Noie.

"Aye, Zoola, who else? That was the message which came to me. Now my
office is fulfilled, but you two will live though I must die, I who have
destroyed the People of the Dwarfs; I who was born that I should destroy
them."

"Destroyed them!" exclaimed Rachel. "What do you mean?"

"I mean that when their Tree dies, they die, the whole race of them. Oh!
Nya told me, Nya told me--they die as their Tree dies, by fire. To the
Wall, to the Wall now, and look. Follow me."

Forgetting their hunger-bred weakness in the wild excitement of that
moment, Rachel and Richard struggled hand in hand, after Noie's thin,
ethereal form. Across the open space they struggled, through the furious
bufferings of the gale, sometimes on their feet, sometimes on their hands
and knees, till they came to the great wall where a stairway ran up it to
an outlook tower. Up this stair they climbed slowly since at times the
weight of the wind pinned them against the blocks of stone, till at length
they reached its crest and crept into the shelter of the hollow tower.
Hence, looking through the loopholes in the ancient masonry, they saw a
fearful sight. The flakes of burning moss from the Tree of the Tribe had
fallen among the tops of the forest, parched almost to tinder with drought
and heat, and fired them here and there. Fanned by the screaming gale the
flames spread rapidly, leaping from tree to tree, now in one direction,
now in another, as the hurricane veered, which it did continually, till
the whole green forest became a sheet of fire, an ever-widening sheet
which spread east and west and north and south for miles and miles and
tens of miles.

Earth and sky were one blaze of light given out by the torch-like resinous
trees as they burned from the top downwards. By that intense light the
three watchers could see hundreds of the People of the Dwarfs flitting
about between the trunks. Waving their arms and gibbering, they rushed
this way and that, to the north to be met by fire, to the south to be met
by fire, till at length the blazing boughs and boles fell upon them and
they disappeared in showers of red sparks, or, more fortunate, fled away,
never to return, before the flame that leapt after them. Ophelia. And he
will not come back again? And he will not back again No, no, he is Todt,
go to your death bed, he comes not back again. His beard was as white
as snow All silver-color his head He is gone, he's gone, and we sigh in
vain; sey peace with his soul! And with all Christian souls - God forbid
you. (She goes anyway.) Laertes. You see that their gods? King. Laertes ,
let me euern pain Theiler, it failed me or my right: Is not if you doubt,
read your friends understand that they should judge between me and you Seyn:
Find them that we are on any kind, or even verdekter way in this Case
woven - so our Kingdom, our crown, our life, and everything we
call you to Genugthüung Seyn forfeited. But it is not so leihet us
your patience, and we want to work collectively with each other, to
satisfy your revenge. Laertes. Let it Seyn. The nature of his death,
his secret burial without honor character without some Gepränge
that his state had paid all the circumstances Ruffer as loud as if
they are from earth to heaven wanted to be heard, that I should
pull in investigation .

King. This does: and where the offense takes place, then let the Tight
fall. I ask you, follow me. (They go from.) Eighth Scene. (Horatio
with a servant occurs.) Horatio.

Who are these people who want to speak with me? Operated. Sailors, my lord,
they say, they have letters for you. Horatio. Let them come in - I can
not begreiffen, for whatever portion of the world I should be getting
letters if they are not Prince Hamlet are from. (Some sailors occur.)
Sailors. God help you, Sir. Horatio. You, too. Sailors. This is it, even
if he wants, Mr. - Here is a letter to you, Mr. - if you called Horatio,
how I said he comes from the delegates, after England was geschikte. Horatio
(überließt the letter.)

Horatio, if you have read this about you, it gave these people an opportunity
before the king to come, they have sent letters to him . Eh, we still
zween days on the seas were persecuted us a sea-robbers of a very
impressive reputation. As we saw from him übersegelt, we decided for the
opposition, and while I Handgemeng jumped on board with them - let them
Augenbliklich our boat ride, and so I remained their prisoners.

You have met me, how the thieves know to live, which makes them knew why,
and to me they should not have done nothing. Make that the king's letter,
and then search me eilfertig so on, as if you before death lieffest.
I did it to avenge the death of Nya upon you all, as she bade me to
do. I did it because the cup of thy wickedness is full, and because I was
appointed to bring thy doom upon thee. Thus ends the greatness thou hast
plotted so many years to win, Eddo."

"Aye," he answered, "thus it ends, for the magic of the White One there
has overcome me, and thus with it ends the reign of the Ghost Kings, and
the forest wherein they reigned, and thus too, thou endest, traitress, who
hast murdered them and whose soul shall be spilt with their souls."

As the words left his lips suddenly Eddo sprang upon Noie and gripped her
about the middle. Richard and Rachel leapt forward, but before ever they
could lay a hand upon her to save her, the dwarf in his rage and agony had
dragged her to the edge of the wall. For a moment they struggled there in
the vivid light of the flaming forest. Then Eddo screamed aloud, one wild
savage shriek, and still holding Noie in his arms hurled himself from the
wall, to fall crushed upon its foundation stones sixty feet beneath.

Thus perished Noie, who, for love's sake, gave her life to save Rachel, as
once Rachel had saved her.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was morning, and after the tempest the sky was clear and cool, for
heavy rain had fallen when the wind dropped, although far away the dense
clouds of rolling smoke showed where the great fire still ate into the
heart of the forest. Rachel and Richard, seated hand in hand in the little
tower on the wall, looked at one another in that pure light, and saw signs
in each other's face that could not be mistaken.

"What shall we do?" asked Richard. "Death is very near to us."

Rachel thought awhile, then answered:

"The dwarfs are gone, we have nothing more to fear from them. Yonder where
the fire did not burn, dwell their slaves, whose villages are full of
food, and beyond them live the Umkulu, who know and would befriend me. Let
us go and seek food who desire to live on together, if we may."

So they climbed down the wall, and with difficulty, for they were very
feeble, crawled over the stones which they had piled up in the passage to
keep out the dwarfs, and thus passed to the open belt beyond. A strange
scene met their eyes, all the wide lands that had been covered with giant
trees were now piled over with white ashes amongst which, here and there,
stood a black and smouldering trunk. That is what we want - What
will it finally be? Marcellus. Verborgnes There must be an evil in the
State of Dännemark lie. Horatio. The sky will manage everything. Marcellus.
Fort, we want him to go. (They go from.) Eighth Scene . (Turns into a remote
portion of the terrace.) (The Spirit and come back to Hamlet.) Hamlet.
willt Where you lead me? Speech, and I go no further. Spirit. Listen
to me. Hamlet. I want. Spirit. The hour rükt close herbey because I sulfur
in tormenting flames must zurükkehren. Hamlet. You daurst me, poor soul!
Spirit. I am Sorry not, but listen carefully to what I'll be village
Why do so many. Hamlet. speech, I am guilty, to hear - mind. And, to
avenge what you'll hear.They seemed quite alone in the world, those two, and yet their hearts were
full of joy and thankfulness, for while they were left to each other they
knew that they could never be alone.

"See, Rachel," said Richard, pointing to the smouldering wreck of the
forest, "there lies our past, and here in front of us spreads the future
clothed with flowers."

"Yes, Richard," she answered, "but Noie and all whom I love save you are
buried in that past, and in front of us the desert is not far away."

"Life is ours, Rachel, and love is ours, and that which saved us through
many a danger and brought me back to you, will surely keep us safe. Do you
fear to pass the desert at my side?"

Gut; IZT come, my Ariel, bring a spirit too much rather than that
of a mangle; seemed blithely us - not a word you speak, louder Seyde
eye, Still!

(You hear a nice music.) Third Scene. (An allegorical drama .) (Iris
occurs.)
And there on the mound, standing between that dead sea of ashes and the
green slopes of flowering plain, Rachel stretched out her arms to the man
to whom she was decreed.