Produced by This e-text was produced by Greg Weeks, Charles
Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY

OR

A Daring Escape by Airship

BY VICTOR APPLETON

AUTHOR OF "TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-CYCLE," "TOM SWIFT AND HIS
WIRELESS MESSAGE," "TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD," ETC.

ILLUSTRATED


CONTENTS


    I   A STRANGE REQUEST
   II   THE CIRCUS MAN
  III   TOM WILL GO
   IV   "LOOK OUT FOR MY RIVAL!"
    V   ANDY FOGER LEARNS SOMETHING
   VI   ALARMING NEWS
  VII   FIRE ON BOARD
 VIII   A NARROW ESCAPE
   IX   "FORWARD MARCH!"
    X   A WILD HORSE STAMPEDE
   XI   CAUGHT IN A LIVING ROPE
  XII   A NATIVE BATTLE
 XIII   THE DESERTION
  XIV   IN GIANT LAND
   XV   IN THE "PALACE" OF THE KING
  XVI   THE RIVAL CIRCUS MAN
 XVII   HELD CAPTIVES
XVIII   TOM'S MYSTERIOUS BOX
  XIX   WEAK GIANTS
   XX   THE LONE CAPTIVE
  XXI   A ROYAL CONSPIRACY
 XXII   THE TWIN GIANTS
XXIII   A SURPRISE IN THE NIGHT
 XXIV   THE AIRSHIP FLIGHT
  XXV   TOM'S GIANT--CONCLUSION


CHAPTER I

A STRANGE REQUEST


Tom Swift closed the book of adventures he had been reading, tossed
it on the table, and got up. Then he yawned.

"What's the matter?" asked his chum, Ned Newton, who was deep in
another volume.

"Oh, I thought this was going to be something exciting," replied
Tom, motioning toward the book he had discarded. "But say! the
make-believe adventures that fellow had, weren't anything compared to
those we went through in the city of gold, or while rescuing the
exiles of Siberia."

"Well," remarked Ned, "they would have to be pretty classy
adventures to lay over those you and I have had lately. But where
are you going?" he continued, for Tom had taken his cap and started
for the door.

"I thought I'd go out and take a little run in the aeroplane. Want
to come along? It's more fun than sitting in the house reading about
exciting things that never have happened. Come on out and--"

"Yes, and have a tumble from the aeroplane, I suppose you were going
to say," interrupted Ned with a laugh. "Not much! I'm going to stay
here and finish this book."

"Say," demanded Tom indignantly. "Did you ever know me to have a
tumble since I knew how to run an airship?"

"No, I can't say that I did. I was only joking."

"Then you carried the joke too far, as the policeman said to the man
he found lugging off money from the bank. And to make up for it
you've got to come along with me."

"Where are you going?"

"Oh, anywhere. Just to take a little run in the upper regions, and
clear some of the cobwebs out of my head. I declare, I guess I've
got the spring fever. I haven't done anything since we got back from
Russia last fall, and I'm getting rusty."

"You haven't done ANYTHING!" exclaimed Ned, following his chum's
example by tossing aside the book. "Do you call working on your new
invention of a noiseless airship nothing?"

"Well, I haven't finished that yet. I'm tired of inventing things. I
just want to go off, and have some good fun, like getting
shipwrecked on a desert island, or being lost in the mountains, or
something like that. I want action. I want to get off in the jungle,
and fight wild beasts, and escape from the savages!"

"Say! you don't want much," commented Ned. "But I feel the same way,
Tom."

"Then come on out and take a run, and maybe we'll get on the track
of an adventure," urged the young inventor. "We won't go far, just
twenty or thirty miles or so."

The two youths emerged from the house and started across the big
lawn toward the aeroplane sheds, for Tom Swift owned several speedy
aircrafts, from a big combined aeroplane and dirigible balloon, to a
little monoplane not much larger than a big bird, but which was the
most rapid flier that ever breathed the fumes of gasolene.

"Which one you going to take, Tom?" asked Ned, as his chum paused in
front of the row of hangars.

"Oh, the little double-seated monoplane, I guess that's in good
shape, and it's easy to manage. When I'm out for fun I hate to be
tinkering with levers and warping wing tips all the while. The Lark
practically flies herself, and we can sit back and take it easy.
I'll have Eradicate fill up the gasolene tank, while I look at the
magneto. It needs a little adjusting, though it works nearly to
perfection since I put in some of that new platinum we got from the
lost mine in Siberia."

"Yes, that was a trip that amounted to something. I wouldn't mind
going on another like that, though we ran lots of risks."

"We sure did," agreed Tom, and then, raising his voice he called
out: "Rad, I say Rad! Where are you? I want you!"

"Comin', massa Tom, comin'," answered an aged colored man, as he
shuffled around the corner of the shed. "What do yo'-all want ob
me?"

"Put some gasolene in the Lark, Rad. Ned and I are going to take a
little flight. What were you doing?"

"Jest groomin' mah mule Boomerang, Massa Tom, dat's all. Po'
Boomerang he's gittin' old jest same laik I be. He's gittin' old,
an' he needs lots ob 'tention. He has t' hab mo' oats dan usual,
Massa Tom, an' he doan't feel 'em laik he uster, dat's a fac', Massa
Tom."

"Well, Rad, give him all he wants. Boomerang was a good mule in his
day."

"An' he's good yet, Massa Tom, he's good yet!" said Eradicate
Sampson eagerly. "Doan't yo' all forgit dat, Massa Tom." And the
colored man proceeded to fill the gasolene tank, while Tom adjusted
the electrical mechanism of his aeroplane, Ned assisting by handing
him the tools needed. Eradicate, who said he was named that because
he "eradicated" dirt, was a colored man of all work, who had been in
the service of the Swift household for several years. He and his
mule Boomerang were fixtures.

"There, I guess that will do," remarked Tom, after testing the
magneto, and finding that it gave a fat, hot spark. "That ought to
send us along in good shape. Got all the gas in, Rad?"

"Every drop, Massa Tom."

"Then catch hold and help wheel the Lark out. Ned, you steady her on
that side. How are the tires? Do they need pumping up?"

"Hard as rocks," answered Tom's chum, as he tapped his toe against
the rubber circlets of the small bicycle wheels on which the
aeroplane rested.

"Then they'll do, I guess. Come on now, and we'll give her a test
before we start off. I ought to get a few hundred more revolutions
per minute out of the motor with the way I've adjusted the magneto.
Rad, you and Ned hold back, while I turn the engine over."

The youth and the colored man grasped the rear supports of the long,
tail-like part of the monoplane while Tom stepped to the front to
twist the propeller blades. The first two times there was no
explosion as he swung the delicate wooden blades about, but the
third time the engine started off with a roar, and a succession of
explosions that were deafening, until Tom switched in the muffler,
thereby cutting down the noise. Faster and faster the propeller
whirled about as the motor warmed up, until the young inventor
exclaimed:

"That's the stuff! She's better than ever! Climb up Ned, and we'll
start off. You can turn her over, Rad; can't you?"

"Suah, Massa Tom," was the reply, for Eradicate had been on so many
trips with Tom, and had had so much to do with airships, that to
merely start one was child's play for him.

The two youths had scarcely taken their seats, and the colored man
was about to twist around the fan-like blades of the big propeller
in front, when from behind there came a hail.

"Hold on there! Wait a minute, Tom Swift! Bless my admission ticket,
don't go! I've got something important to tell you! Hold on!"

"Humph! I know who that is!" cried Tom, motioning to Eradicate to
cease trying to start the motor.

"Mr. Damon, of course," agreed Ned. "I wonder what he wants?"

"A ride, maybe," went on Tom. "If he does we've got to take the
Scooter instead of this one. That holds four. Well, we may as well
see what he wants."

He jumped lightly from his seat in the monoplane and was followed by
Ned. They saw coming toward them, from the direction of the house, a
stout man, who seemed very much excited. He was walking so fast that
he fairly waddled, and he was smiling at the lads, for he was one of
their best friends.

"Glad I caught you, Tom." he panted, for his haste had almost
deprived him of breath. "I've got something important to tell you. I
hurried over as soon as I heard about it."

"Well, you're just in time," commented Ned with a laugh. "In another
minute we'd have been up in the clouds."

"What is it, Mr. Damon?" asked Tom. "Have you got wind of a city of
diamonds, or has some one sent you a map telling where we can go to
pick up ten thousand dollar bills by the basket?"

"Neither one; Tom, neither one. It's something better than either of
those, and if you don't jump at the chance I'm mistaken in you,
that's all I've got to say. Come over here."

He turned a quick glance over his shoulder as he spoke and advanced
toward the two lads on tiptoe as though he feared some one would see
or hear him. Yet it was broad daylight, the place was the starting
ground for Tom's aeroplanes and save Eradicate there was no one
present except Mr. Damon, Ned and the young inventor himself.

"What's up?" asked Tom in wonderment.

"Hush!" cautioned the odd gentleman. "Bless my walking stick, Tom!
but this is going to be a great chance for you--for us,--for I'm
going along."

"Going where, Mr. Damon?"

"I'll tell you in a minute. Is there any one here?"

"No one but us?"

"You are sure that Andy Foger isn't around."

"Sure. He's out of town, you know."

"Yes, but you never can tell when he's going to appear on the scene.
Come over here," and taking hold of the coat of each of the youths,
Mr. Damon led them behind the big swinging door of the aeroplane
shed.

"You haven't anything on hand; have you, Tom?" asked the odd
gentleman, after peering through the crack to make sure they were
unobserved.

"Nothing at all, if you mean in the line of going off on an
adventure trip."

"That's what I mean. Bless my earlaps! but I'm glad of that. I've
got just the thing for you. Tom, I want you to go to a strange land,
and bring back one of the biggest men there--a giant! Tom Swift, you
and I and Ned--if he wants to go--are going after a giant!"

Mr. Damon gleefully clapped Tom on the back, with such vigor that
our hero coughed, and then the odd gentleman stepped back and gazed
at the two lads, a look of triumph shining in his eyes.

For a moment there was a silence. Tom looked at Ned, and Ned gave
his chum a quick glance. Then they both looked sharply at Mr. Damon.

"A--a giant," murmured Tom faintly.

"That's what I said," replied Mr. Damon. "I want you to help me
capture a giant, Tom."

Once more the two youths exchanged significant glances, and then
Tom, in a low and gentle voice said:

"Yes, Mr. Damon, that's all right. We'll get you a giant right away.
Won't we, Ned? Now you'd better come in the house and lie down, I'll
have Mrs. Baggert make you a cup of tea, and after you have had a
sleep you'll feel better. Come on," and the young inventor gently
tried to lead his friend out from behind the shed door.

"Look here, Tom Swift!" exclaimed the odd gentleman indignantly. "Do
you think I'm crazy? Lie down? Rest myself? Go to sleep? Say, I'm
not crazy! I'm not tired! I'm not sleepy! This is the greatest
chance you ever had, and if we get one of those giants--"

"Yes, yes, we'll get one," put in Ned soothingly.

"Of course," added Tom. "Come on, now, Mr. Damon. You'll feel better
after you've had a rest. Dr. Perkinby is coming over to see father
and I'll have him--"

Mr. Damon gave one startled glance at the young inventor and his
chum, and then burst into a peal of hearty laughter.

"Oh, my!" he exclaimed at intervals in his paroxysms. "Oh, dear! He
thinks I'm out of my head! He can't stand that talk about giants! Oh
dear! Tom Swift, this is the greatest chance you ever had! Come on
in the house and I'll tell you all I know about giant land, and then
if you want to think I'm crazy you can, that's all I've got to say!"


CHAPTER II

THE CIRCUS MAN


Without a word Tom and Ned followed Mr. Damon toward the Swift
house. Truth to tell the youths did not know what to say, or they
would have been bubbling over with questions. But the talk of the
odd man, and his strange request to Tom to go off and capture a
giant had so startled the young inventor and his chum that they did
not know whether to think that Mr. Damon was joking, or whether he
had suddenly taken leave of his senses.

And while I have a few minutes that are occupied in the journey to
the house I will introduce my new readers more formally to Tom Swift
and his friends.

Tom though only a young man, was an inventor of note, as his father
was before him. Father and son lived in a fine house in the town of
Shopton, in New York state, and Mrs. Swift being dead, the two were
well looked after by Mrs. Baggert their housekeeper. Eradicate
Sampson, as I have said, was the man of all work about the place.
Ned Newton who had a position in a Shopton bank, was Tom's
particular chum, and Mr. Wakefeld Damon, of the neighboring town of
Waterfield, was a friend to all who knew him. He had the odd habit
of blessing anything and everything he could think of, interspersing
it in his talk.

In the first volume of this series, called "Tom Swift and His
Motor-Cycle," I related how Tom made the acquaintance of Mr. Damon,
afterward purchasing a damaged motor-cycle from the odd gentleman.
On this machine Tom had many adventures, incidentally saving some of
his father's valuable patents from a gang of conspirators. Later Tom
got a motor boat, and had many races with his rivals on Lake
Carlopa, beating Andy Foger, the red-haired bully of the town, in
signal fashion. After his adventures on the water Tom sighed for
some in the air, and he had them in his airship the Red Cloud.

"Tom Swift and His Submarine Boat." is a story of a search after
sunken treasure, and, returning from that quest Tom built an
electric runabout, the speediest car on the road. By means of a
wireless message, later, Tom was able to save himself and the
castaways of Earthquake Island, and, as a direct outcome of that
experience, he was able to go in search of the diamond makers, and
solve the secret of Phantom Mountain, as told in the book dealing
with that subject.

When he went to the caves of ice Tom had bad luck, for his airship
was wrecked, and he endured many hardships in getting home with his
companions, particularly as Andy Foger sought revenge on him.

But Tom pluckily overcame all obstacles and, later, he built a sky
racer, in which he made the quickest trip on record. After that,
with his electric rifle, he went after elephants in the interior of
Africa and was successful in rescuing some missionaries from the
terrible red pygmies.

One of the mission workers, later, sent Tom details about a buried
city of gold in Mexico, and Tom and his chum together with Mr. Damon
located this mysterious place after much trouble, as told in the
book entitled, "Tom Swift in the City of Gold." The gold did not
prove as valuable as they expected, as it was of low grade, but they
got considerable money for it, and were then ready for more
adventures.

The adventures soon came, as those of you who have read the book
called, "Tom Swift and His Air Glider," can testify. In that I told
how Tom went to Siberia, and after rescuing some Russian political
exiles, found a valuable deposit of platinum, which to-day is a more
valuable metal than gold. Tom needed some platinum for his
electrical machines, and it proved very useful.

He had been back from Russia all winter and, now that Spring had
come again, our hero sighed for more activity, and fresh adventures.
And with the advent of Mr. Damon, and his mysterious talk about
giants, Tom seemed likely to be gratified.

The two chums and the odd gentleman continued on to the house, no
one speaking, until finally, when they were seated in the library,
Mr. Damon said:

"Well, Tom, are you ready to listen to me now, and have me explain
what I meant when I asked you to get a giant?"

"I--I suppose so," hesitated the young inventor. "But hadn't I
better call dad? And are you sure you don't want to lie down and
collect your thoughts? A nice hot cup of tea--"

"There, there, Tom Swift; If you tell me to lie down again, or
propose any more tea I'll use you as a punching bag, bless my boxing
gloves if I don't!" cried Mr. Damon and he laughed heartily. "I know
what you think, Tom, and you, too, Ned," he went on, still
chuckling. "You think I don't know what I'm saying, but I'll soon
prove that I do. I'm fully in my senses, I'm not crazy, I'm not
talking in my sleep, and I'm very much in earnest. Tom, this is the
chance of your life to get a giant, and pay a visit to giant land.
Will you take it?"

"Mr. Damon, I--er--that is I--"

Tom stammered and looked at Ned.

"Now look here, Tom Swift!" exclaimed the odd man. Young, stands
on the highest ground in St. George's Castle, and is the first
building on the south side toward the Tagus.

Near the entrance it is divided internally as follows below:--_Saletta_
(the small hall;) _Salla Livre_ (free hall,) so called, because
visiters are allowed to go in to see their friends, except when the
jailer or intendant orders otherwise; _Salla Fechado_ (the hall
shut,) so called, because no communication is allowed with the
prisoners in that hall; _Enchovia_ (the common prison,) where
thieves, murderers, and vagabonds of every description are confined.

This last receptacle is a horrid place; and is often made use of
as a punishment for prisoners from other parts of the gaol.

Hither they are sent when they commit any offence, for as many days
as the jailer may think proper, and are often put in irons during
that time.

Besides these different prisons on the ground floor, there are eight
dungeons in a line, all nearly alike in shape and size; but some are
superior to others as to light and air: and in proportion to
the degree they wish to annoy the unfortunate victim, so are these
dungeons used.

A few dollars never fail to procure a better light and air when
properly applied.

Three of these dungeons are about six feet higher than the other
five.
There is a corridor in the front of them, which is always shut up
when any one is confined in them, so that no one can ever
approach the door of a dungeon.

And to make this a matter of certainty, whenever the jailer or
officers of the prison carry prisoners their food, they lock the
door of the corridor before they open that of the dungeon.

The first of the lower five of these dungeons is in the passage leading
from, the _Salla Livre_, and next door to the privy of the prison;
so that it is never used as a secret dungeon.

The lower four are enclosed as those above, and are much darker
than that in the passage.

This latter is claimed by the book-keeper as his property, and I hired
it of him to sleep in, and to be alone when I wished to be so.

The dungeons are all bomb proof, and over them is a terrace thickly
formed of brick and stone; still I could distinctly hear the sentry
walking over my head when all was quiet at night.

The walls of these cells are about six feet thick, with bars
inside and out; the bars in the windows are three inches square,
making twelve inches in circumference, and being crossed they form
squares of about eight inches; the windows differ very much in size,
some not being half so large as others.

Besides these double bars, there is a shutter immensely strong and
close, so that when shut, light is totally excluded; the iron door
has a strong bolt and lock, and outside of this there is a strong
wooden door; in the front of the windows, and about six feet from
them, there is a high wall; so that in the best of these dungeons,
there is only a reflected light.

These are all the prisons on the ground floor, and when full (which
they too often are) the wretched prisoners are forced to lie at
night in two rows, with their feet to the wall, and their heads to
the middle of the room; this position they adopt on account of the
cold and damp of the stone walls; they touch each other, and the
floor is completely covered.

Nay, at times, so full is the gaol, that they are obliged to lie on
the corridors, and even on the steps.

The Saletta will hold forty prisoners, the Salla Livre more than
sixty, the Salla Fechado one hundred, and the Enchovia, near one
hundred and forty. When one prison becomes too full, they remove some
of the victims to another, or send them to the forts, or on board
the ships in the river.

The first floor is divided into two parts, officers' rooms, and the
Sallao, (saloon or large hall.) This hall will hold about 150 persons,
when full. Besides the Sallao and officers' rooms on the first
floor, there is a room set apart for questioning people who are
in the dungeons.

This room has an entrance from the street, and another through a
passage from the dungeons, as well as one from the officers' rooms.

The magistrate and his clerk enter from the street, and no one in
the prison sees them. The prisoner is taken up stairs from the
dungeon, and the jailer or book-keeper enters from the officers'
apartments.

Every thing is done in the most secret manner. If they cannot cause
the prisoner to commit himself, by confessing to the offence with
which he is charged, they send him back again to the dungeon.

The gaol of St. George's has a second floor tier of offices; but
that belongs to the governor and jailer; there are no prisoners
above the ground and the first floor.

None of the authorities ever inquire whether he has any means of
subsistence; there is neither bed blanket, nor even straw, unless
the prisoner can buy it, and then he must pay the guards to let it
pass to him.

Amongst the many thousands of unfortunate beings who are now confined
in Portugal, great numbers of them are without money or any other
means of subsistence; and were it not for the charity of people in
general, starvation would necessarily ensue.

The only authorities employed about the prison are a jailer, secretary,
and eight guards; of the latter three are always on duty; one of
them being stationed at the first iron gate at the entrance of the
prison, another at the second gate, and a third to attend the interior,
each with a bunch of keys in his hand, which serve for nearly all
the doors.

The guards are relieved every night at nine o'clock, when, the
man who is posted at the outer door carries a strong iron rod (_see
the Engraving_) with which he strikes every bar in the windows and
gates of the gaol; and if any one of them does not vibrate, or ring,
he carefully inspects it to ascertain whether it has been cut with
a saw, or corroded by any strong acid.

This dismal music lasts an hour.

The whole expense of the prison to government does not exceed 16_s_.
per day, and the few officers and guards, when Mr. Young was there,
manage upwards of four hundred prisoners.

He was confined from June 16, to September 7, and his account of the
myriads of bugs, rats, mice, and other vermin is truly disgusting.

The reader will however readily credit this report when he has
been told of the revolting state of the city itself. Mrs.
Baillie, in her recent _Letters on Lisbon_, says, "for three miles
round Lisbon in every direction, you cannot for a moment get clear
of the disgusting effluvia that issue from every house."

Doctor Southey says "every kind of vermin that exists to punish the
nastiness and indolence of man, multiplies in the heat and dirt of
Lisbon.

In addition to mosquitoes, the scolopendra is not uncommonly found
here, and snakes sometimes intrude into the bedchamber.

A small species of red ant likewise swarms over every thing
sweet, and the Portuguese remedy is to send for the priest to
exorcise them."

The city is still subject to shocks of earthquake; the state of the
police is horrible; street-robbery is common, and every thief is
an assassin. The pocket-knife, which the French troops are said to
have dreaded more than all the bayonets of either the Spanish or the
Portuguese, is here the ready weapon of the assassin; and the Tagus
receives many a corpse on which no inquest ever sits. The morals,
in fact, of all classes in Lisbon appear to be in a dreadful state.

* * * * *

THE CARD.

A TALE OF TRUTH.

(_For the Mirror_.)

Young Lady Giddygad, came down From spending half a year in town,
With cranium full of balls and plays, Routs, fêtes, and fashionable
ways, Caus'd in her country-town, so quiet, Unus'd to modish din
and riot, No small confusion and amaze, "Quite a sensation," is the
phrase, Like that, which puss, or pug, may feel When rous'd from
slumber by your heel, Or drowsy ass, at rider's knock, Or----should
you term him block; Quoi qu'il en soit, first, gossips gape, Then
envy, scandalize, and ape!

Quoth Mrs. Thrifty: "Nancy, dear, My Lady sends out cards I hear,
With, I suppose, 'tis now polite, Merely 'At Home,' on such
a night, Now child, altho' I dare not say We can afford to be so gay,
We're as well born as Lady G---- And may be, as well bred as
she!
That is, quite in a sober way So as we've nothing more to pay:
For instance, when folks choose to come, And I don't choose to be
'At Home,' I'll have a notice stuck, you know, On the hall door,
to tell them so:
'Twill save our Rachel's legs you see, And soon the top will copy me!

But, Nancy, d'ye hear, now write That I'm 'At Home' on Thursday
night; 'Tis a good fashion, for 'tis what Most fashions in this age
are not A saving one: ah, prithee think, How it saves time, and
quills, and ink!" So, duteous Nancy seiz'd a pen, To ladies, and
to gentlemen Sent quickly out the cards; as quick Came one again:
"Poh!

fiddlestick An answer, yes?--come, let me see, My spectacles!" cried
Mistress T---- "Hum--Mrs. Thrifty,--Thursday night--'At Home'--oh
malice!

fiendish spite," (Quoth the good dame in furious ire, Whilst the
card, fed the greedy fire) "No, never, never, will I strive To be
genteel, as I'm alive, Beneath my own 'At Home' was cramm'd, There
stay, good madam, and be d--d!"[2]

M.L.B.

[2] A fact.

* * * * *

MAHOMET THE GREAT AND HIS MISTRESS.

_An Anecdote_.

(_For the Mirror_.)

After the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, in the year 1453,
several captives, distinguished either for their rank or their
beauty, were presented to the victorious Mahomet the Great.

Irene, a most beautiful Greek lady, was one of those unfortunate
captives. The emperor was so delighted with her person, that he
dedicated himself wholly to her embraces, spending day and night
in her company, and neglected his most pressing affairs.

His officers, especially the Janissaries, were extremely exasperated
at his conduct; and loudly exclaimed against their degenerate and
_effeminate_ prince, as they were then pleased to call him.
Mustapha Bassa, who had been brought up with the emperor from a
child, presuming upon his great interest, took an opportunity to
lay before his sovereign the bad consequences which would inevitably
ensue should he longer persevere in that unmanly and base course
of life.

Mahomet, provoked at the Bassa's insolence, told him that he
deserved to die; but that he would pardon him in consideration of
former services.

He then commanded him to assemble all the principal officers and
captains in the great hall of his palace the next day, to attend
his royal pleasure.

Mustapha did as he was directed; and the next day the sultan
understanding that the Bassas and other officers awaited him,
entered the hall, with the charming Greek, who was delicately dressed
and adorned.

Looking sternly around him, the Sultan demanded, _which of
them_, _possessing so fair an object_, _could be contented to
relinquish it_? Being dazzled with the Christian's beauty, they
unanimously answered, that they highly commended his happy choice,
and censured themselves for having found fault with so much worth.

The emperor replied, that he would presently show them how much they
had been deceived in him, for that no earthly pleasure should so
far bereave him of his senses, or blind his understanding, as to
make him forget his duty in the high calling wherein he was placed.

So saying, he caught Irene by the hair of her head, which he instantly
severed from her body with his scimitar.

G.W.N.

* * * * *

Select Biography.

* * * * *

JUVENILE POETESS.

MEMOIR OF LUCRETIA DAVIDSON,
_Who died at Plattsburgh, N.Y., August 27, 1825, aged sixteen years
and eleven months_.

[We hardly know how to give our readers an idea of the intense
interest which this biographical sketch has excited in our mind;
but we are persuaded they will thank us for adopting it in our
columns.

The details are somewhat abridged from No. LXXXII. of the _Quarterly
Review_, (just published), where they appear in the first article,
headed "Amir Khan, and other Poems: the remains of Lucretia Maria
Davidson," &c., published at New York, in the present year.
Prefixed to these "remains" is a biographical sketch, which forms
the basis of the present memoir, and from the Poems are selected
the few specimens with which it is illustrated.

--ED.]
Lucretia Maria Davidson was born September 27, 1808, at Plattsburgh,
on Lake Champlain. She was the second daughter of Dr. Oliver Davidson,
and Magaret his wife.

Her parents were in straitened circumstances, and it was necessary,
from an early age, that much of her time should be devoted to
domestic employments: for these she had no inclination, but she
performed them with that alacrity which always accompanies good
will; and, when her work was done, retired to enjoy those intellectual
and imaginative, pursuits in which her whole heart was engaged.

This predilection for studious retirement she is said to have manifested
at the early age of four years. Reports, and even recollections
of this kind, are to be received, the one with some distrust, the
other with some allowance; but when that allowance is made, the
genius of this child still appears to have been as precocious as
it was extraordinary.

Instead of playing with her schoolmates, she generally got to some
secluded place, with her little books, and with pen, ink, and paper;
and the consumption which she made of paper was such as to excite
the curiosity of her parents, from whom she kept secret the use
to which she applied it.

If any one came upon her retirement, she would conceal or hastily
destroy what she was employed upon; and, instead of satisfying
the inquiries of her father and mother, replied to them only by
tears.
The mother, at length, when searching for something in a dark and
unfrequented closet, found a considerable number of little books,
made of this writing-paper, and filled with rude drawings, and with
strange and apparently illegible characters, which, however, were
at once seen to be the child's work.

Upon closer inspection, the characters were found to consist of
the printed alphabet; some of the letters being formed backwards,
some sideways, and there being no spaces between the words. These
writings were deciphered, not without much difficulty; and it then
appeared that they consisted of regular verses, generally in explanation
of a rude drawing, sketched on the opposite page.

When she found that her treasures had been discovered, she was
greatly distressed, and could not be pacified till they were restored;
and as soon as they were in her possession, she took the first opportunity
of secretly burning them.

These books having thus been destroyed, the earliest remaining
specimen of her verse is an epitaph, composed in her ninth year,
upon an unfledged robin, killed in the attempt at rearing it.

When she was eleven years of age, her father took her to see the
decorations of a room in which Washington's birthday was to be
celebrated.

Neither the novelty nor the gaiety of what she saw attracted her
attention; she thought of Washington alone, whose life she
had read, and for whom she entertained the proper feelings of an
American; and as soon as she returned home, she took paper, sketched
a funeral urn, and wrote under it a few stanzas, which were shown
to her friends.

"That is my idea," declared Tom. "I'll take the Lark with me. That's
a mighty powerful machine for its size, and it can be taken apart in
sections. It will carry three on a pinch, and I have had five in her
with two auxiliary seats. I'll take the Lark, and she may come in
handy."

"When can you start?" asked Mr. Preston.

"As soon as we can fit out an expedition," answered Tom. "It
oughtn't to take long. I don't have to build an air glider this
time. It won't take long to take the Lark apart. I haven't finished
work on my noiseless airship yet, but that can wait. Yes, we'll be
ready as soon as you want us to start, Mr. Preston."

"It can't be too soon for me. I'll deposit a certain sum in the bank
to your credit, Tom, and you can draw on it for expenses. I'll pay
any amount to get word of poor Jake, to say nothing of having a
giant for my circus. Now as to ways of getting there. Have you a
large map of South America?"

Tom had one, and he and the others were pouring over it when Tom's
father came into the room.

"Well, well!" he exclaimed. "What's this? What are you up to now,
Tom, my boy? Mrs. Baggert said you took down the South American map.
What's up?"

"Lots, dad? I'm going after giants this time!"

"Giants, Tom? Are you joking?"

"Not a bit of it, Mr. Swift," answered Mr. Damon. "Bless my check
book! I believe if some one wanted the moon Tom Swift would try to
get it for them."

Then Mr. Swift noticed the stranger present, and was introduced to
the circus man.

"Is it really true, Tom," asked the aged inventor, when the story
had been related, "are you going to have a try for giant land?"

"That's what I am, dad, and I wish you were going along."

"No, Tom, I'm getting too old for that. But I did hope you'd stay
home for a while, and help me work on my gyroscope invention. It is
almost completed."

"I will help you, dad, as soon as I get back with a giant or two.
Who knows? maybe I'll get one myself."

"What would you do with one?" asked Ned with a laugh.

"Have him help Eradicate," answered the young inventor. "Rad is
getting pretty old, and he needs an assistant."

"But are these giants black?" asked Mr. Swift.

"That's a point I don't know," answered the circus man frankly.
"Jake didn't say in his letter. They may be black, white or midway
between. That's what Tom has got to find out for us."

"And I'll do it!" exclaimed our hero. "Now let's see. I suppose the
best plan would be to take a ship right to the Rio de la Plata,
landing say at Buenos Ayres or Montevideo, and then organize an
expedition to strike into the interior."

"Why don't you do just as Mr. Poddington did?" asked Ned, "start
from the Amazon and work south?"

"It would take too long," declared Tom. "We know that the giants are
somewhere in the northern part of Argentina, or in Paraguay or
Uruguay. Or they may be on the other side of the Uruguay river in
Brazil. It's quite a stretch of territory, and we've got to take our
time exploring it. That's why I don't want to waste time working
down from the Amazon. We'll go right to Buenos Ayres, I think."

"That's what I'd do," advised the old circus man. "Now I can give
you some points on what to take, and how to act when you get there.
The South Americans are a queer people--very nice when treated
right, but very bad if not," and then he told some of his
experiences as a circus man in South America, for he had traveled
there.

"I'd go again, if my business didn't keep me here," he concluded,
"for I'd ask nothing better than to hunt for giant land, or try to
rescue poor Jake. But I can't. I'm depending on you, Tom Swift."

"What's that? Giant land?" exclaimed Mrs. Baggert, the motherly
housekeeper, as she came in to announce that dinner was ready. "You
don't mean to tell me, Tom, that you're going off again?"

"That's what I am, Mrs. Baggert. You'd better put me up a few
sandwiches, for I don't know when I'll be back," and Tom winked at
his chum.

"Oh, of all things I ever heard in all my born days!" cried the
housekeeper, throwing up her hands. "Will you ever settle down, Tom
Swift?"

"Maybe he will when Miss Mary Nestor is ready to settle down too,"
said Ned mischievously, referring to a girl of whom Tom was very
fond.

"Say, I'll fix you for that!" cried our hero, as he made an
unsuccessful grab for Ned. "But, Mrs. Baggert, can you put on a
couple of extra plates? Mr. Damon and Mr. Preston will stay to
lunch."

"Not if it's going to put you out, Tom," objected the circus man. "I
can go to the hotel, and--"

"No, indeed!" exclaimed Mrs. Baggert graciously, for she prided
herself on her housekeeping arrangements, and she used to say that
unexpected company never "flustrated" her. Soon the little party was
seated around the table, where the talk went from grave to gay, the
subject of the giants being uppermost.

Mr. Preston told many funny stories of his circus days, and some of
them had the spice of danger in them, for he had been all over the
world, either as a performer or as the owner of amusement
enterprises.

"Now, the next question to be settled," said the old circus man,
when they were once more gathered in the library, "is how many are
going?"

"I am, for one!" exclaimed Ned quickly. "I'm sure my folks will let
me. Especially as we aren't going to use an airship, but will travel
just as ordinary folks do."

"Except in case of emergency," explained Tom. "We'll have the Lark
to use if we need her."

"Oh, of course," agreed Ned. "How about you, Mr. Damon? Will you
go?"

The odd man looked around the room before replying, as though he
feared someone might be listening on the sly.

"Go on, Andy Foger isn't here," invited Tom with a laugh.

"I'll go--if I can pursuade my wife to let me," said the odd man in
a whisper, as if, even then, the good lady might overhear him. "I'm
not going to say anything about giants. I'll tell her we are going
to rescue a poor fellow from--er--well from the natives of South
America, and I'm sure she'll consent. Of course I'll go."

"That's three," remarked Tom. "I think I can get Eradicate to go. He
doesn't like airships, and when he knows we're not going in one it
will please him. Then he likes it hot, and I guess South America is
about as warm as they come. I am almost sure we can count on Rad."

"That will make a nice party," commented the circus man. "Now I'll
make out a list of the supplies you'd better take, and tell you what
to do about getting native helpers, and so on," and with that he
plunged into the midst of details that took up most of the remainder
of the day.

"Well, then I guess that settles most everything," remarked Tom,
several hours later. "I'll begin at once to take the Lark apart for
shipment, and begin ordering the things we need."

"Oh, there's one thing I almost forgot about," said Mr. Preston
suddenly. "Queer, how I should overlook that, too. I don't suppose
you mind a fight or two; do you?" he asked, looking sharply at Tom.

"Well, it all depends. We've had several fights on other
expeditions, though I can't say that I like 'em," replied the young
inventor. "Why do you ask?"

"Because you may have one--or several," was the answer of the circus
man. "You'll have to beware of my rival."

"Your rival?"

"Yes, the bitterest foe I have is a rival circus man named Wayland
Waydell. He, or some of his men, are always camping on my trail when
I send out after a new consignment of wild animals, and I shouldn't
be a bit surprised but what he'd try to get ahead of me on the giant
game."

"But how does he know you want giants?" asked Tom.

"Because news of circus expeditions always leaks out somehow or
other. I'm sure Waydell will learn that you are acting for me, and
so I warn you in time. In fact, he tried to get ahead of me when I
sent Jake Poddington out over a year ago, and I always had my
suspicions that he had a hand in Jake's disappearance, but maybe I'm
wrong. So that's what I mean when I say beware of Wayland Waydell,
Tom."

"I will!" exclaimed Tom. "He'll have to get up early to get ahead of
us." But Tom little knew the man against whom he was to pit himself
in the search for giants.


CHAPTER V

ANDY FOGER LEARNS SOMETHING


Once Tom Swift made up his mind to do a thing, he did not waste time
in setting about it. He had decided to go to giant land, and that
was all there was to it. His father talked with him about the
matter, pointed out the dangers, and suggested that, as the young
inventor had had many adventures in the last few years, and had made
considerable money from the discovery of the city of gold, and the
platinum mines, the prize offered for a giant was not much of an
inducement.

"But it isn't that so much, dad," explained Tom. "There's that poor
circus man, maybe suffering in the centre of South America. I want
to find him, if I can, or get some news that he died a natural
death, and is decently buried."

"You never can do it, Tom."

"Well dad, I'm going to make a big try!" he returned; and that
settled it as far as Tom was concerned.

For several days after the visit of Mr. Preston Tom was busy making
plans for his trip to South America. He wanted to lay out a regular
schedule before proceeding. Ned Newton had had hard work to persuade
his folks to let him go, but they finally consented, and as for Mr.
Damon, his plan was simple.

Without mentioning giants at all, he took Mr. Preston home with him,
and the circus man's tale of his assistant lost in the wilds of
South America was too much for Mrs. Damon.

"Go? Of course you'll go!" she said to her husband. "I demand that
you go, and I want you to find that poor man and rescue him. If you
could rescue the exiles from uncivilized Siberia I'm sure you can
get a man out of a civilized country."

Mr. Damon did not stop to point out that South America was far less
civilized, in some ways, than was Russia. He just kept still, and
made his preparations to go. Mr. Preston was a distant relative of
the odd man, and that was how he had happened to meet him and hear
the story which was destined to play such an important part in the
life of Tom Swift.

"Do you think we'll have much trouble after we get to South America,
and strike into the interior?" asked Mr. Damon one afternoon, when
he and Mr. Preston were helping Tom in the delicate work of packing
the wing planes of the Lark.

"No, South America isn't a bad country to travel in," replied the
circus man. "The natives are fairly friendly, and with a well-organized
party, and plenty of money, which I shall see that you have, you
ought to get along swimmingly. Only one thing bothers me."

"What's that?" asked Tom quickly.

"That's my rival, Waydell. He's sure to make trouble if he gets on
your trail."

"Have you heard from him?"

"No, and that's what makes me all the more suspicious. If he'd come
out and fight me in the open it wouldn't be so bad. But this
underhand business gets on my nerves. I don't know what he's up to."

"Maybe he isn't up to anything," suggested Ned. "He may not even
know you are going to make another try for the giants."

"Oh, yes, he does," replied the circus man. "He didn't succeed in
beating me when poor Jake was after them, for the simple reason that
it was a snap case, and even I didn't know that Poddington was
trying for the giants until he had started. But Waydell was soon
after him, and he knows that when I once set out for a freak or a
certain kind of animal I keep on until I get it. So he has probably
already figured out that I'm making new plans to get a giant."

"But how will he know that I am going?" inquired Tom.

"I don't know how he will know, but he will. We circus men have
queer ways of finding out things. I shouldn't be a bit surprised but
what he was already plotting and scheming to send an expedition on
my trail, to take advantage of anything you may learn."

"Well, we'll try and fool him, the same as we did the Mexicans when
we hunted for the city of gold," spoke Tom; and then putting aside
that worry, he and the others labored hard to get matters in shape
for a departure to South America.

"I suppose Eradicate is going," remarked Ned, in the intervals of
packing the aeroplane.

"Well, I've hinted it to him," replied Tom, "but I haven't asked him
outright. He said he wouldn't mind going to a hot country though.
Here he comes now. Guess I'll see how he takes it."

The colored man shuffled up with a hammer and nails, for he had been
putting covers on packing boxes.

"Then you are coming with us to South America; aren't you, Rad?"
asked Tom, winking at Ned.

"Souf America? Am dat de hot country yo'-all was referencin' to?"
asked Eradicate.

"That's it, Rad. It's nice and warm there. All you have to do is to
lie under a tree and cocoanuts will drop off into your mouth."

"Cocoanuts in mah mouf, Massa Tom! 'Scuse me! I doan't want t' go to
no sich country as dat. Cocoanuts in mah mouf! Why I ain't got but a
few teef left, an' a cocoanut droppin' offen a tree would shorely
knock dem teef out, shorely!"

"Oh, Rad, I didn't mean cocoanuts! I meant oranges and bananas--
they're soft," and Tom glanced quickly at Ned, for he saw that he
had made a mistake.

"Oh, well, den dat's diffunt, Massa Tom. I jes lubs oranges an'
bananas, an' ef yo'-all is shore dat I'll find some, why, I'll come
along."

"Find 'em? Of course you will!" cried Ned.

"And cocoanuts, too," added Tom. "Only, Rad, I meant to say that the
monkeys would throw the cocoanuts down to you from the trees. That
breaks the hard shells you see, and all you have to do is to take
out the meat, and drink the milk. Then the monkeys throw you down a
palm leaf fan to cool yourself off, while you're eating it. Oh, I
tell you, Rad, South America is the place to go to have a good
time."

"I believe you, Massa Tom. When do we-all start?"

"Pretty soon now."

"An' what all am yo' gwine arter, Massa Tom?"

The young inventor thought a moment. In times past he had not
hesitated to confide in his colored helper, but of late years
Eradicate had become somewhat childish, and he talked more than was
necessary. Tom wondered whether it would be safe to trust the giant
secret to him. After a moment's thought he realized that it would
not be. But, at the same time, he knew that if he did not give some
kind of an answer Eradicate would become suspicious, and that would
be worse. The colored helper had been with Tom on too many trips not
to know that his master never went without some object.

"Well, Rad, we're after big game this time," Tom said. "I don't know
what it will be that we'll get, whether animals or plants, and--"

"Oh, I knows, Massa Tom. Yo'-all means dem orchard plants that lib
on air--dem big orchard plants." Eradicate meant orchids, of which
many rare and beautiful kinds are found in South America.

"Yes, Rad, I guess we will get some big orchids," agreed Tom.

"An' I shorely will help climb de trees arter 'em. Or maybe we kin
git de monkeys to frow em down, same as dey will de cocoanuts."

"Maybe, Rad. Well, now go ahead and nail up the rest of these boxes.
We want to get started as soon as we can," and the colored man got
busy, murmuring from time to time something about oranges and
bananas and cocoanuts.

Everyone was occupied in getting matters in shape for the trip to
South America, even Mr. Swift laying aside his work on his pet
invention--a gyroscope--while he helped his son. And had Tom not
been quite so engrossed with his preparations he might have gone
about town more, in which case he would have learned something that
might have saved him and the others considerable trouble and no
little danger. And this fact was that Andy Foger had been in Shopton
several times lately.

After the trouble which the red-haired bully and his father caused
Tom and his friends on their trip to the city of gold, Mr. Foger
moved away from Shopton. He had lost his fortune and had to begin
all over again. The Foger homestead was closed up, and Andy ceased
to be a fixture of the town, for which Tom and Ned were very glad.

But of late Andy had been seen in Shopton several times, and it was
noticed that, on one or two occasions, he had a man with him--a man
who seemed to have plenty of money--a man with an air about him not
unlike that of Mr. Preston. A man with what newspaper men would have
called a circus or theatrical "air."

This man had visited Shopton soon after Mr. Preston made the giant
proposition to Tom, and before meeting Andy Foger had made special
inquiries about Tom Swift.

"Who are the people who have a hard feeling against this young
inventor in town?" the man had asked of several persons.

"Tom Swift has more friends than enemies," was the general reply.

"Oh, surely he must have some enemies," the man insisted. "He's been
running his aeroplanes and autos around town a long time, and surely
there must be some one who has a grudge against him. I suppose he
has lots of friends, but who are his enemies?"

Then he learned about Andy Foger, and, hearing that Andy now lived
in a nearby town, the man had at once gone there. It was not long
before he reappeared--and the red-haired bully was with him.

"And you haven't learned anything yet, Andy?" asked this mysterious
man one afternoon, when he met his tool in a quiet resort in
Shopton.

"Nothing yet, Mr. Waydell. But give me a little more time."

"Time! You've had more time now than you need. When I agreed to pay
you for finding out what part of South America Tom Swift would head
for to get some sort of a freak or animal for Preston's circus I
thought you'd make good quicker than this."

"So did I. But you see Tom is suspicious of me, and so is his chum,
Ned Newton. I can't go to them, and if I'm seen sneaking around the
house or shop, after what happened last, I'll be driven off."

"Well, it's up to you. I paid you to get the information and I
expect you to do it. Why don't you tackle that old colored man whom,
I understand, works for him? He ought to be simple enough to give
the game away."

"Eradicate? I will! I never thought of that I'll get that
information for you, Mr. Waydell, in a few days."

"You'd better, if you want to keep that money."

The two plotters parted, and that very afternoon gave Andy the
chance he wanted. He met Eradicate on his way to the village where
he was going after something Tom needed.

"Hello, Rad!" called Andy with a show of good feeling. "I haven't
seen you in some time. I suppose you're getting too old to travel
around with Tom any more?"

"Gittin' too old!" exclaimed the colored man indignantly, for that
was his sore point. "What yo'-all mean, Andy Foger? I ain't gittin'
old, an' neider am Boomerang."

"Oh, I thought you were, as you haven't been on any trips lately."

"I ain't, hey? Well I's gwine on one right soon, let me tell you
dat, Andy Foger!"

"No! Is that so? Glad to hear it. Up to the North Pole I suppose?"

"No, sah; not much! No cold country for this coon! I's gwine where
it's nice an 'warm, an' where de cocoanuts fall in yo' mouf--I mean
where de bananas an' oranges fall in you mouf, an' de monkeys frow
down cocoanuts an' palm leaf fans to yo'!"

"Where's that, Rad?" asked Andy, and he tried to make his voice
sound indifferent, as though the matter did not interest him.

"South America, dat's where it am, an' I's gwine wif Massa Tom. We's
gwine t' git a monstrous big orchard plant."

"Oh, yes; I've heard about them. Well, I hope you get all the
oranges and bananas you want. South America, eh? I suppose along the
Amazon river, where they have crocodiles forty feet long, that are
always hungry."

"No, sah! No crockermiles fo' me! We ain't goin' neah de Amerzon
riber at all. We's gwine away down in de middle part of South
America. It's a place suffin laik Gomeonaway--or Goonaway, or
suffin' laik dat."

"Oh, yes; I know where you mean!" and Andy could hardly conceal the
note of triumph in his voice. He had the very information he wanted
from the simple colored man. "Yes, I guess there are no crocodiles
there, and plenty of monkeys and cocoanuts. Well, I hope you have a
good time," and Andy hurried away to seek out the rival circus man.


CHAPTER VI

ALARMING NEWS


"Hand me that hammer, Ned."

"There it is, right behind you, on the bench."

"Oh, so it is. Here are those nails you were asking for."

"Good. Now we'll make things hum," and Ned Newton's voice was
drowned in the rapid driving of nails into boards.

"Bless my screw driver!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Damon, who was
sawing planks to make covers for boxes.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom, looking up from a bundle he was
tying up. It contained the magneto of his aeroplane and he was
putting waterproof paper about it. "Did you cut your finger?"

"No, but I just happened to think that I nailed my watch up in that
last box."

"Nailed up your watch!" cried Mr. Preston, who, after a trip to New
York to make arrangements for passages on a steamer, had come back
to help Tom pack up.

"Yes, I took it out to see how long it took me to make a box cover,
and then Tom asked me to nail up that box containing the motor
parts, and I laid my watch right down on top, and put the boards
over it."

"Well, the only thing to do is to take off the cover," remarked Tom
grimly.

"Bless my chronometer! That will delay things," said the odd man
with a sigh. "But I suppose there is no hope for it," and he
proceeded to open the box, while Tom, Ned, the circus man and
Eradicate busied themselves over the hundred and one things to be
done before they would be ready for the trip to the interior of
South America.

"Look out, Ned!" called Tom. "You're making those top boards too
long. They'll stick out over the edge, and be ripped off if the box
catches on anything."

"Yes, you can't be too careful," cautioned Mr. Preston. "Each box or
package must be the right weight, or the porters and mule drivers
won't carry them into the interior. You may have to cross rough
trails, and even ford rivers. And as for bridges! well, the less
said about them the better. You aren't going to have any picnic, and
if you want to back out, Tom Swift, now is the time to say so."

"What! Back out?" cried our hero. "Never! I said I'd go and I'm
going. Ned, pass that brace and bit over, will you. I've got to bore
a hole for these screws."

And so the work went on in the big aeroplane shed, which they had
made their packing headquarters.

The Lark, that small, but strong and speedy aeroplane, had been
safely packed, and most of it had been sent on ahead to New York,
where the travellers were to take the steamer. There remained to be
transported their clothing, weapons and ammunition, and several
bundles and cases of trinkets which would be of more value in
bartering with the natives than money. Tom and Mr. Preston had
selected the things with great care, and at the last moment the
young inventor had packed a box of his own, and said nothing about
it. Included in it were some of his own and his father's inventions,
and had one been given a glance into that same box he would have
wondered at the queer things.

"What in the world are you taking with you, anyhow?" asked Ned, of
his chum, noticing the mysterious box.

"'You'll see, if we ever get to giant land," replied Tom with a
smile.

"How long before we can start?" asked Mr. Damon, late that day, when
most of the hard work had been finished. He was as anxious and as
eager as either of the youths to make a start.

"We ought to be ready at least a week from to-day," replied Tom,
"and perhaps sooner."

"Sooner, if you can make it," suggested Mr. Preston. "The steamer
sails a week from to-day, and if you miss that one you'll have to
wait two weeks more."

"Then a week from to-day we'll sail," decided Tom, with emphasis.
"We'll work nights getting things in shape."

Really, though, not much more remained to be done, and the next day
Mr. Preston again went to New York, accompanying a shipment of boxes
and cases that Tom sent on ahead.

The two chums were busy in the aeroplane hangar a few days after
this, nailing up the last of some light cases containing medicines,
personal effects and comforts that would accompany them on their
trip.

"Well, I'm glad of one thing," remarked Tom thoughtfully, as he
drove home the last nail in a box, "and that is that we won't be
bothered with that Andy Foger on this trip. I haven't seen hide nor
hair of him in some time. I guess he and his father are down and
out."

"I guess so. I haven't seen him either."

"Massa Andy were in town a few days ago," ventured Eradicate.

"He was?" cried Tom. "Did you see him? What was he doing, Rad?"

"Nuffin, same as usual. He done say I were too old to go on any more
hexpiditions wif yo' an' I proved dat I wasn't."

"Proved that you weren't, Rad? How?" And Tom looked anxiously at his
colored helper.

"Why, I done say t' him dat I was gwine wif yo'-all dis time, t' dat
Comeaway country after a big orchard plant. Dat's how I done prove
it to dat Andy Foger."

"Rad, you didn't tell him we were going to South America?" asked Tom
reproachfully.

"Suah I done so, Massa Tom. Dat were de only way t' prove t' him dat
I wa'an't gittin' too old."

"Oh, Rad! I'm afraid--" and Tom hesitated.

"Oh, I don't believe it amounted to anything," interposed Ned. "Andy
didn't have any one with him, did he, Rad?"

"No, Massa Ned. He were all alone by hisse'f."

"Then I guess it's all right, Tom. Andy was only rigging Eradicate,
and he didn't pay any attention to what he said."

"Well, I hope so," and the young inventor wore a thoughtful air as
he resumed the finish of the packing.

The colored man, blissfully unconscious that he had been the
innocent cause of a grave danger that overhung Tom and his friends,
whistled gaily as he gathered the boxes, bales and packages into a
pile, ready for the expressman, who was to call in the morning.

Tom, together with Ned, Mr. Damon and Eradicate, were to leave the
following afternoon, and stay in New York until the sailing of the
steamer. They preferred to be a day or so ahead of time than half an
hour late, and were taking no chances.

"Bless my timetable!" exclaimed Mr. Damon that night, as they sat in
the library of the Swift home, checking over the lists to make sure
that nothing had been forgotten, "bless my timetable, but it doesn't
seem possible that we are going to start at last."

Lights. Blurr.
Gone.
On, on. Lead.

Lead. Hail.
Spatter. Whirr!

Whirr!
'Toward that patch of brown; Direction left'. Bullets a stream.
Devouring thought crying in a dream.

Men, crumpled, going down....
Go on. Go.
Deafness. Numbness.

The loudening tornado.
Bullets. Mud. Stumbling and skating.
My voice's strangled shout:
'Steady pace, boys!' The still light: gladness.

'Look, sir. Look out!' Ha! ha! Bunched figures waiting.
Revolver levelled quick!
Flick! Flick!

Red as blood.

Germans. Germans.
Good! O good!

Cool madness.

FULFILMENT

Was there love once?

I have forgotten her.
Was there grief once? grief yet is mine.
Other loves I have, men rough, but men who stir More grief, more
joy, than love of thee and thine.

Faces cheerful, full of whimsical mirth, Lined by the wind, burned by
the sun; Bodies enraptured by the abounding earth, As whose children
we are brethren: one.

And any moment may descend hot death To shatter limbs!

pulp, tear, blast Beloved soldiers who love rough life and breath
Not less for dying faithful to the last.

O the fading eyes, the grimed face turned bony, Oped mouth gushing,
fallen head, Lessening pressure of a hand shrunk, clammed, and
stony!

O sudden spasm, release of the dead!

Was there love once? I have forgotten her.
Was there grief once? grief yet is mine.
O loved, living, dying, heroic soldier, All, all, my joy, my grief,
my love, are thine!

THE PHILOSOPHER'S ORATION
(From 'A Faun's Holiday')

Meanwhile, though nations in distress Cower at a comet's loveliness
Shaken across the midnight sky; Though the wind roars, and Victory,
A virgin fierce, on vans of gold Stoops through the cloud's white
smother rolled Over the armies' shock and flow Across the broad
green hills below, Yet hovers and will not circle down To cast
t'ward one the leafy crown; Though men drive galleys' golden beaks
To isles beyond the sunset peaks, And cities on the sea behold Whose
walls are glass, whose gates are gold, Whose turrets, risen in an
hour, Dazzle between the sun and shower, Whose sole inhabitants are
kings Six cubits high with gryphon's wings And beard and mien more
glorious Than Midas or Assaracus; Though priests in many a hill-top
fane Lift anguished hands--and lift in vain-- Toward the sun's shaft
dancing through The bright roof's square of wind-swept blue; Though
'cross the stars nightly arise The silver fumes of sacrifice; Though
a new Helen bring new scars, Pyres piled upon wrecked golden cars,
Stacked spears, rolled smoke, and spirits sped Like a streaked flame
toward the dead:
Though all these be, yet grows not old Delight of sunned and windy
wold, Of soaking downs aglare, asteam, Of still tarns where the
yellow gleam Of a far sunrise slowly breaks, Or sunset strews with
golden flakes The deeps which soon the stars will throng.

For earth yet keeps her undersong Of comfort and of ultimate peace,
That whoso seeks shall never cease To hear at dawn or noon or night.

Joys hath she, too, joys thin and bright, Too thin, too bright, for
those to hear Who listen with an eager ear, Or course about and
seek to spy, Within an hour, eternity.

First must the spirit cast aside This world's and next his own
poor pride And learn the universe to scan More as a flower, less as
a man.

Then shall he hear the lonely dead Sing and the stars sing overhead,
And every spray upon the heath, And larks above and ants beneath; The
stream shall take him in her arms; Blue skies shall rest him in their
calms; The wind shall be a lovely friend, And every leaf and bough
shall bend Over him with a lover's grace.

The hills shall bare a perfect face Full of a high solemnity; The
heavenly clouds shall weep, and be Content as overhead they swim
To be high brothers unto him.

No more shall he feel pitched and hurled Uncomprehended into this
world; For every place shall be his place, And he shall recognize
its face.

At dawn he shall upon his path; No sword shall touch him, nor the wrath
Of the ranked crowd of clamorous men.
At even he shall home again, And lay him down to sleep at ease,
One with the Night and the Night's peace.
Ev'n Sorrow, to be escaped of none, But a more deep communion Shall
be to him, and Death at last No more dreaded than the Past, Whose
shadow in the brain of earth Informs him now and gave him birth.

THE NAIADS' MUSIC

(From 'A Faun's Holiday')
Come, ye sorrowful, and steep Your tired brows in a nectarous sleep:

For our kisses lightlier run Than the traceries of the sun By the
lolling water cast Up grey precipices vast, Lifting smooth and
warm and steep Out of the palely shimmering deep.

Come, ye sorrowful, and take Kisses that are but half awake:
For here are eyes O softer far Than the blossom of the star Upon the
mothy twilit waters, And here are mouths whose gentle laughters
Are but the echoes of the deep Laughing and murmuring in its sleep.

Come, ye sorrowful, and see The raindrops flaming goldenly On the
stream's eddies overhead And dragonflies with drops of red In the
crisp surface of each wing Threading slant rains that flash and
sing, Or under the water-lily's cup, From darkling depths, roll
slowly up The bronze flanks of an ancient bream Into the hot
sun's shattered beam, Or over a sunk tree's bubbled hole The perch
stream in a golden shoal:
Come, ye sorrowful; our deep Holds dreams lovelier than sleep.

But if ye sons of Sorrow come Only wishing to be numb:
Our eyes are sad as bluebell posies, Our breasts are soft as silken
roses, And our hands are tenderer Than the breaths that scarce can
stir The sunlit eglantine that is Murmurous with hidden bees.

Come, ye sorrowful, and steep Your tired brows in a nectarous sleep.

Come, ye sorrowful, for here No voices sound but fond and clear Of
mouths as lorn as is the rose That under water doth disclose, Amid
her crimson petals torn, A heart as golden as the morn; And here
are tresses languorous As the weeds wander over us, And brows as
holy and as bland As the honey-coloured sand Lying sun-entranced
below The lazy water's limpid flow:
Come, ye sorrowful, and steep Your tired brows in a nectarous
sleep.

THE PROPHETIC BARD'S ORATION
(From 'A Faun's Holiday')

'Be warned! I feel the world grow old, And off Olympus fades the gold
Of the simple passionate sun; And the Gods wither one by
one:
Proud-eyed Apollo's bow is broken, And throned Zeus nods nor may
be woken But by the song of spirits seven Quiring in the midnight
heaven Of a new world no more forlorn, Sith unto it a Babe is born,
That in a propped, thatched stable lies, While with darkling,
reverent eyes Dusky Emperors, coifed in gold, Kneel mid the rushy
mire, and hold Caskets of rubies, urns of myrrh, Whose fumes enwrap
the thurifer And coil toward the high dim rafters Where, with lutes
and warbling laughters, Clustered cherubs of rainbow feather, Fanning
the fragrant air together, Flit in jubilant holy glee, And make
heavenly minstrelsy To the Child their Sun, whose glow Bathes them
His cloudlets from below....

Long shall this chimed accord be heard, Yet all earth hushed at His
first word:
Then shall be seen Apollo's car Blaze headlong like a banished star;
And the Queen of heavenly Loves Dragged downward by her dying doves;
Vulcan, spun on a wheel, shall track The circle of the zodiac;
Silver Artemis be lost, To the polar blizzards tossed; Heaven shall
curdle as with blood; The sun be swallowed in the flood; The universe
be silent save For the low drone of winds that lave The shadowed
great world's ashen sides As through the rustling void she glides.

Then shall there be a whisper heard Of the Grave's Secret and its
Word, Where in black silence none shall cry Save those who,
dead-affrighted, spy How from the murmurous graveyards creep The
figures of eternal sleep.

Last: when 'tis light men shall behold, Beyond the crags, a flower
of gold Blossoming in a golden haze, And, while they guess Zeus'
halls now blaze, Shall in the blossom's heart descry The saints of a
new hierarchy!'

He ceased ... and in the morning sky Zeus' anger threatened murmurously.

I sped away.

The lightning's sword Stabbed on the forest. But the word Abides with
me.

I feel its power Most darkly in the twilit hour, When Night's eternal
shadow, cast Over earth hushed and pale and vast, Darkly foretells
the soundless Night In which this orb, so green, so bright, Now
spins, and which shall compass her When on her rondure nought shall
stir But snow-whorls which the wind shall roll From the Equator to
the Pole ...

For everlastingly there is Something Beyond, Behind: I wis All Gods
are haunted, and there clings, As hound behind fled sheep, the
things Beyond the Universe's ken:
Gods haunt the Half-Gods, Half-Gods men, And Man the brute.

Gods, born of Night, Feel a blacker appetite Gape to devour them;
Half-Gods dread But jealous Gods; and mere men tread Warily lest
a Half-God rise And loose on them from empty skies Amazement,
thunder, stark affright, Famine and sudden War's thick night, In
which loud Furies hunt the Pities Through smoke above wrecked,
flaming cities.

For Pan, the Unknown God, rules all.
He shall outlive the funeral, Change, and decay, of many Gods,
Until he, too, lets fall his rods Of viewless power upon that
minute When Universe cowers at Infinite!

THE TOWER

It was deep night, and over Jerusalem's low roofs The moon floated,
drifting through high vaporous woofs.

The moonlight crept and glistened silent, solemn, sweet, Over dome
and column, up empty, endless street; In the closed, scented gardens
the rose loosed from the stem Her white showery petals; none regarded
them; The starry thicket breathed odours to the sentinel palm;
Silence possessed the city like a soul possessed by calm.

Not a spark in the warren under the giant night, Save where in a
turret's lantern beamed a grave, still light:
There in the topmost chamber a gold-eyed lamp was lit-- Marvellous
lamp in darkness, informing, redeeming it!

For, set in that tiny chamber, Jesus, the blessed and doomed, Spoke
to the lone apostles as light to men en-tombed; And spreading his
hands in blessing, as one soon to be dead, He put soft enchantment
into spare wine and bread.

The hearts of the disciples were broken and full of tears, Because
their lord, the spearless, was hedgéd about with spears; And in
his face the sickness of departure had spread a gloom, At leaving his
young friends friendless.
They could not forget the tomb.

He smiled subduedly, telling, in tones soft as voice of the dove, The
endlessness of sorrow, the eternal solace of love; And lifting
the earthly tokens, wine and sorrowful bread, He bade them sup
and remember one who lived and was dead.
And they could not restrain their weeping.

But one rose up to depart, Having weakness and hate of weakness raging
within his heart, And bowed to the robed assembly whose eyes gleamed
wet in the light.

Judas arose and departed: night went out to the night.

Then Jesus lifted his voice like a fountain in an ocean of tears,
And comforted his disciples and calmed and allayed their fears.

But Judas wound down the turret, creeping from floor to floor, And
would fly; but one leaning, weeping, barred him beside the door.

And he knew her by her ruddy garment and two yet-watching men:

Mary of Seven Evils, Mary Magdalen.
And he was frighted at her. She sighed: 'I dreamed him dead.
We sell the body for silver....' Then Judas cried out and fled Forth
into the night!... The moon had begun to set:
A drear, deft wind went sifting, setting the dust afret; Into the
heart of the city Judas ran on and prayed To stern Jehovah lest his
deed make him afraid.

But in the tiny lantern, hanging as if on air, The disciples sat
unspeaking.

Amaze and peace were there.
For _his_ voice, more lovely than song of all earthly birds, In
accents humble and happy spoke slow, consoling words.

Thus Jesus discoursed, and was silent, sitting up-right, and soon
Past the casement behind him slanted the sinking moon; And, rising
for Olivet, all stared, between love and dread, Seeing the torrid
moon a ruddy halo behind his head

.

* * * * *

HAROLD MONRO

TWO POEMS
(Numbers I and X in 'Strange Meetings')

I

If suddenly a clod of earth should rise, And walk about, and breathe,
and speak, and love, How one would tremble, and in what surprise
Gasp: 'Can _you_ move?'
I see men walking, and I always feel:
'Earth! How have you done this? What can you be?' I can't learn
how to know men, or conceal How strange they are to me.

II
A flower is looking through the ground, Blinking at the April weather;
Now a child has seen the flower:
Now they go and play together.

Now it seems the flower will speak, And will call the child its
brother-- But, oh strange forgetfulness!-- They don't recognize
each other.

EVERY THING

Since man has been articulate, Mechanical, improvidently wise, (Servant
of Fate), He has not understood the little cries And foreign
conversations of the small Delightful creatures that have followed
him Not far behind; Has failed to hear the sympathetic call Of
Crockery and Cutlery, those kind Reposeful Teraphim Of his domestic
happiness; the Stool He sat on, or the Door he entered through:
He has not thanked them, overbearing fool!

What is he coming to?

But you should listen to the talk of these.
Honest they are, and patient they have kept, Served him without his
'Thank you' or his 'Please'.

I often heard The gentle Bed, a sigh between each word,
Murmuring, before I slept.
The Candle, as I blew it, cried aloud, Then bowed, And in a smoky
argument Into the darkness went.

The Kettle puffed a tentacle of breath:-- 'Pooh! I have boiled his
water, I don't know Why; and he always says I boil too slow.
He never calls me "Sukie, dear," and oh, I wonder why I squander
my desire Sitting submissive on his kitchen fire.'

Now the old Copper Basin suddenly Rattled and tumbled from the shelf,
Bumping and crying: 'I can fall by myself; Without a woman's hand
To patronize and coax and flatter me, I understand The lean and
poise of gravitable land.'

It gave a raucous and tumultuous shout, Twisted itself convulsively
about, Rested upon the floor, and, while I stare, It stares and
grins at me.

The old impetuous Gas above my head Begins irascibly to flare and
fret, Wheezing into its epileptic jet, Reminding me I ought to go
to bed.

The Rafters creak; an Empty-Cupboard door Swings open; now a wild
Plank of the floor Breaks from its joist, and leaps behind my foot.

Down from the chimney half a pound of Soot Tumbles, and lies, and
shakes itself again.

The Putty cracks against the window-pane.
A piece of Paper in the basket shoves Another piece, and toward the
bottom moves.

My independent Pencil, while I write, Breaks at the point: the
ruminating Clock Stirs all its body and begins to rock, Warning
the waiting presence of the Night, Strikes the dead hour, and tumbles
to the plain Ticking of ordinary work again.

You do well to remind me, and I praise Your strangely individual
foreign ways.

You call me from myself to recognize Companionship in your unselfish
eyes.

I want your dear acquaintances, although I pass you arrogantly over,
throw Your lovely sounds, and squander them along My busy days.

I'll do you no more wrong.

Purr for me, Sukie, like a faithful cat.
You, my well trampled Boots, and you, my Hat, Remain my friends:
I feel, though I don't speak, Your touch grow kindlier from week
to week.

It well becomes our mutual happiness To go toward the same end more
or less.

There is not much dissimilarity, Not much to choose, I know it well,
in fine, Between the purposes of you and me, And your
eventual Rubbish Heap, and mine.

SOLITUDE

When you have tidied all things for the night, And while your
thoughts are fading to their sleep, You'll pause a moment in the
late firelight, Too sorrowful to weep.

The large and gentle furniture has stood In sympathetic silence all
the day With that old kindness of domestic wood; Nevertheless the
haunted room will say:
'Some one must be away.'
The little dog rolls over half awake, Stretches his paws, yawns,
looking up at you, Wags his tail very slightly for your sake, That
you may feel he is unhappy too.

A distant engine whistles, or the floor Creaks, or the wandering
night-wind bangs a door.

Silence is scattered like a broken glass.

The minutes prick their ears and run about, Then one by one subside
again and pass Sedately in, monotonously out.

You bend your head and wipe away a tear.

Solitude walks one heavy step more near.

WEEK-END

I
The train! The twelve o'clock for paradise.

Hurry, or it will try to creep away.
Out in the country every one is wise:

We can be only wise on Saturday.

There you are waiting, little friendly house:
Those are your chimney-stacks with you between, Surrounded by old
trees and strolling cows, Staring through all your windows at the
green.

Your homely floor is creaking for our tread; The smiling tea-pot
with contented spout Thinks of the boiling water, and the bread
Longs for the butter.

All their hands are out To greet us, and the gentle blankets
seem Purring and crooning: 'Lie in us, and dream.'

II
The key will stammer, and the door reply, The hall wake, yawn, and
smile; the torpid stair Will grumble at our feet, the table
cry:
'Fetch my belongings for me; I am bare.'

A clatter! Something in the attic falls.
A ghost has lifted up his robes and fled.
The loitering shadows move along the walls; Then silence very slowly
lifts his head.

The starling with impatient screech has flown The chimney, and is
watching from the tree.

They thought us gone for ever: mouse alone Stops in the middle of the
floor to see.
Now all you idle things, resume your toil.
Hearth, put your flames on.

Sulky kettle, boil.

III

Contented evening; comfortable joys; The snoozing fire, and all the
fields are still:
Tranquil delight, no purpose, and no noise-- Unless the slow wind
flowing round the hill.

'Murry' (the kettle) dozes; little mouse Is rambling prudently about
the floor.

There's lovely conversation in this house:
Words become princes that were slaves before.
What a sweet atmosphere for you and me The people that have been
here left behind....
Oh, but I fear it may turn out to be Built of a dream, erected in
the mind:
So if we speak too loud, we may awaken To find it vanished, and
ourselves mistaken.

IV
Lift up the curtain carefully. All the trees Stand in the dark like
drowsy sentinels.
The oak is talkative to-night; he tells The little bushes crowding
at his knees That formidable, hard, voluminous History of growth
from acorn into age.

They titter like school-children; they arouse Their comrades, who
exclaim: 'He is very sage.'

Look how the moon is staring through that cloud, Laying and lifting
idle streaks of light.
O hark! was that the monstrous wind, so loud And sudden, prowling
always through the night?
Let down the shaking curtain.

They are queer, Those foreigners. They and we live so near.

V
Come, come to bed.

The shadows move about, And some one seems to overhear our talk.
The fire is low; the candles flicker out; The ghosts of former
tenants want to walk.

Already they are shuffling through the gloom.

I felt an old man touch my shoulder-blade; Once he was married here;
they love this room, He and his woman and the child they made.

Dead, dead, they are, yet some familiar sound, Creeping along the
brink of happy life, Revives their memory from under ground-- The
farmer and his troublesome old wife.

Let us be going: as we climb the stairs, They'll sit down in our
warm half-empty chairs.

VI
Morning! Wake up! Awaken!

All the boughs Are rippling on the air across the green.
The youngest birds are singing to the house.

Blood of the world!--and is the country clean?
Disturb the precinct. Cool it with a shout.
Sing as you trundle down to light the fire.

Turn the encumbering shadows tumbling out.
And fill the chambers with a new desire.
Life is no good, unless the morning brings White happiness and quick
delight of day.

These half-inanimate domestic things Must all be useful, or must
go away.
Coffee, be fragrant. Porridge in my plate, Increase the vigour to
fulfil my fate.

VII
The fresh air moves like water round a boat.
The white clouds wander. Let us wander too.
The whining, wavering plover flap and float.
That crow is flying after that cuckoo.

Look! Look!... They're gone. What are the great trees calling?
Just come a little farther, by that edge Of green, to where the
stormy ploughland, falling Wave upon wave, is lapping to the hedge.

Oh, what a lovely bank! Give me your hand.
Lie down and press your heart against the ground.
Let us both listen till we understand, Each through the other, every
natural sound....
I can't hear anything to-day, can you, But, far and near: 'Cuckoo!
Cuckoo! Cuckoo!'?

VIII
"Suspicious? How so? You don't think--"

"Oh, I mean I think he's some kind of a confidence man who has
adopted the respectable clothes of a minister to fool people. He may
be a card sharper himself. Well, we won't have anything more to do
with him. It won't be long before we arrive at Buenos Ayres, and
then we won't be bothered with card sharpers or anybody else but--"

"Giants and fighting natives," finished Ned, with a laugh. "You
forget, Tom, that there's a war going on near the very place we're
headed for."

"That's so, Ned. But with what we have with us I guess we can make
out all right. I'm going to have the electric rifles handy the
minute we start for the interior."

The voyage continued, and was fast drawing to a close. "Mr.
Blinderpool" made several more attempts to strike up a friendship
with Tom, or his chum, but they were on their guard now, and,
failing to get into much of a conversation with the two young men,
the pretended clergyman turned his attentions to Mr. Damon.

That eccentric gentleman welcomed him at first, until a quiet hint
from Tom brought that to an end.

"Bless my fire shovel!" cried Mr. Damon. "You don't say so! Not a
clergyman at all? Dear me!"

And then, getting desperate, and needing very much to learn how long
a journey his rivals were to undertake, so that he, too, might
prepare for it, Mr. Hank Delby, alias Blinderpool, began to "pump"
Eradicate.

But the latter was too sharp for him. Well knowing that a white man
would not get suddenly friendly with one of the black race unless
for some selfish object, Eradicate fairly snubbed the seeming
minister, until that worthy had to go off by himself, saying bitter
things and casting black looks at our friends.

"But I'll get ahead of them yet!" he muttered, "and I'll get their
giants away from them, if they capture any."

The box on which Tom set such an importance, and which had so nearly
been the cause of a disaster, had been stored in one of the fire-proof
compartments of the ship, and now, as a few days more would see
the vessel entering the harbor of the Rio de la Plata, thence to
steam up to the ancient city of Buenos Ayres, Tom and the others
began to think of what lay before them.

"How do you propose to head into the interior?" asked Mr. Damon one
afternoon, when the captain announced that the following morning
would see them nearly opposite Montevideo.

"I'm going to hire a lot of burrows, donkeys or whatever they have
down here that answers the purpose," replied Tom. "We have a lot of
things to transport, and I guess pack mules would be the best, if we
can get them. Then I've got to hire some drivers and some porters,
camp-makers and the like. In fact we'll have quite a party. I guess
I'll need ten natives, and a head man and with ourselves we'll be
fifteen. So we'll need plenty of food. But then we can get that as
we go along, except when we get away into the interior, and then
we'll have to hunt it ourselves."

"That's the stuff!" cried Ned. "We haven't had a good hunting
expedition since we went to elephant land, Tom. The electric rifles
will come in handy here."

"Yes, I expect they will. Now come on, Ned, and help me get a list
ready of the things we've got to take with us, and how they can best
be divided up."

Thick weather delayed the ship somewhat, so it was not until evening
of the next day that they made Montevideo, where part of the cargo
was to be discharged. As they would lay over there a day, the boys
decided to go ashore, which they did, wondering at the strange
sights in the old city.

Tom watched to see if the pretended minister would land, and
endeavor to force his acquaintance, but Mr. Hank Delby, to give him
his right name, was not in evidence. In fact he was turning over
scheme after scheme in his mind in order to hit on one that would
enable him to take advantage of the preparations which had been made
by his rival in the circus business.

"I've just got to get a line on where those giants are to be found,"
mused Mr. Delby, in the seclusion of his stateroom, "even if I have
to take some other disguise and follow that Swift crowd. That's what
I'll do. I'll put on some other disguise! I wonder what it had
better be?"

Tom and Ned, to say nothing of Mr. Damon and Eradicate, found much
to interest them in the capital of Uruguay, and they were rather
sorry, in a way, when it was time for them to leave.

"But we'll see plenty more strange sights," remarked Tom, as the
steamer started off for Buenos Ayres. "In fact our trip hasn't
really begun yet."

In due time they dropped anchor at the ancient city, and then began
a series of confused and busy times. In fact there was so much to
do, seeing to the unloading of their stuff, arranging for hotel
accommodations, seeing to hiring natives for the expedition into the
interior, and other details, that Tom and his friends had no time to
think anything about the pretended clergyman who had caused them a
little worry.

Eventually their belongings were stored in a safe place, and our
friends sat down to a good dinner in a hotel that, while it was in
far-off South America, yet was as good as many in New York, and, in
some respects the boys, and Mr. Damon, liked it better.

They found that the Spanish and Portuguese languages were the
principal ones spoken, together with a mixture of the native
tongues, and as both Ned and Tom, as well as Mr. Damon, had a
working knowledge of Spanish they got along fairly well. Some of the
hotel people could speak English.

Tom made inquiries and found that the best plan would be to
transport all his stuff by the regular route to Rosario, on the
Parana river in Argentina, and there he could make up his pack
train, hire native carriers, and start for the interior.

"Then we'll do that," he decided, "and take it easy until we get to
Rosario."

It took them the better part of a week to do this, but at last they
were on the ground, and felt for the first time that they were
really going into a wild and little explored country.

"Are you going to stick to the Parana river?" asked Ned.

"No," replied Tom, in the seclusion of their room, "if there are any
giants they will be found in some undiscovered, or at least little
traveled, part of the country. I don't believe they are in the
vicinity of the big rivers, or other travelers would have heard
about them, and, as far as we know, Mr. Preston's animal agent is
the only one who ever got a trace of them. We'll have to go into the
jungle on either side of the river."

"Bless my walking stick!" cried Mr. Damon. "Have we really to go
into the jungle, Tom?"

"I'm afraid we have, if we want to get any giants, and get a trace
of Mr. Poddington."

"All right, I'm game, but I do hope we won't run into a band of
fighting natives."

In Rosario it was learned that while the "war" was not regarded
seriously from the fact that the fighting tribes were far inland,
still it was going on with vigor, and large bands of natives were
roaming about, stealing each others' cattle and horses, burning
villages, and taking captives.

"I guess we're in for it," remarked Tom grimly. "But I'm not going
to back out now."

Unexpected complications, difficulties in the way of getting the
right kind of help, and a competent man to take charge of the native
drivers, so delayed our friends that it was nearly two weeks after
their arrival in Rosario before they could start for the interior.

Of course the object of the expedition was kept a secret, and Tom
let it be known that he and his friends were merely exploring, and
wanted rare plants, orchids, or anything in that line. The natives
were not very curious.

At last the day for the start came. The mules, which had been hired
as beasts of burdens, were loaded with boxes or bales on either
side, the natives were marshalled into line. Tom, Ned, and Mr.
Damon, each equipped with a rifle had a saddle animal to ride, and
Eradicate was similarly equipped, though for a weapon he depended on
a shotgun, which he said he understood better than the electric
rifles.

The aeroplane, divided into many small packages, the goods for
barter, their supplies, stores, ammunition, and the box of which Tom
took such care--all these were on the backs of the beasts of burden.
Some food was taken along, but for a time, at least, they could
depend on scattered towns or villages, or the forest game, for their
eating.

"Are we all ready?" called Tom, looking at the rather imposing
cavalcade of which he was the head.

"I guess so," replied Ned. "Let her go!"

"Bless my liver pad!" gasped Mr. Damon. "If we've got to start do
it, and let's get it over with Tom."

"All ready, Rad?" asked the colored man's young master.

"All ready, Massa Tom. But I mus' say dat I'd radder hab Boomerang
dan dish yeah animal what I'm ridin'."

"Oh, you'll do all right, Rad. Then, if we're all ready, forward
march!" cried Tom, and with calls to their animals, the drivers
started them off.

Hardly had they begun the advance than Ned, who had been narrowly
watching one of the natives, hurried up to Tom, and rapidly
whispered something to his chum.

"What?" cried Tom. "Armed with a six-shooter, is he? Well, we'll see
about that! Halt!" he cried in Spanish, and then he called San Pedro
the head mule driver, to him.


CHAPTER X

A WILD HORSE STAMPEDE


"Who is that man?" demanded Tom pointing to the one Ned had
indicated. Tom's chum had had a glimpse of a shining revolver in the
hip pocket of one of the mule drivers, and knowing that the simple
natives were not in the habit of carrying such weapons, the lad had
communicated his suspicions to Tom.

"What man, senor?" asked the head mule driver.

"That one!" and the young inventor again pointed toward him. And,
now that Tom looked a second time he saw that the man was not as
black as the other drivers--not an honest, dark-skinned black but
more of a sickly yellow, like a treacherous half-breed. "Who is he?"
asked Tom, for the man in question was just then tightening a girth
and could not hear him.

"I know not, senor. He come to me when I am hiring the others, and
he say he is a good driver. And so he is, I test him before I engage
him," went in San Pedro in Spanish. "He is one good driver."

"Why does he carry a revolver?"

"A revolver, senor? Santa Maria, I know not! I--"

"I'll find out," declared Tom determinedly. "Here," he called to the
offending one, who straightened up quickly. "Come here!"

The man came, with all the cringing servility of a born native, and
bowed low.

"Why have you a weapon?" asked the young inventor. "I gave orders
that none of the drivers were to carry them."

"A revolver, senor? I have none! I--"

"Rad, reach in his pocket!" cried Tom, and the colored man did so
with a promptness that the other could not frustrate. Eradicate held
aloft a large calibre, automatic weapon.

"What's that for?" asked Tom, virtuously angry.

"I--er--I--" and then, with a hopeless shrug of his shoulders the
man turned away.

"Give him his gun, and get another driver, San Pedro," directed our
hero, and with another shrug of his shoulders the man accepted the
revolver, and walked slowly off. Another driver was not hard to
engage, as several had been hanging about, hoping for employment at
the last minute, and one was quickly chosen.

"It's lucky you saw that gun, Ned," remarked Tom, when they were
actually under way again.

"Yes, I saw the sun shining on it as his coat flapped up. What was
his game, do you suppose?"

"Oh, he might be what they call a 'bad half-breed' down here. I
guess maybe he thought he could lord it over the other drivers when
we got out in the jungle, and maybe take some of their wages away
from them, or have things easier for himself."

"Bless my wishbone!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "You don't think he meant
to use it on us, Tom?"

"Why no? What makes you ask that?"

"Oh, I'm just nervous, I guess," replied the odd man.

But if Mr. Damon could have seen that same half-breed a little
later, as he slipped into a Rosario resort, with the yellow stain
washed from his face, the nervousness of the eccentric gentleman
would have increased. For the man who had been detected with the
revolver muttered to himself:

"Caught! Well, I'll fool 'em next time all right! I thought I could
get away with the pack train, and then it would have been easy to
turn the natives any way I wished, after I had found what I'm
looking for. But I had to go and carry that gun! I never thought
they'd spot it. Well, it's all up now, and if Waydell heard of it
he'd want to fire me. But I'll make good yet. I'll have to adopt
some other disguise, and see if I can't tag along behind."

All unconscious of the plotter they had left back of them, Tom and
his companions pushed on, rapidly leaving such signs of civilization
as were represented by small native towns and villages, and coming
nearer to the jungles and forests that lay between them and the
place where Tom was destined to be made a captive.

They were far enough away from the tropics to escape the intolerable
heat, and yet it was quite warm. In fact the weather was not at all
unpleasant, and, once they were started, all enjoyed the novelty of
the trip.

Tom planned to keep along the eastern shore of the Parana river,
until they reached the junction where the Salado joins it. Then he
decided that they would do better to cross the Parana and strike
into the big triangle made by that stream and its principal
tributary, heading north toward Bolivia.

"For it is in that little-explored part of South America that I
think the giants will be found." said Tom, as he talked it over with
Ned and Mr. Damon in the privacy of their tent, which had been set
up.

"But why should there be giants there any more than anywhere else?"
asked Ned.

"No particular reason," answered his chum. "But, according to the
last word Mr. Preston had from his agent, that was where he was
heading for, and that's where Zacatas, his native helper, said he
lost track of his master. I have a theory that the giants, if we
find any, will turn out to be a branch of a Patagonian tribe."

"Patagonians!" exclaimed Ned.

"Yes. You know the natives of the Southern part of Argentina grow to
a considerable size. Now Patagonia is a comparatively bleak and cold
country. What would prevent some of that big tribe centuries ago,
from having migrated to a warmer country, where life was more
favorable? After several generations they may have grown to be
giants."

"Bravo!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "It's a good theory, at any rate, Tom.
Though whether you can ever prove it is a question."

"Yes, and a big one," agreed the young inventor with a laugh.

For some days they traveled along over a comparatively flat country,
bordering the river. At times they would pass through small native
villages, where they would be able to get fresh meat, poultry and
other things that varied their bill of fare. Again there would be
long, lonely stretches of forest or jungle, through which it was
difficult to make their way. And, occasionally they would come to
fair-sized towns where their stay was made pleasant.

"I doan't see any ob dem oranges an' bananas droppin' inter mah
mouf, Massa Tom," complained Eradicate one day, after they had been
on the march for over a week.

"Have patience, Rad," advised Tom. "We'll come to them when we get a
little farther into the interior. First we'll come to the monkeys,
and the cocoanut trees."

"Hones' Massa Tom?"

"Surely."

And though it was pretty far south for the nimble simians, the next
day they did come upon a drove of them skipping about in the tall
palm trees.

"There they are, Rad! There they are!" cried Ned, as the chattering
of the monkeys filled the forest.

"By golly! So dey be! Heah's where I get some cocoanuts!"

Before anyone could stop him, Eradicate caught up a dead branch, and
threw it at a monkey. The chattering increased, and almost instantly
a shower of cocoanuts came crashing down, narrowly missing some of
our friends.

"Hold on, Rad! Hold on!" cried Tom. "Some of us will be hurt!"

Crack! came a cocoanut down on the skull of the colored man.

"Bless my court plaster! Someone's hurt now!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Hurt? Bless yo' heart, Massa Damon, it takes mo' dan dat t' hurt
dish yeah chile!" cried Eradicate with a grin. "Ah got a hard head,
Ah has, mighty hard head, an' de cocoanut ain't growed dat kin bust
it. Thanks, Mistah Monkey, thanks!" and with a laugh Eradicate
jumped off his mule, and began gathering up the nuts, while the
monkeys fled into the forest.

"Very much good to drink milk," said San Pedro, as he picked up a
half-ripe nut, and showed how to chop off the top with a big knife
and drain the slightly acid juice inside. "Very much good for
thirst."

"Let's try it," proposed Tom, and they all drank their fill, for
there were many cocoanuts, though it was rather an isolated grove of
them.

The monkeys became more numerous as they proceeded farther north
toward the equator, for it must be remembered that they had landed
south of it, and at times the little animals became a positive
nuisance.

Several days passed, and they crossed the Parana river and struck
into the almost unpenetrated tract of land where Tom hoped to find
the giants. As yet none of their escort dreamed of the object of the
expedition, and though Tom had caused scouts to be sent back over
their trail to learn if they were being followed there was no trace
of any one.

One day, after a night camp on the edge of a rather high table land,
they started across a fertile plain that was covered with a rich
growth of grass.

"Good grazing ground here," commented Ned.

"Yes," put in San Pedro. "Plenty much horse here pretty soon."

"Do the natives graze their herds of horses here?" asked Tom.

"No natives--wild horses," explained Pedro. "Plenty much, sometimes
too many they come. You see, maybe."

It was nearly noon, and Tom was considering stopping for dinner if
they could come to a good watering place, when Ned, who had ridden
slightly in advance, came galloping back as fast as his steed would
carry him.

"Look out! Look out!" he cried. "There's a stampede of 'em, and
they're headed right this way!"

"Stampede of what? Who's headed this way?" cried Tom. "A lot of
monkeys?"

"No, wild horses! Thousands of 'em! Hear 'em coming?"

In the silence that followed Ned's warning there could be heard a
dull, roaring, thundering sound, and the earth seemed to tremble.

"The young senor speaks truth! Wild horses are coming!" cried San
Pedro. "Get ready, senors! Have your weapons at hand, and perchance
we can turn the stampede aside."

"The rifles! The electric rifles, Ned--Mr. Damon! We've got to stop
them, or they'll trample us to death!" cried Tom.

As he spoke the thundering became louder, and then, looking across
the grassy plain, all saw a large troop of wild horses, with flying
manes and tails, headed directly toward them!


CHAPTER XI

CAUGHT IN A LIVING ROPE


"Quick! Peg out the mules!" cried San Pedro, after one look at the
onrushing horses. "Drive the stakes well down! Tie them fast and
then get behind those rocks! Lively!"

He cried his orders to the natives in Spanish, at the same time
motioning to Tom and Ned.

"Get off your mules!" he went on. "Peg them out. Peg out the others,
and then run for it!"

"Run for it?" repeated Tom, "Do you think I'm going to leave my
outfit in the midst of that stampede?" and he waved his hand toward
the thundering, galloping wild horses which were coming nearer every
moment. "Get out the electric rifles, and we'll turn that stampede.
I'm not going to run."

"Bless my saddle!" cried Mr. Damon. "This is awful! There must be a
thousand of them."

"Nearer two!" cried Ned, who was struggling to loosen the straps
that bound his electric rifle to the side of his mule. Already the
pack animals as well as those ridden by the members of the giant-hunting
party were showing signs of excitement. They seemed to want to join
the stampeding horses.

"Peg our animals out! Peg them out! Make them so they can't join the
others!" yelled San Pedro. "It's our only chance!"

"I believe he's right!" cried Mr. Damon. "Tom, if we wait until
those maddened brutes are up to us they'll fairly sweep ours along
with them, and there's no telling where we'll end up. I think we'd
better follow his advice and tie our mules as strongly as we can.
Then we can go over there by the rocks, and fire at the wild horses.
We may be able to turn them aside."

"Guess that's right," agreed the young inventor after a moment's
thought. "Come on, Ned. Peg out!"

"Peg out! Peg out!" yelled the natives, and then began a lively
scene. Pegging stakes were in readiness, and, attached to the bridle
of each mule was a strong, rawhide rope for tying to the stake. The
pegs were driven deeply into the ground and in a trice the animals
were made fast to them, though they snorted, and tried to pull away
as they heard the neighing of the stampeding animals and saw them
coming on with an irresistible rush.

"Hurry!" begged San Pedro, and hurry Tom, Ned and the others did.
Animal after animal was made fast--that is all but one and that bore
on its back two rather large but light boxes--the contents of the
case which Tom had rescued from the fire in the hold.

"What are you going to do with mule?" asked Ned, as he saw Tom begin
to lead the animal away, the others having been pegged out.

"I'm going to take him over to the rocks with me. I'm not going to
take any chances on this mule getting away with those things in the
boxes. Give me a hand here, and then we'll see what the electric
rifles will do against those horses."

But the one mule which Tom had elected to take with him seemed to
resent being separated from his companions. Bracing his feet well
apart, the animal stubbornly refused to move.

"Come on!" yelled Tom, pulling on the leading rope.

"Bless my porous plaster!" cried Mr. Damon. "You'd better hurry,
Tom! Those wild horses are almost on us!"

"I'm trying to hurry!" replied the young inventor, "but this mule
won't come. Ned, get behind and shove, will you?"

"Not much! I don't want to be kicked."

"Beat him! Strike him! Wait until I get a club!" yelled San Pedro.
"Come, Antonia, Selka, Balaka!" he cried, to several of the natives
who had already started for the sheltering rocks a short distance
away. "Beat the mule for Senor Swift!"

Ned joined Tom at the leading rope, and the two lads tried to pull
the animal along. Mr. Damon rushed over to lend his aid, and San
Pedro, catching up a long stick, was about to bring it down on the
mule's back. Meanwhile the stampeding animals were rushing nearer.

"Hold on dere, Massa Tom!" suddenly called Eradicate. "Yo'-all done
flustered dat mule, dat's what yo' done. Yo'-all am too much excited
'bout him. Be calm! Be calm!"

"Calm! With that bunch of wild animals bearing down on us?" shouted
Tom. "Let's see you be calm, Rad. Come on here, you obstinate
brute!" he cried, straining on the rope.

"Let me do it, Massa Tom. Let me do it," suggested the colored man
hurrying to the balky beast.

Then, as gently as if he was talking to a nervous child, and totally
oblivious to the danger of the approaching horses, Eradicate went up
to the mule's head, rubbed its ears until they pointed naturally
once more, murmured something to it, and then, taking the rope from
Ned and Tom, Eradicate led the mule along toward the rocks as easily
as if there had never been any question about going there.

"For the love of tripe! How did you do it?" asked Tom.

"Bless my peck of oats!" gasped Mr. Damon. "It's a good thing we had
Rad along!"

"All mules am alike," said the colored man with a grin. "An dish
yeah one ain't much different from mah Boomerang. I guess he's a
sorter cousin."

"Come on!" yelled San Pedro. "No time to lose. Make for the rocks!"

Tom, Ned and Mr. Damon sprinted then, and there was need to, for the
foremost of the galloping horses was not a hundred feet away. Then
came Eradicate, leading the mule that had at last consented to
hurry. The natives, with San Pedro, were already at the rocks,
waiting for the white hunters with the deadly electric rifles.

"If they stampede our mules we'll be in a pickle!" murmured Ned.

"I guess those ropes will hold unless they bite them through,"
remarked Tom.

"Yes, they sure hold," cried San Pedro, and indeed one had to shout
now to be heard above the thundering of the horses. Now the tethered
mules were lost to sight in the multitude of the other steeds all
about them.

"Come on, Ned!" yelled Tom, as he sighted his rifle. "Pump it into
them! We must turn them, or they may come over this way, and if they
do it will be all up with us."

"Shoot to kill?" asked Ned, as he drew back the firing lever of his
electric rifle.

"No, only a stunning charge. Those horses are valuable, and there's
no use killing them. All we want to do is to turn them aside."

"That's right," agreed Mr. Damon, forgetting in the excitement of
the moment to bless himself or anything. "We'll only stun them."

The rifles were quickly adjusted to send out a comparatively weak
charge of electricity, and then they were trained on the dense mass
of horses, while the three marksmen began working the firing levers.

At first, though horse after horse fell to the ground, stunned,
there was no appreciable effect on the thousands in the drove. The
poor mules were hidden from sight, though by reason of divisions in
the living stream of animals it could still be told where they were
tethered, and where the horses separated to go past them.
Fortunately the ropes and pegs held.

"Fire faster!" cried Tom. "Shoot across the front of them, and try
to turn them to one side."

From the rocks, behind which the natives and our friends crouched,
there came a steady stream of electric fire. Horse after horse went
down, stunned but not badly hurt, and in a few hours the beasts
would feel no ill effects. The firing was redoubled, and then there
came a break in the steady stream of horseflesh.

Some hesitated and sought to turn back. Others, behind, pressed them
on, and then, as if in fear at the unknown and unseen power that was
laying low animal after animal, the great body, of horses, suddenly
turned at right angles to their course and broke away. There were
now two bodies of the wild runaways, those that had passed the
tethered mules, and those that had swung off. The stampede had been
broken.

"That's the stuff!" cried Tom, jumping up from behind the rocks, and
swinging his hat. "We've turned them."

"And just in time, too," added Ned, as he joined his chum. Then all
the others leaped up, and the sight of the human beings completed
the scare. The stampeding animals swung off more than before, so
that they were nearly doubling back on their own trail. The others
thundered off, and the ground was strewn with unconscious though
unharmed animals.

"One mule gone!" cried San Pedro, hastily counting the still
tethered animals which were wildly tugging at their ropes.

"Never mind," spoke Tom, "it's the one with some of that damaged
bartering stuff I intended for trading. We can afford to lose that.
Rad, is your animal all right?"

"He suah am, Massa Tom. Dish yeah mule am almost as sensible as
Boomerang, ain't yo'?" and Eradicate patted the big animal he was
leading.

"I'll send a man down the trail, and maybe he can pick up the
missing one," said San Pedro, and while the other natives were
quieting the restless mules, one tall black man hastened in the wake
of the retreating horses.

He came back in an hour with the missing animal, that had broken its
tether rope and then, after running along with the wild horses had
evidently dropped out of the drove. Aside from the loss of a small
box, there had been no damage done, and the cavalcade was soon under
way once more, leaving the motionless horses to recover from the
effects of the electricity.

"Bless my saddle pad!" cried Mr. Damon. "I don't think I want to go
through anything like that again."

"Neither do I," agreed Tom. "We are well out of it."

"How much you take for one of them rifles?" asked San Pedro
admiringly.

"Not for sale," answered Tom with a laugh.

They camped in a fertile valley that night, and had a much-needed
rest. As yet Tom had made no inquiries as to the location of giant
land from any of the natives of the villages or towns through which
they passed. He knew as soon as he did begin asking questions, his
own men would hear of it, and they might be frightened if they knew
they were in an expedition the object of which was to capture some
of the tall men.

"We'll just go along for a few days more," said Tom, to Ned, "and
then, when I do spring my surprise, they'll be so far from home that
they won't dare turn back. In a few days I'll begin making
inquiries."

They traveled on for three days more, ever heading north, and coming
more into the warmer climate. The vegetation began to take on a more
tropical look, and finally they reached a region infested with many
wild beasts and monkeys, and with patches of dense jungle on either
side of the narrow trail. Fruits, tropical flowers and birds
abounded.

"I think we're getting there," remarked Tom, on the evening of the
third day after his talk with Ned. "San Pedro says there's quite a
village about half a day's march ahead, and I may learn something
there. I'll know by to-morrow whether we are on the right trail or
not."

The natives were getting supper, and Eradicate was busy with a meal
for the three white hunters. Mr. Damon had strolled down to the bank
of a little stream, and was looking at some small animals like foxes
that had come for their evening drink. They seemed quite fearless.

Suddenly something long, round and thick seemed to drop down out of
a tree close to the odd gentleman. So swift and noiseless was it
that Mr. Damon never noticed it. Then, like a flash something went
around him, and he let out a scream of terror.

San Pedro, who was nearest to him, saw and heard. The next instant
the black muleteer came rushing toward the camp, crying:

"He is caught in a rope! Mr. Damon is caught in a rope!"

"A rope!" repeated Ned, not understanding.

"Yes, a rope in a tree. Come quickly!"

Tom caught up one of the electric rifles and rushed forward. No
sooner had he set eyes on his friend, who was writhing about in the
folds of what looked like a big ship cable, then the young inventor
cried:

"A rope! Yes, a living rope! That's a big boa constrictor that has
Mr. Damon! Get a gun, Ned, and follow me! We must save him before he
is crushed to death!"

And the two lads rushed forward while the living rope drew its folds
tighter and tighter about the unfortunate man.


CHAPTER XII

A NATIVE BATTLE


"Bless my--!" but that was as far as poor Mr. Damon could get. The
breath was fairly squeezed out of him by the folds of the great
serpent that had dropped down out of the tree to crush him to death.
His head fell forward on his breast, and his arms were pinioned to
his sides.

"Quick, Ned!" cried Tom. "We must fire together! Be careful not to
hit Mr. Damon!"

"That's right. I'll take the snake on one side, Tom, and you on the
other!"

"No! Then we might hit each other. Come on my side. Aim for the
head, and throw in the highest charge. We want to kill, not stun!"

"Right!" gasped Ned, as he ran forward at his chum's side.

San Pedro, and the other natives, could do nothing. In the gathering
twilight, broken by the light of several campfires, they stood
helpless watching the two plucky youths advance to do battle with
the serpent. Eradicate had caught up a club, and had dashed forward
to do what he could, but Tom motioned him back.

"We can manage," spoke the young inventor.

Then he and Ned crept on with ready rifles. The snake raised its
ugly head and hissed, ceasing for a moment to constrict its coils
about the unfortunate man.

"Now's our chance--fire!" hoarsely whispered Ned.

It seemed as if the big snake heard, for, raising its head still
higher, it fairly glared at Ned and Tom. It was the very chance they
wanted, for they could now fire without the danger of hitting Mr.
Damon.

"Ready?" asked Tom of his chum in a low voice.

"Ready!" was the equally low answer.

It was necessary to kill the serpent at one shot, as to merely wound
it might mean that in its agony it would thresh about, and seriously
injure, if not kill, Mr. Damon.

"Fire!" called Tom in a whisper, and he and Ned pressed the triggers
of the electric rifles on the same instant.

There was a streak of bluish flame that cut like a sliver through
the gathering darkness, and then, as though a blight had fallen upon
it, the folds of the great snake relaxed, and Mr. Damon slipped to
the ground unconscious. The electric charges had gone fairly through
the head of the serpent and it had died instantly.

"Quick! Mr. Damon! We must get him away!" cried Tom. "He may be
dead!"

Together the chums sprang forward. The folds of the serpent had
scarcely ceased moving before the two youths snatched their friend
away. Dropping their rifles, they lifted him up to bear him to the
sleeping tent which had been erected.

"Liver pin!" suddenly ejaculated Mr. Damon. It was what he started
to say when the serpent had squeezed the breath out of him, and, on
regaining consciousness from his momentary faint, his brain carried
out the suggestion it had originally received.

"How are you?" cried Tom, nearly dropping Mr. Damon's legs in his
excitement, for he had hold of his feet, while Ned was at the head.

"Are you all right?" gasped Ned.

"Yes--I--I guess so. I--I feel as though I had been put through a
clothes wringer though. What happened?"

"A big snake dropped down out of a tree and grabbed you," answered
Tom.

"And then what? Put me down, boys, I guess I can walk."

"We shot it," said Ned modestly.

"Bless my insurance policy!" exclaimed the odd gentleman. "I--I
hardly know what to say. I'll say it later. You saved my life. Let
me see if any bones are broken."

None was, fortunately, and after staggering about a bit Mr. Damon
found that he could limp along. But he was very sore and bruised,
for, though the snake had squeezed him but for part of a minute,
that was long enough. A few seconds more and nearly every bone in
his body would have been crushed, for that is the manner in which a
constrictor snake kills its prey before devouring it.

"Santa Maria! The dear gentleman is not dead then?" cried San Pedro,
as the three approached the tents.

"Bless my name plate, no!" exclaimed Mr. Damon.

"Praise to all the saints! The brave young senors with their
wonderful guns saved him. Now you must rest and sleep."

"I feel as if that was all I wanted to do for a month," commented
Mr. Damon. His soreness and stiffness increased each minute, and he
was glad to get to bed, while the boys and Eradicate rubbed his
limbs with liniment. San Pedro knew of a leaf that grew in the
jungle which, when bruised, and made into poultices, had the
property of drawing out soreness. The next day he found some, and
Mr. Damon was wrapped up in bandages until he declared that he
looked like an Egyptian mummy.

But the leaf poultices did him good, and in a few days he was able
to be about, though he was still a trifle stiff. Of course the
cavalcade had to halt in the woods, but they did not mind this as
they had traveled well up to this time, and the enforced rest was
appreciated.

"Well, do you feel able to move along?" asked Tom of Mr. Damon one
morning, about a week later, for they were still in the "snake
camp," as they called it in memory of the big serpent.

"Oh, yes, I think so, Tom. Where are you going?"

"I want to push on to the next village. There I hope to get some
line on giant land, and really I ought to begin making inquiries
soon. San Pedro and the others are wondering what our object is, for
we haven't collected any specimens of either flowers or animals, or
the snake skin, and he thinks we are a sort of scientific
expedition."

"Well, let's travel then. I'm able."

So they started off once more along the jungle and forest trail. As
San Pedro had predicted, they came upon evidences of a native
village. Scattered huts, made of plastered mud and grass, with
thatched roofs of palm leaves, were met with, as they advanced, but
none of the places seemed to be inhabited, though rude gardens
around them showed that they had been the homes of natives up to
recently.

"No one seems to be at home," remarked Tom, when they had gone past
perhaps half a dozen of these lonely huts.

"I wonder what can be the matter?" asked Ned. "It looks as if they
had gone off in a hurry, too. Maybe there's been some sort of
epidemic."

"No, no sickness," said San Pedro. "Natives no sick."

"Bless my liver pill!" cried Mr. Damon, who was almost himself
again. "Then what is it?"

"Much fight, maybe."

"Much fight?" repeated Tom.

"Yes, tribes at war. Maybe natives go away so as not be killed."

"By Jove!" exclaimed the young inventor. "That's so. I forgot about
what Mr. Preston said. There's a native war going on around here.
Well, when we get to the town we can find out more about it, and
steer clear of the two armies, if we have to."

But as they went farther on, the evidences of a native war became
more pronounced. They passed several huts that had been burned, and
the native mule drivers began showing signs of fear.

"I don't like this," murmured Tom to his chum. "It looks bad."

"What can you do?"

"Nothing, I guess. We've got to keep on. No use turning back now.
Maybe the two rival forces have annihilated each other, and there
aren't any fighters left."

At that moment there arose a cry from some of the natives who, with
the mules and their burdens, had pressed on ahead.

"What's that?" exclaimed Tom.

"Something's happened!" gasped Ned.

"Bless my cartridge box!" cried Mr. Damon.

Success in this venture had led to new and more profitable fields--the
chewing-gum trade.

The rise to wealth of these two was the result of the careful plodding
of the German workman, who kept the "K. & H." products up to an
unvarying standard, joined with the other's energy and acumen in
marketing the output.

And this mutual relation had been disturbed by but one difference.
When Houghton was disposed to consider a college man for a vacancy,
Kaufmann had always been ready with his "practical man dot has
vorked hiss vay."

And each time, in respect to his wishes, Houghton had given in,
reflecting that perhaps (as Kaufmann said) it had been that he,
himself, was a good business man in spite of his college training,
not because of it; and, after all, college ideals had sunk since
_his_ time.

And the college applicant had been sent away.

Young Johann Kaufmann graduated from grammar school. Houghton
suggested high school and college.

"Vat? Nein!" said the elder Kaufmann.

"I show him how better the gum to make."
And he did. He put on an apron as of yore and started his son under
his personal supervision in the washing-room.

He took off his apron when Johann knew all about handling chicle
products, from importing-bag to tin-foil wrapper. Then he died.

And this year troublesome conditions had come on. The Consolidated
Pepsin people were cutting in severely. Orders for the great
specialty of K. & H.--"Old Tulu"--had fallen. Something had to be
done.

Houghton, now senior partner, had proposed, and young Kaufmann
agreed, that an advertising expert be secured.

But the agreement ended there.

For the first words of the junior partner showed Houghton that the
spirit of the father was still sitting at that desk opposite, and
smiling the same fat, phlegmatic smile at his supposed weakness for
"dose college bitzness."

They had compromised upon Mr. Pepper, secured from Simpkins' Practical
Advertising School.

But at the end of six months, Pepper's so-called "follow-up campaign"
had failed to meet materially the steady inroads of the western
men. He had explained that it was the result of his need of an
assistant. It was determined to give him one.

Then, one night as he sat in his library, John Houghton had looked
into a pair of blue eyes and promised to "give Tom Brainard the
chance."

In consequence he had had his hair tousled, been given a resounding
kiss and a crushing hug from the young lady on his knees.

For Dorothy Houghton, despite her nineteen years, still claimed that
privilege from her father.

In that way, for the first time, a college man had come into the
employ of K. & H., and been made the assistant of Mr. Pepper at the
salary he demanded--"any old thing to start the ball rolling."

And now had come the information that the senior partner's long-desired
experiment had ended in failure.

Young Kaufmann turned to his work with the air of one who has given
a child its own way and seen it come to grief.

"I--I suppose," Houghton said slowly, "we'll have to let Brainard go."

And then a peculiar thing happened. Through the open window, floating
in the summer air, he seemed to see a familiar figure. It was dressed
in fluffy white, and carried a parasol over its shoulders.

It fluttered calmly in, seated itself on the sill, and gazed at him
with blue eyes that were serious, reproachful.

"Daddy!" it said, and it brushed away a wisp of hair by its ear--just
as another one, long ago, had used to.

"Daddy!" it faltered. "Why did I ask you to give him the place,
if it wasn't because--because----"
The spell was broken by Kaufmann's voice.

"Whatefer you do, I am sooted," he was saying. It might have been his
father. "But if w'at Pepper says about Brainard----"
The senior partner straightened up and pushed a button. "Yes. But We
haven't heard what Brainard says about Pepper."
Several moments later Tom Brainard entered.

Medium-sized and muscular, he was dressed in a loose-fitting suit that
by its very cut told his training.

He stood between them as Mr. Pepper had done, but there was nothing
of the other's ingratiating deference in his level look.

"Sit down, Brainard," said Houghton.

The newcomer did so, and the senior partner marked an attitude of
laziness and indifference.

Houghton became stern. "Brainard," he began, "I gave you a chance with
us because----" He paused.

The other colored. "I had hoped to make good without that."
"But this morning Mr. Pepper----"
"Said we couldn't get along together.

That's true."

"Ah! You admit!" It was Kaufmann.

"Yes."
There was a pause. Then Houghton spoke.

"I can't tell you how much this disappoints me, Brainard.

The fact is, for years I have tried to shut my eyes to the development
of college training. In my time there was not the call for practicality
that there is today. Yet it seems to me that the training in our
colleges has grown less and less practical. Why do the colleges turn
out men who spend their time in personal gossip over sport or
trivialities?"

"You remember that the King of Spain--or was it Cambodia--puzzled his
wise men for a year as to why a fish, when dropped into a full
pail of water, didn't make it overflow."

"What's that got to do with it?"
"Because I must answer as the king did: It's not so--the pail _does_
overflow. They hadn't thought to try it."
"You mean that I am wrong."

"Yes. Are you sure your gossips were 'college men'?"
"Ah!" Houghton made a gesture to his partner, who was about to
speak.
"Then let us commence at the root of the matter. Mr. Kaufmann and I
have often discussed the subject.

In this case you are the one who has 'tried it.' Suppose you explain
our mistake."

"I'd be glad to do that," said Brainard, "because I've heard a lot of
that talk."
"Well?"

"Well--of course when I say 'college man' I mean college graduate."

"Why?"
"If a kitten crawls into an oven, is it a biscuit?"
There was an earnestness that robbed the question of any
flippancy.

Houghton laughed. "No!"
"If a dub goes into college and gets flunked out in a month, is he a
college man?"
"Hardly."

"Oh, but he calls himself one.

He goes to Podunk all decorated up in geraniums and the rest
of his life is a 'college man.' I'm not talking about him or the man
who comes to college to learn to mix cocktails--inside. He may
last to the junior year.

I'm talking about the graduate--they're only about a tenth of the
college. But they're the finished product. Mr. Kaufmann, you wouldn't
try to sell gum that had only gone as far as the rolling-room,
would you?"

"W'at--me?"
"Would you?"

"No." The junior partner was puzzled.

"That's because you want it to go through all the processes. Well,
let's talk only about the boy who has gone all the way through the
man factory."

Houghton nodded. "That's fair."

"The trouble is, people don't do that. They persist in butting into
the college world, jerking out some sophomore celebration,
and saying, 'What use is this silly thing in the real world?'"
"Well, aren't they right?"
"No. That's just the point. The college world is a mimic world--and
your lifetime is just four years.

The sophomore celebration is a practical thing there; perhaps it's
teaching loyalty--that generally comes first.
That's your college rolling-room. But the graduate--he's learned to
do _something_ well. I never knew a college man who wasn't at least
responsible."
"But----"

"But here's the trouble: after selecting say two hundred fellows out
of an entering bunch of six hundred, and developing the thing each
is best fitted for, _father_ steps in and the boy who would have
made a first-class professor is put into business and blamed for
being impractical.

The fellow who has been handling thousands of dollars in college
management and running twenty assistants--the man who could have
taken the place--has no father to give him the boost necessary, and
the other man's failure has queered his chances.

He has to go to work as a mere clerk under a man--excuse me, I don't
want to do any knocking."

"You think the whole trouble is caused by misdirected nepotism."

"Yes."
"Ah----" It was young Kaufmann again.

"But you said that you were trained in advertising on your college
paper."
"Yes--and I was going to tell you today, if Mr. Pepper hadn't,
that the money you're paying for me is utterly wasted."
"Ah!"

"Yes. I can't look in the face of a hungry designer and beat him
down to within a dollar of the cost of materials. And--and--my
suggestions upon broader lines don't seem to cause much hooray."

"Well--" the junior partner sat up--"since you admit----" He paused
for his partner to speak the words of discharge.

But Houghton was looking quizzically at the college man. "What
was your idea as to broader lines?"
Brainard hesitated.

"Well, it seemed to me that Pepper is trying to do two things
that are antagonistic: be _'élite'_ and sell chewing-gum. The fact
is that _élite_ people don't chew gum.

I'd like to know how the statement, 'Old Tulu--Best by Test,' will
make a kid on the corner with a cent in his fist have an attack of
mouth-watering."

Kaufmann roused himself. "It is true. Our gum _is_ the best."
"I'm not disputing that, but still it's _gum_.

If you're trying to increase the vulgar habit of gum-chewing--well--you
can't do it by advertising the firm's financial standing, its
age, or the purity of its output. That would do for an insurance
company or a bank--but _gum_! Who cares for purity! All they want to
know is if it _schmeckt gut_." This last with a humorous glance at
Kaufmann.

The latter was scowling. Brainard was touching a tender spot.

"Well, what would you do?"

Brainard flushed. He felt the tone of sarcasm in the elder man's
voice.
He tightened his lips.

"At least, I'd change the name of the gum!"
"Change the name!" Kaufmann was horrified.

"Well, nobody wants 'Old Tulu.' They want 'New Tulu' or 'Fresh Tasty Tulu.'
At least, something to appeal to the imagination of
Sadie-at-the-ribbon-counter."

"Oh!" observed Houghton. "And the name you suggest?"
"Well,--say something like 'Lulu Tulu.'"

"Gott!" Kaufmann struck the desk a blow with his fist. It was an
insult to his father's memory.

Brainard rose. "I'm sorry," he said, "if I have offended. To save
you any further bother, I'll just cut it out after Saturday. I--thank
you for the chance"--he smiled a little ruefully--"the chance you
have given me. Good day, gentlemen."
He turned on his heel and left the office

.

* * * * *
As John Houghton was driven home that night, he became suddenly conscious
that he would soon meet the apparition of the afternoon in the
flesh.

And though, of course, there was no need, he found himself rehearsing
the justification of his position.

"Lulu Tulu" indeed!

Imagine the smile that would have illumined the faces at the club on
such an announcement.

The impudence of the boy to have suggested it to him--him who
had so often held forth upon the value of conservatism in
business! And he remembered with pride the speaker who had once
said, "It is such solid vertebrae as Mr. Houghton that form the
backbone of our business world."

That speaker had been Bender, of the New York Dynamo Company.

Poor Bender! The Western Electric Construction had got him after
all.

This line of thought caused Houghton to reach in his pocket and
produce a letter.

He went over the significant part again.

"Our Mr. Byrnes reports the clinching of the subway vending-machine
contract," it read, "and this, together with our other business,
will give us over half of the New York trade. With this statement
before us, we feel that we can make a winning fight if you still
refuse to consider our terms. In view of recent developments, we
cannot repeat our former offer but if you will consider sixty-seven
as a figure----" 
Sixty-seven!

And a year before he would not have taken one hundred and ten! In
the bitterness of the moment, he wondered if he, too, would finally
go the way that Bender had.

And then, as the butler swung the door back, he was recalled to the
matter of Tom Brainard by the sight of a familiar figure that
floated toward him as airily as had its astral self that
afternoon.

He kissed her and went to his study. Just before dinner was not a time
to discuss such things. But later, as he looked across the
candelabra at his daughter, all smiles and happiness in that seat
that had been her mother's, he regretted that he had not, for----

"Daddy," Dorothy was saying, "I got such a funny note from Tom this
afternoon.

He says there has been a change at the office and that you will explain."

"Yes."

"Well----?" She paused eagerly. "It's something awfully good--I
know."
Her father frowned and caught her eye. "Later," he said significantly.

The girl read the tone, and the gaiety of the moment before was
gone.

After that they ate in silence.

One cigar--two cigars had been smoked when she stole into the
library.

Since coffee (whether from design or chance he never knew), she had
rearranged her hair. Now it was low on her neck in a fashion of
long ago, with a single curl that strayed over a white shoulder
to her bosom.

She knelt at his side without a word.

He looked down at her.

Somehow he had never seen her like this before--that curious womanly
expression.

"Tell me," was all she said.

And, as he told Tom Brainard's failure to fit in, he watched
her closely. "I'm sorry," he concluded.

"So am I, daddy," she returned steadily; "because I am going to marry
him."
"What?"

"Oh, you knew--you must have," she said, "when I asked you to give
him the chance."
The father was silent.

In fancy he again heard Dolly Warner promising, against her parents'
advice, to wait for her John to "get on in the world."
"Well?" he asked.

"Do you think you've given him a fair chance?"
He was restored to his usual poise. "I suppose he complained that
I didn't."

Dorothy's eyes went wide. "No, he said that after I had heard the
news from you, he would leave everything to me."
"Oh!"

"But, father, I don't think you _have_ been fair. Tom is right. _I_
don't chew gum, do I?"
"Well----" He was indignant. Then he stopped thoughtfully. "No."
"But Mary downstairs does. She wouldn't be offended at 'Lulu
Tulu.' I dare say she'd think it 'just grand.'"
He returned no answer.

"Come, daddy," she went on. "New York has grown lots--even since
I was little. And--and some people get behind the times. They think
they're being dignified when it's only that they're antiquated."

He looked shrewdly at her. "I never heard you talk like that
before.

Where did you----"
"Tom said that a week ago," she admitted.

"And he said, too, that he could double the results if he only had
full swing. Instead, you admit he's a mere clerk for that horrid
Pepper. Oh, daddy, daddy," she pleaded. "Give him a chance." Then her
voice went low again. "I'm going to marry him anyway," she said,
"and you don't want this between.

If he fails, I'll stand the loss from what mother left me. Give him
full swing--a real chance, daddy!

He's going to be--_your son_."
John Houghton looked into the earnest girlish face. He wound the
curl about his finger. "Kaufmann has always wanted to visit the
Fatherland," he said irrelevantly.

She gave a quick, eager look. "And that Pepper could go on a
vacation."
* * * * *
Days drag very slowly at a summer resort, especially when one has
promised not to write to him.

But Dorothy's father had kept his word, so she could but do the same.
Behind, in the sweltering city, in full charge for six weeks was Tom
Brainard. His authority included permission to invent and use any
new labels or trade-marks he saw fit.

The girl at the seashore, however, was also busy--amusing her father
that he might not give too much time to thinking.

And then, when three of the six weeks had passed, came the accident
to the motor car.

She was told that with rest and no worries, her father would recover
in a week or two.

She cheerfully fitted into the rôle of assistant to the nurse in
charge, and, as soon as the doctor allowed, prepared to read his mail
to him as he lay, eyes and head bandaged.

But as she opened and glanced over the accumulated letters, she
suddenly went pale.

She read one in particular from end to end, and then, with a scared,
furtive look at the bandaged figure, slipped it into a pocket.

Later, when her father had finished dictating to her, she answered
the concealed letter herself.

Again the days drifted. The bandages were removed; but still the
girl continued to scan the mail.

Her vigilance was rewarded. She flushed over a second letter which,
with one in a worn envelope, she took to her father.

He saw the careworn expression. "My little girl has been overworking,"
he said.

She held out the worn letter. "I've had this for some time--but--but
I waited for something more, and here it is." She showed the
other.

He took the first, and when he had finished, his hand was trembling.

"I regret to report that things are in a chaos," it ran.

"All of the regular advertising has been withdrawn. The usual
entertainment money for salesmen classed under this head has been
stopped. In consequence, our city trade has tumbled fearfully--and
you know how bad it was before. The worst news I have to offer
is in regard to Mr. Brainard personally. Our detective reports
that his time outside is spent in most questionable company.

He has been seen drinking at roof-gardens with a certain dissipated
pugilist named Little Sullivan, and was traced with this man to
the apartment of a song-and-dance woman named Violette. He seems
to be spending money extravagantly and visits certain bohemian
quarters in the vicinity of Jones Street, where he puts in his time
with disreputable-looking men.

I beg leave to advise immediate action.--Mowbray."
"My God!" groaned Houghton. This explained that derisive offer of
fifty-one from Consolidated Pepsin.

"And you kept this from me?"
"They said not to worry you," she said. "I--I've had enough for
two.

Besides, I answered it."
"You did! What----?"

"I told them to wait a little longer."
The father groaned again.

"I just _had_ to, daddy; and then today this letter came."
He seized it eagerly. It read: "You were right about waiting. Suspend
all action."

"What does it mean?" she asked.

"We'll find out tomorrow," he answered grimly.

The 4:30 train gave John Houghton just time to reach the office
before it closed. Dorothy went home. Her father, roused by the evil
news of the day before, had impressed her with all that it might
mean in a material way.

As though that mattered!--as though anything could hurt her more!
She would have been willing to go with Tom Brainard in rags before--but
now!

She sat by the telephone with clenched fists, her traveling veil
still pushed up on her hat, the lines that had come into her face
during the past week deepening with the dusk.

At last--a long, sharp ring!
"Yes--father--not dine at home--meet you at the Yolland--a guest.

Yes--but about Tom--what?

--7:30--But about Tom, daddy? Good-by?!! But, daddy!!!"
It was no use. He had hung up. She called feverishly for the office,
but the reply was, "They do not answer." Mechanically she went up
to her room. "The blue mousseline, Susan," she said.
As the maid laid it out, she walked the floor. Through the window
the park lay green and inviting. She longed to fly to the cool grass
and run--and run----
From below came the loud, rasping notes of a street-piano that, in
some incomprehensible fashion, had wandered to the deserted row of
houses.
The noise, for all that there was a pleasing swing to the air,
irritated her. She threw the man a quarter. "Go away," she waved.
At last the maid said her mistress was ready, and Dorothy, without
questioning the decision, allowed herself to be put into the
brougham.
The drive seemed hours long, and then--her father's face told her
nothing. Without a word, he led her to a reception-room. As they
entered, a figure sprang to meet them.
For a moment she hesitated. Then, "Tom!" she cried, and caught his
hand.
He saw the whiteness of her face, and all the yearnings of their
separation matched it upon his.

"Dorothy!" he faltered.
Her father interrupted. "Tom is to explain how he has quadrupled
our business in the last week."
A sudden weakness seized her. She followed them unsteadily. Seated
at a table, however, she was able to smile again. At that moment,
the orchestra, striking up, suddenly caught her
attention.
"Tum--tum-tum--tum-tum--tum"--that haunting, swinging melody of the
street-piano.

"What tune is that?" she asked.
Brainard smiled. "_That_ is a tune that has suddenly become popular.
Any night you may see hundreds of East Side children dancing on the
asphalt and singing it."
"Yes," she said. "I heard it on a street-piano."
"It's called," he went on, '"My Lulu Tulu Girl.' All the grinders
have it. Billy Tompkins, Noughty-three, who lives in the Jones
Street social settlement, worked that for me. Those dagoes worship
him--saved a kid's life or something."
A light came into John Houghton's eyes.
"That's part of the scheme. Aspwell wrote the song. I found him
down in bohemia working on an opera. But, for the sake of old days
in the senior extravaganza, he turned off 'My Lulu Tulu Girl.'Before our hero had a chance to reply the flap of his tent was
pulled back, and a head was thrust in. But such a head! It was
enormous! A head covered with a thick growth of tawny hair, and a
face almost hidden in a big tawny, bushy beard. Then an arm was
thrust in--an arm that terminated in a brawny fist that clasped a
great club. There was no mistaking the object that gazed in on the
two youths. It was a gigantic man--a man almost twice the size of
any Tom had ever seen. And then our hero knew that he had reached
the end of his quest.

"A giant!" gasped Tom. "Ned! Ned, we're in the big men's country,
and we didn't know it!"

"I--I guess you're right, Tom!"

The giant started at the sounds of their voices, and then his face
breaking into a broad grin, that showed a great mouth filled with
white teeth, he called to them in an unknown tongue and in a voice
that seemed to fairly shake the frail tent.


CHAPTER XV

IN THE "PALACE" OF THE KING


For a few moments after their first ejaculations neither Tom nor Ned
knew what to do. The giant continued to gaze at them, with the same
good-natured grin on his face. Possibly he was amused at the small
size of the persons in the tent. Then Tom spoke.

"He doesn't look as if he would bite, Ned."

"No, he seems harmless enough. Let's get up, and see what happens. I
wonder if there are any more of them? They must have come out on an
early hunt, and stumbled upon our camp."

At this moment there arose a cry from Mr. Damon's tent.

"Bless my burglar alarm!" shouted the odd gentleman. "Tom--Ned--am I
dreaming? There's a man here as big as a mountain. Tom! Ned!"

"It's all right, Mr. Damon!" called Tom. "We're among the giants all
right. They won't hurt you."

"Fo' de good land ob massy!" screamed Eradicate, a second later, and
then they knew that he, too, had seen one of the big men. "Fo' de
lub ob pork chops! Am dis de Angel Gabriel? Listen to de blowin' ob
de trump! Oh, please good Massa Angel Gabriel, I ain't nebber done
nuffin! I's jest po' ol' Eradicate Sampson, an' I got a mule
Boomerang, and' dat's all I got. Please good Mr. Angel--"

"Dry up, Rad!" yelled Tom. "It's only one of the giants. Come on out
of your tent and get breakfast. We're on the borders of giant land,
evidently, and they seem as harmless as ordinary men. Get up,
everybody."

As Tom spoke he rose from the rubber blanket on which he slept. Ned
did the same, and the giant slowly pulled his head out from the
tent. Then the two youths went outside. A strange sight met their
gaze.

There were about ten natives standing in the camp--veritable giants,
big men in every way. The young inventor had once seen a giant in a
circus, and, allowing for shoes with very thick soles which the big
man wore, his height was a little over seven feet. But these South
American giants seemed more than a foot higher than that, none of
those who had stumbled upon the camp being less than eight feet.

"And I believe there must be bigger ones in their land, wherever
that is," said Tom. Nor were these giants tall and thin, as was the
one Tom had seen, but stout, and well proportioned. They were
savages, that was evident, but the curious part of it was that they
were almost white, and looked much like the pictures of the old
Norsemen.

But, best of all, they seemed good-natured, for they were
continually laughing or smiling, and though they looked with wonder
on the pile of boxes and bales, and on the four travelers, they
seemed more bewildered and amused, than vindictive that their
country should have been invaded. Evidently the fears of the natives
who had told Tom about the giants had been unfounded.

By this time Mr. Damon and Eradicate had come from their tents, and
were gazing with startled eyes at the giants who surrounded them.

"Bless my walking stick!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Is it possible?"

"Yes, we've arrived!" cried Tom. "Now to see what happens. I wonder
if they'll take us to their village, and I wonder if I can get one
of these giants for Mr. Preston's circus?"

"You certainly can't unless he wants to come," declared Ned. "You'd
have a hard tussle trying to carry one of these fellows away against
his will, Tom."

"I sure would. I'll have to make inducements. Well, I wonder what is
best to do?"

The giant who had looked in the tent of Ned and Tom, and who
appeared to be the leader of the party, now spoke in his big,
booming voice. He seemed to be asking Tom a question, but the young
inventor could not understand the language. Tom replied in Spanish,
giving a short account of why he and his companions had come to the
country, but the giant shook his head. Then Mr. Damon, who knew
several languages, tried all of them--but it was of no use.

"We've got to go back to signs," declared Tom, and then, as best he
could, he indicated that he and the others had come from afar to
seek the giants. He doubted whether he was understood, and he
decided to wait until later to try and make them acquainted with the
fact that he wanted one of them to come back with him.

The head giant nodded, showing that at least he understood
something, and then spoke to his companions. They conversed in their
loud voices for some time, and then motioned to the pack animals.

"I guess they want us to come along," said Torn, "but let's have
breakfast first. Rad, get things going. Maybe the giants will have
some coffee and condensed milk, though they'll have to take about
ten cupsful to make them think they've had anything. Make a lot of
coffee, Rad."

"But good land a massy, dey'll eat up eberyt'ing we got, Massa Tom,"
objected the colored man.

"Can't help it, Rad. They're our guests and we've got to be polite,"
replied the youth. "It isn't every day that we have giants to
breakfast."

The big men watched curiously while Rad built a fire, and when the
colored man was trying to break a tough stick of wood with the axe,
one of the giants picked up the fagot and snapped it in his fingers
as easily as though it were a twig, though the stick was as thick as
Tom's arm.

"Some strength there," murmured Ned to his chum admiringly.

"Yes, if they took a notion to go on a rampage we'd have trouble.
But they seem kind and gentle."

Indeed the giants did, and they liked the coffee which they tasted
rather gingerly at first. After their first sip they wanted more,
made as sweet as possible, and they laughed and talked among
themselves while Eradicate boiled pot after pot.

"Dey suah will eat us out of house an' home, Massa Tom," he wailed.

"Never mind, Rad. They will feed us well when we get to their town."

Then the pack animals were laden with their burdens. This was always
a task, but for the giants it was child's play. With one hand they
would lift a box or bale that used to tax the combined strength of
the four travelers, and soon the steers, horses and mules were ready
to proceed. The giants went on ahead, to show the way, the first
one, who seemed to be called "Oom," for that was the way his
companions addressed him, walked beside Tom, who rode on a mule. In
fact the giant had to walk slowly, so as not to get ahead of the
animal. Oom tried to talk to Tom, but it was hard work to pick out
the signs that meant something, and so neither gained much
information.

Tom did gather, however, that the giants were out on an early hunt
when they had discovered our friends, and their chief town lay about
half a day's journey off in the jungle. The path along which they
proceeded, was better than the forest trails, and showed signs of
being frequently used.

"It doesn't seem possible that we are really among giants, Tom,"
spoke Ned, as they rode along. "I hardly believed there were
giants."

"There always have been giants," declared the young inventor. "I
read about them in an encyclopedia before I started on this trip. Of
course there's lots of wild stories about giants, but there have
really been some very big men. Take the skeleton in the museum of
Trinity College, Dublin. It is eight feet and a half in height, and
the living man must have even taller. There was a giant named
O'Brien, and his skeleton is in the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of England--that one is eight feet two inches high, while
there are reliable records to show that, when living, O'Brien was
two inches taller than that. In fact, according to the books, there
have been a number of giants nine feet high."

"Then these chaps aren't so wonderful," replied Ned.

"Oh, we haven't seen them all yet. We may find some bigger than
these fellows, though any one of these would be a prize for a
museum. Not a one is less than eight feet, and if we could get one
say ten feet--that WOULD be a find."

"Rather an awkward one," commented Ned.

It did not seem possible that they were really in giant land, yet
such was the fact. Of course the country itself was no different
from any other part of the jungle, for merely because big men lived
in it did not make the trees or plants any larger.

"I tell you how I account for it," said Tom, as they traveled on.
"These men originally belonged to a race of people noted for their
great size. Then they must have lived under favorable conditions,
had plenty of flesh and bone-forming food, and after several
generations they gradually grew larger. You know that by feeding the
right kind of food to animals you can make them bigger, while if
they get the wrong kind they are runts, or dwarfs."

"Oh, yes; that's a well-known fact," chimed in Mr. Damon.

"Then why not with human beings?" went on Tom. "There's nothing
wonderful in this."

"No, but it will be wonderful if we get away with one of these
giants," spoke Ned grimly.

Further talk was interrupted by a sudden shouting on the part of the
big men. Oom made some rapid motions to Tom, and a little later they
emerged from the woods upon a large, grassy plain, on the other side
of which could be seen a cluster of big grass and mud huts.

"There is the city of the giants!" cried Tom, and so it proved, a
little later, when they got to it.

Now there was nothing remarkable about this city or native town. It
was just like any other in the wilder parts of South America or
Africa. There was a central place, where, doubtless, the natives
gathered on market days, and from this the huts of the inhabitants
stretched out in irregular lines, like streets. Off to one side of
the "market square," as Tom called it, was a large hut, surrounded
by several smaller ones, and from the manner in which it was laid
out, and decorated, it was evident that this was the "palace" of the
king, or chief ruler.

"Say, look at that fellow!" cried Ned, pointing to a giant who was
just entering the "palace" as Tom dubbed the big hut. "He LOOKS
eleven feet if he's an inch."

"I believe you!" cried Tom. "Say, I wonder how big the king is?"

"I don't know, but he must be a top-notcher. Much history she had
also read, both sacred and profane; "the whole of Shakspeare's,
Kotzebue's, and Goldsmith's dramatic works;" (oddly consorted names!)

"and many of the popular novels and romances of the day:" of the
latter, she threw aside at once those which at first sight appeared
worthless. This girl is said to have observed every thing:
"frequently she has been known to watch the storm, and the
retiring clouds, and the rainbow, and the setting sun, for
hours."
An English reader is not prepared to hear of distress arising from
straitened circumstances in America--the land of promise, where
there is room enough for all, and employment for every body.

Yet even in that new country, man, it appears, is born not only to
those ills which flesh is heir to, but to those which are entailed
upon him by the institutions of society.

Lucretia's mother was confined by illness to her room and bed for
many months; and this child, then about twelve years old, instead
of profiting under her mother's care, had in a certain degree to
supply her place in the business of the family, and to attend, which
she did dutifully and devotedly, to her sick bed.

At this time, a gentleman who had heard much of her verses, and
expressed a wish to see some of them, was so much gratified on
perusing them, that he sent her a complimentary note, enclosing a
bank-bill for twenty dollars.

The girl's first joyful thought was that she had now the means,
which she had so often longed for, of increasing her little stock
of books; but, looking towards the sick bed, tears came in her eyes,
and she instantly put the bill into her father's hands, saying,
"Take it, father; it will buy many comforts for mother; I can do
without the books."

There were friends, as they are called, who remonstrated with her
parents on the course they were pursuing in her education, and
advised that she should be deprived of books, pen, ink, and paper,
and rigorously confined to domestic concerns. Her parents loved
her both too wisely and too well to be guided by such counsellors,
and they anxiously kept the advice secret from Lucretia, lest it
should wound her feelings--perhaps, also, lest it should give her,
as it properly might, a rooted dislike to these misjudging and
unfeeling persons.

But she discovered it by accident, and without declaring any such
intention, she gave up her pen and her books, and applied herself
exclusively to household business, for several months, till her body
as well as her spirits failed.

She became emaciated, her countenance bore marks of deep dejection,
and often, while actively employed in domestic duties, she could
neither restrain nor conceal her tears.

The mother seems to have been slower in perceiving this than she would
have been had it not been for her own state of confinement; she
noticed it at length, and said, "Lucretia, it is a long time since
you have written any thing."

The girl then burst into tears, and replied, "O mother, I have given
that up long ago."

"But why?" said her mother.

After much emotion, she answered, "I am convinced from what my
friends have said, and from what I see, that I have done wrong in
pursuing the course I have.
On either side
of him, upon rude benches covered with soft jaguar skins, sat two
men, evidently his brothers, for they looked much like the king. One
was called Tola and the other Koku, for the ruler addressed them
from time to time, and seemed to be asking their advice.

"They're making up their minds what to do with us," murmured Tom. "I
only hope they let us stay long enough to learn the language, and
then I can make an offer to take one back to the United States with
me."

"Jove! Wouldn't it be great if you could get the king!" exclaimed
Ned.

"Oh, that's too much, but I'd like one of his brothers. They're each
a good nine feet tall, and they must be as strong as horses."

In contrast to some giants of history, whose only claim to notoriety
lay in their height, these giants were very powerful. Many giants
have flabby muscles, but these of South America were like athletes.
Tom realized this when there suddenly entered the audience chamber a
youth of about our hero's age, but fully seven feet tall, and very
big. He was evidently the king's son, for he wore a jaguar skin,
which seemed to be a badge of royalty. He had seemingly entered
without permission, to see the curious strangers, for the king spoke
quickly to him, and then to Tola, who with a friendly grin on his
big face lifted the lad with one hand and deposited him in a room
that opened out of the big chamber.

"Did you see that!" cried Ned. "He lifted him as easily as you or I
would a cat, and I'll bet that fellow weighed close to four hundred
pounds, Tom."

"I should say so! It's great!"

The audience was now at an end, and Tom thought it was about time to
make some sort of a present to the king to get on good terms with
him. He looked out of the palace hut and saw that their pack animals
were close at hand. Nearby was one that had on its back a box
containing a phonograph and some records.

Making signs that he wanted to bring in some of his baggage, Tom
stepped out of the hut, telling his friends to wait for him. The
king and the other giants watched the lad curiously, but did not
endeavor to stop him.

"I'm going to give him a little music," went on the young inventor
as he adjusted the phonograph, and slipped in a record of a lively
dance air. His motions were curiously watched, and when the
phonograph started and there was a whirr of the mechanism, some of
the giants who had crowded into the king's audience chamber, showed
a disposition to run. But a word of command from their ruler stopped
them.

Suddenly the music started and, coming forth as it did from the
phonograph horn, in the midst of that hut, in which stood the
silence-awed giants, it was like a bolt of lightning from the clear
sky.

At first the king and all the others seemed struck dumb, and then
there arose a mighty shout, and one word was repeated over and over
again. It sounded like "Chackalok! Chackalok!" and later Tom learned
that it meant wizard, magician or something like that.

Shout after shout rent the air, and was taken up by those outside,
for through the open door the strains of music floated. The giants
seemed immensely pleased, after their first fright, and suddenly the
king, coming down from his throne, stood with his big ear as nearly
inside the horn as he could get it.

A great grin spread over his face and then, approaching Tom, he
leaned over, touched him once on the forehead, and uttered a word.
At this sign of royal favor the other giants at once bowed to Tom.

"Say," cried Ned, "you've got his number all right! You're one of
the royal family now, Tom."

"It looks like it. Well, I'm glad of it, for I want to be on
friendly terms with His Royal Highness."

Once more the king addressed Tom, and the head hunter, motioning to
Tom and his friends, led them out of the palace, and to a large hut
not far off. This, he made himself understood by signs, was to be
their resting place, and truly it was not a bad home, for it was
well made. It had simple furniture in it, low couches covered with
skins, stools, and there were several rooms to it.

Calling in authorative tones to his fellow hunters, Tom had them
take the packs off the beasts of burdens and soon the boxes, bales
and packages were carried into the big hut, which was destined to be
the abiding place of our friends for some time. The animals were
then led away.

"Well, here we are, safe and sound, with all our possessions about
us," commented Tom, when all but Oom had withdrawn. "I guess we'll
make out all right in giant land. I wonder what they have to eat? Or
perhaps we'd better tackle some of our own grub."

He looked at Oom, who laughed gleefully. Then Tom rubbed his
stomach, opened his mouth and pointed to it and said: "We'd like to
eat--we're hungry!"

Oom boomed out something in his bass voice, grinned cheerfully, and
hurried out. A little later he came back, and following him, a
number of giant women. Each one bore a wooden platter or slab of
bark which answered for a plate. The plates were covered with broad
palm leaves, and when they had been set down on low benches, and the
coverings removed, our friends saw they had food in abundance.

There was some boiled lamb, some roasted fowls, some cereal that
looked like boiled rice, some sweet potatoes, a number of other
things which could only be guessed at, and a big gourd filled with
something that smelled like sweet cider.

"Say, this is a feast all right, after what we've been living on!"
cried Tom.

Once more Oom laughed joyfully, pointing to the food and to our
friends in turn.

"Oh, we'll eat all right!" exclaimed Tom. "Don't worry about that!"

The good-natured giant showed them where they could find rude wooden
dishes and table implements, and then he left them alone. It was
rather awkward at first, for though the bench or table looked low in
comparison to the size of the room, yet it was very high, to allow
for the long legs of the giants getting under it.

To show that the statistics of 1885 are not exceptionally favorable
to the name of the town, let us take a longer period,--say of six
years, 1879-85.

During this period the death-rate has been 14.45 per 1,000, which
gives an average number of deaths for each year, of 79; and within
this period 159, deaths have been of persons over 70 years of age.

Since the new year came in 15 persons have died, and the average
age of 5 was over 90 years.

Each of the nine churches in Andover has an interesting history.

Of these five are of the Congregational order, and their enrolled
membership numbers 1,099, nearly one-fifth of the entire population.

When to this is added the membership of the Episcopal, Baptist,
Methodist and Catholic churches it is probable that one person in
four, of whatever age or nationality, is a member of some church.

The enrolment of the Sabbath Schools is about the same as that
of the churches.

This is owing partly to the fact that the "foreign element" in Andover
consists largely of Scotchmen, who love the kirk; and also
because the educational facilities of Andover are such as to draw
hither persons of intelligence, and of literary tastes and habits.

The town is well supplied with libraries.

The Memorial Hall was built to commemorate the Andover defenders
of the national flag, and contains a free reading-room, well
supplied with current issues of the press, and a free public
library, containing 5,259 pamphlets, and 9,185 volumes, to which
additions are constantly being made.

In 1865 the Library building of the Theological Seminary was erected,
through the generosity of Mr. John Dove and Messrs.

John and Peter Smith, at the cost of $60,000. It was named
"Brechin Hall," from their native town in Scotland.

Its shelves contain more than 43,000 volumes, the gentlemen who built
the library having given large sums for the purchase of books.

On its walls hang the portraits of many of its founders and professors,
and on the lower floor is a valuable museum and reference library.

Besides these are various private libraries; and there is a community
of taste, which brings all valuable books to the town in some
connection.

Another educational element is that of the public lectures.
The People's Course is a thrifty annual, which, each autumn, provides
a series of ten entertainments at merely nominal prices. During
the past year there has also been a course of Emergency Lectures;
and various others, upon many topics, detached from the established
courses, are of frequent occurrence. Abbot Academy provides its
annual and popular series of public "Piano Recitals," under the
oversight of its efficient professor, S. M. Downs.

Phillips Academy has its annual contests for the "Draper Prizes" and
the "Means Prizes," and a year seldom passes in the history of the
Theological Seminary without one or more courses of special lectures,
in addition to those which are in constant progress, under the
regular instructors of this and of the other institutions.

Nor should the anniversaries, with all the strangers and alumni they
bring, the stir they make, the congratulations and the partings,
be forgotten.

So it is that all the important phases of our best American life
are found in the history and enterprise of this illustrious town.

Here one may find the house in which have lived seven generations,
the head of the family bearing the same name; and the home of the
recent immigrant.
"I may as well out with it. I came after a giant, and
I'm going to get one for Mr. Waydell."

"Then you took advantage of our trail, and followed us?" asked the
young inventor.

"Oh, you can put it that way if you like," replied Delby calmly. "I
HAVE followed you, and a hard time I've had of it. I tried to do it
quietly, but you got on to my tricks. However it doesn't matter. I'm
here now, and I'm going to beat you out if I can."

"I remember now!" exclaimed Ned whispering in Tom's ear, "he was
disguised as one of the mule drivers and you fired him because he
had a revolver. Don't you remember, Tom?"

"That's right!" exclaimed the young inventor as he noted the face
and form of Delby more closely. Then our hero added: "You played a
low-down trick, Mr. Delby, and it won't do you any good. I caught
you trying to sneak along in my company and I'll catch you again.
I'm here first, and I've got the best right to try and get a giant
for Mr. Preston, and if you had any idea of fair play--"

"All's fair in this business, Tom Swift," was the quick answer. "I'm
going to do my best to beat you, and I expect you to do your best to
beat me. I can't speak any fairer than that. It's war between us,
from now on, and you might as well know it. One thing I will promise
you, though, if there's any danger of you or your party getting hurt
by these big men I'll fight on your side. But I guess they are too
gentle to fight."

"We can look after ourselves," declared Tom. "And since it's to be
war between us look out for yourself."

"Don't worry!" exclaimed Tom's rival with a laugh. "I've gone
through a lot to get here, and I'm not going to give up without a
struggle. I guess--"

But he did not finish his sentence for at that moment Oom, the big
hunting giant, came up behind him, tapped him on the shoulder, and
pointed to the king's hut, motioning to indicate that Mr. Delby was
wanted there.

"Very good," said the circus agent in what he tried to make sound
like a jolly voice, "I'm to call on his majesty; am I? Here's where
I beat you to it, Tom Swift."

Tom did not answer, but there was a worried look on his face, as he
turned to join his friends in the big hut. And, as he looked from a
window, and saw Delby being led into the presence of Kosk, Tom could
hear the strains of the big phonograph he had presented to the king.

"I guess his royal highness will remain friends with us," said Ned
with a smile, as he heard the music. "He can see what a lot of
presents and other things we have, and as for that Delby, he doesn't
seem to have much of anything."

"Oh, I haven't shown half the things I have as yet," spoke Tom. "But
I don't like this, just the same. Those giants may turn from us, and
favor him on the slightest pretence. I guess we've got our work cut
out for us."

"Then let's plan some way to beat him," suggested Mr. Damon. "Look
over your goods, Tom, and make the king a present that will bind his
friendship to us."

"I believe I will," decided the young inventor and then he and Ned
began overhauling the boxes and bales, while a crowd of curious
giants stood without their hut, and another throng surrounded the
palace of the giant king.

"There goes Delby out to get something from his baggage," announced
Ned, looking from the window. Tom saw his rival taking something
from one of the packs slung across the back of a mule. Soon the
circus agent hurried back into the king's hut, and a moment later
there was heard the strains of a banjo being picked by an
unpracticed hand. It was succeeded by a rattling tune played in good
style.

"Bless my fiddlestick!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "Does your phonograph
have a banjo record, Tom?"

"No." was the somewhat hesitating answer of the young inventor.
"Delby who can play a banjo himself must have given Kosk one for a
present, and, like a child, the king is amused by the latest
novelty. So far he has scored one on us," he added, as once more
they heard the unmelodious strains of the banjo slowly picked. "The
king is evidently learning to play the instrument, and he'd rather
have that than a phonograph, which only winds up."

"But haven't you some other things you can give the king to off-set
the banjo?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Plenty of them," replied Tom. "But if I give him--say a toy steam
engine, for I have one among our things--what is to prevent Delby
giving him some other novelty that will take his attention? In that
way we'll sea-saw back and forth, and I guess Delby has had more
experience in this business than I have. It's going to be a question
which of us gets a giant."

"Bless my reserved seat ticket!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I never heard
of such a thing! But, Tom, I'm sure we'll win out."

"Get something startling to give the king," advised Ned, and Tom
began opening one of the boxes that had been transported with such
labor from the coast.

"Delby had much better luck with his mule drivers than we did Tom,"
remarked Ned as he saw the two natives standing by the pack animals
of the rival circus man. "They evidently didn't get scared off by
the giants."

"No, but probably he didn't tell them where they were headed for.
Though, as a matter of fact, I don't believe any one has anything to
fear from these big men. All they ask is to be let alone. They're
not at all warlike, and I don't believe they'd attack the other
natives. But probably their size makes them feared, and when our
drivers heard the word 'giant' they simply wilted."

"Guess you're right. But come on, Tom. If we're going to make the
king a present that will open his eyes, and get him on our side
instead of Delby's, we'd better be getting at it."

"I will. This is what I'm going to give him," and Tom brought out
from a box a small toy circus, with many performing animals and
acrobats, the whole being worked by a small steam engine that burned
alcohol for fuel. A little water put in the boiler of the toy
engine, a lighting of the alcohol wick and there would be a toy that
even a youngster of the United States might be proud to own.

"Mah land a massy!" exclaimed Eradicate as Tom got the apparatus
ready to work. "Dat shore will please him!"

"It ought to," replied the young inventor. "Come on, now I'm ready."

Delby had not yet come from the king's hut, and as Tom and his
friends, bearing the new toy, were about to leave the structure that
had been set aside for their use, they saw a crowd of the giant men
approaching. Each of the big men carried a club and a spear.

"Bless my eye glasses!" gasped Mr. Damon. "Something is wrong. What
can it be?"

He had his answer a moment later. With a firm but gentle motion the
chief giant shoved our four friends back into the hut, and then
pulled the grass mat over the opening. Then, as Tom and the others
could see by looking from a crack, he and several others took their
position in front, while other giants went to the various windows,
stationing themselves outside like sentries around a guard house.

"Bless my--" began Mr. Damon, but words failed him.

"We're prisoners!" gasped Ned.

"It looks like it," admitted Tom grimly. "Evidently Delby has
carried out his threat and set the king against us. We are to be
held captives here, and he can do as he pleases. Oh, why didn't I
think sooner."


CHAPTER XVIII

TOM'S MYSTERIOUS BOX


The young inventor walked slowly back to the middle of the hut--a
prison now it was--and sat down on a bench. The others followed his
example, and the elaborate toy, with which they had hoped to win the
king's favor, was laid aside. For a moment there was silence in the
structure--a silence broken only by the pacing up and down of the
giant guards outside. Then Eradicate spoke.

"Massa Tom," began the aged negro, "can't we git away from heah?"

"It doesn't seem so, Rad."

"Can't we shoot some of dem giants wif de 'lectric guns, an' carry a
couple ob 'em off after we stun 'em like?"

"No, Rad; I'm afraid violent measures won't do, though now that you
speak of the guns I think that we had better get them ready."

"You're not going to shoot any of them, are you, Tom?" asked Mr.
Damon quickly.

"No, but if they continue to turn against us as easily as they have,
there is no telling what may happen. If they attack us we will have
to defend ourselves. But I think they are too gentle for that,
unless they are unduly aroused by what misstatements Hank Delby may
make against us."

"Misstatements?" inquired Ned.

"Yes. I don't doubt but what he told the king a lot of stuff that
isn't true, to cause his majesty to make us captives here. Probably
he said we came to destroy the giant city with magic, or something
like that, and he represented himself as a simple traveler. He's
used to that sort of business, for he has often tried to get ahead
of Mr. Preston in securing freaks or valuable animals for the
circus. He wants to make it look bad for us, and good for himself.
So far he has succeeded. But I've got a plan."

"What is it?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I'll tell you when I've got it more worked out. The thing to do now
is to get in shape to stand off the giants if they should attack us.
This hut is pretty strong, and we can risk a siege in here. Let's
arrange the boxes and bales into a sort of breastwork, and then
we'll take the electric rifles inside."

This was soon done, and, though there was considerable noise
attending the moving about of the boxes and bales, the giant guards
did not seem at all alarmed. They did not even take the trouble to
stop the work, though they looked in the windows. In a short time
there was a sort of hollow square formed in the middle of the big
main room, and inside of this our friends could give battle.

"And now for my plan of teaching these giants a lesson," said Tom,
when this work was finished. "Ned, help me open this box," and he
indicated one with his initials on in red letters.

"That's the same one you saved from the fire in the ship," commented
Ned.

"Yes, and I can't put it to just exactly the use I intended, as the
situation has changed--for the worse I may say. But this box will
answer a good purpose," and Tom and Ned proceeded to open the
mysterious case which the young inventor had transported with such
care.

"Bless my cannon cracker!" exclaimed Mr. Damon who watched them.
"You're as careful of that as if it contained dynamite."

"It does contain something like that," answered Tom. The superstition
of the ancients may be seen by the few here copied. My author further
says that there were treatises written to show against what
regions the malevolent effects of any particular eclipse was aimed,
and the writers affirmed that the effects of an eclipse of the
Sun continued as many years as the eclipse lasted hours, and that
of the Moon as many months."
The most comprehensive (indeed almost the only) modern English book
on eclipses is the Rev. S. J. Johnson's,[155] of which frequent
use has already been made in these pages. It contains a vast amount
of matter put together in a condensed form but the references to
authorities are rather defective and deficient.

Less comprehensive in one sense yet exceedingly valuable and interesting
as a succinct summary of solar eclipse knowledge up to the date of
1896 is Mrs. D. P. Todd's excellent little volume[156] which has
been several times quoted on previous pages.

On various occasions in 1890 and following years Professor
J. N.
Stockwell contributed to the American _Astronomical Journal_ a number
of papers[157] discussing in a very interesting and exhaustive manner
many of the eclipses recorded by the ancient classical authors.
These papers should be consulted by all who desire to realise the
value of eclipse records in connection with mundane chronology.

The calculation of eclipses is a matter of some interest. It is
beyond the scope of the present work to explain even in outline
the methods in use, but with the aid of the books mentioned
below[158] a reader possessed of the necessary time, mathematical
knowledge, and patience, will be able to pursue this matter as far
as his inclination may lead him.

Johnson has found very useful the tables given in the eighth edition
of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ (Article, "Astronomy") but strange
to say these tables do not appear in ninth edition of that famous
work.

Lalande[159] has given numerous references to eclipses of the Sun
during the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries which may be useful to
those who wish to work at the history of eclipses.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 144: _Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften_,
vol. lii. Vienna, 1887.]
[Footnote 145: There are several editions of this work in circulation.
The first (published in 1783) was in folio volumes, but the best
known edition is in a large number of octavo volumes published in
1818 and following years.

The eclipse lists will be found in the 1st volumes of the first
and second series respectively. The French astronomer, Pingré,
is responsible for them.]

[Footnote 146: Published at Bononia (Bologna) in 1653.]
[Footnote 147: _Omnia Opera_, vol. ii. pp. 311-16. Edited by
Ch.
Frisch. 8 vols. 8vo. Frankofurti-a-M., 1857-60.]
[Footnote 148: A collected edition of Tycho Brahe's works, edited by
"Lucius Barettus," was published at Augustæ Vindilicorum (Augsburg)
in 1666.

Lucius Barettus is an anagram for the real name Albertus Curtius.]

[Footnote 149: J. 

L. E. Dreyer, _Tycho Brahe: a Picture of Scientific Life and Work
in the Sixteenth Century_.]
[Footnote 150: _Opus Chronologicum._ Francofurti ad Moenum, 1650.]

[Footnote 151: _Astronomica_, vol. iv. Lugduni, 1657.]
[Footnote 152: _Inleiding tot de Algemeene Geographie._ Amsterdam,
1740.]
[Footnote 153: _Astronomy Explained upon Sir Isaac Newton's
Principles._ 2nd ed. 4to, pp. 167-79. London, 1757.]
[Footnote 154: _Astronomy_, p. 178.]
[Footnote 155: _Historical and Future Eclipses._ 2nd Ed., 1896.]

[Footnote 156: _Total Eclipses of the Sun._ Boston, U.S., 1894.]
[Footnote 157: _Astronomical Journal_, vol. x. pp. 25, 185; vol.
xi.

pp. 5, 28, 57; vol. xii. p. 121; vol. xiii. p. 73; vol. xv. p. 73;
vol. xvi. pp. 89, 175.]
[Footnote 158: J. Ferguson.

_Op. cit._; W. D. Snooke, _Brief Astronomical Tables for the
Expeditious Calculation of Eclipses_, 8vo. Lond. 1852.]

CHAPTER XVIII.

STRANGE ECLIPSE CUSTOMS.

I had intended heading this chapter "Eclipse Customs amongst Barbarous
Nations," but in these days it is dangerous to talk of barbarians
or to speak one's mind on points of social etiquette so I have
thought it well to tone down the original title, otherwise I should
have the partisans of the "Heathen Chinee" holding me up to scorn
as a reviler of the brethren.

Did space permit a very interesting record might be furnished of
eclipse customs in foreign parts.

An eclipse happened during Lord Macartney's embassy to China[160]
which kept the Emperor and his Mandarins for a whole day devoutly
praying the gods that the Moon might not be eaten up by the great
dragon which was hovering about her.

The next day a pantomime was performed, exhibiting the battle of
the dragon and the Moon, and in which two or three hundred priests,
bearing lanterns at the end of long sticks, dancing and capering
about, sometimes over the plain, and then over chairs and tables,
bore no mean part.

Professor Russell, who is quoted elsewhere in this work with respect
to Chinese eclipses, makes the following remarks in regard to what
happens now in China when eclipses occur:--"It will be interesting
here to note that, even at present, by Imperial command, special
rites are performed during solar and lunar eclipses.

A president from each of the six boards, with two inferior officials,
dressed in their official clothes, proceed to the T'ai-Ch'ang-Ssu.
When the eclipse begins they change their robes for common garments
made of plain black material, and kneeling down, burn incense.
The president then beats one stroke on a gong, and the ceremony
is taken up by all the attendant officials."

A writer in _Chambers's Journal_[161] in an article entitled "The
Hindu view of the late Eclipse," gives an interesting and original
account of divers Hindu superstitions and ceremonies which came
under his notice in connection with the total eclipse of the Sun
of Aug. 18, 1868.

He remarks that "European science has as yet produced but little
effect upon the minds of the superstitious masses of India.

Of the many millions who witnessed the eclipse of the 18th of August
last there were comparatively few who did not verily believe that
it was caused by the dragon Rahu in his endeavour to swallow up
the Lord of Day....

The pious Hindu, before the eclipse comes on, takes a torch, and
begins to search his house and carefully removes all cooked food,
and all water for drinking purposes.

Such food and water, by the eclipse, incur _Grahana seshah_, that
is, uncleanness, and are rendered unfit for use.
Some, with less scruples of conscience, declare that the food may be
preserved by placing on it _dharba_ or _Kusa grass_," and much more
to the like effect is duly set out in the interesting article
cited.

During the total eclipse of the Sun of Aug. 7, 1869, the following
incident is noted[162] to have occurred at a station on the Chilkaht
river, in Alaska, North America, frequented by Indians:--
"About the time the Sun was half obscured the chief Koh-Klux and
all the Indians had disappeared from around the observing tent;
they left off fishing on the river banks; all employments were
discontinued; and every soul disappeared; nor was a sound heard
throughout the village of 53 houses.

The natives had been warned of what would take place, but doubted
the prediction.

When it did occur they looked upon me as the cause of the Sun's being
'very sick and going to bed.' They were thoroughly alarmed, and
overwhelmed with an undefinable dread."
A still more thrilling incident is thus recorded[163] of the eclipse
of July 29, 1878, by a witness at Fort Sill, Indian Territory, U.S.:--

"On Monday last we were permitted to see the eclipse of the Sun in a
beautiful bright sky. Not a cloud was visible. We had made ample
preparation, laying in a stock of smoked glass several days in
advance.
It was the grandest sight I ever beheld, but it frightened the
Indians badly.

Some of them threw themselves upon their knees and invoked the
Divine blessing; others flung themselves flat on the ground, face
downward; others cried and yelled in frantic excitement and terror.

Finally one old fellow stepped from the door of his lodge, pistol in
hand, and fixing his eyes on the darkened Sun, mumbled a few
unintelligible words and raising his arm took direct aim at the
luminary, fired off his pistol, and after throwing his arms about
his head in a series of extraordinary gesticulations retreated to
his own quarters.

As it happened, that very instant was the conclusion of totality.
The Indians beheld the glorious orb of day once more peep
forth, and it was unanimously voted that the timely discharge of
that pistol was the only thing that drove away the shadow and
saved them from the public inconvenience that would have certainly
resulted from the entire extinction of the Sun."
A certain Mr. F.

Kerigan, in a book published in 1844, made the following remarks
on ancient Jewish ideas respecting eclipses:--
"The Israelites, like their benighted neighbours, esteemed an eclipse
of either luminary as a supernatural and inauspicious omen, which
filled them with the most gloomy and fearful apprehensions: as may
fairly be deduced from the 8th chapter of Ezekiel, v. 15: 'Then he
brought me to the door of the Lord's House, which was towards the
N.; and, behold there sat women weeping for Tammuz.'

Now Tammuz is the name under which Adonis was known in
Palestine: he was the favourite of Venus, or Astarte, the principal
goddess of the Philistines and Phoenicians.

Being killed by a wild boar, the prevailing superstition of the age
induced the uninformed multitude to believe that when the Moon was
eclipsed, it was in complement to their beloved goddess Venus or
Astarte, who, concealed behind the full Moon, sat weeping under a
dark veil for the loss of her beloved Tammuz or Adonis

."[164]
The African travellers, R. and J. Lander, have given[165] a graphic
account of what took place on the occasion of the eclipse of the
Moon of Sept. 2, 1830, as witnessed by themselves:--"The earlier
part of the evening had been mild, serene, and remarkably pleasant.

The Moon had arisen with uncommon lustre, and being at the full,
her appearance was extremely delightful. It was the conclusion
of the holidays, and many of the people were enjoying the delicious
coolness of a serene night, and resting from the laborious exertions
of the day; but when the Moon became gradually obscured, fear
overcame every one.

As the eclipse increased they became more terrified. All ran in
great distress to inform their sovereign of the circumstance, for
there was not a single cloud to cause so deep a shadow, and they
could not comprehend the nature or meaning of an eclipse....

Groups of men were blowing on trumpets, which produced a harsh and
discordant sound; some were employed in beating old drums, others
again were blowing on bullocks' horns.... The diminished light, when
the eclipse was complete, was just sufficient for us to distinguish
the various groups of people, and contributed in no small degree
to render the scene more imposing.

If a European, a stranger to Africa, had been placed on a sudden in
the midst of the terror-struck people, he would have imagined
himself to be among a legion of demons, holding a revel over a
fallen spirit."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 159: _Bibliographie Astronomique._ Paris, 1803. Indexed at
p. 938.]

[Footnote 160: _Authentic Account of an Embassy to China_, by Sir
G.
Staunton.]
[Footnote 161: Fourth Series, vol. v. p. 676. October 24, 1868.]
[Footnote 162: _Report U.S. Coast Survey_, 1869, p. 179.]
[Footnote 163: Letter published in the _Philadelphia Inquirer_.]

[Footnote 164: _A Practical Treatise on Eclipses_, p. 2.]
[Footnote 165: _Journal of an Expedition to Explore the Niger_,
vol.

i. p. 366.]

CHAPTER XIX.

ECLIPSES IN SHAKESPEARE AND THE POETS.

The sound of these words may be large but facts do not bear out the
theory, for eclipses do not appear to have captivated our great
poets to anything like the extent that Moon, Stars, and Comets
have done.

Shakespeare has a few allusions to eclipses, but they are not of
prime importance. In _Macbeth_ we find:--
"And slips of yew Shivered in the Moon's eclipse" --Act iv. sc. 1.

the precise meaning of which is not very obvious. "Shivered" of course
means divided into pieces, but the idea intended is obscure.

The next quotation is more comprehensive and reflects more plainly
the current of thought prevalent in Shakespeare's day, albeit here
again the word "eclipse" will be found to stand without much definite
connection with what goes before.

However the reader shall judge for himself:--
"As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, Disasters in the
Sun; and the moist star, Upon whose influence Neptune's Empire
stands, Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse." --_Hamlet_, act
i. sc. 1.

In _King Lear_ we seem to come upon something very definitely
historical, but I am not able to say what it is.

The Earl of Gloster says:--

"These late eclipses in the Sun and Moon portend no good to us."
With this, Edmund, Gloster's son, apparently agrees, for he
exclaims:--
"These eclipses do portend these divisions." --Act i. sc. 2.

In _Othello_, the Moor of Venice himself, in a moment of excitement,
says:--

"O, insupportable! O, heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse Of Sun and Moon, and that
the affrighted globe Should yawn at alteration." --Act v. sc. 2.

In _Anthony and Cleopatra_ we find Anthony expressing what our
forefathers so often thought in connection with astronomical matters:--

"Alack, our terrine Moon is now eclipsed; And it portends alone
The fall of Anthony!"

--Act iii. sc. 11.

Milton has an allusion to an eclipse of the Sun which possesses a two-fold
interest--intrinsic and extrinsic.

The former feature will be self-evident when the passage is read. The
poet, in describing[166] the faded splendour of the fallen archangel,
compares him to the Sun seen under circumstances which have temporarily
deprived it of its normal brilliancy and glory:--
"As when the Sun new-risen Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the Moon In dim eclipse,
disastrous twilight sheds On half the nations, and with fear of
change Perplexes Monarchs."

It has been well said by Dr.

Orchard[167] that "this passage affords us an example of the sublimity
of Milton's imagination and of his skill in adapting the grandest
phenomena of nature to the illustration of his subject."
What I alluded to in saying that extrinsic interest attached to
this quotation, is the fact that these lines might have caused the
suppression of the poem as a whole.

Mrs.

Todd puts the matter thus:--"_Paradise Lost_ was begun probably in
1658, although not finished until 1663, nor its thorough revision
completed until 1665.

The censorship still existed, and Tomkyns (one of the chaplains
through whom the Archbishop gave or refused license), although a
broader-minded man than many of his day, found this passage especially
objectionable.

The poem was allowed to see the light only through the interposition
of a friend of Milton. Upon such slender chances may hang the life
of an incomparable work of art! But it is easy to see that in the
turbulent days when Charles the Second had returned to power,
after the death of Cromwell, these lines should have been
deemed dangerously suggestive, in imputing to monarchs 'perplexity'
and 'fear of change.'"

Other allusions to eclipses by Milton will be found as follows:--

Through the air she comes, "Lur'd with the smell of infant blood,
to dance With Lapland witches, while the labouring Moon Eclipses
at their charms."

--_Paradise Lost_, Bk. ii. lines 663-6.

"So saying, he dismiss'd them; they with speed Their course
through thickest constellation held, Spreading their bane; the
blasted stars look'd wan, And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse,
Then suffer'd."

--_Paradise Lost_, Bk. x. lines 410-14.

"O dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of Noon, Irrecoverably dark,
total eclipse, Without all hope of day!"

--_Samson Agonistes_, Lines 80-2.

"It was that fatal and perfidious bark, Built in th' eclipse, and
rigg'd with curses dark, That sunk so low that sacred heart of
thine."

--_Lycidas_, Lines 100-2.

Pope, in the following lines, may be presumed to mean that the
covering up of the Sun by the Moon, during a total eclipse, results
in the Moon becoming visible, at the cost of the Sun's disappearance:--

"For Envy'd wit, like Sol eclips'd, makes known Th' opposing body's
grossness, not its own."

--_Essay on Criticism_, Lines 469-70.

I have not attempted to pursue this matter through the pages of our
modern poets, but it is not unlikely that Scott and Tennyson (especially)
would have something on the subject of eclipses.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 166: _Paradise Lost_, Book i., lines 594-9.]

[Footnote 167: _The Astronomy of Milton_, p. 259.]

CHAPTER XX.

BRIEF HINTS TO OBSERVERS OF ECLIPSES OF THE SUN.

A few words (they must be few for lack of space) may usefully be
added, by way of advice, to persons proposing to choose a suitable
locality at which to station themselves for viewing a total eclipse
of the Sun.

To begin with, of course they ought to get as close as possible to
the central line, say within 10 or 20 miles at the most; this matter
settled, the next important point is to find out where the duration
of the totality will be longest, coupled with the Sun at its maximum
elevation above the horizon (to escape the influence of mists and
fogs).

No advice, properly so-called, can be given on these points, because
they depend on the special circumstances of every eclipse, and must
be ascertained _ad hoc_ from the _Nautical Almanac_.

In anticipation of a forthcoming eclipse, it is very important to
know beforehand the probabilities of weather. If the _locus in quo_
of an expected eclipse is in a civilised country, there will generally
not be much difficulty in obtaining a certain amount of information
as to this 6 or 12 months in advance. But inasmuch as total eclipses
of the Sun, and often the best of them, are visible only in
uncivilised countries or over trackless wastes, the problem becomes
a complicated and anxious one.

In such cases it is exceedingly desirable, where competent observers
(including money) are available, that preliminary notes of weather
should be made for a year or even two years in advance.

There is in one sense no difficulty as to this, for all the mathematical
local elements of every eclipse are always made public three or
four years in advance through the pages of books like the _Nautical
Almanac_, the _Connaissance des Temps_, the _Berliner Jahrbuch_, &c.

One difficulty always confronts every eclipse expedition.

If an out-of-the-way part of the world has to be visited, accessible
by sea, transport from England, say, to the foreign shore is not
usually a matter of difficulty, because Government ships are often
placed at the disposal of astronomers.

But the gravest difficulties often have to be faced after the arrival
at the foreign shore, and for this reason. Every sea coast is,
as a general rule applicable to the whole world, bad for astronomical
observations.
The problem then which has to be solved is, how best to get away
from the coast inland to a high hill, and to find the means of
transporting thither heavy packing-cases of instruments, personal
luggage, creature comforts, and, if needs be, tents and the other
accessories of camp life.

Let not the reader of either sex take fright at the idea of sleeping
under a tent. I speak with considerable experience when I say that,
given fine or fairly fine weather, nothing is more enjoyable in a
temperate climate.

Under the term "creature comforts" I mean such things as tinned
soups and preserved provisions which nowadays can so easily be
purchased everywhere in England, and of such good quality.

I would recommend these being taken even when the eclipse traveller
expects to be lodged in the dwelling-places of civilised nations.

Of course, if in order to see his eclipse he has to go into the
wilds of America, Asia, or Africa, he must start fully equipped
with all those personal _impedimenta_ which will be found scheduled
in the books mentioned in the footnote.[168]
FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 168: _The Tourists' Pocket-Book_, 1s. (Philip); F.
Galton's _Art of Travel_, 7s. 6d. (Murray); Royal Geographical
Society's _Hints to Travellers_, 5s. (R. G. S., Savile Row). &c.]

CHAPTER XXI.

TRANSITS AND OCCULTATIONS.

No book professing to deal with eclipses would be complete without
a few words of mention of "transits" and "occultations." A transit
is the passing of a primary planet across the Sun, or of a secondary
planet (_i.e._ satellite) across its primary, whilst an occultation
is the concealment of a star by the Moon, or of a secondary planet
(_i.e._ satellite) by its primary.

A little thought given to this definition will make it clear that a
transit is essentially the same in principle as an eclipse of the
Sun by the Moon--one body comes in front of another, and the former
conceals in succession parts of the latter.

"I believe so myself," agreed the young inventor. "And now to throw
a real scare into these giants," he added, as he went to a distant
room of the hut where he had hidden some of the things he had taken
from his "box of tricks," as Ned dubbed it.

"Bless my necktie!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's up now, Tom."

"I'm going to show these giants that they'd better make friends with
us soon, or we may blow their whole town sky-high!" cried Tom. "I'm
going to use some of the blasting powder--just a pinch, so to speak--and
knock an empty hut into slivers. I think that will impress these
fellows. If I can only--"

"Look, Tom!" suddenly cried Ned. "The king's two brothers are coming
here. Something's up. He's sent some of the family to interview us.
Get ready to receive them."

"Couldn't be better!" cried the young inventor. "I've been waiting
for this. Now I'll give them a surprise party."

The two big brothers of the king, for such Tom and his friends had
recently learned was the relationship the giants on either side of
the "throne" bore to the ruler, were indeed headed toward the hut of
the captives. They came alone, in their royal garments of jaguar
skins, and, standing about the palace hut, could be seen the giant
guards who had doubtless carried the news of the question Tom had
asked.

"Come on, Ned, we've got to get busy!" exclaimed Tom. "Connect the
electric battery, and get that magnet in shape. I'm going to make a
fuse for this blasting powder bomb, and if I can get those royal
brothers to plant it for me, there'll be some high jinks soon."

Tom busied himself in making an improvised bomb, while Ned attended
to the electrical attachments, and Mr. Damon and Eradicate acted as
general assistants.

The two giant brothers entered the hut and greeted Tom and the
others calmly. Then they explained that the king had sent them to
investigate certain stories told by the guard.

"I'll show you!" exclaimed Tom, and he induced them to take hold of
the handles of the battery. The current was turned on full strength,
and from the manner in which the royal brothers writhed and howled
Tom judged that the experiment was a success.

"With all your strength you can not let go until I move my finger,"
the young inventor explained, and it was so. Even the skeptical
giants agreed on that.

"Now I shall show you that I am stronger than you!" exclaimed Tom,
and though the giants smiled incredulously so it was, for the magnet
trick worked as well as before. There were murmurs of surprise from
the two immense brothers, and they talked rapidly together.

"I will now show you that I can call the lightning from the sky to
do my bidding," went on Tom. "Is that possible to any of you
giants?"

"Never! Never! No man can do it!" cried Tola and Koku together.

"Then watch me!" invited Tom. "Is there an empty hut near here?" he
asked. "One that it will do no harm to destroy?"

Tola pointed to one visible from the window of the prison of our
friends.

"Then take this little ball, with the string attached to it, and
place it in the hut," went on Tom. "Then flee for your lives, for
standing from here, I shall call the lightning down, and you shall
see the hut destroyed."

"Why don't you ask them something about Jake Poddington?" asked Ned.

"Time enough for that after I've shown them what a little powder
will do, when I attach electric wires to it and press a button,"
replied Tom. "I've got that bomb fixed so it will go off by an
electric fuse. If they'll only put it in the hut for me. I'd do it
myself, only they won't let me go out."

The brothers conferred for a moment and then, seeming to arrive at a
decision, Koku, who was slightly the larger, took the bomb, looked
curiously at it, and walked with it toward the empty hut, the
electric wire being reeled out behind him by Tom.

The bomb was left inside the frail structure, the two brothers
hurried away, and, standing at a safe distance from the hut of the
captives, as well as the one that Tom had promised to destroy by
lightning, they waved their hands to show that they were ready.

"Bless my admission ticket!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "You've got quite
an audience, Tom."

And so he had, for there was a crowd in the market square, another
throng about the king's palace, while all about, hidden behind trees
or huts, was nearly the whole population of the giant town.

"That's what I want," said the young inventor. "It will be all the
more impressive."

"And there's the king himself!" exclaimed Ned. "He's standing in the
door of his royal hut."

"Better yet!" cried Tom. "Are those wires all connected, Ned?"

"Yes," answered his chum, after a quick inspection.

"Then here she goes!" cried Tom, as he pressed the button.

Instantly the hut, in which the bomb had been placed, arose in the
air. The roof was lifted off, the sides spread out and there was a
great flash of fire and a puff of smoke.

Then as the smoke cleared away Ned cried out:

"Look, Tom! Look! You've blown a hole in the hut next to the one you
destroyed!"

"Yes, and bless my check book!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "some one is
running out of it. A white man, Tom! A white man!"

"It's Poddington! Poor Jake Poddington. We've found him at last!
This way, Mr. Poddington! This way! Mr. Preston sent us to rescue
you!" cried Tom.


CHAPTER XXI

A ROYAL CONSPIRACY


Howls of terror, cries of anger, and a rushing to and fro on the
part of the giants, followed the latest trick of Tom Swift to
impress them with his power. But to all this the young inventor and
his friends paid no attention. Their eyes were fixed on the ragged
figure of the white man who was rushing toward their hut as fast as
his legs, manacled as they were, would let him.

"Come on! Come on!" cried Tom.

"Look out!" yelled Ned. "Some of the giants are after him, Tom!"

Several of the big men, after their first fright, had recovered
sufficiently to pursue the captive so strangely released by the
explosion.

"Hand me an electric rifle, Ned!" cried Tom,

"Bless my shoe laces!" cried Mr. Damon. "You're not going to kill
any of the giants; are you, Tom?"

"Well, I'm not going to let them capture Jake Poddington again," was
the quick answer, "but I guess if I stun a few of them with the
electric bullets that will answer."

Poddington (for later the white captive did prove to be the missing
circus man) ran on, and close behind him came two of the giants,
taking long strides. Tom aimed his electric rifle at the foremost
and pulled the trigger. There was no sound, but the big man crumpled
up and fell, rolling over and over. With a yell of rage his
companion pressed on, but a moment later, he, too, went down, and
then the others, who had started in pursuit of their recent captive,
turned back.

"I thought that would fix 'em," murmured Tom gleefully.

In another five seconds Poddington was inside the hut, gasping from
his run. He was very thin and pale, and the sudden exertion had been
too much for him.

"Water--water!" he gasped, and Mr. Damon gave him some. He sank on
one of the skin-covered benches, and his half-exhausted breath
slowly came back to him.

"Boys," he gasped. "I don't know who you are, but thank heaven you
came just in time. I couldn't have stood it much longer. I heard you
yell something about Preston. Is it possible he sent you to find
me?"

"Partly that and partly to get a giant," explained Tom. "We didn't
know you were in that hut, or we'd never have blown up the one next
to it, though we suspected you might be held captive somewhere
around here, from the queer way the giants acted when we asked about
you."

"And so you blew up that hut?" remarked the circus agent. "I thought
it was struck by lightning. But it did me a good turn. I was chained
to the wall of the hut next door, and your explosion split the beam
to which my chains were fastened. I didn't lose any time running
out, I can tell you. Oh, but it's good to be free once more and to
see someone my own size!"

"How did you get here, and why did they keep you a prisoner?" asked
Tom. Then Poddington told his story, while Ned and Mr. Damon aided
Tom in filing off the rude iron shackles from his wrists and ankles.

As Mr. Preston had heard, Jake Poddington had started for giant
land. But he lost his way, his escort of natives deserted him, just
as Tom's did, and he wandered on in the jungle, nearly dying. Then,
merely by accident, he came upon giant land, but he had the
misfortune to incur the anger of the big men who took him for an
enemy. They at once made him a prisoner, and had kept him so ever
since, though they did not harm him otherwise, and gave him good
food.

"I think they were a bit afraid of me in spite of my small size,"
explained the circus man. "I never thought to be rescued, for,
though I figured that Mr. Preston might hear of my plight, he could
never find this place. How did you get here?"

Then Tom told his story, and of how they themselves were held
captives because of the treachery of Hank Delby.

"That's just like him!" cried Poddington. "He was always mean, and
always trying to get the advantage of his rivals. But I'm glad I'm
with you. With what stuff you have here it oughtn't to be difficult
to get away from giant land."

"But I want a giant," insisted Tom. "I told Mr. Preston I'd bring
him back one, and I'm going to do it."

"You can't!" cried the circus man. "They won't come with you, and
it's almost impossible to make a prisoner of one. You'd better
escape. I want to get away from giant land. I've had enough."

"We'll get away," said Tom confidently, "and we'll have a giant or
two when we go."

"You'll have some before you go I guess!" suddenly interrupted Ned.
"There's a whole crowd of 'em headed this way, and they've got
clubs, bows and arrows and those blow guns! I guess they're going to
besiege us."

"All right!" cried Tom. "If they want to fight we can give 'em as
good as they send. Ned, you and Mr. Damon and I will handle the
electric rifles. Eradicate, use your shotgun, and fire high. We
don't want to hurt any of the big men. We'll merely stun them with
the electric bullets, but the noise of Rad's gun will help some."

"What can I do?" asked Mr. Poddington.

"You're too weak to do much," replied Tom. "You just keep on the
lookout, and tell us if they try any surprises. I guess we can
handle 'em all right."

With shouts and yells the big men came on. Evidently their
indifference toward their captives had turned to anger because of
the freeing of Poddington, and now they were determined to use harsh
measures. They advanced with wild yells, brandishing their clubs and
other weapons, while the weird sound of the tom-toms and natives
drums added to the din.

When a short distance from the hut the giants stopped, and began
firing arrows and darts from the blow guns.

"Look out for those!" warned Tom. "They probably are poisoned, and a
scratch may mean death. Give 'em a few shots now, Ned and Mr. Damon!
Rad, give 'em a salute, but fire high!"

"Dat's what I will, Massa Tom!"

The gun of the colored man barked out a noisy welcome, and, at the
same time three giants fell, stunned by the electric bullets, for
the rifles were adjusted to send out only mild charges.

Thrice they charged, and each time they were driven back, and then,
finding that the captives were ever ready for them, they gave up the
attempt to overwhelm them, and hurried away, many going into the
king's hut. His royal majesty did not show himself during the fight.

"Well, I guess they won't try that right away again," remarked Tom,
as he saw the stunned giants slowly arouse themselves and crawl
away. "We've taught them a lesson."

They felt better after that, and then, when they had eaten and
drank, they began to consider ways and means of escape. But Tom
would not hear of going until he could get at least one giant for
the circus.

"But you can't!" insisted Mr. Poddington.

"Well, it's too soon to give up yet," declared Tom. "I'd like to
take the king's two brothers with me."

"By Jove!" exclaimed Mr. Poddington, "I never thought of that. There
is just a bare chance. Did you know that the two brothers, who are
twins, dislike the king, for he is younger than they, and he
practically took the throne away from them. They should rule jointly
by rights. If we could enlist Tola and Koku on our side we might win
out yet."

"Then we'll try!" exclaimed Tom.

Jake Poddington, who had been a captive in the giant city long
enough to know something of its history, and had learned to talk the
language, explained how Kosk had usurped the throne. His brothers
were subject to him, he said, but several times they had tried in
vain to start a revolution. To punish them for their rebellious
efforts the king made them his personal servants, and this explained
why he sent them to see the tricks Tom performed.

"If we could only get into communication with the big twins," went
on the circus man, "we could offer to take them with us to a country
where they would be bigger kings than their brother is here. It's a
royal conspiracy worth trying."

"Then we'll try it!" cried Tom enthusiastically.


CHAPTER XXII

THE TWIN GIANTS


Daring indeed was the scheme decided on by the captives, and yet its
very boldness might make it possible for them to carry it out. The
king would never suspect them of plotting to carry off his two royal
brothers, and this made it all the easier to lay their plans. In
this they were much helped by Poddington, who knew the language and
who had made a few friends among the more humble people of the
village, though none dared assist him openly.

"The first thing to do," said the circus man, "is to get into
communication with the twins."

That proved harder than they expected, for a week passed, and they
did not have a glimpse of Tola and Koku. Meanwhile the giant guard
was still maintained about the hut night and day. No more food was
given the prisoners, and they would have starved had not Tom
possessed a good supply of his own provisions. It was evidently the
intention of the king to starve his captives into submission.

"Suppose you do get those big brothers to accompany you, Tom?" asked
Ned one day. "How are you going to manage to get away, and take them
with you?"

"My aeroplane!" answered Tom quickly. "I've got it all planned out.
You and I with Mr. Damon, Mr. Poddington and Eradicate will skip
away in the aeroplane. We can put it together in here, and I've got
enough gasolene to run it a couple of hundred miles if necessary."

"But the giants--you can't carry them in it."

"No, and I'm not going to try. If they'll agree to go they can set
off through the woods afoot. We'll meet them in a certain place--where
there's a good land mark which we can easily distinguish from the
aeroplane. We'll take what stuff we can with us, and leave the rest
here. Oh, it can be done, Ned."

"But when you start out with the aeroplane they'll make a rush and
overwhelm us."

"No, for I'll do it so quickly that they won't have a chance. I'm
going to saw through the beams of one side of this hut. To the rear
there is level ground that will make a fine starting place. When
everything is ready, say some night, we'll pull the side wall down,
start the aeroplane out as it falls, and sail away. Then we'll pick
up the giant brothers out in the woods, and travel to civilization
again."

"By Jove! I believe that will work!" cried the circus man.

"Bless my corn plaster, I think so myself!" added Mr. Damon.

"But first we've got to get the brothers to agree," went on Tom,
"and that is going to be hard work."

It was not so difficult as it was tedious. Through an aged woman,
with whom he had made friends when a captive, Jake Poddington
managed to get word to the royal twins that he and the other
captives would like to see them privately. Then they had to wait for
an answer.

In the meanwhile the giants tried several times to surprise Tom and
his friends by attacks, but the captives were on the alert, and the
electric rifles drove them back.

One night nearly all the guards were observed to be absent. There
were not more than half a dozen scattered about the hut.

"I wonder what that means?" asked Tom, who was puzzled.

"I know!" exclaimed Jake Poddington after a moment's thought. "It's
their big annual feast. Even the king goes to it. They were just
getting over it when I struck here last year, and maybe that's what
set them so against me. Boys, this may be our chance!"

"How?" asked Ned.

"The king's brothers may find an opportunity to come and talk to us
when the feast is at its height," was the reply.

Anxiously they waited, and in order that the royal brothers might
come in unobserved, if they did conclude to speak to the captives,
Tom and his companions hung some pieces of canvas over the windows
and doors, and had only a single light burning.

It was at midnight that a cautious knock sounded at the side of the
hut and Tom glided to the main door. In the shadows he saw the two
royal brothers, Tola and Koku.

"Here they are!" whispered Tom to Jake Poddington, who came forward.

"Come!" invited the circus man in the giants' tongue, and the
brothers entered the hut.

How Jake persuaded them to throw in their fortunes with the captives
the circus man hardly knew himself. Perhaps it was due as much as
anything to the dislike they felt toward the king, and the mean way
he had treated them.

"Come, and you will be kings among the small men in our country,"
invited Poddington. The brothers looked at each other, talked
together in low tones, and then Koku exclaimed:

"We will come, and we will help you to escape. We have spoken, and
we will talk with you again."

Then they glided out into the darkness, while from afar came the
sounds of revelry at the big feast.


CHAPTER XXIII

A SURPRISE IN THE NIGHT


Tom and his friends could scarcely believe their good fortune. It
seemed incredible that they should have induced two of the biggest
giants to accompany them back, and, not only that, but that they had
the promise of the strong men to aid them.

"Now we must get busy," declared Tom, when their visitors had gone.
"We've got lots of work to do on the aeroplane, and we must try out
the engine. Then we've got to fix the side of the hut so it will
fall out when we're ready for it. And we've got to plan how to meet
the giants later in the forest."

"Yes," agreed the circus man, "and we must take care that Hank Delby
doesn't spoil our plans."

Then ensued busy days. In the seclusion of their hut the prisoners
could work undisturbed at the aeroplane, which had been almost
assembled.

The engine was installed and tried, and, when the motor began its
thundering explosions, there was consternation among the giants, who
had again surrounded the hut to see that the prisoners did not
escape.

Meanwhile Delby seemed to be unusually active. He could be observed
going in and out from his hut to that of the king, and he often
carried large bundles.

"He's making himself solid with his royal highness," declared Tom.
"Well, if all goes right, we won't have to worry much longer about
what he does."

"If only those twin giants don't fail us," put in Ned.

"Oh, you can depend on them," said Mr. Poddington. "These giants are
curious creatures, but once they give their word they stick to it."

He told much about the strange big men, confirming Tom's theory that
favorable natural conditions, for a number of generations, had
caused ordinary South American natives to develope into such large
specimens.

Our friends were under quite a nervous tension, for they could not
be sure of what would happen from day to day. They continued to work
on the aeroplane, and then, finding that it would work in the
seclusion of the hut, they were anxious for the time to come when
they could try it in the open.

"Do you think it will carry the five of us with safety?" asked the
circus man, as he gazed rather dubiously at the somewhat frail-appearing
affair.

"Sure!" exclaimed Tom. "We'll get away all right if I can get enough
of a start. Now we must see to opening the side of the hut."

This work had to be done cautiously, yet the prisoners had a certain
freedom, for the guards were afraid to approach too closely.

The supporting and cross beams were sawed through, for Tom had
brought a number of carpenter tools along with him. Then, in the
silence of the night, the two royal brothers brought other beams
that could be put in place temporarily to hold up the roof when the
others were pulled out to allow the aeroplane to rush forth.

In due time all was in readiness for the attempt to escape. The
royal twins had agreed to slip off at a certain signal, and await
Tom and his party in the forest at the foot of a very large hill,
that was a landmark for miles around. The giants could travel fast,
but not as fast as the aeroplane, so it was planned that they were
to have a day and night's start. They would take along food, and
would arrange to have a number of Tom's mules hidden in the woods,
so that our hero and his friends would have means of transportation
back to the coast, after they had ended their flight in the airship.

"I wish we had brought along the larger one, so we could take the
giants with us," said Tom, "but I guess they're strong enough to
walk to the coast. We'll take what provisions we can carry, our
electric rifles, and the rest of the things we'll leave here for the
king, though he doesn't deserve them."

"What do you think Delby will do?" asked Ned.

"Give it up. He's got some plan though. I only hope he doesn't get a
giant. Then ours will be a greater attraction."

Several days passed, and the last of the preparations had been made.

"The giant twins will pretend to go off on a hunting trip to-morrow
morning," said the circus man one night, "but they won't come back.
They'll wait for us at the big hill."

"Then we must escape the following morning," decided Tom. "Well, I'm
ready for it."

From their hut, surrounded as it was still by the giant guards, our
friends watched the royal brothers start off, seemingly on a hunting
expedition.

The day passed slowly. Tom went carefully over the aeroplane, to see
that it was in shape for a quick flight, and he looked to the wall
of the hut--the wall that was to be pulled from place to afford
egress for the air craft.

They went to bed early that night--the night they hoped would be
their last in giant land. It must have been about midnight when Tom
suddenly awoke. He thought he heard a noise outside the hut and in a
moment he had jumped up.

"Repel boarders!" cried Tom.


CHAPTER XXIV

THE AIRSHIP FLIGHT


For a few moments there was confusion inside the hut that was to be
the last stronghold of our friends against the approaching force of
giants. Confusion and not a little fear were mingled, for Tom's
words sent a chill to every heart. Then, after the first panic,
there came a calmer feeling--a feeling that each one would do his
duty in the face of danger and, if he had to die, he would die
fighting.

"Everyone take a window!" yelled Tom. "Don't kill any one if you can
help it. Shoot to disable, Rad. Mr. Poddington, there's an extra
shotgun somewhere about! See if you can find it. We'll use the
electric rifles. Get those Roman candles somebody!"

Tom was like a general giving orders, and once his friends realized
that he was managing things they felt more confidence. Ned grasped
his electric rifle, as did Mr. Damon, and they stood ready to use
them.

"The strongest stunning charge!" ordered the young inventor.
"Something that will lay 'em out for a good while. We'll teach 'em a
lesson!"

BANG!

That was Eradicate's shotgun going off. It had a double load in it,
and the wonder of it was that the barrel did not burst. It sounded
like a small cannon, but it had the good effect of checking the
first rush of giants, for the electric rifles had not yet been
adjusted, and Mr. Poddington, in the light of the single electric
torch that had been left burning, could find neither the spare
shotgun nor the Roman candles.

BANG!

Eradicate let the other barrel go, almost in the faces of the
advancing giants, but over their heads, for he bore in mind Tom's
words not to injure.

"That's the stuff!" cried Tom. "Come on now, Ned, we're ready for
'em!"

But the giants had retreated, and could be seen standing in groups
about the hut, evidently planning what to do next. Then from back in
the village there shone a glare of light.

"Bless my insurance policy! It's a fire!" cried Mr. Damon. "They're
going to burn us out!"

"Jove! If they do!" exclaimed Ned.

"We mustn't let 'em!" shouted Tom. "Fire, Ned!"

Together the chums discharged their electric rifles at the enemy and
a number of them fell, stunned, and were carried away by their
companions.

The glaring light approached and now it could be seen that it was
caused by a number of the big men carrying torches of some kind of
blazing wood. It did look as though they intended to fire the prison
hut.

"Give 'em another taste of it!" shouted Ned, and this time the three
electric rifles shot out their streaks of blue flame, for Mr. Damon
had his in action. It was still dark in the hut, for to set aglow
more of the electric torches meant that Tom and his friends would be
exposed to view, and would be the targets for the arrows, or darts
from the deadly blow guns.

Several more of the giants toppled over, and then began a retreat to
some distance, the first squad of fighters going to meet the men who
had come up with the torches. There was no sign of women or
children.

"Shall we fire again?" asked Ned.

"No," answered Tom. "Save your ammunition until they are closer, and
we'll be surer of our marks. Besides, if they let us alone that's
all we ask. We don't want to hurt 'em."

"Bless my gizzard!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I wonder why they attacked
us, anyhow?"

"Maybe it's about the two giant brothers who have not come back,"
suggested Mr. Poddington. "They may imagine that we have them
captive, and they want to rescue them."

"That's so," admitted Tom. "Well, if they had only postponed this
reception for a few hours we'd have been out of their way, and they
wouldn't have had this trouble," and he glanced at the aeroplane,
that stood in the big hut, ready for instant flight.

"They're coming back!" suddenly shouted Ned, and a look from the
half-opened windows showed the giants again advancing.

"I've got the Roman candles!" called Mr. Poddington from a corner
where he had been rummaging in that box of Tom's which contained so
many surprises. "What shall I do with 'em?"

"Let 'em go right in their faces!" yelled Tom. "They won't do much
damage, but they'll throw a scare into the big fellows! Get ready,
Ned!"

"They're dividing!" shouted his chum. "They're coming at us from two
sides!"

"They're only trying to confuse us," decided Tom. "Fire at the main
body!" And with that he opened up with his electric rifle, an
example followed by Mr. Damon and Ned.

With a whizz, and several sharp explosions, the circus man got the
Roman candles into action. The glaring fire of them lighted up the
scene better than did the flaming torches of the giants, and truly
it was a wonderful sight. There, in that lonely hut, in the midst of
a South American jungle, four intrepid white persons, and an aged
but brave negro, stood against hundreds of giants--mighty men, who,
had they come to a personal contact, any one of which would have
been more than a match for the combined strength of Tom and his
party. It was a weird picture that the young inventor looked out
upon, but his heart did not quail.

Giant after giant went down under the fierce rain of the electric
bullets, stunned, but not otherwise injured. There was a shower of
sparks, and a hail of burning balls from the Roman candles, but
still the advance was kept up. Eradicate was banging away with his
shotgun.

"Dis suah am hot work!" cried the colored man, as his hand came in
contact with the barrel. "Wow! It's most RED hot!" he added with a
cry of pain.

Mr. Helps, author of _Friends in Council_, he spoke of as his near
neighbor there in Hampshire, and his intimate friend. Mr.
Charles Reade he knew, and I think he said he was also a neighbor:
his _Christie Johnston_ he thought showed high original power.

Mrs.

Gaskell we talked of, whose _Life of Charlotte Bronté_ had just
then been published: Mr. Kingsley thought it extremely interesting
and "slightly slanderous." He told me of the author of _Tom Brown's
School-days_, a copy of which, fresh from the publishers, was lying
on his table. Mr. Hughes is now so well known to us I need only
mention that Mr. Kingsley spoke of him as an old pupil of Arnold's
and a spiritual child of Maurice.

He spoke most warmly of him, and offered me a letter of introduction
to him. I could not avail myself of this, having so little
time to remain in London.

I must mention, as showing further Mr. Kingsley's state of mind toward
Maurice, that he had named his son after him.

He spoke of the boy as being intended for the army: the family, he
said, had been soldiers for generations. "That is the profession
England will need for the next five-and-twenty years."

Of Forster he said, "What a pity he had not been put in the army
at the age of eighteen!

--he would have been a general now. England has need of such men." I
note this as showing the curious apprehension of war which he, an
Englishman, felt eighteen years ago, and which he expressed to me,
an American.

How little either of us thought of the struggle which men of English
blood were to engage in in three years from that time!

How little I could dream that one of the decisive battles of the world
was so soon to be fought in my own State, Pennsylvania!

Our morning was spent in all this varied talk, walking partly on the
lawn, partly in the study. His pipe was still his companion. He
seemed to need to walk incessantly, such was his nervous activity
of temperament.

He asked me if it annoyed me for him to walk so much up and
down his study. The slight impediment in his speech one forgot as
one listened to the flow of his discourse. He talked a volume while
I was with him, and what he said often rose to eloquence. There
was humor too in it, of which I can give no example, for it was
fine and delicate.

But what most impressed me was his perfect simplicity of character.
He talked of his wife with the strongest affection--wished I could
remain longer with them, if only to know her better. Nothing could
be more tender than his manner toward her. He went for her when we
were in the study, and the last half hour of my stay she sat with
us.

She is one of five sisters who are all married to eminent men.

It occurs to me to note, as among my last recollections of our talk,
that I spoke of Spurgeon, whom I had heard in London a short time
before, and was very favorably impressed with. I could not but commend
his simple, strong Saxon speech, the charm of his rich full voice,
and above all the earnest aim which I thought was manifest in all
he uttered.

"Start the motor!" cried Tom to his chum.

There was a rattling, banging noise, like a salvo of small arms, and
the big propellers revolved with incredible swiftness. The two white
men were already in place, and now Eradicate, still carrying his
shotgun, clambered up.

"Up with you, Ned!" yelled Tom. "I'm going to head her around and
make a flying start."


CHAPTER XXV

TOM'S GIANT--CONCLUSION


"I don't see anything of them, do you?"

"No, and yet this is the place where they said they'd meet us."

It was Tom who asked the question, and Ned who answered it. It was
the day after their sensational escape from the giants' prison, and
they were circling about in the aeroplane which had been the means
of getting them away from giant land. For they were safely away from
that strange and terrible place, and they were now seeking the two
giant brothers who had promised to meet them at a certain big hill.

For an hour that night Tom and his friends had traveled on the wings
of the Lark and when a rising moon showed them a level spot for a
landing, they had gone down and made a camp. They had provisions
with them, and plenty of blankets and it was so warm that more
shelter was not necessary.

The next day, leaving Mr. Damon, Eradicate and the circus man in the
temporary camp, Tom and Ned had gone aloft to see if they could pick
up the giant twins, who were to meet them and have some mules ready
for the journey back to civilization.

"Well, we're in no great hurry," went on Tom, after vainly scanning
the ground below. "They may not have traveled as fast as we thought
they could, and the mules may have given trouble. We'll stick around
here a day or so, and--"

"Look!" suddenly exclaimed Ned. "Didn't you see something moving
then."

"Where?"

"By that big dead tree."

Tom took a look through a pair of field glasses, while Ned steered
the aeroplane. Then the young inventor cried:

"It's all right. It's one of the giants, but I can't tell which one.
Ned, I believe they're hiding because they're afraid of us. They've
never seen an aeroplane in action before. I'm going down."

Quickly and gracefully the Lark was volplaned to a level place near
the dead tree. No one was in sight, and Tom, after looking about,
called:

"Tola! Koku! Where are you? It is I, Tom Swift! We have escaped!
Where are you? Don't be afraid!"

There was a moment's silence, and then two big forms rushed from the
dense bushes, one of them--Koku--advancing to Tom, and catching him
up in what was meant for a loving hug.

"Oh, I say now, Koku!" cried the young inventor, with a laugh. "I've
got ribs, you know. Easy on that squeeze!"

The two giant twins laughed too, and they were immensely pleased to
see their friends again, both talking at once and so fast that not
even the circus man could catch what they said.

"Have you got the mules?" It will be necessary, for the purpose of
my story, that I shall go back more than once from the point at
which it begins, so that I may explain with the least amount of
awkwardness the things as they occurred, which led up to the incidents
that I am about to tell; and I may as well say that these first
four chapters of the book--though they may be thought to be the
most interesting of them all by those who look to incidents for
their interest in a tale--are in this way only preliminary.

The world has not yet forgotten the intensity of the feeling which
existed when old Mr. Scarborough declared that his well-known
eldest son was not legitimate. Mr. Scarborough himself had not
been well known in early life. He had been the only son of a squire
in Staffordshire over whose grounds a town had been built and
pottery-works established. In this way a property which had not
originally been extensive had been greatly increased in value, and
Mr. Scarborough, when he came into possession, had found himself to
be a rich man. He had then gone abroad, and had there married an
English lady.

After the lapse of some years he had returned to Tretton Park, as his
place was named, and there had lost his wife. He had come back
with two sons, Mountjoy and Augustus, and there, at Tretton, he had
lived, spending, however, a considerable portion of each year in
chambers in the Albany.

He was a man who, through many years, had had his own circle of
friends, but, as I have said before, he was not much known in
the world. He was luxurious and self-indulgent, and altogether
indifferent to the opinion of those around him. But he was
affectionate to his children, and anxious above all things for their
welfare, or rather happiness. Some marvellous stories were told
as to his income, which arose chiefly from the Tretton delf-works
and from the town of Tretton, which had been built chiefly on his
very park, in consequence of the nature of the clay and the quality
of the water.

As a fact, the original four thousand a year, to which his father
had been born, had grown to twenty thousand by nature of the operations
which had taken place. But the whole of this, whether four thousand
or twenty thousand, was strictly entailed, and Mr.
Scarborough had been very anxious, since his second son was born, to
create for him also something which might amount to opulence.

But they who knew him best knew that of all things he hated most
the entail.

The boys were both educated at Eton, and the elder went into the Guards,
having been allowed an intermediate year in order to learn
languages on the Continent.

He had then become a cornet in the Coldstreams, and had, from that
time, lived a life of reckless expenditure.
Koku gave the colored man one look, then, with a good natured grin
on his face, he reached over one hand, calmly lifted Eradicate from
his mule and set him on the ground. Then, with a push, he shoved the
mule galloping ahead, and took his place at the side of the young
inventor.

"Well, what do you know about that?" gasped Ned.

"Bless my coffee cup!" cried Mr. Damon.

Eradicate stood still for a moment, gazing first at his master and
then at the big being who had so ruthlessly plucked him from the
mule's back, as easily as he would have lifted a child. Then
Eradicate, with a trace of tears in his eyes, stretched forth his
hands toward Tom, and turned aside. That was too much for our hero.

With one leap he was off his animal, and the next minute he had his
arms around the faithful old colored man.

"By Jove, Rad!" cried Tom, and his own eyes were not dry. "I'm not
going to be deserted by you in that way. You're just the same as
ever to me, giant or no giant, and don't you forget it!" and he
patted the old man on the back affectionately.

"Praise de Lord fo' heahin' yo' say dat, Massa Tom," gasped
Eradicate. "Praise de dear Lord!"

And then, knowing that he still held a place in his young master's
heart, the colored man was content. And from then on he rode on one
side of Tom, while the giant, Koku, strode along on the other. He
had established himself as Tom's bodyguard and even though Eradicate
insisted on remaining, Koku would not go away.

"I guess I'll have to keep 'em both," said Tom, with a grin, "but
I'm going to change Koku's name."

"What are you going to call him?" asked Ned.

"Let's see, what month is this?"

"August," said Mr. Damon.

"Then August is his name!" exclaimed Tom. "Koku sounds too much like
a cocoanut cake. Here, August, shift that package on the white
mule," he called, "it's cutting her back," and the giant, with a
pleased grin, did as he was bid. And August he was called from then
on.

But my story is getting too long, so I must bring it to a close. And
really there is not much to tell. The march back to the coast was
full of hardships, danger and difficulties, but they accomplished
it. The two giants seemed glad that they had left their own country
behind and they were simple and affectionate beings. Tom made up his
mind he would let the circus man have one and keep the other for his
personal attendant.

They traveled by day, and slept at night, shooting game as they
needed it. Several times they narrowly escaped getting mixed up in
the native conflicts. Tom had one striking evidence of his giant
servant's usefulness. One day he was stalking a small beast, like a
deer, when, from a tree overhead, a jaguar sprang down at him. But
Koku--I beg his pardon--August was at hand, and, like Sampson of
old, the giant slew the beast bare-handed, choking it to death.

"He'll never come back," the artist muttered. "Poor Andrea! But it is
better--now."
Warm with the pity the thought inspired, he turned the corner into the
street that led to the post-office, and was almost run down by the
first mule of a train that came driving through the rain.

"Bachelder!" the rider cried.

It was surely Paul. Pulling up his beast, he thrust a wet
hand from under his rain poncha, then, turning in his saddle,
he spoke to the woman who rode behind him, "Ethel, this is Mr.

Bachelder."
The alternative had happened! As a small hand thrust back the
hood of mackintosh, Bachelder found himself staring at a sweet
face, while an equally sweet greeting was drowned by echoing questions
in his mind.

"Good God!" he first thought.
I really couldn't!"

"I wonder how our old enemy Delby made out?" asked Mr. Poddington.
They heard later that he was driven from giant land, not even being
allowed to take a boy as a specimen. He had worked on the "tip" Andy
Foger had given Mr. Waydell, but it failed. When Tom escaped, the
king confiscated all the things in the hut, and he was so taken up
with the novelties that he paid no more attention to the circus
agent, who had all his trouble, plotting and scheming against Tom
for his pains.

"A giant in the house!" cried Mrs. Baggert, when Tom got home with
August. "I never heard of such a thing in all my life! Where will he
sleep? Not a bed is big enough!"

"We'll give him two beds then," laughed Tom.

And so they did, and August was immensely pleased with his new life.
He proved to be very useful, and readily adapted himself to
civilized ways.

Tola, the other giant, made a big sensation when exhibited, and Mr.
Preston said he was well worth the fifteen thousand dollars he had
cost.

"Well, Tom, what next?" asked Ned one day, when they had been home
several weeks and had told their story over and over again.

"No where!" exclaimed Tom. "I'm going to take a long rest."

But Tom Swift wasn't that kind of a young man, and he was soon
active again. In fact, the knowledge will grow on her. But not now.
It wouldn't do. She couldn't understand."
"No?" But the quiet sarcasm was wasted on Paul, and the artist
continued, "Aren't you leaving Andrea out of your calculations?"
Paul ruffled like an angry gobbler.And now, for a time, we will take leave of the young inventor and
his new giant servant, to meet them again a little later.

THE END